LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

SEVENTY SEVENTH REPORT
DELAY AND ARREARS
IN
TRIAL COURTS

November, 1978


D. 0. No. F. 2 (7)/77-L.C. November 27, 1978

My Dear,

T send herewith the seventy-seventh Report of the Law Commission relat
ing to delays and arrears in trial courts.

The subject was taken wp for consideration pursuant io the terms of
Teference of the Law Commission, according to which the Commission should,
inter alia, keep under review the system of judicial adauinistration to stcure
elimination of delays and speedy clearance of arrears.

I must place on record my appreciation of the assistance rendered by
Shri P. M. Bakshi, Member-Secretary in the preparation of this Report.

With Kind regards.
Yours
Shri Shanti Bhushan
Minister of Law, Justice
and Company Affairs (Sd))
New Dejhi 110 001 (H. R. Kanata)

(465 LAD IND 18


CHAPTER

Appendix 1 —
Appendix 2 —
Appendix 3 —

Yer Au # wD -
!

CONTENTS

Toric
Problem of delay and arroare in trial courts
The Triat Court Judge
‘The present system evaluated: comparison with ancient judicial system
Stages of delay—summons
Pleadings and issues: the pretrial procedure
Court diary and evidence and substitution of tegal representatives.
Arguments, judgment and decree
Conciliation
Recruitment and personality of the trial judge | inspection of courts
and training of judicial officers

Cases under ceratin speciat Acts

Execution.

Criminal oases

Some general suggestions .
Summary of conclusions and recommendations

APPENDICES

Figures of pendency in. subordinate courts for the year 1977
‘The special list system in Kerala
Questionnaire issued by the Law Commission of India

él

91


CHAPTER |
. PROBLEM UF DELAY AND ARREARS IN TRIAL COURTS

1.1. The problem of delay in the disposal of cases pending in law courts la 7० 7 कक,
net a recent phenomenon. It has been with us and has us since a long time.

A umber of Commissions and Committees have dealt with the problem

and given their reporis. Although the recommendations, when implemented- ,

have had some effect, the problem has persisted. Of late, it hay assumed 887 ny!

tic proportions. This bas subjected our judicial system, as it 1108४, to § 4,

stra. Ip has also shaken in some measure the! confidence of the Pe 016 in

the capacity of the courts to redress their grievances and 1 grant ad€O‘unte png

«timely relief,

12, A State consists of theee organs, the legislature, the vxiecutive and the The judiciary in
judiciary. The judiciary, it has been said, is the weakest of ‘the three Otgans, 0९ Modem ‘State,
It has neither the power of the purse nor the power of the sword, ‘either money

cr patronage nor even the physical force to enforce its decisions. Desplte that,

the courts have, by and large, enjoyed high prestige amongst, atad commanded

great respect of, the people. This is because of the moral authowi ty of the courts

and the confidence the people have in the role of the courts to clea Justice between

the rich aud the poor, the mighty and the weak, the State and tne eltizen, without

fear or favour.

13, A modern State has to arm itself with immense powers with a view to Activities of the
implementing socio-economic policies and schemes for welfeire measures, These modern State,
powers have 10 be exercised through a host of officers at various levels of admi-

nistration. The grant of such powers has to be cushioned: with the tight of

aggricved citizens to approach the courts with a view to ensue that in exercise

of ‘these powers, the State acts within the bounds of the law and the executive

officers do not act arbitrarily or capriciously, The liberties cof the citizens face

real danger in insidious encroachments by men of zeal, well-meaning but lack-

ing in due deference for the rule of law.

14, For efficient discharge of the responsibilities of the courts, it is essential Publi. confide
that the broad confidence which the people have in them, ‘the high prestige and in te ee nee
the great respect they have enjoyed should be maintained and not be subject

to any eclipse. Tie community has a tremendous stake in the preservation of

image of the courts as dispensers of justice. Weakening. of the judicial system

in the 1081 run has necessarily the effect of undermining, rhe foundations of the

democratic structure.

1.5. Long delay in the disposal of cases has resulu:d in huge arrears and a Areate—in terms
heavy backlog of pending file in various courts in the country. A bare glance of number of
at the statements of the various types of cases pending in different courts and Pending caees and
of the duratim for which those cases have been pending is enough to show ‘uration.

the enormity of the problem. The delay in the disposal of cases understand-

ably causes dismay 00, and creates disillusionment in, all those who knock at

the doors of the courts. If the number of cases in the disposal of which there

is delay is very large, the dismay and distillisionme.nt would necessarily become

widespread

Long delay has also the effect of defeating justice in some cases. As
a result of such delay, the possibility cannot be ruled out of loss of important
evidence because of the fading of memory or death of witnesses. The conse-
quence thus would be that a party with even a strong case may lose it not
because of any fault of its own but because of the tardy judicial process entail-
ing disappearance of material evidence,

16. While laying stress on the necessity of elimination of delay in the Caution against
disposal pf cases, we must guard against undue speed or haste in the matter Uodue haste,

of disposal, because this would be substituting one evil for another evil. Any

stress on speedy disposal of cases at the cost of substantial justice would impair

the faith and confidence of the poopie in the judiciat system—pethaps in a much

greater degree than would be the case if there is delay in the disposal of cases,

It has to be borne in mind that in the disposal of cases certain procedural require.

ments which ensure fair trial and satisfy the demands of justice have to be


Need for effective
steps,

View of Rankin
mittee,

2

followed. Without complying with such procedure, a trial in a court of law can
hardly be said to satisfy the minimum requirements of a judicial wial, it would,
in fact, be a mockery oi a trial. It would be wholly wrong to bring about speed
in the disposal of oourr cases at the cost of substantial justice. Our object,
therefore, sould be to eusure that consistently with the demands of fair play
and substantiai justice, ways and means might be found to eliminate delays in
the disposal of cases,

1.7. There is another aspect of which also we must not lose sight. Whatever
suggestions we orake ior eliminating delay im the disposal of cases. can prove
useful only if somecliling elective can be done to deal with the huge arrears
which have ulready piled up. No reform, and no suggestion for improvement,
would make any mark if the existing courts remain burdened with the heavy
backlog of peuuing casos. The existence of such heavy backlog preseuts an
almost iusurmountable barrier 19 improvement in methods, Suggestions for
improvement cun yield results only if something concrete is done with regard
to the already exisliug beavy backlog of cases and if at least some of the courts
can start with a clean slate.

As long as courts remain burdend with arrears, the other suggestions for
expediting the disposai of cases would be nothing more than palliatives and
would not provide any elleclive relief, The position as it emerges at present is
that even if service is effected and issues are framed within one month of the
instiution of a suit, lhe cases would still linger on for years im most of the
courts because the courly would remaim pre-occupied with whe disposal of older
cases which account ior the backlog of arrears. Any serious attempt to elimi-
nate delay in the disposal of cases must, at the threshold, seek effective remedy
for clearing the huge backlog of arrears.

We have appended! charts aud statemenis to this Report showing the insti-
tution and disposal of cases in various States. From the perusal of the figures
mentioned ihercin, it would appear that the courts at present by and large are
only disposing of that number of cases in a year as are instituted im that year.
‘The result is that the number of peading cases with all the heavy backlog remains
as it is. To cope with the backiug of cascs, we must have additional number ,
of courts which may deal exclusively with the old cases. In some States, we
also tind that the existing number of judges is not enough to cope even with
the fresh imsijlutions. था such States the number of courts would have to be
increased on a permanent basis so that the disposal may Keep pace with the
institutions.
£8 We cab also do no better im this respect than icpeat what was said by
the Rankin Commiuec? as far back ay 1925. The position since then, if any-
thing, has aggravated out of all proportion. Ihe Committee observed :—

“Improvement in methods is of vilal importance. We can suggest
improvements, but we are convinced that, where the arrears are un-
manageable, improvement in methods can only palliate. It cannot cure,
It is patent that, when a court has pending work which will occupy it for
something between one year and two years or even more, newcomers
have faint hopes. When there is cnough work pending at the end of
1924 10 occnpy a suberdinate judge till the end of 1926, difficult contest-
ed suits instituted in 1925 have no chance of being decided before 1927.
Whatever be the improvement in methods, improvement in 1 methods alone
cannot be expected in such circumstances to produce a satisfactory result
even in a decade. :

“Until this burden is removed or appreciably lighened, the prospect
is gloomy, The existence of such arrears presents further a serious
ubsiacle ww improvement in methods. It may well be asked—Is there
much tangible advantage gained by effecting an improvement in process
serving, pleadings, handling of issues and expediting to the stage when
parties are in a position to call their evidence, when it is a certainty that,
as soon as that stage is reached, the hearing must be adjourned to a date
eighteen months ahead or later, to take its place, in its turn, for evidence,



—_—

3

arguments and decision? Unless a court can start with a reasonably clean
slate, improvement of methods is likely to tantalise only. The existence
of ३ mass of arrears takes the heart out of a presiding officer. He can
hardly be expected to take a strong interest in preliminaries, when he
knows that the hearing of the evidence and the decision will not be by
him but by his successor after his transfer, So long as such arrears
exist, there 18 a temptation to which many presiding afficera succumb. to
hold back the heavier contested suits and devote attention 60 the lighter
ones. The turn-out of decisions in contested suits is thus maintained
somewhere near the figure of the institutions, while the really ‘dificult
work is pushed further into the background.”

19. One of the important questions which wo have to consider is as to what
should. be the criteticn to determine as to when a judicial case can be treated
as an old case ia the trial court. So far as this question is concerned, we are
of the opinion that a civil case, which would include a civil suit as well as a
case under a Special Act, should be treated old if a period of one year clapses
Since the date of its registration till the pronouncement of the final judgment
in the case. We are conscious of the fact that suits of higher value generally
fequire voluminous evidence to be recorded. At the same time, we cannot
lose sight of the fact that before 1947, in a number of States, which were then
Imown as provinces, the subordinate judges who tried these cases managed to
finish majority of them within a year. It may be that in some cases the period
taken for disposal of the case was longer, and this would remain true even in

. future. Such cases should, in our opinion, be treated to be of an exceptional

nature. The target for most of the cases, in our opinion, should be a period
of one year.

1.10. For criminal cases, the earlier criterion in some of the States was to
dispose them of within four months. Although that should be the desideratum,
the more realistic पंप for the disposal of these cases, in our opinion, should
be six months. period would be calculated from the date of filing of the
charge sheet or complaint till the date of pronouncement of final judgment. In
case of sessions trials, the above period should also include the time during
which proceedings remained pending before the committing magistrate.

4.11. Those who may be looking for suggestions of radical changes and major
innovations in this Report may pechaps experience some disappointment. The
system of administration of justice which we have in the country, in our opinion,
is basically. sound and by and large suitable. It is the same i’ stem which is in
force in the United Kingdom, United States, Australia, Can and a pumber
of other countries, The system, no doubt, has to be adapted to our national
needs and we should not be averse to making for this purpose such changes
as are called’for. The history of our judicial system shows that many such
changes have, in fact, been made with the above object in view. Despite, how-
ever, the basic soundness of the system, some weaknesses have manifested them-
selves. It should be our endeavour to remedy the defects which are responsible
for those weaknesses. One such weakness is that of undue delay in the disposal
of cases. This weakness, as stated above, in a considerable measure, has affected
the image of the system and undermined people’s confidence in its efficacy. We
are in this Report concerned with identifying the factots responsible for the
said weakness and with suggesting consequential remedies.

1.12. To deal with the question of delay in the disposal of civil cases both in
the High Courts as well as in the subordinate courts, a Committes_was appoint-

ed in 1924 under the Chairmanship of Mr. Justice Rankin of Calcutta High हि

जाए, The task of the Committee was “to enquire into the operation and
effects of the substantive and adjective law, whether enacted or otherwise. follow-
ed by the courts in India in the disposal of civil suits, appeals, applications for
Tevision and other civil litigation (including the execution of decrees and orders),
with q view to ascertaining and reporting whether any and what changes and.
improvements should be made so as to provide for the mote speedy, economical
and satisfactory despatch of the business transacted in the courts and for the
ore speedy, economical and saiisfactory execution of the process issued by the
courts”. The Committee, after a thorough and careful enquiry into the various

‘Rankin Committes.

Criterion for treat-
ag a case as an
०

न

Criterion कण eri-
minai cases.

Radical changes
why not suggost-

Past attempts to
tackle delay at-all
india level.


Committees ap
pointed in vatiou

Law Commission's
Reports.

4

aspects, forwarded an exhaustive report in 1925. In 1949, a High Court Arrears
Commiltee was set up by the Government of India under the Chairmanship of
Mr. Justice 8. R. Das for enquiring and reporting as to the advisability af cur-
tailing the right of appeal and revision, the extent of such curtailment, the
method ‘by which such curtailment should be effected, and the measures which
should be aropted :o reduce the accumulation of arrears. & number cf Sug-
gestions were then made by this Commitice. Ar the end of the year 1965, dhe
Government of India constituted a Committee presided over by Mr. Justice
Hidayatoliah, the then Chist Justice, to go into the problem of arrears in all
‘HS aspects aud eo suggest remedial measures. Upon the retirement of Mr. Justice
Hidaya‘uilah, Mr. Justice Shah was appointed the Chairman of that Committee!

41.13. Apart from the above three Committees which worked at all-India level,
some, Committers were appointed in different States to look into the problem
delay.

One such Committee was in West Bengal. This Committee was consti-
tuted in 1949 under the Chairmanship of Sir Trevor Hasties, the then Chief
Justice of the Calcutta High Court, Another Committee was constituted in
1950 in Uttar Pradesh under the Chairmanship of Mr, Justice K. N. Wanchoo.

LM4._ Besides the above, the Law Commission of India presided over by Mr.
M. C. Setalvad, in its fourteenth Report made in 1959, weni into all aspects
relating to Reform of Judicial Administration, including the question of delay
ip the disposal of cases in different courls and exhaustively dealt with the
matier. We shall have occasion to refer to this Report.

Successive Law Commissions have, after that also, when making their re-
commendations for revision of the procedural Codes, addressed themselves, inter
alia, to the need for reducing delay at various stages of the trial, both in civil
and in criminal cases. Reference may be made, in particular, to the 27th and
54th Reports of the Law Commission dealing with the Code of Civi] Procedure
and the 419 Report dealing with the Code of Criminal Procedure

When the Law Commission reviewed the structure and jurisdiction of the
higher judiciary (58th Report), it took note of the imperative need to redyce
arrears in the higher Courts

"High Couet Arrears Committee Report (1972)



CHAPTER 2
THE TRIAL COURT JUDGE

2.1, While dealing wilh the question of delay in the disposal of judicial cass,
we should primarily direct our attenion to Une trial courts.

_ Af ap evaluauon were made of the importance of the cole of the different
functiovaries who play their part in the udministzation of justice, the top posi-
tioa would necessarily have to be assigned: to the trial court judge. He is -the
key-maa in gue judicial. systems, the most important aod influential participant
in the dispensation of justice. [t is mostly with the trial judge rather than
with the appeliate judge that the members of the general public come in con-
tact, whether as partizs or as witnesses. The image of the judiciary for the
vommon man is projected by the wial court judges and this, in turn, depends
upon their intellectual, moral and personal qualz.ics.

22. What we mean primarily oy the problem of court congestion is the
problem of ‘system’ deiay, such that evem though the parties are ready and
anxious to try their case, the court system cannot accommodate them promptly
because there are other controversies waiting ahqad of them for the court’s time,
Systemic delay also caists in obtaining decisions after tial and in appeal _pro-
ceedings, but these afieci reiutively few cases compared io delayed trials, Delay
is the product cf too’ much court business for too few judges, creating an imbal-
ance in their work-time relationship. More precisely, systemic delay occurs
when the demand made by a group of cases for courtroom processing exceeds
the supply of court resources, numely, judge time, available to process thea. A
remedy {hat works is one that restores equilibrium by favourably adjusting the
lance.

2.3. There has, of late, been manifold increase in the number of civil and
crigsinal cases and this increase has subjected the trial judges to extreme strains.
The problems faced by the trial courts call for great qualities of head and heart.

Another misconception which alse needs te be semoved is that as Ours
is a Governmint of Jaws and not of men, the personality of the trial judge makes
no diflersace, Most of us who ate familiar with the fanctioning of the courts
would bear out that the above notion is divorced from realities. A trial judge's

abilily, efficiency and tact or the lack of them can make all the dillerence regard-

ing he fate of cases handled by him. 1 has to be borne 17 mind thar the work
in a court of law is nat purcly mechanical. The cases do not always proceed
‘on set lines, There is ap limit to the varicty of new situations which can arise
in hurian selationship in the complex society of today. No courts and yn
judge-made precedents can provide guidance nor cam any fixed formula furnish
solution in those situations. Jt is in such like situations for which there are
no guidelines or precedents that the personal qualities and worth of a judge
quake themselves manifest. Jt is when the ६०0४५ do not makh, observed
Justice Cardozo, when the references in the index fail, when there is no decisive
lent, that the serious business of the judge begins. Errors committed by
the trial judge who is not of the right calibre can sometimes be so crucial that
they change the entire course of the trial and thus result in icreparable miscat~
riage of justice, Apart from that, a rectification of the error by the appellate
‘court which must necessarily be after lapse oft 2 long time, can hardly com-
pensate for the mischief which resulted from the error committed by the trial
judge.
24, The notion about the provisional nature of the trial court decisions being
tubject to correction ia uppeal, or what has been called the “upper<ourt myth’,

importagce of
wial courta.”

System deiay.

Per: ity
rea ot के

The Tureer court”

ignores the realities of the situation. in ope of the tight of appeal, there arc*

snany cases in which appeals. are not fil This apart, the appellate courts
having, only the written cecord before them, are normally: reluctant to Interfere
with the appraisement uf evidence of wimesses by the trial judges who have
had the advantage of looking at the demeanour of the witaesses. The

“719 Hacry ¥ Hayy थे: fone (Ed), “The Courts, The Public and the Law Explosion (1965 Ed.)
pages 32 to 38. :

5

appellare |


6

court, it has been said, operates in one esta) the. ial vacuum of the printed record. A

stenographic transcript ‘fails to luce tones of yoice and hesitations of
speech that often make a sentence mean the reverse of what the mere words
signify. The best and most accurate record of oral testimony is like a dehydrat-
mo each; it has neither the substance nor the flavour of the peach before it was

a

Mr. Justice Han- 2.5, The importance of the role of trial Judges has been desctibed by Mr.

snn's view.

Justice Hanna of the Irish Free State, . The learned Judge said!: = _
“Sometimes the judges of the higher courts think—and I am bound to
say I thought sometimes myself—that ibe restoration of law and order
depended upon what the high court judges did in dealing with the heavier
classes of crime.. But I have finally come to the lusion.........,..tha€
the real basis of establishment of law and order lies in the competency,
honesty and fidelity of the lowest rank of judges”.

मचा, Justice Hanna (Irish Froe State)



CHAPTER 3. :

ao .
THE. PRESENT SYSTEM EVALUATED: COMPARISON WITH
ANCIENT JUDICIAL SYSTEM

हे . Whether System Unouited to Indian Conditions —

3.1. °° ‘la ‘answer to the ériticism that the present judicial system is unsuited The present - ays-
to the Ind dian conditions and is something alien transplanted on the Indian soil, tem end ita Tinks
it may be observed that though some of the changes in the early period of With | traditional
British rule in india were influenced by ihe system prevailing in England in

those days, the changes did not have the effect of ousting the personal laws.

No judicial systern in any country is wholly immune from, and unafiected by,

‘owgide influences, nor can such outside influence be always looked upon as a

bane. The laws of a country do not reside in a sealed book; they grow and

develop. The winds of change, and the free flow of ideas, do not pass the laws

idly by. As bas. been observer!, even in procedural law, which was codified by

the foreign rulers in this country, the basic principles of a fair and impartial

trial, which were well-known to their predecessors, were adhered to. In the

matter of subsiantive law. as weil, ‘the British did not wholly bring in the

Western concepts. The personal law of the varicus communities living in this

country remained the determining factor in questions like succession, inheritance,

martiage, casie, réligious institutions, etc. New laws were enacted to provide

for matters which were either not fully covered by the indigenous law, or where

such laws were not clearly defined and ascertainable, or were otherwise not

acceptable to the modern way of thinking. Such outside influences are, how-

ever, an integral part of the historical process of development of thought and

institutions all over the world, and once the new concepts get assimilated, they

cease to be alien in character. Viewed in this light, it seems hardly correct

to say that the present judicial system is a- foreign transplant on Indian soil,

or that it is based on alien concepts uaintelligible to our‘people. The people

bave become fully accustomed 10 this system during more than a hundred years

of its existence. The procedures and even the technical terms used by the

lawyers and the Judges are widely understuod by the large majority of litigants.

3.2, ‘The popular fceling that institutions like panchayats, councils of elders, popular feeling.
assemblies of brother-hood or of respevlabies of the locality in fact represent
the indigenous system of this country reveals insufficient appreciation of the
important fact that the sphere of activity of such institutions was confined fo
settling petty disputes, mostly by the method of conciliation and compromise.
With the growth of society, the function of administration of justice was trans-
ferred to the king, who came to be known as the fountain-head of justice. The
king administered justice cither himself or through his officers. A regular
hierarchy of courts was sct up which gradually developed into the sophisticated
system. The panchayats and the assemblies of the brotherhood or of ivcal
respectables, however, did not cease functioning altogether because of their useful -
role of settling minor disputes in rural areas through compromise and that is
why the British retained them through necessary, legislation.

3.3, “The criticism that the present system of admimistration of justice is not Fallacy of
suited to the genius of our people ts based on the ground that our society is rian society.
basically an agrarian society, not sophisticated enough to understand the. tech-

nical and cumbersome procedure followed by our courts, x

3.4. We do not propose to go into details of ancient Indian judicial procedure. Judicial procedure
However, it would be appropriate to state that the rules of procedure and evid- in ancient India.
- ence in ancient India were sophisticated enough. In. broad outlines there is

considerable similarity between the system then in vogue and the system now

im force. Let us mention some of the interesting rules of the ancient system. A

civil judicial proceeding was commenced ordinarily by filing a plaint before a

competent authority. A  plaint, it was provided? must be brief in words,

unambiguous, free from confusion,* devoid of improper arguments and -capable

of meeting opposite argument :

i

agrar

Pakistan Law Reform Commission Report (1967-70), page TOT. 7३77.
°Brihaspati, cited by M. K, Sharan, Court Procedure in Ancient India (1978), page.57
७00 A.D—500 AD).

3Cf, Kane, History of Dharmasastra (1972), Vol. 3, page 299 (words containing no
coherent sense).

7


8

of pleading 38. “There were elaborate rules about the contents of the plaint; for example!,
im socieat Sedis. plaints concerting immovable properly were required to state, inter alia, the
country and place (town or village) the situation (boundaries), name of the
field and so on. There was x0 be a. writicn . statement to be filed by the
defendant in reply to the plaint. The wiitten statement must meet all points
of the piaint, must not empioy vague words, must not be self-contradictory and
so, on?

Virose in anc- 36. Witnesses could be summoned by the order of the judge. According to
ent India. the celebrated work Arihasasira : 3
“The parties shall themselves produce witnesses who are not far removed
either by time or place. Witnesses who are far away or who will not
tit oui shall be made to present themselves by the order of the judge.”

Consequences of 3.7, Manu‘ enumerates numerous situations in which a plaintiff may be non-

default. suited or a defendant may lose his cause. According to Kautiliya, failure by
a defendant to file the reply within three tortaights would mean the Joss of the
wait by the defendant,’ A similar injunction is also to be found in Manus

Means of proof, 34. The various means of Broof were classified as human-or divine. The
buman means ot prool were sub-divided into documents, witnesses and posses-
tion. There is the famous rext of Yajnavglkya’ enumerating three means of
proof. There were even directions tor Somparison of handwriting In the
abeeoce of human proof, divine proof (orders) supplicd the deficiency.?

Alter evidence had been led, a decision had to be rendered on the basis
of certain recognised principies, These Principles are enumerated in some of
the smritia’ as cight-fold, namely, the three means of proof! (pramanas), bps
inference, the usage of the country, oaths and ordeals, the edict of the kis
and the admissions of the litigants. The successful party was catitled to a
dayapatra (document of success). Rendering Of the judgment represented the
fourth and the last stage of the Jaw suit. Several modes of execution were
known.'!? These included, inser alia imprisonment, sale, demand for additional
security and fine,

Misondutt by 3.3. There are directions to the effect that if a clerk of the court makes errors

ministerial a8. in writing which lead to a miscarriage of justice, he should be punished,!*

Res jolie. = 418, The doctrine of res judicala was well-known,'

Crmmet justice 3.14. It would appear that the criminal justice system was equally sophisticated.

in अंक! india. Ancient indian law-givers and commentators exhibit a.cichness of thought and
variety; reminiscent of modern legal systems, -

‘Substantive law. 3.12. in substantive criminal law, for example, we find an elaborate classifica-
tion of offences. The broad categories were five, namely, abusive words,
assault, theft, adultery and crimes af violence,' There, were, however, a sumber
7 "ikatyayann, chod by Mok. St

a ,
Katy ann, 48 by M, $.. Sharan, Court Procedure in Ancient Indie (1978), page 37

(400 ही
nie IW, 5.199, olted by M. K, Sham, Court Procedure in Ancient India (1978),
page 57.
ti Sf ist Chi |+ |] Je,
cunt SORE 17205 "४०० 0 Kan, age Atma
{Manu, Vill, 53-56, Vol. 25, Sacred Books of the East (1967), pages 263-264,
‘Kangle, Kauliliya Acthasantra (University ‘of Bombay) (1963), Part UL, page 218,
‘Manu, Vill, 58, Wal, 25, Sscred Bocks of the East (1967), page 264 y
om "Valnavalkye, ॥, 2% (100 A.0.—300 A.D}; Kane, History of Dharmasariras, Vol. 3,
i.

*Vishou, Vill, 12; M. K. Shatan, Court Procedure in Ancient indi (1978), page 96,
"Yejeavalkya, 11, 22.

“Subra, 1४, 5.371, Kane, History of Dharmasastra, Vol, 3, page 279.

"Documents, witnemes and possesion, . हि

"Kane, History of Dharamasnsien 11972) Val, 3, page 260 and page 379,

4M. K. Shatin, Court Procedure in Ancient Indie (1978), page 163,

“Kangle, Kautiliya Arthuswvira (Univenity of Bomba ) (1965), Patt 11; 221
बा to vara 43.17 of The Book on Arteaga oes?) 1969 art ॥॥ pape था,

“Kane, History of Dharnuastrus (1972), Vol, 3, page 301,
‘kane, Hitory of Dhirmasanras (107%), Vol. 4, gage 311,



9

of variations or aggravations in each of these broad categories, For example,
theft was classified into three kinds according to-the value of the things stolen—
trifling, middling and grave or high.’ Another interesting refinement was the
classification of thieves into open or patent thieves and secret thieves, reminding
us to a certain extent of the modern discussions about white, collar crimins.s
and others. In open or patent thieves were included traders who enspic;
false weights and measures, gamblers, quacks, persons giving bribes, perscs:.
whe profess to arbitrate, persons who manufacture counterfeit articles and the
like2. “Concealed thieves” are. illustrated by persons who move about with
tools for house-breaking without being observed. These were again sub-divided
into nine categorics.?

“Learned discussions as to the right of private defence were not unknown *
3.83, Detailed rules are‘to be found for the punishment of abettors The rules
relating to abetment and the penalties for various species of abetment as pre-
vided by Katyayana‘ offer an interesting parallel to the graded punishment io
the Indian Penal Code for various species of abetment.

3.14. The range of offences itself was surprisingly पाए, . Not only were offences
such as murder, rape, dacoity and the like (which may be calicd conventional
offences) punishabic. but there were provisions punishing other crimes as well.
For example, not running, to the rescue of -another person. in distress Was an
offence.© This is a surprisingly modern provision, as it should be noted that
it is only during the last twenty years or so that the question. whether such -an
omission ought (0 be. made an offence has been seriously debated in common
Jaw countries.

3.45. Punishment is prescribed for causing damage to trees in city parks. to
trees providing shade, 10 trees hearing flowers and fruits. to trees which are
useful, to trees in holy places, or wees serving as boundary marks.”

Even the giving of x. wroug decision, if dene corruptly by a judge, was
regarded as punishahle.*

An ‘inleresting provision was that punishing a person who made a breach
in an embankment.” Fqually interesting is the prevision punishing 3 person.
who, exctp: in cése of extrente Aeeessity, drops filth on the king’s high read '*

3.46. As ts juciaal procedure in criminal cases. the law-givers scem io fh.

been awate ef ioe presumption of waimocence, there are texts which forbid con
tion merely on stspicion.”/ Rules for the evaluation of evidence of various
classes of pith are met with. The famous Sanskrit play Mrichhekatikam

has an interesting trial scene that reveals stages of procedure not very different
from 8 modern criminal trial
3.17. Perjury and other offences by witaesses were punished severely by the
crimins? law'?, the penalty being fine and banishment,
3.48 There were six types of punishment,—fine, reprimand, torture: imprison-
ment, death and banishment.

The punishment was graded according to several factors. It was material
to consider whether the offence was the first crime of the offender’? or whether

Punishment
abetment.

Offences,

Crimina!
dure.

Perjury

Punishment—type |
of,

it was his second criminal act, and so on. The time and place (of the offence):

and the strength and knowledge (of the offender} were to bé fully considered’*

iKaneg, History of ‘the Dharmasastra (1972), Vol. 3, pages 519, 520,
‘Kane, History of the Dharmasastra (1972, Vol. 3, page 520.

‘Katyayana, Verses 832-834, as quotedby Kano, History of the Dharmasestra (1972),
Vol. 3, page 529.

‘Kane, History of the Dharmasastra (1972), pages 507-508.
\yor page पक 832-834, as quoted by Kane, History of the Dhgrmasastra (1972),
है ‘Kangle, Kautiliya Arthasastra (1965), Part 3, page. 230.

3.19 "Kangle, Kautiliya Arthasasteg (1965), Part 3, paga 229, citing chapter 3.18 and

‘Kautiliya 1५.9; Kane, History of the Dharmasastra (1972), Vol. 3, page 271.
‘Manu IX, 279; Vol. 25, Sacted Books of the Bast, page 392.

*Mianu IX, 282; Vol, 25, Sacred Books of the East, page 392,

UKame, History of the Dharmasastra (1973), page 521. पु
BManw: Vill, 120-123; Vol, 25, Sacred Books of the East, page 275.

*Manu VIII, 129; Vol, 25, Sacred Books of the East, page 276.

“Mann WII, 16; Vol, 25, Sacred’ Books of ‘the East, page 218,

of

proce:


10

Compensation to 3.19. It is one of the justified complaints against the modern penal law that in
victim. criminal proceedings the injured party is generally neglected. In ancient Hindu
Law, the law-givers were fully aware of the necessity of directly compensating
‘the victim of the crime. Thus, Manu says.)
“Lf a limb is injured, a sound (is caused) or blood (flows), the assailant
shall be made to pay {to the sufferer) the expenses of the cure, of the
whole (both the usual amercement and the expenses of the cure as a)
fine (to the king}”
Manu adds— ‘
“He who damages the goods of another, be it intentionally or uninten-
tionally, shall give satisfaction to the (owner) and pay to
equal to the (damage)”. .
dt would appear that on the basis of the injunotions contained in the texts,
one could construct an entire code of criminal la

F
i
हे

made
in the hierarchy of courts as well as in the procedures followed by them,
as the society gradually became more and more developed. The preseny
complications and delays in disposal of cases are not uch on
the technical and cumbersome nature of our legal system they are
other factors operating in and outside the courts. Ip spite of the fact
are still heavily dependent on agriculture, we can no longer be regarded
undeveloped peasant society, in view of the great strides that have beer
in the direction of industrialisation and urbanisation of population, besides
expansion of trade and commerce. It will be a retrograde step 140 revert to the
Primitive method of administration of justice by taking our disputes to a group
of ordinary taymen ignorant of the modem complexities of life .
sant with legal concepts and procedures. The real necd appears to
improve the existing system to meet modem requirements
national ethos and noi to replace it by an inadequate s:
behind long ago.

'Mama VII, 287; 288 Vol. 25, Sacred Books of the East, poze 393,

&

i
Baga,

ft



CHAPTER 4

STAGES OF DELAY :SUMMONS -
In dealing with the question of delays in the disposal of civil suits in the Scretiay of pluiat.
ets, we must first direct our attestion to the points of botileneck. or
stages of the suit where delays actually take place. After a plaint is filed in court,
the same i scrutinised by a court official with a view to secing as to whether
court fee has been paid whether the other formalities for filing the
with.

and
Ta some courts considerable time clapses between the filing of the plaint and
the registering of the suit, It should be ensured that the time taken for this
purpose should not exceed one week.

42, The Coun then fixes a date for which summonses are issucd to the Issue of summons
defendant. These summonses are prepared by the court afficial on a printed ©

form. As the duties of the court official are manifold, it takes him a oumber

of days to prepate the necessary summonses. It would result in considerable

saving of time and ensure prompe issue of-summons if, along with the piaint | -

besides the copies of the plaint, the necessary forms of summons, duly filled in,

afe also filed by the plaintiff. AN) that would have to be done in such an event

by the presiding officer or some other authorised official would be 10 insert the

date of hearing in the blank left for the purpose, sign the summons and put the
* seal of the court 00 the same.

43. Complaints are often made against the process servers of getting mixcd Summons to be
up with with one of the parties to the case and on that account. not getting service 2a! through pea-
effected. Usually, the defendant is interested in delaying the case ‘and in Jiew $s ‘by post.

of some gratification. il is stated. the process setver makes an incorrect report

of his being not available. On other occasions, a plaintiff gets an ex parte stay-

order or other such order prejudicial to the defendant and is interested in not

getting service effected upon the opposite side with a view to prolonging the

operation of the ex parte.order. In sach an event it is not unusual for a plaintiff
. to get an incorrect report from the process server regarding the non-service of

the defendant. To get over such a state of affairs, it 18 desirable that the sum-"

mons should issue to the defendant both in the ordinary way and by registered

cover. This is what is now required as a result of the amendment already made

in the Code of Civil Procedure.’ The registered cover should be sent
acknowledgment duc. हि दर

4A. There are some salutary provisions of the Code which should be kept in Serrice of sum
view in order to avoid delay at the stage of service of summons upon the defen- एप:

dant. Where the court is satisfied. or has reasonable cause to believe, ttat the

defendant is keeping out of the way for the -purpose of avoiding service, or

when for any other reason the court is satisfied that summons cannot be served

in the ordinary way, the court bas the power of directing substituted service as

contemplated by Order V, rule 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure? Some of the

methods of effecting substituted service are by affixation of a copy of the summons

on 8 conspicious part of the court house and also upon Some conspicuous part

of the house (if ahy) in which the defendant is known to have Iast resided or

castied on business or personally worked for gain or by intimation by beak of

drums in the locality wherein the defendant is known to have fast शक छा by

ication in a newspaper having circulation in that locality. ‘Substituted service

is as effectual as if it had been made upon the defendant personally, In case the

<ircumstances warrant, the court should readily make use of the provisions of

Onder V, cule 20 in the matter of getting service effected.

45 Where the aumber of defendants is very large and they have the same Representative
interest in the suit, tufl use should be made of the provisions of Order 1, cule है Mt :
of the Code of Civil Procedure which permit a person to sue or defend a. suit

> on bebalf of other persons having the same interest. '

20. 5, BL 19A, Code of Civil Procedure. (Simultaneous ite of gammors tor rervice
by post io addition to pertonal service). -
90. 5, R. 20, Code af Civil Procedare,

1९


Administrative su-
pervision of = pro-
cess servers.

12

46. To obviate delay in the matter of effecting service because of neglect. ”
lethargy or other extraneous considetation on the part of the process servers,
it is necessary that there should be proper admmistrative supervision of their work.
11 also makes it necessary io ensure that the process serving agency is manned
by persons of the requisite calibre and integrity. This question is to some extent
Nnked with the pay scales of the process servers. If necessary, the same should
be suitably revised. With a-view to secure proper administrative supervision,

- we have in some States a judicial officer who is designated as Administrative Sub-

Examination of
process server.

Judge and who spends a major part of his time in sypervising and looking after
the work of process servers and bailiffs in big cities.' It may be useful to adopt
similar practice in large cities in other States. . .

The suggestion that some incentive may also be provided to process servers
for getting personal service effected on a number of persons in a month may. also
be looked into.

4.7, According to Order V. rule 19 of the Code of Civil. Procedure, where a ~
summons is returned under rule 17; the Court shall, if the return under that rule
has not been verified by the affidavit of the serving officer, and may, if it has

‘ been so verified, examine the serving officer on oath, or cause him to be so exa-

mined by another court touching his proceedings, and may make such further
enquiry in the matter as it thinks fit;, and shall either declare that the summons
has been duly served or order such service as it thinks fit. _ This provision under-
lines the importance of the reports of the process server and contemplates that
those reports should be correct. To ensure that the above provision is. not re-
duced to a dead etter, we are of the opinion that in those cases where the court
as a result of enquiry comés to the conclusion that the process server has made
a false report, it should take stringent and prompt action agains, the process
server concerned. Such action, we have no doubt, would act. 8४: 9 deterrent for
other process servers making false reports. | It would alse +viate the. necessity
of applications under Order IX, C.P.C. for setting aside ex parte dectec or ex
parte proceedings which consume so much of the time of the court.

186७ also para. 11.4, infra.


CHAPTER 5 -

PLEADINGS AND ISSUES: THE PRE-TRIAL PROCEDURE

Sl. Order VII of the Code of Civil Procedure specifies the particulars which Ccmpiiance
must be contained in a plaint. If proper attentidn is paid at the appropriate tme —- Order 7.
to ensure that: all the requirements of Order VIF have been complied with, it
would eliminate many causes of delay which occur on account of non-compliance
wich those ‘provisions. Particular attention shauld be invited to Order VII.
tule 14. according to which, where a plaintiff sues upon a document in his posses-
sion or power, he should deliver the document or a copy thereof tc be filed with
the plaint,
5.2. It has come to the notice of the Commission that in many of the Slates 8, है, R. 1—Writ-
the defendant does not file the written statement on the first date of hearing and ten statement to
that 2 number of adjournments covering a period of many months ate granted be filed at. frst
for ihis purpose, According to the provisions of Order VIII, Rule | of the Searing.
. Code of Civil Procedure, the defendan, shall, at or before the first hearing or
within such time as the court may permit, present a written statement of his
defence. In fact, in the summonses which are issued tu the defendany in regular
suits, it is indicated that the defendant should file his written statement on the
first: hearing.

5.3. _ Attention in this connection may be invited to the provisions of Order ४, 0. 5, R-S—Sum-
Rule 5 of the Code of Civil Provedure, according 19 which the court shall deter. monses for settle-
mine, at the time of issuing summons. whether it-shall h for settlement nf issues Mept Of | laeues
Only or for the-final disposul of th: बचा, and the summons shal! contain a direc final disposal.
tien accordingly. It would therefore, follow that excepi in cases where ihe .

~ summons is issued for the fina! disposal of the ‘suit, Hie summons chail he for
the settlement of issucs, Such settlement of issues can take place .only if the
written s‘a’ement is filed. It is. therefore, implicit in 2 summons for the settle-
ment of issues thai the written statement be filed on the date of hearing after
service of the. defendant.

£4. In faci, the summonses which are issued in such cases are requited. as a Filing of written
result ‘of amendment made by Act 104 of 1976 to the Code of Civil Procedure, statement. ltd
to expressly comtain a dircction that the defendant shoutd file the written

statement on the above date of hearing.! .

it would, of course, be open to the court to ex‘end the time for filing 1
written statement in appropriate cases, but thé normal rule should be to file tl (व
written statement on the first datc of hearihg. .

$5. It should alsu be imperatiy: for the defendant to file, along with th.

Copies 2५. -vrittes,

wrilten statement, a copy of the same for being supplied to the plaintilt. Sonic me fo be.

High Courts have already made a provision about that.by muking the necessary
aendment? in Order VII. rule 1 of वार Cod2 of rocedure. The requi
rent that the defendant should produce all documents in his possession or pawe-
oa which he bases his defence or any claim for set-off shou'd also कट eniorce +
This would prevent. delays and adjournmests for che production of thase
documents. ss

$6. The main reason for the omission of tho defendants in many’ States ६:
file the written statement on the fist date of heating has been the laxity को 2
ing the provisions of Order VIII. rate 1, ९.०४, - The Commission was
the practice-prevailing in s¢me States is that on die. first date of hearing the des
ant merely puts in appearance along with his counge! whom he engages jus: बह
that date and gets a date. He thereafter goes back (0 his villaee with a view ५5
secure documents which may form the basis of his defence, Th seems that it
because of the prevaience-of the genere! impcession that wri ten statements are ne
ty be fied on the firs: date of hearing, that there is con-compl'ance with the ie-

quirersents ofthe Code of Civil Procedure. “This resuhis in repeated itips hy ib:

ferdant from his village: 10 the district or Taluka head-quarters where the court

iSee Appendix F lo the Code.
Local amerdmeats as te Order २. के, ), as cc che copies of written sisteornts,

3

in. fling
statements.

2-468 LAD/ND/78


4

holds its sittings, The repealed trips alse put unnecessary financial burdén upon -
the parties, All this can be obviated if the provisions of the Code are onforted
by the court and an impression comes to prevail that it is necessary to file the
written statement on the first date of hearing. The effect of that would be that
4S s00n as service is cffécted upon the defendant, he would immediately 177०1 mov
Bs in the matter and try to secure naceastry documents before the date of

If, however, the time-lag between stivice of the defendant and ‘the ‘first date
hearing is too short, that may be a geod ground for giving him another date for.
filing written statement. 7

te re 5.7, One of the most important Provisions which can go a

il a idence arcumserit’ Cry in
fore eattemeel curtailing the 6 and circumscribing ti area of controversy is that Sonat .

in Order X, C-P.C., relating to. examination of the perti¢s by the coum before
the framing of the issues. Experience tells us that if proper use is made’ of these
Provisions and the statements of parties.are recorded before the framing of the
_ issues, many admissions, which. do not appear in the pleadings, are made. Even
. when the parties are at variance on certain points, the statements can Teveal the-
absence of difference up to a certain extent. The admission about the exécation
of documents before the framing of ‘the issues also helps in narrowing the area -
“of controversy. The inevitable effect of all this would be to obviate the necessity ~
of producing evidence in respect of matters which stand admitted as a result of.
the recording of statements of parties: under Order X.

how to 5.8 In order to be in a position to make effective use of the provisions of .
7७ effec- Order X, it is essential that the trial judge should have read in advance the plead.
ings of the pacties and should know the ¢asc-of cach Party as set ont in the plead-

ings. It is only then that he would be able to put the crucial questions to the

parties while recording their statements for narrowing the area of conttorerny. 5

This apart, statement before the framing of the issues aiso helps.in clearing he
obscurities, designed and-inadvertent, oe Pleadings and knowing the exact startd

_ of the patties from. which’ they would find it difficult to wriggle cut subsequently.

एच ty be fram-.$,9. Familiarity with the pleadings is also of vital importance for the trial
ed by the Judge. judge in framing the issues. The practice which prevails in subordinate

courts

in some States of depending upon the. drafe issues supplied -by the ‘counsel of
parties, withont the trial judge himself applying his mind to the pleadings and
the issues, is extremely undesirable. It, in effect, is tantamount #6 the abdication
of an essential function by the trial judge. Although it is desirable to ask.counsel
for the parties about tie issues framed in the case and to ask for their comments
and suggestions regarding the forer.of an issue and the desirability of framing an.
additional issue, it must not ऐड forgotten that the pri ३००१३ ae to ensure.
that correct issues are framed is that of the trial court. Suc h responsibility should
neither be shirked nor abdicated. ‘ - .

In the above context, the obsérvations made by the Civit Justice Committee
presided over by Mr. Justice Rankin! have as much relevance today'as they fad -
ar the time when they were made in 1925-:— .

“Not only is the law clear. The duty of the court to frame the issues itself

” and frame them properly is laid down in many circulars and rulea of High
Courts, Presiding officers ignore the directions of the law and the orders

- of their own High Courts and continue to leave the framing of issues. to other
persans, There 18 no reason of-course why they should not take sugges
tions from the parties as to the issucs to be framed. It would be unwise
for them not to take such estions. The taking of suggestions is, how-
ever, a very different matter है, rom the’ ignoring of their own responsibility.
When we endeavoured to ascertain the views of presiding officers as to why
they did not follow the clear law on the subject, we were often met with the -
teply that under present conditions presiding officers have no time to com-
ply with the law and the rues. -

“This objection will है ee ive examination. If the law directa pre-
siding officers to perform 8 duty, that duty must be performed
and time must be found for its performance, but apart. from that, this
objection is unsustainable. In: suits, where the contest is slight, the दाफ- .
mination of the parties and of the pleadings should gecupy a very short ©
time before the issues are framed. These cases occur for the most part in

‘Rankin Committee,



15

the courts of munsifs, There, although the work is frequently very heavy,
the time necessary for the purpose is not considerable and can be found.
In suits in which the contest is severe, consitlerable time must occasionally
be devoted to the purpose, but those suits occur usapily in the courts of
subordinate judges who do not decide many ¢ontested’ suits in a year.
When-the preliminary work has been done carefalty ahd intel iligently, ly, there
will Se a. very great saving of time in the later stages. Three spent
upon the examination of parties, the studying of the pleadings and careful
scrutiny of the documentary evidence may mean five or six days saved during
the subsequent hearings.” ‘

$0. About the necessity of recording statements of parties before framing Law Consmis-
पु क in big complicated cases, the Law Commission, im its fourteenth report. sion’s view in the
observed: - * * 1b Report.

“As pointed out by the Uttar Pradesh Judicial Reforms. Committee, the pre-
siding officer is over-worked and bas io rush throagh.the process of settl-
ing. issues and does not have sufficient time to make proper use of Crder X.
Further, in view Of the heavy arrears in many of.the Courts, the presiding
officers are not inclined to spend time and labor over preliminary steps
in cases which they themselves may not be called apom-to try. In simple
cases of small vahie. the examination of patties ander these rules may pro-
bably put an end to the suit by the examination-demonstrating that the ~
parties are not at variance. on any matter whatever, or have only trifling

ferences. In difficult and complex cases a great saving of time will
resyll, if proper and timely use is made of:these provisions, It should
be the duty of the district judges at the time of inspection to see whether
-the presiding Officers make proper use of these yxovisions. Their failure
to observe thése rules should. also be taken- info consideration in decid-
ing upon the officet’s fitness for promotion.”

SUL, Regarding framing of issues, the Law Commission in that report stated?:

“The court is undoubtedly entitled tc invite the advotates of the partics
fo state the-pgints on which the parties are at issue. But the framing of
Proper issues is the responsibility of the couet. igsues constitute the
points of dispute on w! hick the parties go to t al ‘and give notice to the
parties of the matters on which they have to addyce etidence or expound
the law. Unless, therefore, the issues are complete atid-precise, the trial
cannot, come to a satisfactory conclusion, If issues do not reflect .the
peal points in dispute, advantage is likely 10 be takdn of these defects
ata sul sequent, stage or in appeal. Delay abd tajustige will often result
the {af the first contt 10 deal with and decide the real points

है, provisioas ‘which may have the effect of conaiJerably curiailing ©. 11-~-Discovary

evidence and narrowing the area of controversy are comteimed in Order XT and 204 Inspeotion,

Order XIE-of the Code of Civil Procedure, ‘the forwier felates to discovery ० 0, शा

and inspection, the latter! Order pertains to admissivas, “Under Order XI, any Admissions,

enti imteredgatories in writing
the opposite parties. Order XI also SP for apali-
7 and for their inspection. jet KYL provides
for notice to admit documents as well ax to admit facts. jon for iss of
provisi arise in those civil cases a numiter of
bie of fact arise and the cate involves many. isears. In comparatively
f sa s

to to thens provi
‘observed by the Rankin Committee,’ the framers of the (Cotle anticipsted that -
in mofuseil ‘courts the members of the Bar vould mot Hd कं जे चांद accustont’
 themeclves to the procedure provided and woald ' themoszives of
- jta provisions, They, therefore, inserted in section 30 of the Code a provision

<whick gives the court abthority to order ican ae ion of its ows
ea Their anticipations have unfortutately been nies ad the power
iy

tp the court hes not been utilend._ At the sng can be 20
3 judicious use of these provisions, can © narrow
the area of controversy and curtail the volus:2 of evidence. ©

eee ee Ta Enae

*  3Rourtessth Report, Vol 1, page 313.
‘*Pourteeath Report, Vol. 1, page 372, para 26, pasa 28.
‘Rankin. Committee.


Pre-tria!

dure ia U.S.A,

_is to simplify “the. issues, secure agreements on

Wo .

513. In the U. S.A. we have pre-trial procedure. The scope of pre-trial dis-~
covery under the federal rules is very broad and covers any matier, not privilee-
ed, which is relevant 10 the subject matter involved in the pending action,
whether it relates to the claim or defence of the i

‘examining party or to ‘th ४ claim
tr defence of the other party, including the existence, description, nature, custo-'

dy, condition and location of any books, documents or other. tangible things:
aud the identity ang location of persons having knowledge of relevant facts,
It is not round fer objection that the ‘tesii ony will be inadmissible at the
trial if the testimony sought appears reasonai ly calculated to ledd 10 the dis-
covery of admissible evidence.
The federal rules also provide for.a pretrial conference “called by the judge
and attended by the parties and their lewvers”. The purpose of the conference
; ; . facts which are not really in
dispute, and give the parties. another ‘Opportunity to see if the case can be setéled.
without trial. :
S14. Regarding the success of discovery and pre-trial procedures, the follow-
ing opinion has been expressed in the Courts, the Public and the Law Explosion *
edited by Harry W. Jones!» — +
“The discovery and pre-trial procedure has beet in operation in the
United States District Courts for over twenty-five years and hus served
as a model for reformed state court procedure in 4 Majerity of the states.
There js no doubt that it has produced beneficial resulis: cases are fetier +
Prepared, actual trial time has been saved by pre-trial processing, settle-
meats without trial have been encouraged. and Probably the quality of |
justice has improved in the cases. which do. go to trial. The procedure
is nét, however, an unmixed blessing,” -Critics claim that it is not appro-
priate in all types of cases, that it 18 “subject to abuse, that it has increased
the costs of fitigation, ang that it has“contributed to court congestion by
increasing pre-trial delay, Further study and experience will he necessary
before a balance can be struck between the metits and demerits of the:
“system and a delermination made as to the modifications indicated.”

In or opinion, the provisions contained in Orders X. XT and Xi, of
che Code of Civil Procedure are sufficient to deal with the situation in India
and it is mot necessary to transplant the pre-frial system with all irs amplitude
जा the ladiae soil. We may also in this context refer ro the observations of
the Law Commission in its Fourteenth Report with which we agree and which
read as under?: . . हु

“The working of ths system of pre-trial procedure which ‘has been intro-
duced in some states in the United states was examined by FEvershed
Committee. The American system made it clear that the success of these
pretrial conferences depended for the most part on the personality of the
Judge and his willingness to deal and aptitude for dealing with suck pro-
ceedings. ‘No doubi’, said the Committee. ‘it would be the same in
England’. We believe it would be the same in India as well. The Com-
mittee examined this procedure with reference to the Rules ‘of Practice

- and Procedure in Fagland avd came to the conclusion that the existing,
rules relating to the summons for difections in Order 30 of the Rules
of the Supteme Court’ give all the powers that’are needed. The Com-
mittes took the view .that the general adoption of the pre-trial conference
procedure in alt forms of proceedings would not be advisable in England.
The procedure has undoubtedly its attractions, pariicularly to those who
have become accustomed -to its workiag. After careful consideration. we
have reached a clear conclusion that it would. not be appropriate for
adoption in this country—certaimly not for the purpose of saving cos‘s,
More than this, the Procedure may betome somewhat elaborate and
of Jong diration, possibly developing into a ‘finishing expedition’.

“As lo the introduction of similar provisions for a similar procedure
in India, the witnesses before us have pointed out that the practice already
obtains in a modified form under the: provisions relating to the cxamina-
tion of parties ind iscovery and inspection under Orders X, XT and १418]
of the Civil Procedure (५ ‘Fhe provisions for the amendment of?

‘Barry W. Jones (Ed.), The Courts, the Public and the Law Explosion (1965). Pager!
22, 23 article by Milton D. Green, “The. Business of the Trial Courts”. पर

* "Fourteenth Report. Vol. 1, page 323. i.



[7

pleadings are found in Order VL, Rules 16 and 17, of the Civil Procedure
Code. Rule 16 gives Power to the Court at any stage of the proceedings
(> order to be struck oul or amended any matter in any pleading which
may be ib} unnecessary, (२) scandalous or which May tend to prejudice.
embarrass or delay the fair trial of the suit. Similarly the duty of fram-
aig precise issues is cast upon the. court under jhe Provisions of Order
XIV and if these issues are framed after the preliminary examination of
the parties and the reading -of pleadings as already suggested. it would
ne doubl lead to 2 considerable simplification of the issues. Thus, it can
he said that the rules of the Civil Procedure Code amply provide for
ai the maiters caumerited in Rule 16 of the Roles of the Civil Procedure
for the United States District Courts.”

3.18. We may now consider the desirability of the trial court initiating concilia-
tion proceedings. It would also be necessary in this context
- Stage at which efforts should be made for conciliation.
that the Code of Civil Procedure dots not contain ex pre:
purpose. Under Order XXXITA, which was inserted with :
(977, by Act 104 of 1976, a duly has been cast upon the courts to make efforts
for setilement in suils telatiag to matters concerning the family. Apart from
such disputes, as alreudy mentioned, ine Code does nol cuntain any specitic
Provisious. We are dealing elsewhere in this Repos:! with the question about
he irability ‘of having conciliation councils or boatds and the necessity of
tion efforts by suck councils or boards. We ire convened bere with
the question ax whether a trial judge might hinsetf undertake the sole of a
conciliator, iS lespect, we ure in agreement with the view expressed by
Co its Fourteenln Report that the tial judge could hisnself
ator. The proper time for initiating and facrfully help-
ing parties w arrive ut a compromise would be when the clarification of the
pleadings and the examinalion of parties under Order X. Rules { and 2 take
Place. Sometimes, it happens jhat judges who (ry to induce she parties to come
to an amicable setilement are misunderstood, That shouid nul. as observed
by the Law Commission in its Fourteenth Report? make a judge deny himself
all initiative ia the matter of Suggesting a compromise or deter him in help'ng
the parties in ariivimy at a settlement in suitable cases, As observed by the
Commission. a competent and expercnced judge wh. hus learned to m a
Proper use of the provisions of Order X will have no diffic ty in perceiving
Cases yre-eminently suitable for a compromise. A few tactful” words by the
Judge at a suitable opportunity, without the appeatamece of taking a view on
ether side and without playing an unduly active role. may bring about the
desired result. The promotion of a compromise in suitab'e cases should be lett
largely to the initiative and the personahty of the judge and to the parties and
their lawyers, The Bar can undoubtedly play a very useful ant Significant part
in bringing about a compromise. .

To reproduce ४ passage trom the American Bar Asscaration Journal’:

“Luwyers perioim ६ real service to their clients and 10 seviety and the
courty when the: make setilements that are cight settlements: where there
4te two sides ७) ५ case, where the issue may well be in doubl, where the
facts are honesily in conflict or where the jaw is unsettled, there is al-
ways some fivure which is fair to both sides. In should be the lawyer's
aint (0 make such a seitlement if he can” :

‘Ree ¢ Chapter relating ए Concihation Whapler Mae ___जन्‍न्‍+-+ relating lo Concihation (Chapter है, infra).

Fourteenth Reporl. Vol. 1. pages $2032%. praia 8. second: sub-pars,

Emly BR. Buckeer (May 1929), American Bar Assoe'ation faurnal. “The ‘Trial of

Causes", cited in 14th Report, Vol. 1, page 321, Para 38, last sub-paragraph

Conciliation,


18

CHAPTER 6

COURT DIARY AND EVIDENCE: SUBSTITUTION OF LEGAL
REPRESENTATIVES

Court Diary and Evidence

Court Diary—fix- 6.1. In the matter of controlling the court diary and in fixing cases for each
ing Cases—impor-
tant function of
the Judge.

Practice of fixing
too many cases
not desirable.

Creation of addi-
tional courts.

Prolix
tion of

examina-
witnesses.

working day. the trial judges discharge a very important duty. There is quite
often a tendency on the part of presiding judges to leave the matter of fixing
dates to their readers or sheristadars. This is extremely undesirable, because
such a practice is liable to be abused by the readers or sheristadars, The ques-
tion as to how many cases of various categories,—i.e., miscellaneous cases, issue
cases, evidence cases and argument cases,—should be fixed on a day calls for
judicious appraisement of the capacity of a judge to deal with a number of cases
within the limited court time. Such a power should not be delegated by the
presiding judge to subordinate officials.

6.2, The practice which prevails in some courts of fixing a number of cases on
a day on which there is no reasonable chance of their being taken up for hear-
ing, should be avoided. As it is, we find that some courts spend half an hour
every day in calling certain cases with a view to adjourn them to a future date.
The time spent for this purpose can hardly be considered to have been put to
any constructive use,

Referring to the practice of some courts fixing more work than they could
complete on the ground that if work just sufficient for the day were fixed, some
cases might collapse and the presiding officer might thus be left withput full
occupation, the Rankin Committee observed! :

“The uimost concession that should be made to this view, would be
to fix for hearing on one day perhaps one quarter. more than could be
done on it and to give the undone work precedence on the next date. We
have been unable to find in the majority of cases that any such practice
hhas been adopted. More work is fixed for the day than can possibly be
got through, whatever drops out, and precedence is not given to the
undone work on the next date,

In aty circumstances the principle is vicious. It appears to be based
upon the idea that the courts may safely ignore the convenience of the
public, in order to enable them to show a tale of work, which they sup-
pose will be considered satisfactory by the higher authorities. It must
be impressed and impressed very clearly that the first consideration should
be the convenience of the public and that all other considerations should
give way to that.” हि
The above observations, in the opinion of the Commission. provide a

good rule for guidance.

63. There must be some kind of standard for the number of cases pending in
court. Whenever there are indications of an increase in the number of cases
in a coutt beyond the prescribed standard, efforts should be made to relieve the
congestion by having additional courts.

64. A very important, if not the most important, stage in the trial of a case
is the recording of evidence. There is, it is said, a. tendency in India to over-
prove allegations. This is trie aot only of essential allegations, but also of

_allegations which are not very essential. This results in considerable time of

the court being taken up in the recording of oral evidence even at the point of
examinalion-incchiet waa large number of cases. If that be true of cxamina-
tion-in-chief, the position is much worse in cross-examination. Cross-examina-
tion of witnesses often tends to be unduly prolix. Some clients are inclined %
judge the proficiency of the counsel by the length of his cross-examina ton हैँ
a witness. This attitude reveals a pathetic ignorance of the technique of effective
cross-examination. We may also. in this context refer to the observations of
the Civil Justice Committee*:

‘Rankin Committes.



19

“The impression created in the minds of those who are acquainted with
the procedure in English Courts of Law, as to the production of evidence
in courts in India is that there is a tendency in India to over-prove essen-
tial allegations. There is further a tendency to preve and to over-prove
uhessential allegations. Such observers wonder at the extraordinary ela-
boration with which the examination-in-chief is conducted. Every sort
of detail, however distant may be its bearing upon the value of the evi-
dence of the witnesses, is brought out, and much time is taken up in
eliciting and recording unessential particulars to which no reference is
usually made in argument, and to which no reference can be made
usefully, *

Even more surpcising is the cross-examination. It is not toc much
to say that cross-examination frequently extends over a period which is
more than six times as long as is necessary to produce useful results. The
waste of time is most noticeable: in cases of larger value, especially in
which the dispute relates to valuable landed property It is difficult to
exaggerate the unnecessary labour and the delays caused thereby.

It is not easy to devise a remedy. The litigants prefer that examina-
tion and. cross-examination should be conducted in this manner, and the
methods are the traditional methods of many. District Bars. We feel
that we should not be justified in su; ing alterations in the law by
which presiding officers would be authorised? to terminate the examina-
tion of any particular point. It seems only possible to wait, till litigants
begin to see for themselves that in their own interests thete should be

expedition. At present we must leave the solution to the good sense of
the Bench and Bar.”

65. Sometimes questions which are put to the witnesses in cross-examination
are unnecessary and uncalled for; on actasions hatassing and even slanderous.
It is on such occasions that it becomes necessary for the trial judges to control
the proceedings, Although it is essential that all reasonable opportunity be
afforded to counsel for parties to prove their case and bring material on record
by explaining and cross-examining witnesses which may Suppor mt the respective
cases of patties, the presiding officers have also to ensure that under the cover
of that the file is not burdened with wholly irrelevant and unnecessary material.
Experience tells us that many presiding officers, with a view to avoid a piquant
situation with an aggressive counsel, adopt the path of least resistance and allow
most things to be brought on record wi Bich an aggre aggressive counsel desires. The
trial judge who is shaky in professional understanding, imperfect in moral reso-
Iution or unduly conciliatory in personality, will inevitably be over-powered and
overborne by forceful and ‘aggressive trial counsel. Cases have not been un-
known when some judges have revéaled psychic inability to stand up abrasive
and strong-willed leaders of the bar. The way the witnesses are treated in wit-
ness-box while being subjected to cross-examination by the cross-examining
counsel was described by Harold Laski after his gruelling cross-examination at
the hands of Sir Patrick Hastiiigs in the following words! :—

“He performs his war dance about you like a dervish intoxicated by the
sheer ecstasy of his skill in his own performance, ardent in his knowledge
that, if you trip for one second, his knife is at your throat......He moves
between the lines of sarcasm and insult. It is an effort to tear off. piece
by piece, the skin which he declares no more than a mask behind which
any man of understanding could have grasped the fouiness of your pur-
pose. He treats you, not as a human being, but as a surgeon might treat
some specimen he is demonstrating to students in a dissecting “room”

66 Whether the above criticism is well-founded or not, the courts must
ensure, while affording every reasonable tunity ६0 the counsel to cross-exa-
mine a witness, that the witness is not sub jected to harassment as might deter
all decent, self respecting persons from coming into the witness-box and giving
evidence about facts within their knowledge. Sections 148 to 152 of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 arm the courts with sufficient power for this purpose.

6.7. We in India have adopted the accusatoria] system as against the inquisi-
torial system which is in vogue in many of the countries of the European continent.

‘Harold Laski.

Control of crom-
examination
the trial judge.

Need to avoid
harassment of wit-
nesaes,

Role of the Judge.


Evidence not to
be taken in instal-
menta.

Affidavits.

20

In an accusatorial system it is for the Patties or their counsel to prove
theit respective case or demolish that ef the adversary, while, in an inquisitorial
system, a great responsibility for bringing the true facts on the record Jies on
the presiding officer of the court. Despite the fact that we have adopted the
accusatorial system, the trial judges, in our opinion, should not play an altoge-
ther passive role, leaving it to the parties and their counsel to bring on recerd
such facts as they may consider essential. The trial judges, we feel, should take
Steater interest in the proceedings before them and uid by putting appro-

1818 questions to the witnesses elicit such information as may be helpful in
Ending the (ruth for determining the points of controversy and also for the
Purpose of removing obscurities on questions of fact,

64 = Another sahuary practice which must be adhered to while recording
evidence is to complete the entire evidence and to avoid recording of evidence
ofa iin in a case in instalments. According! to clause (a) of the proviso ta
sub-rule (2¥ of role 1 of Order X'VIE of the Code of Civil Procedure, when the
hearing of the suit has commenced, it shall be continued from day to day walil
all the witnesses in attendance have been examined, unless the court finds that,
for exceptional reasons ta be recorded by it, the adjournment of the hearing
beyond the following day is necessary. As things are at present, the practice
prevailing in most of the courts is 10 record: evidence in instalments, Such
a practice was condemned by the Law Commission in its Fourteenth Report
in the following words?;

“It has also been brought to our notice that in many States the provisions
of Order XVII, cule 1, are disregarded and the hearing of case once
begun is not continued from day-to-day. This happens in spite of the
instructions 10 the contrary laid down by all the High Courts for the
guidance of subordimate courts. Our examination of the order sheet of
a large number of suits in the courts of munsifs and subordinate judges in

~ West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh showed the utter confusion which Prevails
in the matter of fixing the dates of hearing. Day after day the cases were
adjourned either because the lawyers are engaged elsewhere or because
the court is otherwise busy. Indeed, so chaotic Were the files, that cases
were often adjoumed to a future date only for the purpose of fixing the
Next date of hearing. This difficulty, in our opinion, is created by a total
distegard of the provisions of Order XVI, Rule 1 and a failure (0 appre-
ciate that it contemplates the continued hearing of a case, once it has
Started, from day to day until it is finished. In vatious States we found
the subordinate judiciary acting as if they understood the Code to provide
the contrary. They seemed to think that interrupted hearings should be
the rule and « day-to-day hearing the exception. We found ia some
States the cross-examination of a witness Spread over several hearings
with breaks running in some cases into months. It seemed 10 be the
invariable practice 10 adjourn the case after the closing of the plaintiff's
evidence and before the starting of the defendant ie evidence. It would
also appear to be common practice to adjourn the®case affer the record-
ing of evidence is completed to enable the counsel to हर their
arguments. A further adjouroment invariably takes place after the argu-
ments are closed for the judge to deliver his judgment. It needs to be
emphasised that every ste> in this method of what may be described as
the heating of a suit through a series of adjournments, is contrary to the
Code, There is no reason why all the witnesses in the case whether those
of the plaintiff or of the defendant should not be examined in a series,
the evidence followed immediately by arguments of counsel, and, in most
cases, the judgment following the close of the arguments.”

We fully agree with the above observations.

“69, In the matter of recording evidence, we should also consider the desicabi-

lity of proving things Jike those of a formal nature by affidavits, instead of by
oral evidence. As it is, the general practice is to call witnesses to Court even
though their evidence is of a very formal character. Much time of a number
of witnesses whose evidence is cf a formal nature and, to some extent, of the
Coutts, would be saved if, instead of producing them in courts, the facts in
a aaa nS

‘Order 17, rule 1 (20), Proviso, C.P.C,
*Fourteenth Report, Vol. i, page 335, para 63.


21

respect of which they have to depose are proved: by the atfidavit filed
by them. in accordamce with 0.19, C.P.C. » Without Bi ah थे our concurrence:

we may refer to the observations of Lord Deviint who has gone to the extent
of saying- -

“We shall not make any worthwhile saving in‘ the. cost ‘of litigation so
“.. long as we accept it as the inalienable right of every litigant to have the
whole of his evidence and argument presented by word of mouth. It is

not a right that is recognised by any logal system. extept the Huglish and
those that are based on it.”

G18, kn the matter of adjournments certain changes have been made in. Order
XVIL of the Code of Civil Procedure with effect from February 1, 1977 by Act
104.0f 1976. The. sew provisions, if enforced strictly, wauld prevent unneces ‘ary
adjournment of casés. We have referred above? to ofg of those provisions in
coarection with aveiding the recording of evidence ‘instalments. .The other-
provisions ure?

iowa

“{b) 20 adjournment shall be granted at the request of a party, excepl
where the citcusmstances are beyond the control ‘of that party

(00. the fact that the pleader of a pariy is engaged in, ancther court
shall fot be a ground for adjournment." है

(d) where the illness of a pleader or his inghiiy to conduct the case
for any reason, other than. his being eifjaged ther court, is pui for-
ward as a ground for adjournment, the court shall Det grant the adjourn-

ment unless jt is satisfied that the party applying for adjournment could
not have engaged another pleader in time.”

(6) where a witness is presentin court but a parly or his ricader is
ot preseat or the party or his pleader, thongh' ‘present in court, is not
ready to examine or cross-examine the wittiess, the court may, if it thinks

" fit, record the statement of the witness and pus such-order as it thinks

+ Gt dispemsing with the examinalion-in-chief of crdgs-examination of the

witness, as the case may be, by the party, or his pleader not present or
not ready as aforesaid.”

It is further provided पं

“Where the evidence or a substantial portion. of ihe pvidence of any party

has-already been recorded and such party :fails to appear on any day to
+ which the hearing of ihe suit is adjoumned, the. ¢ourt may, 10 its discretion.
” -peoceed with the case as if such pearly were present.

6.11, We have eppended at the: end of this Report! the details and particulars gpeciat List Sys:
of the Special List Sysiem which has been adopted. in Kerala for the disposal ‘=.
_ Of casts im subbrdinate courts. We have been प्रिया that the system has
proved effective in reducing the backlog of cases abd e@suring early d.sposal
‘of old cases.5 The other High Courts may efamine the question of adopting
the. system in their respective States, either in its enlifety or with such modifica-
tions as may be considered necessary.

. See Law Quarterly, Val, 15, No. I (adian Law Institute, .W. 8, State Unit), page 48.
‘Park 6.8, supra.

2Order 17, nile 12), Proviso, C.P.C.

‘Sea Appendix 2 (Special List System in Kerala). :

414th Report, Vpl. 3, papes 333-334, para 59 fof » blag description of the Madrat


22

Legal  representa- 6,12, One of the causes of long delay in the disposal of cases is the inordinate

tives,

Commissions.

length of time which is consumed in bringing on record the legal representa.
tives Of a party who dies during the pendency of the ‘case. 2 amendment
made in Order XXIL, Rule 4 of the-Code of Civil Procedure and the व
of Rule 4A in that Order by Act 104 of 1976 may. to some extent, be helpful
in relieving the difficuity.

6.13." Another cause of delay in the disposal of cases is the provision about
issue of commissions for the examination of witnesses or for local inspestion.?
Quite frequently, the needful is not done by the mext date of hearing, and the
case has to be adjourted repeatedly on that account. Necessary directions may
be given, while issuing the commission, 10 ensure that the needful is done before
the next date of hearing. Only in -exceptional cases, the necessity should arise
for giving another date for the purpose. Obligation may also be cast, except
in some particular cases, on the party desiring -the examination of 3 witness on
commission to ensure his presence before the commissioner on the date fixed.

1Order 26, Code of Civil Procedure.



CHAPTER 7

next.
The desirable practice for this purpose is to hear arguments i
diately after the conclusion of the evidence, As it we find that in most
the courts there is tiie lag, sometimes ‘considerable,

n the conclusion
the evidence and the addressing 01 arguments in thecase, From a practical

imme-

of
of

Only causes inconvenience;
it alo results in duplication of labour. WP evideane is 7

nce A Tecorded at a stretch—

q 4 ed.
may “be necessary to grant t adjournments to enabilé the partics’ counsel to ant
Prepare for arguments. The adjournments 10 eee ey ae, 9070006 should not
00-80 long as might result in or ing “out of thé impressions created

may cee, the ect tis on. the mind of the judge and tho counsel In

amy case, the recourse to F hhad ‘only in some of the cases

and not invariably in every case, complicated or simple, a: a matter of course.

73. There is a common complaint of atgoments.being addressed. ‘I€ Lengthy
‘May not be out ot place to refer to the observations made in the Fourteenth meat.
Report of the Law jission? Which read as under: पु हे

“It is true that in many cases unduly prolix. Some:
times ta 2 ees sreuments age पक pe

arguments become lengthy because
experience or for other reason is unable to contel counsel.

x
§

court cither from in-
; others are brief and to the point. Similarly some

tad can it गे fo a ny, abe, li with the evidence
and can if necessry go through the record of the case fore the arguments
are

Commenced to refresh its memory. ‘The Presiding officer who has

followed the evidence will be in a much better’ ition to control argu-
ments. The control of arguments is a matter ‘wich . Must pre-eminently

be loft fo the capacity, experience and discretion of the judge aud the good
c

do not think it is practicable to confer: any

special powers on the judge in this respect.
ve often, delay is occasioned by’ the postponement of arguments
to a later date on the conclusion of the evidence, - The aw. coutemplates

that arguments shall be heard immediately after the evidence is conclud-
ed. In many enses, however, arguments ate postponed either because the

lawyers are not ready or because the court has ofher work on hand.

the court’s diary is methodically prepared in the matiner already -indicat-

ed, there will be fewer occasions for a judge to postpone the arguments
‘ on the conclusion of the evidence. The Court must insist upon the law-
yets-appearing in the case Presenting their arguments immediately on the

conclusion of the evidence. Such a. practice Prevails on the original side.
of the High Court in Bombay, Pica however heavy the record, counsel

never ask. for

time to prepare arguments. In ¢ases of exceptional
, complexity and a heavy record, it may perhaps be reasonable

‘14th Report, Vol. 1, pages 345, 346,

23

argu-


sities,

24

to give 4 short udjoursmenl! te enable the lawyers to prepare their arga-
menis, but the normal rule should be to hear the aTgumenis. imme diately
00 the conclusion of. the evidence.”

Citation of autha- 7.4. One general tendency is to cite a very large number of authorities and

fo read lengthy pussages from those judgments. Bxperience tells us that the
fate of most cases depends upon facis, The law beating om the cases is well-
settled by statute or ihe pronouncements of the highest court. Jt would be much
better if. (18 judgments of the trial coutts deal with questions of fact by spprais-
ing the evidence, zefer to the relevant slatutory provisions appicable to the
matter and cite such of those suthorities as have @ direct bearing. Burdening

of the judgments with too many authorities mostly with a view io distirguish
them bas invatiably the effect of making judgmenis unduly lengthy. {ft fas to
be borie in inind that he primary fiusection of the Judge is to decide the case
before him. A judgment should set out the salient facts of the case, deal with
the points of coatrcvetsy, appraise the relevaat evidence, discuss the questions
al faw which arse aud incorporate the Sindings of the court on the various issues,

75. A judgment, it needs to be emphasised, is not a medium to display the
learning of the jusige, on points which have only incidental “bearing . 146 fume-
ton of a yudge while deciding a case is not ihe same as that of a research scholar
writing a thesis cn a particular branch of law. The art of writing not very long
judgments while at the same line dealing with all muierial points of controversy:
can be acquired only slowly. and graduilly, 1; is indeed Jeatning the art of ©
condensing (he maximum of ideas into the minimum of words

Hievily not at the 7,6, There is, however, one danger which we have to guard against. Brevity

cust uf complete:
nem, .

inicrval
arg uments.
judgment.

Preparation
decree.

उ the mutter of judgmeais should not be used as a justification For not dealing
with inconvenient contentions aad sot facing the crux of the argument of 3
counsel ugainst whoni the judge decides the matter. The stress on brief judg-
men.s should certainly not provide a cover for mental lethargy stor an alibi .for
intellzctual dishonesty, A‘ balance has, therefore, to be kept in the matter,

betweerr 7.3. We also wish to emphasise’ the imgor.ance of ensuring that the time-bag
mi

between the conclusion of atguments and the pronouncement of judgment shouk)
not be very tong. Complaints are somedmes made of some judicial ulficers
sleeping over thetr judgments and takin uiusually long iime for this purpose.
This must be pat an end tw. 11 is also a mistake to Suppose that judicial off-
cers can produce betesr judgments dy taking Jung time for their preparation and

* promgancement. We wonkd in 15 context draw atention io the proy.80

appen to sub-rule (1) of Rule 1 of Order XX of the Code of Civil Procedure
by Aci 104 of 1976, according to which! where the judgment is not pronounced
ai once, eve.y endeavour shall be made by the courl lo pronounce the judgment
within fifteen days from the date om which the hearing of the vase was Concluded
but, where it is nol practicable so to do, ihe court shall fix a future day for the
pronouncement of the judgment, and- such day shall not ordinarily be a day
beyond thirty days from (he date on which the hearing of the case was comcluded,
and duc notice of the day so fixed shall be given to the parties or their picaders.
provided lurth-r that where | judgmeny is aot pronounced within Uhirty days from
the datz on which the hearmg of the case was concluded, the Court shall recerd
the reasons for such delay and shail fix a future day on which lhe judgmeat will
be pronounced and dug notice of the day so Bxed shall be given ta the parties or
their pleaders.

DECREE

A. The oveessily of avoiding delay in the preparation of the decree after the
af vronouucemeat of Jadement must also be emphasised, 1 this coniexl, we would
like to invite attention to Rule 6A iaseficd ia Order XX of the Code of Civil
Procedure by Act [04 of 1976. According 10 sub-rule (2) of the newly added -
Rule, every endeavour ‘shall. be made to ensure hat the decree is drawn up us
expeditiously as possible. und. in any case, within Rfteen days from the date on
which the judgment is pronounced; but where the decree 18 not drawn up within

'O, 2, है. ।, CPC.
©. 2) & 6A, CPC.


25

the time aforesaid, the Court shall, if requested so to do by a party des:rous of
appealing against the decree, certify that the decree has not been drawn up and
indicate in the certificate the reasons for the delay.

73 One other stage where considerable delays take place in certain category Stage after preli-
Of suits is that. subsequent to the passing of a preliminary dectee. In suits for PUNY 0
rendition of accounts or for partition, the cowris, after awarding preliminary ७७ pe aa
decree, generajly appoint a Commissioner for going into the accounts or for

effecting partition by mctes and bounds. Experience tells us that such pro-

ceedings before the Commissioner linger on for a long time. In one metropoli-

tan city, the above task is performed by a judicial officer, while in other towns

it. is actually entrusted to Commissioners. Complaint all the’ same has been

sade that even before the said judicial officer the proceedings take unusually

Yong time. It is necessary that the court awarding the preliminary decree should

keep & strict watch with a view to ensure that proceedings after the preliminary

decree. do not get protracted indefinitely. This can be done by asking for some

kind of progress report whenever uest is made for extension of time for

compieti ng. Ue proceedings Some credit may also be given, in terms of statistics,

for awarding the final decree. . .


Advanta,
of coneiliation,

Other countries.

Conciliation in *

Japan.

CHAPTER 8

CONCILIATION

81. One of the methods which can be devised for relieving the courts of the
heavy 1040 of cases is the adoption of the system of conciliation of civil cases.

"Settlement of cases by mutual compromise is Pi often a better method

quite often leaves a trail of bitterness. Results more in consonance with justice
equity and good conscience can sometimes be achieved by having a mutual settle-
ment of the dispute than by having a court decision one way or the other,

82, According to the Fourteenth Report of the Law Commission,’ the system
of conciliation was being tried in three countries. The relevant passage in the
Report zeads as under: .

“The Code of Civil Procedura does not contemplate such (conciliation)
proceedings but such a procedure exists in Japan, France and Norway. In
Japan it is the duty of the court either on the application of the parties
oF suo moto to send all civil proceedings either to a body consisting of
two laymen and a judge-or to judicial commmissioners for a negotiated.
settlement. If the conciliation court succeeds in persuading the parties
to arrive at a settlement, its terms are recorded by the court and the onder
becomes binding as a judgment. In the event of a failure, the proceeding
is dealt with in the ordinary manner. In France, थी cases go to a Cantonal
Court presided over by a layman for conciliation and an agreed settle-
ment. Failing a settlement, the case goes for disposal to the court. Tn
Norway, such proceedings are an essential preliminary to a proceeding in
a civil court. The proceedings first go before a conciliation council, com-
posed of three mediators, designated by the local authority. The council
can record an agreement. If any of the parties fail to appear, the comncil
can in petty cases settle the proceedings. If the conciliation proceedings
fail, the parties may approach the court for the redress of their grievances.”

8.3. The characteristics of the conciliation system in Japan have deen given
in a publication entitled “Outline of Civil Trial in Japan” issued by the Supreme
Court of Japan in 1969. The passages in this Tespect read as under?:

“4. Conciliation Cases.

Conciliation is a system peenliar to Japan. Its special characteris
tic is to settle disputes not by means of a formal court decision but by
mutual concession of the parties concerned through the g0od offices of
the Conciliation Committee. composed of either one judge or one*judge
and two Conciliation Commissioners. appointed from among the people
in general. Since the proceedings are simple and inexpensive, the extent
of utilization is very great. So. in one sense, it may be said that it fulfifs
4 part of function of legal aid in our country. In 1968, cases newly re-
ceived for concifiation numbered 54,323 while the total number of cases
received by the courts of the first instance was 184,808. . The ratio bet-
ween the two is roughly one to three. Judging from this fact, we can
easily tell what an important part the Process of conciliation plays in
settling civil disputes. It may also Be interesting to.note that the number
of cases involving domestic disputes newly received for conciliation: in
1965 of the Domestic Relations Division of the Family Court amounted
to 60,015. 7

Historically this system was originally adopted in 1922 for the © pa
pose of settling disputes involving वात and house lease as indicated in

— a
'Fourteenth Report, Vol. 1, page 319, para 36.
*Supreme Court of Japan, Outline of Civil Trial in Sapan (1969).

26



27

the Law for Conciliation concerning Lease of Land or House, but since
then its scope has been expanded and now it is made available to settie
था types of civil disputes.

The proceedings in conciliation cases are commenced, as a rule, on
the application of the parties concerned, but the courts on their own
motion, occasionally refer cases pending before them for conciliation,
Determination as to whether a case should’ be disposed of by the Concilia-
tion Committee or by the judge is a matter within the discretion of the
court. On the date of’conciliation, the Committee or the judge in charge
as the ca may be, summons the parties concerned and endeavours to.
settle the disputes‘either by persuading them to make concessions, or by
suggesting proper conditions of settlement.

कि When conciliation is sudcessfully accomplished, the terms of concilia-

ion afte entered in a protocol Such a protocol has the same force and
effect as a finally binding judgment. On the other hand, if the concilia-
tion has not been successful, the proceedings come to an end with the
disputes still remaining. unsettled. Jn that event, if the court deems
it mecessary,-it may resort to the judicial ‘process and adjudicate the case
by entering a judgment in place of an agreement, taking every circum-
stance into consideration, regardless of the failure of conciliation.”

84, In Norway, when it is intended to bring an action against someone, the
case cannot as a rule be brought before the court unless an, attempt has been
made to settle the dispute by way of mediation. Such mediation is carried out
by the conciliation council. “ This council is composed of thtee members elected
by the rural or town councils for a period of four years. As a rule, each munici-
pality is to-have a conciliation council. It is, however, permissible to divide
a municipality into several different conciliation council jurisdiction. Accord-
ing to the publication “Administration of Justice in Norway” edited by the Royal
Norwegian Ministry of Justice,! there: were in 1957 about 750 conciliation coun-
cils. Professional members of the Bar and certain State officials were not eli-
gible as conciliators, Conciliators were normally always non-lawyers, They were
paid a petty small fee for handling of each individual case; otherwise, they re-

Norway.

ceived no salary, There is no mediation by the conciliation council in matri-

tonial cases, descent cases, cases brought against the State or municipal autho-
tities or institutions. The procedure adopted by the conciliation council has
been described as under :

“It is up to the one who intends to “bring the action to request mediation
by filing a summons with the Conciliation Council, usually at the place
where the other party is domiciled. The summons must state the subject
matter of the dispute. The chairman of the conciliation council will
then summon the parties to a sitting of the council, where they, as a tule,
must appear in person. They are not allowed in any case to let profes-
sional. barristers appear in Heu of them or to appear accompanied by
barristers. If the Conciliation ‘Council succeeds in bringing about a
settlement between the parties, a formal agreement is entered into and
is recorded in the official records of the Conciliation Council. Such a
formal agreement will, in the main, have the. same effect as a final judg-
ment. If the parties fail to agree, the dispute will usually be referred
to the Court for trial.

The Conciliation Council may, however, pronounce judgment in any
case, provided both the parties appear and request the Council to settle
the dispute.. On the request of one of the parties only, the Conciliation
Council may deliver judgment in cases concerning the boundaries of
bounds of estates or grounds, im cases concerning established partial
tights in immovable property as well as in cases involving claims for com-
pensation for damage inflicted on such property, provided the value of
the matter in dispute does not in any such case exceed Kr. 4,000 (ie.
about £ 200}, and in cases involving other claims of an economic nature
if the value of the matter in dispute does not exceed Kr. 1,000 fie. about
£ 50). On the request of the plaintiff the Conciliation Council may more-
over deliver judgment in debt cases, provided the value of the

iRoyal Norwegian Ministty of Justice, Administration of Justice in Norway (1957),
pages 29-30,


Figures jp Nor-

_ way,

Views expressed
in the dincusaions
with the Chait-
man in Norway.

Denmark.

France.

Pakistan.

28

matter in dispute does noi exceed Kr. 10,000 (ie. £ 500), if the defendant
fails to appear, or if he appears and acknowledges his obligation to pay
the principal debt. In practice the privilege of delivery of judument by
the Conciliation Council is only exercised to a small extent, apart from
cases where the defendant fails to appear. In such. cases judgment is
delivered on the basis of the plaintiff's i’ presegration of the case in so
far as it does not conflict with established ”

$5. According ,t0 the above publication, in 1954 the conciliation courts
(councils) dealt with 24,773 cases. Of these, 2,712 cases were settled by way
of mediation; 6,477 cases were referred to courts of justice for trial; 9,065
were settled by what is nice adh called “delivery of judgment by default”, while
76L cases were otherwise judged. The remaining $758 cases were
rejected, formally taken out of the council or discontinued.

The fact that mediation has already been tried without success in cases re-
ferred tu the Court of justice does not Prevent the court in question from allempt-
ing mediation at any stage of the proceedings. This also applies to
cases in which conciliation council has no jurisdiction. Judy igments delivered by
ihe conciliation council can be appealed to the Country or Town Court,

The figures ip Norway of total pumber of cases in the year and the number
of cases in which reconciliation was brought about during the years 1971 to 1976
are given in the publication “Civil Judicial Statistics 1976” published by Central
Bureau of Statistics, 0810, Norway? These figures are as under -

Year Total number Reconciled
1971 «7 60295 4500
1972 . 106 . 4820
1973 79520 3159
1974 84004 4909
1975 * 80803 4524
1976 81460 4329

8.6... The Chairman of the -Law Commission who happened to be in Europe
in some other connection, had the occasion to discuss the conciliation system
with some of the judges and a leading member of the Bar in Norway. It trans-
p'red during the course of the discussion that most lawyers considered the con-
citiation machinery in Norway to be more of less a formality, as not more than
10 per cent of the cases got compromised. No lawyer can appear before. the
conciliation council. Only a small court fee is necessary for proceedings before
conciliation councils. In case conciliation efforts fail, separate plaint with proper
court fee is Filed in regular courts.

View all the same was expressed that the conciliation procedure was not
without i's utility, especially im cases of small vaiue.

$7. It 5150 transpired during the course of the talk in Norway that the con-

ciliation system had been earlier jn vogue in Denmark, but it was given up

nearabout the year 1952.

88. Conciliation procedure was in vogue in France. bul in the fifties of this
century, the procedure about conciliation was given up. About two years ago,
it has again been revived in the parts of France, as it was felt that the system
was nol altogether wilhoiit merit.

But it was, according to French officials in the course of discussions with
the Chairman, too early to express any opinion about the success of the sysem
after its revival in France.

&9. The system of canciliation has also been tried in Pakistan. The Concilia-
fion Courts Ordinance was promulgated in 1961. The Ordinance brought about
important changes in regard to setllement and adjudication of petty civil and
criminal cases. Primarily the role .of the court is to conciliate between the
parties and that is why it has beem given the name of the Conciliation Court.

‘Royal Norwegian Minisiry of Justice, Adminisivatinn of Tustice in Norway (195M),.
page 31. है
‘Central Bureau of Siatistics, Osto, Norway; Civil Judicial Statistics, 1976.


29

The Chairman has to constitute the Court every time a case is brought to
him for seftlement. Each of the parties to the dispute has to nominate two
fepresentatives out of whom one must be a member of the Union Council
concerned. So, the constitution of the Court varies with each case. The
system of settlement of petty disputes through local ‘tribunals has also been
extended to urban areas. The Report of the Pakistan Law Reforms Commission
1969-70 published in 1970 sheds light on the working « ing of the conciliation courts.
We can do no better than reproduce two paragraphs from that Report:! -

“In spite of all the objections made against the system af local
tribunals, we find that the Conciliation Courts have been playing a useful
role in settling disputes amicably. By and large people are satisfied
with the sense of participation the system gives them and in gang
the institution of Conciliation Courts is not open to any serious objection.
These .Courts have not only provided relief to the ordinary courts but
have also enabled the parties te get quicker and cheaper justice, It will
appear from Appendix F to this Chapter that each year quite a sizeable
pumber of cases which otherwise would have tome up before the regular
courts both on the civil and the criminal side- have been dealt with by
these Courts in both the wings-of the country. Tn a developing society
}ike ours where our financial resources are more needed for development
projects, it will net be advisable to scrap this system as otherwise it
wanld undoubtedly necessitate the setting up of more Jaw courts and
consequently an increase in the expenditure, The Conciliation Courts
have also saved the people from unnecessary Htigation expenses because
only a nominat fee is charged from the petitioner on the vetition filed
by him in a Conciliation Court. The parties ate also saved from the
expenses of engaging lawyers because the provisions of the Conciliation
Courts Ordinance do not permit the appearance of legal practitioners in
proceedings before a Conciliation Court. As the witnesses are available
at hand, the parties do not have to incur any heavy expense for taking
them to the Tehsif. Sub-divisional or the district headquarters where
the courts gre situated. -

The criticisms levelled against the Conciliation Courts are based on
a comparison of these Courts with the ordinary law courts. This com-
parison is, however, not justifiable because the Concifiation Courts have
been set up to give efféct to the long established custom of settlement of
disputes through mediation, arbitration and compromise, whereas the
ordinary courts are primarily required to decide शी matters brought before
them in accordance with law. Jn the case of Conciliation Courts, adjudi-
_ cation of dispntes is not the primary function, A Conciliation Court
has to adjudicate only where its efforts at conciliation have failed. In
most of the cases, they do succeed in effecting conciliation between the
parties. It was suggested to us that the jurisdiction of the Conciliation
Court should be confined only to Bringing about compromises between the
parties and settling disputes through conciliation and in case of failure
to let the matter to gq to the regular courts for adjudication according
to Jaw. This suggestion cannot he accepted. because a tribunal which
is empowered to settle a disnnte thronch conciliation only withoot having
any newer to decide it in the event of शिफ्ट of ennciliation cannot
function successfully. No one wonld like to take a dispute before a
tribunal which does not possess the power of finally determinins it. Tt
is for this reason that the village panchayats even in the earliest davs
onioyed powers of decidine cases where the nerties. failed to reach at
some settlement. "The decisions of these pancHiyatr were always res-
pected because the members of the panchayat enjoyed full and compfete
confidence of the parties. Te is. therefore, not desirable to deprive the
Conciliation Courts of their judicial powers and to restrict or limit their
function only to the settlement of disputes through conciliation.”

t

B10. It Rould 8 appear from the above that the system of conciliation has not
been_an unqualified success in the countries in which it has been tried. At the
same time. # cannot be denied that the system is not without its merit.

"Pakistan Law Reforms Commission Report.
3468 LAD. ND/78

Recommendation

as fo conciliation
being शान

troduced on expe-


Settlemént by the
Conciliation
Board.

Provedure of pro-
seedings taken in
3

‘Experimental

Inducing parties
10 resort to arbi:
tration.

30

of population of about one lakh in rural areas and about two lakhs in urban
areas, Every aggrieved person, before filing a sutt for the recovery of money
not exceeding five thousand rupees, should first approach the conciliation board.
The board should iry to get the dispute amicably settled within three months

of the service of the notice on the person complained against.

B11. If scitlement is arrived at within that period, the settlement should be
reduced to writing. Tt should be signed by all concemed and be filed in court
like a compromise. If ao settlement is arrived _at within three months, an order
should be made by the board to that effect. Even if no order about settlement
having been not arrived at is made by the Board wilhin the above period of
three months, che court shall presume that no settlement was possible.

Such category of suits as may be considered advisable may be kept ता
of the jurisdiction of the conciliation

812. No piaint should be filed ia any court relating to a dispute mentioned
above without the aggrieved person first approaching the conciliation board. In
case, however, sufficient ground or urgency is shown to the satisfaction of the
court for straightaway starting such proceedings without approaching such board,
the court may entertain such a plaint. In case 10 such sufficient cause oF
urgency is shown, it would be within the competerce of the court to reject the
plaint or, in appropriate cases, ‘to stay further proszedings in the suit tiff such
time as recourse is had to the board. Suitable provisions for this purpose will
have to be enacied if it is decided to adopt the above scheme. The details of
the scheme can also be gone-into at that stage.

8.13. As mentioned earlier, the settiag up of the conciliation boards would
have 10 be done onfy on experimentad basis in certain areas, If it is found
that the conciliation boards have proved a wgeful agency in relieving the work-
Joad of courts and the experience in other respects is also happy, we might
extend the system to more areas. In case, however, our experience is to the
contrary, we may do away with conciliation boards even in those areas where
they are set up on an experimental basis.

8.14, It might also seem desirable ta induce the parties to resart to arbitration
jn case concitiation proceedings fail. The efforts of the conciliation board should
be, as mentioned above? to bring about conciliation between the parties. Ta
vase, however, the parties somehow do not agree to 6 mutually acceptable com-
promise formula, in that event, the conciliation board might suggest to the
parties the desirability of referring the matter to arbitration.

a Ac

‘Para 8.10, supra,
*Para 8.11, supra.


CHAPTER 9

RECRUITMENT AND PERSONALITY OF |THE TRIAL JUDGE:
INSPECTION OF COURTS AND TRAINING OF JUDICIAL OFFICERS

Recruitment and Personality of the Trial Judge
9.1. Whatever suggestions may be made to improve the working of our Personality,
subordinate judiciary with a view to eliminate delays and ensure prompt dis-
posal of cases, everything in the ultimate analysis. would depend upon the
personality of the triai judge. A trial judge indeed is the tinchpin of the entire
system, Nowhere, it has been said, in the whole range of public office | are
weaknesses of character, intellect, or psychic constitution revealed more merci-
lessly than in the discharge of the responsibilities of a trial judge. The
advocates engaged by the rival parties fight tenaciously to protect the interest
of their clients. No ane can preside effectively aver such a situation if he is
mediocre in intellect or professional skill, lacking in decisiveness, or is otherwise
not emotionally stable. The court-room decorum, it has heen -observed. has
to be maintained with a firm hand if cases are to be tried fairly and expedi-
tiously. As the case proceeds, the trial fudge is called upon to make many
rulings and pass interlocutory orders which are of ercat strategic and tactical
importance for the ultimate decision of the case. These rulings have to be
given anc! orders made under the pressure of the trial and without opporhinity
for elaborate arguments. The trial judge, it has been said by the American
writer H. W. Jones.’ who is shaky in professional understanding, imperfect in
moral resolution, or unduly conciliatory in personality, will “inevitably be over-
powered and overborne by forceful and aggressive trial counsel. The evil that
weak judges do. less often from partiality. as commonty supposed, than from
simple psychic inability to stand up to abrassive or strong willed leaders of the
trial bar is a bitter but largely untold story in the administration of justice.
Other <hortcomings which sometimes mar the proceedings in a court of law
and leave a had taste with litigants and witnesses are short temper. peevish:
nature, irascible disposition. overbearing manners and undue impatience of a
trial judge. Proper and fair trial requires not only professional competence:
it also needs cool temperament. mental firmness and capacity for remaining
unruffled despite the provocation given and the stress and strain caused by the
unscrupulous conduct of those who appear during the course of the trial. Tf.
as observed. by Roscoe Pound. men count more then machinery in adminis-
tration of justice, it is imperative that they should be men of the right calibre.
9.2, It is, therefore, essential to attract voung bricht law praduates and lawyers Need ‘young law
of the rieht calibre to the indiciary. This can only be done if there are mood graduates,
pay-scales for the judicial officers. Yt is, no doubt. true that the pay-scales of
the judicial officers should normally be such as fit in with the general pattern of
pay-scales of government officers of ecuivalent rank in other departments: it has,
at the same time. to be borne in mind that bright young lawyers can earn much
more in the profession. Unless. therefore, we are going to be content with
mediocrity manning our judicial services, some allowance would have to be made
for the consideration that by stigking to the profession, bright young lawyers
can ear much more. One way of meeting the objection that there should not
be much disparity between the pay-scales of judicial officers and those in other
government service is to give higher initial pay to a judicial officer by taking
into account the aumber of years he has practised in the profession. Tt is also
noteworthy to observe in the above context that unlike -people joining other
services. those entering the judicial service do so at a higher age because of the
requirement about practice at the bar for a certain number of years. Keeping in
view the fact that the age of retirement is the same for both indicial officers
and those in other branches of administration. it would follow that the judicial
officers would be putting in fess years of service.

9.3. Tt may, in the above context, be nertinent to refer to the observations of 10 Report.
the Law Commission presided over by Shri M. C. Setalvad in its fourteenth
Report. The Commission said:—2

"Harry W. Jones. “The Tria) Sudee--Role Anafvsis and Profile” in Harry W. Jones
(Ed), The Courts, the Public and the Law Explosion (1965), page 137,

114th Report. Vol. 1, page 163, para कि.
31


Requirement
Practice,

All India Judicial

Servico,

toa

32

“In the matter of scales of pay and remuneration, the judiciary compares
unfavourably with the executive branches of the Goverment. It is troe
that. generally speaking, the scales of pay of the judicial officers and the
corresponding executive officers are identical in many of the States. However,
it has to be remembered that the executive officers are, by and large.-

_ teeruited at a much younger age than the judicial officers. The entrant

to the judicial service is required to be a graduate in Jaw and in most of
the States it is also necessary that he should have practised for a certain
number of years at the Bar. On the othgr hand, for recruitment to the
executive branches of Government service. ६ degree in arts or science is,
generally speaking, sufficient. In the'result, a person entering the judicial
service does so when he is about tweaty-six or twenty-seven vears of ace
and at a time when his contemporaries who have entered the executive
service of the Government have already acquired 2 certain seniority in
the service and have come to draw a higher salary. It will thus be seen
that 4 nerson ioinins the judicial service starts with 9 lower remmmertion
than what he would have received if he had entered the executive service
a few years earlier. Tt has also to be noted that owing to the lesser pro-
portion of superior posts in the Judicial Service. promotions come less
quickly to the judicial officers, and a person who has entered the service as
a munsiff, assuming that he is fit and fully qualified. take much longer
time to become a district indge than would an equally competent deputy
collector to reach the position of a collector. Again the judicial officer,
having started at a later ave, 18878 shorter svan of service than the exe-
cutive officer and this effects his pension and other retirement benefits.”
One other auestion linked with the above is whether practice at the bar

for a number of vears should’ he made compulsory before a person can be
recruited as a judicial officer. Tn case the answer be in the affirmative. another
anestion which would arise would be as to what should be the period of practice.
Protagonists of the view that it should not be necessary to insist upon practice
for a number of vears st the bar assert that practice of three to five vears
serves no useful nurpose.— During the first three to five vears. an averave practi-
Honer hardly nicks up much practice. As such, it is stated. he does not aconire
crest familistity with the procedural and substantive aspects of the legal system.
Tt is only the exceptional. favourably situated voung man, enioyine the advantace
of havine 2 senior member being interested in him. who would gather much
experience at the har in sq short a time.- Such an exceptional person, as observed
in the fourteenth Report of the Law Commission, would naturally not care to
be a competitor for entrance into the subordinate indicial service. Tt. therefore.
haowens that most of the people whorstrive to get into the indicia) service
after three to five vears nt the bar are the disappointed persons, Recrtitment
from the bar is thus described by some veople as recruitment from amongst the
disappointed members of the bar who have failed to make much headway in
the profession. .

9.5.

As against the above view, a substantial body of opinion still favours the

retention of the system of secruitment from the members of the bar after they
have oractised for a number of years. According to this opinion, the system
Of recruitment from the bar has been in operation for the last many vears

and

recrritment on the whole has been satisfactory. It is also emohasised by

the persons subscribing to this view that even thouch a member of the bar does

not

pick un much practice during the first three to five years of his career at

the bar, he still gets some familiarity with the working of the courts which
Proves to be of considerable help.

‘We have considered the pros and cons and are of the opinion that the present

system of insisting upon a number of years of practice at the bar as mandatory
for recruitment fo the subordinate judicial service should continue. The minimum
petiod of vractice. in our opinion. should be three vears. Some exception
regarding requirement of mintmum practice may possibly have to be made in
the case of law graduates employed in courts.

5.6.

- At the same time. we are of the view that the suggestion to have an All

dia Tudicial Service of the same rank and same pav-scales as the Indian Ad-
ministrative Service should receive serious consideration. According to article

312.

as now amended. Parliament may by law provide for the creation of one

or more all-India services {including an all-India Judicial Service) common to


33

the Union and the States: We are conscious of the fact that a school of thought
and many States are strongly opposed to the creation of all-India Judicial
Service. The objection is. mostly based upon the consideration ‘that since the
Proceedings before he: subordinate courts would be conducted in regional

During that period, they can acquire also familiarity with and mastery of the

Fegional language of the State to which they are’ to be allocated aller the com-
Pletion of their training period. The requirement about practice at the bar may
Perhaps have lo be waived for recruitment to All india Judical Service, ag taey
wilt ७6 recruited at a comparatively younger age. It should, however, be
esseniial that the competitors are graduates im law.

9.64. Another reason which should weigh in favour of the creation of the AU

young graduates, including law graduates, The result is thal many oi them
compee for aud are selected tor the Indian Administrative Service. if ihe AU
india Judicial service is created with the same sak and pay scale as indian
Administralive Service, the Judicial Service would hold perhaps greater attraction
for bright law graduates, Ihe Judicial Service in such an event would not be
Wenuded of talented young persons. The Law Commission presided over by
Dbri Seiaivad aiso felt this aiiticulty and observed! that an important factor
which detracts from the altractiveness of the judicial service is 116 inferiority
i the stains of a judicial ollicer compared witt that of the execuuye ollicer.
The Law Commissivn in this connection ‘referred io the foliowiag observations
of an experienced Chiet Justice:

. “Que 1eason why meritorious young men or young practuuoners of
pome siauding keep away trom the judicial service is the’ comparative
soieriority of the status of district judicial olticers vis-a-vis omcers 01
the disuuct executive. Formerly, ihe district judge, like the district
Magsiraic, uscd to be 4 member of the Indian Civil Service and tis
position in the District was superior to that of the District Muagisirate,
—Under the present sysem, the district magistrate is a membez ot
the indian Admimistralye Service which is a service ot an all-india
character, while che distict judge ig a member of the higher judicial
service which is a Siate service. The dillerence in ४8 category of the
cadres 10 which they belong is reflected ia the status they occupy in
relation to each other and im the estimation of the public, Yis-a-vis the
district magistrate, the district judge feels smail and 1s treated ag a person
Of little consequence. Nor can the district judge altain the sense’ of
indepeudeace which he might have acquired, it he nad not becn under
The adminstraive control ot the Slate Goverment in regard to bis service.”

of Alt
india judicial Service 1s the attraction that an All India Service nolds tor bright India Sefvice.

%7. One of ‘the essential needs for the due administration of juluce 1s not Recruitment trom

Only the capacity of judges to bring a dispassionate approach io cases hanoled other States.

by them, but aiso to inspire a 1००७३ in all concerned that a dispassionate approach
would underlie their decision. Quite offen, cases which arouse strong local
sentiments and regional icelings come up before cour of law, ‘Fo handle such
cases we need Judges who not only remain unaffected by local seatiments and
regional feelings, but also appear to be so, None would be better
sued ior ibis purpose than judicial officers hailing irom ober Siates.
4k as ६ common (०७108 amongst old lawyers that apart from cases with political
Overtones, the English judges showed a sense of great faitness and brought a
dispassionate approach im ibe disposal of judicial cases handles by them. We
in India are in the fortunate posilion of having a vast country. here can,
iherefor¢, be no ditficulty in haying a certain pescentage of judicial officers who hadi
trom other States, The advantage gained by having persous from other Staies
48 judicial oiticers would be much greater compared with any disadvantage which
might accrue therefrom Jt would also, to some extent, cesult iu national
integration. &

9, Qusstion has also been raised as 10 whether we should have & training Training.

course for ail recruits to the judicial service before they actually start functioning
पक Report, Vol. 1, page 164, para 9.



34 ह -

as judicial officers. We are m favour of having a training course lasting for a
period of three to six months for recruits to ame subordinate He judiciary. Such
period can be utilised for, giving imtensive training to the judicial ollivers by
compeient and experienced members of the judiciary. The stress in such a
coutse would be to acquaint the recruits with procedural requirements tor dealing
with different stages of cases. For example, the recruits can be trained as to
how to record slalements of parties before framing issues, how to frame issucs
and how thereafter to record evidence and write judgment. The recruits caa
also be trained in the art ot wriling interlocutory orders. Apart from that,
recruits can be made familiar with different stages off execution proceedings and
also taught how to dispose of matiers at each of those stages. One aspect of
training can also cover the method of dealing with administrative matiers which
are a part of the duties of a judicial officer.

luspection. 9.8. The need for periodic and intensive inspection of the subordinate courts
by the District Judge and a Judge of the High Court must also be emphasised.
in carrying out the inspection, the inspecting judge not only brings to the
aotice of ihe subordinate judge any of the mistakes and errors committed by him;
he also acts as a guide and mentor for the young junior officer. The emphasis
in inspection should be to bring about improvement of the functioning of the
otticer concerned. The inspection can also provide an opporiunity to Lie subor-
dinate judge to tring to che notice of the inspecting Judge some of the ditiicullics
whicn inignt have been experienced by him.

While slressing Ube necessity of inspection of the subordinate courts by the
High Court Judges, we would like to sound a note of caution against a practice
which has also come 10 our notice in a State of deputing one High Court Judge
for inspection of all the cvuris. The better practice in our view would be
to depute a separate judge {or inspection of courts in each district.

Judges in charge 9-20. in some High Courts, one judge is placed in charge of each district ior
of districts, one or lwo years. He periodically visits the district with a view to ensure proper
functioning of the courts and to see that the cases do not get old. It is staid
that this practice has yielded good results. This may probably be due to the
fact that the judge in charge of the district is able to scrutinise more closely the
retums received irom the subordinate courts of the district from time to time
and suggest micasures ond give appropriate directions through the District and
Sessions Judge for the disposal of old cases and, if necessary, impress upon the
Chief Justice the necessity for the etablishment of additional courts on a perma-
nent or tempurary basis in the district for disposal off old cases and for cuping
with tbe current ide. He will be also in a position to suggest such other remedies
and measures as may be called lor in the district of which he is in charge:

Control of arrears 9.11. We feel that it is primarily for the High Court im each State to ensure that

by High Courts. arrears of cases in suburdinale courts are cleared or brought under control.
Repeated reports of the Law Commission or other Committees appuinted for the
purpose are not going io bring forth the desired results unless adequate steps
for clearing old cases are taken in every State. The State Governments on their
part should lend ali effective co-operation and assistance to the High Courts
tor this purpose.- The Chairman of the Law Commission was informed during
his visif 10 one of the States that as many as sixty posts in the Muasilis’ cadre
were lying vacant lor many months and a number of the munsiff courts in
several talukas were not functioning at ali for want of presiding officers, This
was a perturbing revelation. Apart from the inadequacy in the strength of the
subordinate judiciary to deal with the arrears and the fresh institutions, the failure
to fili up the vacancies immediately they arise will inevitably contribute to the
accumulation of more arrears; it will also bring about a sense of frustration and
helplessness among the litigant public which, for no fault of its.own, is prevenied
from getting appropriate redress from the courts in time. This must shake the
pudtic confidence in the judiciary and undermine the image of the courts. It
must be ensured that such a state of alfairs does not recur in future.

High Court's re- 9.12, A common complaint which has been made is that therc are not enough
commendation a% nymber of judicial officers. The increase in the strength of the judiciai officers
to icin strength to Has not been commensurate with the increase in the aumber of pending cases.
receive prompt Complaint also is made that whenever the High Court makes a recommendation

attention. for increasing the strength of judicial officers in a district, the matter has


४ 35

erred to State Government which takes many months—or even some-
ied ren than a year—to give its decision on the i recommendation. The
decision quite often is to turn down the recommendation of the High Court,
Even when the recommendation is accepted, the lapse of tia: between the date
of recommendation and its acceptance robg the ofiginal recommendation of its
effectiveness as a fesult of further aggravation of the problem. We are of tbe
view that a recommendation of the High Court for iacreasing the strength of
judicial officers in a district should receive prompt consideration and not be
lightly turved down. It may perhaps be considered in the above context ‘Nigh
whether we should not have a convention that the recommendation of the High
Court in this respect, in the absence of some compelling reason, be binding j upon
the State Government. It is presumed that the High Conzt would mot lightly
make a suggestion for increase in the strength of the judicial officers.

9.13, In the context of the heavy backlog of civil ang criminal cases for the
clearance. of which we need additional coutts for a period of a few years, we
may point out the desirability of utilising the services of some retired judicial
officers. The judicial officers retire in some States at the age of 55 and in other
Slates at the age of S8 years. Many of them are known for their integrity,
efficiency and quick disposal. The High Court is presumed to know as to which
of the many judicial citicers who have retired recently possess the above qualifi-
cations. To prevent appointment of judicial officers who have become senile
or out of touch with the judicial work because of the passage of long time since
their reirement, it may be necessary to lay down that judicial officers only in the
age group of 55 to 62 years should be appointed for this purpose. The appoint-
ment should be made by the State Government on the reconimendation of the
High Court. No one should be appointed for the post unless his name is re~
commended by the High Court. For the work done by the judicial officers, they
would, ig addition to pension, be paid such honorarium as may be prescribed.
A number of old cases may be assigned to such judicial officers for disposal,
and they would be expected to dispose them of within the prescribed time, The
appointment should normally be made for a period of two or three years, with
power to the State Governmen; to extend the period of appointment at the
recommendation of the High Court.

9.34 One difficulty which may be experienced in having retired judicial officers
known for their integrity, efficteacy and quickness is that such judicial officers
would normally retire after becomme district and sessions judges, They would.
at least on that account, be reluctant to act as munsiffs or subordinate judges
or magistrates. To get over this difficulty, we might give them special designa~
tion like Special Judge (Civil) or Special Judge (Criminal).

Retired officers.

Designation.

9.15. They should hear old cases pending in the courts. Appeals against their Jurisdiction.

judgments or orders should lie straight to the High Court and not to the court
of district and sessions judge.

Once the suggestion about the utilisation of services of relired judicial
officers is accepted, necessary statutory ameadments would have to be made.

916. It may, however, be not euough to have retired judicial officers to deal Appointment of
with old cases. Sore special recruitment may have tc be made from bright Penbers of the

young members of the Bar who have practised for at least seven years for of old

disposal of old cases. These members of the Bar would necessarily bave to be

given a higher start and on satisfactory performance, be ultimately absorbed in

service as District and Sessious Judges or Additional District and Sessions Judges.

This fact might act as an incentive ‘and induce bright young lawyers to join
ie service. .

Without that assurance it would not be possible to attract bright lawyers
who bave put in more than seven years practice to the job. It is most unlikely
that they would offer themselves for the special recruitment if the prospects be
tbat after che clearance of arrears, they would have to revert back to their Practice.
It also seems apposite that the procedure for the special recruitment may be sub-
stantially the same as that for appointment of District Fudges from the Bar. The
reason for that is that in (he matter of selection for a judicie! post from amongst
the members of the Bar with some standing, the High Court is in a much better
position compares 1 to any other agency to appraise the merit and suitability of the
candidate. According to article 233 of the Constitution, appointment of persons to
be District Judges in any State has to be made by the Governor of the State in

disposal
cases,


Need 0. ciesr
Gacklog within
about thtee years.

36

consultation with the High Court exerasing jurisdiction in relating to suchi State,
while according to arucie 234, appointmem ७1 persons otner than District Judges
to the judiciai service of a State bas to be made by lhe Governor of the Slae
in accordance with the 11103 mide by bin in wet bebau alter consultayon wilh
te Slale Fubne Service Cownussiog and win ihe 1187 Cour exercising jurisdie~
aon in relauon 19 such sia, “Lue expression “District Judge” iuciuges, ater
alia, as mentioned in arlicle 230, Assisiaat District judge aad Assisiant Sessions
Judge, ii tue recruitment ol the Meunbers of the Bar bas 10 be in accordance wilh
aciicw 233, un that eveni che persaus io be uppomivd as a result of special te-
cruitment muy be designated as Assisiany Visinct and Sessions Judges til) such
lime 4s iney are appoiuied District and Sessions Juages or Addilionar District
and Sessions Judges. Une dilliculty waich may, however, be expenenced in
designating inem ay Assistant, District and Sessions. Juuges ig thal only such of

vrimuwal (६३८४ would be Leard by Lhew as are unsud.e by Loe Cour. of Sessions,
Amviher suag in the prepusal is wat though there ig icierenice iv Assislaal District
Judge in arucle 236, there are so far as we ale aware 00 Assisiaat District Judges
fuuclivaing in any State The concept of Assistant Disirict Judges woaid thus
moake a deparivre trom 198 kuowa hierarchy of judicial oilicers. in the aiterna-
tive, if the recruitment is tu be governed by ariicie 234, in tbat event such mules
may be framed for the special recuiument es Way conlorm mare er less with
the proceduze prescribed by article 233. Perhaps ihe lalicr alternative im view
ot the diftieuities poimed out earlier may seeai preterable. We may add that the
Brabuce of recruiiing Lright young lawyers who have piactised ai ike Bac for at
feast seven Years for ihe post of higher juMiciat service 1४ alceady in vogue in most
ob tbe States.

9.17, ln addition to the above, some of serving judicial officers can also be
asked to deal exclusively with ofd cases. The divecsion of some of these officers
towards the disposal of old cases is possible and would not affect the disposal of
ites cases, because the wurkioad of the existing courts would get considerably

on agcount of the transter of old cases 10 courts dealing with such cases.
Care, however, must be taken, while diverting some judicial officers towards the
disposal of old cases, 10 see that the mumber of couris dealing with fresh or not
old civil and criminal cases is enough io dispose them of withia a period of one
year of six monibs respectively.

9.48 While setting apart aod creating cetiain courts for dealing with old. cases, -
we should easure that their number is such as might make it possible that all
arrears are Cleared within a period of about three years.


CHAPTER 10
CERTAIN CASES UNDER SPECIAL ACTS

40.1. There are certain cases which, 09 प्रो very nature, have an element ol Matrimonial
urgency about them aud call for speedy disposal. Quile a aumier of these caves cases, = *
are under special Acts. One such caicgory is of mairimonial cases. When per-

soas approach the courts ia such cases, ney do so with a Lond hope Unat the cases

will be decided at an early date. As it is, we find that these cases drag on for

years. Of what avail is a decree of divorce granted in miauimonial proceedings,

When 116 parties are past the stage of youth by the time the celiei is granted?

Young peuple should get reiief in matrimonial cases when they are still young.

it would be a pity it they have 10 waste years of their youth because of the long-

drawn course of the niitrimoaial cases. It 18 also plain that there are great possi-

bilities of young people omg astray if quick relief is not grantea tv them in
juatrimenial cases.

Linked with matrimonial cases are cases relating to the cusiody and guardian-
ship of minor children. ‘The need for their urgent disposal is as great as for
matrimonial cases, >

10.2. A second category of cases which call for early disposal are eviction cases, Bjection cases,
buch vases obviously cali for an early disposal.
especiaily those on the ground of bona fide personal necessity of the landlord,

40.3. A third category of cases calling tur speedy dispusal are ibuse ied beture Motor Accidents
Motor Accidents Ciaims ‘Iribénals.' Many of these claums are nude by widows Claims.
and children of persons who 1058 their lives as a result of lie uccivet. Quite
a large number of these widows and children are in suaitened circumstances be-
cause of their having iost the adult earning member of the Lamily as a result of
the accident, At most of the places, the disirict judge is designuted as the Motor
Accidents Ciaims ‘‘ribunal. He, however, because of Pressure vi giher work,
has hardly enough time 19 deal with 11058 cases. in a piace ike Deibi, igere was,
ill recently, uniy one Irrbunal and the nuaiber of cuses pending belure ibe
itibunal was so large thut they vould remain pending for live or six years or
even wore, ‘Chis causes-~as it musi—great dismay and frustration amongst the
people.

The enure object of appointing Motor Accidents Cains Tribunals and ut

creating third party liability by staiute is set at naught by the iaordinate lengih
of time taken to dispose of these cases.

404A, We are also of the view that the power of designating and appointing Power of appoint-.
judicial officers as the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal’ should vest in the High img, Acedents
Court, ims wit ibunala
to be with High

Every effort should be made to see that sucht claims are dispused of within a Coun.

period of less than a year, Likewisc, the courts dealing with matrimonial cases

should give privrity to the disposal of these cases.

10.5. Another category ot eases requiring speedy disposal are those under the Cases under Suc-
indian Succession Act, #25. Some of these cases are applications for succession Session Act.
certilicates, while others are petitions for probate or iellers of adsninistration.

Quite often, ihe money belonging to a deceased person remains locked Up because

the heics are not legally entitled to claim the thoney from: the persons or institu-

Uons, like banks, wilh whom it is lying, without obiaining succession certificate

of probate or letiers-of adinivistration, as the case may be, This quite often results

in great distress to the widow and the ciuldren of the deceased person.

10.6. it is, therefore, essential that the cases of the above categories should.
Teceive prompt attention and they should not be allowed to linger ou for a long
time. ५

10.7, There should be enough number of judicial officers to deal with the above Need for enow, out
calegories of cases, While the number of cases like eviction cases in each district umber ot F
would be so large as 10 keep fully occupied 006 or more than 006 judicial officer,

‘Section 110, Motor Vebiclea Act, 1939.

37


Labour disputes.

38

the number of other cases, slike, calms acing ont का srcagens made fhe Mae
Vehicles Act, may not be sufficient to 1 € judicial officers fully ny coca

some of (he districts, For the quick disposal of such cases, two al
tions are possible, One sclution is to have one Motor Accidents Claims
for a number of such districts, The other solution is to vest the powers of
Tribunal in an Additional District Judge or a senior Subordinate Judge,
should set apart a number of days in a month for the exclusive disposal
such claims.

॥ the number of such cases in the court concerted be not sufficiently
to keep it fully occupied, the court should set apart a sufficient number of days
in a month for the disposal of these cases with a view to ensure that these
cases are disposed of as quickly as possible and do not. in any case, take
more than a year to be decided.

The same observations wili also hold good for cases under the Indian
Succession Act.

108. One category of disputes, even though not strictly civil Uisputes, where
there is need for speedy adjudication, are those relating to labour, between
managenient and workmen. Any protraction of these disputes impinges upon
industrial production and often results in loss of numerous man-hours. Pro-
longation of these disputes also leaves a bitter scar on management-workmen
relations, and makes restoration of industrial harmony difficult, It is, therefore,
eséential that there should be enough number of Jabour courts and industrial
tribunals, so that the disputes do not linger on and there is speedy adjudica-
tion of such disputes, .

fale

a


caarrzx 11
EXECUTION

1L4. Che execution of decrees represents a very important feature of civil Importance

litigation. Leaving aside the limited number of decrees like declaratory dectées
which by their very nature are inexecutable, all other decrees have to be execu-
ted before the relief sought by ihe successful aggrieved person is obtained by him
in concrete terms. Unless, therefore, a decree-holder is in a position to effectively
execute his decree, the decree obtained vy him would be no more than a piece of
Paper or a teasing illusion, Complaint has been repeatedly made that many of the
decrec-hoiders in India 4ind it difficnk: to obtain full, and in some cases
even a partial, satisiact bn of their decrees, The Government of India in a
letter addressed to the Provincial Governments in June 1923, referred to the
glalistics in different courts with a view to highlight the non-salistaction of the
decrees in a large number of dases.' The Law Commission, in its Fourteenth
Report? 450 referred to it when it said that the genetal complaint against the
system of execution of decrees of civil courts in India is that in a large number
of cases the decree-holders, who have obtained after much trouble and expense,
decrees for payment of money or for delivery of specific property or for other
reliel, are not able to obtain full, or even q partial, satisfaction of their decrees.
The evil was noticed as far back as 1872 by the Privy Council in the Maharaja
of Darbhanga’s case’ wherein it was siated that the difficulties of a litigant in
India begin when he has oblained a decree.

11.2, One great obstacle in obtaining satisfaction of the decree is the tendency
on the part of a judgmeni-debtor to file objections either himself or through some
other person. Most of these objections, when sorutinised, are found to be with-
out merit. The fact that those objections are ultimately found to be without
merit alfurds poor consolation to the decree-holder because, in any event, the
objections have the effect of delaying the process of the satisfaction of the decrees.
Many decree-holders on account of the above dilatory tactics of the judgment-
debtors prefer to forgo complete satisfaction of the decree and agree to a partial
satisfaction of the decree by way_of settlement.

11.3, Complaint is quite often made that courts do not devote as. much atlention
to execution cases as they do io regular suits. The reason for that is stated to
be that the disposal of an execution case does not add to the unit of cases dis-
Posed cf by the courts, In many States theré are instructions or regulations pre-
scribing a number of units for disposal by each judicial officer at the district
Jevel. [To meet this didiculty, we might either !allow some credit, m terms of
units or otherwise, for those cases in which the decree-holder gets complete
satisfactiun of the decree. In the alternative, we might have a quarterly state-
ment from each of the judicial officers in the district giving statistics about the
cases in which there was satisfaction of the decree, cither fully or in part, as
also the cases in which there was no satisfactioh of the decree. The fact that
4m some courts the percentage of the complete satisfaction of the decree was very
high should count as a plus pout in favour of the presiding oflicer of that court.

113A. The’ Commission was informed in one State by judicial officers dealing
with urban property eviction cases that it takes normally about two years to
Tecover possession of the demised premises in execution proceedings after the
disposal” of appeal against eviction onder. Successive attempts are made to
obstruct the delivery of possession by various persons, mostly in collusion with
and at the instance of the judgment-debtor. Such obstructions necessitate filing of
applications and replies thereto in the executing court and their disposal, quite
often after recording of evidence. All this highlights the importance of giving
due attention to the execution proceedings and the need to give some credit for

‘Letter dated 25/28 Fune, 1923, adéresied by the Government of India to the Provin-
cial Governments, quoted in the Civil Justice Committee Report, page {v)-(vi) apd the 14th
Report, Vol. f, paige 43}, para 2.
~ Hdth Report, Vol. 1, page 431, para. 1,

{Phe General Manager of the Rej Darbhanga ¥. Moharaj Coomar Rampus Singh, (1872)
14 Moors’s Indian Appeals 612.

39

execution,

Objections

of

0

cause delay.

Attention not paid
to execution

Eviction
execution,

cases—


Nazirs and
pay scales,

their

40
statistical purposes to the judicial oificers for the disposal. of these proceedings.
To discourage frivolous obstructions, the executing courts have ample power to
award suhable costs against those offering such obstructions. In case of con-
tumacious obstruction, the court has also the power under sub-rule (2) of rule 98
of Order XXI of the Code of Civil Procedure to order detention in civil prison
of the person offering such obstruction.

114, The satisfaction of a decree in quite a large number of cases depends upon
the Nazirs who are entrusted with carrying out the ना आर sieps in the course
of the execution of a decree. Attachment of properties { effected through them.
Delivery of immovable property in respect of which a decree for possession has
been awarded jn favour of a decree-holder is also made by the Nazirs. It is,
in our opinion, essentiai that the officials concerned with the execution of decrees
should be men of experience and, by and large, should project an image of
integrity and etticiency. It is with this end in view that we might think of revising
the _pay-scales of these officials, It is also essential that the work of these
officials should be constantly supervised by a judicial officer.!

‘See also para 4.6, supra.


CHAPTER 12
CRIMINAL CASES

324, Most of our general observations about civil cases, apart from those Importance
relating strictly to procedure, would also hold good for criminal cases. There r# evidence.

is 016 aspect which we want particularly to highlight. The chances of miscarriage
of justice as a cesult of delay in the hearing and disposal of court cases is much
greater in criminal cases than in civil cases. The decision of a civil case generally
depends more upon documentary evidence than upon otal evidence. As against
thi., the decision of a criminal case depends more upon oral testimony of wit-
nesses. than upon documentary evidence. The chances of the fading out of
memory in some essential matters are considerable as a fesult of passage ot
time. | Apart from that, there are also possibilities uf the material witnesses
succumbing to undue pressure and being won over, if there be long time lag
between the actual occurrence and the date of recording of their depositions in
court, It is, therefore, essential, so far as criminal cases are concerned, that the <
delay in their disposal be eliminated as far as possible.

of

12.2. Complaints are quite often made of witnesses being kept waiting and 10 witnesses not to

being examined on the day for which they are summoned. This is an extremely be kept waiting.

undesirable practice.’ Tt actually proceeds upon the assumption that one necd. not
take into account the convenience of the witnesses. Every crimina! court, in our
view, should keep a register showing the number of witnesses summoned for a
date. the number of witnesses actually examined and the number of witnesses

. who were scent back without being examined and the reasons for their non-
examination. These registers should be produced before the inspecting judge at
the time of inspection. Monthly statements giving figures for the month, based
upon these registers, should be submitted to the High Court for scrutiny.

12.3. According to section 326 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, whcn- gyidence _record-
ever aby Magistrate! afier having heard and recorded the whole or any part of ed by predecessor.

the evidence in an inquiry or a trial, ceases to exercise jurisdiction therem and
is succeeded by another_Magistrate who_has and who exercises such jurisdiction,
the Magistrate so succeeding may act om the evidence 50 recorded hy his pre-
decessor and partly recorded by himself, provided that if the succeeding
Magistrate is.of opinion that further examination af any of the witnesses whose
evidence has already been recorded is necessary in the interest of justice, he may
Te-summon any such witness, and after such further examination, cross-exami-
nation and re-examipation, if any, as he may permit, the witness shall be dis-
charged, The section further provides that when a case is transferred under the
provisions of the Code from one Magistrate to another Magistrate, the former
th be deemed te cease to exercise jurisdiction therein, and to be succeeded
latter

The above section, by ‘its terms, does not apply to courts of session.
Otherwise also, the Code of Criminal Proceduse contains no such provision for
the court of session. The result is that if the presiding officer of the sessions
court is transferred or otherwise ceases to preside over that court after record-
me part of the evidence, the successor has to record ‘that evidence all over again.
is results in duplication of labour and wastage of the time of the court. It
also results in prolonging the trial. There are a number of cases in the court
of session in which voluminous evidence has to be recorded during a. period of
weeks and sometimes of months. If in such cases after @ major part of the
evidence has been receded. the presiding officer és transferred or for some other
Teason ceases le over that court, the

ted all over haan t, the whole process would have to be

12.4, Instances have also not been Jacking when witnesses have gone back on Difficulties of de

their earlier depositions during the cours¢ of de novo trial as a result of undue novo trial.

Pressure. This results, as it must, in miscarriage of justice. The ii
Teason of the existing law is the desirability to ensure that the judge who decide
Ihe case should also record the entire evidence, as he would hdve the

"Section 326, Code of Criminal Procedures ISH] 326, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973

4]



Recomenenda ii
in 41at Report,

Cases under

42

advantage of looking at the demeanour of the witnesses. Though we do not deny
the force of the above view, we feel that the disadvantage accruing therefrom
in present times when there are 4 number of cases in the court of session
wherein voluminous evidence has to be recorded, is much greater. In the cis-
cumstances, we would like to have the same law to operate in the court of
session as prevails in the court of magistrates. Tt is also noteworthy that power
would ctill be there in the sessions court, even after section 326 is made appli-
cable to that court, of recording the evidence of any witness de novo when-
ever that court feek it necessary to do’ so in the interest of justice.

¥25. We may also mention that the Law Commission in its Forty-first Report,
hed also made a similar observation when it observed, after referring to section

* 350-of the Code of Crimina) Procedure of 1898, corresponding to section 326

Pre.

vention of (वा-

ruption
1947,

Aci,

Piecemeal secord-
ing - of — evidence
pat to be encon-

Service op

wit.

of the new Code:—
“The section is confined to cases in_Magistrate’s courts, and is inappli-
cable to the Courts of Session, we have considered the advisability. of
extending this rule to Sessions cases, as we understand that sometimes
Sessions Judges are transferred. leaving behind part-heard cases which
have to be heard alf over again. It would be an ideal position if such
YWansfer did not take place, as Sessions cases are to be heard from day-
today and decided within a few days. It is obviowsly desirable that ix
serious cases the whole evidence should be heard hy the Judge who finally
decides the case. However, having repard tc the realities of the situation.
it is necessary to make some provision for cases where such transfers do
+ take place, because a mandatory provision for a de novo trial may often
caust considerable inconvenience and hardship. We. therefore, propose
to extend the section to Judges of Sessions Courts by refersing to ‘Fudge
or Magistrate’ instead of ‘Magistrate’ only.”
12.6. Cases under the Prevention of Corruption Act are tried in the sessions
court and the iudges of that court sit as snecial judges for the trial of those
cases. Sub-section (3A) of section 8 was inserted by Criminal Law Amend-
trent Act: (Act 2 of 1958) in Criminal Law Amendment Act of 1952. Accond-
ing to that sub-section, the provisions of section 350 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898 shall as fac as possible be anplied to the proceedings before
n special judee and for the purpose of the said provisions, a special judge shall
be deemed to he a magistrate. The reasons which operated with the legislature
in preventing the necessity of de navo trial in cases under the Prevention of
Coruntion Act would also, in our opinion, hold good even for other cases tried
dy the sessions canet.
12.7. Our above observations should in no way be construed to provide a stamp
of approval for piecemeal recordine of evidence in the court of session. We
would like to emhasise that. as far as possible, every effort should be made
to 16007 the entire evidence in a case tried by the Court of session at 2 stretch.
so that immediately after the recording of the evidence and the statement of
the accused, the court may be in a position to proceed with argument and
pronouncement of the judgment. It is. however. hard realities and the undesirable
results which accrue from the comoulsion for recording voluminous evidence
de novo in heavy cases which impel us to sugeest that the provisions of section
326 shoufd also be made applicable to the cour: of session.

12.8. We have in ‘the earlier paragraph? emphasised the necessity to record the
entire evidence in ctiminal cases at a stretch. This would be necessary not
only in the courts of session but also in the courts of magistrates. Such 2 course
is feasible only if afl the witnesses whose evidence has ta be recorded are actnal-
Iv present in court premises on the date fixed for trial.” As it is, we find thet
all the witnesses are seldom present on the date of hearing. This is particularly
50 in the courts of anagistrates, The inevitable effect of that is that the evidence
has to be recorded: piecemeal and there ic fone time lag between the recordine
of the evidence of different witnesses. This is 1. most unwholesome practice
and the sooner it is put an end to, the beiter. In not verv distant past the
investignting agency. at Teast in some States. evinced keen interest in the court
proceedings and ensured that alt witnesses were nresent in court on the date. of
hearing. The result was that the entire prosecution evidence was recorded -t
a stretch and cases were disposed of very quickly. The importance of the

‘ist Report. Code of Criminal Procedure. 18%, Vol, 1. page 17, paragraph 24.77
‘Pare 12.2, supra, .



43

we practice, in our opinion, should be brought home 160 all concetnéd in
pone ome times. Lt seams to us desirable that at least two police officials at
every police station should be set apart for getting serviee effected upon wit
nesses for cases relating to that police station and for ensuring their presence
on the date of hearing. We may also in the above context refer to the provi-
sions of section 309 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. According to these
provisions, in every inquiry or trial, the proceedings shall be held as expedi-
tiously as possible, and in particular. when the examination of witnesses has
once begun, the same shall be continued from day to day until all the witnesses
in attendance have been examined, unless the court finds the adjournment of the
same bevond the following day to be necessary: for reasons to be recorded. It
is also further required, according to the above section', that when witnesses
are in attendance. no adiaurnment or’ postponement shall be , granted without
examining them. except for special reasons to be recorded in writing.

12.8A. It has been hrought to the notice of the Commission that the police
agency auite offen deliherately refrains from producing all marerial witnesses
before the magistrate on one date. as it wants to know the trend of the defence
case as manifested by the cross-examination of the first witness. The produc-
tion of other witnesses is hekt up to a later date with a view to make up lacunae
in prosecution evidence during the intervening period. This practice of deli-
derately not producing all material witnesses on one date of hearing. in our
opinion. is not only unfair and not warranted bv the prévistons of the Code of
Criminal Procedure. it alse results in protongation of the trial.

12.88. In one metropolitan city. the pending file in the, court of magistrates is
3.33.00 Out of them, ever 3 lacs of cases relate to traffic offences. while
about 27.000 ‘cases relate to nrunicipal offences. AH these cases are to be tried
summarily. Some of the cuses are more than one or two years old. The delav
in the disposal of these cases ic attributed to the fact that the nolice agency
which is entrusted with the task has not been able to get service effected unon
the accused. Some nf the accused persons tried for traffic offences, were cvclists
who. it is stated, did not state correctly their names ind addresses, and effecting
service upon them has heen difficult. Another reason for delay is stated to he
the diversion of the nolice constables, entrusted with the task of cettine service
effected, to other duties relating to law and order.

12.9. It is common!y said that the investigatine agency now-a-days is not able
to devote as much time as it should do to criminal cases pending in courts.
Decause the police which constitute the investigating agency is over-burdened
with manifold other duties, including those relating to maintenance of law and
order. We are of the view that those officials of the police force who are con-
cerned with the investigation of casec should. as far as possible, concentrate

Practice of nol
producing alt ma-
terial witnesses on
one date criticis-
od.

Traffic offences.

Cancenication by
the

‘on ine
‘vestigation -

upon investigation and Jonkine after the progress of the cases even after thev-
are filed in court. Thev should not. as far as possible, he devuted for other,

Purposes. Piecemeal recording of evidence and delayine the disvosal of cases
undoubtediv canses hardship 10 the accused, but mere than that. it resnits aufte
often in wroneful acauittals. Wroneful acauittals are aa undesirable as wroneful
convictions. Both shake the confidence Sf the public in the administration of
iustice. The heneficiarics of wroneful acquittals are undoubtedly the anti-socia?
elements, Tt is plain that wroneful acauittals would give incentive and provide
encouragement to criminals and the enemies of society.

12.94. Tt mav have 0 be considered in the above context as to whether it ic
not desirable to separate the investigating agency of the police from that deal-
ine with general problems relating to maintenance. of law and erder. An investi-
eating agency not hucdened ith other duties would not only ensure promot and
efficient investivation of crime: it would also help in the quick disposal of court
cases and preverit miscarriage of justice. Tt may be mentioned thet the Law
Commission presided over by Shri Setalvad in the Fonricentlhy Report sunnorted
the Idea of sevaration of the investicating aeency? The auestion us to whether
the investieatine avency should be not susceptible to executive interference and.

for that nurpose. he independent of the executive contro! may also need con-
sideration.

se
Weetion 309, Cr. B.C. 1973,
Math Report, Vol. 2, pay: 741, para 24,

Separation of in-
veatigating ageocy.


Petty eases

Traffic offences,

English law as to
certain traffic off-
ences,

44

12.10, There are a very large number of petty cases like those relating to traffic
offentes, pending in criminal. courts, Complaint is often made by the people
prosecuted for such offences that they have 10 wait for a long time ‘in courte
on the date for which they receive notice or summons and that the time spent
and the inconvenience to which they are subjected are out of all Proportion to
the gravity of the offence. Most of the persons involyed in these offences are
not disposed to contest the case. It is for this reason that section 206 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, provides that if, in the opinion of a Magis-
trate taking cognizance of a petty offence, the case may be summarily disposed.
of under section 206 the Magistrate shall,! except where he is, for reasons to
be recorded ia writing, of a contrary opinion, issue summons to the accused
requiring him. either (0 appeariin person or by pleader before the Magistrate
on a specified dats: or if he desires to plead guilty to the charge without appear-
ing before the Magistrate, to transmit before the specified date, by post or
by messenger to the Magistrate, the said plea in writing and the amount of
fine specified in the summons of if he desires to appear by pleader and to nlead
guilty to the charge through such pleader, to authorise, in writing the pleader
to plead guilty to the charpé on his behalf and to pay the fine through the
Pleader. provited that the amount of fine specified in such summons shall not-
exceed one hundred rupees. Likewise, sub-seotion (1) of section 130 of the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 provides that the Court taking cognizance of an offence
under this Act,—

(i) may, if the offence is an offence punishable with imprisonment under

this Act, and

(ii) shall in any other case, state upon the summons to be served on
the accused person that he—

fa} may appear by pleader and not in person, or

th} mav. by a specified date prior to the hearing of the charge. plead
guilty to the charge by registered letter and remit to the Court
such sum {not exceeding the maximum fine that may be im-
posed for the offence) as the Court may specify: ~
Provided. that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any offence
specified in Part A of the Fifth Schedule.
12.11. One difficulty which. however, arises is in cases where the policeman on
duty finds a person violating a traffic law. In such cases, the policeman hands
over to the person violating the traffic law what is commonly known as a ticket
for appearance-in court on a date specified in that ticket. Most of the persons
to whom such tickets are handed over are not disposed to contest the case in
court. 16 would, in our opinion, he appropriate that (in the case of persons
other than professional drivers) for some specified traffic offences of a minor
nature, the ticket shoud also contain separately the amounts of fine for various
categories of traffic offences in respect of different types’ of vehicles. so that if
the person who-is found committing the infraction of law is so inclined, he
can plead guilty and also remit The amount of fine to the court concerned before
the date of hearing.
12.12. We may also in this connection refer to the scheme of the English law,
viz.. section 80 of the Road Traffic Regulation Act, 1967 which deale with
oanishment without proseention of offences in connection with lichts. reflectors
and obstruction: According to that section? where a police constable. finds any-
one in some specified areas committing an offence in respect of a vehicle as
under:
(a) by its being left or parked during the hour of darkness without lights
or reflectors as -requited by law, or
(6) by its obstructing a road,-or
(c). by the non-payment of the charge made at a street parking space,
he may givé the person concerned a prescribed notice in writing. offering the
opportunity of the’ discharzé of liability to 2 conviction of that offence by pay-
ment of a fixed penalty within 21 ‘days of the service of the notice The fixed
penalty for the offence shal! be £2 or one-half of the maximum amount of the
fine to which a person not previously convicted is tiable on summary conviction
of the offence, whichever is less.

‘Section 206, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Section 20. Road Traffic Regulation Act. 1967. (Eng2;



45

12.12A. In criminal trials we wish to emphasise the importance which attaches Framing of the

to the framing of the charge. The trial magistrates should take particular charge का
interest in this matter,and should not leave it to the prosecutors to give to accused

them a draft of the charge. Many subsequent complications can be avoided and
delays on that account obviated, if a charge is properly framed and worded,

Likewise, it is necessary that while recording statements under section
313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the magistrates should take particular
care to ensure that all incriminating pieces of evidence are put to the accused.
Failure to do so sometimes results in undeserved acquittal, and on other
occasions, in remand of the case.

id exa-
of the

12,13. It has been brought to the notice of the Commission that the disposal of Absence of one of

cases in which there is a large number of accused gets delayed because one te

of the accused absents himself on the date of hearing. The result is that the
case cannot proceed, and all the witnesses and the other accused who are present
haye to go back without anything substantial being done in the court. The trial
magistrate might in such cases direct representation of the absent accused by
his counsel. Difficulty in such cases can arise if the counsel declines to represent
the absent accused on the date of hearing. The hope of the Commission is
that responsible members of the Bar would offer all co-operation in the matter.

12.14. Complaints have also been heard that there are not enough number of Number of pro-

prosecutors, and quite often the trial court has-to wait for the prosecutor to scutors.

be free from another court before starting the criminal case.

This has been particularly so in cases under the Prevention of Food
Adulteration Act. as also in cases investigated. by the Central Bureau of Investi-
gation.

This, in our opinion, is a wholly unwarranted practice. There should be
as mafy prosecutors as there are criminal courts. One prosecutor should nor-
mally be set apart for each Criminal Court and he should see to it that the
Court is not kept waiting on his account, .

Efforts should be made to attract bright young lawyers as prosecutors.
Cases have not been unknown of wrongful acquittals because of the fact that
the prosecutor is lacking either in efficiency or in diligence.

12.15, In certain areas the.same judicial officer exercises both civil and criminal Civil and crimi.
powers. Normally, the judicial officer should not in such cases fix both civil nal cases heard by

and criminal cases on the same day, as this causes great inconvenience to
counsel. litigants and witnesses. If such a course cannot be avoided, in that event
it would be appropriate to set apart separate time for civil cases and criminal
cases. :

the same court,

12.16. Cases in which there is possibility of death sentence should receive Death sentence.

jority over all other cases. The agony of the accused in these cases is en-

Eanoed by the uncertainty of the fate which awaits them. It is essential that
the sword of Democles should not hang over them beyond the period which
is absolutely necessary.

4—468 L.A. D.JND/78


cHAPTER 13
SOME GENERAL SUGGESTIONS

the 13.1. Efforts should be made to draw, talented young persons to the judicial
Ban care to be service. The scales of pay for judicial officers and other amenities to them
reer! le

Residence of judi:
cial officers,

016 be sufficiently attractive and be of such a nature as can provide them
stone Oe oy decent standard of living Such scales of pay may deter,
not rule out altogether, any temptation being thrown in the way of
officers. View has been expressed by 8 large number of judges and the pet
that there is lot of scope for improvement inthe recruitment of fudicial officers.
Every effort, therefore, should be made to recruit! candidates of the right calibre.

13.2, The judicial officers have to face all kinds of situations in courts, includ-
ing difficulties created by obstructionist and cantankerous litigants and overbear-
ing and aggressive counsel. To enable them to meet such situations and ad
equip them properly for the discharge of their responsibilities, it is. es
that there should be a course of training for all judicial offcers before they
start functioning ss judicial officers.’

13.3. With the increase in the number of judicial officers, there will aleo have
to be increase in the number of court rooms. Much needs to be done in this
respect even for the present strength of the judicial officers. Complaints have
been made that in some places sufficient number of judicial officers have aot
been posted because there are pot enough court rooms. In other places the
complaint is that some of the judicial officers have to function in shabby of
small-sized court rooms. It has to be borte in mind that no court can fusiction
efficiently and with requisite dignity if it does not have a proper coust room.
We require in a court room a dais flor the judge to sit, a witness-box, a dock
for the accused in criminal cases, space for lawyers to sit and from where to
address the court, and space to accommodate the parties and others interested
in the case. Reader and the stenographer in some courts sit at the same level
as the presiding officer and in other courts at a slightly lower level. Besides
the regular court room, there is also needed an ante room or a chamber for
the presiding officer and another room for-keeping the records of cases pending
in the court. The court clerks also sit there. 5

Each court room has also to be suitably furnished and provided with
sufficient number cf books. Although it mey be perinissible to have an element
of austerity in furnishing a court room, it must also be kept की view that there
i in standard of furnishing which cannot be dispensed with in a court
room. Tikewisc, we cannot do without certain law books. They constitute
essentials of a court room. Apart from certain law books which are necessary
in each court room, there can be a sef of law books which can cater to the
needs of a number of courts situated in the same building.

We have dealt above with the requirements of each cour; room. Is needs
hardly to be emphasised that in every court building, there has to be provision
for a Bar room, waiting space for the litigants and witnesses as well as pro-
vision for public conveniences. In one metropolitan city, the facilities for this
purpose for the Magistrates Courts were of a most scanty character. There was
no proper space for those attending the courts. Although the strength of tho
Bar was more than 400, the Bar Room consisted of two small court-roomg and
of a verandah. The members of the Bar have consequently to sit in a place
covered with asbestos sheets.

13.4. The question of providing residential accommodation to judiciat officers
is of great importance. As it is, we find that in a number of places a judicial
officer, on being transferred to a new station, has to look fer residential accom-
modation. For this purposes, he may have to approach some landlords or take
the assistance of some local lawyers. It is plain thay any of such practices fs
highly undesirable and is Table to be abused. To prevent this, we must have
at all places where courts function sufficient number of residential houses. for

See also Chapter

46


47

judicial officers. These should be at the disposal of the District Judge and should

be allotted to the successor as soon as the present incumbent of the judicial

office is transferred or retires. हि .
13.5. In big cities like Bangalore and Madras, the judicial officers, especially Transport for ju-
at the subordinate level, have to spend about an hour in thé moraing in going “al officers.
by public transport buses to the court and an hour in the evening in reaching

back their places of residence, It would result{in considerable saying of time

and thus operate as a great economy if, in each big city, there are three or

four vans at the disposal of the courts to operate in different areas for bring-

ing judicial officers to the courts and for taking them back after the court time

to their homes. This would provide extra time to the judicial officérs to attend

to their fies and to prepare their judgments.

136 In all matters in which an appeal or revision is filed against an intey- APpea! against in-
locutory order, the court to which the appeal or revision is filed should ensure tetoemtary orders
that such an appeal or revision is disposed of within a reasonable length of time,

so that the cases do not get delayed on that score, :

137. 1६ should be ensured that the record of the trial court is normally sent Sending back re
back within 10 days of pronouncement of judgment im an appes! or revision Ord = of = fel
against an interlocutory order. Similar course should be adopted if the case is
remanded on appeal or revision to the trial court.

13.8, Judicial officers should be provided with stenographers to whom they can Stenographers.
dictate the judgments. This wo val result in considerable saving of the judicial
officer’s time and thus operate as economy in the ultimate analysis.

13.9. The evidence in the courts of District and Sessions Judges should normally Typing of evid-
be typed, so that after the completion of depositions‘carboa- copies of the same can °F
be immediately supplied to the counsel for the parties.

13.10. Long delays take place in supplying copies of judgments and depositions Delay in suppiy-
+0 the perties by the copying agency. These delays can be avoided or cut short ‘8 Comes

if, instead of typing ovt the copies, the whole thing is done by mechanical or

electronic process.

13.11. Misceilaneous spplications should not be kept pending for a jong time Miscellaneous ap-
and should be disposed of immediately after giving notice of those applications Plications.

ta the opposite parties, Not very long and elaborate orders should be needed to

dispose of these applications. It should be quitelenough if the main contentions

advanced and the main reasons which prevail with the judicial officers in dispos-

ing of those applications are indicated in the order.

13,12. Jn all cases where a carbon copy of the judgment is not available, certified Supply of copies
_ copies of the judgment prepared by mechanical or electronic process should be of judgment.

ee ied to the parties within a period of 15 days of the pronouncement of ths

judgment. Carbon coples of the judgment, if ready, are required to be furnished

immediately, on pronouncement of judgmen: under Order 20, Rule 6B, Code of

Civil Procedure, inserted in 1976,

13.13. It was brought to the notice of the Commission at one place that no Credit in statisti-
ctedit ig given, while evaluating the out-tum, of a judicial officer, for civil cases Cal purposes for
in which there is compromise. Likewise, no credit is given in those criminal vil cases or com
cases where the offence is compounded. The result is that the presiding officers position of crimi-
have no impetus to encourage compromise or composition of the offence even in nal cases,

those cases where the parties are inclined to do so, and a slight word by the

presiding officer would bring about this result. Some credit, in our epinion, be

given for such cases also, while evaluating the out-turn. :

13.14. One factor which causes considerable inconvenience and irritation to the Funetuality of Ju-
litigants, witnesses and the members of the Bar. and which also results in lower “iia! officers
out-turn of judicial work, is the.tendency on the part af some judicial officers

mot to observe strict court timings. Fortunately, this shortcoming is restricted

to a few judicial officers, but it is they who on account of this habit bring e Bad

name to the judiciary. It is plain that if the judicial officers Jo not sfart the

court work punctually, and do not adhere to the court timing, those whe have

to attend the court would not be able to adjust their other engagements. With

2 view to ensure that judicial officers stick to the court timings. it fs necessary

that the District Judge should pay surprise visits to the different courts. Necessary

action may be taken against those who are found to be recalcitrant in this respect.

court,


False statements.

Finenciat
Impact.

Further recom
mendation to the
waste if neces
sary in future.

48

13.15. There is a tendeticy 01 the part of some persons to make statements on
oath and file affidavits containing averments which are false. Some of them even
feel no compunction fo sesor! to patent falsehood in judicial proceedings. All
this affects the image of the judicial system. We have to dispel the impression
that falsehood pays in court and that persons cap resort to it with impunity. It
may. therefore, seem essential that whenever a clear case of falsehood becomies
manifest, necessary action against the delinquent might be taken in accordance
with law.

13,16. Some of the suggestions made in this Report would necessitate the alloca-
tion off more funds by the State for the administration of justice. This cannot in
the very nature of things be helped and the government, in our opinion, should not
be Joath to do the needful for this purpose. Due and proper dispensation of
justice is one of the most essential functions and obligations of the State. The
State cannot evade ar shirk its fesponsibility in this behalf on grounds of economy.
Such an spproach would be grounded on false notions of economy. Nothing
rankles more in human heart than a brooding sense of injustice. Delay in the
affording of judicial redress in cases where wrong has been done quite often leads
many persons to settle scores by extra-legal methods. These in their turn create
fresh problems of lay and order and further add to the work-load of the courts.
Despite the heavy demands on the State exchequer which is already hard pressed
to find funds for the various activities of the State, especially in the field of nation-
building, we 1०९) that there is no alternative to the allocation of additional funds
tor administration of justice, if something real and effective has to be done to
contain the people’s resentment arising from the existing tardy judicial process.

13.17. Before concluding we may add that if some matters come to our notice
necessitating further recommendations, a supplementary report would be sent.


Cuarrmn 14
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Our important conclusions and recommendations in this Report are sum-
matised below:——

1. Problem of delay and arrears in trial. Courts

ई1) The problem of delay in law courts has of Jate assumed gigantic pro-
portions. It has shaken the confidence of the public in the capacity of the courts
to redress their grievances and to grant adequate and timely relief.!

(2) The judicial system bas enjoyed high prestige of the people. In a
modern State, vast powers are granted to numerous authorities for carrying out
governmental functions. The right of aggrieved citizens 10 approach the Courts
acts as a cushion to the grant of powers to a host of officers. Foi the efficient
discharge of the responsibilities of Courts it is essential that the great respect they
have enjoyed should be maintained. Weakening cf the judicial system in the long
tun undermines the foundations of the democratic structure.?

(3) A civil case should be treated as old if a period of one year elapses
since the date of its registration till the pronouncement of judgment. This applies
to civil suits as well as to cases under Special Acts: दि

44) A criminal case should be disposed of within six months. In case of
sessions trials, the above period should include the period of pendency of commit-
Ment proceedings’

2, The Trial Court Jadges

(5) The importance of the trial Judge should be properly understood and
appreciated:

+ The present system evaluated : comparison with ancient judicial sytem

(6) In answer to the criticism thatthe present judicial system is unsuited to
Indian conditions and is an import from an alieh country, it is pointed out that 10
judicial system in any country is wholly unaffected by outside influences, nor are
such influences to be looked upon always as a bane*.

(7) The general notion that institutions like panchayats, councils of elders
and the like, represent the entire indigenous system of India, is misconceiyed.
These institutions were concetned with settling petty disputes. With the growth
of society, a regular hierarchy of courts came into existence’.

(8) The ancient Indian judi gem and procedure, both civil and crimi-
nal, contained definite and detailed

(9) The present judicial system is the result of gradual process of evolution.
Modifications have been made in the hierarchy of Courts to meet-the requirements
of a developing society. The delays are’‘ue to the many factors. including those
Operating in and outside the Courts’.

(10) It will be a retrograde step to revert to the primitive method of admini-
stration of justice by taking disputes to a group of ordinary laymen not conversant
with legal concepts and procedures. The teal need is to further improve the exist-
ing system to meet modern requirements!”

Para 1.1.

"Para 1.4

Para 1.9.

‘Para 1.10.

"Chapter 2.

"Para 3.1.

"Para 3.2.

"Para 3.4 to 3.19.
"Para 3.20, earlier half.
“Para 3.20, latter half.

49


50.

4, Stages of delay : summons

; (11) The time taken io scrutiny of the plaint should not exceed one week
(between the filing of the plaint and registering of the suit).

1. (12) Along with the plaint, besides the copies of the plaint, necessary forms
of symmous duly 9161 in with necessary particulars except the date should also
be filed by plaintiff? so as to save the time at present taken in preparing the form
of summons.

(13) Long delays take place in geaing service effected upon the defendants.
To obviate this deiay, summonses to the defendants should be issued both in the
ordinary way (for service through the process seryer) and by registered cover.
acknowledgement due*.

” (14) Where the circumstances warraat, the Court should readily make use
of the provisions of 0.5, 7, 20, C.P.C. for substituted service’.

: (19) Full use should be made of 0.1, ह. 8, C.P.C., which permits represeata-
tive a

(16) There should be proper administrative supervision of the work of pro-
cep servers. If necessary, their pay scales should be suitably revised. The prac-
tice prevailing in some States of having an Administrative Sub-Judge who super-
vises the work of process servers and bailiffs in big cities can be usefully adopted
in other States also, The suggestion that some incentive should also be provided
10 process servers im getting g personal secvice effected on a number of persons in
a mouth may also be looked into*. :

(17) Stringent and prompt action showld be taken against process servers
making false reports’. पु

5. Pteadings and issues : pre-trial procedure

(18) Many causes of delay would -be eliminated if proper g,atention is paid
in ensuring compliance with provisions of Order 10, Code of Civil Procedure*.

(19) Judicial Officers should normally imsisi upon the filing of the written
stafemeat on the date immediately after service of summons on the defendant
Repeated adjournments for this purpose should be avoided?.

(20) The requirement of the defendant filing copy of the written ‘state
ment and of the defendant produciog all documents in his possession ot power
sbould be enforced. ]f necessary, local amendment may be made for the
purpose!

{2)) Laxity in enforcing the provisions of 0.8, 1. 1, C.P.C. ig the main
reasoa for omission of the defendanis in many States to file the written state-
ment on the first date of hearing’.

(22) Proper use of the provisions of Order 10, C.P.C. relating to examina
tion of parties before framing issues would go a long way in curtailing the
evidence and ciccumsctibing the area of controversy. Hxpericace shows that in
the course of such examination, many admissiogs including admissions as to
documents, are made which narrow down the scope of controversy. This would
obviate the necessity of producing evidence in respect of matters which stand
admitted as a result of such examination,

‘Para 4.1.

"Para 4.2.

*Pata 4.3.

‘Pare 4.4,

‘Pang 4.5.

"Para 4.6 (Administrative supervision of process servet}, See also para 11.4,
"Pera 4.7.

Para 35.1.

"Pare 5.2. to 24.
UPare 5.5.
Pare 3.6,

मत 57,


51

(23) In onder to be in & position 10 wake effective use of the peovisions
of Order 10, C.P.C, it is essential that the trial judge should have read the
pleadings of the parties and should know the case of cach party ss set out

therein!

(24) The practice prevailing in subordinate courts in some States of
depending upon draft issues supplied by counsel, without the triel judge himeelt
applying his mind, is extremely undesirable.

(25) A judicious use of the provisions of Order 11, C.P.C. (discovery and
inspection of documents) and Order 12, C.P.C. (admissions) can considerably
narrow down the area of controversy and custail the volume of evidence.

(26) In the U.S.A., the pre-trial procedure has been stated to have pro-
duced beneficial reswits, The provisions of Orders 10, 11 and 12, C.P.C. are
sufficient to deal with the situation in India, and it ig no not necessary to tragsplant
the pre-trial system with all its amplitude on the Indian soil -

(27) In appropriate cases, the trial judge himself can act as a ‘conciliator.*
The Bar also can play a significant part m bringing about compromise.

& Court dinry and evidence and substitution of legal representatives

(28) The work of controlling the court diary and the fixing of dates
should be done by the presiding officers and should not be left to ihe Reader
or Sheristadar. While fixing cases for a particular date, the presiding officer
sbould ensure that the number of cases fixed on a parcular date is such as
can reasonably be disposed of on that day, allowing at the same time a maagil
for the collapse of one or two cases because of unforeseen circumstances?

(29) ए is not desirable to fix a case for a date oa which there are no
prospects of ils being taken up. The better course would be to fix one quarter
of work more than can be disposed of on a day®

(30) There must be some standard for the number of cases pending m
a court, Whenever there are indications that the number of cases goes beyond
that standard, additional courts should be created.?

G1) There is a tendency*to over-prove allegations of fact. Unnecessary
prolongation of depositions should be avoided.$

(32) Control may be exercised.by the trial judge when questions, that are
uncalled for, harassing or slanderous. are put in crosg-examination®

(33) Although we have adopted the accusatorial system, the trial judge
should not play an alfogeiher passive role, bur, must take greater interest and
elicit such information as may be helpful in finding the truth.!°

(34) Entire evidence should, as far as possibie, be recorded at a stretch.'!

(35) Desirability of proving things like those of a formal nature by afli-
dayits instead of by oral evidence be, considered.'? दि

(36) The provisions of Order 17, Code of Civil Procedure as amended,
be enforced strictly, to prevent unnecessary adjournment of caseaJ?.

(37) खा of adoption of the list system in force in Kerala in other
Sates may be idered.44

‘Para 5.8.
ara 5.12.
"Para 5.14.
‘Para 5.15.
‘Para 6.1.
"Para 6.2.
Para 6.3.
Para 6.4.
"Para 6.6.
Para 6.7.
UPara 6.8.
“Para 6.9.
Para 6.10.
Para 6.

(Special list system).


32

(38) In regard t0 bringing on record legal sepresentatives of deceased
parties, the recent amendments made in Order 22, Code of Civil Procedure, may
kept in view!
(39) While issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses, direc-
tion should be given to ensure that the needful is done within the time fixed?

7. Arguments, jedgmest and decree

(40) Arguments should be heard soon after the close of evidence. The
general experience is that arguments so beard take much fess time than argu:
ments advanced after a long interval,
हे tn heavy cases involving voluminous evidence and complex questions of
jaw, an adjournment may be necessary for hearing arguments, but it should not
be too long.

(41) Unduly lengthy arguments may be avoided.4

(42) Tendency to cite needlessly large mumber of authorities and read
lengthy passages from judgments may be avoided.’ Judgments of trial courts
should deai with questions of fact by appraising the evidence, referring to rele-
vant statutory provisions and citing such authorities as have direct bearing.

Brevity in judgments, however, should not be used as a justification for
noi dealing with inconvenient contentions or crucial arguments,?

(43) 013८7 20, Rule 1, Code of Civil Procedure should be complied with
as to the time within which the judgment should be pronounced,’

Time: lag between pronouncement of judgment and preparation of decree
should not be long. Order 20, Rule 6A, Civil Procedure Code, lays down 15
-days as the normal interval,"

(43A) In suits for accounts for partition, after the peeliminaty dectee is
passed, proceedings before the Commissioner linger on for a long time. To
avoid such delay. the coure should keep a strict watch, and some kind of pro-
gress report should be asked for when a request is made for extension of time
for completion of the proceedings. For awarding the final decree, credit may
be given for stastical purposes.?

&. Conciliation

i (44) Que of the methods which can be devised for relieving the Coutts of
the heavy load of. cases is the adoption of system of conciliation of civil cases.i°
The system is in force in Japan! and Norway.!? It was previously in force in
France; it was abolished a few years ago, but has been revived to a limited
extent'3 Jt is in force for certain casés in Pakistan.

(45) In the countries in which it has beem cried, the system of conciliation
has not. been an unqualified success, Ar the same time, the system is not with-
cnt its merit. The Commission recommends the setting up of coticiliation
boards on experimental basis in selected areas im disputes giving 1156 to claims
for recovery of money not exceeding five thousand rupees.

(6) Lf the setilement is arrived at within three months, it should be
reduced. to. writing, signed by all concerned and filed in court, like a compromise.
if no settlement is altived at within three: months, the court should make an

फूड 6.12 (0, 22, 8. 4, 4A, Civil Procedure Code.
Para 6.13.
Para 7.1 and 7.2.
‘Para 7.3.
कण 74,
‘Para 7.5.
Para 76.
+ Para 7.8.
"Para 7.9.
Para 8.1 acd 8.2.
“Para 8.3.
“Para £4 to 8.6.
“Pare 8.8.
“Para 8.9.
“Pera 3.10.



33

order to that effect. Even if no order about settlement having been not arrived
is made within the above period of three months, the court shall presume that
no scitlement was possible.!

Such category of suits as may be considered proper may be kept out of
the iurisdiction of the conciliation boards?

(47) No plaint in the absence of a. sufficient cause should be filed in
court relating toa dispute mentioned above without the aggrieved person first
approaching the conciliation board.

Suitable provisions may be enacied if this scheme is adopted.*

-(48) The setting up of such boards should be done only on experimental
basis in certain areas*

9. Recevitment and personality of the trial Judge — inspection of courts aad
training of judicial officers

(49) The trial Judge is the linchpin of the entire system. He has, in the
course of the proceedings, to give a number of rulings on the spur of the
moment. Proper and fair trial requires not only professional competence, but
also cool temperament and firmness.*

(50) it is essential 10 attract young bright law graduates and iawyers of
the right calibre to the judiciary. Thus can be done if there are good pay scales.
It should be remembered that bright young lawyers can carn much more in the
profession. Higher initial pay be given to a judicial officer by taking into
account the years of practice.! -

(51) The present system of insisting upon a number of years of practice
at the bar should be retained, the period being 3 years, The only possible
exception could be for iaw graduates employed in courts? हर

(52) The suggestion to have an all India Judicial Service with the same
tank aod pay scales as the Indian Administrative Service should receive serious
consideration.§

(53) The advantages gained from having all India Judicial Service will
oulweigh any supposed disadvantage.* न

-(54) There shouid be a training course of about 3 to 6 months for recruits
to the Subordinate Judicial office. The recruits should, by such training,
acquainted with procedural requirements for dealing with different stages ot
cases, including the writing of judgments and interlocutory orders and dealing
with administrative matters,!

(55) Need for periodic inspection of, subordinate courts by the District
Judge and a Judge of the Higa Court must be emphasised. The emphasis in
inspection should be to bring about improvement in the functioning of the cflicer
concerned a separate Judge should be deputed for inspection of courts in
each district.

(56) The practice in some High Courts of one judge being made in charge
of each district for one or two years is stated to bave yielded good results,"

‘Para 8.11.

"Para 8.11.

Page 8.12.

‘Pata 8.13,

Pare 9.1.

"Para 9.2 and 9.3,
Para 94 and 9.5
"Para 9.6.

Pata 9.7,

“Para 9:8. See also para. 13.2
Para 9.9.

SPara 9.9.

MPara 9.10.



4

‘The High Court should ensure that arrears in subordinate courts are
cleared and brought under controL! 8. courts

___ 457) Long delays ip filling up vacancies of judicial officers should, be
avoided * ‘

458) Recommendation of the High Court for increase in judicial strength
should receive prompt consideration from Siate Guvernment and should not, i0
the absence of some compelling reason, be tumed down.>

(59) To clear the heavy backlog, the services of retired judicial officers
kaown for their integrity, efficiency and quick disposa] should be ulilisgd. Such
ofiicers should be appointed only on the recommendation of the High Court.‘

In addition to appointing retited judicial officers, some special secruit-
mem may have to be made from bright young members of the Bar who have
practised for at least seven years for disposal of old cases, These members of
the Bar would necessarily have to be given 4 higher start and, on satisfactory
performance, be_ultimately absorbed. in service af Disirict and Sessions Judges
cr Additional District and Sessions Judges* 5

Some vf the serving judiciat officers can also be asked to deal exclusive-
ly with old cases$
The number of additional courts should be such as to make it possible
that all arreass are cleared within a peric of ubout three years.’
10. Cases ander cestuic special Acts

६ under special Acts which, by
out them and call for speedy

(60) There are certain categories of
their very nature, have an clement of urgen
disposal The following categories are ९1४९७:

(a) Matrimonial cases,—These cases diai on for years. A decree of
divorce gratted when the patties ar. jasc the stage of youth is not
of such avail, Such delay might aiso lead t young people going
astray. Matrimonial cases should therefore be disposed of early.

Linked with matrimonial cases are cases relating to custody and
guardianship of miner children’ which stand on the same footing.

(b) Eviction cases.—-Especially those on the ground of bova fide personal
necessity of the landlord.”

(c) Cases filed before Motor Accidents Claims Tribunals.—Many of these
claims are by widows and children of persons who lost their lives in
the accident. Delay causes great dismay and frustration amongst
the peaple!?

(0) Cases under the Indian Succession Act, 1925.—Quite often, money
befonging to a deceased person remains locked up because the heirs
cannot receive payment without obtaining succession certificate,
probate or letters of administration, as the case may bet!

It is therefore essential that the cases of above categories should receive

prompt attention?

(61) There should be enough number cf judicial officers who should deal
with the above cateyories of cases.

Wara 9.11.

"Para 9.11.

"para 9.12,

Para 9.12 to 9.15.
Para 9.16.

Para 9.17.

"Para 9,18.

‘Para 10.1.

‘para 10.2. .
‘Para 10.3.

“Para 10.5.

"Para 10.6.

para 10.7.


35

७७2) Apart from the above, following specific suggestions and obsziva-
tions 1998 been made in respect of the above categories of cascs:—

(3) Cou

res dealing with matrimonial cases should give privricy ‘to the

disposal of these cases.'

{b} The

number of cases for ¢viction in each district would be so large

as to kesp folty vecupied ome or more than one judicial officers?

fe) (i)

ti)

ili)

(9) Simi
Act
{63) Ther

At most places, the district Judge is desigaated as the Tribunal
for Motor Accidents Cisims. but he has hardly encugh time to
deal with them! The powers of designating and appointing
judicia] officers as such tribunal shouid vest in the High Court.*
Every effort should o¢ made to see that Motor Accidents claims
are disposed of within less than a year

The number of such cases in some districts may not be encugh
to keep the judicial officers fully occupted. One solution is to
have One Tribunal for a number of such districts. The other
sojulign is to vest the powers in an Addilional District Judge
or a senior subordinate judge, who should set apart a number
cf days in a month for the exclusive disposal of such claims’

ilar observations will hold good for cases under the Succession
i

re 4s also- need for speedy adjudication of disputes relating to

labour, between management and workmen. There should be enough number
of Jabour courts and industrial tibuvais® in the interest of industrial harmony
and to जाइए higher production,

iL. Execatior

(64) Necd to pay sufficient attention to the execution of decrees is

emphasised?
(65) One

great obstacle in obtaimng satisfaction of the decree 3s the

tendency on the part of a judgment-debtor to file objections either himself ot
through some vther person, Most of these objections, when scrutinised, ate

found to be wi

(66) The
because of the
towards the sta

To meet

ithout merit.

tendeticy of the courts not Lo pay allention to execulion work
fact that the disposal of an execution application does not count
adatd disposal must be deprecated,

this difficulty, we might either allow some credit {in ierms of

units of otherwise) for those cases in which the dectee-holder gels complete
salisiaction of the decsee or in the alternative, we might have a quarterly state~
ment from eacl. of the judicial officers in the district, giving statistics about the

cases in which

there was satisfaction of the decree, either fully ar in part, as

also the cases in which there was no Satisfuction of the decree, The fact that

the percentage

of complete satisfaction of whe decree in a court was very high

should count as a plus point in favour of the presiding officer of that court)!

{66A) In

eviction cases relating to urbam property, delay is caused by

successive attempts to obstruct defivery. Due attention should therefore be paid
10 execution proceedings and im the statisticgl abseracts credit shoufd be given
for the disposal of these proceedings. ‘Executing court can also exercise the
powers amply conferred by the present Jaw to stop such obstructions.!?

‘Para 10.4.
‘para 104,
“Para 10.7.
Para 17.
Para 10.8,
"Para 14.1.
para ४1.2.
upara 11.3.
Upgra LIGA.


56

(67) The satis‘action of a ४०८82 jn quite a large number of cases depends
upon. the Nazirs who are entrusted with catrying out the different steps .m the
course of the execution of a decree. The officials comcemed with the execution
of decrees should he mea of experience aml, by aad large, should project an
image of integrity, We might think of revising the pay-scales of these officials.
The work of these officials should be cunstanlly supervised by a judicia’

Officer?
12, Criminal cases
(68) In criminal cases, it is particularly necessary tat delay be eliminat-
ed, since (he decision depends upon oral rather then documentary evidence, and
with the passage of time, the memory of witness fades.?

Every criminai court should keep a register showing the number of wil-
Aesses summoned fer a date, the number examined, the number sent back and
reasons for sending them back without examination.’ The tendency of some
criminal courts of sending back witnesses withou: examining (hem must be
deprecated,

(69) The iaw should be amended to enable a Sessions Judge to act cn
evidence partly or wholly recorded by his predecessor.4 .

(70) At least two police officials at every police station should be set
apart for getting servwe of summonses effected upou witnesses for cases relating
to that police station and for ensuring their presence on the date of hearing.>

(704) The police quile offen deliberately refrain fom producing all
material witnesses on one date, the objec: beig 10 clear up Uke Jacusae in fhe
prosecution evidetice after the defence case becomes manifest by cross-examina-
tion. This practice is uofair and not warranted oy the Criminal Procedvre
Code, and results im prolongation of the triaL*

(70H) in ons metropolian city. in the courts of Magistrates, there was a
huge pending file relating to traffic and municipal offeaces to be tried summurily,
some of which were mote than one or two ycars okt. Delay in disposal was
altributed tu the fact that the police had not been able to get service elfected
upon the accused.’

(71) Officiais gt the police sialion who are coLacrted with investigation
should concentrate ov investigation. As far as possible, they should not be
deputed for ather purposes.*

(715) Desirability of separating the investigating agency of the police
from that dealing with law and order may have to be considered, The question
whether the investigating agency should be not susceptible to executive inter-
ference and, for that purpose, be independent of executive control may also need
consideration.®

(72) The Motor Vehicles Act, 1939. section i30(1) provides for a special
procedure for cerlain atic offences wheceunder the accused can plead guilty
to the charge by post and semit the specified fine, In the case of persons other
than professional drivers for some specified cffences of a minor nature, the ticket
issued by the policeman should also contain separaely the amounts of fine for
various categories of traffic offences in respect of different types of vehicles, so
that if the person committing the infraction of law is so inclined, he can plead
guilty aud also remit the amount of fine to the court concerned before the date
of hearing.!° है

फुडाब 11.4 (and also para 4.6)

Para 12.1.

3Para 12.2

Para 12.3 to 12.7 (Section 326, Cr. P. ९. 1973).
‘Para 12.8. .
"Para 12.64.

‘Para 1288.

‘Para 12.9.

Para 12.98.

wpata 12.11.


37

(73) Disposal of cases in which there is a large number of accused. gets
delayed because one of the accused absents himself onthe date of heating, The
trial court _in such contingencies should consider the advisability of directing
representation of the absent by counsel!

(73A) Having regard to the importance attached to the framing of the
charge, the trial magistrates should not leave it to the prosecutor to frame a
charge.?

(738) In recording statements of the accused under section 313, Cr. P.C.
the magistrates should ensure that all incriminating pieces of evidence are put
to the accused.3 >

(74) Complaints have been heard that there are not enough number of
prosecutors, particularly in cases under the Prevention of Food Adulteration
Act and those investigated by the Central Bureau of Investigation. Steps should
be taken to ensure that there आह as many prosecutors as there are Criminal
Courts.+

(75) Where the sate Judicial Officer exercises both civil and criminal
powers, normally he should not fix both the type of cases on the same day. If
such a course cannot be avoided, he should set apart separate time for civil
and criminal cases.

(76) Cases in which these is possibility of ‘death sentence should receive
Priority over all other cases.*

13. Some general suggestions

(77) To draw talented young persons to the Judicial service, scales of
pay and other facilities in respect of judicial officers should be such as to pravide
a decent standard of living.’

(78) To engble judicial officers to meet the various kinds of situations
that they have 10 806 in court, there should be a course of training for all
judicial officers before they Start functicning.*

(79) Adequate court rooms, equipped with proper facilities and sufficient
accommodation, should be provided. These should be suitably furnished and
provide with a sufficient number of books. There should also be provision for
a bar room and. waiting space for the litigants.?

(80) Providing residential accommodation to judicial officers is of great
importance. There should be sufficient number of residential houses for judicial
Officers, which should be at the disposal of, and be allotted by, the District

Judge.10

(81) In big cities three or four vans should be placed at the disposal of,
and be allotted by, the District Judge for bringing ju puss officers to the court
and for taking them back to their homes!

482) In all matters in which an appeal or revision is filed against an
interlocutory order, the appellate or revisional court should ensure that’ such
an appeal or revision is disposed of within a reasonable length of time"?

(83) It should be ensured that the record of the trial court is sent back
within 10 days of the judgment,!? in appeal or revision against interlocutory
orders. Similar course should be adopted if the case is remanded on appeal
ete, to trial court.

1Pare 12.12 ~
"Para 12.12A.
"Para 12.12A. .
Para 12.14.
Pera 12,15.
"Para 12.16.
Para 13.1.
‘Para 13.2 (See also para 9.8).
‘Para 13.3. ‘
Para 13.4.
UPara 13,5.
“Para 13.6.
“pera 13.7.
“Para 137.


58

(84) Judicial officers should be provided with stenogeaphers for dictat-
ing judgments.’

(85) Evidence in courts of District and Sessions Judges should normally
be typed, so that czrbon copies of deposition can be supplied immediately to
ihe parties?

(84) Long delays take place in the grant of copies of judgments and
depositions. These can be cut short if, instead of typing, the whole thing is
done by mechanical or electronic process

(87) Miscellaneous applications should be disposed of immediately after
giving notice. The orders passed thereon should not be unduly tong or
elaborate.* पु
(88) Where carbon copy of the judgment is not available, certified capies
by mechanical or electronic process should be supplied within 15 days. Carbon
copies, if ready, must be furnished immediately under 0.20, 7. 6B, C.P.CS

(89) In statistical abstracts, credit should be given for civil cases-in which
there is a compromise and criminal cases in which there is a compounding of
the offence.6

_(90) Judicial officers who are unpunctua! bring a bed name to the judi-
ciary. To ensure punctuality, it is necessary that the D: dude? should pav
surprise visits to the different courts and take necessary gaiust those wha
बाई recalcitraut.?

(91) False statements on oath-and false averments in <fidavit, should not
be tolerated. Wheiever a cl case of faisehood becomes miernifest, necessary
action against the delinquent might be taken in accordance with law!

(92) Seme of the suggestions made in this Report would neces
allocation of snore funds by the State for the administration of justice.
camo}. in the very natuse of things, be helped and the government she:
be [cath to co the nevdfal for this purpose. Due aad proper
justice is one of the most essential functions and obligation of the State. The
State cannot evade ar shitk {is tesponsibility in this behalf on grounds of
economy.

(93) If matters come to the Commission's notice necessitating further
recommendations, a s.pplemeniary report would be पढ़ा,

tien

tara 13.8.
Para 13.9.
spara 13.10.

> ‘Para 13.18.
SPara 13.52.
Para 13.13,
"Para 13.14.
*Para 13.15.
‘Para 13,16
para 13.17.


39

H. R. Khanna
S. N. Shankar
T.S. Krishnamoorthy Iyer

P.M. Bakshi ©

Dated, New Devi,

the 27th November, 1978.

Chairman

Member

Member

Member-Secretary.


APPENDIX 1

FIGURES OF PENDENCY IN SUBORDINATE COURTS
{Civil and Criminal canes)

61
5--468 1...4.0.0प0)/78


63

TABLE I

Table showing institution and disposal of Regular Suits aad Miscellaneous Cases during the quarter endieg
December, 1977 and disposal as percentage of Institation during 401 quarter of 1976 and Ist, 300, 3rd
ant 4th Quarters of 1977

‘Name of Institution and otherwise Disposal Percentage of disposal over Institution
the Stato | during
Regular te Totat Regular Mix. Total 4th Ist 2nd आधे 49
a Se कफ Pn ign das
| 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1112
1. Andhra Pra-
Pradesh ©. 21,942 1,31,211 1,53,153 23,063 1,832,478 1,58,54E 105-4 107-9 92-6 96.6 OES
2. Astam 1,428 (1,004 2,432 1,230 १62. 1,992 101-9 106-0 10-1 100-4 B1-D
3, Bihar -. 9,344 «3,839 12,888... 7709. 3123 10,892 222-8 12 AS 961 BL
4, Gujarat 12,697 9,863 22,260 12,235 8,373 20,608 «102-5 99.3 692 LOTR I
5. Haryana 9,100 1,176 10,276 9,239 128 10447 124-6 1193. BEB HS 1091
6. Himachal Pra-
पल . ~ 1463 1,459 2922 £361 1212 9,672 105-4 3246 ३323-98 1029. OL
4. Jammu के Kashmit ‘Not ceceived.
8, Karnataka 10,168 6,788 16,956 8,656 7,190 15846 94:2 967 69.2 O10 99S
9. Kerala 10,714 35,562 46,256 11,771 38,031 49,802 105-8 104-0 92-9 102-0 107-7
10, MadhyaPradesh 18,423 4,989 23,412 18,671 4,930 23,601 109-1 114-3 74-2 BOS 100-8
11, Maharashtra. 25,459 14,348 39,807 21,080 13,631 34,711 97-1 103-30 78.3... 880 872
12, Manipur 4 88... 132 “38 96 134. 7H 1004 104-1 98-72 10155
13, Meghalaya . Not received-
14, Nagaland 33 8 4 39 2 60. 38-9 1137 1233 [4858 1489
15, Orissa BAS 284. 609. 3868. 2,600. 5,858 LIS-B 132-4 6-3. 105-1984
16, Punjab + 12,888. 6166 19,054 13,84 6,858 20,599 10-71 111-2 87-2 90:60 108-6
17, Rajasthan . 7,699 3,669 11,368 7,240 4,188 11,428 109-9 104-0 88-9 83°F 1005
18, Sikkim . 39. a 82 32 49 81 1-3 102-9 93-6 115-3 OBB
19, Tamil Nadu. 18,087 89,459 1,07,546 18,582 88,605 1,07,187 105-1 100-6 = 9+0 101-4 ##7
20. Tripura 188 103 aw 369 99 468 44-5 725 GA I 160३
21. Uttar Pradesh 36,996 23,008 60,004 35,017 21,511 56,528 102-4 92-3 MISS OSL 94-2
22. West Benga! 16,625 3,823 20,148 31,408 2.00 14,210 81-2 89-3 9-0 9-0. 705
UNION TERRI-
TORIES
1, A&NIsecds |= 22 4 26 2 10 3 168-8 1667 778 ORD 119-2,
हि है: « 2 “~ 2 4 ” 4 200-0 oo 0-0 20-0 WOO
3. Chandigah ५... 20... 62... 808. 13... 66. TDG 106111 OB
ज. Dadra & Na- पु
हुक Haveli . 2 3 5 10 7 17) «75-0 95771 100-8 500-0 340-0
5. Deb! - ~ 4249 2,002 6341 3,545 22,223 $,768 «103-8 «105-4 108:9 9.2 1D
6. Sos, Daman
& एप . 439 192 631 345 137 4820-73 इक? 11-0 1060 76-4
4. Lakshadweep S$ 15 10. ७ 107 21 1089. 97 BO 944. 9-1
है, Mizoram. 56 छह 45 64... 10 171. 83-9 120-9 126-4 OM
9, Pondicherry « 599 981 1,580 656 803) 3,459 102-0 101-3 B10 DE 92-3
TOTAL . 2,220,157 3,42,584 5,64,741 2,009,503 3,41,922'$,51,425 105-9 103-4 894 S60 976



Table showing total strength of courts func!
in Units and rate of disposal per court on t!

64

TABLE It

Jurisdiction during 4th Quarter of 1976 and Ist, 280, 3rd and 4th Quarters of 1977

(a) After fell trial पु . . . . . .
(b) Without Trial . . . . . . .
(bytamfr eet
(@) Without contest, ex parte admission of claims, compro-

mise of arbitration .

tioning, disposal of Regular Suits and Miscellaseous Cases
he basis of time devoted by courts ¢o civil work in original

Disposal of onc Regular Disposal .of one Misc.
suits . cases:
6 Units 2 ULits
1/4 Unit 1/12 Unit
1 Units 13. Unit
2 Units 1/2 Unit

Name of the Total Disposal in units during Average rate of disposal per court during
" StatefUnion —strenath
Terttorls —ofcouris जा ad beds th ath et 2d है itt
पाप पिला पार oe Se wie or oft) जता oft
i 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 mo ou oR
1. Andhra

Pradesh.” 186 1,12,891 83,762 69,435 1,08,958 1,03,498 600-5 475-9 436-7 637-2 556-1
2 Asam. BS 43L. 6,026. 6590... 6742. 3,377 142-9 241-0 235-4 232-5 146-8
3, Bier . ५. 213 30,484 30,950 32,106 33,235 15,801 $7-3 146-0 145-3 155-3 Teg
4, Gujarat 124 38814 37586 22,799 47,186 33,532 320-8 308-1 262-1 357-5 270-4
5 Beryne =. 47 17450. 17,820 15,410 20,652 - 21,685. 5453540 467-0 543-5 461-3
6. Himachal Pra-

dah 18 5489 4422. 827. 5,372 5313. 3033. 24S-7ASLS 284 295-2
7. Jem & ~
__ "Kashmir. — Not received: _

@ Karnataka | 114 27,853 29,791 20,461 35,980 30,014 255-6 256-8 170-5 3050 263-3
9. Kerala.» «96 4653 30866 28,203 48,797 47,977 475-6 529-9 290-8 488-0 499-8
10. Madhya Pre-

dish TORY 49,188: 53,790 34,054 59,857 49,034: 268-8 275-8 181-1 328-9 454-0
11, Maharashtra. 173, 66,104 72,098 51,239 73,670 53,343. 382-1 497-5 299-6 533-8 308-3
12. Manipor 5 535. 379 497 ह9.. 598... 246 26-6 14ND 1G 70.4... 44-7
13, Meghalaya Not received: —
14. Nagaland =. 19108 395... 184. TABATA 3.1
15. Orica =. 52. «10,735 15,327 6348 12,048 9,377 104-2 255-5 105-8 334-7 180-3
16 Punjab ss BL 29318 31,849 25,171 30,284 34,637 451-0 513-27 3648 373-4 427-6
17, Rajasthan» 66 20,886 19-211 16.342 23.259 20,127 300-5 282-5 267-9 352-4 305-0
18, Sikkim | बह 250... 208. 230... 192. 184. 7-4 273.134 100-7 105+
19. Tamil Nadu. 150 91,292 929. 52,904 1,03,565 92,111 6568 7644 397-8 699-8 ठा4-1
20. Tripum «५ 4... 399. 690. 744 91. 904. 790. 130-0 149-8 180-2 226-0
21 Uttar Pradesh 349 94858. 99,920. 77,007 1,24.472 92,422 403-7 283-1 305-6 371-6 264-8
22, West Bengal «4126-24472 33,995. 38254 40,609 21,773 191.2 275-9 308-6 324-9 172-8
UNION TERRI-

TORIES—
1AQ&NIstnds 1-25 6 39. 36 BAT 260. HOD
2. Arunachal

Pradesh, 4. 4 7 19 OF ..  -.. 170 79-06
3. Chandigath . 255 1,000 1,129 «B14. 61... 772. 8000. SOL-B 361-8 271-6 34344
4, Dadra & N3- है

gatHavell 02... 4... 983 6 3. 39 16-0 1420. 17.0... 6.0. 1520
5. फल |... ५». 36 14843 15,399 11,879 14086 11,863 436-6 427-8 330-0 391-6 329-5
6 Goa, Daman & .

Dis 9 1382 1,602 1150 1804 1.26 172-8 188-5 135-3 212-2 149-0
Lakshadweep 1-250 '03 2 61S BST 128-0.. 4-0... 15-0.. 55.2
8. Mizomm =. BR 49S SID 159... 372. 23S. 495-0. 519-0 159-0 372-0
9. Pondicherry BS B9T4 RAT 1,362 288... 2,903. 424-9 438-0 209-5 356-4 Ba].

TOTAL . 2.01575 6,923,450 7,02,733 522,048 7.90,645 653,002 325-2 349-9 272-7 999-4 323-8



65

TABLE पा

Peadoney of Regular suits and miscelimeous Cases on the Original side as on 1-1-1977, 1-10-1977
and 31-12-1977 and rate of increase { decrease during the ath quarter of 1976 and Ist, 2nd, 3rd and 4th

quarters of
Name of the State/ Pendeacy as on- Rate of increase or decrease Percentag
Union Territories. Derease 0.
LI-77) 110-77 आना 4... Ast. 7 2nd = ard 4th_~——decreascin
gree gene gees pane gfe ey
° 1976 1977-1977, :1977 «1977 to 3112-77.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8g 9 10
1. Anthes Pradesh 215,605 222,661 2,18,272 37 49 44:30 426 EL +12
Lamm. «५ 14933 14,537 का 0-3 13 1-3 G1 +300 403
| 3 Biber 149,877 149,475 151,526 8-7 93-7 429 406 कब. 41k
% Gujarat 120,348 1,26,4331,28,085 0-5 +04 +38 0.8 +13 +64
5. Haryana 25,061 26,770 26,599 5-7 29 447 45:0 —06 +61
6 Himachal Pradesh , 17.82... 16513... 16,763 1-1 —29 4-2 —O-5 415 —60
2, Janunn & Kashmir Not received ———.
8. Kamataka . . 1,80,014 187,166 188276 +05 40-3 +27 1:0 +06 +46
9. Kel. 87,232 86,623 83,077 २7 BL 425 10 41 48
~ 10, Madhya Pradesh 1,00,352 106400 106,211 —1-8 —3-1 45:8 +34 0-2 45:8
पर, Maharashtra . 3,590,871 3,6:,878 3,70,974 40-4 O04 43:0 41-7 +h4 457
12, Manipor 538 $31 59 49-8 02 -22 कांड 04 ना
13. Meghalaya. Not received
14, Nogdiand 2 381 332 313 +56-3 -+2 -३-6 5-7 —S:7 -३7०8
15, Orissa se 22954 222322453 >ऊय 10-0 +9-4 16 +1-0. 22
16, Punjab. 53,633... 56,700 55,055 0-5 3-0 +47 442 —29 42:7
47, Rajasthan 5. 790375345 75285 1-4 OT 418 के? 01 447
48, Sikkim. . « 236 28 29 3,3 —O8 42:1 -+6 +04 3-0
19, Tamil Nadu. 1,75,507 1,179,168 1,79,527 2-9 0-3 +34 —O9 402 42:3
20. Tripura . 2,815 308602909 412-5 $51 473 28 —5-7 +33
24, Uttar Pradesh 219,072 2,23,500 227,016 0.7 +2.7 —2.5 $49 41.6 +3.6
22, Weat Bengal. =. 1,84,252 1,01,312 192,250 +1.9 41.3 41.2 412-2 43.20 47.0
UNION TERRITORIES .
1, A & N lolands 7 38 93 10.2 12.4 47.1 $7.7 >ई-1. 4.1
2 Arunachal Pradesh . 5 4 12 16.7 +100.0 428.6 —33.3 —14.3 +140.0
3. Chandigarh 2. 2,846 2899 2,977 42.6 2.2 —3.4 47.7 426 +45
4, Deden & Nagar Ha-
wi. el 140 ct 52 +0.7 —42.9  — ~20.0 —18.7 —62.9
5 Debi... 3961. 3,656. 39.04 0.9 1.2 25 F422 418 40.2
6. Goa, Daman & Diu 6,458... 6329... 6478 +2.8 414 —26 —O7 +24 +03
7 Lalabedweep पड उ42 151 9.6 +4-4 +17.8 42.2 +63 +33.6
8. Mintim wl 216 180 19% 7.7 40.6 —1.3 151 $6.70 न्‍या.1
9. Pondicherry . 2,545 2593 2,684 —-1.S$ —O.7 $7.3 —5.5 +47 45.5
Totak का THR COUNTAY 20,37,397 20,96,670 21,089,986 —i.6 09 $2.5 41.3 40.6 43.5



66

‘TABLE IV

Table showing institotion and disposai of Regular and Miscellaneous Appeals in district Appellate Courts
during 4th quarter of 1977 and percentage ef disposal over Institution during 4th quarter of 1976 and
Ast, 2nd, 3rd and 4th quarters of 1977

Institution and other- Disposal Percentage of disposal over Institution
Name of the wise received during
State/Union
Territcry Regular Misc. Total Regular Misc. Total 4th Ist dod 3rd 4th
Appeals Appeals. Appeals Appeals quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter
of 1976 of 1977 of 1977 of 1977_of 1977
i 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Mi 12

4. Andhra Pradesh 2,893 1,642 4,535 2473 1,885 4,363 106-3 105-7 579 1075. 962

2, Assam 14 $5 209 45° 156 16-1 105-6 836 82-6. 74-6
३. Bihar. «1,432 490. 1,922 1,200 48 11 9 1073. 8-6. 89-14... 89-०0
4. Gujarat. 844 413 वहा उव 3959 3,153. 900 10:8. 80-8 126-8. क्रय
5, Haryana. 2,092 456,548,778 «3782156 93:0. 72.8 BB O12
6. Himachal 802 226 1,028. 192243 43587-2724 BBS LL 4S
Pradesh
7. Jammu and Not received,
Kashmis. हे
$ Karstaka . 4147 1,127 2,274 ॥37 1,048 23565 11.4 130.2.. 94.4. 143-8. 104-0
9. Kerala « 1,966. 781 शा 2447 866 3,313 1131 118-6.. 74-14 116-9 120-6
10. Mednya 2,293. 1,188 34481. 2,068. 1081. 3,149. 82-8  109-4.. 84-8 dG” OOS
Pradesh. .
11. Mahszashua 1,833 758-2591 1,562 579 शराब 126-2974 847. 121:3.. 82-6
12, Masipur WW — ul 9 3 12 100-0 141-2 100-0 4-3 20944
13. Meghalaya ~ + Not received,
14 Nagaland =» WO aD ~ 12 593 7 19-8 425-0 60-0
15. Oris, + 5336. 236772462 28 690 891 105-1 69-8 105-6 . 89.4
16. Punjab 5310 628 3,938 3,435 6924127 101-0 108-6 104-6 103-0 1048
17, Rajaschan 1384 738 2,422,198 562 1,760 1015956926902 gg
18, Sikkim: _ _ _ - - - _ — 1200 25-0 न
19. Tamil Nadu 3,049 1,833. 4,622 3,326... 1,792. 5168. 105-9 12.9... 8O-d LS 111-8
20. Tripura 35 20 5s 2 15 44° (176-9 173-9 195-1 83 Bog

21, Lita Pradesh 8,901 $,347 14,168 7,198 5,619 12,817 100-4 97-0 135-8 103-7 9006
22, West Bengal = 4,222 604. 183. 1,035 529. 164. 1084. 208-1 105-2 104-1 85-4

UNION TERRITORIES

LA &Nisland = - - - _ - — 200-0 — 100-0 _
h 1 = 1 _ _ _ हि
2 Arunachat i 2 3 50-0 300-0
3. Chandigarh i7 74 क्र 23 59 82... 69-9 116-9 - 130-6 121-2 99-4
4. Dadra and - i 1 - 1 1 +- ~ = — 100-0
‘Nagar Haveli
5, Dells 168 ee 10st me «9 217 90-7 90-5 FS BSD 86-8
6. Goa, Daman a 985 1159 91-2 65-1 847
7, Lakshadweep i _ a 3 1 6 50-0 25-0 न - 600-0
& Mizoram .. + 16 15 3 6 is 21. 65 110-0890 18-6 «7-7
9, Pondicherry . 65 so 115 37 65.122 0D BSG 83-5 129-2 106-1

Torat in the 34,341 17,152 51,493 3118 “17,174 48360 105-6 100-7 96-7 107-3

gountry 93-5



TABLE ¥

67

‘Table showing total strength of Courts for Appellate Civil work,-disposal in Units and average rate of
disposal per court on the basis of time devoted by Courts to Appellate Civil work daring 4th quarter of
1976 and ist, 2nd, 3ed and 4th quarters of 1977

Regular Appeals Miscellaneous Appeals

(a) After full hearing

(७) Dismissal or not prosecuted =
(० Transferred to other courts =

2 units
U6 unit
+ unit

Disposal in Units during

Average rate of

disposal cour on
ihe basis Of me devoted ‘by courts 40

Name of the हित appellate civil work during
State/Unien — of courts ~
' “Territory for Appellate 4th Jat 2nd ard 4th 4th Ist 2nd and 4th
work quarter quartex quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter
of 76 of7? oof 77) Of 77 गा जड़ of 77 गया जया of 77
1. 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 7 10 | 12
1. Andhra Pradesh «263,683 «3,355 2,036 4,444 4,454 147-3 198... 9-0 170-9.. सा-3
2 Assam . 4 223 372 334 407 191° 37-20 676° BBS 10-8 47-8
3, Bihar | 86. 2112. 2169. 1,962 2452 2124434 363 4052. 141
4, Gujarat 1B 1,705. 1.13 4,37 2,225 1518. 8-2. 100-8 HZ 927. Bee
5. Haryana. Vi 3,556 1,708 कभाण 1,229 3314 311:2 243-0202 ख5-8 210-4
6, Himachai 2. 357 2320. 298. 378. 436 1020. STS 75. OS HO
Pradesh
"5 Jemmy शाप Re nn ne nn a nn ot received,
Kashmir
8. Karanataka « 30. 3570. 4182 2399 4,429 3,083 274-6 4549 95-56 158-2 aad
9, Kerala . 2100 4,676 काठ 2,036 3,733 3,998 «223-8 «236-9 101-8 18-7 190-4
40, Madhya Pradesh 31... 3335. 5,745 3,289 5,503. 3,567 2882 2873. 967 1372 AMS
11, Maharashtra 27 4,812 3,8 2741 3,214 2,925 209-2 1755 13#4 14 108-3
12. Manipur. OS i2 30 29 a4 210 48:00 «60-0 580 RO 42.0
43, Meghalaya . Dea received
14, Nagaland. 3 66 _ Vi 16 A 825 - 37 5:3 80"
15. Orissa . 8 636. 1,034 449 947 625 212-0 S44 २8-७1 236-8 Te
16, Punjab. 142,782) 2,669 3,060. 3,968 3,824 «252-9 242-6 355-0 3308 273-1
17. Rajasthan. Ui 4431 रा 3160. 1,876 1,392 124-4 वऊँब 967 170-5 126-5
18, Sikkim. 0-25 जा ना 1 ना _ — 20 40 _
19. Tamil Nadu 44 6846 6,562 3,092. 6,835 5,907 248-1 285.3 937 427-2 421-9
20. Tripura . 1 37 104 14 56 42. 57-0 1040 114-0 S6-0 42-0
21, Uttar Pradesh. 86 12,034 12.380 10,883. 14,158 10,507 218-8 142-3 143-2 168-6 122-2
22. West Bengal 30 216L 2096 3,099 3,308 1,534 745. NE 418-8 122-3 5B
UNION TERRITORIES
3, A, & N. Islands 0९25 ~ 3 =_ 2 - जे - जन 8.0 जज
2 Arunachal 1 _ - _ 2 2 — _ _ -- 2
Predesh
3. Chandigarh . 0-75 93 144 a dil 81 124-0 192-0 421-3 848-0 108-0
4, Dadra and 0-25 4 z _ - — 160 8-0 ~ - न
Nagar Haveli
5. Delhi . . 8 848 835... GT 1108 824 105-0. 1044 78-44 188-3 103-0
6 Gon, Damen 1 158 Hs 53 101 96 3160 230-0 1107 M20 96-0
7, Lakshadweep 025 4 2 - - 30 53 RF - — m0
है. Mizoram. i at 41 139 72 26. 270 41-0 1390. 720... 26-09
9. Pondicherry . 2 193 190 शव 190 46. 7720-760 37:6 12617. ह4-5.

Toralin the 438-25 53,332 57792 40.52 61,787° 48,775 1843 137-3) 101-8 4D 11153
‘Country



68

TABLE VI

Table showing pendency of Regular and Miscellaneous Appeals in District Courts as on 1-1-1977

1-10-1977 and 31-12-1977 and rate of increase or decrease in peadency during 4th quarter of 1976

Ast, 2nd, 3rd and 4th quarters of 1977 and also the number of cases increased or decreased and
increase or decrease within a period of 12 months i.e.'from 1-1-1977 to 31-12-1977

Rate of incremse or decrease during

Namal tbe Site Usion Peodeovyanee Secs ee
TE जल्ना अनशन Ae tet oe » aati, gilt. =, deringshe
of 76 अर TT oof 77) जा tho yet
‘ a 3 ‘ 4 6 7 4 ’ 10 i
1, Aaibre Pradesh. 5 1239 419,602 SI FL +1283 + ०.
LDeAgam ५... ५-80. 992 OHS + 3.8 - ०७.३७ + 3.0 + 4.4 |+ FITS Od
3. Bihar, 14,005 14.230 14442 LG - 15 के ३-3 क RS + 46 OT
4. फक्ंणआ ५. ५ 9. 6734... 6,622. 6,726 + 2-1 - 0.3 + 3.8 - 4.9 4 1.6 - 8 - ०.
5. Wayans ५ 59 + 35,033... 5.85... ७.77 + 1.6 +19.7 + 2.2 + 1.5 + 6.8 +1,144 4 22-7
6. Himachelprdssh . 11524 1,703 2296 .+# 3.6 + 6.6 + 2.5 + 2.3 + ३३.8 + 772 + 50.7
पे, Iammn & Kashmir. -- Not ce
के Yarnteke ५»... 15,966... AT 14,056... 3.8 OH 7.1 - 9.6 1810 _ 12.0
9, बाघ. ५» «+ 2,825. 12,405. 1,839 _ 3.3 - 4.8 + 5.4 - 3-6 __ 5.6 _ 986 -.. 7
to. Madhya शामबगाक.५.. 13,270. 12,624... 12,956. + 4.4 _ 3.4 4 3.4 — 46 + 2.6 _ 244 -_. 3.8
Th. Mabaeosbirg ||, 592 19513... 19,963... 4.1 + ०.4 + 2-2 -- 2.9 + 32.3 के 371 + 1-9
14. Manipat sss as a5 so ne - २३ + Ce? ry
13, Meghtlays. ss: Not received
iNeed ५ 9 1 $ 63 13 144 +23-0. +1,460.0 _ 16.7 412.3 + 69 414,725.0
“sso. 60 | 202929 3.01  + 3.2 -- 3.9 + 7-1 - 1.9 + 2.0 + 171 + 6.0
हैं किशण्करए a 19480 77899 _ 6.1 - 19 -_. ६.6 _- 1.8 -- 2.4 - ६22 - 7.4
17. अमुंग्गघ्छ8 ५... ५... ५... 7878. 8,260. 3628 -- 0.3 +# 1.0 + 1.4 + 2.4 + 4.4 + 744 + 9.4
18,Siktim se 6 19 10 + +33.3 2105 442.9 — + 4 + 66
19. Tami Ned. | 15.954 15,238 14,689 2-0 > 3.9 + $.7 - ऊन -- 3.6 1,265 _ 7.9
20.Trpars 5 oe 325 258 269 — $8 105 13-4 + 2.4 + 4.3 — 56 ... 7.2
aa. Wier Pradesh. | 38850 55,452 36,783. -- 0.2. + 1.3 - 8.4 - 7.7 + ३3.8 --2,०5 _ 35.3
22. Wast Bongsl =. | 9.09. 876... 9,043 _- 9.0 -. 2-6 - _ + 3.0 — 266 — 20
UNION TERRITORIES
1.4. & Nolslands 2 3 2. 2 109.0 _ $0.0 4100.0
2. Aronachei Prades « . a 1 ~ = _
3, Chasdigtth se 229187 16 +174 _ 9.6 _ 10.6
"५, Daden # Nagas Haveli 27 a5 53S 85.24 8290.0
S.0eb ee 487L 4,809... 4,949 + 20 + 2 + 1.4
6. 998 Damen & Din. 60०0. 651 &64 + 0.5. - 1.7 + 1.7 + 66 + 10.7
7. Lakebadwep “4 20 हि. $27.3 $214 + 23.5 + le 7.1
i Mina. + 67 “ 4 4155 - 3.0 + 16.9 - 3 2 4s
1 433 469 462 - 30,4 6.2 4 3.5 + 9 + 10

Tow) ia the Cogatry =. 192,532 187,449



TABLE VII
General result of Trial of civil Cases in the Courts at district level on the Original side during the year 1977

’

‘Name of the State/Union Pendency as on 2-1-1977 Tnstisution during the year Disposal during-the year 1977 Pendency as on 31-12-1977
‘erritory
Reaulac Misc. Total «Regular. = Misc. =Total Misc. Total ‘Regular Misc. Total
Suits Cases Suits Cases | Suits Cases (+58) 0+6-9 (447-10)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 3 10 W 12 13
1. Andhra Pradesh . . 78,143 1,37462  3,15,605 $6,755 4,66,854 5,53,609 83,679 4,67,262 5,530,941 81,219 1,37,054 2.18,273
PAsam = > +++ 115,551 3382 14953 8034... 5044... 13,078 507 527 13,034 11,078 3,899 14,977
3. Bihar . - . . 122,326 27,551 1,49,877 62,988 18,524 81517 62,245 17,617 79,862 1 23,069 28,457
4 Gujarat > + = + 86,982 3336 10348. 58/007 37/454 9461 52,375 35,399 87,724 92) 664 35.432
5. Haryana - 21,268 «© 3793. 25061 «33,628 «41616 «38,244 321301 4315 706 505 4094
6. Himachal Pradesh . 12,389 3443 17,832 400 5,735 14,135 6,346 5,858 12,204 11,443 5,320
बे. Jama & Kashmic + *+ - Not available. --2 ० के
.. Karnataka - = + 62,286 «117,728 1,80,.04. 40,761 26, 67732... 34,719 24,751 9,470. 68,328 1,19,948
9. . + 4,22,888 44,944 87,232 41,612 1,26,370 1,67,982 45,696 1,26,441 1,72,137 38,204 873
10. Madhya Pradesh . 81933 18,419 — 1,00,352 79,625 1,681 — 1,00,306 75,548 19,35 445, 87,010 19,201
11, Maharashtra = - . + 2,57,194 93,677 3,50,871 — 1,17,079 67,250 1,84,329 99,675 64,551 1,64,226 2,74,598 96,376
12. Manipur - . ’ - 364 aT4 538 4 554 5 428 566 994 367 162
13. Meghalaya Hoe Not available
14. Nagaland - * 211 170 381 16) 94 255 185 138 323 187 126
15. Orissa 7 14,849 8,105 954 14,444 11,915 26,359... 15,044 11316 26,860 14,249 8,204 an
16. Punjab 35,320 18,313 53,533 49,302 25,982 75,284 49,185 24,677 73,862 35,437 19,618 as
17. Rajasthan - पु 55,965 15,938 71.903 31,970 14849. 46819. 28678 14,759 43,437 59,257 16,028
18. Sikkim soe 173 63 236 13 170 300 144 163 307 159 70
19. Tamil Nadu + = + 90268... 65,259. 1,75,507 72,948 3,34,406 407,34 70,294 3,33,040..._ 4,03,334 92,902 86,625
20. Trpura’ rr Ce (3) 654 2315 61, 1,824. 115 515 1: 2151 258
21 Uttar Pradesh + + > ‘164,034 55,038 88,613 2,63,347 1,73,451 81,952. -2,55;403 165,317 61,699
22' West Bengal 5. - - 148,410 35,842 19,167... 94,385 प 17692 18,387 1,59,873 37377
UNION TERRITORIES :
1 A.&NJslands ++ 85 12 7 82 28 110 87 27 114 80 13 93
2. Amumachal Pradesh + « os 5 5 8 2 10 6 6 2 126% + 12%
3. Chandigath + +s 822 2024. 2,846 65. 26७ 3279 504 2,648 3,152 993 1,980 2973
3. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 121 19 40 | 8 1 87 20 io7 45 7 52
5. Delhi + 21,953. 10,008 «31,961 16782. 9183. 25,765. 16,319 9,583 25,902 22,416 9,608 32,024
6. Goa, Daman & Din + “A668 = 179... 6458. 1780 750 2530. 1,058 1,002 250 4,940 1,538 6.478
7. Lakshadweep - ++ 56 57 113 18 334 352 24 290 314 50 101 151
8 Mizoram ४. 5५ +e 135 81 216 292 226 518 295 247 542. 132 60 192
9. Pondicherry - 1,299 1,906. 23545. 2554. 3314. 5.868. 2,407 3,322 57729 1,386 1,298 2,684
TorAL फ़ THE COUNTRY : —- 13,17,174 _7,20,623 2,20,37,797 9,76,634 12,92,314 22,68,948 9,23,747 12,73,021 21,96,768 —13,70,071 739,915 21,09,986

@The pendency of Misc. Cases in Bihar on 31-12-1977 shuold be 28458.
*Revised pendency. (2897 M.A.D.R, Cases included).
{b) The pendency of Misc. Cases in Madhys: Pradesh comes to 19203.

#4 The pencercy of Regular Suits 88 cn 31-12-1977 should te 2 of Misc. Cases 1 in Arunachal Pradesh.


70

. TABLE VII
“General result of trial of Civil Cases in District/Additional Judges Courts oa the Original side

during the year 1977

Mages tthe eet Pondenoy as on £-161977 Institotlon during 1977 —-Disporal during 1977 Pandentyaeon 31-12-76-75

Ree A ee, ORR he Td "tates
a
a a 4 4 3 6 7 ड़ 2 10 pty te I 14

1. Acdhve Pradesh 317 83.30. 4,818 869 35,572 37.441 ३96 37397. 38,189 870
2. Amen oe 245 882 | tel 27 224 1,044 1,268 164 = 906. 1,070 1,525
eS |» - - Tha 4,324. 5,072 438 $553 3,991 426 3,579 4.005 5093
4.Gwart 6: 120 5,588 5,678 63 6,069 6.132 91° 55782 इक 30837
3, Haryana woe 573 628 1191 673 92 1,565 520 375) «(1095 eet
6. Hicmebal Fradosh Not avilable 90770 ९879

7. Jamon कै Kashar ee 7०४ sytilable ee ee nee eee ee eee “>> *+
§.Kamatsks . 90 3,640 3.730 324 3,988 4,312 214 3,639 3.953 100 3989. 4088
9. Berle se 46 4696 4.730 373 10,268 10,841 313 9,007 9320... 306 5,945 6,251
10. Madhya Pradesh. 5.439.875 9,314 6.200 4,839 11,039 5,600 4,51L 10,191 6.039 44803 80,242
11 , Matarashire . ५... 431067 4,848 48,695 10,743 3.952 14,695 8,803 3,393 1996 45,797 5,407 51154
12-Manipur 5 as 89. 43 43... 32. 75 45... 43. 87 ai . 30
(3, Moghalays . _...... Ree eee Not artilable

14. Nepland ५.५5 ne Net avnilatle Sopirately
15. Orisa 2 33. 7. 210 a7 9568... 983 36... 602... 838 2 931... 955
16,व्ण्घ्याण 1 59 * 1518. 11323. 2,841 531. 3,085 3,656 1679 21557. 42826 370 1881. 2,221
17. Raleathaa ५.५... 3,061. F716 6,777 2056 3586. 35642... 1,490. 3218 4708 3,627 4,084 करा
पड, डक... ५५»... 6६ SD 37... 105... 142 30... 97. 17 cr 58
19, TemilNada. «५ 688 5,058. 3,746 694 24245 24,939 1,197 24,177 24,374 185 SRG SPIE
20. Tripura. - + 7s २66. 341 46 308. 354 6. 226. 272. 78 348. 433
31, UttarPradosh =» 1,089 8,225. 9314... 3961. 17,969 21,930 4,074 17441 2151S 196 7,793 9,729
23. WortBongsl —- «TAK 2424. 9,867... 71353. 5,490 16,843. 9,851. 5425 15,276 11,945 9689 2834
UNION TERRITORIES ~

1. &. Nudilande «5 3 6 9 7 a] 2 6 13... है. 29 4. 7 u
2. Aruaachal Pradesh ne a Nol received Separately a
3. Chandigarh. + a 562. 565 — 409. 409 — s49 3549 30 42%. 425

“Patan Ser To uo ः ः

3. Delhi oe 817 3,803 4,620 814 2,875 3,689 718 3,438 4,136... 919. 3420. 4133
6. Gon, Daman & Dia 183 430. 65. 36 164 290 52 258... ककया 167 ta 606
7. Lakshadwesr . - - 7 - ~ - - - - - = ~
ec -———— Not received separately --.--०-+्वनन््फेे़ा ता 55

9. Pondicherry » + 4 115 181 6 319 325 4 363 367 a छा 9

ee न नाच

TOTAL inthe countey. 70391. 69,543 1.401134 39,716 1,30:734 3,70,452 36,355 1,27,188 1,63,543. 73,974 73,086. 14,740

*Peadenoy of MircollansoutCasenin Biharon31-t2-1577 aught to be 4290 instead of 4295.


11

TABLE IX
General result of Trial of cases in Senior/Subordinate Judges Courts on the original”side daring
. the year 1977
Pondeuey ३४०१ 11977 Lastitutiondaring 1977 Disposal during 1977 Pendenty 28 03 3061277
“कद tosttony | Raga mics, Teal Regehr Mine F Wat Raga BRE काया RT MEST
aion Territory suits लक cages ° suits 7 Cages me 7 cases 2 nalts हा Cuaes
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 a 9 0 n 1s 15

1. AndhraPradesh . L014 33,080 43194... 7,877 1.01103 1.08980 6,304 98,189 1,064,693 11,457. 35.984 47,881

2. Assam 248 4392,797 1,227 447. 1,674... 4,138... 388. 1,526. 2,337 246. 285
S.Bibar 1 1 ५. 2714149230 10341. 15,356. 7,594 22,950. 16,773 7,541 24,914 25,724 13,285 39,009
फल 5 ५ 5 12911 12,306 55,217 27.162 12,391 39,553. 23,423 11,268 34,691 46,630 13,429 60,075
5. Haryana | 52,856 1.259 कतई... 4.956 1,509 6465 5,376 1,453... 6,329 204368 Las 3,78d
4, Himachal Pradesh ५ Not available separately

7. Jammu कै Kashmir . NA.

8. Karaatakn 1,953 15.512 3128S 4660 14588 19,248. 3,183. 12,397 16,580 9,430 24,523 33,953
हक . 5 «4,503 19,098 25.511 5.837 35,899 41,296 5,770 35,626 41,396 6,570 19.281 25,881
10. Madhya Pradesh . 8.135 1,642 10,777 -B,683. 3,524 12,027 7,998 3.421 L419 8,830 2,743 11,:63
Ui, Mahstashtra .. ‘37,310 17,520 $4,730 19,743 17,495 31,238 45,645. 9,505 25,354 41,204 19,416 60,614
(2.Manipur . -+ si 39190 1199 230. 409 iss 200 asd १6. 99... 243
13, Meghalays . Ma

14. Nagaland 2. Not available separately.

अंडा 1 5 4554 3.545 2,099 3461 4494 7,955 3,628 4455... 8,089 4,387 4,584 75971
16.Panlab ©. - 1,950 2.849 14693 4,098 5,302 940034285 4.407 7,692 2,663 3,148 KCL
पर Ralasthan . 4/198 1072 5270-23 1005. 3,916 2117036 3,141. 4,392 _ 1,053... 5445
18.Sikkim 2 149 34183 33 6S 1S 6 66 012883 at

19. TarailNadu . 10,588 39,523 70111. 23,186 116,583 1,39,769 20,826 1,15,681 1,36,507 32,948 40,425 73,373
20.Tripsra se 378131509 136. 331. 267 151437 288... 363... 125 ae
21. Uttar Pradesh =. 22,726 9,364 32,088 19,281 15,669. 4,947... 18,868 13,994 32,862 23,139 11,054 34,193
22. WostBongal © - 27/119 31996 S115 15446 34162 18,608 14,582 3,058 17,640 27,983 4,100 42,003

UNION TERRITORIES

1AGN Islands. 82 é aa 75 4 89 at व 98 6 € a2

2, Aronashal Pradesh Not available sopscately.

3. Chandigarh . 77 369. 546 165 486... 651 284. 558. 642. 350. 300... 558

4. Dadra & NagarHaveli = 121 19 140 " aw 87... 20. 19. 45 1 352

कब एकआक 5 ATS 4,407 23152 12,781 34943 46,724 12,121 3,727 15,848: 19,405 4,623 24,078
6.Goa,Diman &Din 2,590 1129 4,719 913° 423. 1,336... 801... 679 1,480 2,702 873. 3575

1 30. $1,. . 3. 98. 100 7 70. 77 260 68. 94

8. Mizoram . Not available separately.

9,Pondicherry 428 629. 1054... 733. 1,708 2441 662 He 2,376 499... 623 1,122
TOTAL . . 2,59,087 189,911 4,48 968 1,78,3: 1,861 5,20,:411,, 7 53,30,9924,94,174 2,73,8462,01,189 4,75,087

atenienty of Mine; cesoyon 31-124977 in Bikar oupht to be13283 instead of13285, in Madiya Pradesh 2745 2743
and Chandigurts 237 instead of 500. instead of


72

पु TABLE X

General result of Trial of Civil Cases in Munsif Courts on the original side during the year 1977

Ponting aso 1-1-1977 Institution during 1977 Disrosal during 1977 Pending a4 on 31-12-77
Nameofthe, State) on oe लि en ee कपा Ea आर रिदा
ini i ! Mise. हि lar Mise. Fetal कद ४51 Mic. Tete! Misc, Tote
Union Territory” Reger ee ie मध्य जिम] cates
1 2 a 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 हि 12 13
1. Andbra Pradesh - 56,301 92,872 1,998,173 74,866 3,18,917 3,94,227 74,180 3.27.45 386055 89,380 1,57,
2. Assam. + . 9,058 2,011 11,069 6,583 3,553 10,136 7,208 3,233. 10,438 6.476 2,331 10,769
‘3. Bihar e woe 74,520 91959 33,479 42,278 7318 49,596 36,655 6,464 43,119 79,643 10,813 89,956
4, Gujarat - + . “28,361 10,772 39,133 21529 11,340 32,869 49,616 10,322 29,938 30,274 11,790 42.064
5. Haryana + . 17,839 1,916 19,755 27,999 2.215 30,214 26,495. 2.287 2,878: 19,343 1,844 21,187
6. Jammu & ०4७७0. Not available separately.

7, Himachal Pradesh

3. Kursataka  -

. 54,243 90,786 L,44,999 35,777 8.995 44,272 S122] 7,713 38,937 $8,758 91,436 1,580,226

9 Keral: «4 35,739 2,352 6,997 35,202 80,203 115.405 39,613 81,808 1,21.622 31,326 19,647 50,97:
10. Madhya Pradesh =. 59,789 10,212 70,001 48,107 9,816 57,923 44,438 9,462 53,900 63,488 10,566 74,024
11. Maharashtra ०»... ५... 1,24,343 45,386 1,69,729 63,849 26,817 90,666 52,450 25.434 77.684 1,35,74: 46,765 1,082,511
12. Manipur se 190. 116. 306 209292501 229° 324. 333 170... 84 aa
13. Meghalaya . Not available.

14. Nagaland 5 Not available

15, Orissa + + 2M 3,776 13000 S544 6,434 14,978 8,960. 6,527 15,487. 8,808. 3,683 12.492
16.Puniab ५... 31,701 14,100 $5,801 $4,249 17,568 61,817 43,875 (7,678 61,553 32,075 13,990 46,064
17. Rajsothan =. | 46,810 11,006 57,816 16,084 10,087 36171 23,438 10,365 33,803 49,456 10,728 65,144
18.Sikkim Nil

19. TamilNadu.

20. Tripue ५»
21. Uttar Pradesh
22. Wert Bonga

: 55,818 40,678 76,496. 43,6511,93,5782,37,229 43,188 1,93,182 7.36,370 56,281 41,074 97,355

. 1.708 257 1965 1,023. 180 1,203... 1.08. 1s2 छोा7ए0 1.13. 285. 1,998
+ 115,684 35,168 (,50,852 125, 47,7211,72,980 1,27.687 44,652 1,72,740 1,13,05¢ 38,036 1.51 082
+ 104,275 $2,215 1 16.490 45,808 10,238 56,046. 36,332 8,940 45,272 1॥,3,751 23,513 137,204

UNION TERRITORIES

1. & & N Kolands ,

2. Arunachal Pradesh Not available separately.
3, Chandigarh . 642. 1,093. 1,735 510. 1,706 26216 420 L541 1961. 732 ४258. 1990
4. Dadra 4.1:

ही. पिला Nil
ऊत्फडाक ५ +» Nil
6, Goa,Dumso & Din 1895... 331. 2,126 831. 4169. 994 655 168 323 2,071 226 2,297
7. Lakshadweep «५ 26 16 42 18. 237. 252 12... 220 23700 24. 33. 597
8. >कीडताडप soe Not available separately.
9. Pondi¢herry . « 305 $02 1,307 1,818. ३,281. 3,102 1.741 245. 2,985 279 344 14H
TOTAL 8,37,971 +,14.29412,53,265 655,18 154,055 1,413,247 6,19 G44 7,86,329 1,373,273 8,79,3094,16,090 12,91,535



73

TABLE XI
General result of Trial of Civil Cases in Small Canse Courts on the original side during the year 1977

1 १ ४: 1: EitsUsiog  Peadeacyss yn 1-1-1977 tnstitution during 1977 Disposal during 1977. Pendency.as on 31-12-17
Territory *

Regular = Mise. Total Regulas Misc. Total Regular Mise. Total Regular Miec. Total
बाड़ cates suits cages ‘suits. cages: ‘suits easen

1 2 3 4 3 6 7 8 3 10

पु 12 43
1. Avda Pisdosh 1... 21k 209 6420-2149 10262... 8411. 2,089. 9,371 11,460. 1,271. 4,100. 5,321
damm ५ अत
3.Biher + -+ -+- 20,917 38 20955. 4,916 59 475. 6391-33 8424 17,442 . 64 17,506
4.Gujemt 1 18 ५5 15,590... 4,730 २0,520... 9,253... 7,654 16907... 9,195. 8,027 17,222 15,648 4,387 2,005
5. Maryam. Nit
6. HimachalPradesh Not Available Separately
7, ammo कै Kashmir» +———Not Available_____
8. Kerstunke . 0. iL
‘9, Koma अजगर
10, Madhya Pradesh 4,570 1,690 10260. 16,635. 2,502 19.137 16,812 2,503 19,015 9,693 1,685 10,382
11. Mahteashtra 51,694 25,023 77677 2.2744 24,906 47730. 22,573 26,219 48.792 51,863 24,790 76,655
2, Manipur. 6 N
13. Meghalaya : ——_— Not Available
14, Nagtlaad, 5. NL
1$. Orissa. ५ 3H 7. 1045... 2.42. 31 2,443. 2,420. 32 2,652. 1,090... 1,096
1 . . 25100 47298 4m400 aT 4st M600 35. 381. 329. 39. 36६
19. Rajasthan.» 1,896 144. 2,046... 189... के 1690... 1633 152 5. 082... 163, 4,945
1a, Sikkim 2. wee NIL :
$9. TamiNady . . काठ 1 ऊाठ4 ह़र | 1 कब? 3,083... 5,083... 3,488... 3,488
20. Tepora, 6. . Nit
BL. Usiar Pradesh. 23,838 3,283 26,819 26,233 7.257 33,490. 23,622 5,664 28,286 27146 4,876 32,022
32. West Bengal . 6,572 207 6,780.61 277 2,888 2,989 2.09 3199. 6,194... 775. 6,469
UNION TERRITORIES : -
ASN Idands श्र
2. Arunachal Pradesh. Not Available Senarately
3. Chandigarh. Ni
4. Dades & Nagar Haveli --—~— Not Availableseparsiely ___ हि
5.फका +»+ «+ पु 2,391. 1,798. 4,189 3.187.. 2,165. 4552 3480 2.418 5,898 2,098 1,745. 3,847
6, Goa, Daman & फिए |... NL.
7, Lakshadweep 5. ae NL

8, Mion woe —~.
9. Pondicherry .  «

Not Available Separately ___
कक...

TOTAL. + 1.36,820 41,176 1.77,996 97,500 55,591 1,53,091 97,934 $4,663 1,51,997 13

'५69%6 +2104 1,279,050



74

TABLE XII
General Result of Trial of Civil Cases on the apgeliate side ia the Courts functioning at District level in

‘Name of the State Pondeacy om 1-1-1977 Institution during 1977, Diaposs] during 1977 Fendency on 34-11-77
“Reguint™ “Miss, Total Wegular Mee. Total Ragulay Wise. Total “Regater” hiise. Tota)
मामा 117, Appeal Appeal ‘Aprenlc ‘Appeals ©

1 2 2 4 5 € T a 3 10 u 2 3

1. Andhra Pradesh . 7,994. 4,325 12,919 #7215 5,724 15,439... 7,827... 6,329 14,156
मेक ५ डा... 389. 1,370 92300 388. 1,318 338... 398
Bier... करा

9.882 ३,720. 13,602
1.6. 1166 479 3,065
1834 14,008... 3,619. 2,378 10,997 8,079 2,490 10,569 ॥776% 2,725% 4441९

4, Oujerar . . 3, t 14605, FRE 4,948 1,705. 5,153 3.357 इक 5,161 3.679 1,047 6,726
3. Haryana. 43840549 5,033 3459 UT 6,596 4303-949 5,452. 5,350 827677
6. साख ण्यवा Pradesh « 732 792 OES 1,485 680. 2,163 mn? 676 1,393 1,526 776 2,298
7, amma & Kestral Not Avilable____

है. Karnataka. ५5 10819. 5,147 | 15.966 5,258 4,503 9,751 5,228 5,443 11,671 9,849 4,207 14,086

9 Merle. |. «1027S 2550 12025 4.098 3,925 11423 8,912 3,497 12,009 9,461. 2,378 11,839
19. “Ardhye Pradesh 9761 3439 14,200 10554 S147 {5,501 19,459. 3286. 15745 9656 3,300 12,956

(1 Maharashure 17.031 2,362 19,592 7,978 3.213 11,191 7,764 3.056 10,820 17.245 2,718 19,963
12. Masipor. 5. 36 9 4s 66.10. 76 1 14 a7 29 544
13. Megbeaye 2. Not Available

14.Nagtand 2. 4 ” 4 n 4500 118 1 16 49 429 73
15. Orem 5 tae 736 20860... 2,387... 11089. 347s 2,229 1,076 3,305 2,292 19 ३.05
"6.Ponjab ५ ५ 284 1567 3.81 जा "88 139931977 2,848 13.925 6,452 1,307 1189
fTRyrstaag | N42 736 7.878 5150 ATE T6ZE 4.677.207 6,884... 6,615. २,०७7 8,622
“48. अत eo 4 2 6 9 2 W s 2 7 2 2 10
12, TemitNada , . 10.857 5,087 15.954 12.496 5,987 18,483 19,235 6,513 19.748 10.18 45.71 14,819
20.Tripure  . ५». २66 59. 325 2 86. 198 कि. 83. 254 20762289
रा एवम Prada ५. ० 19753: 19105 15.988 ALAS 12,546 57,377 3,195 26.287 59,452 21,389 15,394 36,783

22, WastBengal, =. 5,866

422.3090 499973 1.976 7,647 3.895 11,342 6,822

2.221 5,043
UNION TERRITORIES
1. AGNIdnada 2 १ 3 zo. 2 2 1.3 2, 2
2, Arapacha! Pradesh . ‘ee ” “ 2 ry 6 t 4 3 1 . 1
3. Chandigarh... 104... 125. 229 “6 232378 13248 43 67 109. 176
. aN
4 Past Newer rr 809... 4. 353 हे. जब... 24 30. 58. 55

SD. 4. +. 998 AE बजा 1447. 3,570 4,092 1,334. 2,260 3,614
6, Gua, Damie & Din. tal 400 ago 16 a6 439 12 43a 499 us 64
7 Latenidweop . 4 + fd fy t > ? t डे “ न 18

Minna oo 43 a हा a4 tas 179 oe 4 182 al 4 64
. Pondigherty 5. *« 4a (dy 433 268 ads 4890. na 329. 341 358 94 6a

rarer a
TOTAL lathesoaaiey 1599103 1'4301,94,892 ।,11,901 19,066 2,084,967 1,13,938 75,0092,08,723 1,39,088 51,696 1,90,१#2
rn लके्ेच्त"्च"-च-.>......हतखेत्ेे

“Paadegay on 31-1261977 in Blawr ought to Be 11711 ‘Reaguine Appeate and 2,742 Mtroeléaneous ‘Appeal

2163 2,786 4,040



15

TABLE XM
General Result of Trial of Civil Cases in District/ Additional District Judges Courts on the appellate side
ing the year
Nana 31६13 d:ace Pandeagy on 1-1-1977 (nstitutiqn during 19797 Diapoaal during1977  Pendeney on 31-19-1977
Regular. Wise, Total j. ‘Woral Seguiee Misc. ois! दशा sfisc. Tota}
अप Mig; Torri Regular 1 wore ie Mise. ) Beale Bee, Tota
' 2 a 4 4 6 1 a > 19 mom ow
1. Avihra Pradesh » 4,516 848. OS, 4,690 2,199 8,900 6,008 2,094 8,094 BAT TY Me OES
Ravam . 5. 228) 120 M8 “49 tos ast Fess 481
ome... 4886 1,898 5,528 4,887 1515 6402 4138 1,556 5.684 5,652% 1,596" 7.245%

4.Gumt. . 5 4.67 880 5557. 2365 1,304 4,549 2,966 1,428 6,394 4,878. 836 5,512
5. Meryans. 9. 5 362... 283. कब 3,619... 509. 4,128,904 502. 9,406 «STF 290. 3,867

4, Hioytchal Pradesh. ———~— Not Reported Separatas__

7, Samene & Kashoir - Net Aveilable_

8. Karstaka =... 797 3,452. 4,249 484... 2392 2,876 S60 3,538 4.098 722 2,306 3,027
DRrala . + - $कठाय 887 5,264 3,866. 1,371 5237 4,961 1,453 60d 3,682 805. ET
13. Madhya Pradesh» 9,761 3.439 13,200... 154. 51147 15,501... 10,459. 5,266 15,745... 9,656. 3,300 13,058
पि. अप वा 717,001 2,550 19,591 7,978 3,223 ॥,ाज... क7्ढ4 3,055 1089. 17,245. 2,718 19,963
1 . 6 36 9 45 66 10.76 73. 14. 87 ne
10. Moghal aya « ————Not ayailable—_—.

14. Magtlend, 5 e —-———Nol Reported Separdiely————

1s.Qrinse . ५» e129 31. (1,640 1322... 604. 2,006. 1,233... 703. 1,935... 1.28. 43TH
16.Punlab ५-५ 1०. 3,667 939 4,606. 3,289. २027. 10.16 ऊ33॥ 1,661 7.22. 6.05. 1,305. 7,710
A7.Ralatthan =. ५ 5,092. 1 6553... 3,800... 203 5,340. 3,892. 1,880 5,772 5,009. 1,622. 6,637
18,Sikkim  + + 4 2 6 9 2 u a 2 a7 डे a 10
19, TamilNada ५ + 3,893 1,867. 57160. 5,612 070 7882... 6,056 2,29 8,347... 3,649. 1,846. 5,295
20.Tiport 2. » 2 8 13 मेक... 29. 103 730027 10 98. 20. 16
2A, Uctar Pradesh. — ५ दी 12,539 25,450 27.727 12,463 47190 26,991 21,896 48,887 14,647 10,106 24,733

22, WotBeazat 0. S174 3,044. 7,218 S354 3,239. 3,593 क,246. 3,391. 9,639... 5,380. 1,899. %72

UNION TERRITORIES .

1.4 % थे सबब... a 1 a Boon 2 2 1 3 Bo. 2
2, Aroatohal Pradeah Not Ro0rted 3०ए4७(४३--------

3. Caradigarh 2g 98 128... 723 130... 232... 3632 कै उब॥8 419 St) 109 166
1 - a7 3 50 2 "2 - 24. ३4 50 sos
S.Dathi » ५» +» 320... 916. २६836 177 2101 अहाह.... 839. 1,847. 2766 838. ३,170 3,008
उ. 933, 0उव३५ & Dia 478 122... 600 260... 156. 46 339... 13... 359 499. 165... es
4. Takehadweep . ———-=+Not Reported Separately ————___

3. Moran soe
9, Pontiamerry 2. 297 ba 385 2320 146 378 176 24. 390 333 20. 313

ना ल--_-_-त______नहनहल_____्->->॒__्0हत0ैतह॥1.
TOTAL in thecoantry 33,033 35,785 11.819 95,625 50,218 1,45.843 91,012. 53,301 144,313 87,658 92,702 120,355

कह कलश न---+-+नन्‍न.ह).>>->-->.>>.08॥8नहनतह॥हनन्‍न-.ब.नन्‍न
‘*Pondency on 31-12-1977 in Bhar ught to ba Ragular Appesis 5,645 aud Miscollaneous Appeals 1597,



76
TABLE XIV

sing Civil J iiges/Sub-Tudpes Courts on the appellate side
ie year 1!

277 Le लिए dering i977 Disposalduring 1977 Pendeneyon 31012-1977

Fandenzyaa tei

sotunion Regular Mise, “Total Rege3ar Mite Total Regular Mis¢ Total Regular Misc, Tutal
कक ADEs stppulls Appeals Appetls Appeals ‘Appeals Appeals

ry 2 2 4 s oa 7 a 2 i) 1 12 13

29S 4,534 6,639 1,823 4,235 6058 4,660 2.776 7,496
7 283 1087 व 220... 961 1,286. 332... Le aT

732 BES 5,595 3,951... 934. 4,385 60,64" 1.129% 7,198
4830 उड़ gO 391... 376... 767. 1,089. शव 14
aso 618 ३0468 1,599. 441 २०046 2,273... 337. 3,310
$, Himachal Pradesh . — ‘Not Repotted Separately ————————————_—___
2, Sedmmu & Keshmir 5 + ‘Not Ataila ble—~-
S-Reemataks . | 10,022 1,694 TIF ATT All 6,885. 5,668 1,905. 7,573 1928. 1,902 11,029
9, Kerala + + * $0898 1,663 7.561 4.232 1934 6,185 $35) 2,046 6.295 5,979 1,573 7,352

जे dinar. -

4. Caiatar

$.Huryana. 4

10, Madtye Pradesh ५... + went ne See - ere ee eee
18210 Se न 1 1 जज म्या न . 1 1 Ne
(2. Manip... — a wore een eee
oo Not Available ——~-————--- -+-----_
an Sane ‘Net Reparted Sepamtely ——————
15. Orisas - se GOS FS ह.2उक्ष 2165 | 405 4,470. 996 4. 1.70 ३,924. 226. 1,508
बढ शद्ार्धी 2. AT 526. 3,775 7,426 , 561. 2,987 Secu. 62 47 2 a
17, Ralasites 0-050 265. 1.15 1,343 447 1,788 tale 1.606 tae 1,994
‘8 Sthkim ee ne eee जे
~ 1०, tamil Madu we GE 38 EAE $409,717 10,602 7.7० & कर 5,685
10, Teisom 5 |» + 659 $4 टा0 28  इ$इ7 95 98 sq 109 4200181
मे Umar Rady 5 + * 5542 6 5H6 12,408. F104 3,083 (ouBT 6.204 10,565 4361 6,742 5,28 12,636
22, West Bengal ५ 1692. 399 2091 1,049 434 1583 1,199 504 1,009. 1342... 329 1,871

UNIGN TERRITORY

J ASNiands 9. + लजमजििनन-++ज-नज+-न्‍जज-+-+-->-----... - - .- -----
2, Aeumeehal Pradegh ५9... भा available Seni rately —————— _
2. Chendigarh 2. 6 6 16 न 16 12 12 10 wt 19

3. Deidre & Nagar Weve. >>-----------------... -.
S Deh. . re 560. 1,035. 745... #69

6,904, 0३७७० ह ७५७... eee

Tlekedwen ५. ५». 1६ . 14 & 1 9 7 1 8. 18. 15
4. Mitgfam 6 8 ‘Not Available Separately ————————_________
S.Pondichery =... गई. 53. 68 36 1386 82 136 186 उठ 5 76. ३9.

FOTAL 15 165 Country ©. 54,245 20,870 72.118 19,862 18,994 58,656 41,06) 21,722 6283 49,845६-58,146 67,993

*Peadenty go 31-12-1977 in Bihar ough! to be 5.066 Regaler L125 Miscellaneous appoel:.



71

TABLE 1

Table showing institution and disposal during the 4th quarter ending December, 197? and disposal a9
percentage of institution during the 4th quarter of 1976, Ist, 2nd, 3rd and 4th quarter of 1977 in the
Session Courts.
1 Original=5 Apreais or 5 Revisicns

Tnstitu- Disposal Disposal as percentage of institution during
‘Namiz of State/Union Territory tion during | ——————___________
during = quarter 4th quar Istquat- 2ndquar- Irdquat- 4th quar-
quarter tet of ter of ter of tet of ter of
1976 1977 1977 1977 1977

{ly Q) ® @ 5) छठी tH) ®
1. Andhra Pradesh . . . * 1,042 1,008 991 97-2 113-8 987 195-7
2. Amam . . . . 322 238 75-0 78-3 83-0 82-6 7359
3. Bihar * . . . हे 23579 1,613 84-0 85-1 8356 THB 6255
4. Gujarat * हे . . . 605 654 93] 99-2 128-3 87 108-1
5. Haryana * - . . ’ Wg 2D C63 5858 140-7 84-9 tones
6. Himachal Pradesh - . bd 99 na 914 659 12058 114-5 193-0
के Jammu & Kashmir = ५. NA. NA. ON7 [8-5 8. घर MAL
8. 4।, 7 + . 5 . 352 377 11407 ORT 113-9 125-2 167.1
9. Kerala - . . . ’ 420 2 1-7 102-6 0-9 14-2 C124
10. Madhya Pradesh = - हे . 1,899 1,961 99-5 NOL 102+7 912 103-3
11, Maharashtra - 5 5 . 1,253 1,259 118*9 101९4 11159 क्रय 100-5
32. Manipur» 5 + tt 4) 29 743 965 962 1047... 9G
13. Meghalaya = - . . . NLA. NA, Sit 32-6 NAL NA. NAL
14, Nagaland . . . . 26 70 792 120-0 1074 169 159-2
15. Orissa + हे 5 . . 385 378 100°0 106-9 TB 89-6 9852
16, Punjab + हे . . हर 1,040 1,002 114:0 11 11059 91-8 9653
17. Rajasthan . . . . 1,320 Lia 8662 वन्य a TBS 85-2
18, Sikkim + . हे हे . 12 13 83*6 OT 80-0. 33 108-3
-19. Tamil Nadu - . . न 851 752 18*3 100-0 6859 वश 88-4
20, Uttar Pradesh = + +. 13,984. 14,977 id 88-9 946 = 100-4 102-8
UW Tripura 5» + +e a2 49 923 EO BE 167
22. West Bengal * . न न 632 mM 94 9758 105-2 1092 W1S>7
UNION TERRITORIES
LA & Ni Islands - . . 5 4, 667 2-00 100-0 150-0 80-0
2. Armachal Pradesh * . . pi a 6h2 63-6 9253 100-0 381
3. Chandigarh + . ’ . 12 15 T8 68°2 9253 150-0 125-0
4. Dadra & Nagar Haveli « . 4 5 300-0 0 15050... 193-3 125-0
5. Delhi - हे . . . 315 201 109°4 125°8 1474 106-5 9556
6. Goa, Daman & Diu . . 6 33 100-0 193°3 2 12055 ६1084
4. Lakshadweep - . . . os oe oe on a न a
है, Mizoram . . हे . 108 28 O18 200°0 2S US 232
9, Pondicherry § - हे . . "वा 17 155°6 9059 59°3 100-0 100-0
TOTAL in the’ country . 28,146 7 27,438 91-9 955 क्र 96-8 97-5

6-468 L-AD.(ND)/78


78

TABLE Il

Table showing the number of courts available for criminal work in Sessions Courts, disposal in units
and average rate of disposal per Court during 4th Quarter of 1976 and Ist, 2nd, 3rd and 4th

Quarters of 1977
Number Disposal in Units during Average rate of disposal per court during
Name of the State/ of Courts
Union Territory available 4th 3rd. 4th 4th Ist 2nd 3rd dth

for crimi- quarter quarter quarter = quarter quarter quarter quarter gnarter
nal work of 1976 of 1977 of 1977 of 1976 of 1977 of 1977 of 1977 of 1977

1 2 a 4 5 6 7 हि 9 0

1. Andhra Pradesh . 32 783 754 1,101 261 196 1851 23-6 34-4
2 Assam + . . 5 228 280 238 3256 2859 25-4 Atel 264
3. Bihar . . . 87 1,754 2,657 1,613 18-3 2253 25-3 25-8 18-5
4, Gujarat - . . 22 553 él} 654 294 245 2856 2952 297
5. Haryana - . . 14 387 231 729 10001 47] 70-6 33-0 S21
6. Himachal Pradesh = © 3 170 a 10248-6367) 387. 2150. 34-0
7. Jammu & Kashmir * NAL 110 1४.७. NLA. वक्त 16:0 NAL NLA. NAL
8. Karnatzka . हे 1s 422 47T 97 124 225 20-8 28-1 Piao}
9.Keraa - +. - 16 436 41 42-3 293. ITO 2B 295
10. Madhya Pradesh ५... 73... 82... 21072... 1.96 2555... S246 EO 26-8
1 + - 5515301519 1239 26-8 296. 2176. 230. 22-9
42, Manipor- = 2 6 45 28. 1350. 2 «5 255. 225. [40
13, Meghalaya: * NA, 116 NA. NA. 8-0 40 NA NA, NAL
14, Nagaland + 5 19 30 nr es ee ey
15. Orissa - . . 20 363 395 378 14-0 1-3 Bg हक 18-9
16. Punjab» 2. 20 922 983 1002 576. LR AR gD 50.1
17, Rajasthan > 30 8891189124 90-9 80363
18. Sikkim - >: 0०5 33 1 13. 66-0 440 3202-0 26-0
19, Tamil Nadu + 20 939 978 2 61 349. 300 6-2. 776
2. Tripura. = 4 a 20 49. WO 3 2०. 210... 2-3
21, Uttar Pradesh- 203-4691 36,127 14377 213047184 OR
22. West Bengal = - 48 732 (1,500 PBL 101 226. Be BRS

‘

UNION TERRITORIES

1. A& N Islands . Os 2 6 4 a0 20 60 4250 &-0
2. Aronachal Pradesh 3 9 12 a 2-2 18 3a 3-0 Pa
3. Chandigarh = - . 1 14 12 ts 14-0 250 12-0 12-0 15-9
4. Dadra & Nagar Haveli as 3 4 5 बन 20-0 650 a0 10-0
5. Debi 5 . हे 13 420 396 301 0-0 35-2 302 33-0 23-2
6. Goa, Daman & Diu i 38 53 33 38-0 87-0 32-0 53-0 320
7. Lakshadweep 1 . हि . es ee कि कि
है. Mizoram रु . 2 493 h 25. 493-0 34 4-3 10-7 25
9. Pondicherry - . 1 14 16 का 14-0 50 24 Bao i?-o

TOTAL in the Country + 701

5 17,777 31,116 27,438 25-3 27.5 355 440 38°



79

TABLE गा

Table showing peadency in Sessions Courts on 1-1-1977, 1-10-1977 and 31-12-1977 and rate of se
or decrease during 4th quarter of 1976 and ist, 2nd, 3rd and 4th quarters of 1977

Pendency as on Rate of increase or decrease in pendency age in-
during crease OF
Name of the State; decrease in
Union Territory 14-77 1-10-77 31-12-77 4th ist 2nd 3rd 4thpendency in

quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter the
of 1976 of 1977 of 1977 of 1977 of 1977 from 1-1-77

10 31-12-77
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 g 9 10

1. Andhra Praiesh पु » 1,064 934 875 -- 0.1 —O1 —108 —1-5 —63 18
2aAsam .  .  . «S72 1752. 1,856 + 5-0 4 44 + 3-2 + 3-5 448 +16-8
3, Bibar + 6 6 VATS 18,766 19,732 420 $23 424 £37 + 5.1. 4182
4. Gujarat . . . पु 917 892 842 + 70 — 0-6 --19:3 419-9 — 56 82
5. Haryana . . . ~ 41,226 1,355 1,344 - 0-8 418-8 — 9-8 + 31 — OB + 9-6
6, Himachal Pradesh . 378 का 405 + 4-1 +15-1 -- 4-6 — 1-9 -- 0-5 केशव
4. Jammu & Kashmir . . NA NA. NA. NA. NA, NA. NA. NA. NA,
है. Karnataka...) PR 66 638 -- HF +0-5 - 5-4 12-6 — 3-8 20-0
9.Keala . . we 518 619 560 -- 1-3 -- 2-3 4344 -. 9.0 — 8-4 के 9-5
10, Madhya Pradesh =. | 3,089. 2.90... 20 2 3-0 — 6-6 —1-6 + 2-2 _. 2-2 — 8-2
Mi. Maharashtra =... 3,264 3,192 3,186 — 6-9 —O-8 -- 5-1 23-9 _ 0-2 24
12, Meghalaya =. पु पु NA. NA. NA, NA. NAD WA, NA NA, NA.
13. Manipur. =. es 45 47 66 +250 + 2-2 443 - 2-1 4404 +46-7
MNagaand ww 82 83 41 482-2 —49 —3-6 410-5 -51-8 50-0
15. Orissa ५.» AMAT 1,248 1,255 — 0-1 20-4 + 7.9 + 3-4 4:06 + 9-4
16 Punjab»... 1.69 159 1,588 --12:0 — 7-6 — 5-2 460 + 2-5 —4y
पर, Rajasthan =. ss 3,16? 3,498. 3,695 10-4 --0:6 + 0-9 F101 4 5-6 416-7
1B.Sikkim 2. ee 5a 62 60 4102 43-7 471 + 3-3 — ३-2 कवा नव
19, Tamil Nadu. . . Ws 809 908 —16-9 Nil +28-5 --12-0 +12-2 427-0
20, Tripura. ke M6 158. ISL + 3-8 -- 5-6 12-7 He? — 404 30-1
Qi. Uttar Pradesh |. 32.924 36341 35,948 44-2 + 2.1 +13 02 _-.1-। +92
22. West Bengal 3,315 3,3 3,010 + 2-6 408 -- 1-9 -- 3-9 2344 जज 75
UNION TERRITORIES :
LA @N Gal. . 4 6 6 Ni +750 $143 —25-0 +50+4
2. Arunachal Pradesh a7 4t 55 se +30-8 कि ५. ESE +48-7
3. Chandigah . wl. 9 23 2 +188 4368 + 3.8 14-8 15, + 5-3
4, Dadra & Nagar Hayeli 7 7 6 22-2 $286 ile] 12-5 —-14es = 14-3
5.Debi .  . - 1082 880 844 --3:2 --9-3 --12.9 -- 2-8 Ey _२२-०
6, Goa, Daman & Din : 165 4 it Nil 25-5 +81 - 68 42:4 23-0
8. Mizoram see AF 19 28 +22:6 2-8 +18-0 -- 2.5 + +58-8
9. Pondicherry. . पु 14 a डा —263 +14-3 431-3 न न +50-0

TOTAL in the Country . 74,941 79,686 80,383 + 1-3 + TL +09 + 1-3 + ५-9 +13



80

TABLE IV

Table showing institution and disposal of cases during the 4th Quarter of 1977 In the Magisterial
Coutts and disposal as percentage of institution during 4th Quarter of 1976 and Ist, 2nd, 3rd and 4th
Quarters of 1977

Institution during the 4th

Djaposal during the 4th
quirter of 1977

Ditposal a4 percensnge of institut
‘quarter of 1977 posal ae perms institution

Name of the Statey

Union Terciiory. Police Complaint Total Poliet Complaint. Total ib fet 2nd 3 ait
Chatluns ~ cases ‘Challeng cases qulrier quarter quarter quafter 405
। Of 1976 OF 1977 997 of 1577
1 2 3 ‘ 4 6 + 8 9. 10 11. 12
1. Andtea Pradesh + + 63,827 27.845 शिवा 65499. 28153... 93,652 103.9 99.8... 94-68 101.9 192.7
2. Assam . . . 1३,328 12,849. 25077 7290 10,590 47880. 91.1 TT 88.1 89.7 71.3
3. Bihar है 5 -. 35238. 19650. 52,978 2813 [7743 45856 BIS 155.5 107.0 100.1, 86.6
4.Gajarat + . + SLT 1,41.427 5 33,155 43860 ६78,665 2567525 90.5. 87.6 113.8 92.7 4.7
5. Haryana . . . 9775 2.470 13,245 10,179 2.199 12378 95.7 10t.3 0 98.7 94.0 1071
6. Himacha) Pradosh * . 2,315 1799 AE Las 1.028 3,933 92.8 98.5. 82.9 100.6 95.6
जे, उपाए & Kashmir . . . कप . a _ 98.4 85.0 NAL NA. NA
8, Karnaaka . . + Sendo 978 SAO Ft 686 7 544 59190. 97.4 94.5 92.5 99.7 3 ड़
9, Kerala है 1 1 gon 2,970. 53,779. FL 17,283. 48,294 [04.4 06.5. lop. 97.9 94,9
10. Madby Pradesh ५. ५. SAAS] 12.941 91582 आह गत. UMD BADE 108.4 43.7 91.3... 96.6 86.5
Tie atanarashtra +++ CHOATE 51180 23726 1.73298 76,670. 20965 96.3 य07.4 111.6 121.2 96.9
12. Manipur one 242 796 1,938 479 उहा 860 142-8 21.6 69.4 120-8 82,9
13.Meghateya = 0) NA MAL ONAL MAS NALD ONAL 68.0 122.0 NA. NAL NA
t4.Negvang = =e 27D i 289 296 34 308 101.2 64.3... 63.9 108.9 396-6
1S.Ocissa © + + US TAI 18840 17,698. 13,805. 86ST 32,862 ॥0-2 263.5 78.6 1३0 By
16. Punjab > + 147892 3446 21 93R 16554... 4.766 20320... 83.0. ot 78.8 Gt 96.6
HT.Rayasthin = ++ 27,856. 16.987. 46963 ३4,691. 2011044801 88.4. 94.1 OTB 89-2 95.6
W8.Sikkim} so ee any 39 456 1.077 39,6 199.5 "82.0 86.2 101.3 242.7
19. Tamit Naga + + 33689 36432 235101 2.09843 42,342 5,685 106.7 90.5. 98.7 103,7 10२1
29,Tripuea * + ३,आ5 P4278 1208 PO 12.18 197.9 102:8 16.7 1266 ogy yg
रा" Umar Pradesh =< + (402813 71532 172 345. 104540 78,०26 179956 88.8. 91.9 96.2. 97.3 tog
zwestmangal + हू. 2 F551 2361 142,031 S4s0t 25919 17820... 85.9. 97.3 17.2. 726 98.9
UNION TERRITORIES
1, 8. NBlands 6 + 1383 671,450 1338 66. 1#05.. 36.1 135.2 161.0 149.65
peAtussetal Pradsh 0-8 $L 192 133 26 89. 94.8 135-0 67.3 49.9
1 न +s 24 81 238 182 ton 292 89.0 84.8. 85.0. 102.5
4 Dadve मरा Haveli + 30 4 oF 123 57. (28 71.9 123.8 196.3 136.2
S.Dani + 5. + + बा 92922 15. ay gpg 20.267 18940. 78.9 18.6 132.5 g3 5
6.693. 3aan% Din + 215 i ba 1070 Ty 1,240 3746-2 992-8 335-6 31.9 age
7. Laksuadweep ++ iB z 13 5 s 3667 85.7 50.0 66.7 38.9
g-Mioram + +e 7 13 Ms 149 1 168 348 35.7 195.2 199.7 78.1
9, Poaducaarey + . 3,911 a 3998. 4,942 91 4,153 124.0 104.8 106.1 95.7 196.5
Total ia ६४७ Couatey 1143,109 4,59,326 16,386,426 12,07,611 5,26,523 16,34,136 96.4 108.6 403.3 100.2 99.7



Table showing number of Magisterial Courts functioning during 4th Quarter of 1977 and} average rate
of per

disposal per Court ia mits on the basis of time devoted by Courts to criminal work during 4th quarter
‘of 1976 and fst, Zed, 3rd and 4th Quarters of 1977 in Magisterial Courts. हि
Dispostlof_
(i) One Police Chailan or complaint cases after Cull trail. rT = 1 anit
20 Potice Challan caves by receiving and accepting ERFF, Ccmpoucsire or withdrave! « . = Lasit
{iii) 20 Complaint cates by dismiitsal absence of somplalnt.comPounding of withéraval - = tupit
iv} 10 Police Cas Lan or Complaintenses by committal to Sessions Courts . oe = L unit
(9) 50 Uncontested Police Clit an or complaint cases «- oe . eee = ॥ पा
वि ot
Dispysal ia uoits during Average ate of dispostl per court in.

” saame of che Statesy

tea गो agile aie oie athe api cpl पी गा, ath
०1776. 717 विकार «of 1977 ०196 of 977 of 1977 OF1977 of 1977 of 1977
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 19 1. 12
1. AnJhea Préderh पक 13187... 1426. 1182... 14015... 12,145. 74.3. 62.4. 61.6. 72-68... 66
pamm. + 53 298-7485 93S 3,502... 2,423 50.6. 50.0... 99.6. 67.4... 45.1
3,छक्य ५» + 0. 759 15,879 13,452. 53952... 4,465. 22-$ 43.2. 34.5. 42.0. 23.8
4. कंपण ५.५ 113 39422 25,674 23,303... 25,032. 21,852. 237.8 217-2 173-9 218.0 195.2
३, Auyana «५ 1... 3309. 5395. 2.880. 3,124... उ,ह81 03.4. 106.6 87.3 82.2. 967
5, घाफ़ा सब] Pradesh « 18 756 1,063 10 781 Wt 42.0. 39.1. 43.9. 43.3 58.9
4, Jaana & Koshmie’ NAL कटा. S714 MAL ONAL ONAL 192.5 156.4 MAL ON, NA,
e. Karate 6 + ag 7,609,798 6.52. 7242 TAKE 65.0 0.) 69.5. 88.0. 81.2
o.Kerala. . ५.» पा 3562... 12,720 12625. 1137. ऊाहइ/ 1-4 123.5 123.8 11.8 123.0
10, Madnye pradesh ५... 221... A782 30,452. 13,730. 16,395. 13,765. 91.7 146.2 92.8 11.1. 62.3
व, Mabarachre + 330 33,085 34,600 33,769 37,369 24,780 114.4 125-8 102.0 121.9 82.6
12, Manipor «+ 4 180 94... 121 176 142. 36.0. 47.0. 30.3. 44.0... 33.3
13, Meghalaya 6 NA us HoONA ONAL NA, 61.0 104 MAL NAL NA
14. Nagtland 5+ as a7 aa ua 140 93 5.1 4.2. 5.4 6.7. 6.2
1 329. 5,580. 14153 8,241. 7,166. 5992. 67.2 132.3 50.7 49.4. 49.9
न 76 $498 S484 4246... 5.73... 6,409 100.0 96.2. 66.3. 63.4. 84.3
17. Rapmbao s+ 192 9,300 4.239 8,182: 9,072 ३४०2. 65.2. 58.4. 5६.9. 52,7 46
18. आ। . 4.5 38 43 140 50 450840 9.6 ३.3. 11.1. 19.8
Do पिाधखदव ५. ५ ५... 2. 2रहढ4ब 23,784 27,208 34123 34.217 169.2 112-7 126.0 155.1 154.8
20, Teipora. . 2s 349 6 sie &65. 1,281 25.8. 27-8 21-6 26.6. $1.2
21. UnttePradosh ५ ५»... 9. UTED आ 502 42,531 47,039 39623. 79.4. 70.4... 68.6. 75.1. ६4.0
22, West Beogal « वर. का... BF 9139. 25,905... 8,607. 52.2. 34.7. 53.8 154,2 50.0
UNION TERRITORIES !

1. A. & N. Islands 3 “4 Wa 194 feed las 49.0. 57.3. 64.7 59.0. Bt
2. Acanichal Pradesh 5 7 223 24 20 Woo? २०७ 207. BF 6.2
3. Gatagigerh 2 42 a7 70 83 94. 56.0. 48.5. 35.0 41.5. 47.0
३. Duara & Nagartisveli 9-5 6 10 12 22 25 60.0 100-0 120.0 220.0 50.0
S.Delbi ५ an 4560 5,962. 4,678 5,866 5,127 108.6 45.4. 95.3 119.7 106.8
&. Goa Dumia & Div 1.8... 8 si 16 363 Sia 189.772.0448 48.6. 42.4
4, Lakahadweep « a 4 4 i 2 1 40 10 1.0. ३०० 10
8. Miomm «+ a 90 1 2 127 $545.0 0.9 12.8. 15.9 6.0
३. Pondicherry 5 6 1 239 154 401 3230 65.2 34.1. 50.6 66.8. 53.8
Fost. «30695 250037 245,684 226 342 2,72,559 219,068 88.2 88.0 76.0 91.3. 76


82

TABLE Vi

Table showing pendency of Police Chailan and Complaint cases in Magisterial Courts ag ou 1-1-1977.
1-10-1977 and 31-12-1977 and rate of increase or decrease im pendency daring 4th quarter of 1976 and
ist, 2nd, 3cd and 4th quarters of 1977

Rate of increase or decrease in Kactease or

Name of the State, Pendency asun 5 pendency राज: ag deciease in

Union: Territery ae omen pendency in
4-1-77 SMTi 4th ht 2nd Sra 4th a penod of

1-10-77

quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter i-1-77 to
af 1976 of 1S77 of E977 of 1977 of 1977

31-12-77
i 2 3 4 Be] 6 7 g 9 to
1, Andhra Pradesh. 69,430 72,840 70,380 -5-3 +0.3 47-4
2. Assam « 95,856 106899 14,096 +253 45-6 43-0
3. Bibar 504,283 472,737 479,854 +21 5-5 0-8
4, Gujarat 425,260 45516 446,156 480 49:39 नहर
5. Haryana 35,285. 35,963. 35830. $3 03 404
6. Himachal Pradesh» 14,895 15,732 15.03. 42-7 40-4 453
3, Jammy & Kashmir Not applicable.
8, Karnatah + 61,983. 7087. 75,643 $31 457 47-8 40-3 46-8 422-0
9, Kerata . + + हा. उमा 60,580 —3-S 5-2 02 419 445 +0-8
to, Madhya Lradesh .. 281,660 257,542 270,707 —1-3 12-2 428 +130 45-1 3-9
ji. Maharashtra - 721,861 605,829 03,090. 41-7 30 4-8 9-4 FED Hide
12. Manipur «18,243 20,778 20,956 4d $192 F240 1 409 9 +14-9
13, Meghalaya. Not applicable. .
14, Naguland . 867 1,204 3185. +5:5 $1%7 420 —3-T 1-6 9 436-7
15. Orissa = 5. +. 1847S 144,060 149,164 $41 28S 446 +44 1356. AHH
16 Punjab = + 46570 SHS 52.03. कर0 कब 49:0 415 है FHT
17, Rajasthas . 245,556 253,602 255७4. 3-90 F120 03 42:4- 40-8 +4
1g. Sikkim. 1874-2967) रा 135-7 45-9 OF 36 = 23-8
19. Tamil Nadu. ५... 8,518 11062... 94478 216 433-8 4103 BS 169 +15:9
0, Tripura . . . 17,396 15,769 7,02} -15-5 -O7 —-28 —5-5 --49«7 S44
21. Unar Pradesh 533,591 392,157 584,536 4-7 43-3 493 FEL 13 495
2, West Bengal « M2112 755,007 756.818 43-4 40-6 3-0 43-8 +02 +6-3
UNION TERRITORIES
LAGNIsands |. अर... 230. 2156 FBS TB 1S —26-1 6-7 4367
2. Arunachal Pradesh « 223 189 229. -1-8 FSB --15-3 +17:0 424-2 42-7
3, Chandigath © « 4715 1822815 +2:6 OT +3.3 $35 0-4 458
4, Dadra & Nagar 400 209 45 +43-0 --22-0. नया —27-4 —16-3 56-2
Haveli.
Deh - + 260,454 245,167 267,961 49-7 $1202 4-4 1230 42-9 +2-9
वि Goa, Daman & Diu 18,164 4,073 3,953 66-9 --51.9 —28-1 —352 ३9 78-2
7, Lakshadweep मु 15 23 33 -48-3. 46-7 437-5 413-6 432-0 4120-0
विद 16 mL 748 484-0 4216 135 —6-9 16-7 +45
9, Pondicherry - न 1,804 1,576 1,321 —41-309 9-8 —13-9 412-5 —16-2 26-8
TOTAL «+ 44001358 43,50,572 43,54,790 41-7 0-2 1-3 —O1 +01 1-1



83

TABLE Vii

Table showisg number of Police Cia! ses pending for want of FF/FR or charge sheet at the end
of 4th quarter of 1977 alongwith percentage thereof during the Ist, 2nd, 3rd and 4th quarters of 4977
and mumber of cases imcreased or decreased iu the period from 31-12-76 and 31-12-77 and percentage

theveot
हि Police challac cased peading Policecallancaseependingfor No.of Policechallan il. of ett
fate OTR TT a Gr OAUPREEE otha “ete
: Frigg Caermte Bik Chalinaseosat tie oad of Che sneet  dereatee parion
oF charge Tt god Sed ath oa on periGd अअन2०76
sheet gpaies auntie quamier quarter 31-12-76 शक from to
of 1577 Qf L977 of 1977 of 1977 BepQT slat
1 ta 3 ‘ 5 67 8 9 19 tt la
{AndhrePradesh 527,225 19.059 56516 45.2 484 49.0. 46.3. 26,562 +363 v2.1
BAgam 0.00. 24505 54838 6143 50.6 2.2 SRB 34.3. 13,922 30589. -+76.0
Bginar IANA Lez 172,262 G6 2 SE rie, tie
AFaiarat. 7 ५ 5 330. 7396. DEK 4-5 1.1 0-४. 577 630. 5087 8H
S.Miyama, 5. 25S 26S NESS 4.4. 8.7... ४38 3.5. 4,60B 2508 2103 45.8
B.MinrebelPradesh 1... 1167... 020... बडा. 13.2: 11.3. 270 8-5. 280... OF
7. Jammu & Kashmir. Not applicable.
जम व 1 मन TONS 218 te DE Hes) 4389
9. Kerala. 6. gua गह 720... 32k कर. Sb ee 20,829 as
19. Madhya Prades LSS 139548 8 YT 82 जया. >>
18. Maharashtra, . 5, /45 153.088 46,903 एज... 1-8 fe oly oe So Fc
12.Manipue ), 380) Sle AE 55.6... 34.0... 16.8 2.55. Gee ES
13, Meghalaya. =. Notapplicr ble.
14. Nagaland. 62 OSE 31160. 5-३ reo er 127 87 wee
वा दबाव. gL BODE कै. 9a 108 7B TE 4
L6Puse L899 STE ws 60 Pn or rE

पर, Rabssthan. ५.५... 34,093. 94,88 LF E7S 20... 19.3. 211. 79-6.. 3036. 1.98.

१६. Sikkim 6 . फू L297 as on . on ¢ + डर
स्य्पाशककव ५.५. 13,868 66,061... 75835. वइ हक... 2 ATG शब्द EEE BTR
20. Trpua ५ Las क521. 5758 9.0. 0.9. 13.9. aE
Sh. Uttar Prados. * ६7,699 9,68,311  J,d6,010 coy Sub s.0 4.6 24,977 Ve we TBE
Fa. WerBsnget 5 52.963 58999 296902 HE Ft at 4३486... 2 EE LBS
UNION TRREITORING
Aa Niskade ५ 2 thd उठते. a rr erste
4. Arce chet Madean ५ ca wn 5.8. 13.5 “s BoB
Chrisie - . ५ हि
Cece के Nagas Mavi. : - . .
51% 1 em wr OF OS Bee Pe net
6,065.5 १७३ & Diu 7 ae न . वि
TLaxsssdwoer. 19 S30 95.8 86.4 भर z eee Stree]
मम . 8 BR 10.7 12 ‘ 2
peewee 0. 24... BREED 63.3. 76.5. 9.7 कढ3. यह. मरा. td >ाआज
कण... गया THINS बज «HO 1७ 0७ ORME स्व डक जाय



84 न
TABLE VII
Table showing oumber of com wplaiet cases pending on account of exquiries wot completed u/s 202 Cr.
me 1977 falong'hwith ‘percentage thereat ist, Zed, 3rd amd 4th

P.C. at the end of 4th quarter of
quarters of 1977 and number of

cases increased o¢ decreased im the

from 31-12-1976 to

Namzafthe S1atef
Vaion Tectitare

Complaint cases pending on
Shinto

taquirie? aol Som
fess ‘Cr. P.-C. percentay

No,

age of
caset pending om ontes ite incretic or

sr dion ena Sane Geese ay मय
i tet gill कक तक 1 nash iss, itr
completed SHOT आफ डर Ais? आनईलैक stay अधिक te
See. | अनीय ।
1 z 3 4 5s 6 ? हे डर 10 प्‌ 12
1. या 7/4र पक... वाह HOHE 2S LD a 4720. 4152) +8444
Beamem 6, 126 50,827 50,953 042 90.1... 0.2 66 46 460 +90.9
३ छा». «सब 173,288 208592 10-7 10.2 14.9 19.2. उेकश4ब ३7304... $3396. +1+.2
न 376 3,41.558 3,41,232... 0.1... ०.1 ou 502 324. 127 ans
S.Maryant 190 6,285... 6475. 8.8. 0.8. 4.4. 2.9 363 190 जा.
6, Himachal Pradesh 7... 5,679. 55926 4.6. 08 OT 0-8 ड़ Cid
7.73 94 & Kashmir, Not applicable,
8. Karntinkas 2. 432 30198 11,530... 6.50 SB ३.1. 3.7 337 42200 105
Ca पे. 35.59. 13,364 ण्त ee 9.1 15 uo a
10. M@dbyaPredesh 1.386 37128 38,514 3-8. 3.8. 3.6 1,299 386 कहा
व. Mabumante. 55258 41,939. बडा? 1.0. 0-8. 0.9. tbr 1238 pee
12, Maeipor | |. « जा Le oe ७. ». +#+ «+ मु . ” ”
13. Msgbalayn 2. Mot Avaliable,
14. Nagaland 6s न उ5 वेद. 6.8. 10.3. 3295 न न ”
1S Oris 5. , 464 58,886. 59350 0.5. 0.6. 0.8. 0.8 444 46400420 +4.5
Pub. 164 3,699. 3,863. 2-4 1.6. 1.2. 1.9 162 164 4200 442
W7Molasthans 5... ५. hBSt 73,888 6F GFF. 4980... 11,381. RRO tt
व  . : 139 Bo lon 57 हु न 25 - 325 _1७0.३
WiamaiNady. . 2818525 11,603... 0.2. 0.1... 9.2... 0-9 “4 28 48a ioe
2). Teapura ks 4 216e I 0.3. 0.4 0.3 , 0-2 14 4... ato Line
2b UAarPridsh 5 LQ 1.84॥$57 9852677 6.8. 7.2. कब 1434. 4294 aa
22, Wen Baagel 47 455959 46005 0.6. 98 1.2. 1.0. 300A? $2te +01.7
UNION TERRITORIES
LAN Fade. 8 PEs) asd 10.7 8.2 3.8 5.0 a a ~13 619
2. Aruaachal Pradesh « न 39 39 40.0 25.0. 7.4 1 न —! ooo.
3, Chandiggh ५». *# . 981 oan a we . न न . . we
™ 4, Dadra tad Nagar Hotell, a 1200 है. my न कि
5, Delni : 195. 98298 98493 0.4... ७... 0.2. 0.2... 434 195 239 __55.
6. dow, Daman & Diu 260 1467 dT? fod 26 2 48.3
7, Lakshadweep ” u th 40.0. 4. 55.6 : . .
2-Mitoram . . a ct 0 $9 . os . कि तर
% Pontichons . 5 83 है8. 5.8. ST 3 3 420 456.7
Total 63,041 12,95)134 17,77,815 2.9



83

TABLE [X
Statement of work done in the Session Cowrts during the year 1977

Dispose l-during
the year
Appeals Ocigiaal Rew. Appomls “Original 2
Sion

tLe peer

Revi- Appeals Orrgicsl Hevi-

Pondency a6 om
Pee

APRONS
99
1 2 3 5 4 ? & 3 19 n 1३ 13
8, आज desk ५... 7३३. DY मर S936 2545 आओ 603... 577... २६०. 1,235
Bama. 1 coo) eT 351 ec Oe 783. 5564... 619. 3580. 5५७. उक0
RBM 5 ५ eg LET A941 12,618. 8,710. #ण7. 7148 53,391. 4190. 7,218 36,189. 5,168 12,546
4. Gaiarat eo. oe 135 उतने... उड़े 1.8Od 16818 4.91 94 Sd Lied 02 60
1 953 N45 Fou? 282 244. क283. 1,172... 758. 307 Obs DS 593
GHimiemifadesh s+ | Wd S25 165: रबर. SASTRY aS
7 Jamas Sishow . . Not applicabie,
SoKeatgke 2 ESE ASE SE ly aL LYS 728 1,750 436... 405. 804
Akanlat Lk reer caer: ce ce TT)
1). MadayePsadesh SATO S108 268 5561 4,816. SSR 1749 2,079. a36T
मा व Se गई व 4 ans 2342 E66 2426
M2. Manipur. 6 ye 153 ith a we 35H
LL Maghalags 5. Nak apahombic,
फि अाइमाब्बड ee 77 Wz soda 2 6 130 3 ie छा या ?
13. Orissa Te 1.20. ढ93 2,341. ee ee हझ;.. 675 2,490
Ls. ९430 ५ « - 21. जूक बजकर 2506 et eC TY 2,306
37. Bajsthan =» sy 1953. 1516. ADL 5.18. 246. 3,164. 2,890. ३,579. 5555 2,136. 8493. 6,100
wSkkim 6 we 34 बन a 36 é 6 5३ 2 eT | 5
पा femiNata 50) ५. 82 2४४ LF 382 1,23७ 2,694 299 ६,013. De ste 478 7,199
yu.Tripsrs - 0) 18S AE tS B28 सकी याए। देड8 236... 4३ 184. 156... |
21, Uttaceisdesn®. ५... ५. धटाड़े 2,925. 5,316 SLMS AMZ Ut uss 7530 9 34,3४8 ३, 23 ger
12 SSB 2D MBS) SUP LITE कारक L102 2,896... 4d eo
UNION TERRITORIES
waAgN Idea 6 ‘ 1 १3 के “4 Iz 44 5 2004
2. Arasiens Pradesh = 4 30 H 2051 os 2 39 ‘ 1 54 . 3
शान मा 6 ee a u fr Le ec) P 2s oad
बे. Data & Sager Helis 7 . 1 n 2 8 mB 2 2 $ = 3
5 Bessi . ~ os + 3st 336 451 932 592 1.899 1,118 SOS 1,830 665 203
3, Gi, Gama $ Din न. eT | 6 at
y Maksksdwep © 1 on कु बन 2 - ' - . 2 .
8. Mizoram hoe IT पु wae 2 fu . eer 2 .
vModswherty 8 2 tap ow (e420 134 ? 63
‘ teal 6 24 8950 92,78) 3,४88 70,090 | “35040 Tha? १० 7.४41 43,132

TAG ASO 93,7७3. 35,832 70,099 6B ३58 FILE THT? 9902 (२,४५1 93,49;

बा, 7५3 २७ GF Kerals, Grssa tas Utlar 2ragesh ty got rity as the revise.) gues Here ४४४५1

by thos 5

cates Hug Cour



35

TABLE X

Statement of work done in the Magisterial Courts during the year 1977

Name of the State!
Union Territory

क्र

Police Challan Cases

Complaint Cases

Pendency Institution Disposal

Pendency Pendency Institution Disposal Pendency

as an during the during the as on as on during the during the as on
1-1-77 year year 34-12-77 1-1-77 year year 4-12-97
i 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
1. Andhra Pradesti 36,797 2,069,036 2,69,519 56,314 = 12,633... 1,038,727 107,314 14,046
2Asam . 51,120... 45,226 33,203 63,143 44,736... 54386... 48,169. 50,853
3. Bihar 2.74335 1,35,612 1,396,685 273,262 2,29,948 83,666 ,07,022 2,06,592
4. Gujarat. ¥4715 4,15,545  4,26,036 74,224 340,545 7,15,837 7,1%450.. 3,41,932
5. Haryana . 29,189 35,287 35091 29,325 6,127 7,401 7,053 6,457
6. Himachal Pradesh 9,451 8,965 8,209 10,187 5.464 8,130 7,868 5,726
7. Jammu & Kashmir. Not available.
8. Karnataka : 52,496 2,50,285 238,756 64,015 9497 30,747 28,614 11,630
9. Keralat 1 45,502 1,35,240 1,35,626 45,216 14,617 56,892 56,145 15,364
10, Madbya Pradesh 244,568 3,05198. 3,17,573 232,193 37,092 44,959 43537. 38,574
11. Maharashtra. 564475 8,11,720 906,282 46923. 1,57,386 2,87,904 3,02,1131,43,177
12. Manipur... 5,910 3,668 1868 97.710 12,333 B27 2334 13,246
13. Meghalaya Not available,
14, Nagaland . . . 804 4,557 4,211 1,150 63 300 328 35
15. Orissat «111,933 69,474 91,065 8984. 72542... 49,273 63,223 59,350
16, Punjab...» 37,173 59,901 53,904 43,170 9,397 13,301... 13,835 8,863
17. Rajasthan 160,571 1,086,720 97,416 1,685... 84,985. 88,169. 89385. 55,769
18, Sikkim. . 1,719 2,ख2 2,664 1,297 155 34 339 130
19. Tamil Nadu 66,926 1,05,586 992,686 79,825 14,593 1,69,747 189,687 14,653
30. Tripura 14,563. 11,243. 20,050 5,756 2,833 3,745 4,407 2171
21, Uttar PradeshY . . 3.60,456 4,87,574 4,87,5623,86,010" 1,73,1353,36,379 4,058,657 _1,98,526
22. West Bengal.» 3,11,815 433,076 4,489,589 2,96,302 40,297 1,83,6531,23,434 4,60,516
UNION TERRITORIES
1, A & N Iolands+ «3683 6,276 7,977,997 149 264 254 159
2. Arunachal Pradesh* . 204 400 382 170 19 fs 85 59
3. Chandigarh =. 855 1,000 1,021 834 860 477 356 981
4. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 384 354 575 163 16 20 १] 12
उ, Delhi. + 184,746 3.35119. 335, 1,69,48. 90,708. 1,07122 99,337 98,493
6. Goa, Daman & Diu. 16,816 3,436 17,786 2,466 1,348 894 755 1,487
7. Lakshadweep. 12 26 16 2 3 15 7 n
& Mizoram... m4 659 642 TA 2 129 14 a
9. Pondicherry . 1,740 14,863 15,370 41,253 64 431 407 88
TOTAL .

+ 26,78,611 49,535,288 50,83,261 25,75,815  17,21,547 23,356,947 22,97,253 17,78,975

“The figuree of Orissa, U. P., Kerala, A & N Islands and Arunachal Pradesh do not tally,


, APPENDIX 2
SPECIAL LisT SYSTEM IN KERALA

it should be the aim of every court to dispose of the cases before it with the utmost
expedition consistent with a full and fair hearing, without sacrifice of quality and with
as little expense and inconvenience as possible to the parties and Others concerned, This
requires (apart, of course, {roa what is most important, eatnesiness छा the purt of the
presiding officer) a suitable ordering of the work of the court, OF cairns lactors the
greatest impediment 1s ihe हक pver-posting vouris geneiully make wilh the siendam
evils of indiscriminate adjourments and piecemeat hearimgs oxlending over months, often
years. In a good many inunsifis’ courts as many as 30 to 40 guise are posted for trial
for a day whereas there’ is ne reasonable chance of more than 1४० deing Iie, In a
Magistrate's court, as many as 30 or 4d witnesses are summoned whereas there is no
Prospect of more than 10 being examined, Apart fram the waste of time involved in
calling the cases, in ordering applications for adjousnment—one. side or the other, in almost
every Case, will seek an adjeutamenat— end securing with dilticulty sufficient work for
the eay—in some courts, the roll-cali, as this process is called, takes the best part of
the moming—this resulls in a slate of uncertainty as lo which. of the cases posted will
actually be taken up for hearing and leaves the Parties, ihe lawyers and the court itself
in a state of unprepatedness. Since almost all the cases will haye te be adjourned for
want af time, no one takes the posting seriously. No one holds himself in full readiness
since that waukl be a waste ‘of times money and energy, the odds being that the case
Will aot be taken up. A nuniber of cases are begun and then adjourned to be heard
piecemeal at long intervals, even wiinesses being examined Piecemeal; a large number of
Part-heard cases accumulale—in some courts, there are more than a hundred ot a lume:
wilh a mind already mortgaged 10 so many paTt-heard matlers, neither the coun nor
counsel are able to besiow much thoughl to or come to grips with the matter actually
on hand; at cach hearing of a case much of what was done before Will have heen
forgotten and will have to be recalled; the more dillicult cases are Passed over to grow
elder, everybody concerned being pre-disposed in layour of the lighter cases; and the
bumerous adjournments which even the simplest case sulfers not merely involve more
Work far everybody concerned, and a less satisfactory conduct and disposal of the case
itself, but also ent unnecessary expense of time and money to the parties in attending
court, in bringing witnesses and in Instructing the lawyers, “Witnesses are pol examined
on the Ways on which they are in attendance with the result that they are not in
altendance waen they ate required. And, it often happens that, owing to the failure
of the other work posted, ४ lawyer is compelled 10 get on with & case on a day when,
owing to the absence of witnesses ar fur ather reasons, he is not really ready 10 do so,
the case having been adjourned on ihe days he was feady; and not infrequently, in
charge is levelled that for the sake of an easy disposal, the presiding officer insists on a
case in which the parties are not ready for being heard, adjourning at the same time cases
in which the parties ate ready, fn defence of this system of aver-posting (if system it
can be called), it is often urged that it makes for larger disposals and permits of
accommodation to the bar while ensuring ihat the court व not left without work. Tt
is also that there is an understanding that only the oldest of the cases wil: be taken up,
IE that be so, it is dificult to undetsiand why the newer oases should be posied at all,
for, it would follow thai the parties concerned would not expect them to be taken up
and would therefore not be ready. In fact, over-posting tends to amaller pot larger
disposal; i! certainly makes for unsatisfactory and haphazard trials and disposals, and
waule if only a suficieat number of cases are posted 100 a tay, the court can reasonably
insist op that wark beiag ready—and, once pacties and their lawyers have had sufficient
notice of the posting of a case fur inal there would appear io be no Justification for
further accommodation—the result of posting more is that no ene will be quite ready
and tbat one side or the other in each case will ask for an adjournment. The refusal
of an adjournment will] be resented when so mady cases have perforce to be adjourned
aod the result might well be to leave the court without sulficient work for the day,

The expeditious and satisfactory disposul of cases demands thal, once a case is
begun, it should be heard coatinususly from day to day——where, ux in a warrant ase,
the uial is ip stages, each stage should be heard Irom day ta day. ‘This is indeed
emoined by both the codes of procedure—we section 344 of the Criminal Procedure
Code and the proviso to Order XVII rile | of the Civil Procedure Code. Aujouraments
shovid got be granted except for good am, suflicient cause and unless justice would other
wise sulfey; and, of course, a person must suiler tbe sunsequence of his own default.
The ideal would be for one cuse lo be completed before another is taken up, and, to
Teach as ncar as possible to that, it is essential that no more work should be ‘posted
for a day than can reasonably be expected to be taken up. And, time permitting, all
ihe work posted for the day must be taken up.

One great advantage of posting only as much work ay can be taken up and of the
certainty that the work will be taken up is thal the lawyers can study the cases for the
Gay thoroughly in advance and be fully prepared. to conduct them, तु

‘The presiding officer also can, and should, prepare himself by géing theough the
Papers which should be takea home the Wrevious evening.

The following system of posting of contested matters of various classes for actual
hearing (as distinguished from the preliminary work necessary 10 make 2 case ready for
hearing} is commended,

87


88

‘CIVIL
A. Original Suits *
This may be called the “Special List System". Under this system no contested suit

will be taken up Lor tial unless ॥ ls posted for the day in the special list to be prepared

and pualished i the totluwiag way. ln ४ munsitf's court, the Bench Clerk will, as at
present, post ali ready contested 501७5 in the heariag book at the rate of, say, about six
a day, So that all the ready suils wuil-be called up once in two months or three months,
But it will be clearly understood that this posting is merely fonnal aud intended only
for the purpose of reporting compromise, death or patties and tho like, and that no suit
will be called on for hearing unless it is in the special jist. The special list will be
prepared i the beginning of a monn for ihe ~whole ofthe following month, For each
day of the following month two suits (and go more) will be sclected from out of the
suuts posted for we day iu the peating book. One will invariably be the oldest of these
suits; ihe olher will be chosen irom among the. remaing suits having regard to the
nature of the old suit, Almost always, tue old suit will 09 a heavy suit and therefore
‘the second suit chosen should be a iight suit, ‘The result will be that there will be
only two suils posted for a day, and, roughly speaking, one will be heavy and the other
light. (When a statutory stay vhich bas been in force for some time is yacnted, there
will generally be a large number of old suits available for trial, in which, by reason
vf the new law, there might not be much evidence to adduce and the tial of which
might not take much time. Under such circumstances, both tho suils selected may be
old suits 800 more than two may be posted per day if there is a reasonable prospect
of the trial being completed), .

‘This list which is a provisional list will be published (by aflixture to the court notice
board, a copy being seal to the Bar Association) by the 5th of each month. Between
tbe Sth and the [0th apy representation which the Jawyers might have to make will be
heard.and the necessary changes made, The final list wili be published by the |0th—the
fist, it will be recalled, is for the foliowing month—and it will be clearly understood
thal, except for compelling cause, po adjourament will be given thereafter. No hardship
whatsoever is involved in ihis, since every lawyer and every party bas clear notice ranging
from three 10 seven weeks that his suit will be peremptorily ken up for hearing on a
particular day.

So far as suits oot appearing in the special list are concerned, it will be suflicieat to
formally adjourn them with the remark,

“Not in the list, Adjourned... a

With regard .o suits that are ip tbe speciad list, these suits must be taken up without
fail so long as lbere is time, unless circumstances compel an adjournment. If for any
xeason, a, suit posted for the day cannot be taken up, it will stand out of tho list apd
be formaily adjourned to some other day unless for some special reason, such as that
ibe sul beug a very old suit cannot wart will it gets into the special list ugain, the
présiting oilicer thinks if necessary te post it peremptorily to a paruicular date,

(Such posing will be made io consultation wilh both sides, and, if necessary, ome of
the suits already posted for that day in the special list will be removed from the List,
unis being notived on the notice board), Falling that, the suit will not be taken up
until it reappears in Uae special list aud it will not be allowed to interlere with the
postings already made in Ihe special list for the month or for the following month.

Ordinarily, it can be. expected that the evidence in the light suit will be completed
before che iuoch interval, anu, by the lunch interval, it should ordinarily be possible
Ww say whether that in ibe Aeavy sut will be compleied tbat day or will go to the next
day. Hf at is expecied 10 take a substantial part of the next day also, the heavy suit
posted Yor ihe next day will be taken oui ot the list and the sawyers concerned informed
accordingly, It will mot ordinarily be necessary to lake oul the Light suit which may
be completed before the part-heard heavy suit trom the previous day is taken up. And,
30 on, if the heavy suit goes to a third or a fourth day. In any event, once a suit is
taken ‘up for heating, the trial must proceed from day to day, until the evidence on
both sides is completed, and there should not be more than one part-heard suit ai a
time. Once the evidence is closed, the suit may be adjourned, if necessary, to some
convenient later day for arguments, (This will be avcessary only in the case of com-
plicated suits. In most suits arguments should be heard immediaicly acier evidence is
closed, when the evidence is fresh im the mands of the advocates and the presiding ofticer,
and, if that is dove, it should be possible to pronounce judgment within a week if it is
not done forthwith by dictanon from the bench, li the provisivus of Order AVL, rules
1 and 2 regarding the opening of 4 case aad addressing the court at the close of the
evidence are followed-—~they safely are—the address or “argument”, as it is cailed, should
not take much time). But, the trial proper should be from day io day.

dt is essential that for the proper working of this system that no adjournments aie
granted except for rcally compelling reasons. Even so, it might sometimes happen that
both the suits posted for the day collapse. In that event, which can happen only very
occasionally, the time Jett over can protitably be utilised by the presiding officer in
checking the various branches of his olfica or in dictating judgments that have been
दा

Bi is necessary that no suit should appear in the special list ए it is ful
for tial, Commissions aud the like shouid be taken out at the earlicst gece oppor
tunity and the taking out of a commission after a suit has come into the special list
should be discountenanced. Presiding officers should themselves sclile issues (there 1s ov
objection to obtaining draft issues provided the aciual settling is done by tha officer
after acquainling himself with the pleadings) and the tims spent by them on this will


89

be amply repaid. If this is done, the’ presiding officer will know at the time of settling
issues whether a commission or other preliminary work will be necessary before the suit
can be taken up for hearing, and, if this is neoessary, he will post the suit to a particu-
lar day for an application for the purpose and the suit will not be regarded as ready
until the preliminary work is done. He will alsa be able to make a note in the notes
paper regarding the light or heavy nature of the suit and this will te helpful in preparing
the special list.

Tt ig also necessary that the provisions of Order VI rules 14 to 18, Order VIII rule 1
and Order XII, rules J and 2, Civil Procedure Code, are strictly enforced and that
documents are filed long before the suit appears in the special list. This can be ensured
by allowing applications to excuse delay, if they are allowed at all, only on terms which
should be very heavy once a suit has come into the special list. The provisions in
question are designed not so much to check the production of spurious documents (which
with some forethaught can be manufactured in time) but to prevent either party from
-taking the other by surprise: and after some time it would be as well to enforce the
provisions very strictly in respect of cases that have appeared in the special list.

Tn the Sub Courts, of course, it will not be possible to post twé suits for a day
and some modification will be necessary. Posting can be on a weekly instead of on a
daily basis, Three suits may be selected for a week. One must he the oldest of the
suita posted in the hearing book for the week; the remaining two may be selected from
the rest having regard tb the heaviness of the first, preference being given to the older
suits; it will be convenient if the old heavy suit-is always posted to a particular day of
the week, say, Monday, the two light suits beine posted ta Thursday for Wednesday) and
Friday. ‘In the hearing book also postings should be on those same days so that a
selected suit will be posted in the special fist for the same day as if stands posted in the
hearing book. When sessions postings are made, the suit posted for the day should, if
the sessions case is likely to take time, be removed fram the list and the lawyers concerned
informed forthwith. In Sub Courts there can be-no risk of the work entirely collapsing
for a sufficient number of appeals can be pasted for each day.

To enable a check as to how the system is being worked. each court wilf send the
District Judze a copy of its list at the end of the menth with remarks as to the progress
made in each case as illustrated in the form given below. The District Iudgc will review
the working of the system by each court and submit the lists with a copy of his review
to the High Court.

It is made clear that the system is not intended to fetter in any wav the discretion
vested in the court to grant adjournments under Order XVIT rule 1 of the Code of Civil
Procedure. It only emphasizes that an adjournment should. as the rule itself says, be
granted onty for snffictent cause, and that, as the proviso to the rule lays down, the
bearing should be from day to day. An adjournment should. of course. be granted if
otherwise justice would suffer but no one should be allowed to take advantage of his own
defauli—he must suffer its consequences.

FORM
Date Snits posted Progress made Hour at which
court rose for
the day

14-1970 0.5,3/70 Heard, Judgment reserved and pronoanced on 5-6-70,

O.8.112/67  Part-heard. Trial continued on 2/6, 3/6. Judgment pronou- 5 p.m.
need on 15-6. :

2-6-1970 0.5.315/69 Compromised.

0.8.118/67 Removed from the list because of part-heard O.S.112/67 Spm,
3-6-1970 ©.8.15/70 Dismissed for default

O.S.10/68 Removed from the list because of part-heard 0.8.112/67 4 p.m.
4-6-1970 0.S.463/69  Decreed > x parte

O.S.1/66 Adjoumed because of death of plaintiff 3 pm.

B. OTHER PROCEEDINGS

8. Other proceedings
Other proceedings invalving the examination of witnesses may, and once they become
old should, be treated as original suits for the purposes of the special ist.

. C. APPEALS

A certain amount of Jatitude is permissible in the case of appeals and other proceed-
ings not involving, the examination of witnesses, but, even so. in appeals and other cases
requiring preparation, the lawyers must he given fair notice as to which of the many
cases posted ir the heating book are to be actually taken up. At a fixed hour every day.
either just before or immediately after the lunch break. the work for the following day
can be settled in open court giving the lawyers concerned an opportunity of being con-
sulted, Only as much work as 2 taken up should be posted for the day, trial work
being ignored against the possibility of its collapse. Preference should be given ta old |
cases. A list of cases to be heard the following day should be published on the notice
board by 3 p.m. each day and ordinarily adjournments should only be for want of time,



0

CRIMINAL
Sessions cases

Sessinns cases should be given precedence over afl other wotk and no other work
should be taken up on sessions days until the sessions work for the day is completed.

A sessions case ance posted should not be postponed unless that is unavoidable, and
once the trial has begun, if should proceed cantinuously ‘from day to day dil it is com-
Pleted. Tf far any reason, a case has to be postponed or adjourned, intimation should
be given forthwith to bath sides and immediate steps be taken to stop the witnesses and
secure their presence an the adjourned date.

On reczipt of the order of commitment the case should be posted for trial to as
early a daie_as possible. sufficient time. say, three weeks, being allowed for securing the
witnesses Ordinarily, it shoutd be possible to post two sessions gases a week, the first
on Monday and the second’ an Thursday. but sufficient time should be allowed for each
case so thal one case dors not telescope inte the next, Every endeavour should be made
to avoid telescoping and for this, if necessary, the court should commence sitting earlier
and continue sitting later than the normal hours. If the entire day is devoted solely to
sessions work and if praper control aver the proceedings is exercised by the judge, the
atdinary run of cases should not take more than two days and only very heavy cases need
go beyond the third day. Judgment in the case begun on Monday should ordinarily be
Pronaunced in the, course of the week and that begun on Thursday the following Monday.

Appeals and Revisions

These should be pasted as early as possible, usually within thtee weeks of insti-
tution. The posting should be made as far as possible in consultation with both sides and
50 28 nol to clash with sessions work. These cases should be gives precedence over all
other work, except sessions work, and, ordinarily, 00 adjournment should be given although.
there is no great harm in following the “one adjournment’ tule followed by some judges
whereby one short adjoursment fand no more) of a week ता ten days is given on tequest.

Inquiries and Trials by Magistrates

The postine of cases involving the examination of witnesses shauld be so made that
the number of vitnesses summoned for a day should not greatly exceed the number that
ean be examined. A magistrate should know, rougnly speaking, how many witnesses can
be examined in (he Gme (eft after dealing with cases mot involving the examination of wit-
nesses. Tf. for instance. eieht witnesses can b2 examined. not More than ten or twelve
should be summoned far the day and cases for tial must be pasted accordingly, Of
course, there can be nu fard and fast suk, ft might be thet in one case there are a
large number of short witnesses while in another there are few witnesses, but each with
a Jong story to tell, However. with some cate in posting. it should be possible to ensuge
that, and large. the witnesses in attendance on a day are examined ता that day or at
Jeast on the following day.

Fach stage of a case shontd be tried cantinnausly from dav ta dav as enjoined by
section 344 of the Criminal Procedure Code and white the posting should. as far as
Possible, be made ta svit the convenience of bath sides. adiourrments should be granted
only far sufficient cause.

When the accused is not in custody ता has not been hound ovet aad his presence
has to be secured. the case may first be posted For the appestance of the accused. In
a summons case the quesiioning of the accused under section 243 of the Code should
be done on che very day of bis appearaice and if there is no conviction under section 243.
the case should be posted to a conveniemt date as early 2s possinle for the examination
af the prosecution witnesses, The prosecution witnesses should be examined continuousty
and at the close of the prosecution evidence, the accused should straightaway be examined
wader section 342 of the Code. Thereafter, if the accused wants witnesses to be examin
ed in his defence. the case shou'd be adjourned to some convenient date as -eatly as
possible for the examination af defence witnesses who should alsa be examined — conti-
ouousiy, Arguments should b: heard on the completion of the evidence and ordinarily
a adjournment should be given for the murpose.

Ina 1४ fnary enquiry under section 2074, that section itself reqpires that the case
should ordinarily he potted for enquiry within fourteen days of the receipt of the charge:
sheel. a later date being permissible only for teasans to be recorded in: writing, Here
tao, the witnesses for the prosecuting shantd be examined cantinuously and at the close
‘of the evidence it should be possible to examine the accused and complete the, enquiry
and either frame a charge of decide to discharge the accused. In an enquity under
section 208, the prosecution witnesses shavld be examiped continuously and the accused
examined at the close of the prosecution evidence. “Then an adjournment should be
given if there are witnesces for the defence and such witnesses should also be examined
continuously, Argemenis. if anv, should be heard on the campiction af the evidence
and a charge framed ता ॥ decision to d'seMaree the acoused 19"60 without delay,

Tn warrant eases instivied an a police reperi. the stage ef discharuime the accused
under section 23142) ar framing a charee under section 2STA(3) can be reached -on the
very day of the accisa!'s appearance, H there is no canvictinn under section 251405),
the case shevld be udiourned to a convenient date as early as possible for the examina-
tien of the proseestinn witnesses. whrse examination must procced continuously. At the
close of the prosce ies evidence the accused should be examined. and, if he has wit-
nesses fo summon ir his defence the case should be adjourned to. some convenient date
for the ex. finn of defence witnesses which also should be done — cantinneusly,
Arguments. if any. showdd be heard forthwith and the trial clased,

Likewise. in case instituted otherwise than on a police reparl, each stage of the
ease shoutd be heard continuously and arguments heard on the closing of the evidence.



APPENDIX 3
Law Comission oF INDIA

DELAY IN DISPOSAL OF CASES AND PENDING ARREARS IN COURTS
INTRODUCTORY NOTE

For same time past, public attention has been focussed on the problem of delay in
the disposal of cases and pending arrears in the courts. Statistics relating to judicial
business. in general, show “a continuous increase in the volume of pending. litigation.
There is already « backlog of cases in many esutis; further increase may put a Severe
strain on the latgely aver-burdened judicial machinery. and pose 2 pressing challenge. in
specific terms, the figures of institution. pendency nd dispose! of cases in the High Courts
and subordinate Courts show that the burden has becn constantly increasing. The fudi-
cial system, by and large, is working well. and this is refiecied in the relatively high
popular esteem of the courts. But itvis apprchended that the increasing volume of cases
before the courts might affect the quality of justice and shake public confidence in the
courts,

The Law Commission of 11919 bas. in conformity with its terms of reference, decided
10 elicit informed opinion on the subject by means of this Questionnaire.

‘This Questionnaize. i is needless to say. is nat based on any pre-conceived notions
as to the remedies thai should be adopted to teduce the arrears, The objective is to
explore all possible avenues, and to elicit opinion in rhe hope that ultimately an effective
and practicable solution. substantially acceptable to all cancerned, might emerge

Efforts and propasals to solve the problem af arréars in the Courts have been many
and varied in the past. There have been suggestions fer the appointment of additional
judges, changes in the distribution of business, amendments in the rules of pracedi
the elimination of delaying tactics ard the like. The problem, however, has persisted.
requiring again a review of the posifien.

[t ip no exapgeration to speak of an impending crisis in judicial administration Te
understand how this crisis has come akour. it is necessary to inquire into the factors
leading to workloads and the procedure adepled for disposal of that 1030,

The factors Joading io judicia’ workloads may be broadly clossified as extra-[eeal
and legal, For example, with the ircrease i population, there is naturally ar increase
in the work of the courts. [n addition. aur society is sow far more complex than twenty-
five years ago. These are extra-leral factors.

Wew rights have been brough! into heine. and older rights (such as contract and pro-
perty) have been mace subject to Guvernmfént regulation and legal control. New social
interests are also pressing for recognition in the courts In part. the increase 18 contri-
buted by Icgislation and ty broadened ervernmental progranme of ail kinds. aince issues
arising cut of these ultimately seach the courts for resolution. These factors may be
described as [egal

‘All these developments have increased the demands on the Jaw and. its institutions,
and it is desirable to ascertain the factors leading to increase in judicial business. The
first few questions therefore solicit views on this aspect.

In terms of improving disposal, twe geness] approaches are available. The resource
ingots ‘Judges, clerks and facilities) can be increased. or the existing resources can be
utilised more. emficiently.

Th is axiomatic that the workload of 2 court is determined by the number of cases
that have fo be handled. multiplied by the average amonnt of work that has to be per-
formed in connection with each case. The valume of institution and the rate of disposal.
therefore, form the subject matter of the bulk of the questions. The time that is needed
for disposal necessarily involves an examination of the precedsire for disposal—which hes
been desit with in a few questions.

The workload so arising has ‘o be distributed amongst the Judges available. Their
numerical strength, and the time actually applied by them in dispasing of the workload,
are therefore relevant and form the subject of a few questions. Attention has alsa been
paid to the question of adequacy of the staff of the Courts.

Bearing im mind that the everall reduction of arrears could ‘be achiewed by improving
one or more of these three factors. namely. by reduction in the number of cases, reduc-
tion in the average amount of work that bas to be performed in connection with each
ease and reduction of the workload of each Fudge thy increase in the total number of
judges), the Commission has. in the Questionnaire. jnclided questions that eal not only
with the organisation of the cauris, the number and sclection of Judges and the distri-
bution of business, but also with certain suegestians concerned with jurisdictian of courts.
Attention has also been paid to the aspect af ribution of business,

Many of the questions facus attention upon the appellate process and _ appellate
jurisdiction. Nobody can object to 2 given volume of appeals, however large or for
that matter, to a given volume of any ofher type of lilizatian- but if the volume has a
serions effect on the speed of disposal, ar otherwise has an aciverse impact on the jedi

process, te matter requires attention

91


Causes,

Decrease in dis-
posal-causes.

Hearing by Single
Judge.

Special know-
Iedge.

Hearing by same
Judge.

92

A view has been expressed that if the High Court is to function well, it is important
that certain judges should specifically be assigned to deal with specific subjects so that
they can develop expert knowledge in the field. Some of the questions, therefore, deal
with this aspect.

The questions relating to delay in the spbordinate courts take into account the re-
cent amendments in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and the recent revision of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. Tt may be that experience of the working of the
amended or Tevised law has not yet been Iong enough to justify further changes. How-
ever, the Commission would like to elicit informed public opinion on the relevant
issues,

Some of the questions might appear to carty radical implications, In putting forth
these questions, as already stated, the Commission has no pre-conceived notions. The
hard facts of delayes justice have, however, driven many persons to a re-thinking about
the existing system.

The solution may not be found in any single administrative or procedural measure
cor merely in the jacrease in the number of Judges or Courts, but in a combination of
several measures, and the efficient use of judicial time and the active co-operation of
the legal profession with the Courts in the expeditious disposal of the work of the

‘ourt,

It is in this background that the Law Commission of India has decided to elicit
views on various aspects of the problem of arrears. The Commission will be grateful
for reasoned and detailed expression of views on cach question. On any matter not

covered by specific questions but regarded as relevant to the problem of arrears in the
Courts, suggestions are, of course, welcome.

प्राप्त COURTS
The problem and its principal causes

0. total If yon regard the problem of arrears in the High Courts as requiring serious
consideration, to what extent is it due, in your opinion, to one or the other
of the following factors: —

(i) increased institution of cases ;
(i) decreased disposal of cases.
{b) Tf, in your view, arrears in High Courts can be attributed to increased insti-

tution, please state what, in your view. are the main factors contributing to
such increased institution.

What measures would you suggest to remedy the, defects ?
0. 2. If arrears in the High Courts are, in your view, duo to decrease in disposal, what

are the concrete factory to which you would attribute such decrease, and the remedies
that you would suggest to improve the position ?

Organisation of the High Courts—
Seiection of Judges and Distribution of Business

0. 3. It has been sngpested that High Courts in which there is a sizable number of
cases pending for mote than one year. should adopt a system whereunder ail cases should
be heard by single Judges, excepting—

(a) death sentence cases and appeals against acquittal ;

{b) appeals, where allowed, against judgments of Single Judges;

(0) cases where there is a statutory requirement to the contrary; and

(0) cases where hearing by a bench of three Judges is necessary to settle the law

on a particular point or for other special reasons.

Tt has been further suggested that the constitution of benches with more than three
Judges in such High Courts should not be permissible under any circumstances,

‘What are your views in the matter?
0. 4. It has been suggested that cases relating to a particular branch of law should be

heard only by Judges with special knowledee of such branch of law, and also that the
High Court may be divided into different jurisdiction. such as:

1. Civil;
2. Criminal:

3. Writs ;

4. Tax:

5. Labour.

What are your views in the matter?

0. 5. Tt has been suveested that as a rule the same Indse or Pench shonld hear a case
in_alt its stares, including preliminary admission, consideration of intetlacstory ‘orders
and final hearing.

‘What are your views in the matter?



93

Turlediction of the High Courts: Suggested Limitations
Q 6. Have you any suggestion to make at to—

{a) the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High Courts, or
(0) limiting appeals from district court to questions of law, or
fe) abolishing or limiting Letters Patent Appeals, in cases where such appeal is at
Present permiseible—
fi) against on original judgment? or
(i) against an appellate judgment on first appeal?
0. 7. It has been suggested that in Order to reduce the acceara iti High Courts, proceedings
for the grant of certificates by the Rie Court under article 133 or 134 of the Constitu-
tion should be elimineted, leaving tt for the Supreme Court alone to grant such leave
under article 136 of the Constitution.

What are your vitwe in the matter +

Q. 8. There has been a recommendation by the Law Commission’ and the High Courts
Arrears Cormitiee® to the effect that the procedure of reference to the High Courts ia
direct tax cases a inst judgment .of income Tax Tribunals should be replaced by an
appeal to the High Court on question of law. What other measures besides such an
amendment would help in facilitating or expediting the disposal of matters relating to
direct taxes ? .

Procedure for hearing in the High Courts

Q. 9. It has been suggested that it should be provided that no relief should be granted
in any appeal, revision or writ petition if the coutt is satisfied that no substantial injusnce
has been caused to the person seeking relief, even if there have been any irregularities.

How far de you agree with the suggestion and in what respects do you regard
the existing provisions in the Code of Civil Procedure? on the subject as requiring 10. be
amplified ?

Q. 10. It has been suggested! that in order to avoid delay, civil appeals and Revisions
should be filed in the original couct which passed the impugned decree. This court should
forward ihe appeal to the High Court, along with the records of the case, and should
also fix the date for appeatance of the parties in the High Court.

Do you agree with the suggestion 7
(0. 11, (a) 10 has been suggested’ that service of notices should be cifected by registered
post in all, proceedin; 88 8700, in case of failure at the firet atlempt, the person
seeking relief from the court should be required to effect service on the other

Parties ahd to file an affidavit of service,

What are your views in the matter ?

(जे Tt -has been suggested’ that the service of notice in appeals through the process
server should be abolished, ah the Pe
9) The first service may be effected by registered post upon the party.

(i) AM other notices including notice of appeal in the matters still pending
in court should be effected on the counsel, it being a statutory liability
of the counsel to accept service of notices

Do you agtee with the suggestion? *
0. 12, It has been suggested® that—
@

in civil appeals, the preparation and peinting of the paper books should be left
to the parties, and they should file them in 3 months’ time in the High Court
upon. the completion of service ;

in criminal appeals, the paper books need not be prepared, The trial court
should record evidence onthe typewriter and the catbon copy of the evidence
may be placed on the record of the case;

(c) paper books should be cyclostyled

Do you agree with the suggestion?

th

‘Law Commission of India, S8th Report (Structure and Jurisdiction of the Hig
Judiciary) (lanuary, 1974), page 75, para 623. ° वाला of the Higher
"High Courts Arrears Committee Report (1972), Chapter V, para 4
para 80° rage a8 eport (1972), npter para 43, page 60 and

‘Sections 99 and 99A, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, aa amended in 1976.
‘Suggestion of 2 High Court Judge.

‘Suygestion of a High Court Judge.

“Compare Order 5, Rule 194, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 fas amended).
Suggestion of a High Court Judge.

‘Suceestion of a High Court Judge

Original jurisdic-
tion.

Appeals under
Articles 133-134.

Tnoome-tax refer
ences.

Relief to be grant-
od only if sub
stantial injustice,

Filing of appeals.

Service.

Papef books.


Perjury

Time limits.

94

Q. 13, It bas been suggested that in case of clear perjury being established either in an
affidavit or in otal evidence, the court should have the power to impose punishment straight-
away after giving an opportunity to the person concerned, instead of merely filing a
complaint in a criminal court. “A right of appeal, should, however, be given to such
person, How far do you regard ihe existing law! on the subject as ‘requiring amplifica-
tion in this regard ?

Arguments and judgment in High Courts
Q. 14. It has been suggested that except with the leave of the court—

{a} a maximum limit of 15 minutes for the hearing af «a case at the stage of admis-
sion should be prescribed ; है

कं a maximum limit of 10 minutes for hearing of an interlocutory matter should
be prescribed

Do you agree with the suggestion ?

Citation of case Q. 15. The following suggestions relating 10 arguments, intended 19 expedite the disposal
law and consoli- of cases, have been made: —

dated fee.

(a) Citation of case law should be restricted normally io not more than two cases
only, in support of one proposition, with liberty to hand over a typed list of
other authorities, with relevant paragraphs extracted if necessary.

ib) Counsel should be required to settle a consolidated fee in a case (fees on daily
basis being prohibited) so that there may be a positive incentive to compress
the arguments as much as possible.

fc) Unnecessary, lengthy and repetitive arguments should be declared as professional
misconduct, proceedings for which may be initiated by a complaint of the
court,

What are your views in the matter १

Scrutiny of papers Q. 16. In regard to the appeals, there is a difference between the practice in England and
without oral atgu- Commonwealth countries on the one hand and the United States on the ather hand. One

ment,

Judgment.

Misbehaviour

incapacity.

sludy has described the position in these terms*: —

“Both in England and in the United States, appellate dockets are to some degree
within the control of the judges. In other words, while some appeals can be taken
as a matter of right, others can be taken only by permission,

In the United States, leave to appeal ordinarily can be granted only by the Court
to which the appeal is taken. is only the United States Supreme Court is em-
powered to grant certiorari to review the decisions of state supreme courts or
federal courts of Appeals.

AA difference exists between the two countries as to the form in which applications
for leave to appeal are made, In the United States applications are made in
writing and decided by the court.on the papers alone, without hearing oral
arguments.”
How far do you regard such a procedure as suitabie for adoption, with ar without
modification, in the High Courts in India in regard to admission of appeals ?
‘0.17. The following suggestions have been made rela!ing to judgments in order (०
expedite disposal: —
19) Judgments should be required to be very brief. They may contain the broad
teasoning only, and ihe citation of authorities should be canfined to theit

gist,’ without quoting extracts, unless the question of extracts is absolutely
necessary for distinguishing a case.

0) Reading of judgments in court should be eliminated. so that only the aperative
order is pronounced +

(c) Judgments should be delivered ordinarily within a week of the conclusion of
the hearing and, in no case, after more than one month}.

What ate your views in the matter ?
Other measures relating to High Courts
or Q. 18. Two suggestions have been made to facilitate the quick disposal of cases in the
High Courts—

(a) Persistent and serious unpunctuality should be declared as misbehaviour for
the removal of a High Court Judge under article 217, proviso (b), read with
article 124(4) of the Constitution.

‘Section 344, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

377 Remar Karlen, “Appeals in England and the United States” (1962) 78 L.Q.R. 371,

{Compare High Courts Arrears Committee Report (1972), Chapter ५, para. 106,
Page 74.
‘Compare Order 20, Rule 12), Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, as amended in 1976.

rare omeare ‘Order 20, Rule téf}, proviso, Code of Civil Procedure, as amended in



95

०) [nadequacy in the disposal ot cases whicn is both serious and persistent in
the opinion of the Chief Justice should be declared as incapecity | for the
removal of a High Court Judge under article 217, proviso {b), read with article
124(4) of the Constitution.

What are your ‘views in the matter ?

Q.19. ft has been suggested that in order to reduce arrears in High Courts: -
la) summer vacations should be reduced to four weeks: and
18) working houis should be increased by half an hour daily or in the alternative
by half a day, that is, thtee hours’ work on Saturdays.

The above special arrangements, it is staicd. may continue tli the arrears are
cleared. What are your views in the matter ?

0.20. (a) Do you suggest any incceasé in the strength of Judges of the High Court, and
if so, what should be the ériterion ता the basis of which it should be increased ?

4h) Would you suggest the exercise of the power under Article 224A of the Con-
stitution for appointing such of the retired Judges as were known for their
expeditious disposal of cases ?

SUBORDINATE COURTS .
Questions appl cable to civil and criminal courts

0. 21. What is the hierareby of civit courts and witat ace the limits of the pecuniary
jurisdiction of each civil courts?

Q.22. Tak What, in your opinion, are the causes of deisy in the irial courts in the dis-
posal of cases ?

[0] Hive you any suggestions to make tor cutting short such delays?

Q. 23. How far is delay due to—
@ inadequate number of Judges?

{b) insufficient accommodation, lack of books, lack of stenographic assistance or
other factors by way of unsalisfactory conditions of work affecting quality of
work ?

(c) defects in the procedure ?

Please indicate concretely the defects in procedure and the remedies suggested to remove
those defects,

Q. 24. Are the members of the subordinate judiciary of the same level in regard to their
knowledge of law, efficiency, hardwark, integrity and punctuality as that of the members
of the subordinate judiciaty in the past? If, in your view, there has been a decline in
this regard, to what specific cause do you attribute such decline ?

९-25. How are judicial officers rectuited 7 Are they raw law graduates or it is necessary
that they should have practised and if so, what should be the minimum period of practice ?
Would you suggest acy change in the period? If so, what? Have you any other
suggestion as to method of Tecruitment of judicial oificers 7

0.26. Have Judicial Oilicers to report periodically particuiars about individual cases
which are more than one year old (in the case of civil cases) and more than six months
old (in the case of criminal cases) ?

Q.27. Should petty criminal cases be disposed of by some agencies other than Stipendiary
Magisirates-—for example, village panchayats, honorary magistrates and Justices of the
ace

0. 28. Should village panchayats be invested with jurisdiction to Uy petly civil cases?

Q.29. Should we have some provision for pre-trial proceedings in civil cases as might
reduce the workioad of the court by obviating the necessity of court proceedings ?

0.30. What are the court timings, and do the judicial officers adhere to those timings
and maintain punctuality ?

(9.31. Do the people generally have confidence in the courts? If not, to what specific
causes would you attribute decline in confidence ?

७. 32. Do you find that the recording of the evidence of witnesses on commission impedes
speedy disposal? Has it been your experience that parties interested in delaying dis-
posal resort to it as dilatory tactics? If so, what remedies would you suggest to improve
the situation ?

Q.33. Do you agree with the suggestion that the examination-in-chief of the witnesses
should be replaced by an affidavit. allowing the parties a right of cross-examination and
re-examination of the witness, with a proviso whereunder the court may, in special cases,
permit examination-in-chief in the interests of justice 7

Vacations and
wurking hours.

Inadequate stren-
eth as a cause of
arrears.

Hierarchy.

Causes.

Specific causes.

Level of subordi-
nate judiciary. .

Recruitment — of
subordinate judi-
ciary.

Periodical reports.
of old cases.

‘
Petty criminal
cases-disposal by
other agencies,

Village = Pancha-
9918.

Pre-trial.

Court timings.

Public confidence.

Commissions for
recording ~ evid:
ence,

Affidavits.


Witnesses in al-
tendance.

Recording of evi-
dence without in-
tersuption.

Arguments,
Judgments,

Ruling जा. objec-
tions to evidence,

Normal time for
disposal. -

Specific causes of
deiay.

Congestion in
court.

Normal work-
load.

Section 80 (९.८.
and analogous
provisions.

Role of the pre-
ing

officer.

Too many wil-
nesses.

Provisional
ree,

Machinery for
settlement.

96

(Nors.—Even if examination-in-chief is replaced by affidavit, there may bo cases

where it will continue to be necessary, for example, where a party desires to examine
a public officer. In most cases, a public officer called upon to make an affidavit on matters
within hus personal knowledge would decline to do so at the request of a party without
an order of the courl and would prefer to be summoned and examined in court. Further,
sometimes a witness, even if he is not a public servant, may 06 unwilling to make at
aifidavit.}.
0.34. Does if frequently happen that witnesses who are present in court in obedience
10 a summons of the court have to go back without heing examined in courl? Are any
statistics maintained to show as to how many witnesses had to go back in such circum-
stances without their evidence being recorded because of want of tims on the part of the
court ?

Q.35. Would you consider it appropriate that once the recording of evidence of witnesses
of a party has commenced, the trial of that particular case should continue and no new
case should be taken up U!l evidence of all the witnesses present in thal case has been
completed?
Q 38. a) 15 1 your view that arguments should follow immediately on completion of
the recording of evidence ?
10) Would you consider it appropriate to have some time-limit for oral argu-
ments, which counsel can. if so desired, supplement by written submissions ?

0.37. Are you of the view that judgments should be shorter than at present and need
not deal with each and every point advanced or with all the authorities cited by counsel
at the Bar? 4s it jikely that shorter judgments may result in arbitratiness, or provide a
caver for mental lethargy and an atlitude to shirk or avoid dealing with inconvenient
arguments ?

0.38. Do you consider it necessary that the presiding officer should, when he allows or
disallows a question objected (0 by the adverse party, record an order giving his reasons ?
Tn case he allows a question despite such objection, is it, in your view, desirable that he
should record the question and answer with a note that it was objected to but has been
allowed after over-ruling the objection ?

CIVIL CASES

0. 39, What, in your opinion, should be the normal time within which civil suit of
different, categories should be disposed of, and beyond which it should be considered an
old one?
Q.40, How far is delay in civi] cases due to—

(9) delay in the service of process ?

{6) non-ulilisation of the provisions relating to tho examination of the partis
before the framing of issues or provisions provided for interrogatories or dis-
covery, inspection and production of documents ?

(०) lengthy evidence and eross-examination ?
(व) large nomber of witnesses on the same point ?

Would you suggest uny remedies to improve the situation in this regard 7?

Q. 41, How far has the congestion af cases in each court led to delay in disposal ?

Q.42. What should be ihe normal workload far each of the different categories of
courts ?

Q.43, Do you agree that in osder to avoid needless technical defences, the provisions of
section 80. of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and analogous provisions in other enact-
meals, requiring notice of suit to the Government and public authorities, should be
deleted? “In case section 80 is retained, would you suggest any modification therein ?

Q. 44, Should the presiding -fficer take a more active part in relation to evidence, instead
of adhering 10 the present practice whereunder the presiding officer leaves it generally
to the parfies fo fead such evidence as they think fit?

09-45. It haa been suggested that in civil cases, a patty should not be allowed to produce
too many witnesses’ for proving the same fact and that the court should be given power
to disallow the production of too many witnesses on the same fact.

What are your views in the matter ?

0. 46. There is a suggestion that a civil court should be empowered, on being satisfied
at any stage that the balance of probability was overwhelmingly in favour of the plain-
tiff, to pass a provisional decree in favour of the plaintiff, subject to its being set aside
‘by the final judgment in the case,

Do you agtee with the suggestion ?

0.47, Should there be some machinery for negotiating settlement between the parties
during the course of the (rial ?

Order 16, Rule 1 and 1A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1906:


oF

Q. 48. It bas been suggested thei in suits for eviction, damages for use and occupation Mecano profits,

premises’ should be fixed at the real [etting value in the market, plus 10% thereat,
insiead of tho rent for which the premises were Jast let, in order to discourage frivolous
defences which are often advanced merely for prolonging tho disposseasion of the
tenant.

Whal ate your views in ibe matter?

0.49. Have you any suggestion regarding the provisions relating to costs?? How far Costs in frivolous

would you favour an amendment of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, to the effect that
in civil cases,’ if the suit or defence should be found by the court to bo frivolous, the
court should have power to direct the party concerned to to the ppossite party,
his costs on an actual basis and not merely on the basis of the legal taxable costs?

caste,

0. 50. Would you favour the insertion in the Code of Civil, Procedure, 1908 of 2 छा०- Refund of court

on withdca-
wal or compro:

vision to the effect that where a civil suit is withdrawn or compromised before hear
ing of arguments, there should
(a) a refund of half of the court fees on the plaint-if the yuic be withdrawn or com-
promised before the commencement of evidence and after that refund of one-
fourth of the court fees on the plaint;

{b) taxing of only balf of the legal costs 7

(2.51. Tt has been suggested that there should be insetted in the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, a provision empowering the court to incorperate, in a decree for money, a direc~
tion that if the debtor does not execute the judgment within a specified ‘iod, interest
will be calculated at an increased rate according to a scale linked with the petiod of
delay.

What aie your views in the matter?

0. 52. Tt has been suggested that the setting up of a single executing court for a parti-
cular local area would make for specdy and effective execution of decrees. Do you
agree with the suggestion or do you cnvisage apy practical difficulties in its
émplementation 7

Smali cavses

0.53. (8) What is your experience as to delay in disposal of cases in smalt causes court?
y decided at the first heating, or ate adjournmeat: granted very
frequently 7

(b) it has been suggested ihar adjournments in the Courts of Small Causes should
net, in amy casc, excced a month, to ensure expeditious disposal of cases,
Do you agree with the suggestion ?

(०) Have you come across cases of delay in courts of Small Causes in the filing
of written statements, preparation of judgments, or other matters vital to the
progress and conchision of the trial

CRIMINAL CASES
Q.54. Do you consider the replacement of the Code of Criminal, Procedure, 1898, by
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, as having rested in eapediting the disposal of

0. 55. How far would you suggest an extension of the procedure for imposing a penalty
or fine without arial, on the plea of the accused sent by post ७ the court, io cases not
covered by the present law?*

0. 56, Is the procedure under sections 208-20% of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
10 regard to sessious cases, an imptovement over the pre-4973 position from the point of
view of ensuricg ६ speedy and fair iziai of the accused ?

[Under the Code of 1973. elaborate commilment’ proceedings in sessions cases
are abolished. When the case is institued on police report, the Magisteate taking ca, gai
zance does only the preliminary work of supplying the accused with copies of the police
Teport, statements of witnesses, documents etc.. and then seads the case to the court of
session. When the case is instituted otherwise than on a police report, the Magestrate
makes a preliminary inquiry and then commits the case to the Court of Sessions,}

Q. 57. If, in your view, the procedure in the Code of 1973 in regard to sessions cases
is not ax improvement,-—

(ay should the pre-1973 pasition be restored, by adopting section 207A of the
‘ode of 1898 as inserted in 1955 and by making suitable modifications in
various sections of the Code of 1973; or

(01 should the pre-1955 position be restored, by adopting sections 207 et seq of
Code of 1398 as they stood before 1955; or

लि is it, in your opinion, yet too early to judge the eect of the change made by
8 Cade of 19
12, section 212) of the Code of Civil Proceduce, 1908, defining “mesne profits”.

*Order 20A of the Code of Civil Procedure, inseried in 1976, and also section 35 of
the Code,

‘Section 356 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
‘Sections 206 and 263. Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973

Interest at eahanc-

ed rate.

Single executing

court,

Delay in
causes,

small

New Code of Cri-
aninal Procedure,

Plea of guilty by
Sh

Sessions casa

on: J

Whether old
tion should
Testoted

ए०अ-
be



Evidence before
२0015 af session.

Medical experts.

Compensation to
victims of crime.

Finality of cer-
tain misceliane-
ous orders.

Avoidance of
technical = argu-
meats 88 to non-
compliance.

98

0. 58. It has been suggested that the provision in the new Code oi Criminal Proveduie.
1973.! requiring the evidence in trials before the court of session to be taken down ord
narily is te form of question and answer causes delay and should be ceplaced by a

provision to the effect that ordinarily it should be taken down in the form of narrative
What are yout views in the matter?

0. 59. These: is a suegestion that in trials other than those for murder, the report of an
oflicial medical expert as to the medical examination of any person or the post-mortem
examination of any deud bady should be permitted to be given in evidence, by making a
suitable addition fo the present section? relating to depositions of such experts, subject
fo the ripht of tne prcnccution or the defence to calt the expert evidence,

Do you agree with the suggestion ?

(0. (७, Do yeu favour any further enlargement of the Power of the court to require the
oniender to properly compensate the victim of the crime 7

Q.61. 1 has been suggesied thai there should be inserted in the Code of Criminal
Procedury-a provision t® the eficct. that amy person aggrieved by an order of the
Magisirate under ihe following seclions of the Code of Crimimal Procedure, 1973, may
uppeal to the Court of Sessions and that the order passed in such appesi shall not be
subject to further appeal or revision:

Section Topic
Section 125 Maintenance.
Section 127 Alteration in maintenance.
Section 138 Public Nuisances
Section 145 Dispute as to immovable property

Do you agree with the suggestions ?
GENERAL .
8, What changes, if any, would you suggest in the Limitation Act, the Evidence Act

‘the Procedural Codes in order to avoid the raising of technical arguments réisting 10
son-compliance with their provisions ?

{Nores—Under the Li tion. Act, 1963, if a swt is barred by limitation! 1: it
ahall be dismissed, although limitation has not been set up as a defence. Hf technical
arguments raising the question of nomcompliance with the provisions of the Act are to
be discouraged or minimised, one possible device that could be adoped is to provide
that an Sbjection as to limitation, if not taken af ifs cariiest opport, i be dis-
allowed. In this connection, reference muy 2 Be
Code of Civil Procedure, 1808, as ७ cbjections

The question to be considered is whether 2 simiiar provision should be inserted
in regard 10 the law of limitation, by amending the reievant portion of section 3°, Limita~
tion Act, 1963, and also by inserting a provision barring dismissal ot the suit uoless the
defence of limitation ‘was Taised at the eatliest possible opportunity.

Section 21 of the amended Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 reads as follows: —

“24. Objections to jurisdiction— .

11) No objection 8६ to the place of suing shal! be allowed by any Appeilate or
Revisional Court unless such objection. was taken in the Court of first instance at the
earliest possible opportunity and in all cases where issues are settled at or befere such
settlement, and unless there has been a consequent failure of justice.

12) No objection as to the competence of 2 Court with reference to the pecuniary
limits of its jurisdiction shall be allowed by any Appellate or Revisiona! Court

“unless such objection was taken in the Court of first instance at she earliest possible
opportunity, and, in all cases where issues ave settled, at or before such setiiement, and
unless there has been a consequent failure of justice,

(3) No objection as te the competence of the executant Court with reference to
the local limits of its jurisdiction shall be allowed by any Appellate or Revisional Court
uniess such objection was taken in the executive Court at the éatliest possible opportunity,
and unless there has been a consequent failure of justice.”

'Sectidn 27672), Code of Criminal Procedure. 1973,
*Section 291, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
‘Section 357, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
“Section 3(1), Limitation Act, 1963.

Section 21, Code of Civil Procédure, 1908. quoted infra.
‘Section 3, Limitation Act, 1963.



99

FRIVOLOUS OBJECTION AS AN OFFENCE
Q.63, The following suggestion has been made in order to discourage frivolous objec: Deliberate  disre-

tions in regard to civil claims: on ee of opt saab

If s party claiming to be entitled to relief of a civil aalure serves due notice on ibe offence.
other patty demanding such. relief and the other party fails to comply with such notice
within a reasonable ume without just cause or excuse even when it ‘4 in a position to
woorply with the dotice, where ic is proved beyond reasonable doubt thas there was no
ake question of fact or law which could possibly have supported such deliberate dis-
regatd of legal rights and that the failure to comply with the notice was dishonest. Of
course, the burden of proving all these ingredients aay, as usna), lie on the prosecution

. Do you agree with the suggestion? IL so, for what classes of claims would you
consider the enactment of such a provision appropriate ?

0.64. It has been suggested thut acbitration sbauld be made compulsory in certain types Compulsory ar
of casea. Have you any suggestions to make in this regard? Who should, in auch tration.
an ¢vent, be the authority to appoint the arbitrator ?

NG SPARIO/PLW/8 2/1 /LAW/84-3 5-6000