"aaa
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

SEVENTY-EIGHTH REPORT

ON

CONGESTION OF UNDER-TRIAL.
PRISONERS IN JAILS.

FEBRUARY, 1979


DO. No. F.2(19)/78-L.C.

New Dethi-110001,
February 2, 1979.

My dear Minister,

I forward herewith the Seventy-cighth Report of the Law Commission of India
relating to congestion of undertrial prisoners in jails.

As mentioned in the first paragraph of the Report, the subject was taken up for
consideration by the Law Commission at the instance of the Government.

I must place on record my appreciation of the assistance rendered by Shri P. M. Bakshi,
Member-Secretary, in the preparation of this Report.

With kind regards,

Yours sincerely

(Sd./-)
(H. R. KHANNA).

SHRI SHANTI BHUSHAN,
Minister of Law, Justice and

Company Affairs,
New Deum.

1525 LAD ND}78


Chapter

Cuaprer 1
Cuarrer 2
Cuarter 3
CGiuaprer 4
Curren 5
Caarren 6
Cuarrer. 7
CGiarrer 8
CHaprer 9
Appendices
APPENDIX 1
APPENDIX 2
APPENDIX 3
APPENDIX 4

CONTENTS
Topte
Introductory . . . . . .

Present law, comparative position and questions for consideration

Expeditious disposal of cases . . .
Expansion of the category of bailable offences
Amount of bond . . . . . .

Release on bond without sureties .

Obligation to appear and surrender— violation to be an offence

Arrangements for detention. . 9. *"

Summary of conclusions and recommendations

List of offences punishable under the Indian Penal Code which, according to the recommen-

dation in this Report, should be made bailable

Figures of under-trial prisoners in certain jails

Page

29
30

Present position as to certain offences affecting national security or economy under special

laws. . . . .

Extract of section 53, Criminal Justice Act, 1972 (Eng.)‘,

APPENDIX 5 Sections providing for release on personal bond

32
33


Cuarrer 1
INTRGDUCTORY |
I. SCOPE AND GENESIS

1.1 The Government of India,” concerned at the large number of undertrial
prisoners in Indian jails, has brought to the notice of tho Law Commission the
neod for undertaking suitable yudicial reforms and changes in the law, in order to
deal with the probiem posed thereby. The material forwarde|_to us in’ this behalf

ives certain statistics as to undertria! prisoners in India. A’ preliminary exami-
nation has disclosed the appalling nature of the problem posed by the pressure
of a 18180 numoer of undercriat prisoners in jails and the inordinately long time
they have to spend before the conclusion of trial, Further detailed examination
was accordingly undertaken, and certain statistics wore also collected and scruti-
nised.? This Keport incorporates our recommendations on the subject.

1.2, There can be no doubt that a large percentage of the inmates of our jails
today is constituted by undertrial prisoners. Jails should primarily be meant for
lodging convicts and not for housing persons under trial, [he evils of contamination
in jail are woll known. This renders it desirable that the two classess of prisoners
should be housed sepearately—a matter to which we shall revort Jater.? However
provision of separate accangements for ‘housing them may take some time. More-
over, even after such arrangements are made, it will be necessary to ensure that

deprivation of liberty of the underirial prisoners for a long time is avoided, if it

ts avoidable without injury to pubtic interest.

Actual realities impel us to find solutions to the excessive nuniber of uader-
trial prisoners in Jails.

1.3. Wo shail first deal with certain matters of an introductory, historical and
general character and the present law on the subject. Certain developments of
comparative interest relating to detention pending trial will be briefly noticed. We
then proceed to a consideration of the issues that arise.
of prison administration in India has been the
nonce during the last seventy years 07 50.1 Some
discuss the question of overcrowding in prisons
number of undertrial prisoners, When the Code
of Criminal Procedure was 185६ reviewed, the topic of bail, alongwith other topics
ucumag pact of that Coae, recelvea due altentlisnim the Law Cominission.® But
the question now under consideration was not posed in the pointed form in which
it has now presented itself.

IL. MAGNITUDE OF THE PROBLEM

1.5. Figures made ayailable to us ‘reveal not only that the number of under-
triat prisoners in Andian jails is large, but also that their porcentage is high cnough.
‘fhus, on Ist January, 1975, the total population of prisoners in Indian Jails was
2,20,146 as against a total capacity of 1,83,369. Out of these 2,20,146 the aumber
of Under trial prisoners was 1,26,772. This represents a percentage of 57.58.
Figures as on 1-4-1977 in the jails are as follows? :

1.4, 116 general question
subject-matter of study more tha:
though not au, of these studies,
and the probiem of the growing

Undertrials « . . . . . . . 1,01,083
Convicted - . . . . . . . 83,086
१९ « . . . . . 1,84,169

{Undericials thus constitute 54.9 p

April, 1977)

3 Papers forwarded by the Ministry of Home 7 Papes Forwarded by tho Ministry of Home Affairs file No. V. 20012/3/78 GAP IV,
under Home Ministry’s note of 2nd November, 1978. पु

2 For statistics, see para 1.5 and 1.6, lifra and Appendix 2.

* Chapter 8, infra.

“Para 1.16 to 1.22, infra.

५ Law Commission of India, 41st
39, pages 315 to 322,

* Figures contained in the papers forwarded by the Ministry of Home Affairs file No.

(20012/3/78-GAP-L1V.
1 Information obtuined from the National Institute of Social Defence, New Delhi, on

18-21-1979.

Report (Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898), Chapter

eecent of the total jail population on Ist

Genesis of the
Report.

Possible remedi-
es to prevent in-
termixing.

Scheme of discus-
sion.

Previous studies.

High Percentage
of underfrial pri-
soners.


Finance Com-
mission's Report

Material for-
warded by a
senior Police

न

Interval between
commencement
of detention and
final termination
lings.

Principles of
Jurisprudence
and penology.

Conflicting con-
siderations.

Problem not
confined 10 India.

2

We havo also collected" figures from certain selected; central jails as on ist Sep
tember, 1978. These figures substantially confirm’ the position stated above, namely
undertrial prisoners constitute; a large prercentage of the total jail population.

1.6. We would also like tc quote certain figures given by the

Finance Commission in its_Report.? The following is the relevant paragraph :
“39, We turn now to the need for additional jail capacity. The information
we have received on the jail population on different dates, and the jail capa-
cities is given in Appendix,V. II (ii), It is clear that the jails in several States
are overcrowded. We have also taken care to look into the proportions of
undertrials to the total jail population in the states. We find that this proportion
is very high in several States, for instance; Assam, Bihar, Orissa, Uttar
Pradesh, West Bengal, rising in some cases to 80 per cent of the total inmates.
While making provisions for additional jail capacity for the long term, we can-
not obviously allow for such high proportions of undertrials. For additions
to jail capacity, we haye limited the proportion of undertrials to a norm of
not more than 40 percent of the total jail population. The basis adopted for
making the provisions for additional jail accommodation has been indicated
in Appendix V. 13.”

1.7, We may also mention that a,study made a member of the National
Police Commission? also bears out every aspect of jail conditions emphasised by
us in this Chapter--the high percentage of undertrials, the overctowding caused
thereby, the long duration of detention and the unsatisfactory conditions.

वा, INTERVAL AND BAIL

1,8. Some interval of time must always elapse, in the criminal process bet-
ween the decision to 1016 a person for trial and the termination of the trial. What
is to be done with the person who is charged with a crime but not yet convicted
of it ? This question has engaged the serious attention of those who have had to
formulate legislative policy in regard to the criminal process.

1.9. Two countervailing principles of jurisprudence, and one principle from
penology, scem to underlie the special provisions made tor unconvicted persons
in custody’. First, unconvicted prisoners must be presumed to be innocent.s As
such, it is inappropriate that they should be subjected to greater harassment than
is warranted by Jaw, or that they should be detained with convicted persons, or that
they should be deprived of any rights that pertain to non-accused persons other than
those deprivations that are inherent in the very process of detention.

The presumption of innocence (on which these proposition$ are based) is,
however, tempered by a second principle, namely, that the course of justice must
proceed unhindered by the activities of those who would seek to subvert it.

These are tho two countervailing principles of jurisprudence. Then, there
is the basic principle of penology that those not contaminated should be protected
from baneful contact with those who have been adjudged to be guilty of crime.

1.10. The question whether the detention of unconvicted persons is ‘justi-
fied’, is by its very nature, incapable of resolution in a simple manner, A judgment
has to be made between several conflicting considerations, to some of which we -
have made a reference above.

IV. PROBLEM NOT CONFINED TO INDIA

1.11, The problem of a large number of undertrial prisoners does not seem
to be confined to India, In regard to the U.S. A., for example, it has been stated*—

“The negative by-products of judicial delay are many. The number of defendants

incarcerated and awaiting trial is reaching alarming proportions in many large
cities, and detention facilites are dangerously overcrowded. The law

3 Appendix 2.
3 Bighth Finance Commission, Report (1978), page 103, Chapter 10, para 39,
ज Letter addressed to Chairman of the Law Commission, received in Jaunuary, 1979,
५ Compare King and Morgan, A Taste of Prison (1976), pages 31, 32, 33.
* Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, 1970 National Jail Census ((971), page 1,
(90५ d ty National Advisory Commission on Criminal Justice reproduced by Incairdi and Seiga!
(Ed) Emerging issues (1977) pages 66-67.


3

Enforcement Assistance Administration National Jail Census in 1970 revealed
that 52 percent of the. jail inmates were awaiting trial. Pre-trial _ incarceration
is costly to the individual, for it denies him income and, in fact may cause
him to lose his job. Extended incarceration resulting from judicial delay is also
costly to the public, since pre-trial detainees must be fed and supervised.”

1.12. Some time ago, azconference_on_detention was_held in England under Bail-British
the auspices of the British fhstitute of Human Rights (fluman Rights ‘Trust).2 Conference.
In his concluding address, the Chairman of the conference, Lord_Kilbrandon made
the following observations on the subject of delay, which are pertinent:—

“Delays

Again something must be said about the appalling delay that goes on
awaiting trial. At the beginning of the eighteenth century the Scottish Par-
liament passed a law, which is strictly enforced to the present day, that once
you have committed a man in custody for trial, his trial has to be completed
within 110 days, otherwise he walks out a free man. Now if you made such a
proposal in most jurisdictions today it would be said that it was impossible. But
it is not impossible: it goes on in Scotland, It simply imposes a certain amount
of discipline on prosecuting counsel to see they don’t overload their indiot-
ments; and to see that they get on with the work. The delays that go on in
England are not so bad as on the continent, but certainly they are had enough
and really { think something of this sort is probably needed.”

1.13, In certain countries, the feeling has even been growing that the decision Decision on me-
of the court on the merits may sometimes itself depend on the detention or reloase fits of bail.
of the accused pending trial. “To continue to demand a substantial bond which
the defendant is unable to secure, raises considerable probloms for the equal aé-
ministration of the Jaw”.?

4 1.14, The question of persons in prison has received attention at length in the YN. studi
United Nations, The United Nations held the First United Nations Congress “> ‘> Studies.
on the Prevention of Crime and Treatment of Offenders at Geneva in 1955, as a

follow-up of the work of the earlier International Penal and Penitentiary Commission.

The Congress on Prevention of Crime approved the United Nations Standard Mi-

nium Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, offering guidelines on the basis of which

member nations could modify their national practices in the treatment of prisoners.

1.15. Thereafter, a number of developments have taken place in the inter- .
national sphere. While it is not intended to burden this Report with details of Human Rights.
such studies, it is appropriate to mention,that incceasing recognition of human rights
ia particular, civil liberties and human sights in the cimiaal provess—lends — in-
terest to the subject-matter of this Report.

VY. EARLIER STUDIES IN INDIA.

1.16. {nu India the first comprehensive study" of prison problems was made by Earlier studies of

the Indian Jails Committee in 1919-1920. The Committee made several recom- prison problems.
‘mendations concerning prison administration, including a recommendation that
seperate jails should be set apart for the various categories of prisoners, and a minimum
‘floor area of 75 sq. yards should be provided per inmate in prison construction.
' The Committce deprecated overcrowding, and recommended strict limits for each
| prison, the creation of Children’s Courts for hearing all cases of juvenile delin-
है quents and their housing in Remand Homes instead of adult prisons, and the in-
; troduction of probation of offenders, in which voluntary individuals could also
help. it suggested that short-term imprisonment should be replaced by probation,
‘fine or warning or other substitutes such as work in licu of imprisonment.

1.17. In 1923, section 562 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1898, was amend-  poyeto पु
1 facili 4 हु “पदक किशन) pments in
‘ed to facilitate the suspension of scntencos in selected cases. The Presidencies 1923 and upto
of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras enacted Children Acts in the early twenties. 1947.

Fs 1 British Institute of Human Rights, Detention : Minimum Standards of Treatment (1975,)
{page xv. ,

i 3 Bandy ४. U.S. (1961) 7 L. Ed. 9, 11 82S. C. 11 (opinion in Chambers —Mr. Justic
: Douglas),

* Material based on Working Group on Prisoner, Report (1972-1973), para 1.2.1 and 1,2.2°
‘ * Working Group on Prisons, Report (1972-1973), para 1.2.3 aad 124,


4

4
Developnierits 1.18, With the promulgation of the Government of tndia Act, 1935, prison
between 1935 became a transferred subject under the autonomous Provinces. Bombay, adras
and 1948. United Provinces and C.P. and Berar passed probation of Offenders Acts during

1936-1938, The United Provinces Jail inquiry Committee, 1928-29, the Committee
oa Prison Reforms in Mysore, 1940-41, the U.P. Jail Reforms Committee, 1946,
and the Bombay Jail Reforms Committee, 1946-48 were set up to devise measures
to improve prison administration.

¢ Post 1948 deve- 1.19. After independance, the Constitution of India included “Prisons, reforma-
lopments, tories, Borstal Institutions and other institutions of a like nature, and persons de-
tained therein; arrangements with other States for the use of Prisons and other
institutions” at entry 4 in the State list in the Seventh Schedule. More Jail Reforms
Committees were appointed during the last 25 years. These include the East Punjab
Jail Reforms Commiittec, 1948-49, the Madras Jail Reforms Committee, 1950-51,
the Jail Reforms Committee, Orissa, 1952-55, the Jail Reforms Committee, Tra-
vancore Cochin State, 1953-55, the Uttar Pradesh Jail Industries Inquiry Commit-
tec, 1955-56, the Rajasthan Jail Reforms Commission, 1964, the Jail Manual Re-
vision Committee, Delhi, 1969, the Bihar Jail Reforms Committee, 1972 and
the Jail Code Reviston Committee, West Bengal, 1972.

Report by Dr. 1.20. In the fifties, Government of India invited technical assistance from
Reckless, the United Nations, and Dr. W. G. Reckless spent some time in India in 1951-
52 to suggest ways and means of prison reforms. He recommended, inter alia,
the getting out of juvenile delinquents from adult jails, courts and police lock-ups;
the development of whole-time probation and after-care services; the establishment
of revising boards for the selection of prisoners for premature release; the establish-
ment of new jails to perform specialised functions; revision of the jail manuals-
training programmes for the warders and superior staff of prisons; introduction
of legal substitutes for short sentences; ९ xpedition in Police and court action to reduce
the number of undertrial prisoners and the period of their remand to Jail; esta-
blishment of an Advisory Bureau for Correctional Administration at the centre;
> development of a professional conference a.nong the superior staff members con-
cerned with the care and treatment of juvenile and adult offenders; and establish-
ment of integrated departments or correctional administration, including jails,
Borstal, probation and after-care.

Jail Manual 1.21, In 1937, the Government of India set up the All India Jail Manual
* Committee. Committee, which made a very detailed scrutiny of prison problems and drafted,
along with their Report, a Model Prison Manual for the guidance of the State
Governments in 1959,
22. {n 1972-1973, the Working Group on Prisons gave a comprehensive
Working Groups Report on the subject of prison administration. Tne Working Group made the
on Prisons. following comments in its Report? :

“The prison administration in the country is generally in a depressing state.
Most prison buildings are old and ill-equipped and many prisons are heavily
‘overcrowded. Convicts and uidertrials are lodged in the same institutions
throughout; the adults, adolescents, juveniles, women and lunatics are also
generally confined in common institutions and there is a serious lack of separate
institutions for these various categories of prisoners’’.

VI. POSSIBLE REMEDIES

t 1.23. This brief discussion shows the magnitude of the problem of over-
Meputes pre crowded prisons as well as its importance in the international setting. The problem
could be met, in part, by finding more effective ways of dealing with convicted
offenders. This, however, is a matter with which we are not concerned in this
Report. The Report is concerned with undertrial prisoners.

soners,

! 1.24, Detention in prison in the case of undertrial prisoners is generally the

fa ot al, ४ result of arrest for an alleged offence not followed by the grant of bail. It becomes,
therefore, material to consider at some length the law relating to grant of bail.

Accordingly we propose to consider in this Report the present law as to bail, and

the changes that may be needed therein.

1 Working Group on Prisons, Report (1972-1973) , para 1.3.1 to 1.3.4.
* Working Group on Prisons, Report (1972-1973), para 1.1.1.


5

1.25. Under the present Jaw, any answer to the question whether a person
Mested for an offence would be able to secure release on bail mainly depends®
fA the offence with which he is charged (bailable or non-bailable), the discretion

rcised by the bfficer or court (in respect of non-bailabie offences) and (assuming

६, in law, he can be released on bail), his capactity to furnish the security or per-
Be nal recognisance required by the officer or court. It becomes therefore necessary
B spread the canvas wide and to go into the Jaw relating to bail in some detail.

1.26. There are three types of undertrial prisoners who are inmates of jails ;

(1) Persons being tried for non-bailable offences in respect of whom the courts
have declined to pass an order for their release on bail.

(2) Persons being tried for non-bailable offences, in respect of whom courts
have passed order for bail but who, because of the difficulty of finding
appropriate surety or because of some other reason, do not furnish the bail
bond. पु

(3) Persons who are being tried for bailable offences but who, because of the.

difficulty of finding appropriate surety or because of some other reason
do not furnish the bail bond.

» itis plain that if we want to reduce the burden of undertrial prisoners on jails
we shall have to deal with all the above three categories.

Vil. AVOIDANCE OF DELAY

1.27, We shall,in due course, make our recommendations as to the measures
E could be adopted to reduce the number of undertrial prisoners in each of the
categories mentioned above. But we would, at this stage, like to emphasise the im-
tance of one factor which is common to all these categories-the need to reduce
delay in the disposal of cases. We have, in an earlier Report, already made
our recommendations’ for reducing arrears and delay in the disposal of cases in
‘trial courts. We shall Jater in this Report* mention a few important aspects of delay
which have a vital bearing on the problem with which this Report is concerned.
At this stage, we would fike to reiterate the need for implementing our recommen-
‘dations already made in that Report, which should go a long way in reducing the
'duration of detention.
i

Later in this Reports, we shatl deal in detail with a few important aspects of delay
having a vital bearing on the problem dealt with in the present Report. At this
stage, we would merely like to reiterate the need for implementing the recommen-
dations made by us in the earlier Report on delay and arrears in trial courts,

VI, MEANING OF UNDERTRIAL
: 1.28. . Before closing this introductory Chapter, we may make it clear that
in this Report we are using the expression ‘undertrial prisoners’ in a wide sense
even to include persons who are in judicial custody on remand during investigation.
For statistical’ purposes, it would not be possible to treat them distinctly from
persons whose trial has actually commen

+ Para 2.5, infra.
* Para 1.26, supra.
* Law Commission of India, 77th Report (Delay and Arrears in Trial Coutts).
* Chapter 3, infra,

* Chapter 3, infra.

Factors __ deter-
mining right to
bail.

Three types of
undertrial—pri-
soners.

Importance of
avoiding delay.

Meaning of un-
derttial in this
Report.


Legislative au-

thority for de-
tention and re-
10336.

History of bail.

Aspects
necessity.

of

_who though “committed fo

CHAPTER 2

POSITION AND QUESTIONS FOR
SIDERATION

1. BAIL : THE CONCEPT AND HISTORY

2.4. Legislative authority for the detention of persons in prison for a suspected
offence is provided by sections 167 and 309(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure
1973. The Code, however, makes a clear distinction between detention in custody
before taking cognizance and detention in coustody after taking cognizance. The
former is covered by section 167, and the latter by section 309 of the Code. The

two are mutually exclusive.

PRESENT LAW, COMPARATE
Cc

he release of such persons is primarily to be sought
ail-sections 436 et seq., which deal with bail. We
lating to detention’ and release.”

Legislative authority for th
in the provisions relating to b:
shall deal in due courses with the provisions rel:

2.2, The concept of bail has a long history. It would appear that historically,
at least in England, the institution of bail arose because of necessity. When the
administration of justice was in its infancy, imprisonment for the purposes of
preliminary inquiry continued at least till the Sheriff held his ‘tourn’, and in more
serious cases, till the arrival of the justices, which might be delayed for years.

Trials were delayed by the infrequent visits of itinerant justices and many accu-
sed persons died because of insanitary conditions in the prisons. {t was there-
fore a matter of the utmost importance to be able to obtain a provisional release from
custody.? It was this necessity which led to the institution of bail-the need (0 free
untried prisoners waiting for the delayed trials conducted by travelling justices,
Certain ad hoc arrangements were made by the Sheriffs for release on personal re-
cognizance with or without bond or on the promise of a third party to assume res-
ponsibility for the appearance of the accused. It was in 1275 that the practice of
the Sheriffs 10 grant bail was standardised.* This power was later transferred to the
justices in 1360--1361.% The Statute of Westminster (1275) specified the conditions
‘under which pre-trial release was permissible and limited the power of the Sheriffs

ity in each case.* The third party or surety had to assume

to determine sufficient securit
a personal responsibility for the appearance of the accused, on penalty of forfeiture

of his own property.
The Bill of Rights’ guaranteed a right against ‘‘excessive bail”.
8 made certain provisions for discharge on bail of persons
x high treason or felony plainly expressed in warrant
petition be indicted as herein mentioned”’,
In course of time, the granting or denying of bail in England became almost
completely a discretionary function of the judiciary, and (subject to certain special
limitations) this substantially remained the position until 1976. In 1976 was passed
the Bail Act, which confers a right to bail subject to certain exceptions. We shall
mention its important provisions in due course.”
2.3. Thus, the problem with which we are now faced is not a new one, though
the nature and dimensions of the problem may vary from time to time and country
to country, It is necessity that requires 8 second look at the law.

The Habeas Corpus Act’

shall not on

4 Para 2.6, infra.

2 Para 2.5 and 2.8, ef seq, infra.

3 Stephen, History of the Criminal” Law
4 The Statute of Westminster, 1275.

34 Edward 3.

in Bngland, Vol. 1, page 233.

® Statute of 13—1361, कि
* Note “Bail : An Ancient Practice Re-examined” (1961 ) 70 Yale L. JS 966.

2 The Bill of Rights (1689) 1 Williams & Mary 40.
5 Section 6, Habeas Corpus Act, 1679.
५ para 2.18 and 2.19, infra.

6


\

है

24. The position as to bail under the Code of 1898 was, in broad terms, as
ailows :

(1) For bailable offences, bail was a matter of right.

(2) For non-bailable offences, it was a matter of discretion,

(3) Bail shall not ordinarily be granted by the Magistrate if the offence i
punishable with death or imprisonment for life.

(4) The Court of Session and the High Court had ‘a wider discretion in regard
to bail.
Tho position has not been very materially altered by the Code of 1973, 50 far
8 the above broad propositions are concerned. In particular, the basic dichotomy
retween bailable and non-bailable offences has been maintained.

Jl. PRESENT POSITION

2.5. We do not propose to quote the text of the various sections of the pre~
ent Codé of Criminal Procedure, because the manner in which the arrangement
if matter’ appears in the Code, may act give a clear picture of the basic dichotomy
ietween bailable and non-bailable offences and salient features of the law applicable
0 offences in each category. For this reason, we prefer to analyse the contents
f the relevant sections —an analysis which involves a certain re-arrangement of the

The present position under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, as to the grant
f bail, may be thus stated, first generally, and secondly specially with reference to
# High Court and Courts of Session. This dischotomy in treatment becomes
peessary in view of the content of the legislative provisions on the subject.

General position
(1) For bailable offences, bail is a matter of right,? subject to certain qualifica-
ont be mated in due course. The person arrested must be informed of his right
> . नं
| The relevant provisions speak of a person other than one accused of a non-bail-
ble offence, but, for brevity, we use the words “bailable offences”

2. (2) As regards non-bailable offences a person accused of, or susfected of
ombailable offence, shall not be released on bail, if there appear to Ne 10800
tounds for believing that he has been guilty of any offence punishable with death-
f Imprisonment for life.4 There is, however, an important exception to this. The
may direct that even in such a case a person under the age of sixteen years
fany woman or any sick or infirm person accused of such an offence be released
a
4 (3) In other cases of accusation or suspected commission of a non-bailable
Fence, the court has a discretion to grant bail and the person may be released
4 but the discretion is regulated by certain express provisions, many of which,
1 effect, lead in favour of the grant of bail, while some might operate in the cont-
wy direction. These provisions are summarised below.

Provisions leaning in’ fayour of bail
@ The mere fact that an accused person may be required for being indenti-
rt witnesses during investigation shall not be sufficient ground for refusal to
ant bail “if he is otherwise entitled to be released on bail’ and gives an‘under-
‘ing that he shall comply with such directions as may be given by the court.?

(5) If it appears to the officer or court concerned at any stage of the investi-
ition, inquiry or trial (as the case may be), that there are no reasonable ‘grounds
. believing that the accused has committed a non-bailable offence but that there
8 sufficient grounds for further enquiry into his guilt, the accused shall, pending

3 Contrast section 337 with section 439, Cr. P.C. 1973.
® Section 436(1), main para, Cr.P.C. 1973.

3 Section $0(2), Cr.P.C. 1973.

3 Section 437(1), main para, Cr.P.C. 1973,

# Section 437(1), first proviso, Cr. P.C. 1973,

© Section 437(1), main para, Cr. P.C. 1973.

* Section 437(1), second proviso, Cr. P.C. 1973.

Position under
Code of Crimi-
nal © Procedure
as to grant of
bail.

Present position,


Provisions _im-
Resin time
its in regard
to cases of trial
for offences.

8
such enquiry, be released on bail (with sureties) or, at the discretion of such officer
or court, on personal bond.' .

(6) If, in any case triable by a Magistrate, the trial of a person accused of any
non-bailable offence is not concluded within a period of sixty days from the first
date fixed for taking evidence in the case, such person shall, if he is in custody during

the whole of the said period, be released on bail, to the satisfaction of the Magis-
trate, unless, for reasons to fae recorded in writing, the Magistrate otherwise directs.?

(7) There is a spacial provision for the grant of bail at the stage between con-
lusion of trial and judgment,’ in certain cases.

Provisions restrictive of discretion

(8) Certain conditions can b2 imposed while granting bail in respect of non-
bailable offences.*

(9) An officer or a Court releasing any person on bail for a non-bailable offence
shall record in writing his or its reasons’ for so doing’.

(10) Any Court which has released a person on bail for a non-bailable offence
may, if it considers it necessary so to do, direct, that such person be arrested and
commit him to custody’.

(11) The amount of the bond must not be excessive’.

Itigh Court and Court of Session

(12) The High Court and the Court of Session have a wider discretion in re-
pect of bail. These courts can grant bail even in respect of more serious offences*.
In some cases, notice is also required to be given to the Public Prosecutor’.
These courts can cancel bail granted to any porson™.

it. SOLICITUDE OF THE LAW

2.6. Our law of criminal procedure is not totally blind to the problem of time
spent before or awaiting (ial. Following provisions of the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1973 show its concern to keep that time within certain limits :

(1) Remand of the accused to custody during investigation is subject to an

aggregate limit prescribed by law", है

(2) As regards the time taken वी investigation, the Code!2, in the Chapter deal-
ing with investigation of offences, provides that every investigation
‘under this Chepter’ shall be completed without unnccessary delay.

(3) Remand of the accused to custody in the course of the trial is also regulat-
ed by another provision of the Code™.

(4) If, in the case of an offence triable by a Magistrate, the trial of a person
accused of any non-bailable offence is not concluded within 60 days, the
Magistrate (unless the Magistrate, for reasons to be recorded, otherwise
directs), must ielease the accused on bail.

(5) Time spent by the accused in custody during investigation, inquiry or trial
of the case is +¢-credited if the accused person is convicted and sentenced

to imprisonment.'*

4 Section 437(2), Ci
3 Section 437(6), Cr.P.C. 1973.
* Section 437(7), Cr.P.C. 1973.
« Section 4373), CrP.C. 1973.
5 Section 437(4), Cr.P.C. 1973.
© Section 4376), Cr.P.C. 1973.
7 Section 440(1), Cr-P.C. 1973.
* Section 439(1), Cr.P.C. 1973.
© Section 439(1), CrP.C. 1973.
3० Section 439(2), Cr.P.C. 1973.
ut Section 16702), Proviso (a), Cr.P.C. 1973.
See para 3.13, infra.
18 Section 173, Cr.P.C. 1973.
2 Section 309(2), first proviso, Cr.P.C. 1973.
16 Section 437(6), Cr.P.C. 1973; para 2.4, supra
48 Section 428, Cr. ९.०. 1973. दि

P.C, 1973.



9

2.7. In regard to proceedings for security for keeping the peace or for main-
taining good behaviour, the Code of Criminal Procedure directs that the proceed-
ing shall stand terminated if not completed within six months unless the Magistrate,
for reasons to be recorded, directs otherwise.

IV. MEANING OF ‘BAIL?

2.8. At this state, we may refer to the meaning of the word ‘bail’. ‘Bail’ is a
gencric expression used to describe judicial release from custodia legis. Normally
when a person is released on bail, he has not only to execute a personal bond, but
has also to furnish the bond of a surety. The bond is for a certain sum of money
which the surety undertakes to pay in case the person released on bail docs not present
himself during investigation or in court on the date of hearing in accordance with
tho terms of the bond. A question has, however, been raised whether ‘b
cover the release of a person on his own recognizance without his furnishing a surety’s
bond. Tho Supreme Court in a recent case® has held that ‘bail’ covers both release
on one’s own bond without surety and release on bond with surety.

V. PRINCIPLES FOR RELEASE ON BAIL IN CASE OF NON-

BATLABLE OFFENCES

2.9. As already noted,® in case of non-bailable offences, bail is not a matter of.

right, under the Code of Criminal Procedure. It is a matter of judicial discretion

regulated, in part, by the provisions of the Code* and, in part, by certain principles
that have been evolyed in the case law.

2.10. ‘The principles on which bail may be granted or cancefled have been
laid down in several pronouncements of the Supreme Court and are conveniently
collected in some judgments of High Courts also®, and need not be discussed for

the present purpose.

2.41. Whenever and application for Rail
decide whether the offence is bailable or non-bailable. If the offence is bailable,
there is no problem. If the offence is non-bailable, considerations such as the nature
and scriousness of the offence, the character of the evidence, circumstanccs
peculiar to the accused, a reasonable possibility of the presence of the accused
not teing secured, reasonable apprehension of the witnesses being tempered with,
tho larger interests of the public or the State and similar other considerations should
be taken into account before granting bail’.

2.12. The Code of 1898 made no express provision for cancellation of the
bail granted under section 496. Nonetheless, i was held that if, at any subsequent
stage, it is found that any person is intimidating, bribing or tampering with the evi-
denco or attempting to abscond, the High Court has inherent power to cause him
to be arrested’. This power could be invoked in exceptional cases® when the High
Court is satisfied that the ends of justice would be defeated unless the accused is
committed to custody. Such power was preserved by section 561A of the Cr. P.C.
1898. The person so committed could not (as a matter of right) ask for his release
on bail, but the High Court may subsequently grant him bail. In the present Code
the matter is governed by an express provision’.

VI. PURPOSE. AND AMOUNT

2.13. The next question relates to the amount of bail bond. The purpose
of bail and the question of amount are connected with cach other.

made to a cowt, it has first. to

2.14. Tho purposes of bail ponding trial!” in criminal cases are to avoid un-
necessary hardship to accused persons some of wham may be ultimately found not
ily, and to permit the unhampered proparation of the defence and, at the sam

Hy me, to ensure his presence on the various dates of hearing.

३ Section 116(6), Cr.P.C. 1973.

3 Moti Ram vy. State of Maliya Pralsh, AAR. 1978 S.C. 1594 (November Issue).
* Para 2.5, supra,

« Para 2.5, ef seq.

3 State v. Tukaram, (1975) 78 Bom. L.R, 411 (reviews cases).

* State v. Captain Jagjit Singh, A.A.R. 1962 . 253.

1 Talab Haji Mussain ४. M. P. Mondkar, AAR, 1958. 8.0", 376.

© Ratilal Bhawji v. Asstt. Collector of Customs, Bombay, A.LR, 1967. S.
© Section 439(2) Cr. P.C. 1973,

2० 01. Para 1.9. supra

1639,

Time limit for
certain _procecd-
ings relating to
bonds for
keeping the
peace or good
behaviour.

Meaning of ‘bail’,
whether it int

cludes personal
bond.

Bail for non-
bailable offences

Principles of

grant of — bail--
other judge-

ments.

Cancellation — of
bail.

Purpose of bail.


10

Amount of bail. | 2.15. Theoretically, the amount of bail should be set in the light of all the fac-
tors which bear upon the risk of the non-appearance of the accused for trial; the -
seriousness of the offence, the prima facie nature of case against him, the accused's
character, history, reputation. antecodonts and his capacity to secure bail. In prac-
tice, however, the paramoun. cunsideration which gencrafly prevails. is the nature
of the offence.

' . शा. THE CRIMINAL LAW AMENDMENT ACT, 1932
i Criminal daw 2.46. We have so far concorned ourselves with the Code of Criminal Procedure
Aa 982. In connection with the subject-matter of this Roport, it is also pertinent to deat with
. an important provision contained in a special Act, namely, the Criminal Law
Amendment Act, 1932.

, Section 10, 217. Section 10(2} of the Act provides that the State Government may, in
Criminal ow certain contingencies, declare that an offence punishahle under section 188 or section
‘Amendment 506 of the Penal Code shall be non-bailable.

"Ret, 1932.
. VII. COMPARATIVE POSITION.

| Right to bail in _ 2.18. Tn England, there is now, by the Bail Act, 1976, a goneral right to bail
England. which can be refused only for reasons to be recorded by the court,’ and only in cir-

॥ cumstances set out in the First Schedulo to the Act.? Loaving aside circumstances
Hot very material for the present purpose, the defendant need not be granted bail
if the court js satisfied that thero are substantial grounds for [bolieving that the
defendant, if released on bail (whether subject to conditions or not), would—

(8) fail to surrender to custody, or

(b) commit an offence while on bail, or

(c) interfere with witnesses or otherwise obstruct the course of justice, whether

in relation to himself or any other porson.

The systom of personal recognizance is replaced by a statutory duty to surrender
to custody, violation thereof boing an offence.*

249. Further, the English law also provides for the establishment of bait
hostels by probation and after-care committees, with financial assistance from” the
Home Office.*

IX. QUESTIONS FOR CONSIDERATION

1 Importance of 2.20. In the light of this brief survey of the position in India and England, let
financial deter- us now deal with the considerations that would be relevant in for mulating the ques-
fens in present tions for determination. The p-incipal object of bail is to ensure that the person

oe released on bail will attend the trial. This object, as:the law stands at present, is

sought to be achieved by adopting a particular mothod, wherein the financial
deterrent is an essential ingredient. Tho present provisions as to bail take into
account the following postulates :—

(a) need for a financial deterrent to ensure attendance of the person released

on bond;
(b) need to prevent tampering with evidence;
(c) desirability of not releasing on bail persons accused of serious offences.

at has arisen is how much importance is to be at
There could be a stringent approach and there
two approaches. contd be a fiberal approach. In support of a stringent approach, it could, in the
first place, be said that a person is not arrested unless there is some reliable material
to Indicate his guilt. Even after arrost, he is nt prosecuted in the absence ofa
prima facie case, $0 that he can, with some justification, be regarded as one*on whom
restraint can be justly imposed in the interest of ensuring attendance and preventing
tampering with the evidence, both being objectives vitally connected with the process

of justice.

Bail Hostels in
land.

Conflicting con- 2.21. The crucial question th:
siderations and tached to each of these factors.

1 Section 4, Ball Act, 1973, read with “ths First So vedute.
* For history of English law, see para 2.2, supra.

है gectlons 3 and 6, Bail Act, 1976.
«Section 53, Criminal Jus‘tee Act, 1972 (ina). See “Appendix 4.


i

Secondly, it could be said that apart from the risk of faikne to appear, there
he risk that he will repeat the alleged offence or commit some other offence, if

ywed to remain free, so that there will be danger to human life or property.

2.22, These arguments support a stringent approach. On the other hand,
favour of adopting a liberal approach, it could be stated that, in the first place,
yerson accused of crime is entitled to remain free until adjudged guilty, so long
als freedom does not threaten to subvert the orderly process of criminal justice,
4 that his freedom could have this adverse effect only if he deliberately fails to ap-
it at the time and place appointed for the purpose.

Secondly, pending formal adjudication of guilt, his status ought not to be
milated to that of a convicted person.

‘Thirdly, if kept in custody, he is impeded in preparing his defence, since, in cus-
ly, unrestricted consultation with counsel is difficult.

Fourthly, if he is kept in custody, his carning capacity is impaired, thereby
Ising hardship and economic deprivation.

Fifthly, there is a large class of persons for whom any bail is “excessive bail’?
ey ace the people loosely réferred to as indigents. For such persons, provisions

+ bail prove more or less illusory.

These arguments would show that the question has to be decided ona balance
conflicting considerations.

1.23. in fact, tho need for such balancing seems to flow from the nature of the
yjoct-matter. Like many other rules of law, rules as to bail are designed to re-
acile a conflict of interest —conflict of interests between accused persons, who
118 to be at liberty before and during trial, and the State, which insists that they
ould be present for proceedings in court. The adjustment of the conflict between
erest in personal freedom and interest in the efficient enforcement of criminal law
a delicate‘one.- No tendency should be encouraged to attach excessive weight to
2 second consideration to the detriment of the _ first one.

2.24, Onthe other hand, cases have also not been unknown where persons being |

ed for serious offences have, on being released on bail, misused their freedom
“$ntimidating the wilnesses and thus defeated the ends of justice. In such cases,
w remedy has been to deny them the bonefit of bail. The possibility of persons
puted of serious offences absconding also cannot be avoided. This is especially
te of foroigners and others given to trans-border offences, as also of those looking
r asylum in foreign countries.

Liberal
approach.

Reconciliation

between Jiberty
of the individual
and demands
of enforcement.

Misuse of free-
dom by persons
released on bail.

2.25. We can now briefly indicate the directions in which reform of the law poi je
uld be possibly considered. There are soveral matters which need (0 be discussed Kisaton conse

we have already indicated? and the problem requires to be considered in several
pects, mentioned below :
1. Enxpeditious disposal of cases.*
2, Expansion of the category of bailable offences.‘
3, Amount of bond,*
4, Release on bond without surcties.*
5. Penal provision for failure to appear and sutrendor.”
6, Arrangements for detention.* _
1 Seo para 1.9, supra. 7
$ Para 1.3, supra.
© Chapter 3, infra.
¢ Chapter 4, Infra,
# Chapter 5, infra.
* Chapter 6, infra.
१ Chaptes 7, infra,
* Chapter है, wha.



CHarreR 3
EXPEDITIOUS DISPOSAL OF CASES

: 3.1. Besides recommendations which pertain to the law relating to bail, there Earlier Report,

“are certain measures which should be taken up for reforming the present system
ifelating 0. undertrial prisoners.

A matter of the greatest importance to which we would like the highest priority
to be given is the reduction of delay and arrears in trial courts. In this context,
we would like to draw attention to our Report on the subject which we have already
forwarded to Government.? Some of the recommendations made in that Report
are concerned with criminal courts. If the problem of undertrial prisoners is to
be solved to any appreciable extent, implementation of those recommendations
should be regarded as a measure of the first importance.

in 3.2. Broadly speaking, the recommendations made in that Report can be Group of recom-

‘classified into the following groups :—
1 (a) recommendations for strengthening the subordinate judiciary both in point
of number and in point of its efficiency:

(b) recommendations for improving the machinery and equipment of trial
courts;

(c) recommendations stressing the need to pay adequate attention to certain
existing procedural provisions and administrative aspects, in order to avoid
delay;

(9) recommendations for amending the procedural law in order to streamline
the functioning of criminal courts.

3.3, We may first mention the recommendations made for strengthening the

jfubordinate judiciary. These are :

(०) Long delays in filling up vacancies of judicial officers should be avoided.2

(b) Every recommendation of the High Court for increase in judicial strength
should receive prompt consideration from the State Government and in
the absence of some compelling reasons, should not be turned down.®

(c) To clear the heavy backlog, the services of retired judicial officers known
for their integrity, efficiency and quick disposal should he utilised the
appointment being made only on the recommendation of the High Court.*

(d) In addition, some snecia! recruitment may have to be made from bright
young members of the Bar who have practised for at least seven years, for
the disposal of old cases. They should be given a higher start and, on
satisfactory performance. be ullimately absorbed in service as District and
Sessions Iudges or Additional District and Sessions Judges.®

(०) Some of the serving judicial officers can also fe asked to deal exclusively
with old cases." हि

(0 The number of additional courts should be such as fo make it possible that
all arrears are cleared within a period of about three years.”

We may state that these recommendations do not require elaborate changes
in legislation and it should be possible to implement them by suitable administralive
measures.

3.4. As regards improving the machinery and equipment of trial courts. We
made certain recommendations in the carlier Report, the gist whereof may be thus

atated—
(a) Judicial Officers should be provided with stenographers for dictating

judgements.®

t Law Connision of Infit, 77th Report (Delay and Arrears in Trial Courts).
॥ 77th (३090, para 9.1'.
3 77th Report, paca 9.12.
477th Report, para 9.13 to 19.15.
**77th Report, p2ra 9.16.
* 77th Report, para 9.'7.
7 771th Report, para 9.18,
77th Report, para 17,8.

12

mendations.

Strengthening
the subordinate

judiciary.

Improving
machinery
equipment.

and


13

(b) Evidence in courts of District and Sessions Judges should normally be typed,
so that carbon copies of depositions can be supplied immediately to the
parties.’

_ We may mention that these measures can also be implemented without legis-
{ative amendment, They may, at the first sight, appear to be of a minor character,
but their implementation could make a substantial contribution in reducing
the duration of cases in subordinate courts, thereby reducing the arrears 88 well as
the number of undertrial prisoners. हु

3.5. Then, several of our recommendations were intended lo draw attention

deting —provi- *
o cls relevant to the avoidence

and. ad. (0 existing provisions and certain administrative aspe
2800८ of delay in courts. These were as follows:—
sasures 10 avo- we rar . ee .
delay. (a) In criminal cases, it is particularly necessary that delay be eliminated, since
the decision depends upon oral rather than on documentary evidence,
and with the passage of time, the memory of witnesses fades.*

(b) Every criminal court should keep a register showing the number of witnesses
summonéd for a date the number examined, the number sent back and
reasons for sending them back without examination. The tendency of
some criminal courts of sending back witnesses without examining them

must be deprecated.
(c) At least two police officials at every police station should be set apart for
getting service of summonses effected upon witnesses for cases relating
to that police station and for ensuring their presence on the date of hearing.*

(d) The police quite often deliberately refrain from producing all material
witnesses on one date, the object being to fill up the lacunae in the prose-
cution evidence after the defence case becomes manifest by cross-exami-

nation. This practice is unfair and not warranted by the Criminal Procedure

Code, and results in prolongation of the trial.®
[We shall deal with this aspect in detail later also in this Chapter.*)
ation who are concerned with investigation should

(०) Officials at the police st
as possible, they should not be deputed

concentrate on investigation, As far
for other purposes.’
[We shall deal with this aspect in detail later in this Chapter also.*]

(f) Desirability of separating the investigation agency of the police from
that dealing with law and order may have to be considered. The question
whether the investigating agency should be 101 susceptible to executive
interference and, for that purpose, be independent of executive control,
may also need consideration.®
[We shall deal with this aspect in detail later in this Chapter2°]

(g) The Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, section 130(1) provides for special procedure
for certain traffic offences whereunder the accused can plead guilty to the
charge by post and remit the specified fine. In the case of persons other
than professional drivers, for some specified offences of a minor nature,

the ticket issued by the policeman should also contain separately the

amount of fine for various categories of traffic offences in respect of different
types of vehicles, so that if the person committing the infraction of law
is so inclined, he can plead guilly and also remit the amount of fine
to the court concerned before the date of hearing. ही हि रे
[While this recommendation may not directly concern undertrial prisoners,
itis of great importance for reducing over-all congestion in criminal courts. It
possesses, therefore, considerable relevance for undertrial prisoners,though indirectly]

177th Report, para 13.9.

+ 77th Report, para 12.1.

# 77th Report, para 12.2 and 12.8.
«77th Report, para 12.8.

© 77th Report, para 12.8A.

$ See infra.

7 काका Report, para 12.9.

5 See infra.

* 77th Report, para 12.94.

3० Sce para 3.12, infra.

11 77th Report, para 12.8 10 12,12

2-325 LAD/ND/78


Amendment of
procedural law.
Target for dispo-
sal_and giving
prefe

undertrial —pri-
soners..
Strictness in
disposal.

14

(0) Disposal of cases in which there is a Jarge number of accused, gets delayed
because one of the accused absents himself on the date of hearing. The
trial court in such contingencies should consider the advisability of direct-
ing representation of the absent accused by counsel,®

(i) Having regard to the importance attached to the framing of the charge,
the trial magistrates should not leave it to the prosecutor to frame a charge.”

(j) In recording statements of the accused under section 313, Cr. P. C. the magi-
strate should ensure that all incriminating pieces of evidence are put to
the accused.?

(k) Complaints have been heard that there are not enough number of prose-
cutors, particularly in cases under the prevention of Food Adulteration
Act and those investigated by the Central Bureau of Investigation. Steps
should be taken to ensure that there are as many prosecutors as there
are criminal courts.*

(0) Whete the same Judicial Officer exercises both civil and criminal powers
normally he should not fix both the types of cases on the same day. If
such a course cannot be avoided, he should set apart separate time for
civil. and criminal. cases.*

(m) Cases in which there is possibility of death sentence should receive priority
over all other cases.®

3.6. Finally, we may refer to an important recommendation made in the

carlicr Report for amendment of the procedural Jaw in order to streamline the func-
tioning of the Court of Session. At present a Sessions Judge cannot act on evidence
recorded by his predecessor, and this causes considerable delay in the disposal of
sessions cases.’ To avoid this, we recommended in the earliér Report* that the law
should be amended so as to enable a Sessions Judge to act on evidence partly or
wholly recorded by his predecessor. This recommendation, pertaining as it does
to Courts of Session, is of direct importance in connection with the problem of num-
ber of undertrial prisoners and the duration of their detention, since a fairly large
number of undertrial prisoners are persons charged with non-bailable offences

triable by courts of Session.
3.7, An important measure for reducing the burden of undertrial prisoners
on jails is to give preference to the disposal of those cases in which the accused are

in custody. In our earfier Report,” we have suggested a target of six months for dis-
posal of criminal cases. As regards cases in which the accused are in jail, the target

in our opinion, should be four months.

aving mentioned the gist of the recommendations made in our earlier
Report we would like to deal with some of the aspects in detail, We noted in
that Report that one of the main causes for delay in the disposal of criminal
cases is that in the majority of them neither the prosecution nor the accused is in-
terested in the early disposal of cases. T he police take unduly lon, ig time to produce
the presence of witnesses in the court on the dates of hearing. ह
Complaints had also been made, as noted in that Report, that the police does
not produce all prosecution witnesses on the first date of hearing. One reason for
that s that the police officials want to know the defence case as reveal y , he cross
examination of the first witness and thus propose to make up any possi ee acunae
through the evidence of the remaining witnesses.’ The accuses ice are quii e 0 ten
interested in prolonging the cases because the longer the cases last, the greater are

177th Report, para 12.13.
277th Report, para 12.12A.
77th Report, para 12.124.
«77th Report, para 12.13.

5 77th Report, para 12.15.

© 77th Report, para 12.16.

7 Section 326, Cr. ९.८. 1973,
877th Report, para 12.3 to 12.7.
° 77th Report, para 1.10.

10 77th Report, para 12.8A.
11°77th Report, para 12.8A."


15

the chances of prosecution witnesses being won over. It is plain thata certain amount
of strictness would have to be enforced if cases are to be disposed of promptly-

We would like to re-emphasise this aspect of the matter.

3.9. We are also of the view that the trial magistrates should furnish periodical
statements of cases in which the accused are in custody and which are not con-
cluded within four months of the filing of the charge sheet. Such statements should
give the reasons for the non-disposal of those cases. These statements should be
scrutinised by the superior courts for such action as may be deemed necessary.
3.10, On occasions asa result of some agitation, hundreds and even thou-
sands of persons defy the law and court arrest. At times like these, there is a sudden
Spurt In the number of undertrial prisoners. Many of such persons who
doliberately defy the law and court arrest do so asa symbolic measure. It is
plain that most of them would not offer bail and thus ask to be released
peading their trial, Sometimes these persons are, asa result of Government
decision, released without being put on trial. In case of trial, the sentence
which is ultimately imposed upon them is generally of a nominal nature, Itis
desirable that they should be put up for trial soon after their arrest, so that the
Jails do not remain congested with these under trial prisoners.

3.11. Quite a substantial number of persons who are being proceeded against
in security proceedings for keeping the peace or for good behaviour under Chapter
VIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure are detained in jail as undertrial prisoners
because of their inability to furnish the requisite bond under section 116 (3) of the
Code. It is essential that the cases against these persons should be heard with due
promptness and despatch and should not be allowed to linger on. Although
an outside limit of six months has been prescribed by law for the completion of
these proceedings,? efforts in our opinion, should be made to conclude these pro-
coodings within three months.

3.12, Another reason for the large number of undertrial prisoners is the in-
Ofdinate delay which sometimes takes place in the investigation of cases, with the
Yesult that the arrested persons who are remitted to judicial custody have to be
kept in jail as undertrial prisoners, The delay in the investigation of cases takes
place because quite often the police officials concerned with the investigation have

be deputed on other duties relating to problems of law and order. We have,
dn our earlier Report?, stressed the need for not diverting the iavestig ating afficial
tp other duties. Such diversion, in our opinion, not only results in delay in the in-
ion but also entails in its turn failure of justice. It was observed by us in

this connection :

“Jt is commontly said that the investigating agency now-a-days is not able to
devote as much time as it should do to criminal cases pending in courts, because
the police which constitute the investigating agency is over-burdened with
manifold other duties, including those relating to maintenance of law and order.
We are of the view that those officials of the police who are concerned with the
investigation of cases should, as far as Possible, concentrate upon investigation
and looking after the progress of the cases even after they are filed in court
They should not, as far as possible, be deputed for other purposes. Piecemeal
recording of evidence and delay in the disposal of cases undoubtedly causes
hardship to the accused, but more than that, it results quite often in wrongful
acquittals, Wrongful acquittals are as undesirable as wrongful convictions.
Both shake the confidence of the public in the administration of justice, The
beneficiaries of wrongful acquittals are undoubtedly the anti-social elements.

1115 plain that wrongful acquittals would give incentive and provide encourage-
ment to criminals and the enemies of society. Bs

Is may havo to be considered in the above context as to whether it is not desi-
table to separate the investigating agency of the police from that dealing with

+ Secti_0'116(6), Cr.P.C. 1973.
3 77th Report, para 12.9 and 12.94.

Periodical
statements.

Arrests durin;
agitation.

Security
proceedings,

Deley in
investigation


Need for speedy
fovestigation.

Adjournments.

16

general problem relating to maintenance of Jaw and order. An investigating
agency not burdened with other duties would not only ensure prompt and
efficient investigation of crime, it would also help inthe quick disposal of
court case and prevent miscarriage of justice. It may be mentioned that the
Law Commission presided over by shri Setalvad in the Fourteenth Report
supported the idea of separation of the investigating agency. The question
as to whether the investigating agency should be not susceptible to executive
interference and for that purpose, be independent of the executive contro!
may also need consideration”’.

3.13. It is, therefore, essential that the investigation of cases should be com-
pleted as soon as possible. We may also refer to section 167(2) of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, which provides that if an investigation is not completed
within the specified period, the accused should be released on bail.# All this high-
lights the need for quick and prompt investigation.

Of course, despite the above provision, there would be quite a number of arrested
persons who are not able to furnish the requisite bail bond. While most of the rich
criminals generally manage to furnish bail because of their resources, it is the poor
persons who, being without sufficient resources, have generally to spend time as
undertrials in jail. This aspect of the problem is possible of solution if the other
measures? recommended in this Report are effectively implemented. .

3.14. We would also like to draw attention to the recommendation made by
us in the earlier Report in regard to the adjournments of cases?. We would like
to emphasise that adjournment of cases should not be granted where the accused
is in jail, unless such adjournment is absolutely necessary.

1 See also para 2.6, supra, for section 167(2), Cr.P.C.
3 Chapters 4 to 8, infra.
* Tith Report, paras 12.1 and 12.2.


Cuaprer 4
EXPANSION OF THE CATEGORY OF BAILABLE OFFENCES

41, We are now in a position to deal with the various categories of Enlargement of
number of bail-

क prisoners.? हि हे ‘ed able offences.
“The first category* consists of those who are bzing teied for non-bailable
‘offeaces and in respect of whom the court has declined to release them on_ bail.
{One ' possible suggestion to relieve congestion of undertrial prisoners in jails in such
‘eases can, be to enlarge the number of bailable offences. However, while resorting
to this course, we have also to bear in mind that for certain types of serious offences
it isnot normally desirable to release the accused on bail. Many offences have
already been made bailable under the existing Code of Criminal Procedure. The
Increaso in the number of bailable offences would, in the very nature of things,
be of a marginal nature. Nevertheless, the matter does require attention.

Non-bailable

- 42, Whether an offence is bailable or not has to be ascertained with reference [Vp
to the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. The first part deals {hy Indian Penal
with offences under the Indian Penal Code while the second Part deals with offences Code.

wader other laws.
1, OFFENCES UNDER THE I. P. C. PUNISHABLE WITH IMPRISONMENT
. UPTO 3 YEARS
4.3. On an examination of the Schedule referred to above, we have come to General
the conclusion that many of the offences which are non-bailable could be made approach.
Dailable without causing any serious adverse impact on the public interest. Our
spaces! approach in making the recommendation relating to expansion of the catego-
of bailable offences has been that where the maximum punishment prescribed
for the offence does not exceed three years’ imprisonment, then, the offence should
“ordinarily be bailable, unless there are any special features present in the nature
of the offence or in its concrete manifestations in actual practice that justify
‘a different approach. On the other hand, if the prescribed maximum punishment
“exceeds three years’ imprisonment, the offence may not be made non-bailable unless
there are compelling considerations why it sould be made bailable.

44. In deciding the question whether any particular offence should or should Various
not be included in the list of bailable offences under this head, we have had due regard considerations.
to the gravity or otherwise of the offence, the range and ambit of the offence being
80 wide as to include within itself situations of aggravation, the probability of re-
ition of the offence if the alleged offende, remains at large, the effect, if any, of
* his remaining at large on public order and on even flow of the life of the community,3
and other relevant considerations.
45. In the light of the above discussion, we would recommend that the offences Recommenda- |
under the Indian Penal Code listed by us separately! may be made bailable. tion as to certain
offences under
the I.P.C, puni-
shable with im-
prisonment up-
to three years.
Counterfeiting

4.6. The list which we have given® includes some offences relating to counter- bs
coins,

felting of coins. We may state that these offences would not affect the national
‘economy, as most of them would, in practice, be concerned with non-Indian coins.
Moreover, as mentioned above,® the matter has to be considered on an_ over-all
consideration of several factors and their cumulative effect, namely,—Is the release
of the alleged offender likely to result in serious risks to society 2 These offences,
either in the abstract or in their concrete manifestations, do not, in our view, pose
such a serious danger to society as to require that they should be non-bailable.

4.7, We now proceed to a consideration of the more serious offences.

I OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE PUNISHABLE
WITH IMPRISONMENT FOR MORE THAN THREE YEARS

48. As regards offences under the Indian Penal Code which are punishable Offences punisha-
with more than three years’ imprisonment we do not consider it necessary to make able with in
;bailable any of these offences which are at present non-bailable. ae एल than three

3 Para 1.26, supra. years.

३ Para 1.26, supra.

3 For example offences under sections 153A and 295A, Indian Penal Code.

* App:ndix 1.

5. Appendix | read with para 4.5.
© Para 4.4, supra.



Secrets

18

49. We may incidentally mention here that there are certain sections of the
Indian Penal Code prescribing punishment of imprisonment for more than 3 years
and less than 7 years.2

वा, OFFENCES UNDER OTHER LAWS

4.10. In regard to offences under laws other than the Indian Penal Code, the
position as to bail (in the absence of a provision on the subject in the particular
w) is governed? by the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,

Part U, which reads as under :

“IL—CLASSEFICATION OF OFFENCES AGAINST OTHER LAWS

Offence Cognizable or _Bailable or By what Court
Non-Cognizable Non-Bailable Triable
If punishable with death, imprisonment Cogaizable Non-bailable Court of Session.
for life, or imprisonment for more
than 7 years. .
If punishable with imprisonment for 3  Cognizable Non-bailable Magistrate of the
years and upwards but not more than first class
years,

If punishable with imprisonment for fess Non-cognizable Bailable Any Magistrate’’

than 3 years or with fine only.

4.11. We are of the opinion that the second paragraph of Part LU of the First
Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure® should be made more liberal so as to
make bailable offences under the other laws which are punishable with 3 years’
imprisonment*, instead of ‘for less than 3 years.

4.12. The offences that are punishable with imprisonment upto 3 years do
not, so far as we can see, seriously affect the maintenance of law and order. They
have become non-bailable merely by reason of the automatic application of the
general rule® laid down in Part If of the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Proce-
dure, 1973, governing offences punishable with imprisonment upto a certain term

4.13. Onacareful consideration of the matter, we have come to the conclusion
that offences under special laws that are punishable with imprisonment for three
yeats should be bailable. The one exception that we have carved to this general
tule is ralating to offences under the Official Secrets Act, 1923. In the case of
offences under other special laws, the legislature can, when it considers it necessary
to do so, make an offence non-bailable even though the punishment prescribed for
it is imprisonment for three years or less.

4.14. So far as offences under the Official Secrets Act, 1923 are concerned®,
the reasons which have weighed with us in keeping them non-bailable, even though
the punishment prescribed for some of them is three years, are the same that weighed
when the Official Secrets (Amendment) Act, 1967 was passed. In the Statement of
Objects and Reasons for the Bill? which subsequently took the form of the Act*,
while making the offences under the Act non-bailable, it was stated as under:—

“The protection of official secrets is regulated by the Indian Official Secrets
Act, 1923. Except for a few minor amendments made in 1951, the Act has
remained unmodified since it was enacted more than forty years ago. In view
of the changed circumstances after the attainment of independence and the
wide variety of unscrupulous methods which anti-national elements have of
late been adopting to secure their ends, it has become necessary to amend the

Act suitably to remove certain shortcomings and to make it more effective.

* * * * * * * * *

3 Sections 153 A, 153 B, 212, first para, 239, 250, 253, 292, 335, 429, 430, 431, 432, 440,
457, 497 and 505.
2 First Schedule, Part वा, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
3 Para 4,10, Supra.
Para 4.15, infra.

* Para 4.10, supra.
* For other offences affecting national security, see Appendix 3.
पु

Bill No. 9 of 1967 introduced in Rajya Sabha on 23rd June, 1967.
Statements of Objects and Reasons dated 8th June, 1967.


19

18 the context of problems of internal and external security which the
country faces at present, It is necessary 10 make offences under the Act cogni-
‘gable and non-bailable and to enhance the waximum renalties prescribed for
© eestaln offences. It is, therefore, proposed to enhance the punishments for
‘the offences suitably while ensuring, at the same time, that all offences under
fhe Act become cognizable and non-bailable.”

क्ू 4.15, It is, accordingly, our recommendation that Part Hf of the First Schedule Recommenda-
fe Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, should be amended so as to provide that tion po. amend
under other laws should be bailable, where they fall within the ambit of First “Schedule,

jadicated above!, and with the exception already mentioned.? Part Il.

~ Hore is suggested formulation of the legislative provision that could beTin-
oe the subject.

118 the Fisrt Scheduled to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, Past II, entitled

ion of offences against other laws”, the various paragraphs should
asunder. (This Part will consist now of four paragraphs, since it is not
to disturb the present position as to cognizabilty of offences) :—

[Existing first

" galchable with death, imprisonment Cognizable Non-bailable Court of Session®
? Mie or imprisonment for more than pragraph repea-
ted without
“= change].
punishable with imprisonment for more Cognizable] Non-bailable Magistrate of the [Existing second
3 years but not more than 7 years. first class. paragraph. in’
# A हि , part, modified],
foe with imprisonment for  Cognizable Bailable "Magistrate of the [Existing second
yours first class. जम in
हू. part, modified].
| prenided that offences under the Offictal Secrets Act, 1923, shall be non-bailable. [Existing third
wmaishabie with Imprisonment for less Non-cognizable Baitable Any Magistrate.’’ pee
8 3 year, *

a
© 4 Para 4.13 , supra.
"Para 4.13 and 4.14, supra.


CUuAPTER 5
AMOUNT OF BOND

‘Didticalties caused 5.1. The recommendation made in the preceding chapter, if implemented

by, demand for
batt for exc

excessive

amount,

Foreigners | Vion
persons 81
propensity for
absconding.

Legal maximum
} not favoured. :

5 tion for
aiatutory limit
om amount of
bell-not favour-
od,

No change
recommender.

would reduce the number of undertrial prisoners falling within the first of the three
categories mentioned by us.? They would then become entitled to bail and would |
fall within the third category. पु

But this would not, in itself, be an adequate solution to the problem under
consideration. It is common knowledge that even persons accused of. bailable
offences—that is to say, those in the third category — are often unable to secure
bail for the requisite amount because of poverty or other circumstance.

This difficulty is common also to the second category of persons, since, even
where the order of the court releasing them on bail is passed, sometimes they cannot
furnish the bail bond because of their inability to find appropriate surety for the
requisite amount. This could happen if the amount of the bond for which they have
to find surety is so excessive that it is difficult for them to get competent surety
for the requisite amount.

5.2, The Code of Criminal Procedure does provide that the amount of bail
bond shall not he excessive. But, notwithstanding this specific directive in the
Code of Criminal Procedure, there have arisen cases where a disproportionately
high amount of bail was demanded. One such case even went upto the Supreme

-Cout.’

5.3. Of course, there are cases of those persons who are either foreigners or
who have a propensity for absconding and because of that fact, the sureties are re-
luctant to furnish bail bonds on their behalf. Nothing much can be done for persons-
of this category. Wowever, we may note that regarding the third category of under-
trial persons (persons being tried for bailable offences), the policy of the law is that
they be relcased on bail. This policy should not be defeated by demand of bail
bonds of such excessive amount from those persons as might make it difficult for
them to furnish the requisite bond, At the same time, it has to be borne in mind
that the amount of bail bonds be not so low as might tempt them to jump the bail.

It was suggested to us that one possible device of ensuring that the legal
provision prohibiting demand of excessive bail is properly enforced is to impose a
limit—not as an unalterable maximum but as a guideline for minor cases.

5.5. The suggestion was that some limit be imposed on amount of bail in
minor cases, 50 as fo ensure that the rule that bail should not be excessive is adhered
to in practice, and with a certain amount of precision, at least in offences triable
by Magistrates punishable with imprisonment not exceeding three years.

5.6. We are, however, of the view that any such change might, in practice, :
favour rich persons rather than poor persons. The object would thereby be defeat- -
ed. It is better, therefore, not to impose any limit on the discretion of the Magi-.

strate.”

५ 2 Chapter 4, supra,
* Para 1,26, supra,
* Section 440(1), Cr. P.C. 1973
* MatiRam V. State of MP. ALR. 19788. C, 1:94 (Nove ter sste),

20


CHAPTER 6
RELEASE ON BOND WITHOUT SURETIES

61. Apart from the question of excessive amount of the bond,? another Bood without

attics which requires to be considered in regard to persons who are entitled to sureties.
‘bail (the offence being bailable) or who are considered fit for release on bail (though
the offence is non-bailable),—that is to say, the second and third categories of per-
008 mentioned by us*—is the question of sureties. Although an order for release
tan be, or has been, passed, difficulties sometimes arise because the persons con-
permed cannot afford sureties. To meet such difficulty, the Code of Criminal Pro-
gedure even now contains certain provisions whereunder the officer or court can

& person on bond without sureties—sometimes caJed “personal recogni-

&. The following is an illustrative list of provisions in the Code which empower
he officer or court concerned—or, in one case, even require’ the court concerned,*
=o release a person accused of an offence on a bond without sureties.5;—

Sections 42(2), 88, 169, 389, 436(1), proviso, 437(2), 437(7).

62. But the scope of these provisions is limited. It appears to us that ther®. Need to libera-
is need to widen the scope of the power to release on personal bond in certain res” lise provisions
yects. Experience shows that quite a large number of undertarial prisoners are for release on
waable to secure release because of their inability to find sureties. Such inability .
nay arise because of their poverty, social conditions, want of contacts in the loca-
ky is which they are arrested or similar other factors over which they have no
patrol. Prima facie, there is a case for Jiberalising the present provisions for re-
fase on bond without sureties. We propose to consider the matter first with reference
s ffences* and next with reference to non-bailable offences.”

63. First, as to bailable offences, section 436(1), proviso of the Code of Outline of the
Procedure, 1973, gives a discretion to the officer or court to “discharge” amendment —
Person concerned on a personal bond. As to these offences, we are of the view ~*#Ple offiences.
ff a person cannot furnish sureties within one month of arrest, that circumst-
fn the absence of reasons to be recorded, should constitute a fit case for re-
on mal bond. If after one month a person cannot furnish sureties, it
130 wi presumed that the failure was due to geneuine inability to find appro-
. We may, however, add that the release of a person on own bond

out sureties involves the risk of that person absconding. To obviate this risk
| to, provide a deterrent, we ate making a separate recommendation,® so as to
+ gon—appearance and failure to surrender to custody a non-bailable offence.

6 6A. As to non-bailable offences, we recommend that section 437(1) of the Non-bailable

de should be amended, and the officer or court should have a discretion to re- Mences.

‘the person concerned on bond without sureties, but in this case, our proposal

ping the effect of expiry of one month after arrest® should not be made applica-

La is enongh to confer a discretion to release on bond, without rendering its

eolee mandatory iri any form”,

Tho following is our concrete recommendation for amending the Code Recommenda के
i i — mn to

out the points made in the preceding parapgraphs.. मा कुक

and section 437,

Ce. P. C., 1973,

Section 437 (7), Cr. P. C. 1973.
For gist of these sections,” see Appendix 5.
©, The list Is illustrative only.

Pare 6,3,, supra.)
© Pere 6,3 and 6.4, supra.

21


22

“Section 436(1)

Explanation to be added
Explanation.—If such person is unable to furnish bail within one month of
the date of arrest, that circumstance shall, in the absence of reasons to be record-
ed by such officer or court, be a fit ground for the release of such person on his
executing a bond without sureties.”

Section 437(1)
Third proviso, to be added
“Provided also that such officer or court, if he or it thinks fit, may instead

of taking bail from such person, release him on his executing a bond without
sureties for his appearance as hereinafter provided.”

6.6. In the Explanation’ recommended by us to be added to section 436(1 ),
proviso, we have deliberately used the word ‘release’ instead of the word ‘discharge’
which at present occurs in the proviso, since, in our opinion, the word ‘discharge’
as used in the Code has a particular connotation. The appropriate word, in our
opinion, is ‘release’. We also recommend that in the existing proviso, the woud
‘discharge’ should be replaced by the word ‘release’.

6.7. Our recommendation above? to enlarge the scope of the power to re-@
lease on a bond without sureties has been made as a matter of policy. It is now
necessary to deal with a question of language, connected with this very subject.
Our recommendation for inserting provisions for the release of a person on his bond
without sureties in certain contingencies,? will add to the existing provision’ in
the Code of Criminal Procedure which permits such release.

In this position, it is necessary to introduce in the Code a clarification appli-
cable to other provisions of the Code which make a reference to ‘bail’. We have,
in mind, provisions which do not themselves give a power of release, but refer to
other provisions under which bail is granted. A clarification to the effect that
references (in such provisions) to “bail” include release on a bond without sureties,
when such release is permitted by the Code is, in our view, needed to give full effect
to the scope of such provisions.

Accordingly, we recommend that the following clause should be inserted as
clause (aa) in section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 which contains
the definitions :

“(aa) references to ‘bail’ inchide release on a bond without sureties, where such

release is permitted by this Code.”

68. There are certain sections of the Code in which it is necessary to confer

amend: expressly a power to release the person concerned on bond without surety.5 We

Inerted in
 gection 2,
GPC.

है ida-
thea to

section —395(3)

have already recommended the necessary changes in section 436(1) and section
437(1).6 Apart from this, section 395(3) and section 439(1)(a), Cr. P. C. 1973
also should be amended so as to give such a power.

Section 395(3) needs no comments. It deals with a reference made by a sub-
ordinate court to the ITigh Court and with release on bail pending the decision of
such reference. :

As to section 439(1)(a), it provides that the High Court or a Court of Session
may direct that “any person accused of an offence and in custody be released on
bail....”.

We are of the opinion that this provision should be wide enough to cover re-
lease on personal bond, having regard to the fact that this is the principal section
under which release by the High Court or the Court of Session would be ordered,
both in regard to cases of persons’under trial before those courts and in regard
to cases of persons under trial in courts subordinate thereto.

We, therefore, recommend that in both these sections, after the word ‘bail’s
the words ‘or on bond without sureties’ should be inserted.

Para 6.5, "supra.
: Para , 6. & supra.
a १.३ ६6 6, 6 supra.
« Section 435 (1), Proviso, Corte of Crimin wt Procedure, 1973.
® See sections 56, 58, 78 (2), 1, {stand 2nd provisos, 16702), proviso (a), 187 (1), 2099,
306(4)(b), 330(1), 437(4) and (5), 43910), 413902), 4412), 44103) and 4426), The list is iNustrae

tive only.
© Para 63 and 6-4, “supra,


Cuarrer 7 J
OBLIGATION TO APPEAR AND SURRENDER—VIOLATION
TO BE AN OFFENCE

7.4. Consequential on the recommendations made in this Report to liberalise Insertion of new
Jaw relating to bail’, it will be necessary to create an offence of failure, on the part section in the Cr.
q) released on bail or on bond without sureties, to appear in compliance P.C. recommen-
हि terms of the bond and surrender to custody, ded.

© [8 the first place, in order to make it mandatory for the person so released to
and surrender, we recommend that a new section should be inserted in the
of Criminal Procedure, 1973, as lollows :—

"4418. A person released on bail? or on bond without sureties in criminal

3 shall be bound to comply with the terms of the bond executed for the
"perpose in the matter of appearance in court or before the police officer and
dartender to custody.”

13, The obligation so undertaken should be made eaforceable by a suitable Amendment. of

हर ision. The penal provision could be appropriately inserted in the Indian 1.00, ३९०णा-
somewhat on these lines mended,

है Section to be inserted in the Indian Penal Code
1 ०३298. (1) If @ person who has been released on bail or on bond? without Failure ६
आय tn criminal proceedings fails without reasonable cause to appear or sur- ply with, terms
ifender to custody, in compliance with the terms of the bond executed for the pur- of bond,
he shall be guilty of an 260९९,
Q) 6 2 person who—
1
1 (@ has been released on bail or bond without sureties in criminal pro-
Sy
(0) Aaving reasonable cause therefor, has failed to appear or surrender
¢ bo custody in compliance with the terms of the bond executed for the
purpose,
pear and surrender to custody at the appointed place as soon after the
time as is reasonably practicable, he shall be guilty of an offence,

8) ॥ shall be for the accused to prove that he had reasonable cause for his
to appear or surrender to custody,

@ An offence under sub-section (1) or (2) shall be punishable with impri-
wi for a term not exceeding two years or with fine or both.

‘Bxplanation.—The punishment under this section is—

Ws addition to the punishment to which the offender would be liable on a
conviction for the offence which is the subject-matter of the criminal

177 proceedings, and
‘Oa eddition to the power of the court to order forfeiture of the bond.”

Amendment of
First Schedule,

The proposed’ offence should be— Pat 1, (४. ९.८.

bapiecd 4 to 6 अदा,
fa delightion of “ball” is inserted, thea cefereacz to 0311 is not necessary.

23


a4
The punishment which we have proposed is imprisonment upto two Byears.4
Although the general approach adopted by us in this Report? would suggest that

the offence should be bailable, that principle cannot, for obvious reasons, be applied
to this offence.

Accordingly, we recommend that the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, first
Schedule, Part I, should be amended for this Purpose, by adding, after the entry in -
that Schedule pertaining to section 229, .P.C., the following entry:—

"229A. Failure to Jinprisonment Cog- Non- Any

comply with upto two years niza- bail- Magis-
the terms or fine or both. ble able trate.’
of bond.

‘Para 7.2 Supra.
* Para 4.1 to 4.5 Supra,


CHAPTER है
ARRANGEMENTS FOR DEPENTION

8.1. We would also like to make a few observations as to the place of detention
of undertrial prisoners. Undertrial prisoners are, at present, housed in the same
building as convicts, In our opinion, undertrial prisoners should not be sent to
jails with convicts. The evils of contamination are too well known to require
emphasis.*

The induction of a large population of undertrial prisoners in a building essen-
tially meant for convicts, is, in the very nature of things, undesirable. Despite all
the precautions that may be taken, the contact between, and the intermingling of,
undertrial prisoners and convicts cannot be avoided if both are inmates of the same
building. Such contact has the most deleterious effect on the undertrial prisoners.
Even if some of them are ultimately acquitted, their association with the convicts
some of whom are hardened criminals, leaves a bad trail on their mind,

8.2. There should therefore be separate institutions for their detention. We
may also note that a recommendation for separate place of detention was made long
ago in India.? ह ५

Under the Code of Criminal Procedure’, the place of detention is thus specified :—

“417(1). Except when otherwise provided by any law for the time being

in force, the State Government may direct in what place any person liable to be
imprisoned or committed to custody under this Code shall be confined.”

This provision thus leaves the place of confinement to be specified by the State
Government, subject to the provisions of any law for the time being in force.
There should be therefore no legal difliculty.

Creating such institutions would, however, require a policy decision and involve
financial commitments and Jong-term planning. Till such time as this is done,
actual realities impel us to find solution of the problem created by the excessive
number of undertrial prisoners in jails, as already mentioned.

8.3. The question’ whether bail hostels should be established, as in England’,
for persons who have been ordered to be released on bail but who are not actually
released because of their inability to furnish a bond with suretics, is another matter
which also involves financial implications and long-term planning and the prospects
of which are, at present, rather remote, Consequentially, we have not considered
it appropriate to deal with that matter in this Report.

8.4, We are also of the view that a Jot needs to be done to improve the condi-
tions of detention in prisons, apart from relieving congestion of undertrial prisoners.
We have, however, refrained from going into this matter, as that aspect was outside
the scope of the matter referred to us.

1 Para 1:2, supra.

* Para 1:16, supra. Also see pata 1-22, supra.

3 Section 417 (1), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
“Chapter 1, supra.

६४ See Para 2:19, supra.

* Section 53, Criminal Justice Act, 1972 (Eng.) See Appendix 4.

Separate ar-
rangements for
detention of
undertrial
prisoners.

Separate places
of detention.

Bail Hostels.

Conditions of
detention.


CHAPTER 9
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

We give below a summary of the conclusions reached and recommendations
made in this Report.
1. Introductory

(1) The problem of: nndertrial prisoners in jails has assumed magnitude, as is
evident from figures collected from yatious sources. The probleni is not confined
to India; nor is it new. Several recommendations made in the past in various stu-
dies and reports have placed emphasis on various aspects of the problem. A high
percentage of jail populetion comprises persons under trial. This is not a. satis-
factory situation’,

In dealing with the problem, three types of prisoners have to be considered—

{a) Persons being tried for non-bailable offences, in sespect of whom the courts
have dectined to pass an order for their release an bail.

(b) Persons being tried for non-bailable offences, in respect of whom couris
have passed order for bail but who, because of the difficulty of finding ap-
propriate surety or because of some other season, do not furnish the bail
bond.

{c) Persons who are being tried for bailable offences but who, because of the
difficulty of finding appropriate surety or some other reasons, do not fur-
nish the bail bond.

Por seducing the burden of undertrial prisoners on jail, all the above three
categories should be dealt with?

(2) The various measures recommended in the 77th Report of the Law Com-
mission to reduce delay and arrears in trial cours should be implemented in order
to dea! effectively with the problem of large number of undertriat prisoners}. Other
remedies suggested in this Report should also be adopted.

2. Present law, comparative position and questions for consideration

(3) An examination of the concept of bail‘, the present law as to bail’, the various
statutory time limits connected with the investigation or trial of offences* and the
issues that fall 10 be considered’, shows that in formulating Jegislative polfcy in re-
lation to refease on bail, several conflicting considerations have to be balanced.
it also shows that the problem of undertrial prisoners has to be dealt with on several
fronts®.

(4) In England, there is now a presumption in favour of the right to bail for all
offences. Further, a discretion is given to the Court to release a person without
surety. There is no personal recognizance. A duty to surrender to custody is
created, and its viotation is made an offence. On release on bail, certain conditions

can be imposed’.

3, Disposal of cases

(5) For dealing with the problem of Jarge number of undertrial prisoners
implementation of recommendations made in the 77th Report of the Law Commis-
sion (delay and arrears in trial courts) is a measure of the first importance,

मे Para Lt to 1°22.
* Para 2-26.

* Para 1-27,

+ Para 2-3 10 2:4,

* Para 2.5 to 2-17.

$ Para 2-6.

1 Para 2:20 to 2:25.
3 Para 2-25,

® Para 2-48 and 2-19,
Para 311 to 3-6.

26


27

(6) Cases in which the accused persons are in jail should be given prefe-
rance and the target forj their disposal should be four months—instead of six months
recommended in the 77th Report*.

(7) In order to prevent interested parties from prolonging pendency of cases,
a certain amount of strictness is necessary to ensure prompt disposal?

(8) Trial Magistrates should furnish periodical statements of cases in which the
accused are in custody and which are not concluded within the prescribed time.’

(9) In times of some agitation, numerous persons defy law and court arrest,
causing a sudden spurt in the number of undertrial prisoners. Most of them would
not offer bail. Such persons should be put up for trial soon after their arrest in
order to avoid congestion in jails‘.

(10) Quite a substantial number of persons who are being proceeded against
in security proceedings for {keeping peace and for good behaviour are detained in
jail as undertrial prisoners because of their inability to furnish the requisite bond.
The cases against those persons should be heard with due promptness and despatch,
Efforts should be made to conclude these proceedings within 3 months,

(11) Inordinate delay in the investigation of cases should be avoided. The
diversion of police officials concerned with investigation to other duties relating
to law and order should be ayoided*. It causes delay in investigation, as pointed
out in 77th Report.

(12) Investigation of cases should be completed as soon as possible. The law
provides that if an investigation is not completed within the specified period, the
accused should be released on bail, thug highlighting the need for prompt inves-
tigation.”

(13) Where the accused is in jail, adjournments of cases should not be granted
unless absolutely necessary.®
4, Expansion of the category of bailable offences

_ (14) Certain offences under the Indian Penal Code, as listed in the Report,
which are at present non-bailable, should be made bailable. The Code of Criminal
Procedure, First Schedule, Part I, should be amended accordingly.?

(15) Offences under laws other than the Indian Penel Code punishable with
3 years’ imprisonment should be made bailable, with the exception of offiences under
the Official Secrets Act, 1923. The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, First Sche-
dule, Part II, should be amended accordingly **,

5, Amount of bond

(16) The statutory requirement that the amount of bond shall not be excessive!"
should be observed.

(17) There is, however, no need to impose a statutory ceiling on the amount
of bail.?2

6. Release on bond without sureties

(18) In regard to bailable offences, section 436(1), Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, which empowers the officer or court to “discharge” a person on bond with-
out sureties, should be amended by adding an Explanation to the effect that where
a period of one month expires after arrest without the accused furnishing sureties,
that shall (in the absence of reasons to the contrary as recorded) be a fit ground
for release on bond without sureties.18 The word ‘discharge’ should be replaced by
the word ‘release’,14

1 Para 3-7,

* Para 3-8,

3 Para 3-9

* Para 3-10,

5 Para 3.11.

* Para 3.12.

7 Para 3.13, See section 16/(2), Cr.P.C. 1973.
3 Para 3.14,

* Para 4.5 read with Appendix 1.
3० Para 4.11 to 4.15.

मे Para 5.1 and 5.2,

4 Para 5.3 to 5.5.

4 Para 6.3 to 6.5,

२ Para 6.6,


28

(19) In regard to non-bailable offences, a discretion should be given to the
officer or court to release a person on bond without sureties. Section 437(1), Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 should be amended for the purpose?

_ 20) A definition of “bail” should be inserted? as section 2(aa) in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 to make it clear that references to “bail” include references
to a person released on bond without sureties, where such release is permitted by
the Code.

(21) Further, in sections 395(3) and 439(1)(a) of the Code, power to release
on bond without sureties should be experessly provided for.?

. Obligation to appear and surrender—violation to be an offence

(22) A provision should be inserted in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
to the effect that a person released on bail shall be bound to appear and to surrender
to custody. .

(23) Chore sould be inserted in the Indian Penal Code a Provision® creating
a new offence punishing violation of the obligation so undertaken with imprison,
ment upto 2 years or fine or both,

(24) The new offence to be created as above should be—

(a) cognizable;

(b) non-bailable;

(०) triable by any Magistrate.

The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, First Schedule, Part I, should be ap-
propriately amended for the purpose.®
8, Arrangements for detention

(25) There should be separate institutions for the detention of undertrial pri-
soners, the induction of a farge population of undertrial Prisoners in a building
essentially meant for convicts being undesirable. However, the creation of such insti-
tution is a matter of tong-term planning and of financial implications. Other steps
to reduce the number of under trial prisoners may therefore have to be taken,?

(26) The question of providing for bail hostels for persons who, though order-
ed to be realeased on bail, cannot offer bail, has not been considered in the Report
as a part from its financial implications and need for long-term planning, its pros-
pects in the present conditions are rather remote.®

(27) A lot needs to be done to improve the conditions of detention in prisons.
The Report, however, refrains from going into this matter, being outside the scope
of the reference.?

प्र, ए, KHANNA,

Chairman.

8S. N. SHANKAR,

Member.

T. S. KRISHNAMOORTHY IYER,
Member.

P. M. BAKSHI,

Member-Secretary

New शा,
Dated, the 2nd February, 1979,

2 Para 6.5.
* Para 6.6 and 6,7,
3 Para 6.8.
4 Para 7.1.
* Para 7.2.
$ Para 7.3,
॥ Para 8.1 and 8,2,
3 Para 8.3.
ह Para 84,


APPENDIX 1

LISt OF OFFENCES UNDE® THE INDIAN PENAL CODE WHICH ALE NON.BAILABLE
AT PRESENT AND WIUCH SHOULD BE MADE BAILABLE ACCORDING TO
THE RECOMMENDATIONS IN THE REPORT

Section Offence Punishment

161 Being or expecting to be a public servant and taking a gratification other than Imprisonment for — three
legal remuneration in respect of an olficial act, years or fine or both,

162 Taking a gratilication in order by corrupt or illegal means, to influence a public Imprisonment for three years
servant. or fine or both.

163 Taking a gratification for the exercise of porsonal influence with a public servant ‘Simple imprisonment for
one year or fine or both,

lof Abetment by public servant of the oifenves delined in sections 162 and 163 Imprisonment. for three

with reference to himself. years or fine or both.
165 Public servant obtaining any valuable thing, without consideration, from a person Imprisonment for three
concerned in any proveeding or transaction by such public servant. years or fine or both.
65A Abetment of offences punishable under section 161 or 165 Imprisonment for — three

years or fine or both,‘

170 Personating a public servant Imprisonment for two years
or fine or both,

strament for the purpose of counterfeiting coins Imprisonment for three

233 Making, buying or selling
years and fine.

jal for the purpose of using the same for coun- Imprisonment for three years

235 Possession of instrument or mat

first terfeiting coin (not being Indian coin) and fine,
para
237 Import or export of couaterfeit coin, knowing the same to be counterfeit imprisonment for three

years and fine,

241 Knowingly delivering to another any counterfeit coin as genuine which when Imprisonment for two years
first possessed the deliverer did not know to be counterfeit or fine or 10 times the
value of the coins coun-

terfeited or both.

242 Possession of counterfeit coin by a person who knew it to be counterfeit Imprisonment for three
when he becomes possessed thereof years and fine,

ion of any coin Imprisonment — for three

246 © Fraudulently diminishing the weight or altering the compo:
years and fine,

248° Altering app2icancz of aay coin with iateat tat it shall pass as coia of a Lnorisoament for three
different description years and fine,
252 Possession of altered coia by a p2rsoa why knew it to be altered when he became Imprisonment for three years
possessed thereof and fine.
254 Delivery to another of coin as genuine which, when first possessed the deli- Imprisonment for two years
verer did not know to be autered or fine or ten times the
value of the coin,
267 Making or selling false weights or measures for fradulent use Imprisonment for one year
or fine or both,
303 Attempt to connit culpable ho nicids (viere no hurt caused) Imprisonment for three years
Ist or fine or both.
para
406 Criminal breach of trust Imprisonment for hee

tl
years or fine or both,

411 Dishonestly receiving stolen property knowing it to be stolen Imprisonment for three
years or fine or both,

414 Assisting ia concealment or disposal of stolen property, kaowing it to be Imprisonmenttorthree years
stolen or fine or both.

461 Dishonestly breaking open or unfastening any closed receptacle containing or Imprisonment for two years
supposed to contain property or fine or both,

29


; 30

APPENDIX 2
FIGURES OF UNDERTERIAL PRISONERS IN CERTAIN JAILS
Ceutral Jail, Ambain

Information about prisoners and undertrial prisoners +

(a) 254 [Total number of prisoners in the Central Jail, Ambala on the tst September, 1978].

(b) 23° [Out of (a) above, (otal number of persons who are convicted persons undergoing any sentence of
imprisonment}. ~

© 231 [Out of (a) above, total number of persons who are undertrial and no under going any sertence
of imprisonment].

(d) 22. [Out of (c) above, total number of persons who are under trial for bailable offences], and

(०) Either the prisoners did not apply for bail, or could not furnish surety.

[This gives as regards persons at (d) above, the main reason why the persons could not furnish bail].

Nore :—The figures at (c) above,—i.e., undertrial_prisoners—constitute 90.944 per cent of figures at (a) above,—i.e.
total prisoners.

Central Jail, New Dethi
(a) Total number of prisoners in the Central Jail, New Delhi, as on 1-9-1978 is 2,373.

(b)_Out of these 2,373{(a) above}, the number of persons who were convicted persons undergoing sentence of im-
prisonment was 267.

(०0 Out of (a) above, the total number of persons who were undertrial and not undergoing any sentence of im-
prisonment was 2,106.

(9) Out of 2,106 [(c) above], the number of persons who were under trial for bailable offence was 1,156.

(०) As regards persons at (0) above, the main reasons why they could not furnish bail are given as below :
(i) Want of sureties,

(ii) Absence of family members as being not the residents of Delhi,

(iii) Delay in contacting the family members,

(iv) Poverty, not being able to get legal assistance.

1. As per letter No. 43/75/78-3J(2), dated 29th November, 1978, from the secretary, Jails Department, Government
of Haryana to Member-Secretary, Law Commission of India.


31

APPENDIX 3

PRESENT POSITION AS REGARDS CERTAIN OFFENCES AFFECTING NATIONAL SECURITY OR

ECONOMY UNDER SPECIAL LAWS

Act and Section

Offence

Punishment-
Imprisonment
upto ६

1. The Foreign Recruit-

Violation. of the prohibition or condition for permis-

ing Act, 1874, Section sion to recruit persons for service of any foreign State.

2. The Official Secrets
Act, 1923, Section 3.

Section 5
Section 6

Section 7
Section है

Section 9
Section 10

3. Criminal Law Amend-
ment Act, 1938
Section 2

4, The Foreigners, Act,

1946,
Section 14

5. The Criminal Law
Amendment Act 1961.
Section 2
Section 3]

Atomic Energy

6. The

Act, 1962
Section 24(1)4

The) Unlawful Activi-
ties Prevention Act,
1967.4

7

8, Section J13(1).

(1) If any person for any purpose prejudicial to the

safety or interests of the State~

(a)' approaches, inspects, passes over, or is in the vicinity
of, or enters, any prohibited place; or
(b) makes any sketch, plan, model or note which is
calculated to be or might be or is intended to be,
directly or indirectly useful to an enemy; or
(c) approaching prohibited place, making’ sketch,
obtaining, collecting, recording or publishing or
comm nicating to any other person any secret
official code or password, or any sketch, plan,
model article or note or other document or in-
formation which is calculated to be or might be
or is intended to be, directly or indirectly, useful
to an enemy or which relates to a matter the dis-
closte? of wich is likely to affect the :overcignty
and integrity of India, the security of the State or
friendly relations with foreign States.

Wrongful communication, etc. of information

Unauthorised use of uniforms, classification of reports,
forgery, personification and false documents.

Interfering with officers of the Police or members of

the Armed forces of the Union.

Violation of duty of giving information as to the com-
mission of offence.

Attempts, incitement etc.

Penalty for harbouring spies

Dissuading the public from enlistment to the Military,
Navy or Air Forces or instigating to Mutiny or insubor-
dination after enlistment.

Contrayention of provisions of this “Act.

Questioning the territorial integrity or frontiers of
India in a manner projudical to the interests of safety
and security of India

Statements etc. in a notified area prejudicial to main-
tenance of public order or safety, security of India etc,

Contravention of any—

{a) order made under S. 14,

(b) rules under 5.17, as to safety,

(©) obstructing any person authorised by the Central
Government under S. 17(4), or

(9) contravation of S, 18(2) regarding disclosure of
restricted information.

Unlawful activity

7 years.

Imprisonment for a term
which may extend, where
the offence is committed
in relation to any work of
defence, arsenal, naval,
military or air force esta-
blishment or station, mine,
minefield, factory, dockyard
camp, ship or aircraft or
otherwise. in relation to the
naval, military or air force
affairs of Government, or in
relation to any secret offi-
cial code, to fourteen years,
and in other cases to three
years.

3 years,

3 years.
3 years.
3 years.

Sameas that for the

offence,
3 years.

1 year

Slyears,

3 years,

1 year.

57 years.”

7 years,

Assisting in ‘untawful | activity of any association de- 5 years,

clared unlawful,


32

APPENDIX 4

SECEION 53. CRIMINAL JUSTICE ACT, 1972 (Eng.): PROVISION OF DAY TRAINING CENTRES, BAIL.
HOSTELS, PROBATION HOSTELS हाट

(1) A probation and after-care committee may, with the approval of the Secretary of State, provide and
carry on day training centres, bail hostels, probation hostels, probation homes and other establishments for use in
connection with the rehabititation of offenders.

(2) The 32cretary of State may approve bail hostels; and in relation to hostels approved by him under this%sub-
section :— toe ~

(a) Section 46(2) of the Criminal Justice Act, 1948 (Secretary of State’s power to make rules as to management
etc.) shall apply as it applies in relation to approved probation hostels and approved probation homes; and

(b) section 47 of that Act (certain residential institutions to be subject to inspection by Secretary of State)
shall apply as it applies in relation to the institutions mentioned in that section.

(3) The Secretary of state may, with the approval of the Treasury and subject to such conditions as he may
with the like approval determine, make payments to a probation and after-care committee towards any expenditure
of the com niltec i tex :rcising their powers under this section in respect of bail hostels, probation hostels and probation

homes.

(4) The conditions subject to which any payments are made to a probation and after-care committee under sub-
tion (3) of this section may includ? conditions for securing the repayment in whole or in part of the sums
eived by the committee if the hostel or home in question ceases to be used as such.

jon 77 of the said Act of 1948 (contribution out of moneys provided by Parliament
towards expenditure of any socicty or person in respect of approved pro! ion hostels or homes) shall have effect as
if references 10 approved probation hostels or homes included reference 10 bail hostels; and sub-section (5) of that sec-
tion (provisions as to conditions imposed in relation to grants under the said sub-section (3) (b) shall, in relation to any
grant made by virtue of this sub-section, have effect as if the reference to an approved probation hostel or home ceasing
fo be approved were a reference to a bail hostel ceasing to be used as such.

(5) Sub-section (3) (b) of sectii

(6) In this section :-— \

“day training centres"’, means premises at which persons may be required to attend by .a probation order
containing a requirement under section 20 of this Act +
:tbail hostels’, means premises for the accommodation of persons remanded on bail;

he accommodation of persons who may be required to reside there by

“«probation homes’? means premises for th 0 4 ye
‘sons as are mentioned below in the definition of «probation hostels’’;

‘a probation order, not being such per:

“Probation hostels”, means premises for the ;
probation order, being persons who are employed outsi

accommodation of persons who may be required to reside there by a
ide the premises or are awaiting such employment,


33

APPENDIX 5

SECTIONS PROVIDING FOR RELEASE ON PERSONAL BOND*

At present, there are certain provisions in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, which empower the officer or court
concerned or, In one case, even require? the court concerned, to release a person accused of an offence on a bond

without sureties. The following is an illustrative list :

Section 42(2). (Non-cogni-
zable offences).

Section 88. (All offences),

Section 169. (All offences)

Section 436(1), proviso.

4 "GBailable offences)?

Section 437(2). (Non-bail-
able offences)

I

Section 437(7). _(Non-bail-
able offences)

Person who commits in the presence of a public officer a non-cognizable offence refusing
on demand to give his true name and residence may be arrested for ascertaining the
name etc. When the true name etc. has been ascertained, he will be released “on his
executing a bond, with or without sureties, to appear before a Magistrate if so required.”

Officer presiding in any Court may, in respect of a person present in Court, require such
person to execute ‘‘a bond, with or without sureties, for his appearance in such Court”

Release where evidence deficient—‘‘bond with or without sureties”.

In the case of a person accused of a bailable offence, the officer or court may, instead of
taking bail, discharge such person on his executing a bond without surcties for appear-
ance etc.

If at any stage, it appears there are not reasonable grounds for believing that the accused
committed a non-bailable offence, but that there are sufficient grounds for further
enquiry into his guilt, the accused shall be released on bail or, at the discretion of the
officer or court, on the execttion of a bond without sureties for appearance etc. (This
provision applies to person accused of non-bailable offences).

Tat any time after the conclusion of the trial of a person accused of a non-bailable offence
and before judgment is delivered, the court is of opinion that there are reasonable grounds
for believing that the accused is not guilty, it shall release the accused if in custody on
the execution by him of a bond without sureties for his appearance to hear judgement

elivered.

3, See para 6.1 of body of the Report.

*, Section 437(7), Cr.

P.C. 1973,

3, This proviso applies also to persons ordered to give security for peace or good behaviour, subject to section 116(3)

GIPN—S !~525 LAD/ND/78—14-5-79—2,000