po

aa

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

SEVENTY-NINTH REPORT
ON
DELAY AND ARREARS IN HIGH COURTS
AND OTHER APPELLATE COURTS


SEVENTY-NINTH REPORT ON DELAY AND
ARREARS IN HIGH COURTS AND OTHER
APPELLATE COURTS

MAY 10, 1979


CHAIRMAN
D.O. NO. F. 2(8)/,77-L.c. LAW COMMISSION
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

May, 10, 1979.
My dear Minister,

व send herewith the Seventy-ninth Report of the Law
Commission relating to delay and arrears in High Courts and other
appellate courts.

The subject was taken up for consideration pursuant to the
terms of reference of the Law Commission, according to which the
Commission should, inter alia, keep under review the system of
judicial administration to secure elimination of delays and speedy
clearance of arrears. I may mention that the Commission has
already forwarded its Report on delay and arrears in trial courts,
being its 77th Report.

4 must place on record my appreciation of the assistance
rendered by Shri P. M. Bakshi, Member-Secretary, in the prepara-
tion of this Report.

With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,

Sdl-
(H. R. Khanna)
Shri Shanti Bhushan,
Minister of Law, Justice
& Company Affairs,
New Delhi.

(0)


Chapter Topic

1. Introductory... ee ee nek - बज बज teeta

2. Jurisdiction of High Courts and City Civil Courts. - oe oe ae

3 Strength of High Courts: numerical and qualitative aspects 7 ™

4. Appellate jurisdiction 5 कि

5. Procedure in appeals: general . . wee

6. Arguments and judgment in appeals 0.0 ee see teeta
Grouping and listing of appeals रे tees

8... irst appeals, (including appeals from City Civil Courts) to High Courts

9. Appeals under special Acts 9c. ese vee ७. tae

10. Second appeals. ee ese wee atte tees bn

11, Appeals against judgments of single judges...

12, Civil revisions a ae a eee ase we soe

13. Certificate for appeai to Supreme Court under article 133 wee

14, Criminal appeals, revisions and references... sue vee wea

15. Ordinary origiual civit jurisdiction of High Courts... see wee we

16. Extraofdinary originai civil jurisdiction of High Courts: writs ... oe

17... Jurisdiction under Special Acts: Tax cases ... one ee oe vee

18. Appeals to Courts subordinate to the High Court... ane ove oe

19, High Court for Goa, Daman & Div oe ee nee ee tee

20. Conclusion .. +. see tesa rr TS

31... Summary of matters dealt with ae ae ae wee we ae

APPENDICES

Appendix Topic

1, Appellate jurisdiction of District Judges in various States ae te

2 List of sections of the Indian Succession Act, 1925, under which (he
High Courts have istamentary jurisdicti oe .

3 Appeals to High Courts under Special Acts besides those mentioned io
the body of the Report -. ० पु wee

4. Jurisdiction of the High Court under Guardians & Wards Act, 1890 ,.,

5. Oral arguments in France wee . we wee ae vee ase

6. U.P. High Court Abolition of Letiers Patent Appeals Act, 1962... oe

7 Pendency of cases in High Courts during 1976 to 1978 ... on wn

Page

13
17
23
27

42

49
51
53
55
56
7
59
61

70
है
76
78

91
92
93
95

96
oT


बना अर

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTORY
L GENESIS AND SCHEME

1.1. According to the terms of reference of the Law Commission, the Commis-
ston is expected, inter alia, to keep under review the system of judicial
adiuinistration, to secure elimination of delay and speedy clearance of arrears
in courts. The Commission has already forwarded to Government! its Report
on delay and arrears in trial courts. The present Report deals with delay and
arrears in the High Courts and other appellate courts.

We shall deal first with the magnitude of the problem and the efforts
so far made to solve it. After stating in brief the various types of jurisdiction
exercised by High Couris, we shall proceed to a consideration of proceedings
falling within patticular species of such jurisdiction—appellate, original, special
and so on. Measures for expediting disposal in respect of each type of pro-
ceeding will naturally find mention in the Chapter devoted to that particular
type of proceeding, but we also propose to make certain suggestions of a general
character which would apply to the entire judicial work of High Courts.

वा, ARREARS

4.2. As will be evident from a Sater Chapter? of this Report, the jurisdiction
of High Courts in India is of an infinite variety. The remedies available to an
aggrieved p2tson and the proceedings that he can institute for seeking relief
depend on the nature of his legal grievance and the stage at which the matter
stands, These remedies—inclusive of remedies by way of first appeals, second
appeals, revision and writ petitions in the High Court—are, to our mind,
necessary for the proper administration of justice, for the satisfaction of legal
conscience and for the proper enforcement of legal rights,

However, various proceedings filed and pending in the High Courts have,
in course of time, piled up to a disquieting figure and at present, the situation
in regard to arrears is so grave that it needs to be tackled without any delay.‘
The problem is not new: and several efforts have been made in the past to
solve it but there has not been any abiding solution,—as. indeed, there
cannot be,—because of expanding society, continuously changing social values
and, above all, the ever-increasing and diversifying functions of the State, both
in the public and in the private sector and the passing of new legislation, which
adds to the burden and responsibilities of the courts.

1.3. To deal with the present situation rationally, it will be necessary to sce
which type of the pending cases can be said to be old so as to constitute
arrears, We shall deal with this point in due course.>

1.4. While fall in disposal might, to some extent, have contributed to increase
in the arrears of the High Courts, it cannot be denied that, as we have stated
earlier there has been substantial increase in the fresh institutions in the High
Courts. Tn particular, this increase is due to the expansion of its special
jurisdiction under the various Acts and the coming into force of the Constitution,
with Articles 226 and 227 providing efficacious remedies to aggrieved citizens
who, by now, have become more conscious of their rights—though perhaps a
little oblivious to their duties and obligations. The delays in the making of
proper appointment of judges of the High Court when vacancies arise, and the
comparative indifference in regard to the strength of the judges in the High
Court inspite of increase in institutions and the heavy hacklogs, have also very
appreciably added to the gravity of the situation.

177th Report, Delay and Arrears in Trial Courts (December, 1978)
2Chapter 2. infra.

*Para 131 10 1.36, infra.

“Para 1.23 and 1.24, infra.

SPara 1.29, infra.

Para 12, supra.

Genesis and sche
me of discussion.

Accumulation of
cases.

Arrears,

Increase in  insti-
tution,


2

Speed and justice LS. Speedy justice is of the essence of an organised society and it is in the
mony. interest of both the State and the citizen that disputes which go to the law
courts for adjudication are decided as early as possible, Justice delayed is, in
most cases, justice denied. At the same time, it is obvious that in order to
speed up the decision of cases, the basic norms that are necessary for ensuring
justice should not be dispensed with. This is the great problem facing any
Person or group of persons entrusted with the task of devising measures to
secure elimination of delay and speedy clearance of arreats in courts. How does
one balance the consideration of speed and the demands of justice? In making
our recommendations, we have tried to keep in the forefront the need to main-
tain 8 reasonable amount of harmony between these two considerations.
Oeste ay halt 1.54. Delay in the disposal of cases apart from causing hardship to the partie
. has a human aspect and has the effect of embroiling succeeding generations in
litigation started by the ancestors. Some of these aspects were brought out in
a judgment! of the Supreme Court in 1976 wherein the Court observed:

“Apart from that we find that the suit out of which the present appeal
has arisen was filed as long ago as January 1950. From the title of
the appeal we find that many of the original plaintiffs and defendants
have during this period of more than a quarter of century departed and
are no more in the land of the living, having bowed as it wefe to the
inexorable law of nature. They are now represented by their legal
representatives. To remand the suit to the trial Court would necessarily
have the effect of keeping alive the strife between the parties and
prolonging this longdrawn litigation by another round of legal battle in
the trial Court and thereafter in appeal. It is time, in our opinion, that
we draw the final curtain and put an end to this long meandering course
of litigation between the parties. If the passage of time and the laws
of nature bring to an end the lives of men and women, it would perhaps
be the demand of reason “and dictate of prudence not to keep alive after
so many years the strife and conflict started by the dead. To do so
would in effect be defying the laws of nature and offering a futile
resistance to the ravage of time. If human life has a short span, it
would be irrational to entertain a taller claim for disputes and conflicts
which are a manifestation of human frailty. The courts should be loth
to entertain a plea in a case like the oresent which would have the
effect of condemning succeeding generation of familities to spend major
part of their lives in protracted litigation. Tt may be appropriate in
the above context to reproduce what was said in the case of Sant Narain
Mathur प्र. Rama Krishna Mission 22

‘Tt is time, in our opinion, that we draw the final curtain on this
long drawn litigation and not allow its members to smoulder for a
further length of time. more so when the princival contestants have
all departed bowing as it were to the inexorable law of nature. One
is tempted in this context to refer to the observations of Chief Justice
Crewe in a case concerning peerage claim made after the death
without issue of the ‘Earl of Oxford. Said the learned Chief Justice:

“Time hath its revolutions: there must be a period and an end
to all temporal things—an end of names. and dignities and
whatsoever is terrene. and why not of De Vere? For where is
Bohun? Where is Mowbrav? Where is Mortimer? Why, which
is more and most of all, where is Plantagenet? They are all
entombed in the urns and sepulohres of mortality.”

‘What was said about the inevitable end of all mortal beings, however
eminent they may be, is equally true of the affairs of mortal beings.
their disputes and conflicts, their ventures in the field of love and
sport, their achievements and failures for essentially they all have
a stamp of mortality on them.’
One feels tempted to add that if life like a dome of many-coloured glass
stains the white radiance of eternity. so do the doings and conflicts of
mortal beings till death tramples them down.”

‘Bechan Pandey v. Dulhin Janki, (1976) 2 S.C.C. 286, 290, 291.
रहता Narain Mathur v. Rama Krishna Mission, (1974) 2 $.0.0. 730, 737, para 15.


3

1.58. With these preliminary observations, we proceed to a consideration of the
subject,

i, THE COURTS

1.6. Tho judicial power of the Union and the States is exercised through the
courts established by or under the Constitution. The Constitutioa of India.
apart from creating a Supreme Court for the Union of India, has provided for
a High Court for each Sta‘e. It has also empowered every State to establish
for its territory appropriate judicial machinery, with such ju icial powers as
are necessary, subject to constitutional limitations. This accoui‘s for some
differcnee in the functioniag and exercise of jurisdiction by various courts,
including, in certain respects, the High Courts, in each Staie. There are, how-
ever, certain features which are common to most High Couris.

1.7. The utility of the Supreme Court and the High Cours was well brought
out in the 580 Report of the Law Commission’ which dealt with the structure
and jurisdiction of the higher judiciary:

“Ever since our Constitution was adopted and the Supreme Court was
established, the Supreme Court has, by its ver °d during the
last tweny-two years, made the concept of the Rule of Saw relevant,
coherent and stable in this country. It has consisten‘ly pz fod the
Fundamental Rights of the citizens against unconstitutiozal en ent,
examined the validity of legislative and executive a tairly, invpar-
tially and fearlessly, and introduced an element of certainty and un ormity
in the interpretatioa of laws. The service thus rendered by the Suprenie
Court is of a very significant character and its importance cannot be
exaggerated in the context of the federal set-up of th> Indian Republic.

“During the same period, High Courts ia our States also have done
valuable work in exercising their ordinary civil and criminal jurisdiction
and their constitutional jurisdiction under Articles 226 and 227 of the
Constitution. Broadly stated, it can be legitimately claimed that the
operation of judicial ‘process in our country during the fast twenty-two
years has, on the whole, fostered and strengthened the best judicial
traditions and thereby deserved and commanded confidence frv the
Indian community in general and the litigating public in particula:

IV. PAST REPORTS

1.8. To maintain this confidence, it is necessary that arrears be broug't down.
The problem of arrears in High Courts is of Jong standing aad lias de2n aired
into more than once. A brief review of the efforts made in the past may be
of use.

1.9. To deal with the question of delay in the disposal of civil cascs both in
the High Courts and in the subordinate courts, a Committee was appointed
in 1924 under the Chairmanship of Mr. Justice Rankin of the Calcutta High
Court: The task of the Committce was “to enquire into the operation and cficc’s
of the substantive and adiective law, whether enacted or otherwise, followed by
the courts in India in the disposal of civil suits, appzals, applications for revision
and other civil litigation (including the execution of decrees and o-ders’ with a
view to ascertaining and reporting whether any and what cha and improve-
ments should be made so as to provide for the more speedy, economcal and
satisfactory despatch of the business transacted in the courts and for the more
economical and satisfactory execution of the process issued by the

The Committee, after a thorough and careful enquiry i the various
aspects, forwarded an exhaustive report in 1925.

1.10. In 1949, a High Courts Arrears Committee was set up by the Government
of India under the Chairmanship of Mr. Justice $. R. Das, for enquiring and
reporting as to the advisability of curtailing the right of appeal and revision,
the extent of such curtailment, the method by which such curtailment should be

ILaw Commission of India, S8ih Report (Structure and Jurisdiction of the Higher
Judicia-y), Questionnaire and the preamble thereto, quoted at page 1. para 1.1 and 1 2,
*Rankin Committee.

2-253 LAD/ND/79

Courts under

Constitution,

Role of Conrts.

Past efforts,

Rankin Commit-

tee

Committee

of


Review by Gov-

‘Commiftees — ap-
pointed in various
States,

Law Commis-
sion’s Reports,

580 Report,

4

effected, and other measures, if any, which should be adopted to reduce the
accumulation of arrears. A number of recommendations were then made by this
Committee.!

1.21, Ia 1967, the Government of India, greatly concemed at the probiem of
ccumulation of arrears in various High Courts,? conducted a review of the
state of work in each High Court and found that inadequacy of judges was
the main cause of the accumulation of arrears Government increased the
strength of judges in some of the High Courts, taking into account the arrears
of cases then pending, fresh institutions and disposals. Though this had some
effect, no appreciable result was produced.

At the end of the year 1969, the Government of India constituted a
Committee presided over by Mr. Justice Hidayatullah, the then Chief Justice
of India, to suggest ways and means for reducing arrears of cases pending in the
High Courts. Upon the retirement of Mr. Justice Hidayatutlah, Mr. Justice Shah
was appointed the Chairman of the Committee.« When Mr. Justice Shah
retired as the Chief Justice of India, Government requested him to continue as
Chairman of the Committee. The Report of the Committee will be referred to
in due course.

1.12, Apart from the above three Committees which worked at all-India level,
some Commitiees were appointed in different States to look into the problem of
delay and other matters concerning judicial administration.

One such Committee was in West Bengal. This Committee was consti-
tuted in 1949 under the Chairmanship of Sir Trevor Harries, the then Chief
Justice of the Calcutta High Court. Another Committee was constituted in
1950 in Uttar Pradesh under the Chairmanship of Mr. Justice K. N, Wanchoo.

1.13, The Law Consmission of India, in its 14th Report made in 1958, went into
all aspects relating to the Reform of Judicial Administration, including the
question of delay in the disposal of cases in High Courts.

The 27th and 54th Reports of the Law Commission dealing with the
Code of Civil Procedure, and the 41st Report dealing with the Code of Criminal
Procedure, when making recommendations for revision of the procedural codes,
were addressed, inter alia, to the aced for reducing delay at various stages of
the trial, including appeals and revisions to High Courts.

Tt_may be mentioned that it was as a result of the recommendations in
the 54th Report that the scope of the right of second appeal came to be somewhat
circumscribed. Also, it was as a result of the 41st Report that appeals to High
Courts from Presidency Magistrates (who are now designated as Metropolitan
Magistrates) came to be abolished. Such appeals now lie to the Court of
Session.5

1.14. In 1974, when the Law Commission reviewed the structure and jurisdiction
of the higher judiciary® (58th Report), it focussed its special altention on the
imperative need to reduce arrears in the higher courts, and dealt with a number
of questions, including writ petitions, taxation. industrial disputes, matters
relating to conditions of service of the judges. The Report also deals at fength
with appeals to the Supreme Court—both civil and criminal—including appeals
with special leave.

'These ate summarised by the later Committee Report, 1972. pages 9-10, pata~
eraphs 32 to 36.
2९6७ High Courts Arrears Committee Report (1972). page 1, Chapter 1. para 4.
‘The other contributing factors were—
{a) delay in filling up vacancies:
{b) lack of court accommodation:

{c) diversion of serving judges to other duties, such as Commission of Inquiry
etc. without providing replacement in the High Court.

High Courts Arrears Committee Repost (1972). page 2, paragraphs 6 and 7.

SCode of Criminal Procedure, 1973. section 3743).

‘Law Commission of India, 5860 Report (Structure and Jurisdiction of the Higher
Judiciary).



3

¥y. LEGAL AND EXTRA-LEGAL FACTORS

4.15, The very fact that the problem of arrears has received attention for such Complicated na-
a long time, and has been considered by so many high powered committees, and ture of the pro-

yet continues to vex ail concerned, 1s enough 10 indicate that the problem, by
its nature, is not easy of solution, Being very conscious of this fact, we have
Not, in preparing this Report, been unmindful of the complicated nature of the
subject and of the numerous issues involved. The imstitution of cases and
increase therein is not a matter which can be adequately dealt with 16:2५ by
legal amendmenis, though certain aspects thereot could be so atiended to.
Improvement in the raie of disposal of cases cannot also, in its totality, be
achieved by mere statutory reforms, since the human factor cannot be over-
looked. This human factor comprises so many elements—the judges, the
Ministerial staff of the courts, the members of the bar, the partizs and the
witnesses.

1.16, Lt should also be remembered that the judicial system and the legal
machinery do not work in isolation from society. They are parts of the entire
social and political system and their efficient working must, to a large extent,
depend on the co-operation of other elements of the system. Take a familiar
but important example. The service of summonses, notices and other documents
issued by the couris—that is to Say, prompt and efficient service-—pre-supposes
the promptness and efficiency of the serving establishment. Where postal service
is introduced, it pre-supposes the efliciency and prompiness of the postal autho-
tities. Where service 1s effected through the Govermment—as for example, in
the case of Government servants,—co-operation of the head of the ollice is
needed. Delay in these fields—fields which are, in a sense, outside the legal
systemm—necessarily causes delay in the disposal of cases. In this sense, the
role of improvements that are operative only within the judicial system is
obviously a limited one in dealing with the problem.

blem.

Judicial

system

not working in

isolation,

1.17, We are mentioning this consideration, elementary though it may be, in Limitations of re
forms in the sys-

order to indicate that without the active co-operation of other agencies, 100 much
should not be expected of ihe steps that may be taken to implement the recom-
mendations made in this Report or, for that matter, of any other Report on the
subject that might have been given in the past.

tem ant

id need 10

look to the future
ag well as to the

past.

1.18 We would also like to make it clear that it is simple arithmetic that arrears Rate of disposal
and rate of insti-

arise whea—taking one calendar year—tbe rate of disposal in that year is less
than the rate of institution, If disposal maintains a percentage equivalent to that
of institution, then certainly no further arrears would accumulate and the
problem would remain only of dealing with the past arrears. It is therefore of
iraportance that any steps that may be taken in the maiter should look not only
40 the past, but also to the future. This is not to say that the backlog must
not be atiended to. it must also be cleared,! and, in making our recommendations,
we have tried to pay heed to that aspect also.*

tution,

1.19. Jt cannot be denied that the problem of arrears in High Courts is not only Complexity of the

serious in its magnitude, but also complex in its character. In order to elicit
opinion on the complex issues involved, we invited views through a Question-
naire,’ copies of which were sent to various interested persons and bodies, The
Chairman of the Commission also visited several places for holding oral discus-
sions on the subject with the Bench and the Bar. The Commission is grateful
for the co-operation of all concerned who were kind enough to spare their
valuable time and expressed their views.

1,20. With a view to solving the problem of arrears in courts. suggestions have
been made for the appointment of more judges, changes in the distribution of
business, amendments in the rules of procedure, the elimination of delaying
tactics and the like. The problem, however, has persisted, requiring again a
review of the position. It is no exaggeration to speak of an impending crisis in
judicial administration. To understand how this crisis has come about, it is
necessary to inquire into the factors leading to work-loads, and the procedure

adopted for the disposal of that load.

‘Para 1.27 and 1.28, infra.
3$ee Chapter 3, infra.
*The Questionnaire is printed as an Appendix to the 77th Report,

problem.

Efforts
past,

in

the


6

Extra-legal and 1.21, The factors leading to judicial work-loads may be broadly classified as

legal factors lead- extra-legal and legal, For example, with the increase in population, here is

‘ng 10 Worklose. naturally an mexease in the work of the couris, In addiuon, our society 13 with
the passage of time getting more complex. These are illustrations of extra-legal
actors,

New rights. 1.22, New rights have been brought into being, and older Tights (such as contract
and property) bave been subjected to Governmental reguiation and legal con-
trol. New sociai interests are also pressing for recogaition in the courts, In
part, the increase is contributed by legisiation and by broadened governmental
programmes of ali kinds, since issues arising out ot these ultumalely reach the
courts for resolution. These tactors may be described as legal,

हि All these developments have increased the demands on the law and its
institutions, and it is desirable to keep im mind factors Jeading 10 increase in
Judicial business.

Law Commission £23. We have referred above! to the various Reports concerned with the sub-

—l4th Report. ject of arrears. Some of them have examined the causes of arrears at Jength.
Lhe Law Commission of India, in its 14th Repori,? while pointing out that the
probicm ot arrears in the High Courts has to be viewed against ine very large
increase in the institution of cases in the High Courts, pariicularly durmg ine
post-Constitution period, summarised the reasons for the accumulation of work
10 ihe High Courts in the following manner:

“C) The arrears can be partly attributed to the increase in both the
normal work of the High Court and also the expansion of its special
jucisdiction under various Acts,

(2) The coming into force of the Constitution has also greatly added to
ihe work of the High Courts.

(3) The streagth of the High Courts was not increased in time to prevent
the arrears from accumulating,

(4) There has been large increase of arrears in the High Courts and
disposals have fallen short of what they should be in a properiy
tegulated court,

(5) Many unsatisfactory appointments have been made to the High Courts
on political, regional and communal or other grounds with the result
that the fittest men have not been appointed. This has resulted in
a diminution in the outturn of work of the judges.

(6) These unsatisfactory appointments have been made notwithstanding
the fact that in the vast majority of cases appointments have been
concurred in by the Chief Justice of the High Court and by the
Chief Justice of India.”

The Commission also recommended certain remedial measures,

View of High 1.24. The High Courts Arrears Committee: presided over by Mr. Justice Shab,

Courts Arrears after slating as many as fourteen causes which, in its view, were responsible for

Commnitiee, the accumulation of cases} in the High Courts, recommended certain measures

for their clearance. The Report of that Committece concluded thus;

“In the last analysis it is obvious that it will depend entirely on the
calibre and willing effort of individual judges in the country not only to
clear the back-log but keep down the file without unduly affecting the
quatity of justice. It is our fitm belief that if proper care is taken in manning
the superior judiciary in the best possible way with men of ability and
character, that will be the surest guarantee for achieving prompt and
efficient administration of justice in our land.”*

Backlog 1.25, We may mention that most of the High Courts are not able to deal with
हु ‘old cases along with the current files, with the result that there continues to
be a heavy backlog of arrears on their file. In some High Courts, the disposals

‘Paragraphs (.8 and 1.9, supra.

414th Report.

"High Courts Artears Committee Report (1972), pages 36-48,
‘High Courts Arrears Committee Report (1972) pages 91-92.


प्र

are not keeping pace even with the institution.' The courts and their staff have
begun to feel oppressed and suffocated on account of the heavy workload in
cours,

4.26, Every one is familiar with the arrears in law courts, especially in the High
Cours in most of the States. The hard fact ot delayed justice has driven not
oniy many Judges and lawyers, but also members of the public, to re-thinking
about the court procedures and to search for better ways of getting justice, That
congestion of cases in the High Courts is chronic and has been allowed io ron
for some time is clear from vatious Reporis on the subject from 1924 to-date.
Law’s delays is not something peculiar to India, but it should be borne in mind
that delay is curable if the Government, the members of the bar and the
judiciary set their hearts at it. If the right remedies are applied at the
appropriate time, the problem is not beyond solution, The need, therefore, at
present is to find out the correctives; the causes ate, by and large, well known.

1.27. ‘The recommendations already made by us in a separate Report? for the
disposal of suits and other original proceedings in the trial courts will be
helptul in expediting the disposal of cases in these courts. Here we are con-
cerned with the measures needed for the disposal of arrears and the prompt
disposal of current files by the High Courts and other appellate courts. In doing
this, we have to keep two objectives in che forefront—as indeed our terms of
teierence emphasise—namely, inexpensive justice and obtaining of speedy justice,
At the same time, it is necessary to ensure that judicial decisions should not be
hasty and made to depend merely on catculation of time.

1.28, In order that the respect which the judiciary has earned may be maintained,
it is necessary—apart from any other considerations—to examine the problem
of delay and its causes. The elimination of congestion in courts will certainly
enhance the public respect for the law and the judges to a very considerable
extent where it can be achieved without affecting the quality of justice.

This, then, has been the great question that has faced all Committees and
Commissions investigating judicial delay—how to reconcile justice with speed,
and what kinds of measures to suggest tor expediting disposal while maintaining
the yuality of justice,

One could conceive of a variety of measures: reform in the court structures;
improvement in the rules of procedure; Sugmentation of numbers in the judiciary
and in the auxiliary staff; improvement in the conditions of service; and many
other reforms.

1.29. As to the structure of courts, by and large, the appellate courts in India
are streamlined and the causes of delay cannot be sought in their structure. The
structure, no doubt, visualises a hierarchy of courts and a procedure of appeals
from one court to the other—but that is inevitable in any modern system. No
organised system of administration of justice permits the findings of the trial
court to carry a stamp of finality. The fact that the findings are liable to be
assailed in appeal, constitutes in a large number of cases a guarantee against
arbitrariness, and by itself produces judicial constraint, It is also essential
that so far as questions of law are concerned, there should be a uniformity of
decisions? Our system, therefore, by and large, contemplates that there should
be one right of appeal on questions of Jaw and facts and a second appeal on
a substantial question of Jaw io a court whose decisions are binding upon all
the courts in the State.+

1,30, The system, which is in force in many other countries like the United
Kingdom, Canada, Australia and the United States of America, has won the
support of most of those who have been dealing with law, and, in our opinion,
it would not be proper to condemn it as a legacy of the colonial days. No
doubt, every system has to meet the needs of national and local requirements,
and whenever we feel the necessity of making changes for that reason, we should
not be averse to making such changes as may be called for. But, as already

7668 Appendix.

27th Report.

‘See Chapter 4, infra.
“See Chapter 4, infra.

Arrears and reme-
dies,

Disposal of ar-
rears and prompt
disposal of cure
rent files,

Question of ba-
lancing justice and
speed,

Structure of ap-
pellate §— courts—
Hierarchy of
courts inevitable
in modern system,

System not alien
to Indian genius,


8

mentioned,' by and large, the system cannoi be decried as alien to the genius
of India. In this connection, we would repeat wha: was said by us in the 77th
Report, where we observed:

“No judicial system in any country is wholly immune from, and un-
affected by, outside iniluences, nor can such outside influence be aiways
looked upon as a bane. The laws of a country do not reside in a
sealed buok; they grow and develop. The winds of change, and the
free flow of ideals, do nol pass the laws idly by. The present day compli-
cations and delays in disposal of cases are not so much on accounr of
the technical and cumbersome nature of our legal system as they ere due
to other facrots operating in and outside the courts, In spite of the fact
that we are still heavily dependent on agriculture, we can no longer be
tegatded as an underdeveloped peasant sociely, in view of the great
strides that have been made in the direction of industrialisation and
urbanisation of population, besides expansion of trade and commerce.
{t will be a reirograde step to revert to the primitive method of
administration of justice by taking our dispules to group of ordinary
laymen ignorant of the modern compiexities of life and not conversant
with legal concepts and procedures. The real need appears to be to
further improve the exisung system to meet modern requirements in the
context of our national ethos and not to repiace it by an inadequate
system which was left behind long ago.”

Observations in 1.31, The Law Commission presided over by Dr. P. 8. Gajendragadkar made

carlicr Report of the following observations in its 58th Report:?
the Law Commis- oe
sion, “We have sound judicial traditions; a coherent pattern developed tor

the organisation of the judiciary; and a rational and systematic judicial
process. There is no doubt that these factors have conferred great
advantages on the country. An independent and efficient judiciary, a
unified judicial system and a modernised procedure—though legacies of
the pre-independence era—have been cherished by us. The judicial
system has earned the respect of the people, and the respect so earned
is well deserved.”

Compulsions ० £.32, We may mention that even in some of the countries which started with
modern Gociety ;a5 simple legal rules, the compulsions of modern society have led to @ situation
porate ‘Tegal riles Wherein they could not avoid having elaborate and cumbersome legal rules. We
Example of So- may in this context refer to a recemt study‘ about the Soviet legal system,

viet legal system. wherein it is said:

“During the period immediately following the Bolshevik Revoiution of
1917 there were devout Communists who believed that their new polity
would offer the world a model of a different kind of judicial system.
They intended to do away with complex legislation and procedures, to
eliminate the roles of lawyers and even prosecutors, and to substitute
for professionally trained judges wise laymen who would hear
disputes presented by the parties themselves and then make their decisions
according to the principles of socialist morality as much as formal norms,
Justice was to be simple, quick and inexpensive and would not require
an elaborate system of appellate review, judicial precedents, legal educa-
tion, or legal scholarship.”

“Within five years this aspiration was shattered. A frenzy of experimenta-
tion had produced not the simple, locally oriented judicial system that
had been anticipated, but a rather complex and centralised one with
institutions that bore embarrassing resemblances to those of imperial
Russia and the West European tradition from which the last three Tsars
had borrowed. Judges found it too inconvenient to try cases without the
assistance of a public prosecutor, defence counsel, and carefully pres-
cribed procedures, and the courts of the nation were being subjected to

'Para 1.29, supra.

*77th Report, para 3.1.

‘Law Commission of India, 58th Report (Structure and Jurisdiction of the Higher
Judiciary), page 14, para 2.10A.

‘Jerome Alan Cohen, “Wil! China Have a Formal Legal System?” (1968) Vol. 64,
American Bar Association Journal, pages 1510-1511


9

ever greater uniformity of decision through the revival of appellate review
and the issuance of statutes, deorees, and texts designed to guide the
judiciary. ‘The primitive concept of judicial procedure had collapsed
under the burden of practice’, as Professor John N. Hazard concluded.
“The formative years had proved to men who expected to avoid complexity
and formality that there was no alternative’.”

1.33, [6 the context of the judicial system in ancient India, we had occasion, in
the 77th Report,! to point out that with the grown of society, the function of
administration of justice was transferred to the King, who came to be regarded
as the fountainhead of justice, and that a regular hierarchy was set up which
gradually developed into a sophisticated system.

1.34, Reverting to delay, it may be said that it is sometimes due to dilatory
tactics adopted by one party who attempts to protract the proceedings of the
court. The courts must be in a position to control such acts and to see that
the case proceeds in conformity with the rules and according to Schedule.

138. The rules of procedure, on the whole, are simple and devoid of unnecessary
technicalities, so that it cannot be said that these rules are responsible for
holding up the hearing of cases. Improvements in procedure and administration
may, no doubt, be desirable, and will be suggested in due course, but they will
not, by themselves, alone solve the problem.

1.36. Moreover, the best of rules and the best of judges may be helpless in the
face of sheer volume of work, This aspect would suggest that attention will
have to be paid to the strength of judges also. Again, it is desirable that the
tumber and quality of judicial personnel is put to the optimum use by proper
distribution of business.

Thus, the solution lies not in this or that measure, but in a number of
measures taken together. Finally, these measures, once adopted, will not solve
the problem for all times to come. Periodical review of the impact of measures
taken will b> needed-~an aspect to which we shail revert at the end.2

शा, NORMS

Ancient Indian
system also one
of regular hieras-
chy with sophisti-
cated sysiem,

Ditatory tactics.

Rules or proce-
dute not respon-
sible.

Volume of work,

1.37, Since this Report is concerned with “arrears” and “delay” — two concepts Norms for arrears

vitally linked up with the time element—it is necessary to indicate certain
norms to determine what cases can be treated as old at a given time. The Law
Commission in its 14th Report? suggested that cases which were pending for
periods of time longer than those mentioned in that Report should be treated
ag arrears, The periods suggested were as follows:

(Periods suggested in 14h Report}

(a) Second appeals and Letters Patent Appeals One year.

(b) First appeals Two years.

(जे Criminal matters, writs and civil revision Six months.
petitions.

The period for treating cases as arrears was to be counted from the date
of institution.

The High Courts Arrears Committee presided over by Mr. Justice Shah’
considered that it was difficult to adhere to any time schedule for the disposal
of a given cause, because the time for each individual cause would be determined
by many factors. While we agree with the comment made by the High Courts
Arrears Committee, we think that it may be necessary to fix certain periods
beyond which a case should be regarded as “old” whose clearance assumes
importance.

As regards the actual periods, we largely agree with those suggested in
the 14th Report, but have a few modifications and additions to suggest-—-

(a) The period for second appeals and appeals against judgments of
single judges in writ petitions should be one year.

{77th Report. paragraphs 3.2 and 3.3.
°Chapter 19. infra,
44th Report. Vol. I. page 91. para 55.

पे Courts Arrears Committee Report (1972), page 33, para 21 and page 34,
Para 24.


10

(०) The period for regular first appeals should be two years.

(©) The period for criminal matters and civil revisions should be six
months.

(d) So far, however, as petitions under article 226 (other than those for
a habeas corpus) ate concemed, the more realistic period in our
opinion should be one year. The period for a writ petition for
habcas corpus should not normally exceed two months.

{e) Cases submitted to the High Courts for confirmation of the sentence
of death pronounced by a court of Session! should be disposed of
within three months from the date of submission.

(f) As regards original suits being tried in High Courts, the period should
be two years.

(g) Income-tax references and proceedings under the General Sales Tax
Acts, should be disposed of within one year.

Original petitions or appeals or revision petitions under the Land
Reforms Act or Tenancy Legislation and Rent Control Acts should
be decided within six months.

Vil. LITIGATION TO WHICH GOVERNMENT JS A PARTY

Government as a 1.38. No proposal for judicial reform can achieve success without the co-opera-

party. tion of the parties to the litigation. This is particularly so where the Government
is a party. At this stage, therefore, we would like to emphasise that the
Government is one of the main parties in the bulk of cases before the High
Courts. In all criminal cases the main party, apart from the accused. is the
State, As to civil cases, the Government is generally one of the patties in most
writ petitions, As to other civil proceedings, Government constitutes one of
the parties in quite a number of cases. For the quick disposal of cases, it
therefore becomes essential that the various departments of the Government
should afford all reasonable co-operation to the judicial process and attend to
court cases with diligence and promptness. Apart from that, a good bit of
litigation can be avoided if the departments concerned pay proper attention to
the notices issued to the Government prior to the initiation of proceedings.
Likewise, much time of the court can be saved if frivolous objections are avoided
in pleadings and written statements filed on behalf of the Government. The
position of the Government, it needs to be stressed, is not the same as that
of a private litigant. The Government has to project an image of being reason-
able in all cases to which it is a party. Its conduct in litigation should, in the
very nature of things, inspire a feeling of fairness,

शा. NATURE AND MAGNITUDE — STATISTICS

Comparison t it 1.39. The nature and magnitude of the problem will be further appreciated if

Per st 1977 with the position regarding arrears in the High Courts in 1977 is noted. It would

pendency at the appear that in the country as a whole,? the pendency of cases in the High Courts

end of 1972. ‘at the end of 1977 was much higher than the pendency at the end of 1972.
High Court-wise also, when one contrasts the pendency at the end of 1977 with
pendency at the end of 1972, the trend is found to be upward excepting in four
High Courts. namely, Andhra Pradesh (18.6% decline), Gujarat (6.7% decline).
Calcutta (8.10°% decline) and Orissa (6.6% decline). The percentage mention:d
for these four High Courts represents a decline, and not an increase.

Quantum of in 1.40, The increase of pendency at the end of 1977 over the pendency at the
crease in’ Pend ond of 1972 is—
ency. .

(a} more than 50% in the case of nine High Courts and

(b) less than 50% but more than 20% in the case of three High Courts.
The exact percentages are given below alphabetically : १4

(hi

ISection 366(1), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

"Department of Justice figures.

*Bigures for Sikkim High Court are not given in this case.

‘Based on figutes given in Department of Justice letter No. 36/1/78-Tus(M), dated
2-6-78, Table XIE.


11

Comparison of pending cases in the High Courts on 31-12-77 with those
pending on 31-12-72

S.No. Name of the High Court Pending on Pending on Percentage
31-12-1972 31-12-1977 of increase

or decrease
1 Allahabad पु + ‘ . पु BAT 1,32,749 +689
2, Andhra Pradesh पु . . . 19,527 15,887 —18.6
3, Bombay + . पु . . 41,442 52,592 +26.9
4, Calcutta . . . . पु . 18,820 72,448 —8.1
5, Delhi . . . + ‘ . 16,561 26,587 460.5
6,  Gauhati . . . + . पु 5,796 6,548 +12,9
7. Gujarat. . . . . + 12,560 11,722 57
8, Himachal Pradesh =. ’ . . 1,564 5,019 +220.9
9, Jammu & Kashmir. . . . 1,726 4,677 4171.0
10, Kerala. . . . . न 29,353 42,739 +15,6
mM, = Karnataka . . . . . 10,727 36,449 +229,7
12, Madghya Pradesh. पु . पु 20,653 46,613 +225.7
13, Madras . . + . . . 32,678 31,763 458.4
(Orissa. . . . . . 6,470 6,042 —6.6
15, . Patna. + पु . पु पु 23,704 29,435 +24.2
16, Punjab & Haryana toe 25,150 46,069 483.2
17. Rajasthan eee 13,359 10,558 453.9
18. Sikkim. . . . . . on 2a न
Total in the country . . . . 4,10,707 6,07,918 +48.0

141. Taking the actual percentage of increase every year, during the fe feat
Period 1973 to 1977—it would appear that the percentage has been fluctuating.

igh Court-wise, the percentage change in pendency at the end of the year
over the pendency of the previous year is as follows.!

Pendency at the end of each year from 1973 to 197 and percentage change in
pendency over the previous year in the High Courts in India

a है 7 a
ca Name of the Percentage “change in Pendeney over the pendency of previou!
a . अनफक_ अन्त DTS छल आए

1 2 a) 5 6 7
1. Allahabad. . . +13.9 +13.8 +10.2 +10.6
2, Andhra Pradesh . . +2 —16.4 —27.2 +10.4
3. Bombay पु . . +89 44.3 44.4 +5.0
4, Calcutta पु . . 6.0 +8.9 +24 5.7
5. Delhi . . . . +19,1 +8.3 +3.2 +14,4
6. Gauhati . . . 9,2 +18.9 —1.6 +5.8
7. Gujarat . . : ABS +206 3.1 4.6
8. Himachal! Pradesh . . +20.4 433.5 +35.6 +13.7
9. Jammu & Kashmir . +33.7 +14.9 +9.5 +324 +21.6
10. Kerala . . . . +4,3 5.5 +16.9 +275 10.9
11. Karnataka. . . —1.1 AIT +326 +48.2 +49,2
12. Madbya Pradesh . . +376 +241 +10.7 +94 +91
13. Madras. पु . . +5.1 —0.9 +12.9 +95 +23.0
14. Orissa . . . . 9.3 42,2 0.1 —0.5 41.3
15. Patna . न . . +6.2 +3.9 —2.1 +20.4 47.5
16. Punjab and Haryana. +0.7 +14.2 +:12.0 434.4 +5.8
17. Rajasthan. . . +16.3 +4.3 +211 +3, 2 +1.5
18. Sikkim . पु पु पु oy ar . +100.0 —A0,0
Totalinthe country. . +7.0 +5.9 49.7 +10.5 8.4

’Wepartment of Justice letter No, 36/1/78-Jus(M), dated 2-6-78, Table ता.
3—253 LAD/ND/79

if


12

Percentage of in- 1.42, It would appear! that for the years 1973 to 1977, the increase in the
crease _from 1973 whole country of arrears in the High Courts in terms of percentage is as

to 1977.

Sample figures.

follows:
1973 i it हे %,
increase in. peadgney at the end of 1973 over pendency 7.0%
1974 5.9%
1975 9.72
1976 10.5%
1977 8.4%

1.43. It would be tedious to give the figures of such increase during the five
year period (1973 to 1977) for every High Court.

Actual pendency 1.44. One may also obtain a rough picture of the state of arrears? by men-

tioning that at the end of the year 1977, the total pendency of cases in the
digh Courts was 6,07.918 (comprising 4.97172 main cases and 1,10,746
niscellaneous cases). In contrast with the figures of cases pending at the begin-
ning of the year 1977, this increase represents an increase in pendency of 7.7
per cent in the case of main cases and 11.7 per cent in the case of miscellaneous
proceedings.

The highest number of cases pending as at the end of 1977, was in
Allahabad (1,32,749), followed by Calcutta (72,448). Bombay (52,592), Madras
(51,763),, Madhya Pradesh (46,613), Punjab and Haryana (46,069) and Kerala
(42,739).

Three _ principal 1.45. From the above sample figures about arrears, three characteristics of

characteristics
arrears.

of arrears stand out. In the first place, speaking chronologically, arrears, in the
sense of increased pendency at the end of the year. has been continuous for the
vears represented by 1973-1977.4

In the second place, speaking numerically, the rate of arrears itself’ has
atied from year to year.

Lastly, speaking territorially,6 the arrears ate of an all-India extent, in
the sense that they are mot confined to only a few High Courts. With a few
exceptions, arreats are found in all High Courts, though the rate of increase and
the magnitude may vary from State to State.

Department of Justice letter No. 36/1/77-Jus(M), dated 12th Yuly, 1977, Table IX
and Department of Justice letter No. 36/1/78-Jus(M), dated 2-6-78, Table II

For discussion of recent figures, see para 3.2 and 3.3
Lan aDepartment of Justice letter No. 36/1/78-Jus(M), dated 2nd June, 1978. paragraph
i), page 3.

‘Para 1.42, supra.

“Para 1.42, supra.

"Para 1.40 and 1.42, supra.



CHAPTER 2
JURISDICTION OF HIGH COURTS AND CITY CIVIL COURTS

2.1. “di The jurisdiction of High Courts in India presents an infinite variety. The i juris
jurisdiction is original as weil as appellate; civil as well as criminal; ordinary as है १३ माफ
well as extra-ordinary; general as well as special; derived from the Constitution tory.
of the country and the staiute law, as well as from the Letters Patent or other
instrument constituting the High Court and other sources.
Hig This jurisdiction has a 108 history. The oldest High Courts in India—the
High Courts of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay—exercise ee oan original civil
jurisdiction within the respective limits of the three presidency towns.’ The source
of their original jurisdiction is to be found in the Indian High Courts Act? and in
the Leiters Patent issued thereunder. But it may be noted that some of the
provisions of the Letters Patent refer back to earlier Charters of the Supreme
Courts for the three presidency towns.

2.2. [n addition to their ordinary original civil jurisdiction, these High Courts
also exercise original jurisdiction in admiralty? and insolvency,‘ testamentary,>
matrimonial and guardianship matters.° The judisdiction of High Courts in regard
to admiralty is, incidentally, distinct from their ordinary original jurisdiction.’
While many of these matters are now regulated by Central Acts, some of them—
eg. admiralty jurisdiction—still have their source in the Letters Patent® or in
other instruments.?
2.3. All High Courts have extraordinary original jurisdiction.!° Extraordinary ori-
हि ginal jurisdiction.
E prtitions under the Special original
Representation of the People Act.!' Further, they have original jurisdiction under jurisdiction,
the Companies Act, the Banking Companies Act and certain other special Acts.
As Courts of Record, High Courts have also power to punish contempt
of Court.!2 It would be of interest to note that the Mayor’s Courts (which were
the predecessors of the Supreme Courts)! were Courts of Records.'4

2.5. All High Courts exercise appellate and revisional jurisdiction under the Appellate and re-
two procedural codes, and under certain other laws,—those laws themselves visional  jurisdic-
dealing with matters of a diverse character. The High Courts have also super- Ces प्ले कि ibe
visory jurisdiction under Ariicle 227 of the Constitution. laws.

2.6. High Courts also hear references under the laws relating to direct taxes, References.
made by the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal and under the laws relating to
certain other taxes made by the competent authority. They are also vested with
jurisdiction to hear references for the confirmation of death sentence under the
Code of Criminal Procedure.'$ Under the same (०१8, High Courts {and other

2.4, All High Courts have original jurisdiction in election

‘Certain other High Courts are at present vested with ordinary original civil jurisdic-
tion. See Chapter 16, infra.

2The Indian High Courts Act, 1861,

‘Kamalakar v. Scindia Steam Navigation Co., ALR. 1961, Bom. 186, 189.

‘Section 3, Presidency Towns Insolvency Act, 1909.

SIndian Succession Act, 1925, See Appendix 2 for a list of relevant sections.

‘See Appendix 6,

35९6 also Hamid Hasan v, Banwari Lal, ALR. 1947, PC. 90, 93.

*Kamalakar v, Scindia Steam Navigation Co., A-LR. 1961, Bom. 186, 189.

%E.g, certain British statutes. See para 2.10, infra.

105९८ Chapter 16, infra.

Ngection 804, Representation of the People Act, 1951.

Article 215 of the Constitution,

SMayor’s Courts were first established in 1726 and re-established in 1753.

Cowell. Courts and legislative authorities in India (1905), page 13, citing Statute of
1726 (13 Geo. 1)

‘Sections 366 to 368, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

MSection 432. Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

13


44

Courts also) can be consulted by the Government in certain matters concerned
with exercise of the prerogative of mercy (application for suspension or remission
of sentence).

Then, there are civil references heard under statutory provisions. Some
examples of such provisions are given below:

1. Section 113, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

2. Order 46, Rule 1, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

3. Section 69, Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882.

4, Sections 11 and 17, Provincial Small Cause (०००७ Act, 1887.

Under the Contempt of Courts Act, '* a subordinate court can make a
reference to the High Court in regard to contempt of court.

Confirmation pro- 2.7%. Under the Indian Divorce Act, which applies to Christians, every decree
cedure under the for the dissolution of marriage made by a District Court, is subject to confirma
tion’ by the High Court, and section 17 of the Act requires such cases for
confirmation to be heard by a bench of three judges, where the number of
judges of the High Court is three or more, or by a bench of two judges where
the number of judges of the High Court is two.
Matrimonial jurisdiction im regard to Parsis is of a special category.‘ A
judge of the High Court presides over the Chief Parsi Matrimonial Court cons-
tituted under the Act in Presidency (0915.

Revisions. 2.8. Civil revisionalS and supervisory jurisdiction of the High Court is derived
from several constitutional and statutory provisions, chief amongst these being
article 227 of the Constitution; section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908;
section 25 of the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 1887 (or corresponding law)
and section 75(1), proviso, of the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920. Against the
decision of a High Court Judge in revision, there is no Letters Patent Appeal—a,
feature which under the existing law distinguishes revisional jurisdiction from
decisions of a High Court Judge on first appeal.®

Criminal revisional jurisdiction is principally governed by the Code of
Criminal Procedure.

Varied sources of 2.9. ‘Lhe sources of jurisdiction of High Courts are as varied as the jurisdiction

jurisdiction. itself. The jurisdiction is derived from the Constitution, the Letters Patent, the
two procedural Codes, certain other Central Acts and, in some cases, from State
‘Acts,

British statutes on 2.10. Certain British statutes which are still in force? also contribute their share

Admiralty. to the judicial business of High Courts in regard to admiralty jurisdiction.®

File in High 2.1. The jurisdiction of High Courts being, as stated above? wide and of

Courts, infinite variety, judicial business in the High Courts 28180. presents considerable

variety. The files in the High Courts include, in the main, (a) first appeals, (b)
appeals, commonly known as Letters Patent Appeals, by whatever name they
are known in some High Courts, (c) second appeals, (d) civil revision petitions,
(०) criminal appeals, (f) criminal revision petitions and references, (g) petitions
under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution, (h) writ appeals, (i) references
under the Income Tax Act, and other laws relating to direct taxes, (j) matters
arising under the Sales Tax Act, (k) election petitions, (I) petitions under the
Companies ‘Act, Banking Companies Act, and other special Acts already
ment 10

ISection 15, Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.

4Sce in the matter of 0. B. Vora, (1974), Criminal Law Journal. 899 (Delhi).
3Section 17, Indian Divorce Act, 1869.

‘Sections 18 and 19. Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936

‘For history, see para 2.12, infra.

‘Chapter 11, infra.

‘Cf, the Colonial Courts of Admiralty Act, 1890 (53-54 Vic, ० 27) read with the
Colonial Courts of Admiralty Act (Central Act 16 of 1891).

"Para 2.1, supra.

%Para 2.1 to 2.8, supra.

“Pare 2.4. supra.


is

Apart from ihe above, there is, as mentioned above,' the ordinary original
civil jurisdiction in the matter of suits, exercisable by the High Courts of
Bombay, Calcutia and Madras* under their Letters Patent. The High Courts
of Delhi and Himachal Pradesh have ordinary original civil jurisdiction under
a Central Act, to be discussed in due course. The High Court‘ of Jammu &
Kashunir has also ordinary civil jurisdiction.

2.12. The emergence of the various species of jurisdiction of the High Courts
is integrally connected with importani events in Indian legal history. ‘Thus, the
three High Courts in the Presidency wowns have succeeded’ to the jurisdiction
previously exercised by at least three different courts—the Supreme Court
(principaily a court of original yurisdiction),° the Saddar Divani Adalat and the
Saddar Nizamat Adalat (which beard appeals trom civil and criminal courts
respectively),’ Revisional jurisdiction can also be traced to the Saddar Divani
Adalat,

This fusion of jurisdiction by the Indian High Courts Act, 1861 is an
interesting epoch of Indian legal history. Inwoducing the Bill, Sir Charles Wood?
made an inieresting speech, pointing out that “the administration of justice in
the minor courts depends on the mode in which the appeals seat up from them
are treated (by the superior courts)”,

2.13, Another epoch-making change 10०: place with the coming into force of
the Indian Constitution.’ Not only were High Courts created or continued for
all States, but also all the High Courts came to be vested with writ jurisdiction --
a jurisdiction which has played a notable part in the development of the con-
Slitulional and administrative jurisprudence of the country. It bas been stated!”
that presumably the object of giving this power was to put the High Courts
substantially in the same position as the Court of the Queen's Bench in England.
‘The basic principle of constitutionalism is that the Government itself must be
subject to rules. In Aristotle's phrase, “Government must be of laws, not of
men”. Article 226 of the Constitution is intended to provide a machinery to
implement this principle.

Pienitude of juri
diction and
19088 in histery.

is:
iss

The Indian Con-

stitution.

244. This is a brief sketch of the jurisdiction of the High Courts. A full No other court
i i vested with such
wide jurisdiction.

statement of the various species of jurisdiction exercisable by them would
require a conspectus of almost the entire statute law of India. Hardly any
superior court in any other country exercises jurisdiction of such plenitude and
variety.

218. Before closing this Chapter, we may state that the burden of High Courts City Civil Courts

in the Presidency towns in respect of ordinary original civil jurisdiction bas
been somewhat lessened by the establishment of city civil courts.!' Such a court
{was established for the city of Madras in 1892, for Greater Bombay by the
Bombay City Civil Court Act, 1948 and for Calcutta in 1957 under the Calcutta
City Civii Court Act, 1953. Their pecuniary limits have been revised from time
to time. The City Civil Courts of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras have now
jurisdiction to try suits of a civil nature not exceeding Rs. 50,000/- in value, except

‘Para 2.1, supra,
‘Chapter 15, infra.
*Chapter 15, infra,
‘Chapter 15, infra.
a) Cowell, Courts and Legislative Authorities in India (1905), pages 13, 15. 79, 90,
107, 109, 113, 114, 128 and 131.
(b) Kamatakar v. Scindia Steam Navigation Co. Lid, AJ.R. 1961, Bom. 186, 189.
‘Section 17, Act of Settlement (21 Geo. 2 ०. 70).

‘For history of appellate jurisdiction of High Courts, see India Electric Works v.
Registrar, Trade Marks, AA.R. 1947, Cal. 49, 52, 61.

"Hansard (1861), page 647; Cowell, Courts and Legislative Authorities in India (1905).
pages 161-162

‘See para 1.7 and 1.21, supra.
“Election Commissioner v. Saka Venkata Suba Rao, (1952) S.C.R, 1144, 1150,
“See also para 2.9, supra.

in the three
sidency towns.

Pre-


16

those specifically excluded from their cognizance, with the result that the ordinary
original civil jurisdiction of those three High Courts is now confined to suits ण
proceedings exceeding Rs. 50,000/- in value, apart from the original jurisdiction
which they are exercising under some special statutes.

Delhi and Hima- 2.16. As already stated,! High Courts of Delhi and Himachal Pradesh also
chal Pradesh, exercise original civil jurisdiction in suits exceeding Rs. 50,000/- in value? There

are, however, no City Civil Courts in Delhi and Himachal Pradesh.

City Ciyil Courts, 2.17. It may be mentioned that in Ahmedabad and Hyderabad, there are City
and Hyderabad. Civil Courts, constituted under State legislation.

‘para 2.11, supra.
See Chapter 15, infra,


CuapTEr 3

STRENGTH OF THE HIGH COURTS : NUMERICAL AND
QUALITATIVE ASPECTS

L STATISTICS

3.1. We propose to deal in this Chapter with the strength of High Courts and scope of Chapter.
other connected matters,—matters which we regard as of primary importance in

solving the problem of arrears and preventing the further accumulation of

arrears. Since this question requires consideration of figures of institution, dis-

‘posal and pendency of cases in High Courts, we first refer to such figures for

recent years.

3.2. According to the statistics issued by the Ministry of Law, Justice and Increase in pen-
Company Affairs! (Department of Justice), on June 2, 1978, the total number of dency.

cases pending in the High Courts on 1-1-77 and 31-12-77, as also the percentage

of increase in pendency, was as under?:

1-1-1977 31-12-1977 Percentage
increase in
pendency

Main Cases . ‘ . . . . . 4,61,720 4,997,172 +77
Miscellaneous Cases . . . . . . 99,161 1,10,746 +11.7
Total . : . . . . . 5,60,882 6,07,918 +8.4

The position in the High Courts with heavy pendency was as under:

11-1977 31-12-1977 Percentage

crease OF
decrease in
pendency
Allahabad. . . पु . . + 1,20,022 1,32,749 +10.6
Calcutta 2 6 1 ee es 46,866 72,448 —5.7
Bombay . . . . . . . 50,099 52,592 +5.0
Madras . . . . . . . 42,078 51,763 +23,0
Madhya Pradesh . . . . . . 42,723 46,613 +91
Punjab& Haryana 6 ww ee 43,542 46,069 +5.8
Kerala a rs 43,130 42,739 —0.9
Karnataka . . . . . . पु 24,427 36,449 +49.2
Patna . . . . . . . . 27,375 29,435 +75

3.3. Institution and disposal during the year 1977 in the country as a whole Institution and dis-
and percentage of disposal qua institution in each of the High Courts were as posal.

@ In the country (197)

Institution Disposal Percentage

of disposai
qua insti-

tution

MainCaes. 1. 2.2.) 2,39,796 2,04,331 85.2
Miscellaneous Cases 5 www 2,14,937 1,96,373 91.4
Totals. 4,54,733 4,00,704 88.1

'See Department of Justice figures (Appendix).
*For figures of five years, see para 1.32 to 1.36, supra.

17


Main cases at the

end of 197.

Sanctioned
ength.

18

{ii) Percentage of disposal qua institution in the High Courts (1977)

Sikkim + . : . न . . 128.6
Caicatta - हे +$ ४ न- *+ - +- - «- - 110.2
Guat gt पु 104.1
Kerala . . पु . . . . . : - . 101.1
Orissa. . . . . : . न . . . 98.4
Rajasthan . woe . रु मु . . . . 96.8
Andhra Pradesh - . पु - . . . : . . 96.6
Bombay. 2. +«+ tl, soe ek sek 93.6
Punjab & Haryana. . . . . . . . . . : 92.4
Patna पु - . . . . . : न - . . पु 87.6
Madhya Pradesh eek . . . . + . 36.6
Delhi पु . . . . os . . . : 84.5
Himachal Pradesh न पु . : - . . . . - 83.2
Madras see + - . . . . - 82,2
Gauhati . . . + : . . . . - 81.8
Allahabad पु . . . . - . . . . . 719
Jammu ; Kashmir . . . न पु न + + . . 70, 1
Karnataka . . . न . : . . . . 67.5

The average disposal per judge during the years 1976 and 1977 in the
country as a whole and the various High Courts was as under:

1976 1977
@) ) da the country . 7 ्य्ायएए छः ऋछ the country . - . - . - न 688.2 723.2
Gi) in the High Courts . . : . . - . .
Punjab & Haryana . oe . मु न मु 917.4 1216.3
Kerala . . : . . . . . - . - 344, 3 1063.4
Madras . . . * . . न . . - . 1001.2 1031.6
Calcutta - पु पु eee - . : . 1078.1 1006.9
Gujarat . : . . न . - - - . 884.3 840.5
Andhra Pradesh. . . . न . . - . 992.0 826. 1
Kamataka  . . . . . न - . . . 952.9 807.7
Allahabad . : . . . - न . - 590.0 648.3
Bombay . . * - . . . न - . 931.5 627.3
Madhya Pradesh . oe . . . . न 805.2 590.8
Patna . . - . . . न . . : 8.5 380.4
Orissa . . . . . . : - . 608. 1 57.2
Rajasthan. : - . . . - . . . 606.4 444.9
Delhi . . . . . . - . . . $25.2 350.3
Himachal Pradesh . . . न . न . - . 225.0 349.3
Jammu & Kashmir न . - . . . . - 280.0 320.2
Guahati . . . न . . . - . . 385.5 210.5
Sikkim : . . . . . . - - 22.0 30.7

3.4, Total number of main cases in High Courts at the end of 1977 was
4,917,172. Taking 650 main cases as the average disposal per judge per year,
and taking 352 as the total number of judges' during 1977, this number of cases
would take 2 years, 2 months and 2 days for disposal, even if the full Strength
of judges is available.

The statistics mentioned above point to the need for examining at some
length the question of strength of the High Courts.

str- 3.5, The sanctioned strength? of Judges during the year 1977 was 352, as

against the sanctioned strength of 351 in the previous year. One post was kept
in abeyance during the two years. Ont of the sanctioned strength of 352 in
ee eeSeeSeSeSeSeSeSSSSSSSSeSSSSSSS

‘Department of Justice figures.
*Department of Justice Ggures.


19

1977, only 287 Judges on an average were in position. The number of such
judges during the year 1976 was 292. Out of the actual strength, seven judges
on an average were entrusted with work outside their normal duties during the
year 1977 and 14 judges during the year 1976. The effective strength for the
purpose of court work in 1977 was 280 and in 1976 it was 278. The position
as on 315 March, 1979 was as follows for the entire country :—

Strength of High Court Judges—Position as on 3157 March, 1979

{All India)
1. Sanctioned strength, - oe 8 . . + « (a) Permanent 292
(उस्‍अ March, 1979). : . . . + (b) Additional 79
Total . 371
2. Actual strength eee ee ee (३ Permanent 280
Gist March, 1979). . . . + « () Additional 65
Total ae
3, Vacancies. «© 6 + «© «© «© «© «  « (9) Permanent
(3ist March, 1979). . + . . « (0) Additional

Total

वा. INCREASE IN JUDGE STRENGTH
3.6. A close scrutiny of the figures reproduced above would show that the Disposal less than
number of cases disposed of by the High Courts in the country as a whole was institution.
less than the number of cases instituted during the year 1977. This resulted—as
it must—in further piline un of the huge backlog of arrears, Any scheme which
aims at clearing of the backlog of arrears and eliminating delay in the disposal
of cases must take into account the imperative need to achieve two objectives.
namely: (3) the disposal of cases in the High Courts in the country must not
be fess than the institution during the vear. and (ii) effective steps must be taken
to reduce and lighten the heavy backlog of arrears.

To attain the above objectives. increase in the judge streneth of the
Hieh Courts cannot be avoided, Tt has to be borne in mind that the disposal
of cases. whether pending in the Hieh Court or in any other court, needs the
observance of certain procedural requirements. In the absence of such obser-
vance, any attempt to accelerate the disposal of cases would be onfiv at the
cost of rules of fair play and natural justice. Such an attempt would thus be
substituting a much worse evil. comnared with the evil manifested by delav in
the disnosat of cases. We are. therefore. opposed to attempts at expediting the
disposal of cases at the cost of the requirements of fair play and substantial
justice.

3.7. Stress has also been laid anite often on the personatity of judges. Although Recommendation
we asree that the personality of iudges can make a substantial difference in the ent (8
quality and auantum of disposat. we must not lose sight of the fact that there
is a limit up to which this factor can affect the totality of disposal. By and large.
the solution for increasing disposal of cases. eliminating delavs and clearing
arrears lies in raising the judge streneth of the High Courts. With this end in
view. we recommend that the judge streneth of the High Courts should he kept
at that level as ensures—

(a) that the disnosal in the year is not less than the institution.! and

(b) also that one-quarter of the backlog of old cases may be cleared? in a

period of one year.

3.8. So far as the permanent strenoth of each Hieh Court is concerned. we Fixation of _per-
ate of the opinion that it should be fixed keeping in view the average institution manent ‘strength.
during the preceding three years. As and when necessary. the permanent strength

"See para 3.8, infra.
Wee nara 3.9. infra.
4 — 253 LAD (NDYI79


20

may be reviewed. The permanent strength would thus be in a position to cope
with the fresh inistitution! and prevent any further accumulation in the heavy
Additional and ad backlog of cases
hoe judges. 3.9. As regards? the clearance of arrears of old cases, it would plainly be
not necessary to increase the permanent strength of the judges in a High Court
on that account. For this purpose, we would necessarily have to take recourse (0
appointing additional judges and ad hoc judges.?

We have considered the alternative of appointing only additional judges
for clearing the arrears but, on further reflection, we have arrived at the conclusion
that it would not be advisable to have only additional judges for this purpose.
The reason which has prevailed with us in arriving at this conclusion is the
necessity of adhering to a rule that ordinarily, and, in the absence of any special
reason, persons appointed additional judges from amongst the members of the
Bar practising in court and the District Judges should not be sent back to the
profession to practise in that court or reverted to their substantive post. So far
as the members of the Bar are concerned, it is, in our view. extremely undesirable
to appoint them additional judges unless there is certainty of their being ultimately
absorbed as permanent judges, Instances—though, fortunately. very few—have
not been lacking of members of the Bar being appointed as additional judges and.
after a spell of a year or two on the Bench, going back to the profession and
practising in that very court. Such a practice is most undesirable. Tt is fraught
with grave abuse and should not be countenanced. As regards the District Judges
also, it seems desirable that the eventuality of their reversion to their substantive
post should, as far as possible, be avoided. Reversion to the vost of district
judge after a person has been a High Court judge is bound to create within him
a feeling of discontent and frustration. The prospect of reversion is also likelv
to affect the approach and independence of such a judge when sitting in Division
Bench with a senior judge.

Tt is also plain that during the time a person functions as additional 1067९

of the High Court. vacancies are bound to arise from time to time for the office
of permanent judges. consequent upon the retirement of some of those iudges.
As and when such vacancies occur, additional iudges can. in accordance with
their seniority. be made to fill in the vacancies.
3.10. As mentioned earlier.s though the sanctioned ivdge strensth of the Hich
Courts in the country during the year 1977 was 352. onlv 287 judges on an
average were in position. Like wise. in the year 1976. even though the sanetioned
strength was 351, only 292 iudces were in position Teavine aside the judges
who were entrusted with work outside their norma! duties. the fact remains that
the number of indges in position in both the vears was less than the sanctioned
strength. This disparity hetween the sanctioned strensth and the number of
judges in position was apparently due to the fact that vacancies in the posts were
not filled in as soon as they occurred. It is our considered opinion that delav
in filling in the vacancies is one of the maior contributing factors resvonsible
for the niting accumulation of arrears. Tn our opinion. when a vacancy is
expected to arise out of the retirement of a judge, steps for filling in the vacancy
should be initiated six months in advance. The date on which such a vacancy
will normally arise is alwavs known to the Chief Justice of the High Court and
also to others concerned. Tt should be ensured that necessary formalities for the
appointment of a Judge to fill the vacancy are completed by the date on which
the vacancy occurs.

As already mentioned$ the total number of judges in position has. as a
Tesult of certain step. increased to 345 as on 31st March, 1979. as against the
sanctioned streneth of 371.
गा. RECOMVENDATIONS OF CHIEF JUSTICE TO BE PROMPTLY

; ATTENDED TO
Recommendations. 3.11. Complaints have been heard that sometimes a Chief Minister sits tight
fo be attended to Over the recommendation made by the Chief Justice for the appointment of
without delay. judges, and this fact results in delaying the appointment. In this regard, it would,

Filling of vacan-
cies,

Tara 3.79). supra.
‘Para 3.70). supra.
"Para 3.13, infra.
‘Para 3.5, supra.
‘Para 3.5, supra,


21

jn out opinion, be necessary to ensure that whatever may be the view of the
Chief Minister ‘about the particular recommendation of the Chief Justice, the
recommendation of the Chief Justice should engage the prompt attention of the
Chief Minister and should not be kept pending for more than a month. Sometimes
the recommendation of the Chief Justice necessitates the exchange of correspon-
dence beiween ihe Chief Minister and the Chief Justice. In such an event, efforts
shoutd be made to see that because of such exchange of correspondence the
matier does not get stuck up. 11 would perhaps be appropriate that necessary
reply to a letter received be sent within a week of its receipt. We feel that the
outside limit of six months which we have indicated above! should be sullicient
to take into avcount the various bottlenecks and delays which take place at
different stages.

lv. AD HOC JUDGES UNDER ARTICLE 2244

3.12, 11 izas been stated above? that the number of additional judges in each
High Court should be such as takes into account the prospects of their absorption
as permanent judges. Apart from such additional judges, more judges would
also be needed to cope with the arrears, The only suitable aijternative that we
can think of for this purpose is the appointment of ad hoc judges. For this
purpose, we may have (0 avail of the provisions of article 224A of the Constilu-
tion, according to which the Chiei Justice of a High Court for any State may,
at any time, with the previous consent of the President, request any person who
has held the office of a judge of that court or of any other High Court to sit
‘and act as a Judge of the High Court for that State and every such person so
requested shall, while so sitting and acting, be entitled to such allowance as the
President may, by order determine and have all the jurisdictions, powers and
privileges but shalt not otherwise be deemed to be a judge of that High Court.

3,13. We would like to stress that in taking recourse? to asticle 224A, only
those retiied judges may be appointed under that article as are known for
efficiency and quickness in disposal. It is also, in our view, necessary to ensure
that only those persons may be appointed under that article who retired within
a period of three years of their appointment. This would prevent persons who
have got out of touch with the court work being appointed.

The choice in making an appointment under article 224A to a particular
High Court should not be confined to the persons who have retired as judges
from chal very courl. For this purpose, the Chief Justice can look also to persons
who have retired as judges from other High Courts. Such a course is permissible
under article 224A, Initially, the appo:ntment should normally be for a period
tof one year. (0 be extended by further periods of one year each, upto total
three years. Jn making the recommendation for extension, the performance of
the relired judge appoinced under article 224A during the preceding year can be
taken into account.

9. ASSIGNMENT OF WORK

3.14. As mentioned elsewhere also.* the Chief Justice of the High Court can
play a pivotal role in securing the optimum disposal out of the Judge strength
‘of his court. The Chief Justice is presumed to know the aptitude of his
colleagues, and in the formation of Benches and assigning the type of work to
each Bench. he should keep in view the aptitude, grounding and familiarity with
any particular branch of law of each judge. We shall have occasion to revert
to this topic and deal with it at greater length subsequently.>

Vi. QUALITY
3.15. We are also of the opinion that every effort should be made to see that
the best persons available are appointed to serve on the High Court Bench, The

overriding consideration for this purpose should be the merit of the individual. (of

All other considerations must be subordinated to the paramount necessity of
having the best available person for the post. Experience tells us that wrong
appointments not only affect the image of the courts, they also undermine the

tPara 3.10, supra.

Para 3.8 and 3.9, supra.

tpara 3.12, supra.

‘See Chapter 7, infra.
‘Chapter 7, Infra.

Judges appointed
under article 224A
of the Constitu-
tion,

Field of choice
and duration.

Role of Chief
Justice.

Judges on the
Bench best _per-
sons to be appoin-


22

confidence in, and respect for, the High Court amongst the litigants, the members
of the Bar and the general public. A wrong appointment also affects the quantum
of output and the quality of disposal. Cases have also not been unknown when
one wrong appointment has deterred competent persons trom joining the Bench
subsequently despite the entreaties of the Chief Justice.

3.16. Also, with a view to attracting persons of the right calibre io the Bench,
something may have to be done to improve the service conditions. This might
also take into account the benefits, including pension, to which they would be
entitled aiter retirement. While it is true that the pay-scales of the judges cannot
be wholly divorced from the general pattern of pay structure of the country at the
higher levels, it bas also 10 be borne in mind that bright and capable members
of the Bar by sticking to tne profession can earn much more. in the eyes ot
some there may be a halo around the office of judgeship. The halo has, however,
been getting dimmer and dimmer with the efflux of time, the rising spiral of prices
and the disparity between the professional income and the salary of judges, We
must take note of the fact that some measures have recently been adopted to
improve the service conditions of the High Court Judges by providing them rent-
free house and giving them a conveyance allowance. However, having regard
to the existing tax laws, the steps taken in this respect may perbaps not provide
adequate relief.

VIL. INCREASE IN ADMINISTRATIVE FACILITIES

3.17. Increase in the number of judges must also take into account the need
for mofe court rooms and chambers, larger stati of the High Court and the
necessity of adequate number of law books for cach court.

It may also be ensured that judges are provided with suitable residences
and have not to wait long for the purpose. A number of suitable government
houses commensurate with the judge strength of the courts should be earmarked
for the judges and be placed at the disposal of the Chief Justice for being allotted.

Vili. PUNCTUALITY

3,18. We are happy to find that by and large the judges in the High Courts are
punctual and observe court timings. This, however, does not mean that no
vomplaints have been heard about the lack of punctuality or non-observance of
the court timings in some individual cases, It would essentially be ior the Chief
Justice of each High Court to ensure that no deviations in the matter of punc-
tuality and the observance of court timings are countenanced. It is also plain
that failure to adhere to court timings by a judge would result in less time being
given by him for court sittings and thus affect quantum of his disposal. The
Chief Justice would normally be able to secure adherence to court timings by
the judges only if he himself sets an example and abides by the court timings.
Instances have sometimes been known when a_ Chief Justice, as a matter of
routine, does administrative work during court time. This causes dislocation of
the court work and, as such, results in considerable inconvenience to the members
of the bar and the litigant public.

Conditions of ser-
vice,

Court, rooms, staff
and library—con-
sequential increase
needed

Punctuality.


CHAPTER 4
APPELLATE JURISDIC1ION UNDER THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE
4. PRESENY SCHEME AND HISTORY
4... A major part of the judicial business of the High Courts is constituted by
appellae and rvssional work. 1015 wotk 1s Oi Various types—frst appeals (cavily,
second appeals (Civil), appeals uader special Acis, Civil fevisions aud reserences,

criminal appeals and revisions and tne like. In this Cnapier, we are concermed!
wilh appellate jurisdiction under the Code oi Civil Procedure, 1905.

42. Lhe cost of iitigation could very well be reduced and justice made
Speedier it ine remedy vi appeal were to De dispensed witn allogetier, oul at us
enerally agreed धा&६ wus ts not possidle. Giving a stamp o1 finmainy io ine
decisions of Lie Wai ९०५६ May Seem LO 5076 LO be an easy soluiion to the
problem oO: cougesion in cours, but 1. smouid nei be Overiouked ८19६ Lo every
Jitigant his case is very important, There 1s, therefore, 7०७78 surprising in we
atlempts made by many 01 uiem to exhaust all iheir remedies ॥ the various
courts in the judicial bterarchy veture calling a inait to the course of litigation.

43. Whe rationaie oi the sys.em of civil appeais in Indian law has been
considered at length in two Reports vs ive Law Commission*, where the history
of the relevant statutory provisions bas 8150 been dealt with. A orief descripuva
of the present scheme would be usetui.

4.4. ‘Ine Indian procedural law has provided for appeals in civil suits accord-
ing Ww a pailern now Wel: Known. Lic Code of Civil Frocedure, 1908, provides
for first appeal? against tne decree or the trial court, for second appeal on
specitied grounds agaist the uecree of Wne first appellate court,” for appeal against
certain orders passed under the Code, and for revision’ on specified grounds.
The court in which first appeais have to be 91९3 depends on the provisions of
the civil cours Act in force in each State,’ including (as regards decrees passed
by a City Civii Court), the City Civii Court Act in force in some areas.? Second
appeals, and petiiious for revision under the Code of Civil Procedure, are to be
tiled only in the High Court. In addition, appeals and petitions tor revision to
ie Hign Court are provided for by some special Acts” while certain local Acts
vest revisional powers in the District Court.

4.5. As bas been pointed out in the Law Commission’s 54th Report on the
Code of Civil Procedure,!’ the scheme of the Code, ever since 1859, has been
lo give a pariy to suit at least two Opportunities of hearing on tacis—one by the
trial court and another by the appellate court. The right of a iitigant to take
this cause before a second appellate court on a question of law has also been
kecognised in our country,

4.6. Against certain decisions of the High Courts there is a right of appeal
to the Supreme Court.!! By a constitutional amendment,'? certain limitations bave
been introduced on this right, These limitations had their genesis in two Reports

‘For Letters Patent Appeals, see Chapter 11, infra.

*Law Commission of India, 54th Report (Code of Civil Procedure) and 580 Report
(Structure and Jurisdiction of the Higher Judiciary).

Section 96, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
"Section 100, Code of Civil Preedure, 1908.
‘Order 43, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
Section 115, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
See para 8.2, infra,

See para 8.11, infra.

*Section 25, Provincial Small Causes Courts Act, 1887; Section 75(1), proviso, Pro-
vincial Insolvency Act, 1920, See Chapter 2, supra.

54th Report, page 74, para 1-J.16A.

‘For history of appeal to the Supreme Court, see 44th and 45th Reports of the Law
Commission.

BConstitution (30th Amendment) Act, 1972,

23

Scope of the
Chapter.

Remedy of ap-
peal.

Rationale of the
system,

Scheme of civil
appeals,

Two opportunities
on facts,

Appeals to Sup»
reme Court in ci-
vil cases.


Appeal on facts.

Evershed = Com-
mittee’s view.

Need to retain
tight of appeal,

24

of fhe Law Commission, forwarded on a reference made by the Government of
india, *~

__ The position now is that apart from an appeal with special leave under
article 136 of the Constitution, and apart from the right of appeal in a case
mvolving questions of interpretation of the Constituuon, 8 litigant in a civil pro-
ceeding can appeai to the Supreme Cour: against any final decision of the High
Couri only if che High Court certifies that “the case involves a substantial question
of law of general importance which in the opinion of the High Court needs to
be decided by the Supreme Court”.3

I. NEED FOR RIGHT OF APPEAL

4.7, This, then, is a brief description of the existing scheme of civil appeals.
There is, no doubt, a school of thought, according 10 which there shoud be
finality of the decisions of the trial court in regard to findings of fact. According
to dais school, appeals on question of fact serve no uscful purpose, nor do they
justify the expense, delay, anxiety and inconvenience which the right of such
appeal involves, We do not, however, consider it advisable to do away completely
with the right of one appeal on questions of fact,

We have already pointed out! that the appellate courts in India are
streamlined and the causes of delay cannot be sought in their struciure. A hierarchy
of courts and a procedure of appeals from one court to the other is inevitable
in any modern system, No orgaptsed system of administration of justice permits
the findings of the trial court to carry a stamp of finality, The fact that the
findings are liable to be assailed in appeal, constitutes in a large number of cases
a guarantee against arbitrariness, and by itself produces judicial constraint, Ht
is also essential that so far as questions of law are concerned, there should be a
uniformity of decision in a State.

The procedural law in this respect, in our view, has considerable merit
and, in our opinion, it would be inadvisable to deprive a litigant of the right
of first appeal on questions of fact,—a right which has been enjoyed by him for
a long time. The fact that we have not so far been able to devise effective
means for prompt and efficient disposal of appeals is, in our opinion, no reason
for short-circuiting the procedure on a cardinal aspect,

4.8. We may also note that in England, the Committee on Supreme Court
Practice and Procedure expressed itself thus on this subject’ :

“The legal system of every civilised country recognises that judges are
fallible and provides machinery for appea) in some form or another, The
right of appeal is too ingrained in our legal system to be capable of being
uprooted in toto. The problem must be approached on the basis that it
would be palpably wrong to leave the defeated litigant entirely without
remedy even in those cases where the judgment against him is demonstrably
wrong or to deny him altogether the chance of appeal from a decision
which leaves him smarting under a sense of injustice.”

We are in substantial agreement with the above observations. Appeal is an
essential part of the gamut of our judicial system and should continue to be so.

49. Although we are against conferring a right of multiple appeals at various
stages of the same litigation, we are also, as already mentioned? of the opinion
that the right of appeal cannot be dispensed with altogether. The present scheme
of conferring one right of appeal against the judgment of the trial court a
questions of fact and law, and a right of second appeal on a substantial question
of law (in those cases where the judgment on first appeal was of a court subordi-
nate to the High Court) meets the requirements of the situation. So far as. appeals
to the Supreme Court are concerned, the matter is governed by the provisions of
the Constitution? and calls for no comment.

‘Law Commission of India. 44th Report (Appellate Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
in Civil matters) (August 31, 1971).

4Law Commission of India, 45th Report (Civil appeals to the Supreme Court on 8
certificate of 1059 (October, 1971).

YArticle 133 of the Constitution; of, section 109, Code of Civil Procedure,

‘Pata 1.29, supra.

‘Committee on Supreme Court Practice and Procedure in England (1953), page 153,
para 473.

Para 4.8, supra,

‘Para 45 and 46, supra.



25

वा, SECOND APPEALS

4.10. We are also not in favour of doing away altogether with the right of
second appeal in civil cases on a substantial question of law, as provided by
section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure. The reason for that is that, in our
view, there should be uniformity of decisions on questions of law in a State.'
If the findings of the courts subordinate to the High Court wher deciding a first
appeal were to have a finality on a question of law, the inevitable effect of tha!
would be that we shall be confronted with situation wherein. on identical questions
of law, the different courts in the State would be taking difierent—and sometimes
diametrically opposite—views. This, in our opinion, is wholly undesirable and
should not be countenanced. To have uniformity of decisions on a question of
Jaw in the same State, we consider it proper thet for questions of law the final
court of appea) within the State should be the highest court of the State.

It also needs to be emphasised that a finding of fact is of importance only
to the parties to the case, as it is those parties who are affected by that finding.
As against that, a finding on a question of law is of importance not only to the
parties to the case but also to a large number of other persons in whose cases
that question of law would arise. A finding on a question of law is, therefore.
of general importance and it is for that reason also that it becomes imperative
to ensure that the approaches to the highest court in the State to secure authorita-
tive pronouncements on quesions of law should not be barred. We shalf have
occasion to refer to this aspect Iater.?

4.11, At the same time, it was realised that allowing apoeal on a simple ques-
tion of law had given rise to some loopholes for filing all kinds of anneals by
stretching the connotation of the words “question of law” in section 100 11 was.
therefore. thought proper to restrict the right of second appeal under section 100
of the Code of Civil Procedure to an appeal on a substantial question of law. We
find no compelling ground to make any further curtailment of the right of second
appeal as contemplated by section 100.

412, Tt would be useful in this context to refer to what was said by the Law
Commission in its 540 Report. The Commission observed :

“1-J.74. Since we are retaining the right of second appeal with the
above modification, the query may be raised why the litigant who, before
coming to the High Court. has had one right of an appeal before a
subordinate court. should have the right of two appeals on questions of
law. Tn other words. why a multiplicity of appeals should be allowed
Now, it is to be remembered that in anv legal svstem which recognises the
binding force of precedent, the statuc and calibre of the final appellate
court on muestions of faw is vital. This consideration over-balances the
consideration of multiplicity of appeals.

Tt is obvious that the numerous subordinate courts in the districts
cannot be final arbiters on questions of law. Tf the law is to be uniformly
interpreted and applied, auestions of law must be decided bv the highest
court in the State whose decisions are binding on all subordinate courts.

Tf the right of second appeal fs so abridged as to remove questions of
Jaw from the High Court. it would create a situation wherein a number
of subordinate conrts will decide differentty questions of law. and their
decisions will stand. Such a situation would be unsatisfactory.

1-1.78, The subordinate apnellate courts functioning in the districts
are not swnerior comts of record. and their interoretations of Jaw
are not binding on other courts, Tn fact. ordinarily. subordinate courts in
one district are not even aware of the nronouncements of other courts in
other districts fexcept when a point of law is declared bv the Hieh Court
in anneal. Tt is section 100 which enables the High Court to function as
the author. distributor and clearing house of pronouncements of law for
the henefit of all subordinate courts.

‘See also para 10.2 and 10.3, infra.
Mara 106. Infra.
‘Law Commission of India, 540 Report. pages 87-88, paragraphs 14-74 and 1-}-75.

Rationale of se-
cond appeal.

A limited to
sul Tecantiat quee-
tion of faw.

S4th Report,


26

“The interpretation of the law by the High Court is (subject to the law
declared by the Supreme Court) binding on all subordinate courts. It is,
therefore, essential for uniformity that every error of law, raising a subs-
tantial question is promptly rectified by the High Court by a correct
pronouncement of the law.”

Letters Patent Ap- 4.13, We may also make it clear that our observations regarding right of second

peals, appeal on a substantial question of law! relate only to those cases where first
appeals are decided by courts subordinate to the High Courts. So far as first
appeals decided by the High Courts are concerned, even when those decisions are
given by single judges, we are not, as would be indicated elsewhere,? in favour
of grant of a right of second appeal to a Division Bench of the High Court. The
reason for that is that the decision of the court of first appeal in such cases would
be given by the High Court itself.

Measures to ex- 4.14, We now proceed to consider to what extent improvements in the process

pedite hearing. of decision of the appeal are possible in order to achieve expedition in hearing
without impairing the essence of the remedy or principles of fair play and natural
justice.

"Para 4.12, supra,
“Chapter 11, infra,


Cuarrer 5
PROCEDURE IN APPEALS—-GENERAL
I. STAGES OF DELAY

5.4. We propose to discuss in this Chapter certain matters concerning appel- Scope of Chapter.
late procedure in regard to which there is need for improvement. We shall con-

centrate only on those matters that need attention, but it will be convenient to

mention the chronological stages of the process of appeals, and to refer to the

causes of delay at every stage.

3.2. An appeal must be made ready for hearing before it can be heard. Delay Delay in making
in making an appeal ready for hearing, and in the hearing, can be dealt with in 2ppeals ready for
this order, with reference to the various stages of the process— hearing.
(1) delay in making available certified copies of the judgments and decrees
of the Subordinate Courts so as to enable the aggrieved party to file
an appeal, or (though the copies are ready), delay in presenting the
appeal.!
(2) delay in the scrutiny and registration of the appeal?
{3) delay by way of the requirement of preliminary hearing,?
(4) delay in the preparation of notice of appeal and its service,*
(5) delay in the preparation of the paper books for the use of the court
for hearing the appeal.>
(6) delay in final hearing.¢

Certain special issues relevant to appeals from interlocutory orders could
be separately dealt with?

Before an appeal can be filed in the appellate court, there are certain pre-
tequisites that have to be complied with. After the appeal is presented, it has
to be scrutinised. After scrutiny, there is a preliminary hearing for admission.
Tf it is admitted. notice has to be served on the respondent and (in the High
Courts) a paper book has to be prepared. as required by rules made by the High
Court for regulating its appellate procedure.

Il. PRE-REQUISITES FOR APPEAL : COPY OF THE DECISION

5.3. The first pre-requisite for an appeal is the statutory requirement to file seope of delay.
a copv of the decision sought to be appealed from? Delay may result from the

time that elapses between the pronouncement of the judgment and the preparation

of a copy thereof. The fiting of the apveal, either in a subordinate court having

appellate iurisdiction or in the High Court, may then be delayed. This has

heen sought to be remedied by amendment of Order 20 of the Code of Civil

Procedure.” by the insertion of certain new provisions, referred to in the next

paragraph.!0

5.4. By the amendment of 1976, there was inserted a new rule to which we Filing of appeal.
tiade a reference in our Report on arrears in trial courts,'' namely, Order 20,
Rule 6A, Code of Civil Procedure, which deals with judgment and decree. Sub-
tule (1) of this rule provides that the last paragraph of the judgment shall state
in precise terms the relief which has been granted by such judgment. Sub-rule

tPara 5.3, 5.4 and 5.5. infra,

*Para 5.6 and 5.7. infra.

*Para 5.8, infra.

"Para 5.10, to 5.16, infra.

"Para 5.17 to 5.28, infra.

‘SChapter 6, infra

"Para 5.27 to 5.30, infra.

49.41, R. 1(1), Code of Civil Procedure.
१0.20, Rules 6A and 6B, Code of Civil Procedure,
para 5.4, infra.

"77th Report, para 78,

27
5288 LAD/ND/79


i
tation to be heard
first.

Delay in registra
tion of appeal,

28

(2), clause (a) thea provides that an appeal may be preferred against the decree
withou: filing a copy of the decree and. in such a case, the last paragraph of
the judament shall, for purposes of Order 41, rule 1, be treated as the decree,
Tv iil, to some extent, ameliorate the difficulty which was faced
ving to wait for a long time to get cerlified copy! of the
a view to filing the appeal,

pite the above provision, we cannot under-estimate the importance of
the prompt supnly of the copies of the iudement soon after its pronouncement
to the part! ug delays have in the past occurred in the supply of such
comics by the copying agency. Such delays have now been sought to be mini+
inised hy Order 20, rule 6B of the Code of Civil Procedure which was added by
Act 103 of 1976, According to this provision, where the judgment is type-
written, cupics of the type-written judgment shall, where it is practicable so to do,
be made availabie ta the parties immediately after the pronouncement of the
judgment, on payment. by the party applying for such copy. of such charges as
amay be specified in the tules made bv the Hieh Court, Apart from that, such
delays, as pointed out by us in the 77th Report? can be avoided or cut short

astead of typing out the copies, the whole thing is done by mechanical or
electronic process,

An anneal is normatly filed within the time nrescribed therefor by the
ion Act, 1963. But if, for any reason2 it is filed bevond the prescribed
. the memorandum of apneal has to be accomnanied by an application under

5 of the Act. In such case, the Code* of Civil Procedure requires that
tha application should be finally decided before fhe court proceeds to deal with
the appeal under Order 41, Rule 11 or Order 41, Rule 13.

गा. SCRUTINY AND REGISTRATION

RG After an appeal is presented,? it has to be scrutinised and reaistered.s

Dolay in this process is sometimes appreciable, and could be avoided by adopt-
ing certain measures.

There is a practice in almost ail the courts of noting the defects in the
memorandum? cf anpeal and returning the same to the parties for re-orecentation
after curing the defects within a certain time. But the partes or their counsel
take their own time in re-presenting the memorandum of anneal with the anntica-
tion to excuse delay which is automatically eranted, and the office is ab'eed
to reaister the apneal at that time. There is also a complaint among the bar
in some States that 31 the defects found in the apneal are not noted at the same
time, but that the defects are being pointed out in instalments and at different
times.—a practice which, anart from causing inconvenience to the members of
the bar and the litigant public, is responsible for further delay.

To remedy the above difficulty, we suegest that the court should register
the memorandum of apveal within seven davs of its presentation, and the office
should, within that period, note all the defects to be cured. Reeistration,
however, need not be postnoned unt rectification of defects. A time Simit
should then be stipulated within जाली such defects will have to be cured, This
time limit should not exceed fifteen days, and a notice of the same should either
be published on a notice board of the court. or given 10 counsel or the anpelant.
Tf the defects are not cured within that time lim’, the Registrar of the High Court
should have power, under rules to be framed by the Aich Court. to extend the
time for a period not exceeding 15 davs for proner reasons, on an application
to be filed by counsel or by the appellant. If the defects are not cured even
within the extended time, or if no application is filed for extension of time. the
appeal should. without further delav. be listed before the court for necessary

arders, Modifications of the rules, if necessary, may be made to give effect to
the above suggestion’.

Para 5.21), supra,

277th Report. para 13.10.

‘Section 5, Limitation Act, 1963.

‘Order 41, Rule 34. Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
SOrder 41, Rule (1), Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
‘Order 41, Rute 311) Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
Order 41, Rule 9(1), Code of Civit Procedure, 1908.
‘For action jn connection with rules.


29

5. In this connection, reference! should be made to Order 41, Rule 112, Order 41, Rule
ode of Civil Procedure, 1908, waich prov.aes wat every appeai sitould be heard 114, Code of Ci-
andr Order 41, Kule 11, as expeuuousry as pussioie 800 eLULaVOuL Sua os Vi लाख पका
made to couclude sucn nearmg whi vv days tum te due va Walch पाएं expeditions a. ear
AMCMUTANGU OL appeal 15 Meu, LN VieW OL LS PivVsowhi, It do ॥७०-७७०५३ ७ duals

Up पाए admunisirauve macomery Of 4180 Courts tur 5९७७) Of पार Wusuivta ical

1 appeal, so Lal were Is 30६५४4७ Stall And 100 19५01 199९ 1S Spel 1 Wags

to higut deliciencies im the mei vranduin of ४७:२०.

IV. PRELLWINARY HEARING

58 We now tura to the procedure for appeal. Support has been canvassed Suggestion to dis-
tor the view that we? shoutd do away WD Lue 91५10 ७-3 ilcaiuig Gr dig appear Dense with — preli-
@s comtempiated by Order 41, 4९010 11 ० ine Loge ०. ९.1४ riocuare aud "1१६ गत hearing
the omy bearing Of the appeal Suduid be in like presciice एव CUudieci Lut Une (एड not favoured,
pondent ater service Of 00५०७ Upun the ianer, Lue ivasOa gure का Support OF
the above view 1s Lihat very lew appeals are Ustisscd ७४८८८ quer ७1, aie 14
ald tat m most o1 ine appeals ue Wearnig under Order 41, Kule 11 resuits in
the duphcauoa of labour ४४७ serves nO ७४७७४ PiuPyse. We siaVe Ber tile
Matter vur cOnsiderauun ४00 are प्र18016 LY subscribe ५७ Ue View 1180 tue Dearing
० tne appeal under Urder 41, Kwe 11 is without uulity, fxperience teus us
that quile a pumoer of appeats are dismussed under Order 41, Kule 11,

In any case, this provision results in the dismissai, in dinini, of a number
of frivolous appeais. ‘Lo Keep suc appeals peuding aud 10 dispose wien 0. 019
after service O1 Ine 00५०४ ७७०७ ७६ 10५90०:७.७६ ४४७ aLWE elabUiaie 1124.118 would,
WW ०७7 OPiiivu, 101 Oly ४७७ ty Lic workioud Ol We eourls, 0७4 ४०७७ 8150 be
subjecting the respondent to nevdiess cxpeuse, 146 1600 ४॥७४४ 1 Lay ए५४०॥६ OF
diemsssar of Une appeal, Wie appeilaut can ०९ ourdened wiia costs is uo cHouga
to Compensale the respondent 107 Ube 144008॥, tne abd Money 3४८७६ by Aan,
59. ‘The matter can also be looked at from anolier angie. Most di nsoranda Mterim relief an
OL appeal are also accompanied by appliCauuis aking 00 Wei 4७1०३... Wud important factor
ollen, Ine tact Wat the appeal is aumuiled Operates us u ७४ win te courts relma ath
in the matier of grani OL imerim relief, To nave a general provisiun Diaking + fgg UN BE
umperabve that ali appeals which are Hied should oe diopoocd ci ७४३ alii
0010९ to the respondent wouid Jivcessamly act as a lemipladou 100 ie pastes iv
file appeals, nowever frivo.ous, just willy a view to seeking an order tur aiterum
Teliet, Ag the posiion stdias ४८ present, the pruimuaiy weariig of Ine appval
vader Order 41, Kule 11, 901 only 1९3७॥५४ 1D Ue ७1५1015341 Of frivolous apporls, Gat
also results in the dismissal of appucalons asking ior interum rete sougat in suck
appeals,

Y. SERVICE OF NOAICE
5.10, Registration of the appeal is followed by the service of notices on the Summons to be
cespondents to the appeal. i, cannot be gamsaid that 1७8 1s Sine aaiouat of Ried up by par-
delay in the service o1 such notices by the appeliaie court, tor two reasuns-— tes
(a) the first being the delay caused in the office of the High Court? in
the preparation of the nolices,* and
(b) the second being the time taken for actual service of notices on tho
respondents.s

$11, Delay in the office in preparing the notices can be avoided by req
the parties or their counsel ¢o tuilow the same procedure as we have, ४४
Report on delay and arrears in imal courts, recommended 1097 ihe pri pa
of summonses to be issucd in suits to be served on the defen: x
shouid 98 required to produce, along with the memorandum of appeal, praite

forms of the process in duplicate, duly filied up, fur each respondent, ieaviig
the date Jor appearance and the date of the issue of process Dien’ Lot bCing
filled in by the concerned 010९८ of the court, Such pritited terms शाएजो be
made avaiiable to members of the bar and litiganis at nommal cosi by the

Parties to file
3 forms of

P
process,

1Order 41, Rule 11A, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

‘Suggestion of a High Court Judge, forwarded to the Law Commussion,
This applies also to appeals heard by the District Courts,

‘Para 5.11, infra.

Para 5.12, infra.

Para 5.10(a), supra.

‘77th Report, para 42.


Payment of char-
ges or process
feeg and issue of
notice,

Service of notice.

Advantage of
early service.

Paper boeks.

Sending for
records,

30

High Courts. It should also be provided that the appellant should along with
the memorandum of appeal file, as many copies of the memorandum as ihere
are respondents, and additional number of copies for the use of the Court.
This is necessary in view of Order 41, Rule 14(3) of the Code of Civil Procedure
as amended.

5.42, ‘Khe necessary charges or the process fee lor the service of notices on the
respondents should also be paid at the lime of presentation of the appeal or
witnin a week of admission of the appeal under order 41, rule 12(1) of the
Code of Civil Procedure. Order 41, rule 14(1) and (2) of the Code makes
the provisions of Order 5 relating to service of summons applicable to the
court of appeal, and Order 5 now provides for simultaneous issue of summons
by registered post and in the ordinary way. Where there is no dismissal of
appeal under Urder 41, rule 11 of the Code, the notice of appeal can be issued.
by the Court to the respondents by registered post acknowiedgement due and
in the ordinary way at the addresses given im the memorandum of appeal.
This shouid be done within a tume to be fixed by the rules of the High Court
for the purpose, the time bemg computed from ine dale of registration of the
appeal or trom the date of admission of the appeal under Order 41, rule 12(1)
ot the Code.

$13. Afler a notice of appeal is prepared and ready for service, actual service+
on the respondent, according to the present system in vogue, takes quie a long
ume and 15 one of the major factors contributing to the over-all delay in inc
disposal ol appeals.

$.14 lt is true that even if the notice of appeal is served, say, within a month
or so, ४6 appeal, having regard to the presen state of arrears, wil be no nearer
hearing ana decision in the High Court 10 aller tne lapse of two further
years,—or even more. But that 1s due to the heavy backlog ७७७६ Has accur
mulated, tor the disposal of wnich we have elsewhere un (015 xseport made our
recommendauions,>? including, in parucular, the appomument of additional and
ad hoc judges. ii proper care 1s taken, then, as and woen (115 backiong 15
eilminated, early service of the notice of appeal will undouodtedly ensure quick
disposal oi the appeal.

Vi. PAPER BOOKS

5.15. We now come 10 the stage of preparation of paper books. Experience
gas shown that much wme Js laken था We High Cour in ७6 preparauon of
paper books of appeal, but the system Of preparing paper 900 nas proved
neipiul aod of use ॥ an expeditious decision ol tne appeal. Mearimg ot appeal
by 3 Bench consisting Of More ban one Judge 1s DOL possiole WiauoUt a separate
Paper oook tor each one of the Judges constituuing the Bench. Besides itis,
we paper ००0६ also facilitates the hearing. ine 92४०8 of the original record
in Wwe Lal Courts, 4६ Has Deen sce, 15 0८1 ConlusINg and NOt very systematic.
Vaper books prepared mm accordance with ine rules 0 tne 1180 Court eliminate
that difficulty and save the ume of the court when arguments are heard,

There is, however, scope for improvement im certain matters of detail, to
which we address ourselves,

$.16. While dealing with the question af paper books, we should advert to the
necessity of sending for the records of tne courts below as contemplated by
Order 41, rule 13(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure. We teel that except tor
appeals agai uuterlocutory orders? and except in cases wherein those records
have already been sent for under Order 41, rule 1! of the Code of Civil
Procedure, ine High Court should, immediately after an order tor the admission
of appeal has been made, send for tne records of the courts below. Much
delay 10 the preparation of paper books can be elmmated by sending promptly
toc the records of the courts below. As would appear trom wnat Llollows
subsequently,’ we are fastening responsibility upon the appellant to file paper

1Order 41, Rule 143), Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
“Order 41, Rule 14, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
कण implementation by rules.

‘Para 5.10(b), supra.

See Chapter 3, supra.

‘Para 5.28, infra.

See discussion as to copies, pata 5.20, infra.



31

books containiag cettain copies. This ean be done only if the records are
promptly sent for by the High Court. In a large number of cases the counsel
for the appellant would not be able to furnish the requisite copies unless the
records of the courts below are in the High Courts.

5.17, So far as appeals against interlocutory orders are concerned, we are of
the view that the records of the courts below should bz sent for only as and
when a specific order is made by High Couri for that purpose. Our experience
tells us that many cases in the tial courts remain stayed because of transmission
of records to High Courts, even though no stay order has been made by the
High Court.

5.18. Another question in the context of Preparation of paper books relates to
translation of documents and depositions, where such translation is necessary
under the rules of the High Court. In our opinion, it should be the duty of
the party who has to file the requisite copy to also get the deposition or docu-
ment translated. The transiation should be done by a counsel, who would
normally be a junior counsct, and should bear his cettificate about its correctness.
The translated copy, along with other ne: ary copies, should be filed in the
High Court within the time suggested hereafter! in case the opposite party
Guestions the correctness of the translation, the deposition or document in
question should be translated by the official translator of the High Court.

5.19, According to the prevaienl practice, the paper books are printed either in
the Government printing press or in private printing presses selected by the
High Court for that purpose under the supervision and on the direction of
the High Court. This process involves a lot of delay and entails expense which
it is possible to curtail. As compared with Printing, the cyclostyling or typing
of records is not only cheaper, but also more expeditions. We therefore
recommend that except in cases where the court otherwise directs, the printing
of paper books may be dispensed with, and liberty may be allowed to the Parties
to bave the records typed or cyclosiyled in accordance with the Rules of the
High Court.

5.20. Alter the records of the trial court are sent for, the next step would be
the preparation of the paper book. For this Purpose, we are of the view that
as soou as the records are received in the High Court, intimation about that
fact should be sent to the counse} for the appeilant and also to the counsel
for the respondent, or the respondent in case no lawyer has put in appearance
on his behalf, It shall be the responsibility of the appellant in ail regular
first appeals in civil matters to file within four monihs, or such further time as
may tor sulkcient cause be allowed by the court, of the date of intimation of
the receipt of the records of the tial court in the High Court, properly bound
Paper books containing copies of the following documents :

(a) plaint;

(0) written statement ;

(©) issues ;

(@ judgment ;

(९) decree sheet ;

(f) memorandum of appeal ;

(8) admission order ;

(b) documents, depositions, applications, replies thereto, and interlocutory

orders upon which the appellant wants to rely at the time of
arugments ; and

{i) documents, depositions, applications, replies thereto and interlocutory
orders referred to by the trial court in its judgment while dealing
with issues, findings on which are sought to be challenged by the
appellant.

The copies to be included in the paper books, should, as already mentioned?
be either cyclostyled or typed. The number of paper books should be suflicient
for the purpose of supply to the respondents and for the use of the court,

Para 5.20, infra.
4Cy. para 5.19, supra.

Records in ap-
peal against inter-
locutory orders

Translation.

Recommendatioa
for typing.

Paper books—co-
pies to be filed by
appellant.


32

Paper books to be 5.21. Within two weeks of the filing of the abovementioned paper books, one
supplied to res: or more such paper books, as may be necessary, should be supplied to the
Pondents. counsel for the respondents.

Respondeats’ pa- 5.22. It would be necessary for the respondents to file in court within two

er books. months, or such further time as may, for sumicient cause, be allowed by the court,
of the receipt of the above, properly bound paper books containing copies of
depositions, documents, applications, replies thereto and interlocutory orders,
upon which they wish to rely and which have not been filed by the appellant.
‘Ine number of these paper books would be the same as that of the paper ०0005
filed oa behalf of the appellant.

One or more paper books, as may be necessary, filed by the respondents
shall be supplied to ihe counsel for the appellant and counsel for other respon-
dents within a period of one week of the filing of the same in court.

Translation and 5,23, Reference to “copies” in the above paragraphs' wouid inciude reference

fxempted docu to the transiation of tie plaint, written statement, issues, depositions, documents,
applications and replies thereto, when transiated copies of une same are required
according to the rules of the High Court. Nothing in the above paragraphs
should make it necessary to include in the paper book copies of documents io
respect of which exemption has been granted tor the purpose of printing by the
Aigh Court rules.

Existing rules. 5.24. We are aware of the fact that rules have already been framed by the
various High Courts regarding must of the matters referred 10 above. We have
Made the 300४९ suggesuon just with a view to jntroducmg unwormity in the
practice prevailing ॥ the dierent High Courts aud also wila a view to accelarat-
ang the process of preparation of paper books. 486 above procedure, if accepted
by the righ Courts, will not cause any delay in making a case ready for bear-
ing, and will also save the parties from a certain amount of the expenses of
hugation.

Deiegation to Re- 5.25. For the completion of the record of appeal and preparation of the paper

gistrar of powers books, power may be deiegated by the court to the Kegistrar of any other oucer

in connection with of the court specially empowered ॥ this behalf, with tue proviso tnat in case the

paper books. order passed by the Kegistrar or such 0०० is Ot coumpucd with, the appeal
shati be placed before the court tor appropriate orders or awections. Lf the court
linds that धार omission 10 Compiy wit the Order was witul of २1000 sudiicient
cause, it may dismiss the appeal for nod-prusecutiun, or award conuitional costs
against the delauitmg party, Of May uNnconditonauy give such luruier ume as
1६ may consider proper 10 do the neediul., Jt shoud ४:४० be open to Lie court,
40 appropriaie Cases, ४ it twinks Ht just and proper, to direct tbat the appeal shall
be neara wilnoui any turther documents or papers being filed, and 39 such an
event such documents aod papers will not ve allowed to be reierred to at the
ume of hearing.

5,26. It is important from the point of view of saving both cost and time in
tobe Perdened rend hearing of the appeal that ae paper books should not bg jburdened with
with unnecessary unnecessary and irrelevant documents. if in a given casc, this is not done
documenta, and the court, at the time of hearing of tbe appeal, tinds that irrelevant docu:

ments have been included in the paper book, the court may, irrespective of
the decision of the appeal, order that the cost occasioned by inclusion of those
documents should be paid by the party at whose instance they were typed
or cyclostyled. The preparauon of paper book and the order in which the
papers are to be arranged in it should be left to conform to the rules that may
be tramed by the Higa Courts for the purpose.

Vil. INTERLOCUTORY ORDERS

Appeals. and re- 5:27 ‘The filing of appeals or applications for revision sometimes creates pro-
toons against in- biems where the appeal or revision 18 against an inlerivcutory order, as the
terlocutory orders. grant by ube court of appeal or revision ot stay of proceedings holds up the

progress of the case in the lower court.

e i isi i interlocutory orders, records of
t to be 5.28, We recommend that in revisions against int 6

Records ro unless the court below should not be sent for? unless an express order is made for
express orders the purpose by the High Court. It shall be the responsibility of the petitioner
made.

‘Para 5.20 to 5.22. supra,
See also para 5.17, supra.


33

in such a case to file, copies of pleadings, documents, depositions, applications
and replies thereto or orders as are sought to be relied upon at the time of
the hearing of the revision. The copies shall be accompanied by an affidavit
about their correctness. The same should be the procedure in appeals against
interlocutory orders, as already indicated.!

8.29. We are also of the view that in order to obviate any delay in getting
service effected upon the respondents in appeals or petitions for revision against
interlocutory orders, service may be effected upon the counsel representing the
respondents in tria! court. An amendment in the law appears to be needed
in the interests of expeditious justice.

We are, however, of the opinion that so far as service of injunctions is
concerned, the same should be effected upon the party itself, and not upon
the counsel.

5.30. We, therefore, recommend that the following proviso should b:? added

to Order 3, Rule 4, sub-rule (3) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 :

To be added to Order 3, Rule 43), C. P.C.
“Provided that in regard to an appeal or petition for revision against an
interlocutory order passed in the course of a suit or other nroceeding,
pending on the dafe of filing of such appeal or pe ition, service of any
notice or document issued by the court hearing the appeal or petition on
the pleader represeuting any party in the suit or other proceedings in the
trial court shail, waless the court otherwise directs, be as effectual as
service upon the party represented by the pleader, but nothing in this
proviso shail auihorise service on the pleader of any injunction issued by
the court of appeal or revision.”
"Para 5.17, supra.
‘For amendment of Code,

Service on pleader
—Amendment of
Order 3, Rule 463)
CPL. Tecom-

4

mended.

Recommendation
to amend Order 3,
Rule 43), C.P.C,


Scope of Chapter.

fmportange of ar-
guments.

Two methods of
arguments,

The two proce-
dures.

Papers on appeals
in U.S.A, and
England

CHAPTER 6
ARGUMENTS AND JUDGMENT IN APPEALS
I. SCOPE OF CHAPTER

6.1. Once an appeal is ready for hearing,’ the next stage is the addressing of
arguments and judement. We propose to deal in this Chapter with these two
stages of the appellate process.

If. ARGUMENTS : WRITTEN AND ORAL

6.2, In contrast with an original trial, the duration of hearing before an appel-
late court depends almost entirely on the time taken up by the counsel for
the parties in presenting their case before the court. No doubt, the questions
which the appellant proposes to raise can sometimes be properly answered from
an examination of the record; but usually it becomes necessary to allow the
parties to present before the appellate court at some length their points of view
in regard to the verdict of the lower court. The appellate court. therefore,
needs statements of the contentions advanced bv the  resnective parties to
challange or support the verdict. Such statements could be written—these are
known usually as “briefs”: but in India. the practice is to hear the counsel
for the parties orally. This renders it desirable that some attention should be
naid to the time taken in an appellate court in the oral presentation of the argu-
ments, The question whether some saving of time could be effected in his regard
without prejudice to the interests of justice should therefore be examined.

6.3. One of the most imoortant questions which needs attention when dealing
with the hearing of anpeals is about the method of areuments to be adopted.
There are. at present, two main schools of thought in this regard. One school
pleads for substituting written briefs for oral arguments. or for reducing oral
areuments to the minimum extent. The oponsite school stresses the need for
oral arguments and is averse to introducing the system of written “briefs” in
arguments. In U.S.A. the arguments addressed to the apnellate courts are in
the form of written “briefs”, sunolemented by oral areuments lasting normally
not more than an hour for each case.2 In many countries on the European
continent also} the svstem adonted in anneals is that of written areuments.
As against that. the system prevalent in England.‘ Indias and a number of
Commonwealth countries* is of oral arguments.

6.4, We propose to consider at some length the English and American appel-
late procedure, since they revresent two diametrically opnosite systems in regard
to oral and written arguments. The salient features of the two svstems and
the contrast between the two have been given in an article,’ to which we shall
make a reference.

6.5. An outstanding difference between the two nations is the fact that ‘briefs’
are required in the United States, whereas in England they are not. The ‘brief’
is a full-dress argument in writing, often running into fifty or more printed or
mimeopraphed pages in length. Jt states the facts. outlines the claimed errors
in the proceedings helow. and cites and discusses the anthorities claimed to
justifv reversal or affirmance. The appellant serves his brief on the other side
well in advance of the time for oral argument. and fhe respondent then serves
his answering brief on the appellant, again well in advance of oral argument.
Sometimes the appellant serves a reply brief.

‘Chapter 5. supra.

‘Para 6.8. infra.

3E.g. France, see Appendix 7.

4See para 6.4 and 6.5, infra.

"Order 41, Rules $, 10, 11(1) and 16, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
‘For Canada, see para 6.11, infra

“Delmar Karlen, “Appeals in England and the United States” (1962) 78 L.Q.R_ 371.
378-382.

34


35

66. In England, a brief is virtually unknown. The closest approach to it is Case in House of
the ‘case’ normally required from both sides in the House of Lords and Privy 20%:

Council. This however, is a very abbreviated paper, seidom running into more

than six or seven pages in length, and is intended only as a preliminary out-line

of the extended oral argument to be made later. Tt does not discuss authorities

in detail, or argue the propositions of law to be relied upon. Relatively few

cases are cited.'

In the House of Lords,? prior to the hearing, the parties provide the
Court and each other with only a very short out-line of the line of argument
they intend to adopt and the legal authoritics they will rely on. The judges
do not usually analyse this document in any detail before-hand, apparently on
the assumption that this would detract from the right of counsel to make his
case before judges who do not have any preconceptions. Oral argument is
not limited in time, lasts an average of three days and occasionally up to
twenty days, and is the primary external influence on the Court's conclusion.

6.7. ‘The record of appeal in the United States consists of the notices of ap- Record in U.S.A,
peal, pleadings and other format documents, the judgment below and so much
of the evidence as may be relevant as to the questions raised on appeal?

6.8. Oral arguments in U.S.A.4 are secondary in importance to the ‘briefs’. Oral arguments
and are rigidly limited in duration. In the United States Supreme Court, half in U.S.A.
an hour is usually allowed tu each side. In many appellate courts, frequently

no more than fifteen minutes or a half-hour for each side is permitted for oral
arguments.® Reading by counsel is frowned upon.? The judges do not wish

to hear what they can read for themselves. They expect to get all the
information they necd about the judgment below, the evidence, and the
authorities relied upon, from studying the briefs and record on appeal. They

do not even encourage counsel fo discuss in detail the precedents claimed

to govern the decision, preferring to do that job by themselves in the relative

privacy of their chambers, with or without the assistance of law clerks.

The relevant rule, so far as is material reads*

“1, Oral argument should undertake to emphasize and clarify the
written argument appearing in the briefs theretofore filed. The court
Jooks with disfavour on any oral argument that is read from a prepared
text.

2. The appellant or petitioner shall be entitled to open and conclude
argument. But when there are cross-appeals or cross-writs of certiorari
they shall be argued together as one case and in the time of one case,
and the court will, by order reasonably made, advise the partics which
one is to open and close.

3. Unless otherwise directed, one half hour on each side will be
allowed for argument. Any request for additional time shal! be presented
not later than fifteen days after service of the petitioner's, or appellant's,
brief on the merits by letter addressed to the clerk (copy to be sent
opposing counsel), and shall set forth with specificity and conciseness
why the case cannot be presented within half hour limitation.

4. Unless additional time has been granted one counsel only will be
heard for each side, except by special permission when there are several
partics on the same side. Divided arguments are not favoured by the

court.

IDelmar Karlen, “Appeals in England and the United States” (1962) 78
378-382.
sweiler, In the Last Resort (1978). page 24.
SDelmar Karten, “Appeals in England and the United States” (1962) 78 LQ.R. 371.

378-382.
‘Delmar Karlen, “Appeals in England and the United States” (1962) 78 L.Q.R. 371,

378-382.

55९९ Rule 44. quoted infra.

This was the position in 1962.

‘Delmar Karlen, “Appeals in England and the United States” (1962) 78 L.Q.R. 371
‘378-382.

"Title 28, U.S. Code (1970), Ed. Rule 44 (Oral Argument).

6253 LAD/ND/79

LQR. 3



36

‘5. In any case, and regardless of the number of counsel participating,
a fair opening of the case shall be made by the party having the opening
and closing.

6. Oral argument will not be heard on behalf of any party for whom
no brief has been filed.”

Oral arguments in 69,

England In contrast, in England, where there are no written briefs, oral arguments

are all-important. They are never arbitrarily limited in duration. While some
last for only a few minutes, others go on for many days, even weeks. The
position in England has been thus stated! :—

“The only controls ordinarily exercised over the time of oral argument are
informal, ad hoc suggestions from the judges. Thus when counsel wishes
to cite a case as authority, the presiding judge may ask him: for what
proposition? If the judges indicated that they “accept the proposition
as stated, there is no need to read the case. Similarly, if counsel has
persuaded the judges on a certain point, they may indicate that it is
unnecessary for him to pursue it further. If counsel for the appellant,
by the time he finishes his argument, has failed to persuade the court
that the decision below should be reversed or modified, the court informs
counsel for the respondent that it does not wish to hear from him at all,
and proceeds forthwith to deliver judgment. Despite such controls as
these, the time spent in England in oral argument tends to be very
much greater than that spent in the United States.

“In recent years, the average duration of argument in the court of
Appeals has been about a day and a quarter per case, and in the House
of Lords and the Privy Council, about three days per case. Much of
the time, perhaps half, has been spent by counsel reading aloud to the
court. It is in this way that the judges have learned what transpired in
the court below (by listening to a reading of the judgment and such parts
of the evidence as may be relevant), what errors are complained of by
“counsel (by listening to a reading of the notice of appeal, which is
required to specify the errors), and the authorities relied on by counsel (by
listening to a reading of statutes and cases, cither in their entirely or
in large part).”

No ‘brief’ in En- 6,10, Very rarely does one come across a written ‘brief’ in England. In

gland. Rondel v. Worsely,2 a ‘brief’ (written statement prepared by counsel and handed
in to an appellate court to show the contentions put forward) was received and
read by the Court of Appeal, but it was described as “wholly irregular and
contrary to the practice of the Court and should not be allowed as a precedent
for future proceedings”.

Appellate _ proce- 6.11. It may be of interest to note that the procedure in Canada in the hearing
dure in Supreme of appeals before the Supreme Court is half-way between that adopted in
ourt of Canada, England and in U.S.A. A fairly recent study,} after stating that in the House
of Lords, the parties provide the court with only a short out-line of arguments
they intend to adopt and the legal authorities they will rely on, tells us as

follows about Canada‘:

“In the Supreme Court factums are much larger—often over 100 pages—~
and make a much more sustained argument in their own right. The Judges
are assisted by a clerk who can make some analysis of the issues in
the case and critical points in contending positions and provide this for
the Judges before the hearing. . At the hearing, oral argument
is again unlimited, lawyers on each side spend a great deal of time
reading from the record of the case or from prior judicial authorities.
and a typical hearing will last upto two days.”

View of the Ever- 6.12. In England, the adoption of the American method of disposing of appeals
shed Committee. was considered by the Evershed Committee.’ which carefully examined the
arguments in favour of and against the method. The Committee reached the

‘Delmar Karlen. “Appeals in England and the United States” (1962) 78 L.Q.R. 371.
*Rondel v. Worsley. (1967) 1 0.8. 443.

Paul Weiler, In the Last Resort (1974), page 25.

‘For criminal cases in Canada, see para 6.15, infra.

“Committee on Supreme Court Practice and Procedure Report (1953), pages 191-193,
para. 573, 574.


37

conclusion “that the American system would provide in this country a less
satisfactory system for conducting appeals than that now Prevaling. Further-
more, we are satisfied that the American system would be quite unsuitable for
adoption in this country in view of the different conditions prevailing here and
would not be likely to lead to any marked reduction in the costs of appeals”.

6.13. The Evershed Commitice further stated! that “Whatever may be thought
to be the advantage of the American system of ‘briefs’... we found
singula liste enthusiasm for it amongst ihe witnesses whose opinions we
sought. The members of the Court of Appeal whom we consulted were
cmphaticaliy opposed to the adoption of such a system in this country as also
were the representatives of the Bar Council and Law Society”.

6.t4, Ji would be of interest to refer to the views expressed before the Evershed
Committee by certain distinguished judges and jawyers. The Committee stated :

“We also had the advantage of hearing evidence from Mr. Justice
Frankfurter, of the United States Supreme Court, as well as from
Mr. John W. Davis, who was able to speak with a wealth of experience
of appellate work in “the United States Courts. We gained the impres-
sion from these witnesses that they were by no means whole-heartedly
in favour of the American system of conducting appeals, but that they
rather envied the system prevailing here of unrestricted oral argument.
They appeared to regacd the American ‘brief’ system, with its strict
limitation of the time for oral argument, as a necessary evil forced upon
them by the pressure of appellate work, the volume of which is so great
ihat it would be simply impossible to get through it if unrestricted oral
argument were permitted.”

6.15. 11 would secm that the idea of dispensing with oral urguments has not, as
a rule, found favour with Commonwealth countries.?

If]. MODIFICATIONS CONSIDERED

6.16, As already mentioned? the members both of the Bench and the Bar in
tadia nave so far been accustomed to the system of oral arguments.  Afler
giving thc matter our earnest consideration, we are of the opinion that it would
not be desirable to give up the system of oral argumenis. What modifications,
if any, are needed, in this system would be discussed by us later,4 but by and
large we feel that we shall not be justified in dislocating the existing appellate
system by giving up the method of oral arguments and replacing it by that of
written briefs. There are some practical difficulties and weighty considera-
tions which should not be lost sight of while taking a decision in this matter.
Unlike in India, judges in the United States have law clerks who are generally
brilhant law graduates from universities like Harvard or Yale. These clerks
study the whole brief and render assistance to the judges in knowing about
the different aspects of fact and law in each case. The judges in the United
States Supreme Court sit in open court for not more than 8 or [1 days in a month.
The rest of the days are spent by them in studying bricés and preparing
judgments.

The United States Supreme Cowrt normally is in session from the first
Monday in October until the end of June the following year. Generally the
rst [४० weeks of cach month are set apart for hearing cascs argued orally,
and the last two weeks are spent discussing the cases and writing opinions’.

6.17, No oral submissions are made in the United States Supreme Court at the
time of admission of appeals—a stage broadly corresponding to what constitutes
in India a preliminary hearing. It is obvious that if judges have to spend
cousiderable time in studying lengthy and elaborate written briefs, there would
have to be a curtailment of the number of days on which the court holds
public sittings. Looking to the conditions which are prevalent in India, we
are of ihe opinion that such a course would be wholly undesirable.

tice and Procedure Report (1953), pages 191-193,

ICommittee on Supreme Court Pr:
para, 574,

*For Canada, see para, 6.11, supra.

‘para 6.2 and 6.3, supra.

‘Para 6,18, infra.

‘Lewis and Others, Introduction to the Courts and Judicial Process (Prentice-Hall)
(1978), page 91.

Views expressed
by Mr. — Sustice

Frankfurter

and

Mr. John Davis.

Position in Com-

monwealth.

System of eral

afguments to
Félained.

be


View taken in the
140 Report,

Concise note of
arguments to be
filed and read—
Recommendation.

38

6.18. We may mention at this stage that the Law Commission presid:

n . 8 led over by
Shri Sctalvad did not favour the adoption of the American Eystem. It was
observed by that Commission in the 14th Report!—

8 हज will be realised that the system ० peratin
in the United States proceeds on three fundamental “hypotheses, i
postulates :

“wo A competent Bar which should be able to prepare and
submit an exhaustive and fully documented brief ;

(ii) Judges who would be able to comprehend the full hearings
of the points involved in an appeal by a mere perusal of the briefs ;

{iii) Expert qualified assistants to the Judges who would make
research into the questions arising so as to assist the Judges io get
thoroughly seized of the briefs filed.

9. We may, perhaps, with some hesitation accept that the first
requisite would be available at the Bar of the Supreme Court and the
High Courts. Jt would be difficult to say the same with Tegard 10
the second. Our Judges are trained to gather facts and perceive the
televant points of law from fairly full orat arguments. Indeed, they,
from time to time, resolve doubts both as to inferences of facts and
vatidity of legal contentions by questions put to counscl. As to the third,
its introduction into the working of the judicial system in our country
will be an entirely novel feature. It involves the question whether we
“would not be in many cases substituting the efficient Legal Assistants
for the Judges. Lawyers in the United States have not infrequendy a
feeling that cases are disposed of by the Legal Assistants and not by
the Judges....... जहर

10. What is more, the United States system involves the practice of
granting what is called frec time to the Judges to peruse the briefs, the
Judges working in Court half the time, remaining half being devoted to
study and disposal of briefs. It also means the increased cost of the
employment of a number of very capable well paid legal assistants.

Having regard to the essential difference in the jurisdiction and
powers of our Courts and the entirely different conditions in which they
function, is the adoption of the American system by us at all practicable?”

The Commission ultimately rejected the suggestion tor adoption of the
American system.

6.19. At the same time, we are not unmindful of the fact that oral arguments
quite often take much more time than is warranted by the facts of the case. In
our opinion, considerable saving in the time taken can be effected if we have
a sysiem of a concise note of arguments to be presented in advance before the
commencement of oral arguments. This would also bring about a certain amount
of precision and orderliness, and eliminate desuitory submissions.

In our opinion, it will be of assistance to the court and a matter of
satisfaction to the counsel and the litigants if, in every first civil appeal before
the High Court and writ petition other than petition for habeas corpus, a concise
note of arguments is filed in court by the parties, and read and studied by the
judge, before the commencement of the hearing of the case. The note should
contain, in separately oumbered paragraphs, the material facts and all propo-
sitions of fact and Jaw that are sought to be raised by the parties before the
court, with specific authorities in support thereof noted separately under each
head. In order that the note may be of real assistance to the litigants and the
court, it should be drawn up with care and exactitude. Oral arguments should,
ualess otherwise permitted by the court, be confined to the propositions that are
set out in the note. These notes should be exchanged by opposing counsel at
least one week before the commencement of the oral arguments.

So far as writ petitions are concerned, we shall deal with the matter
subsequently also.”

Hath Report, Vol. i, pages 468-469, para, 8-10
Para 16.15, intra.


39

6.20. We may note that the matter was discussed in the 14th Report of the View in 14th Re

Law Commission', which did not favour either the introduction of written atgu-
ments? or the filing of a statement of cases in appeais.

It appears to us, however, that so far as the need for filing a statement
of case is concerned having regard to the magnitude of arrears, which, since then,
have piled up and call for clearance, a somewhat different approach to the matter
is desirable. That is why we are recommending’ a modification in that regard.

6.21. Looking to the magnitude of the problem, we are inclined to agree, in
principle, with the conclusion reached by the High Couris Arrears Committee
presided over by Mr. Justice Shah The Committee, while arriving at its
conclusion, said:—

“97, It is uniformly complained that lengthy arguments are addressed
in many cases oa matters which are only of incidental importance and
there is no attempt to concentrate upon the essentials of the dispute
between the parties to the litigation. Sometimes Passages from evidence
are read out in extenso, and decisions are read verbatim from the com-
mencement to the final order. Citation of decision from obscure sources
is also a common occurrence. To obviate all this and to compel the
counsel of both sides to concentrate upon the essentials of the dispute,
we recommend that unless otherwise ordered by the court, in every appeal
or petition to be heard before the High Coust, the Advocates for the
parties would draw up a concise statement setting out briefly the facts
giving rise to the dispute. the points at issue, the propositions of law or
fact to be canvassed and the authorities relied upon for each proposition,
and the relief claimed. These statements should be exchanged between
ihe advocates and filed in court well in advance of the hearing and the
judges should not ordinarily permit the advocate to travel outside such a
statement or to cile authorities, not included herein. It may be noted
that the High Courts Arrears Committee of 1949 observed that a full
statement of the case on law and fact should be filed by the appellant
along with the Memorandum of appeal, in all second appeals and in
all civil appeals to the High Court a concise statement of the case with
relevant law and authority which will in all essential features be presented
to the court at the time of the final arguments should be exchanged
between the parties and filed in Court, a short time before the hearing
actually begins on the Hines of the statemen; of the case in the Privy
Council. The Law Commission did not recommend acceptance of that
suggestion but merely recommended the exchange between counsel of
lists of authorilies they propose to cite in order to prevent surprise and
to ensure speedy assistance to the court. In our view, if the statemenis
“are properly drawn up and the Advocates are not permitted to travel
vulside except for compelling reasons, the length of arguments would
be considerably reduced”.

6.22. We may observe that the filing of concise note’ of arguments would
prove helpful and result in curiailing the time of the court hearing, only if the
Judge concerned reads beforehand the said concise note of argument Other-
wise, the preparation of a note would prove a mefe exercise in futility. There
is, in the words of an American jurst.’ nothing in the whole field of procedure
as futile as an appellate court solemaly listening to ihe arguments of counsel
without having read and analysed the briefs that counse! have gone—or should
have gone—to great pains to prepare.

623. To avoid any possible misconceptions, we would make it clear that it is
Mot suggested that we should, in this country, adopt the American system of
“written briefs”. But it would be worth while making an experiment aimed at
a real reduction in the time taken in the appellate court and therefore a real
reduction in costs. without at all fettering the right of counsel to fuil oral

414th Report (Reform of Judicial Administration) Vol. 1, pages 465-474,
*Para 6.18. supra.

SPara 6.19, supra.

‘High Courts Arrears Committee Report (1972), pages 72-73, para 97.
SPara 6,19. supra.

"Vanderbilt. Challenge of Law Reform (1955), page 71.

port.

Shah Committee.

Reading
vance.

in ad-

Oral arguments

not to be

sed with,

dispen-


No time limit on

arguments,

Scheme

to

be

tried in the High
Courts in certain
proceedings in the

first instan

ce,

Need for working
the scheme in pro-

per spirit.

Judgments to
pronounced — with-
in reasonable

time.

Statement
circulated.

to

be

be

40

argument of their cases on propositions set out in a concise nole. We do not
contemplate doing away with oral arguments. What we contemplate is a method
whereby the time taken in oral arguments may, to a certain extent, be reduced
and oral arguments could be made more purposeful. A concise note of the
arguments filed in the court and received in advance by the counsel would, in
our view, go a long way towards achieving this object.

6.24. We are also averse (० putting a time limit on arguments. The time
required for oral argument in each case would depend upon the nature of the
case, the questions of fact and law involved in it, the volume of evidence and
the number of legal propositions advanced. To prescribe a time limit on atgu-
ments would not only cause discontent, but might also result in miscarriage
of justice im some cases. Every case is unique and is entitled to the time and
individual attention necessary for a fair hearing, considering all the circumstances
of the case.

If the presiding judge has read the judgment of the trial court and persued
the concise note of arguments in advance, he would be able to regulate the
arguments and avoid any desultoriness therein. -

In this context, we may refer to the observations of the High Courts
Arrears Committee presided over by Mr. Justice Shah :!

“98. We are averse to the suggestion made by some Judges and the
Members of the bar that a time limit should be set for arguments before
the High Court, as is the practice in the Supreme Court of the United
States of America. The Law Commission has in its Report elaborately
examined the system in vogue in the Supreme Court of the United States
of America and has shown how it is unsuitable to the conditions here.

“99, The procedure prevailing in the Supreme Court of the United
States of America is entirely different from that in vogue in our High
Courts. The practice adopted in the Supreme Court of the United
States of America cannot be transplanted here. At the same time we
are conscious of the fact that lengthy arguments waste a good deal of
time of the Court.”

6.25. For the present the scheme recommended by us? regarding concise note
of arguments may be tried in the High Courts in regard 10 regular first appeals
and petitions under article 226 of the Constitution other than those secking
habeas corpus. If this scheme is found successful, it can be extended to regular
second appeals and revisions in the High Courts and also to the Lower Civil
Appeliate Courts.3

6.26. We may finaliy state that the scheme recommended by us will be
successful only if the bar and the bench work it in its true spirit.

IV. JUDGMENTS

6.27. We now deal more specifically with judgments. Jt has been observed that
judgments are generally reserved and, in some cases, pronounced a long time
after the arguments have been heard. Long delay in the pronouncement of
judgment is an unhealthy practice. The Law Commission of India, in its Report
on the Reform of Judicial Administration,* expressed the view that though
ordinarily the most convenient course for the judges would be to deliver the
judgment straightaway at the close of the hearing, there could be certain cases
in which judgments would need to be reserved. The Commission observed that
im such cases the reserved judgments should be pronounced within a reasonable
time. We fully agree that judgments should be pronounced within a reasonable
time.

6.28, Normully, it should be possible to pronounce a judgment, if not done
immediately, within a week of the conclusion of arguments. Care may be taken
to ensure that the time lag between the conclusion of arguments and the pro-
nouncement of the judgment does not exceed one month, except in some special

High Courts Arrears Committee Report (1972) pages 72-73, para 98-99,
*Para 6.19. supra.

"See also para 18.15, infra.

‘14th Report, Vol, 1. page 360, para. 102.


4

matters. We are, however, not unmindful of the fact that judgments are, on
occasions, not pronounced for a number of months after conclusion of argu-
ments. This is an undersirable practice and affects the image of the courts. It
would perhaps administratively help if in each High Court a statement is ciscu-
lated amongst the judges every month, giving a list of cases in which judgments
have not been pronounced within two months of the conclusion of arguments.

6.29, It has been brought to our notice that sometimes the judges have to spend
considerable time in dictating judgments in segular second appeals and civil
revisions, even though those appeals and revisions are devoid of any merit.
We suggest that it would be permissible for a judge. when dismissing a regular
second appeal or a civil revision, to give a short statement of facts, the main
contentions advanced and brief reasons for repelling those contenlions. This
would eliminate the necessity of writing long and elaborate judgment in such
cases,

6.30. We may also draw attention to the observations made by us in the
context of judgments of the trial courts in our 77th Report! We feel that
though some of those observations may not be apt for the judgments of High
Courts, by and large they underline the importance of some wider aspecis which
can prove helpful. It was said in that Report—

“7.4, One general tendency is to cite a very large number of authori-
lies and to read lengthy passages from those judgments. Experience tells
us that the fate of most cases depeads upon facts. The law bearing on
the cases is well settled by statute or the pronouncements of the highest
court. It would be much better if the judgments of the trial deal
with questions of fact by appraising the evidence, refer to the relevant
statutory provisions applicable to the matter and cite such of those
authorities as have a direct bearing. Burdening of the judgments with
too many authorities mostly with a view to distinguish them has invari-
ably the effect of making judgments unduly lengthy. It bas to be borne
in mind that the primary function of the judge is to decide the case
before him. A judgment should set out the salient facts of the case,
deal with the points of controversy, appraise the relevant evidence,
discuss the questions of law which arise and incorporate the findings of
the court on the various issues. The judgment should conclude by
staling in precise language the actual relief, if any, granted to (he
plainuff.

“7.5, A judgment, i: needs to be emphasised is not a medium to
display the learning of the judge, on points which have only incidental
bearing. The function of a judge while deciding a case is not the same
as that of a research scholar writing a thesis on a particular branch of
law. The art of writing not very long judgment while at the same time
dealing with all material points of controversy can be acquired only
slowly and gradually. It is indeed learning the art of condensing the
maximum of ideas into the minimum of words.

“7.6. There is, however, one danger which we have (० guard against.
Brevity in the matter of judgments should not be used as a justification
for not dealing with inconvenient contentions and not facing the crux of
the argument of a counsel against whom the judge decides the matter.
The stress oa brief judgments should certainly not provide a cover for
menial lethargy nor an alibi for imtefiectual dishonesty. A balance has,
therefore, to be kept in the matter.”

"77th Report, Delay and Arrears in THal Courts para. 7.4 छ 36.

Judgment of | dis-

missal.

Observations

in

earlier Report on

the _ subject
judyment

of


Need for proper
listing,

Cause of arrears.

Listing of appeals
and grouping.

Observations ९५
eartier ~~ Commit-
168,

Appeals under
Land Acquisition
Act,

Cuarrer 7
GROUPING AND LISTING OF APPEALS
IL IMPORTANCE

का, In order that an appellate court — or, for that matter, any court — may
function with the maximum efficiency. it is necessary that the business before
that court is so arranged that matters which require prompt attention get such
attention and also that the situation of old cases getting older and of new cases
receiving priority should, as far as possible, be avoided, It is not enough to
ensure the good quality and adequate strength of the judges: it is also necessary
that the same be utilised in the best manner in attending to judicial business,
so that arrears do not accumulate.

7.2, It has not been disputed! that lack of Proper listing and proper notice
of ready cases, and not giving priority to old cases, is a factor which contributes
to the accumulation of arrears. Similarly, failuce to group cases involving the
determination of common questions of law may contribute to the piling up of
arrears. Accordingly, we propose? to devote a few paragraphs to that aspect,

Hl. GROUPING

7.3, In the matier of listing of appeals, it has frequently been noticed that
adequate care is not taken by the Registry. Very often, there are appeals
involving determination of common questions of law. but due notice is not taken
of this important aspect and such appeals are posted separately before different
benches, Instructions should be issted to the staff concerned for (0 the group-
ing of cases involving determination of common question of faw; and (ii) posting
them together for hearing before the same bench.

74, The High Courts Arrears Committee presided over by Mr. Justice Shah

in its Report* made the following pertinent recommendation relating to the
#rouping and classification of cases:

“We recommend that there should be grouping and classification of
cases, so that cases raising similar disputes or cases under spec jalised
branches such as tax cases, cases under the Industrial Disputes Act, cases
under the Land Acquisition Act, petitions for writs dealing with special
statutes may be brought together. This would not only expedite disposal
of cases but would also conduce to a uniformity of approach and
decisions, with a progressive development of the law. The method of
clubbing together and posting before the same Judge or Bench of Judges
cases of the same nature. has in our opinion much to commend. This
method need not be confind to petitions for writs alone, but may be
adopted for all cases including first appeals”.

7.5. It will be useful to refer here, in particular, to appeals under the Land
Acquisition Act’-6 Very often, when large parcels of lands situated in, the same
locally or in similarly placed localities are acquired, separate awatds ate made at
different times in respect of the parcels of land comprised in the locality.
References from the awards of Land Acquisition Collectors are heard by the
District Judge, from whose decisions appeals lie to the High Court. These
appeals relating to different parcels of land in the same locality most usually
involve common questions of law or fact, but are not filed at the same time
nor put up together in the High Court. This leads not only to want of unifor-
mity, but also to the unnecessary accumulation of cases—unnecessary, because
matters involving common questions of fact or law should preferably be put
up together, thereby effecting saving of time.

"Para 7.4, infra,
*High Courts Arrears Committee Report (1972), page 49. para 33, 34

SPara 7.3 and 7.4, infra.

‘High Courts Arrears Committee Report (1972), page 72. para 94,

SAs to general discussion of appeals under special Acts, see Chapter 9, infra,
"As to priortiy. see para 7.9 and 7.10. infra.

42


43

‘There is a remedy which could remove the defect. Officials of the
Revenue Department generally are in the full know of the particulars of atl such
proceedings and of the various awards made by the Land Acquisition Collectors
and by the Land Acquisition Courts in references made to them in such cases.
When the matters come up before the High Court in separate appeals from the
awards of the Land Acquisition Courts, the counsel in charge of conducting the
appeals in the High Court on behalf of the State has ample means and facilities
for collecting the relevant data in this regard from the Departments concerned.
The Registry of the High Court can make necessary enquiries from the counsel
who, after contacting the concerned officials of the Revenue Department should
give necessary information about appeals relating to the same area, All such
pending appeals can then be listed in one batch and posted together for hearing.
This will not only facilitate a correct assessment of compensation by the High
Court, but will also, at the same time, bring about speedy disposal of the

appeals.

7.6, Likewise, there are appeals involving points which, since the filing of the Appeals. involving
memorandum of appeal, have been settled by authoritative decisions. If proper tled ‘atter filing of
care is taken, it should not be difficult for the Registry to pick out those appeals appeal.

and list them in one batch before the High Court for disposal.

WH. LISTING conn

7.7, Another cause of delay in the disposal of appeals is the defect in the System of listing
system of listing with reference to dates.” Fixing of actual dates in all appeals किक १०४०४ ७ lis
is not possible in the High Court. The time taken in each appeal is uncertain
and cannot be estimated. An appeal fixed for a particular actual date, if not
reached on that date. has necessarily to be adjourned to another date which
may well be after several months, because of the intervening actual date appeals
already fixed. This may result in the old appeats becoming older and the
newer appeals being taken up and disposed of earlier, It will be conceded that
this is not desirable. Jn our view, the system best suited to the High Court is

normally that of a continuous list.
care Continuous list—

7%. For the system of continuous list! to work effectively, meticulous tinuous | Use
should be taken in its preparation. We recommend (as, in fact, is the practice prepared 0
already being followed in most of the High Courts) that there should be a ready
list containing particulars of cases ready for hearing in chronological order
according to the dates of their institution. From this ready list, a daily list
should be drawn up in the same manner and with reference to the dates of
institution. The cases should be taken up by the court seriatim from this daily
list from day to day, strictly in the order in which they appear in the list. No
deviation should normally be made save in exceptional circumstances.?
Adjornment of cases reached for hearing according to the daily fist should be
an exception, and not a matter of course.
79. We may add that there are certain types of cases which, on account
their very nature, call for early disposal. It is plain that great injustice wou!
be done and hardship caused if these cases have to take their turn in the queue.
Justice demands that priority should be given to their disposal.
7.10. Certain cases require urgent attention as having effect upon the pendency List.
of other proceedings. Certain cases require urgent attention as affecting life or
fiberty. Certain other cases require urgent attention because of the peculiar
nature of their subject matter.
The following list enumerates the categories of cases calling for priority:
तु Cases Requiring Urgent Attention as having effect upon pendency of
other Proceedings
(a) Cases in which orders have been passed whereby other proceedings
have been stayed.
{b) Appeals against orders of remand.
Yt. Cases Requiring Urgent Attention as affecting Life or Liberty.
{a} Cases involving death sentence.
(b) Habeas Corpus petitions.

of Cases requiring
ig catty disposal.

“Tiara 77, supp,
2866 also Chapter 20, infra,
7-283 LAD/ND/79


44

WI. Cases Requiring Urgent Attention because of their Peculiar Nature

(a) Appeals in matrimonial cases, and cases involving custody of children.

(0) Appeals under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 in claim cases.

(c) Appeals under the Indian Succession Act, 1925.

(d) Cases arising out of statutes dealing with agrarian reform.

(०) Cases between the landlords and tenants where eviction is claimed on
the ground of bona fide personal need of the landlord.

(f) Cases where the relief sought is a declaration that suspension or termi-
nation of service of an employee, including employees in industrial
undertakings, is illegal and not warranted, with or without a prayer
for consequential relief.

{g) Election matters.

(h) Such other cases as may, in the opinion of the High Court, call for
carly disposal.

Criminal appeals. 7.11, We may add that criminal appeals and revisions also need early disposal.

Benches.

Assignment

cases to Judges

with experience,

Observations

Report of earlier

Committee.

One or more’ szparate Benches should normally deal with these appeals and
revisions, so that they do not remain pending for a long time. It hardly needs
to be emphasised, so far as criminal cases are concerned, that it is essential
that as they relate to the liberty of the subject and impinge upon the maintenance
of law and order in the society, they be disposed of as early as possible. The
criminal cases on that account would have to be treated as a class by themselves,
and for that reason it becomes imperative to have separate Benches to deal
with them.

So far as tax cases are concerned, the matter is being dealt with in a
subsequent chapter.!

IV. BENCHES

7.12, Relevant at this stage is also the question of constitution and disbanding
of Benches. It is undoubtedly a matter which falls within the domain of the
discretion of the Chief Justice of the High Court, and we are averse to prescrib-
ing fetiers on the general exercise of that discretion. It is because of the
complaints that have sometimes been made on this score that we have considered
it proper to suggest some guidelines, not with a view to fettering the exercise
of that discretion as with a view to bringing about better functioning of the
High Court in order to attain the objective of securing optimum output. Experi-
ence has shown that a Bench constituted of judges having a particular aptitude
for a certain branch of law is best suited to handle cases pertaining to that
branch with ease, grace and speed, and its overall performance is generally very
satisfactory, both from the point of view of quality and from the point of view
of speedy and larger disposal.

of 7,13. Complaints are not uncommon that some of the judges to whom certain
types of cases are assigned have no experience of that branch of law. The
result is that a case which, before a judge having experience, of that branch of
law, might take. say, one hour would take before the judges before whom it
is posted four or six hours if they have no aptitude for that branch of law. This
results in unnecessary wastage of the time of the court. Such wastage can be
avoided if the Chief Justice takes into account the aptitude of different judges
while constituting Benches. A person holding the office of the Chief Justice
should acquaint himself, as he normally does, with the aptitude of his colleagues.
Tt is necessary that he should take that fact into account when constituting
different Benches. It hardly needs to be emphasised that the Benches of the
High Court cannot be used virtually as training ground for judges in branches
of Jaw new to them.

ia 7.14. In this context, we may refer to the observations made by the High Courts
Arrears Committee presided over by Mr. Justice Shah? which we quote below:
“There is occasionally failure to make optimum utilisation of the judge
strength. One factor which undoubtedly affects the turnover in some
High Courts, is the non-utilisation of judges having special aptitude and

Chapter 17. infra.
High Courts Arrears Committee Report (1972). page 83, para 135.



4>

talent for a particular class of causes. It should not be difficult for the
Chief Justice of the High Court to assess the special aptitude and talent
of the judges in his court and to allocate as far as possible judicial work
in such a manner that judges are called upon to attend to causes for
which they have special experience, aptitude or talent. It need hardly
be emphasised that if judges with special acquaintance or competence or
who have specialised in certain branches of the law are allotted causes
under that particular branch of the law, the time taken to decide those
causes would be much shorter than the time taken by judges not familiar
with the branch, especially a specialised branch.”

7.45. Arthur T. Vanderbilt, Chief Justice, Supreme Court of New Jersey, ON Vanderbilt’s view.

this aspect said :!
“Judicial work is of various kinds; appellate, criminal, civil, equity,
probate and matrimonial. A Judge who is equally interested or equally
proficient in all of them is indeed a rarity. Every judge, if he is to do
his work best, should be assigned, wherever possible, to the kind of
judicial business in which he excels Because this power
‘of assignment is a delicate one, to be exercised only on mature reflection
in the interest of the judicial establishment as a whole, it should be
committed to the Chief Judicial Officer of the state, and be, in wm
would do well to seek the advice of his colleagues, even though the
ultimate responsibility must be solely his.”
Experience has shown that the observance of this rule has yielded good

results.

7.16. We may also advert to the question of duration of benches. Principally, Duration of Ben-
the object of constituting a Bench is disposal of a particular (ype or calegory ches.

of work, such as first appeals, second appeals, land acquisition appeals or writ

petitions. To relieve monotony, work of a different nature is also included

at times in the list of cases posted before a Bench. But the principal object

is what we have just now stated. This system has worked well, and has yielded

good result. It is, however, desirable that the Benches so constituted should

be allowed to function for a reasonable length of time and the Judges constitut-

ing the Bench should know well in advance when the Bench is to break, so

that there may be no part heard cases left by the Bench after it is disbanded.

7.47. Another aspect that results in delay and also dis-satisfaction amongst the pisbanding of
lawyers and the litigants is that the bench so constituted for bearing a particular benches.
type of appeal is discontinued abruptly without making arrangement for the
hearing of cases (of the same type) ‘already on the daily list in the order of
their dates of institution, What happens in such cases is that when the bench
is disbanded, those cases are taken out of the daily list altogether and very
often it is after months, if not years, that they suddenly appear again in the
daily list either at the bottom or at the top. In either event, apart from causing
inconvenience to the counsel, this results in the old matters becoming older and
the newer institutions gaining preference.

To obviate this difficulty, it is necessary that cases not disposed of by
the disbanded bench should be posted for hearing before the successor bench.
In case that is, for some reason, not immediately possible, steps should be taken
to post them for hearing without delay.

\vanderbilt, Challenge of Law Reform (1955), page 87.


Scope of the
Chapter.

Admission of first
appeals to e
done by Division
Bench.

Hearing of first

appeal by Bench.

No further appeal
in High Court,

CHAPTER 8

FIRST APPEALS (INCLUDING APPEALS FROM CITY CIVIL COURTS)
TO HIGH COURTS

IL MATTERS DEALT WITH
8.1, We have so far considered the general question of appeal and appellate
procedures; it will be convenient now to deal with particular types of appeals.
We stall deal Jater with appeals under special Acts! and with what have come
to be known as Letters Patent Appeals.2 This Chapter will be mainly confined
to first appeals that lie under the general provision in the Code of Civil Proce-
dure} to the High Courts. It will, however, be necessary to deal with certain
connected quesions. In the first place, the matter that will engage our attention
is the appellate machinery in City Civil Courts, these being courts that have
been established under State or Central legielation, in Ahmedabad, Bombay and
Calcutta, Hyderabad and Madras. In the second place, we shall also deai with
the question whether first appeals should be admitted and heard by a single
judge or by a division bench. Thirdly, certain points of procedure will also

require attention, namely, summary dismissal of appeals,

Il. ADMISSION AND HEARING BY BENCHES

8.2, In some High Courts, while the regular first appeals are heard and decided
only by a Division Bench, they are put up for admission before a single judge.
In such cases, the single judge has no alternative but to admit the appeal,
simply because he has no power to dismiss it. This practice sets at naught the
provisions of Order 41, Rule 11, Code of Civil, Procedure, 1908. If regular
first appeals are to be heard and decided by a division bench, they should be
placed for admission before such a bench only, so that the bench may be
competent to scrutinise and pass appropriate orders in the matter,

83. ‘There is also a difference as regards the hearing of first appeals in various
High Courts. In some High Courts, appeals arising out of suits upto a certain
amount are heard by single judges. In other High Courts, all first appeals are
normally heard by a Bench of two Judges.

In the High Courts where the appeal is heard by a single judge, a further
appeal lies to the bench, normally consisting of two judges, under the Letters
Patent or corresponding law‘-5, This, in our opinion, is unnecessary duplication
of work, and if the minimum limit of appellate jurisdiction of the High Court
is increased as will be recommended later in this Report,’ it would be a conve-
nient rule to be framed by the High Court that all regular first appeals should
be placed before a Division Bench for admission, hearing and disposal. So
far as other first appeals are concerned, they may be heard by single or division
bench according to the rules made by the High Court.

84. We are also of the opinion that there should be no further right of ap-
peal in the High Court against the judgment passed in appeal by a single
Judge. We have already recommended’ that so far as regular first appeals are
concerned, they should be heard by Division Benches and not by single judges.
This would bring about the application of a plurality of minds for the disposal
of those appeals. Regarding other first appeals decided by single judges, in
our opinion the decision should have a stamp of finality, except in those cases
where the matter is taken up by certificate or special leave in appeal to the
Supreme Court. We shall, in a later Chapter’ advert to the reasons which have
weighed with us in arriving at this conclusion.

"Chapter 9, infra.

*Chapter 11, infra.

Section 96, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

‘See Chapter 11, infra.

3566 also sections 17-20, Indian Divorce Act, 1869
‘See infra.

"Para 8.3, supra.

"Chapter 11, infra.


47
UI. APPEALS AGAINST JUDGMENTS OF CITY CIVIL COURTS

85. We now address ourselves to the appeals that lie to the High Courts from Introductory.
the judgments of City Civil Courts. This topic was briefly dealt with in the

Report of the High Courts Arrears Committee presided over by Mr. Justice

Shah.!' The matter requires some discussion. From the following rapid survey,

it would be evident that there are certain differences as regards the structure

and composition of the various City Civil Courts, leading to differences regarding

the forum of appeal against decision of the respective judges,

8.6. We have, at present, city civil courts functioning in five metropolitan cities City Civil Courts
Calcutta?, Bombay?, Madras* Ahmedabad? and Hyderabad°. ind their jurisdic-

ton.
The jurisdiction of the City Civil Courts at Ahmedabad and Hyderabad
is, from the point of view of pecuniary limits, unlimited. The jurisdiction of
the courts in the three presidency towns is limited to Rs. 50,000, suits of a
higher value being within the exclusive competence of the respective High Courts
which have ordinary original civil jurisdiction.’

8.7. More important is the difference in the position as regards structure and Structure and
composition, including rank of the personnel, of the various City Civil Courts, composition,

In the City Civil Courts in Calcutta, Bombay and Ahmedabad, the presiding

officers are of the rank of District Judges. In the City Civil Courts in Madras?

and Hyderabad®, some of the presiding Officers are of the rank of District

Judges!, and other officers are of a lower rank.

8.8, Connected with this difference in the internal structure!! of the various Jurisdiction of in-
City Civil Courts is the difference as regards the forum of appeal from their dividual judges—
decisions. original and ap-

pellate.
(a) In the City Civil Courts in Calcutta, Bombay and Ahmedabad, the
judges have concurrent original jurisdiction. But they have no appel-
late jurisdiction. Appeals from their decisions lie to the respective
High Courts. The valuation of the subject matter makes no
difference to the forum of appeal.

(b) In the City Civil Court at Madras, the various Presiding Officers—
Principal Judge, Additional Judges and Assistant Sudges—All
exercise ofiginal jurisdiction!?. But a) is lie? to the Principal
Tudge from a decision of the Assistant ‘iin in any suit or proceed:
ing where the value does not exceed Rs. 10,000. The cipal
Judge may, from time to time, transfer for disposal such appeals to
any Additional Judge.'*

This alfords a contrast to the position applicable to the City Civil Courts
in the three cities of Calcutta, Bombay and Ahmedabad.

89. Similarly, in the City Civil Court, Hyderabad the Chief Judge and Addi- Hyderabad.
tional Chief Judges have, under the relevant State law's, jurisdiction to hear and

dispose of appeals against the decisions of the other judges of the court in

certain cases; in other cases, the appeals lie to the High Court.

‘High Courts Acrears Committee Report (1972), page 66, Chapter ©, para 66.
*City Civil Court Act, 1933 (Calcutta).

SBombay City Civil Court Act, 1948.

‘For statutory references relating to Madras, see para 8.9, infra (footnotes
‘Ahmedabad City Civil Court Act, 1961.

‘For statutory references relating to Hyderabad. see para 8.9, infra.
*Chapter 2, supra and Chapter 15, infra.

*Principal Judge and Additional Judge in Madras.

*Chief Judge and Additional Chief Judge in Hyderabad.

1E.g, in Madras the Principal Judge belongs to the cadre of D. J, Grade 1, and the
Additional Judges belong to the cadre of D. J. Grade Il.

para 8.7, supra.
WSection 4(1), Madras City Civil Court Act (Central Act 7 of 1892).

“Section 15(2), Madras City Civil Court Act (Central Act 7 of 1892), as amended in
1957; and information obtained in F, 2(7)/77-L.C., Part II, Si. No. 17.

‘Section 15(4}, Madras City Civil Court Act ( Act 7 1892).
“Andhra Pradesh (Telangana Area) Civil Courts Act, 1954, ion 16(2).



Question of intro-
ducing uniformity
regarding forum
of appeal consi-
dered.

Dismissing __preli-
minary hearings.

Change needed as
to regular first ap-
peals.

48

8.10. The above resume will show that there are differences as regards the
structure and composition of the various city civil courts, and as regards the
appellate forum in respect of decisions of judges thereof. In fact, as already
stated! the differences regarding appellate forum are due to the differences in
respect of structure and composition, including the rank of the Presiding Officers.

We have considered the question of having a uniform pattern for city
civil courts in all the metropolitan cities in the context of appeals which lie to
the High Courls, There can be no doubt that each of the systems, the one im
operation in Calcutta, Bombay and Ahmedabad and the other in Madras and
Hyderabad, has its pros and cons. To adopt a uniform pattern for ail the five
metropolitan cities, would necessarily have the effect not only of disturbing the
status quo, but also of causing considerable dislocation either in the system in
operation in two cities, or in that in force in the other three cities. The litigants
and the members of the Bar in each of these cities have grown used to the exist-
ing sysiems and there has been no major demand for changing the pattern of the
city civil courts in operation in these cities. Looking to all the facts, we are
averse to recommending any change in the system of city civil courts function-
ing in the different metropoiican cities, or in the forum of appeal from their
judgments, In case any change is called for, the same can well be effected by
local legislation in the light of any particular difficulty which might have been
encountered in the metropolis concemed.

Tv. SUMMARY DISMISSAL OF FIRST APPEALS

8H. Reverting to the chronological stages in the appellate process, we would
iike to deal with the dismissal of appeals at the preliminary hearing under
Order 41, rule [1 of the Code of Civil Procedure.2 Under Order 41, 106 11(4),
inserted in 1976, where an appellate court, not being the High Court, dismisses
an appeal, it shall deliver a judgment recording in brief its grounds for doing
so. The Law Commission had, in the its 54th Report} recommended that the
mandate which subsequently came to be contained in Order 41, rule 11, sub-
rule (4) should be applicable not only to the subordinate courts, but also to
the High Courts when dealing with first appeals.

This recommendation of the Law Commission, in so far as the High
Courts are concerned, does not appear to have been incorporated in the statute
when necessary amendment was made in the Code of Civil Procedure in 1976.
8.12, We have given the matter our consideration and are of the ०| pinion that
so far as regular first appeals in the High Courts against final judgments of
trial couris are concerned, there should be a rule, making it imperative that
when the High Court dismisses such appeals under Order 41, rule 11, Code of
Civil Procedure, it should do so by a brief order giving reasons for the dismissal
ot the appeal at the preliminary stage. The High Court, when it decides a
regular first appeal against the final judgment, has to record its findings, both
on questions ot fact and law, and its findings on questions of fact are final. The
normal rule is that an appeal which raises triable issues for court of appeal
should not be dismissed in limini. The Supreme Court also, in one of the cases,‘
expressed the view that when a first appeal raises triable issues, it should not
be dismissed in limini. To give effect? to our recommendation made above,
necessary amendment should be made in Order 41, rule 11, Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908.

At the same time, we would like to emphasise the fact that the need for
a brief order giving short reasons for dismissal should arise only in regular
first appeals. 11 would not be necessary for the High Court to record such
an oider in the case of second appeals or appeals against orders.

‘Para 8.8. supra.
99.41, 1. 11(4), Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
‘Law Commission of India, 54th Report, paragraphs 41.13 to 41.15.

4M. 2, Vetale y. Smt. Sugandha, AJR. 1972 S.C 1932, 1933, para 4
sAamended of Code recommended,


CHAPTER 9

APPEALS UNDER SPECIAL ACTS

9.1, Apart from regular first appeals, there are other statutory appeals also
which lie to the High Court against decisions under special Acts, as for example,
the Guardians and Wards Act, the Land Acquisition Act,? the Companies Act,
the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act,> the Workmen’s Compensation Act*-5
and the Motor Vehicles Act.¢ Rules have been framed in most of the High
Couris in this regard. It is necessary that there should be no default in their
observance.

For the preparation of paper books in such appeals, typed copies
supported by an affidavit as to their correctness may be accepted. and the same
procedure as has been recommended by us in an earlier Chapter? for supplying
copies thereof to the respondent in case of regular fitst appeals may be adopted,

Scope of the

apter,

. . oo हि पि Appeals वा matri-
9.2, Appeals in matrimonial cases have an importance of their own, and ‘manial cases.

should be given priority®-° as already recommended by us while dealing with
the listing of appeals.

9.3, The majority of appeals in matrimonial cases in the High Court are now
appeals under section 28 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. There are also
certain appeals filed under the corresponding provision in the Special Marriage
Act, 1954. As regards Christians, jurisdiction of the High Court under the
Indian Divorce Act, 1869 is ordinarly by way of confirmation’ of the decree of
divorce passed hy the District Iudge, proceeding for such confirmation being
mandatory'! under the Act."2_ In regard to the Parsi Marriage Act. 1936. in the
three Presidency towns, the Chief Matrimonial Courts presided over by a High
Court Judge exercise special jurisdiction of an original character ia matrimonial
causes under that Act.3 Appeals lie to a Division Bench of the High Court.

What we have said above, as to giving priority to appeals in matrimonial
cases, is intended to cover all these Acts.

9.4. It is also our view that the existing provision of the Indian Divorce Act,!4 Confirmation—ca-
ses under =the

under which a decree of divorce granted by the District Judge needs to be
confirmed by a special Bench consisting normally of three judges of the High
Court, on a reference made to it, should be modified and need for such a
reference and confirmation should be done away with altogether. The existing
procedure not only causes delay in the final disposal of the petitions for divorce
under the Indian Divorce Act, but also subjects the parties to unnecessary
expense.

9.5, It may be mentioned that other matrimonial laws like the Hindu Marriage
Act, contain no provision for confitmation of a decree of divorce and we see
no cogent ground why a special provision for the purpose applicable to decrees
of divorce granted under the Indian Divorce Act, should be required.

Section 47. Guardians & Wards Act (8 of 1890).
Section $4, Land Acquisition Act, 1894, (See also Chapter 7, supra).
‘Section 109(2), Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958.

‘Section 30, Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923.

5888 also separate note as to special Acts, Appendix 3.

'Section 1100, Motor Vehicles Act. 1939.

*Chapter 8, supra.

"Cf. Law Commission of India, 77th Report (Delay and Arreats in Trial Courts),
Chapter 10 (as to priority in trial courts),

‘Chapter 7 (Listing of appeals).

Section 17, Indian Divorce Act, 1869.

“Para 2.7, supra,

See pata 9.4, infra, for recommendation.

“Parsi Marriage Act 1936, sections 17 to 19.
MSection 17, Indian Divorce Act, 1869, para 9.3, supra.

49

Indian
Act, 1869.

Divorce


50

It is also plain that the above requirement about the confirmation of the
decree by a Bench of the High Court is a hangover of the days which no longer
exist. It has also lost all its relevance in the present-day India. 1६ should,
therefore, be done away with and replaced by appeals, as in the Hindu Marriage
Act. We may add that a substantially similar recommendation was also made
by the Law Commission in its Reports dealing, inter alia, with the Indian Divorce
Act..2_ The High Courts Arrears Committee? presided over by Mr. Justice
Shah also recommended a similar change in the law.

‘Law Commission of India, 15th Report (Law >elating to marriage and divorce
amongst Christians in India), page 40, para 78 and page 128, Note on section 17.

2Law Commission of India, 22nd Report (Christian Martiage and Matrimonial Causes
Bill, 1961), page 2.

High Courts Arrears Committee Report (1972). Chapter 5, page 68, para 76.


Cuaprer 10
SECOND APPEALS

10,1. The search for absolute truth in the administration of justic must, in the Second appeals—
very nature of things, be put under some reasonable restraint. Such search for.
has to be reconciled with the doctrine of finality. There must come, in the

course of litigation, a stage when the decision rendered on a question of fact

should become final and the matter should be allowed to rest where it lies,

without further appeal on facts. At the same time, any rational system of Jaw

must provide for taking the cause to a specified superior court on a question

of law—a superior court whose decision on the question of Jaw will become

binding on subordinate courts. There should be one authoritative and final
tribunal in various appellate matters, competent to give decisions which are
recognised as binding all over the State and which keep alive what

Lord Birkenhead so felicitously described as the ‘immense unity of the law’!

When a substantial question of law is in isuse, the general interest of society

in the predictability of the law clearly necessitates a system of appeals to the

highest court of the State.2

10.2. This aspect has a vital connection with two basic principles of our Basic principles.
constitutional and legal system, and its imterest therefore transcendes the

boundaries of mere procedural law. It is a basic principle of our legal system

that precedent is a source of law. This postulates that there shall be a superior

court with jurisdiction to determine questions of law, whose determinations

shall find a place in the law reports of the country.

Then, it is also a postulate of the rule of law that if the Jaw has been
clearly laid down by such a superior court, and the decision of a subordinate
court when exercising appellate jurisdiction is in clear violation of the law
pronounced by the superior court, the power of the superior court of the State
to correct that decision should be recognised.

10.3. These may be said to constitute the implicit assumptions underlying the Implicit | aseump-
right of appeal to the High Court from appellate decrees, provided by section tions of section
100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. These are also the implicit assump.

tions underlying the negative provision in section 101 of the same Code, to

the effect (01६ no second appeal shall lie except on the grounds mentioned in

section 100.

10.4, Section 100 of the Code, as amended in 1976, allows a second appeal only Second appeal un-
if the High Court is satisfied that the case involves a substantial question of Code, emended
law, The limitation flowing from this provision may be emphasised.

Nairow scope of

10.5, Even before its amendment in 1976, section 100 had a restricted scope. (४0 100
The restricted scope of interference by the High Court in second appeals even
before the amendment had been repeatedly emphasised by the Supreme Court
while dealing with second appeals and their admission by the High Court.
After the amendment, it has become all the more necessary to bear in mind
the restricted ambit of the section, in view of the fact that the scope of inter-
ference in second appeal has been further narrowed down. What the section
now requires is not only that the appeal should raise a question of law, but
also that it should be a substantial question of law.
10.6. We would again like to point out an essential difference between a first Feet eral and
appeal and # second appeal. The primary purpose of an appeal on facts is .
justice in the individual instance. On the other hand, the primary purpose
of an appeal on law, at least in the case of a second appeal, is the affirmation
or e-affirmation of a particular rule of law. The principal aim, in this case,
is the production of certainty in the law. The mere dissatisfaction of a litigant
with the judgment on the merits does not itself furnish a ground of second
appeal. This is the theory underlying section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

q i in (1927) 63 LJ. 298, 304. “The Judicial Committee” (ord Bir-
kenheatts Dieta fom the Chair while presiding over a lecture by Professor J, H-
Morgan).

'B.g. para 4.10, supra.

a
8—253 LAD/ND/79


Small cases.

No change for the
present.

52

10.7. So much as regards the principle underlying section 100. While the
section permits a second appeal on a substantial question of law, practical
considerations impel the law to place certain limitations even in this respect.
For example, in cases where the amount involved is not large, the policy of
the iaw is that at a particular stage halt should be called, and the parties
should not _be burdened, or even be tempted to burden themselves, with further
expense. The quest for justice is not something abstract. It has also to bear
the impress of a certain amount of pragmatism. It is because of these consi-
derations that limitations have been placed on the right of appeal when the
amount involved is not Jarge.' It is plain that in such matters a line has to
be drawn somewhere. The point at which the line is drawn may appear to
some to smack of arbitrariness, but such a charge would perhaps be always
there, whenever we have to draw a line at some point. While determining the
peint at which the line is drawn, the law has to keep in view all the relevant
factors, including the need for finality, the cost to be incurred and the impera-
tive of ensuring that the cost should not be disproportionate to the stakes
actually involved. Section 102 of the Code accordingly bars a second appeal
in any suit of a nature cognisable by courts of small causes when the amount
or value of the subject matter does not exceed rupees three thousand. The
amount of rupees three thousand was increased from rupees five hundred as
a result of the amendments made in 1956 and 1976. These amendments seck

to ensure that the time and energy of the courts should not be wasted by
over-litigious individuals.

10.8, We have in an earlier Chapter dealt at some length? with the question
as to whether we should have a right of second appeal on a substantial question
of law. It would not, therefore, be desirable to cover the same ground over
again. Not much time has elapsed since the amendment referred to above in
section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure. It is obvious that the impact of
the amendment would be visible only after the passage of some time. It is
apposite that we shouid for the time being watch the situation.

Section 102, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
SPara 4.10 to 4.13, supra.


CHAPTER 11
APPEALS AGAINST JUDGEMENTS OF SINGLE JUDGE
11.1, This Chapter is concerned with appeals from the decisions of a

High scope of

Court judge to a Bench of the High Court. The right of appeal in such cases Chapter,

is governed by the relevant clauses of the Letters Patent of the High Court
concerned,!-} or, in the case of High Courts which are not governed by the
Letters Patient, by the corresponding provisions contained in the instruments
constituting the High Courts. Such instruments usually provide for appeal
against judgments of a single judge to a Bench of the High Court.

112, There can be no doubt that even if an appeal were permissible against
the judgment of a single judge of a High Court rendered im first appeal® it
would amount to second appeal.

11.3. In an earlier Chapter? of this report, we made certain recommendations Recommendation

as to appeals in the High Courts—

Patent

made as to Letters
Appeal

(a) there should be no further right of appeal in the High Court against from decision on

a judgment pronounced in appeal by a single judge ;

(0) regular first appeals should be heard by Division Benches, and not
by single judges ;

(०) in regard to other first appeals decided by single judges, the decision
shouid have a stamp of finality, except where the matter is taken
up by certificate or special leave in appeal to the Supreme Court.

We then indicated that we would later give the reasons which had
weighed with us in making the above recommendations, We now proceed to
give our teasons.

ficst appeal.

11.4, In regard to regular first appeals, our recommendation® that they should Reasons for hear-
be heard by Division Benches was influenced by the fact that these appeals pe att Division

bgve an importance of their own, and it is but meet that there should be an
application of plurality of mi for their disposal.

Regarding other first appeals’ our recommendation was based on the
view that important though they are, their importance cannot rank on the same
level as that of regular first appeals. We, therefore, recommended that except
where the statute so provides otherwise, such appeals may be heard and decided
by single judges, This would result in larger disposal of the appeals belonging
to this category. It may be that some of these appeals against orders might
involve questions of importance. In such cases, it would be always open to the
single judge before whom these appeals are posted to direct, either at the time
of admission or at the time of regular hearing, that they be posted before a
Division Bench. In any case, the decision of the single judge should, as already
stated, have a stamp of finality’?

IClause 15, Lettera Patent, Calcutta, Bombay and Madras.

SClause 10, Letters Patent, Allahabad, Lahore, Patna and Nagpur (substantially con.
tinned in force by tho High Courts Order or other instrument, ¢g. section 8, Delhi High
Court Act, 1966).

‘Clause 12, Lettera Patent, Jammy & Kashmir.
4E.g, (a) Section 5, Kerala High Court Act, 1958 (5 of 1959),
(b) Section 18, Rajasthan High Court Ordinance (5 of 1949),

For procedure, see Mulla, Code of Civil Procedure (1955), Vol. ॥, pages 25, 417, 452.

Unless abolished by statute, e.g, the U.P, High Court Abolition of Letters Patent
Appeal Act, 1962 (Appendix 8), page 305.

Tpara 8.9 and 8.10, supra.

SPara 11,420), supra,

Para 11.30, supra.

WPara 11.3(0), supra.

53


54

Reasons for bar- 11.5. Coming now to the reasons which have weighed with us in recommending!

ring |

Questions of fact.

Question of Law.

against

Arpeal is ins
Sida side,

ihat there should be no further right of appeal in the High Court against the
judgment of a single judge in first appeal, we may point out that the present
Position presents two anomalies, which will become evident when one compares
the position under the Code of Civil Procedure (in respect of appeals governed
by that Code) with the position under the Letter Patent. The matter could be
considered with reference to questions of fact and questions of law.

11.6, So far as questions of fact are concerned the general scheme of the Code
of Civil Procedure which applies where the first appeal is decided by a subordinate
court—is that the decision in first appeal should be final. Where a first appeal
is decided by a judge of the High Court, the reason for putting a stamp of
aay on the finding of fact recorded by the court in first appeal is all the more
weighty.

11.7, So far as questions of law are concemed, there no doubt exists under the
Code a right of second appeal to the High Court, against the judgment passed
in appeal by a court subordinate to the High Court, if a substantial question
of law is involved. We have, in an earlier Chapter, examined the rationale of
second appeal under section 100 of the Code. As we have already stated,? the
principle underlying such appeals is that on questions of law, the authoritative
pronouncement should emanate from the High Court, whose pronouncement on
such questions would be binding on all the courts in the State. Now, most of
regular second appeals are decided by single Judges and no further appeals can
be filed in the High Court against such decisions in view of the express bar
created by section 100A of the Code of Civil Procedure. Enunciations of
principles of law? when given by single judges in second appeals thus bind the
courts in the State. It would, therefore, seem somewhat anomalous that such
enunciations of law should lose their binding force if they emanate from single
judges of the High Court when dealing with first appeals. Necessity of affording
a right of second appeal on substantial questions of Jaw may exist when the
matter is decided by a court subordinate to the High Court, but this consideration
loses its relevance where the decision sought to be appealed from is itself that of
a High Court judge. In this sense, a further appeal under the Letters Patent
is anomalous, even on questions of law. There may be justification for allowing
an appeal to the High Court (on iaw) from a judgment in first appeal passed
by a subordinate court, but not when the first appeal itself is decided by @ a judge
of the High Court, The demands of uniformity of law are amply satisfied by
allowing an appeal to the High Court, and a further appeal is not needed. Of
course, in all appropriate cases, where the question of law is of importance or
needs an authoritative pronouncement by a larger Bench, it would be always
open to the single judge,* to refer the matter to a larger Bench. But there is
no compelling reason for permitting a second appeal in such cases.

11.8. 11 is for these reasons that we have made the recommendations on the
subject, to which we have already made a reference.6

11.9. It may be mentioned that under the Letters Patent of the High Court or
other instrument creating the High Court, appeals against the judgments ot the
single judge exercising original or writ jurisdiction lie to a Division Bench of
we High Court’ Nothing herein stated would affect the maintainability of such
appeals.

Para 11.3(a) and 11.3(0, supra.

*Para 4.10 to 4.13, supra.

§Section 100A, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
‘Compare para 11.9, supra,

sPara 8.9 and 8.10 supra.

"Para 11.3, supra.

"Para 11.1, sepra.


Cuarter 12

CIVIL REVISIONS

12.1, The High Courts in India exercise revisional jurisdiction under several scope of revi
Provisions to which we haye already made a reference.’ Of these, the provision sional power.
juently resorted to in civil cases is section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure,

1908. This is one of those sections that have come up for consideration

whenever the question of delay in courts has been discussed. Section 115, it should

be noted, contributes its share not only to increased judicial business of the

High Courts, but also to the progress and duration of proceedings in subordinate

courts.

At least since 1924, this section has attracted the attention of law reformers,
and the solutions suggested to minimise delay consequential on revision have
been numerous and of infinite variety. We need not enter into a history of the
section or of the various measures considered in the past for revising it. Attention
will be confined to such features of revisional jurisdiction as are relevant for
our purpose.
12.2, It may, in the first place, be mentioned that section 115 of the Code of Revision _under
Civil Procedure prescribes a very narrow area for interference by the High Court the Code of Civil
in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction. The High Court can interfere only Procedure “Need
where the subordinate court has exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, &* *T™uliny.
or has failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested or has acted in the exercise of
its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity. There are certain other
limitations recently introduced by the amendment made in 1976 in section 115.
The scope of the section, and the limitations introduced recently, should both
be borne in mind. It may be true that not more than 40 to 50 per cent of the
applications for revision are admitted, and the res are dismissed summarily.
But when a rule nisi is issued in case of a revision, proceedings in the lower
court are generally held up during the pendency of the revision and it is not
infrequently that the record of ¢he case in the subordinate court is also calied
for in the High Court, so that further proceedings in the subordinate court,
even in the absence of a stay order, come to a #andstill. Greater care should
therefore be taken, and close scrutiny be made, at the stage of admission of
revisions,

12.3. We have, in an earlier Chapter,? laid stress on the point that in revisions Filing of fresh re-
against interlocutory orders, records of the court below should not be sent for vision proceed
unless an express order is made for the purpose by the High Court. We have ings.

also expressed} the view that it would be the resonsibility of the petitioner

in such a case to file copies of pleadings, documents, depositions, applications

and replies thereto or orders as were sought ‘to be relied upon at the time of

the hearing of the revision. The copies are to be accompanied by an affidavit

about their correctness. To give effect to this recommendation, necessary modi-

fications may be made in the rules of the High Court.‘

‘Chapter 2, supra.
"para 5.2, supra (Revision against interlocutory orders).

*Para 5.22, 5.29, 5.30, supra.
‘For action in connection with rules.

55


Constitution (44th
Amendment) Act,

Cuarter 13
CERTIFICATE FOR APPEAL TO SUPREME COURT

13.1, Articles 132, 133 and 134 of the Constitution make provisions for grant
by the High Court of certificate of fitness for appeal to the Supreme Court in
certain categories of cases. Experience tells us that most of the applications
for such certificate in the past used generally to be made some days after the
pronouncement of the judgment of the High Court. Notice of those applications
had therefare to be issued to the opposite party. The applications were there-
after posted for hearing and necessary orders were made on the same after
hearing the counsel for the patties.

13.2, All this consumed considerable time and resulted in protracting the pro-
ceedings. The appropriate course to remedy such a situation appeared to be
to provide for making of an oral application immediately after the judgement
was Pronounced by the High Court. The High Court would then pass an order
on application soon thereafter. The adoption of such a course would
have obviated the necessity of issuing notice to the opposite party, because both
parties already would have notice of the date on which the judgment is to be
pronounced. It would have also rendered unnecessary elaborate arguments,
as the whole matter would be fresh in the mind of the court as well as of the
counsel for the parties. The necessity for making a suggestion on the above
lines is no longer there, as we find that according to the Constitution (Forty-
fourth Amendment) Act, amendment have been made in articles 132, 133 and
134, and a new article 134A has been inserted. As a result of the above
amendments and insertion, every High Court passing or making a judgment,
decree, final order or sentence referred to in clause (1) of article 132, clause (1)
of article 133 or clause (1) of article 134:—

(a) may, if it deems fit so to do, on its own motion ; and

(b) shall, if an oral application is made, by or on behalf of the party

aggrieved, immediately after the passing or making of such judgment,
decree, final order or sentence,

determine, as soon as may be after such passing or making, the question
whether a certificate of the nature referred to in clause (1) of article 132,
clause (1) of article 133 or, as the case may be, sub-clause (०) of clause (1)
of article 134, may be given in respect of that case.

In view of the said amendment of the Constitution, the time that was
consumed in proceedings before the High Court for obtaining a certificate of
fitness for appeal to the Supreme Court would be saved.


CuapTer 14
CRIMINAL APPEALS, REVISIONS AND REFERENCES

I. INTRODUCTORY

14.1, Criminal appellate and revisional jurisdiction of the High Courts presents Introductory.
a fair measure of variety. Appeals could lie against convictions! or acquittals.2
Revision can also lie against certain judgments and other orders,3 when the
case falls within sections 397 to 401 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

Then, there is the jurisdiction by way of hearing references for confirmation of
the death sentence.

Ii CRIMINAL APPEALS

14.2, A criminal appeal lies to the High Court under the Code of Crimi! pee
Procedure, 1973, in a limited number of cases. Jn the first place.> any person .
convicted on a trial held by a Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge

or On @ trial held by any other court in which a sentence of imprisonment for

more than seven years has been passed, may appeal to the High Court. There

are certain statutory limitations’ on the right of appeal, which are not material

for our purpose. In the second place,’ the State Government may, in any case

of conviction on a trial held by any court other than a High Court. direct the

Public Prosecutor to present an appeal to the High Court against the sentence

of the ground of its inadequacy and. in certain cases, this power of appealing

to the High Court can be exercised by the Centra! Government. In the third

Place,’ subject to cetrain limitations, Government may direct the Public Prose-

cutor to present an appeal to the High Court from an original or appellate order

of acquittal passed by any court other than a High Court. This appeal caazet

be entertained except with the leave of the High Court’ In the case of an

order of acquittal passed in any case instituted upon complaint, the complainant

thay present an appeal against acquittal to the High Court after obtaining “special

leave” of the High Court.!¢

We need not deal with appeals from orders of criminal courts other than
judgments of conviction or acquittal.

143, The need for expediting the hearing of criminal appeals has been Need for expedi-
emphasised more than once. The High Court Arrears Committee!! दीप over tion,

by Mr. Justice Shah noted that in some courts. a criminal appeal did not reach

hearing for five or six years after the appeal was admitted to the file.

24.4. Measures for expediting the hearing of criminal appeals in the High Ctiminal a
Coutts, as far as we can see, will have to be mostly administrative. We may, from te ie
however, deal with certain matters which need particular attention and in Tespéct Judge,

of which the law or rules, if necessary, should be amended

145, There has been a tendency in some courts of dismissing first appeals Summary diemit-
against judgments of conviction in limini with a one word order—‘dismissed’. nal pl ciiminal ap-
Many such orders are reversed on further appeal and the cases are remanded. viction.

We are of the view that whenever a first appeal against a judgment of conviction

is dismissed in limini, the count of appeal, irrespective of the fact whether it is

the High Court or the Court of Session or Chief Judicial Magistrate, should

‘Para 14.2, infra.

"Para 14.2, infra.

"Para 14.7, infra. and sections 397 to 401, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
‘Chapter 2, supra. See also section 432(2), Code of Criminal Procedure. 1973.
‘Section 3742), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. See also para 14.8, infra.
‘Sections 375 and 376, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

Section 377, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

Section 378, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

Section 378(3), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

‘Section 378(4), Code of Criminal Procedure. 1973. See para 14.10, infra,
‘High Courts Arrears Committee Report (1972), page 75, para 109.

37


Hearing ingle
Wage tot सा
appeals —_ against
eonvictions.

Variows orders,

Importance of or-
ders for mainten-
2000.

58

record & brief order, giving reasons as to why it is dismissing the appeal at the
preliminary stage.

So far as the courts of session and of the Chief Judicial Magistrate are
concerned, there already exists! a provision in the Code that such courts, while
dismissing an appeal summarily, should record reasons for doing so. We have?
while dealing with regular first appeals against final judgments in civil matters,
recommended that not only the subordinate courts [for whom a provision already
exists in Order 41, Rule 11(4), Code of Civil Procedure, 1908] but also the High
Courts, should record a brief order giving reasons which weigh with it in dis-
missing such appeals at the preliminary hearing. We feel that the need for such
an order when a first appeal against a judgment of conviction is being dismissed
at a preliminary hearing is all the more great, because a criminal appeal involves
the liberty of the subject and has quite often more serious consequences.

146. In our view, it is also necessary to enlarge the power of the single judge
of High Courts so as to enable a single judge to dispose of all criminal appeals
against convictions except those in which a sentence of death or imprisonment
for life is passed. We would recommend that the High Courts may revise their
rules accordingly, where such is not the position at present.

वा. CRIMINAL REVISIONS

14.7. The orders against which criminal revision may be filed could themselves
be of infinite variety,—such as orders for security, orders for the maintenance of
wives and children, orders of certain types finally disposing of the proceedings,}-*
and orders concerned not with the determination of guilt but with other matters
(e.g. disposal of property).

148. We are particularly mentioning’ revisions in regard to orders for main-
tenance passed under section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, since, on
a perusal of the reported decisions*.?-* on the subject, it appears that both the
jurisdiction of the Magistrate to award maintenance under this section and the
powers of the High Court to revise such orders, are assuming greater importance
every day. The exercise of the revisional jurisdiction of the High Court under
the Code, or its supervisory jurisdiction under the Constitution,? has remedied
serious injustice that might have otherwise arisen from orders of the Magistrates.

‘Section 3843), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

"Para 8.1%, supra.

Section 397(3), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

‘See also Appendix 4.

SPara 14.7, supra.

‘Mehbubabl y. Nasir. Mohd. Sheikh, (1976) Maharashtra Law Journal, 631, summarise
ed in the Yearly Digest (1976), column 313.

™iehbubabi v. Nasir Mohd. Sheikh, (1976) 78 Bombay Law Reporter 258.

*Kunhi Moyen v. Pthomma, (1976) Kerala Law Times summarised in the Yearly
Digest (1976), column 814,

‘Articles 227 of the Constitution.



Cnarter 15

ORDINARY ORIGINAL CIVIL JURISDICTION OF HIGH COURTS
15.1. We propose to deal, in this Chapter, with the ordinary original civil Ordinary original
jurisdiction of High Courts. To start with, only the three High Courts of Calcutta, civil jurisdiction.
Madras and Bombay were vested with such jurisdiction, exercisable within the
respective limits of the three Presidency towns. However, two important deve-
lopments took place later. On the one hand, certain other High Courts (besides
those in the Presidency towns) came to be vested with such jurisdiction! On
the other hand, the jurisdiction of the High Courts in the three Presidency towns
came to be curtailed in course of time.?

15.2. As to the other High Courts, it may be noted that in the year 1966, Delhi High Court
ordinaty original civil jurisdiction was conferred on the Dethi High Court? in ordinary civil jue
respect of suits of a value of more than Rs. 25,000/-. This amount was subse- "

quently? raised to Rs. 50,000/- with effect from 1st October, 1969.

15.3. Jn regard to the erstwhile Union Territory of Himachal Pradesh, the Himachal Pra-

hierarchy of courts was previously regulated by the Himachal Pradesh (Courts) desh.

Order, 1948, issued under the Extra Provincial Jurisdiction Act, 1947, as then

in force. After the Delhi High Court was established, such jurisdiction as was

exercisable in respect of the Union Territory of Himachal Pradesh by the Court

of the Judicial Commissioner for Himachal Pradesh was transferred to the High

Court of Delhi, and it was also provided® that the High Court of Delhi shall

have. in respect of the territories Ror the time being included in the Union

Territory of Himachal Pradesh, “ordinary original civil jurisdiction in every suit

the value of which exceeds twenty-five thousand rupees, notwithstanding any-

thing contained in any law for the time being in force”. The amount of

twenty-five thousand rupees was raised? to fifty thousand® rupees in 1969.
Subsequently, on the creation of Himachal Pradesh as a State in_1970,

the High Court of Himachal Pradesh was created as a separate High Court,’

and succeeded to the jurisdiction of the Delhi High Court in relation to the Union

Territory of Himachal Pradesh. That is how the High Court of Himachal

Pradesh has come to be vested with ordinary original civil jurisdiction in every

suit the value of which exceeds fifty thousand rupees.

18.4. It would be of interest to note that when the Chief Court of Oudh was Oudh Chief Court.
established under an Act enacted by the United Provinces legistature,!° it was
invested with original civil jurisdiction for the trial of suits valued at Rs. 5 lacs
or above. The relevant section was as follows!'! :—
“7, Original Civil Jurisdiction
The Chief Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine any
suit or original proceeding of which the value is not less than five lakhs
of rupees and notwithstanding anything contained the section 15 of the
Code of Civil “Procedure, 1908, every such suit or proceeding shall be
instituted in the Chief Court.
Provided that nothing in this section shall affect the provision of
section 24 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.”
This jurisdiction was abolished in 1939,7

1868 para 152 and 15.3, infra.

3७८७ para 15.5, infra.

WSection 5. Delhi High Court Act, 1966,

‘Delhi High Court (Amendment) Act, 1969,

SSection 17(1) and (2). Delhi High Court Act. 1966,

Section 170), Delhi High Court Act (26 of 1966).

"Delhi High Court Amendment Act, 37 of 1969.

Soe para 15.2, SUPTA. veer esee cette cesses जम wate

‘The State of Himachal Pradesh Act. 1970,

angection 7, Oudh Courts Act (U.P, Act 4 of 1925). See Bisent Bhuvan v. Son of
Madho Singh ALR, 1927 Oudh 59.

UGovernment of UP. Gazette dated 16th May 1925. Part VIT, U.P. Act No. 4 of
1925 (Oudh Courts Act 1925).

"Qudh Courts (Amendment) Act—U,P, Act 9 of 1939.

59

9-253 LAD/ND/79


Cartaitment
ay Chat Cours to be limited with the establishment, at different times, of the City Civil Courts,

60

हि: 153. The jurisdiction of the three High Courts in the Presidency Towns came
in all the Presidency towns. In Madras, the original civil jurisdiction of the
Madras igh Court was curtailed by the establishment of the civil court for
the city of Madras in the year 1892, with jurisdiction in respect of suits or
other proceedings of a civil nature not exceeding Rs. 25,000/- in value. The
limit was gradually raised, until ॥ was Rs, 50,000 in the year 1955. This
continues to be so up to the present time. The ordinary original civil jurisdic-
tion of the Madras High Court, at present, is only in regard to matters exceeding
Rs. $0,000'- in value.

., rhe jurisdiction of the Bombay City Civil Court, according to the City
Civil Court Act, 1916, was initially Rs. 10,000'-. It was raised to Rs. 25,000/-
in January, 1950 and subsequently raised to Rs. 50,000/-.

in Calcutta, the City Civil Court was established only in the year 1957,
with a pecuniary jurisdiction of Rs. 10,000/-. In regard to certain types of
suits—compendiously described as “commercial causes”—its jurisdiction was
restricted to suits and proceedings not exceeding Rs. 5,000/-. Some other
exceptions were also made in regard to certain other types of suits which were
not cognisable by this court, but they are not material for the present purpose.
At Patra the jurisdictional limit of the City Civil Court at Calcutta is
Rs. 50,000}.

Present position. 15.6. So the position in all the five High Courts! which exercise ordinary original

civil jurisdiction is that they try suits exceeding Rs. 50,000/- in value.

Jammu & Kash- 15.7. Apart from the above, the High Court of Jammu & Kashmir has ordinary

mir,

origina! civil jurisdiction in suits above Rs. 20,000/-.

Debate about utt- 15,8, This process of expansion and curtailment of the ordinary original civil

tity.

jucisdiction of High Courts has been accompanied by an interesting debate as
to the utility of such jurisdiction. The argument in support of ordinary original
civil jurisdiction of the High Courts has been that the administration of justice
at this higher level is of a better quality and that it also inspires more confi-
dence in the litigating public. There, however, is also a contrary view, which
is opposed to the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High Courts on
the ground that it is more costly and cumbersome.

Previous Reports. 15,9, The question which has called for examination is whether the ordinary

Conclusion.

Original

suits

original civil jurisdiction of the High Courts should be retained or not. In the
case of the Calcutta High Court, this question was referred for consideration
to the Judicial Reforms Committee for the State of West Bengal (Trevor Harries
Committee). The Committee recorded its conclusion thus :

“After giving the matter the fullest consideration ... ve. that the
original side of this court should not be abolished in its entirety. We are
convinced that there is a genuine demand for it, particularly in the commer-
cial community and its ab~lition would be a rea} loss to the litigant public
of Caleutta.”2
The Law Commission of Inuta, presided over by Shri M. C. Setalvad, also

took the same view in its 14 Report.*

15.10. We do not propose to suggest any change in the matter. We may note
that there is already a move to enhance the lower pecuniary Jimit of some of
the High Courts to Rs. 1 lac. In view of the lower purchasing power of the
rupee, this approach has much to commend itself.

in 15.11. We have, while dealing with the question of delay in the trial courts, made

High Courts—ad- certain suggestions in the 77th Report‘ with a view to cutting short delays.
option of sugges: While some of those suggestions pertain only to the subordinate courts, many

tion in 77th = Re-

port.

other suggestions, such as the desirability of recording statements of the parties
under Order 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure before the framing of issues,
would equatly hold good for the trial of original suits in the High Courts, Those
suggestions made in the 77th Report, if adopted with such modifications as
may be called for in regard to proceedings in the High Court can, in our opinion,
go a long way in cutting short the time taken for the disposal of original suits
in the High Courts.

Wara 15.2, 15.3 and 15.5, supra.
3566 14th Report. Note १.

‘Law Commission of India. (4th Report, Vol. 1, pages 117-118, para 12 to 14,
‘Tith Repost.



CHAPTER 16

EXTRAORDINARY ORIGINAL CIVIL JURISDICTION OF HIGH
COURTS: WRITS
1, GENERAL

16.1. Besides ordinary original civil jurisdiction,! High Courts have extraordinary
original civil jurisdiction, derived from a number of sources. These sources
include the Constitution? the Code of Civil Procedure, 19083 the Letters Patent,‘
and other laws or instruments having the foroe of law

16.2. Occassions for the exercise of such jurisdiction® may arise when a suit or
proceeding is withdrawn by the High Court for trial before itself, under the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, or when the suit or proceeding is wansferred by
the Supreme Court from another court to the High Court under that Code.7
By che Letters Patent® also, certain High Courts in exercise of their extraordinary
original civil jurisdiction, are empowered to remove any civil case from a court
subordinate to them and cause it to be tried and determined by themselves.

Ml. WRITS : NATURE AND VOLUME

16.3. The most important species of extraordinary original civil jurisdiction of
the High Courts that has assumed importance in recent times is the jurisdiction
to issue “writs”. Before 1950, the power to issue a writ as such was vested
only in the three High Courts for the three presidency towns,—though there were
certain statutory provisions conferring on other High Courts the power to grant
substantially similar relief. After 1950, under Article 226 of the Constitution,’
power has been expressiy conferred on all High Courts to issue, inter alia,
directions in the nature of writs for the specified purposes. We are here con-
cerned not with the details of the purposes for which writs can be issued, but
with the breadth of the jurisdiction.

16.4. With the increase in the socio-economic and welfare activities of the State
and the geowing awareness of the citizen as to his rights, Article 226 of the
Constitution assumed singular importance in our system of administration of
justice. Jt empowers every High Court, throughout the territories in relation to
which it exercises jurisdiction, to issue to any person or authority, including, in
appropriate cases, any Government within those territories, directions, orders or
wrils, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition,
quo warranto and certiorari or any one of them for the purpose mentioned in
thal Article. With the passage of time, the institution of writs has been on the
increase. The relevant Appendix!? to this Report shows that the pendency of
writs has substantially increased. Taking था all-India view, the total number
of writs pending in ail the High Courts as on December 31, 1977, was 134639,
as against 122009 pending on Ist January, 1977. There is, thus, an increase
of 12630, representing a 10.35 per cent increase in 1977 over the previous year.
The existing strength of judges of the High Courts is obviously not sufficient
to clear the backlog and at the same time to deal satisfactorily with the increasing
institution. This shows the imperative need for the appointment of additional
and ad hoc judges to tackle the problem,—a matter which we have already dealt
with.!' Here we confine ourselves to the ways and means that may be adopted
to expedite the disposal of writ petitions. What we propose to indicate will be
3 general pattern

IChapter 15. supra.

Articles 226-227, of the Constitution,

Xa) Section 24120). Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,

(0) Section 25, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

‘B.g. Letters Patent, clause 9 (Allahabad), clause 13 (Calcutta) and so on.
‘See Chapter 2. supra.

‘See para 16.1, supra.

ection 2500, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

‘Pare 16.1, supra.

‘para 16.4, infra, :
Appendix refating to figures of institution etc., Table IV.
“Chapter 3, infra.

61

Extraordinary
gina) civil juris-
diction.

Occasions for the
exercise of extra-
ordinary original
civil jurisdiction,

Writs,

Scope of writs.


Service of notice
and recommenda-
tion,

Service matters.

Lengthy writ peti-
tions.

Show cause notice.

Order of dismis-
sal.

62

जा, PROCEDURAL DELAYS IN WRITS ; SERVICE

16.5, One of the causes of delay in the matter of writ petitions is the difficulty
in getting service effected on the respondents. In most of the writ petitions,
apart from the other respondents, the State Government or the Central Govern-
ment too is a respondent. Whatever steps may be taken to expedite the
service on other respondents, we may mention that so far as the State Government
or the Central Government is concerned, in some of the High Courts the Advocate-
General accepts service of the notice on behalf of the State Government, and
the Central Government Standing Counsel accepts service of notice on behalf of
the Central Government. We are given to understand that this procedure has
worked well, and has resulted in the ¢limination of delays.

We suggest that the feasibility of adopting this course in other places might
also be considered by the State Government and the Central Government, It
may be added that the adoption of this course would necessitate increasing the
strength of the staff of the office of the Advocate-General and the Central Govern
ment Standing Counsel.!' Looking to the advantage which would accrue, no one
should grudge the increase in the expense on that score.

16.6. In service matters, especially those relating to seniority, it has been often
noticed that in addition to the Government, quite a large number of respondents
who are interested in the subject matter of the writ petition or who are likely
to be affected by the order on the petition, are also impleaded. Individual service
of such respondents takes a fot of time. Quite often, by the time the notice
of the writ petition issued by the court reacbes at the address given, the official
js transferred and the notice comes back with the report that the official is no
longer at that station. To avoid this difficulty, we recommend that instructions
may be issued to the various departments of the Government that so far as court
notices are concerned, they should, instead of being sent back to the court with
the above report, be re-directed to the new station of posting of the official
concerned. It is obvious that the department would know the exact place at
which ag oificial is posted at a particular time.

16.7. It is not uncommon to come across writ petitions which are lengthy and
pfolix, even though the facts relevant to the points that call for decision lie
within a narrow compass. It would facilitate quick disposal of writ petitions on
the date of preliminary hearing as well as that of final hearing, if the writ petition
is accompanied by a chronological statement of facts necessary for the Purpose
of the relief sought by the petitioner. This may be provided for in the rules.?

16.8 There are many petitions under article 226 of the Constitution which are
dismissed at the preliminary stage by the High Court with a one-word order
“dismissed”. Quite a number of these orders are reversed on appeal and the
cases ate remanded to the High Court for disposal. All this entails unnecessary
wastage of time and also leads to duplication of work. We arc of the opinion
that a substantial number of writ petitions can be disposed of at the preliminary
hearing if a notice is issued to the opposite side to show cause why the writ
petition be not admitted. The result of issuing such a notice is that fresh light is
thrown on many of the allegations of fact which otherwise remain uncontroverted.
Some new facets of law, not mentioned in the petition, may also be brought to
the notice of the court in the retum. All this helps the court in deciding whether
the petition should or should not be admitted for regular hearing. Experience has
also shown that as a result of show cause notice, the area of controversy
becomes so much narrowed down that the parties agree to some quick solution
of the controversy at that stage itself. These aspecis highlight the utility and
advantage of a show cause notice in appropriate cases. It is, however, essential
that the show cause notice is made returnable by an early date, so that the
provision regarding interim relief is also not abused. The High Court would
also be on a much firmer ground in dismissing a writ petition if it does so
after issuing a show cause notice.

16.9. Apart from the above, we are of the opinion that the High Court, while
dismissing a petition under article 226 of the Constitution, should record a
short order, giving its reasons for not admitting the petition. This is necessary
to enable the petitioner as well as the Supreme Court, in case the matter is

For action by State Governments and Central Government.
*For rules.



63

taken up before it, to know what considerations have weighed with the High
Court in dismissing the petition. The need for such an order is all the more
great in writ pititions because, unlike in an appeal, in a writ petition there is
generally no reasoned decision of a subordinate court.

16.10. Rules of the High Court should also specify the time, — as has already Time for filing

been done in many of the States,—during which counter-affidavit or the affidavit
in opposition should be filed by the respondent. In our view, such time should
not exceed three months from the date of the service of notice of admission
of the writ. However, if sufficient cause is shown by application in writing
made before the expiry of three months, the court may further extend the
time for a period generally not exceeding one month. The respondent must, in
every case, serve an advance copy of the counter-affidavit on the petitioner or
his counsel. The Registry should refuse to accept the counter-affidavit if it
is filed beyond three monihs or without obtaining an extension of time for
the purpose from the court or without serving an advance copy on the petitioner
or his counsel.

16.11, If the counter-affidavit is not filed within three months or within the
extended time, the case sbould be listed for hearing without countcr-affidavit.
The respondent shall not be entitled to file counter-aifidavit after the expiry of
the period mentioned above (original or extended) without express permiss‘on of
the court. An advance copy of the counter-altidavit should be served on the
petitioner or his counsel betore the same is filed in court.

16.12, Rules of the High Court should also provide for filing a replication, if
any is desired to be filed by the petitioner or if the court considers it necessary.
Time for this purpose may be prescribed by rules to be four weeks from the
date of service of copy of the countet-affidavit.

IV. WRIT PETITIONS : HEARING

16,13, Afler the matter is complete in terms of the aforesaid rules, the writ
petition should be included in the ready list of cases published by the court in
chronological order according to its date of institution, except where the petiiion
has, for sufficient reason, to be listed for a future date. The writ petitions which
belong to a class needing priority, as has been indicated elsewhere,’ would not,
however, have to stand in queue, Apart from that, the daily list should be
prepared strictly in the order in which the cases appear in the ready jist, subject,
‘of course, to the order of the court as to actual date in any matter.

16.14, As recommended by us in the case of regular first? appeals, a concise note
of arguments should be filed in writ petitions before the date of hearing. ‘The con-
tents of the note of arguments and the time of ils filing should be the same as in
the case of regular first appeals, 1t would not, however, be necessary to file such
note of arguments in peiitions for the issue of a writ of habeas corpus, as these
petitions stand in a class by themselves. This apatl, the reasons which weighed
with us in suggesting filing a note of arguments in regular first appeals equally
thold good for writ petitions.

16.15. We have indicated above only a general pattern of rules’, However, it
would be open to each High Court to frame or amend its own rules with such
changes or variations as may be found to be necessary. The object of the rules
should be to obtain a regulated procedure conforming to the principles of
natural justice, at the same time securing quicker disposal of the writ petitions.
The rules! will be efficacious and purposeful only if their observance is
scrupulously adhered to.

२. BENCHES FOR DECIDING WRIT PETITIONS

16.16. It is the general practice in High Courts to have separate writ benches,
but it is necessary that their sittings should continue for a reasonable length

off time.

‘See Chapter 7, supra.
"Para 6.19, supra.
"Para 16.4, supra.
"Para 164, supra.

counter-affidavit,

Consequences of
non-filing of
counter-affidavit.

Replication by pe-
titioner when to be
filed,

Ready list.

Concise note of
arguments.

General pattern of
rules.

Writ Bench.


64

is of writl6.17. While dealing with civil appeals' we have pointed out the necessity of

tion of other pe-
litions not to be

Time limit for dis

cessary for expe-
ditious disposal of

grouping of appeals involving the same question of law. This is all the more
important and necessary in the case of writ petitions. Very often, a number of
writ petitions are filed in respect of the orders of administrative tribunals, involving
not only the same point of law, but also the same or similar facts The grouping
of all such petitions by the Registry will very much help in the quick and
satistactory disposal of these cases.

16.18. lt has also been observed that writ petitions raising a particular question
are not listed by the office for hearing before the bench, simply on the ground
that other petitions of the same nature are likely to follow. This is not a
correct practice. Normally, unless there are some special features, it will be
moie conducive to better administration of justice it such a petition, when filed,
is given precedence,—if need be, with the permission of the Chief Justice, and
put up for decision in accordance with law. The chances of further or more
petitions of the same or similar nature are thereby eliminated or minimised,
‘a case the petition is dismissed. On the other hand, jf the petition succeeds,
it is possible that the department or authority concerned may take suitable action
wiihout further loss of time and harassment to persons similarly aggrieved,

VI. DISPOSAL OF WRITS

16.19, The writ is basically an expeditious remedy and the decision of the writ
petition should normally be as quick as possible. The Writ Rules of the High
Courts should be framed wiih Unat object in view. Having regard, however,
io the extensive field that is covered by Article 226 and the nature of contro-
versies that come up for decision before the court in these Proceedings, is wo are
of the view that the writ petitions should normally be disposed of wil a year
from the date of their institution, as suggested elsewhere in this Report.

16.20, lt would be seen from the scheme of the Writ Rules recommended by us
that for the expeditious functioning of the writ court very prompt and whole-
hearted co-operation of the Government and its various Departments is necessary.
Without such co-operation, the very purpose underlying article 226 of the
Constitution would be frustrated. We, therefore, suggest that special

be paid to this aspect at the Governmental level, and necessary instructions be
issued (0 the various departments. It is only then that the problem of arrears
and {urther accumulation of writ matters in courts can be tackled with any
measure of success,

‘Chapters 4 and 5, supra.
286८ para 1.29, supra,



CuarTer 17
JURISDICTION UNDER SPECIAL ACTS—TAX CASES
I. THE PRESENT POSITION

17.1. A number of special Acts confer jurisdiction on the High Courts.! Ta at tntroductory.

earlier Chapter? we have referred to the Purisciction exercisable by the High
Courts in appeals under special Acts. In this Chapter, we propose 10 deal with
one important species of jurisdiction under special Acts, namely, jurisdiction in
Tegard to matters relating to taxation. We are, in this context, primarily con-
cerned with direct taxes.

Taxing statutes, as is well known, undergo changes more frequently than

legislation on other subjects. It is obvious that as the pattern of taxing law
changes, the pattern of litigation in proceedings concerned with the decisions of
income-tax authorities would also change. Tax planning, in the sense of
Planning one’s affairs so as to legitimately avoid tax, is also now a familiar
phenomenon. In this process, the complexity of the questions that come up
for determination before various appellate authorities under the direct tax laws
increases. Thus, taxing statutes. complicated and technical as they usually are,
require continual concern with them for acquiring and maintaining reasonable
familiarity with their provisions. Jurisdiction under these laws has, therefore,
an interest and importance of its own.
17.2, Authorities administering the direct tax laws have large powers, but an
important restraining influence is the review of their decisions by appellate
authorities functioning under those laws. The Income Tax Act and other Central
laws relating to direct taxes provide a machinery for appeals. There is a whole
hierarchy, starting with the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and ending with
the Supreme Court. The first appeal lies generally to the Appellate Assistant
Comm fesfoner,

The Finance (No. 2) Act (19 of 1977) now makes provision for disposal
of appeals by the Commissioner (Appeals). From the decisions of the income-tax
authorities mentioned above, an appeat lies‘ to the Income Tax Appellate

ribunal.’

Jn certain cases, there is an alternative avenue by approaching the
Commissioner of Income-tax, but we are not concemed with that.

In this hierarchy of appeals, the finat authority on facts is the Income
Tax Appellate Tribunal,’ while the High Courts, and. in certain cases, the
Supreme Court? can be approached on questions of law. Jurisdiction of the
High Court, as the law stands at present, is advisory (being exercisable on a
reference made by the Appellate Tribunal). To the High Court, the Appellate
Tribunal can make a reference on question of law. From the judgment of the
High Court delivered on such reference. an appeal lies to the Supreme Court
on a certificate of fitness for appeal granted by the High Court® or on special
leave granted by the Supreme Court.?-10

17.3, This jurisdiction has been extensively resorted to, as would appear from Volume of

the statistics on the subject. .
A large number of matters before the High Court consists of references
made to it by the Appellate Tribunal under section 256 of the Income Tax Act.

‘Chapter 2. supra.

‘Chapter 9, supra.

‘Finance (No. 2) Act (29 of 1977), section 39 and Fifth Schedule.

‘Section 253, Income Tax Act. 196].

‘Briefly referred to as the Appellate Tribunal.

‘Rameshwar Prasad Bagala v, C4.T.. U.P. AAR. 1973 SC 182. 185, para 10

TSection 261, Income Tax Act, 1961.

"Section 261. Income Tax Act, 1961.

पर. Arunachalam Chettiar, 23 UTR, 180, 185; SC: AIR 1953 SC 18. 121
8 8.

Martie 136, Constitution of India.

65

Appeals in
tion cases,

cases,

taxa-

tax


66

1961, or under substantially similar provisions in the other central enactments
relating to direct taxes, or in certain state enactments relating to sales-tax and
other indirect taxes.
It would appear! that on the Ist January, 1977, 12,133 Income Tax refe-
rences and applications were pending in the High Courts, and during the year
1977, 6289 such references and applications were instituted. During the same
year, 3195 such references and applications were disposed of by the High Courts.
At the end of the year 1977, 15,227 such references and applications were pending.
The disposal, counted as a percentage of institution, was 50.8 per cent in the
case of such references and applications. Barring the disposal rate in regard
to election petitions, during the year 1977, this rate of disposal as a percentage
of institution represents the lowest disposal rate of various types of cases during
the year 1977.
II. VARIOUS ALTERNATIVES

Need for, devising 17.4, This is hardly a satisfactory situation. We have to devise ways and means

हसन कलम Gaasiso as to ensure that not only the arrears of references pending in the High

gal. PO” Courts are cleared, but also that the number of references disposed of by the
High Courts in a year is commensurate with the number of references made to
the High Court during that period. . Care would have, therefore, to be taken
that as far as possible the number of references disposed of is not less than
those made to the High Court in a year. It is apparent that the early disposal
of references in tax matters is of importance, both from the point of view of
the assessee and from the point of view of the State. So far as assessees are
concerned, they would, by and large, be interested in the early disposal of
matters relating to their tax liability and the extent of such liability. As regards
the State. its interest in the recovery of revenue and avoidance of delay in such
recovery is so obvious that it hardly needs any dilation.

Need for certain 17.5. From the figures to which we have referred above? it is evident that
wi ० concerted efforts are needed to—
gard to taxation (a) increase the strength of judges in the High Courts to deal with
matters. taxation references: and

(b) constitute separate benches in High Courts wherever the volume of

work so justifies, for disposing of tax cases.’

On the question whether any structural or procedural changes are needed
in the machinery for finally determining questions arising in taxation matters.
considertble fabour has been devoted in the past to examining various
alternatives.4

Separate Benches 97,6, One way of expediting the disposal of income-tax references and of pre-
venting accumulation of arrears in such matters is to constitute one or more
separate Benches in the High Court to deal with such references, depending
upon the volume of work. It is also plain that to get the optimum disposal.
we should put those judges on such Benches as have some grounding in the
subject. The constitution of a separate Bench for the disrosal of tax cases
might necessitate an increase in the strength of Judges. In view of the fact
that delay in the disposal of tax matters impinges upon the revenue, the burden
on the exchequer which would fall as a result of the increase in the strength of

judges should not be grudged.

Central Tax 17,7. One of the questions which has attracted attention in the matter of tax

Court, cases is the creation of one or more Central Tax Courts. This question was con-
sidered by the High Courts Arrears Committee presided over by Mr. Justice
Shah. which expressed its view against the creation of such courts.’ The Law
Commission. in its 58th Report® also considered the pros and cons of the
proposal to create such a Court and ultimately came to the conclusion that
the idea of a National Tax Court could not be recommended.

tMinistry of Home Affairs, Department of Justice.
dated 2nd June, 1978. Table V. item 9.
‘Para 17.3. supra.
‘See also para 17.9, infra.
§Para 17.6 to 17.17, infra.
‘High Courts Arrears Committee Report (1972). page 69, para 81-82.
‘Law Commission of India, 58th Report (January. 1974), pages. 72-73, para 6.12 to

“etter No. 36/1/1978-Tustice (व).

6.18,


67

17.8. As against the above, the Direct Tax Laws Committee (more popular: mmendati
known as the Chokshi Committee), in its Report of September 1978 has Lacie beget eee
mended the creation of a Central Tax Court with Benches at Ahmedaiad, mittee.
Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi, Kanpur, Nagpur and Madras. According ta the
Committee each Bench of the proposed Court should consist of two judges.
Highly qualified persons should be appointed as judges of this court from among
persons who are High Court judges or who are eligible to be appointed as High
Court judges. According to the Committee, in the matter of conditions of
service, scales of pay and other privileges, the judges of the Central ‘Tax Court
should be on par with High Court Judges.! Such courts, in the words of the
Committee, “will be special kind of High Courts with functional jurisdiction

over tax matters and enjoying judicial independence in the same manner as the

High Courts”. The Committee has also recommended that the jurisdiction of

the Central Tax Court should be avpellate, and not advisory. As such, appeals

on questions of law would lie to the Central Tax Court and it would not be
tmecessaty to make a reference as is being done under the -xisting law to the

Hich Courts, The Committee was conscious of the fact that implementation of

this recommendation mav necessitate amendment of the Constitution and that
mieht take time. The Committee has accordinaly suggested the desirability of
constituting, in the meanwhile, special tax Benches in the High Courts to deal

with the large number of tax cases bv continuous sitting throughout the vear.

The indges to be appointed to these special Benches. im the view of the Committee
should be selected from amongst those who have special knowledge and
experience in dealing with matters relating to direct tax laws.

WW, CENTRAL TAX COURT AND TAX BENCHES

479, While we are in aereement with the view of the Chokehi Committee? that preference of this
there should he a continuous sitting of the tax Benches in the High Courts if Commission for
the volume of work so warrants? and also as to the desirabilitv of deputing view taken by ear-
those juders on such Benohes as have a grounding in the tax laws. we would. fit Commission,
as regarda its proposal for creatine 2 Central Tax Court. express our nreference
for the view taken bv the Hieh Courts Arrears Committee presided over bv
Mr. Justice Shah and by the Law Commission in its 58th Revort. in so far as
they arrived at the conclusion against the formation of the Central Tax Conrt.
The main reason which weiched with the Choksh’ Committee in recommending
the establishment of a Central Tax Court was the inability of the High Courts
to cope with the number of references which were made to them under the
tax laws.
In our view, low disposal of references relating to direct tar laws can

he adequately remedied by resorting to continuous sittin of tax Benches in the
Hieh Courts where the volnme of work so warrants. Tn High Courts where there
ate not sufficient number of tax references. the tax Bench can have.a continous
sitting till all the readv tax matters are disposed of. As mentioned earlier5
the view of the Chokshi Committee is bared on the assumption that a constitu-
tional amendment is required.
17.10. We are not in favour of too freqnent changes of the Constitution. ‘The Frequent eonstitu-
Constitution is our bacic law and there shonld be a resort to amendment of its tonal changes not
provisions only in exceptional situations of the most comnelline satnre, Amend- favoured,
ment of the Constitution is not the answer to meet the general run of adminis
trative and other difficulties. There is an element of sanctity about the nro.
vistone of the Conctitntion and althoush we do not stieeest that they be canonised
or given a stamn of deffication we are averse to suegestine chances of the con-
stitutional provisions with a view to taking us out of every difficulty. fancied
or genuine.
VIAL Another reacon which hae also weiched with us in. aereeine with the Inconvenience to
conclusion of the Hieh Courts Arrears Committee’ and the Law Commission assessees,
in its 58th Renort? is the inconvenience to which the assessees wontd be snb-
jected if, when they feel aggrieved. they have to go outside their Stat anneal

गर्दन Tax Laws Committee Report (September 1978). pages 172-175 nara 16 10
to 1-+.22.

Mara 78 supra.

3९28 aler para 17.5, supra

‘arn 177. supra.

SPara 179, supra.

‘Para 179. supra.

"Para 17.9. supra.

10 -253 LAD/ND/79



68

or teference against the order of the Appcilate Tribunal. It is plain that
according to the Report of the Chokshi Committee,’ the proposed Central Tax
Court would not function in all the States. This would make it necessary
in quite a number of cases for the assessees to go to other States for approach-
ing the Central Tax Court.

Conflicting views 17.12, It is, 10 doubt, true that the disposal of
unavoidable.

|

1; e tha rences by the various High
Courts scmetimes results in different and conflictine views, This in the very

nature of things. cannot be helped. ft, how-ver, necds to be mentioned that as
stated elsewhere? the Anrellate Tribunal? is empowered to make a reference
direct to the Supreme Court of a question of law, if the Tribunal is of the opinion
that, on account of a conflict in the decisions of Hieh Courts in respect of any
particular question of law, it is expedient that a reference should be made direct
to the Supreme Court.

TV. SUBSTITUTION OF APPEAL FOR REFERENCE

Substitution of aP- 47,13, A view has also been expressed that the nresent procedure of the Appellate

peal for reference. Teinnal making a reference to the “ich Conrt कतार] he dane noay with,
and, instead of that, an appeal should lie to the Hich Court against the order
of the Tribunal on १ question of law or a substantial question of law. The
position. as already noted‘ is that an anneal Ties from the Income Tax Authority
concerned to the Appellate Tribunal on a question of fact as well as law’.
The finding of the Apnellate Tribunal on auestionc of fact is final.S In
case. however, the assessee or the devartment feele arerieved with rerard to
the finding of the Appellate Tribunal on a anestion of law. it can file an
application to the Appellate Tribunal under section 256(1) of the Tncome Tax
Act. 1961, within the prescribed time. for a reference to the Hieh Court on the
question of law arising out of the order of the Tribunal.7 If the Appellate
Tribunal finds, after issuing notice to the opposite party, that a question of law
arises out of its order, it draws up a statement of case and refers to the High
Court the formulated question of law. .

Tt the Apvellate Tribunal declines to make a reference to the High
Court, it is open to the aggrieved person te apply to the Hich Court under
sub-section (2) of section 256 of the Income Tax Act for an order directing the
Appellate Tribunal to make , 9 reference to the High Court regarding the
question of law about which the Trihunal had declined to accede to the praver
of the applicant. The High Court in such application can, after hearing both
the parties. make an order if the circumstances of the case so warrant. directing
the Appetlate Tribunal to refer the avestion of law to the Hieh Court. In
pursuance of the order of the High Court the Appellate Tribunal draws up a
statement of case and refers the formulated question to the Hieh Court.

Advantage of ap- 17.14. The advantage of doing away with the reference. and substituting in its

peal. place a right of appeal. is that the time spent hefore the Apvellate Tribunal
in proceedings for referrine the question of Jaw to the High Court would be
saved. Tt would also obviate the necessity of filing applications under sub-
section (2) of section 256 of the Income Tax Act® in those cases in which the
Apretlate Trihunat has declined to make a reference about a question of law
‘to the High Court.

Advantage of re- 17.18. As against the above. the advantage of adhering to the present system of
ference, treference is that the time spent af the hearing of the reference is much fess.
vompared with the time which the heariny in the High Court would take if
the matter is taken up before it by wav of apneal. Tn a reference. the Hieh
Court has before it the statement of the case drafted by the Appellate Tribunal.
The statement of the case contains al! the relevant facts. and in most cases
tt is 9 statement which is agreed to bv both the narties to the case. The state-
ment of case. as already mentioned? formulates the question of law which has

‘Para 17.9. sunra.
See nara 17.17. intra.

Kection 256. Income Tax Act. 1961.
‘Para 173. supra

‘Section 9253/1). Income Tax Act.
Para 17.3. eupra.

"Section 256(1). Income Tax Act, 1956.
"Para 17.12. supra.

"See para 17.12, supra,


69

to be answered by the High Court. At se ee of the hearing, the High Court,
after looking at the statement of case, straightaway proceeds to hear arguments
ion the question of law. As against the above, in the event of an appeal,
the High Court would have to cull out the necessary facts from the order of
the Appellate Tribunal and also to find out Deng, question of law which would
arise. This would result in greater time being spent at the time of hearing.
We unay state that both the High Courts Arrears Committee and the Law
Commission in its 58th Report have dealt with this question.

17.16. The High Courts Arrears Committee presided over by Mr. Justice Shab View . nf Shah
nt

observed in this respect as under! ;—
“43. This procedure under our administrative sysiem is entirely
archaic and is capable of being an instrument of great injustice
“It would be wise to do away with all complicated provisions relating
to the application for stating a case either under the order of the 111-
bunal or the figh Court or the Supreme Court and to confer upon the
aggrieved litigant a right to appeal trom the order of the Tribunal on
questions of law, on points raised and/or argued before the Tribunal.
३६ would be necessary to impose certain restrictions on the exercise ot
that right—
(3) that the appeal shall te only on questions of law raised
and/or argued berore the Tribunal; and
(0) that absence ot evidence to justify a finding or a perverse
jinding be deemed a quesuon of law.”
47.47, The Law Commission, in its 28th Keport, observed as under: ;—

“6.13. in regard to the present provisions Telaung w the frelerence ,,

of Law

Proceedings, unere “appears to ve almost complete unanimity for deleting लए (58th
port),

inem and tor substiiuuon Ol an appeal in Ube place; and Us uend OL
opinion can be well appreciated, because it is commion experience tat
the procedure of reference, at present contemptated by section 256, is
dilatory and serves no signitcant or important purpose. We ought to
add that if proceedimgs relauog to relereace are omitted irom section
256, 10 is certain that We decisions ot the Income 183 Appeilaie Lribupal
would naturally be more elaborate ana copiorm io the tadilional
requirements of appellate judgment. We are, iereiore, sauished that
the present provision about reterence should be deleted. We shali deal
jaier with the question of the procedure to be subsututed in their piace.”
“6.23. ‘Ihereiore, having careiully exammed this problem, we are
salisied that the oly reasonabie soluuon, which may tend 10 make ihe
Gispusal Of lax Mailers 10016 sauisiaciory and expeditious, would be to
deiele the presen: provision relaung to reierence (secuon 2०७, income Tax
Acl) and to provide ior an “appwai agaims, (6 decision of the income ‘Sax
Appewiale ‘inounai on a subdsiaullai quesiioa ot jaw mmstead of on a
Sumple quesiion of law, as at preseni, aud ७150 10 provide that agamst
the appeuaie decision of the 14480. Court, it should be open to the
aggrieved party lo move the Supieme Court with a certilicate of the High
Court that the case involves 4 subsianuai question of law of general
unporance which needs to be deciued by ihe Supreme Court.”
47,18, 4t may also be mentioned thai if on an application made under section 256,
the Appellate 17091 is of the opmion thai on account of a conilict in the

i Co r ae to
decisions ot the filgh Courts m respect ot any parucular question of law, it is

by
expedient that a reerence should oc made direct to ive Supreme Court, ihe Trl

Appellate Tribunal may draw up a statement of tae case and refer it through
its President direct to the Supreme Court.)

Direct _ reference

Supreme Court
the Appellate
ibunal.

17.19. Since the matter about the substitution of appeal in place of reference No further com-
against the order of the Tribunal has already been dealt with? by the High 70००७.

Courts Arrears Commitiee and the Law Commission in its 58th Report, sent
in 1974, we do not propose to say anything further in the matter,

‘ourts Afrears Commitiee Report (1972), page 60, para 43.

“Law Commission of India, 58in Report (Stricture and Jurisdiction ot the Higher
Judiciary), para 6.13 and 6.23,

"Section 257, Income Tax Act. 1961.

‘See also para 17.11, supra.

‘Para 17,15 and 17.16, supra.



Cuaprer 18
APPEALS TO COURTS SUBORDINATE TO THE HIGH COURT
L CIVIL AND CRIMINAL APPEALS IN SUBORDINATE COURTS

Civil appeals in 181. First appeals in the courls subordinate to the High Court constitute an

subordinate courts. important stage of litigation in quite a jarge number of cases. In order to cut
short the chequered course of iitigation, one of the major steps which wilt
shave to be taken would be to reduce the time consumed ior the disposal oi
appeals in the courts subordinate to the High Court. The chart given on
page No. 71 indicates the number of appeals pending at ihe district level in
(the various States im the countey in 1978,

Criminal _ appeals 182, The chart given on page No. 71 also indicates the number of criminal
is aa

to subordinate appeals and revisions pending in the Sessions Courts in the various States during

courts. the year 1978.

Forum of civil ap- 18.3, So far as civil appeals from decrees passed by the trial courts are con-

Beats and crimi- cerned, they lie to the High Court or the District Judge or the Subordinate

nal appeals. Judge, by whatever name he is desctibed m the State, depending upon the
yaluation of the swt as provided in the Civil Court Act in force in that particular
te.

Criminal appeals lie to the Court specified in the Code of Criminal
Procedure.

Any person convicted on a trial held by a sessions judge or an addi-
tional session judge can appeal to the High Court. Any person convicted on
& trial held by any other court in which a sentence of imprisonment for more
than 7 years has been passed can appeal to the High Court,

Any person convicted on a trial held by an Assistant Session Judge or
a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first or the second class may
appeal to the court of session.' There are certain limitations as to appeals in
petty cases?

Appeals against a sentence on the ground of its imadequacy and appeals
against acquittals lie 10 the High Court, subject to certain conditions?

I PECUNIARY LIMITS OF APPELLATE JURISDICTION OF THE
DISTRICT JUDGE

Present law. 18.4. Coming more specifically to the pecuniary limits of the appellate jursidic-
tion of the District Judge, we may state that the limits of such jurisdiction vary
from Slate to State! For example, the appellate jurisdiction of the District
Judge in Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala and Rajasthan is Rs. 10,000/-.
In Andhra Pradesh, it is Rs. 15,000/-, but a proposal to raise it further is stated
to be under consideration. In Maharashtra> according to the Bombay Civil
Courts Act, 1869, the appellate limit has been raised to Rs. 25,000/-.

Need for change 18.5. The regulation of appellate jurisdiction on the basis of valuation is sound
in valuation. in principle, but it has to be kept in mind that the amount for the purpose of
jurisdiction has to be fixed according to the conditions as they prevail when the
fixation is made; and such amount ought to be revised with the changing con-
ditions. As far back as 1949, the High Court Arrears Committee,’ set up by
the Government under the Chairmanship of Mr. Justice S, R. Das for enquiring

Section 374, Cr. P.C, 1973.

"Section 376, Cr. P.C., 1973,

"Sections 377 and 378, Cr. P..C., 1973,

‘Seo Appendix 1.

*For details of appellate jurisdiction of District Judge, see Appendix 1,

*High Courts Arrears Committee Report (1949), quoted in 14th Report, VoL I,
page 370, para 12.

70


Position of Institution, Disposal and Pendency In Criminal and Civil Courts During 1576, 1977 and \st Half Year of 1978.

Institution Disposal Pendency as on
1-1-76 to 1-1-76 to I-I-77to 1-1-77 to 1-1-78 to 1-1-76 ९० 1-1-76 to नया to 1-1-7 to 1-1-78 to 30-6-76 31-12-76 30-6-77 31-12-77 30-6-78
30-6-76 31-12-76 306-77 31-12-77 30-6-78 30-676 31-12-76 W-6-77 31-12-77 30-6-78
__ 7 2 7: ६ | ४ 6६ री ंंंपी-पप्-ज--_पिपपफ।9”।ण”णए 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 2 TFT TTT 13 14 15
CRIMINAL
Sessions Courts

Original. 31,267 62,920 36,791 92,763 53,258 25,769 53,955 34,899 89,838 $2,338 60,264 64,548 66,716 67,992 68,975
Revision. 19,470 37,401 16,343 36,848 21,210 18,542 35,553 17,272 35,920 19,938 19,552 19,239 18,035 19,841 21,104
Appeals. 33,878 79,853 34,750 71,990 34,082 30,377 64,436 34,960 1,741 32,996 38,035 42,098 41,620 42,103 43,184

TOTAL « 84,615. 1,71,174 87,884 2,01,601  1,08,550 74,688. 1,53,944 87,131 1,97,499  1,05,2721,17,851 1,25,8€5 1,26,371_ 1,29,936 1,33,263
Magisterial Courts

Police challans 28,96,670 $8,96,900 25,54,903  49,55,288 24,31,578 26,85,136 56,89,229 26,21,523 $0,83,161  22,46,893 26,14,391 27,32,279 26,40,119 25,75,815 27,57,897.
Complaint

cases « 13,18,638 27,00,166 11,61,536 23,£6,S47 11,19,CC1 12,53,847 25,05,1SC 11,€4,825 22,.57.253 11,11,522 26,(9,226 17,29,8€6 17,08,759 17,78,975 17,86,328
Toray + 42,15,308 85,97,066 37,16,439 73,12,235 35,£0,579 3€,28,SE3 81,94,419 37,£6,3€2 73,£C,414 33,58,415 42,23,617 44,72,145 43,48,858 43,54,750 45,44,225

एाशा,

Original side

Regular Suits 4,53,004 9,26,851 4,57,592 9,76,624 4,79,245 41.2,.€C4 912,121 4,26,8€€ 923,747 4,31,7CO 13,6C,8C7 13,1782) 13,37,96 13,70,C71 14,17,002
Miscellaneous
cases. 5,86,352 12,89,583 5,75,068 12,92,314 5,95,C€7 5,42,259 12,4854 5,63,683 12,73,C21 5,74,945  7,19,263 718,225 7,31,906 739,915 12,14,196*

Tora. ‘Siie 10,39,355 22,16,439 10,32,660 22,68,948 10,74,2£2  9,85,CC3 21,€C,715 10,€0,483 21,56,7€8 10,C6,€45 20,€0,C70 20,36,046 20,69,872 21,09,986 26,31,198
Appellate
Regular = ap-

न 61,596 1,27,051 63,574. 1,36,901 66,284 54,980. 1,22,णा 62,312 1,32,922 64,140 1,37.710. 1,34,659. 1,36,363. 1,39,086 1,41,156
Misecllaneous
appeals. 37,967 85,012 34,279 70,066 33,673 35,711 80,741 36,220 75,803 33,473 55,985 57,€€0 55,493. 51,09९ 51,862

ToraL . 99,563. 2,12,063 97,853  2,06,967 99,957 90,691 2,02,812 98,532. 2,08,725 97,613 1,93,€95 1,92,319 1,51,856 190,782 1,93,018

*This increas in pendency is due to 454463 Karnataka Agriculturist Debt. Relief Aci cases which were not included previously.

uu


12

and reporting, besides other matters, as to the advisability of curtailing the right
of appeal and revision and the extent and method by wich such curtailment
should be effected, observed that 30 to 40 per cent of the arst appeals in the
High Court arose out of suits valued at Ks, 10,000;- or less, and that “con-
sidering the depreciatiog which has taken place in the vaiue of money and ihe
consequent rise in the market value of the properiy generally, there does not
appear to be any cogent reason why ihe District Court should not be vesied
with jurisdiction to dispose of tirst appeals uplo Rs. 10,000/-”. It may oe
mentioned that the jurisdiction of tne District Judge tor purposes of civil appeals
was Rs, 5,000/- in most States when the above observations were made.

18.6. in the Report of the High Courts Arrears Committee, presided over by
Mr. Justice Shah, this aspect was again stressed.' Ine Committee stated that
disputes concermmg transactions in immovabie property and conmodities that
were then brought beiore the High Court by way of first appeals were such as
did not reach the High Cour in the eariier decades. The Committee also re-
commended Rs. 20,000/- as the minimum toc ihe appeilate jumeuiction ol ihe
High Court,

Need to raise ap- 167. The pecuniary appellate jurisdiction of the District Judge was fixed jong

pellate jurisdiction ago in most of the States. Since then, there has been a considerable depre-

of District Judges. ciation in the value of the rupee and we feel urat it would be appropriate if
the pecuniary appellate jurisdiction of the District Judge is raised. ‘This woukl
also have the effect of relieving the workload in the High Courts. No doubt
it would give rise to a corresponding rise in the workload of the District Judge
and this might, in its turn, entail the appointment of more persons as District
Judges or Additional District Judges. Despite this, we are of the view that
the pecuniary appellate jurisdiction of ihe Disirict Judge should be saised,
because we find thai the time normally taken for the disposal of an appeal in
the court of District Judge is less than the time taken in the High Court and
also because the cost involved in an appeal in the Disirict Court is less than
vhat in the High Court.

Whether uniform 18.8. This takes us 10 the next question as to what should be the pecuniary

figure feasible. jurisdiction of the District Judge, and wheiher we suouid bave a uniform figure
for the different areas in the country. We have given our thought io the matier
and are of the view that it would not be desirabie to fix a uniform figure for
the entire country, The circumstances vary from Slate to State and place to
place. The impact of the depreciation in the value of the rupee is also not
felt to the same extent in different areas,

Recommendation, 18.9. We fiave, therefore, refrained from Suggesting a uniform figure for the
pecuniary appellate jurisdiction of the District Judge. All ihat we can polnt
out? is that the pecuniary appellate jurisdiction of the District Judge has been
raised to Rs. 25,000/- in one State and that in some other States it has been
taised to Rs. 20,000/-. As already mentioned,’ it would depend on local con-
ditions in cach State as to what figure shouid ve xed for ihe purpose of
appellate jurisdiction of the District Judge. Accordingly, we leave the matter
o the authorities in each State.

These remarks would also hold good so for as the question of enhancing
the appellate jurisdiction of subordinate judges (by whatever nomenclature
they are described) is concerned.

Appeals of higher 18.10, At the same time, we are averse to increase inordinately the pecuniary
value to continue appellate jurisdiction of the District Judge. Appeals in cases of higher values
to. be heard ०४ in our opinion, should continue to be decided by the High Courts, because the
High Courts. High Courts, by and large, inspire greater confidence,

पा. NUMBER OF COURTS AND ALLOTMENT OF DAYS

Number of appet- 18.11. One important step which will have to be taken with a view to curtailing
late courts and al the time taken for the disposai of civil appeals is to ensure that the number of
lotment of days appellate courts in each district is sufficient to deal with the volume of appeals
for civil appeals instituted in the district. As it is, we find thac these appeal. remain pending

‘High Courts Arrears Committee Report (1972), page 63, para 53
*See Appendix 1.
"Seo para 18.8, supra,


73

in the courts subordinate to the High Court for a long time because of the low
priority which is accorded to them in the matter of disposal. It has been
conor: experience that the appeals fixed in the court of District Judge are
seldom taken up for hearin: on the first or second date of hearing. The parties
and their coursel attend the court on those dates and after waiting for a
considevable time hove to ro back because the presiding officer of the court
aS pre-occupied with the recor of evidence in a sessions case or has to deal
with some other matter to which preference is shown for the purposes of dis-
posal. It is one thing if such a situation were to arise on a few occasions or
in a small number of cases. Where, however, it becomes almost a matter of
rule and civil anneals eet reneatedly adjourned for want of time because of the
pre-nccunation of the presiding officer with other cases, the inevitable effect is
to create a feeling of dissatisfaction and frustration amongst the litigant public.
Te also results in what we regard as unnecessary and avoidable prolongation of
the course of litigation. We recommend that the courts subordinate to the High
Conrt vested with apnellate jurisdiction should set apart a number of days
every month for the disposal of civil anpeals. On those days, except for some
vompelling reason, the only cases. avart from miscellaneous matters. to be listed
hefore the court should he civif appeals. Where, however, the workload of the
pending file in a partionlar court (that is to say, the general workload apart
from appeals) is so heavy as not to vermit the setting apart of a number of
days in a month exclusively for the disposal of civil appeals, recourse should
be had to increasing the number of annellate courts in he district, so that the
anpents cm he disnaced of mithant undue delay,

18,42. Tt needs ta he emphasised that the time required for the disposal of an
appeal is much less compared with that taken for the disposal of the original
suit. So far as appeals in the courts subordinate to the High Court are con-
cerned, generally they are not of a verv complicated nature. and if a number of
days were earmarked in each month for dealing exclusively with such appeals
we sce no particular reason as to why they should remain pending for an
unduly long time, Normally. in our opinion, it should he possible to dispose
of most of the civil appeals iy the courts subordinate to the Hirh Court within
slx to nine months of their institution. The objective of exneditious disposal
of anpeals in those courts, in our orinion, can be attained without much
difficulty if only proner attention is given for this purpose. The problem in
this respect is not intractable. OF the three problems of delay which face us,
namely, those relating to—

(disposal of suits in trial courts,
{ii) disposal of appeals in courts subordinate to the High Court, and
(ii) disposal of appeals in the High Courts,

we feel that the problem at No. (i) is the erciest of solution. Tt can be tackled
by just increasing the number of the aprellat> courts and the increase which
would be needed for this purpose would be rather small and insienificant com-
bared with the increase ia the number of courts necessary for dealing with
problems at No. (i) or (iii),

18.13. What we have said above about civit appeals also holds good for criminal
appeats in the courts subordinate to the High 0050. We have already civent
the number of those appeals rending in the varions States. With a little increase
in the number of those corrts, it would he possible not only to keen the dis-
nosal abreast of the institution but alsn to reduce the backlog of arrears.
Criminal appeals too are accorded low priority. Experience tells us that quite
‘often thev have to be adiourred b-c2u-e ‘hr presiding officer of the court is
pre-cccupied with the disnosal of some sessions or other important case. What-
ever steps we have indicated above regarting civil anneals? can also he adopted
for the disposal of criminal enpeals. Increase in the number of courts of
Adritional District and Seccione Tdgee would be heloful in exneditine disposal
of both civil and criminal anneals. as these courts can deal with both types of
appeals It can also sometimes hrnseq that there i< not enough work for the
eourt of Additional District and Sessions Judge which may be created for one
district. In such an event. the Additonal District and Sessions Judge can 1011:
after the anneals jn two adioinine districts,

"Para 18.2. supra.
Para (8.3 10 18.12, supra.

Time required tor
disposal of civil
appeals,

Number of courts
and allotment of
days for criminal
appeals.


74

Number of Public 18.14, One difficulty which sometimes has been encountered in the disposal ot

Prosecutors, criminal appeals is that there are not enough number of public prosecutors for
each district. Most often one public prosecutor has to look after criminal cases
in more than one Sessions Court. This actually leads to the situation that when
criminal cases are called in both the courts, the public prosecutor can attend to
‘eases in only one of them. The result jis that the cases in one of the courts
‘either proceed without effective representation of the public prosecutor, or have
to be adjourned. Either of the results is undesirable. We are, therefore, of
the opinion that there should be as many public prosecutors in each district as
are adequate to deal with criminal cases as and when they are called in the
different courts.!

IV. CONCISE NOTE OF ARGUMENTS

Concise note of 1815. In the Chapter dealing with arguments and judgments? we have made a
arguments not ०८० recommendation that in regular first appeals to the High Court the parties should
coesary, in civil aR" file a concise note of arguments. We have considered the question whether the
nate courts. filing of a concise note of arguments should be similatly made compulsory in
regard to civil appeals in the courts subordinate to the High Court, and have
decided against such a course. The reason is that generally, appeals in those
courts are, as already mentioned,? not of a very complicated nature. The time
taken for arguments in those courts is also much less compared with that taken
for arguments in regular first appeals in High Courts. Stenographio assistance
fs also not available in those courts to the same extent as in the High Courts.
Taking all these circumstances into consideration and keeping in view the
existing conditions we do not regard it proper at present to make the filing of
concise notes of arguments compulsory for civil appeals in these courts.4

1Cf, Tith Report, para (2.14,
"Para 6.19. supre.

‘See para 18.12, supra,

‘See also para 6.25, supra,



CHAPTER 19

HIGH COURT FOR GOA, DAMAN AND DIU

19,1, While the territories throughout the length and breadth of Union of India Present position as
are subject to the jurisdiction of some High Court, the Union Territory of Goa. to , Goa, Daman
Daman and Diu stands in a different position. The highest court for this हर्ष Div.
territory is that of the Judicial Commissioner. Appeals against the judgments

of the Judicial Commissioner can, of course, lie to the Supreme Court as against

judgments of High Courts. Income tax references relating to the above territory

lie to the High Court at Bombay.' Apart from that, writ petitions relating to

that territory are filed in, and disposed of by, the court of the Judicial Commis-

sioner? Likewise, civil and criminal appeals against the judgments of District

‘and Sessions Judges and subordinate courts lie to the court of the Judicial

Commissioner.

19.2, In our opinion, the present disparity? between the Union Territory of Recommendation.
Goa, Daman and Diu and other parts of India, which is primarily due to the
accident of history, should be done away with as soon as possible, and the
above territory should also be made subject to the jurisdiction of a High Court.
Considering the fact that the population of the territory is not very large, it may
not be feasible to have a separate High Court for it. It seems to us more
appropriate to extend the jurisdiction of another High Court to the territory. A
circuit Bench of that High Court can sit in the territory for the disposal of cases
arising in the territory. Creation of such a circuit Bench would obviate the
necessity of people belonging to the territory being forced to go to any other
State for approaching the High Court, It would also prevent the chance of cases
arising in the territory getting submerged in the large number of cases of the
State wherein the High Court already exercises jurisdiction. Not to post a
circuit Bench of the High Court in this territory would necessarily cause heart-
burning in the people belonging to the territory.

19,3, Members of the Bench and the Bar in the Union Territory with whom View of the Bench
the Chairman of the Commission held discussion during his visit to the Union and the Bar.
Territory were definitely of the view that for this Union Territory, jurisdiction

should be conferred on some High Court. so that its inhabitants may have access

~ justice of the same quality as the inhabitants of the rest of India at every

evel,

19.4, Jt may also be mentioned that for the Union Territory of Dadra and Nagar Dadra and Nagar
Haveli. jurisdiction has been conferred on the Bombay High Court.4 The Dadra Haveli.

and Nagar Haveli Act provides that as from such date as the Central Govern-

ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, the jurisdiction of

the High Court at Bombay shall extend to Dadra and Nagar Haveli. The requi-

site notification was issued’ so as to take effect from 15 July, 1965.

‘Sections 256 and 269%vi), Income Tax Act, 1961.

Judicial Commissioners (Declaration as High Courts) Act. 1950,
"Para 19.1, sunea.

‘Section 11, Dadra and Nagar Haveli Act. 1961, (35 of 1961).

. No. 1957, dated 15th June. 1965, Gazette of India, dated {7th June, 1965, Part
भरा 201), Extraordinary page 579.

735
11-253 LAD/ND/79


Details avoided

Search for solu-
tions to be regard-
ed as a quest.

Periodical _re-defi-
nition af metheds.

Similarity with
past recommenda-
tions and need for
implementation.

Cuarrer 20
CONCLUSION

20.1, We are now coming to the close of our Report. We have deliberately
avoided burdening this Report with too much of detail or too many statistics.
Having regard to the paramount importance of prompt action for implementing
such of our recommendations as may be found acceptable, and bearing in mind
the need for presenting our views in a form that may facilitate such prompt
action, we have considered it wise to confine ourselves to the essentials of the
problem.

20.2. It should not, however, be assumed that the adoption of the various
measures recommended in this Report will solve the problem of arrears for
all times to come. We have no such illusions, and would prefer to be a little
sceptic till the implementation of our recommendations. The search for a
permanent solution to the problem would be futile. 10 human history, in the
long run, there are no solutions—only problems. The search for a solution
must, therefore, be a continuous process. It is a quest, not a discovery.!

In the affairs of men—and particularly in a field in which many complex
factors operate together and in which a satisfactory solution postulates a
consideration of several aspects in conflict with each other—a permanent
solution would be difficult. This or that aspect may with the passage of time,
become prominent and others may shade into insignificance. No solution, even
if it is satisfactory for the needs of the moment, would be effective for all times
to come. Experience may reveal the inadequacy, or even the total inappropria-
teness. of a particular assumed solution, and fresh efforts may then have
to be made to devise measures for dealing with the problem. This is precisely
the reason why in most countries with whose legal systems we are familiar,
the problem of delay and arrears in courts had to be examined more than
once in the course of, say, the last half a century.

20.3. In this sense, the quest for a solution must be continuous and the system
must be kept under constant review. Each fresh effort must assess the gains
that might have already been made, take into account the shortcomings which
might have come to the surface and the deficiencies which have made themsel-
ves manifest, and in the light of that, re-define the methods and seek new
solutions.

20.4, Perusal of this Report would show that though we have made a number
of new fresh recommendations, there are certain other matters about which our
recommendations are more or less similar to those that have been made already
by the various Committees and Commissions which have, in the past, dealt with
the question of delay and arrears. The similarity of those recommendations,
in the very nature of things, is inevitable and cannot be helped. The response
of those who have spent many years in the world of law to some of the
problems faced in the working of the judicial system cannot be very dissimilar
or much different, and it should not be surprising if we find a trend towards
similarity of the remedies suggested by them The fact that, like other
Committees and Commissions appointed for the purpose in the past, we have
had to pin-point attention to the desirability of resorting to substantially similar
steps and measures in quite a number of fields goes to show that much remain-
ed to be done in the matter of implementing the recommendations made in the
past hy the various Committees and Commissions, It is in the above context
that we wish to emphasise that, unless there be positive will and strong desire
to give concrete and practical shape to the recommendations, the problem of
delay and arrears would dog our steps in the judicial field. It is also plain
that there cannot be much satisfaction in having Reports of Committees and
Commissions. if those Reports are ultimately to be shelved in pigeon holes to
gather dust and to be taken out only when a future Committee or Commission
is again entrusted with the task of dealing with delays and arrears.

__ SDaniel Borstin (Librarian of Congress) “Democracy and its Discntents™, extracted
in “Technology and Democracy" (Autumn 1978) American Review, 66, 72.

76


77

20.5. Finally, we may add that any report that deals with the question of delay Need for speedy
in the disposal of judicial cases and the heavy backlog of arrears can bear fruit implementation.
only if prompt action is taken on the report and there is speedy implementa-

tion of such of the recommendations contained therein as are found to be

acceptable. A report dealing with the question of delay must be distinguished

from a report dealing with the review of a particular enactment or code. A

report of the former kind has an urgency ot its own, and it is but imperative

that there should be no undue delay in taking action on report which itself

deals with the question of eliminating delay.


Cuaprer 21
SUMMARY OF MATTERS DEALT WITH
Following is a summary of matters dealt with in the Report.

1. Introductory.

(1) The High Courts in India exercise a variety of jurisdictions, affording
a variety of remedies; these are necessary for ensuring the proper administration
of justice and enforcement of legal rights. However, the problem of piling
arrears, aggtavated by increased institution and delay in appointing judges,
requires to be attended to without delay.!

(2) Speedy justice is essential to an organised society. At the same time,
the basic norms for ensuring justice cannot be dispensed with? The judicial
process in India has commanded the confidence of the Indian community. To
maiotain the confidence, delay and arrears should be attended to.

(3) Various efforts have been made so far to solve the problem. Mere
Jegal amendments cannot, however, solve a problem created by increased insti-
tution. Nor can mere statutory reforms achieve improvement, as there are
human factors involved,> and improvements operating within the judicial system
can have only a limited impact.

(4) To prevent arrears, disposal must maintain pace with institution. The
backlog must also be attended to. There have been legal as well as extra-
1९88) factors, leading to increased workload. Nevertheless, the problem is
curable if all concerned set their hearts at it.

(5) Certain norms have to be prescribed to determine the cases which
can be treated as old. (Specific periods of durations are set out).

(6) A good deal of litigation being one to which the Government is a
party, its departments should afford all reasonable co-operation to the judicial
process.?

(7) The figures show that arrears have been continuous; that their rate
itself has gone up; and that they are of an all-India extent.#

2 Jurisdiction of High Courts and City Civil Courts.

(8) High Courts in the three Presidency towns exercise ordinary origina
civil jurisdiction, and also several other species of jurisdiction,’ though their
burden has been somewhat reduced by establishing City Civil Courts.

AML High Courts have extea-ordinary originai jurisdiction, original juris-
diction in election petitions, and appellate and revisional jurisdiction, writ
jurisdiction and power to punish for contemp!.!”

(9) High Courts hear references under various laws and also have civil
revisional and supervisory jurisdiction."

(10) For historical and other reasons, judicial business in the High Couris
also presents considerable variety.!2

(11) The writ jurisdiction has played a notable part in the development
of constitutional and administrative jurisprudence.3

Para 1.1 to 1.4.

Para 1.5 to 1.6.

Para 1.7,

‘Para 1.8 to 1.14; also para 1.20.
‘Para 1.15 to 1.17.

Pare 1.3 and 1.29.

"Pace 1.30.

*Para 1.31 to 1.37.

‘Para 2.1, 2.2 and 2.14 to 2.17.
“Para 2.3 to 2.5,

UPara 2.6 and 2.7 to 2.10.
Para 211 and 2.12.

UPara 2.12.

78


79

3. Strength of High Couris : numerical aud qualitative aspects.
(12) Institution being in excess of disposal, any scheme for improvement
must ensure that: —
(0) the disposal is not less than the institution; and
(ii) the heavy backlog is reduced—one quarter be cleared in one year
‘Increase in judges’ suength is unavoidable.!

(13) Permanent strength of each High Court should be fixed and reviewed,
keeping in view the average institution during the preceding three years.?

(14) For clearing arrears, additional and ad hoc judges should be
appointed. However, it is not advisable to have only additional judges for
the purpose as, ordinarily, persons so appointed should not be sent back to the
profession or to their substantive judicial posts.3

(15) Recommendation of the Chiet justice {for the appointment of Judges)
should be attended to prompily. An outside limit of six months should be
observed in this regard.

(16) For clearing arrears, Article 224A of the Constitution may be availed
of. Retired Judges, who had a Teputation for efficiency and quick disposal, and
who retired within three years, be reappointed ad hoc under this article.
Persons who have retired from other High Courts can also be considered.5 The
appointments should be normaliy for one year, 00. ७8 extended by further
periods of one year each, upto a total of three years,

(17) The Chief Justice can play a pivotal role in securing disposal,

(18) The best persons should be appointed on High Court benches, the
over-riding consideration being merit.’

(19) Service conditions of judges should also be improved in order to
altract persons of the right calibre.*

(20) lncrease in the number of judges must also take into account the
need for more court rooms, stail, and law books.’

(21) Punctuatity should be adhered 10, and court timings duly observed.

4. Appellate jurisdiction

(22) Giving finality (० decisions uf the trial courts my sulve congestion
in courts, but every litigant expects the best possible justice. Hence the need
for ‘one good appeal on facts and on iaw.!!

(23) The Indian procedural law bas provided for appeals in original
Suis, according to a pattern now well known.!2

It is not advisable to curtail the right of appeal under the present scheme
(one uppeal on facts and law, and second appeal on a substantial question of
Jaw).!3

Way 5 and means of expediting the hearing of appeals constitute the
real remedy.!¢

‘Para 3.1 to 3.7.
2Para 3.8,

Para 3.9.

4Para 3.10,

SPara 3.12 and 3.13,
Pare 3.14,

7Para 3.15.

*Para 3.16.

SPara 3.17.

Para 3.18,

UPara 4.1 to 4.3.
Para 44 to 4.7.
Para 49 and 4.10.
“Para 411.


80

5. Procedure in appeals : General

(24) Delay occurs in making the appeal ready for hearing at various
Stages,?

(@ As lo time taken in obtaining copy of the judgment, Order 20,
Rules 6A and 6B, Code of Civil Procedure (newly inserted) would
expedite the filing of appeal without waiting for certified copies? of
the judgment and decree.

(0) If an appeal is filed beyond the prescribed time, Order 4, Rule 3A
of the Code now requires that the application for extension of time
should be first decided.>

(25) As to seruliny, the court should register the memorandum of appeal
within sevea days of its presentation and, within (hat period, the office should
note all the defects therein. The appellant should be directed to cure the defect
within a specified time limit (not exceeding fifteen days), subject to extension
by the Registrar for further fifteen days failing that the appeal* should, without
further delay, be placed before the court for necessaly urder.

(26) Administrative machinery for the scrutiny of appeals should be
toned up.>

(27) Elimination of preliminary hearing of appeals is not favoured. It
would encourage the filing of frivolous appeals, particularly to seek interim
reliefs

(28) (8) The appeliant should be required to produce, along with the
memorandum of appeal, printed forms furnished in duplicate, duly filled up.7

(७) The appeliant should also file as many copies of the memorandum
as there are respondents, and additional number of copies for the court.§

(c) Charges or process fee for service should also be paid when the appeal
is presented. The notice can be sent to the respondents by registered post,
within a time to be fixed under the rules.’

(५ Early service of the notice of appeal will undoubtedly enable quick
disposal of appeal.l’

(29) Paper books are essential for ensuring proper hearing of appeals
(patiicularly, hearing by benches), but there is scope for improvement in certain
matters of detail.!!

(30) Record of the lower court, where required for appeal, should be
promptly sent for by ihe High Court. Except in appeals against interlocutory
orders, this should be done immediately on admission.!?

(31) In appeals against interlocutory orders, the record should be sent
for only if specifically ordered by the High Court.'5

(32) The party who has to file a document etc. should get it translated

by counsel. If that translation is questioned, the official translator will translate
the document.!4

(33) Except where the High Court otherwise directs, parties may be
allowed to type or cyclostyle the records.!>

Para 5.1 and 5.2.
2Para 5.3 and 5.4.
3Para 5.5.

4Para 5.6.

SPara 5.7 (Order 41, rule 11, Code of Civil Procedure referred to).
Para 5.8 and 5.9.
7Para 5.10 and 5.11.
कब 3.11.

SPara 3.12.

Para 5.13 and 5.14,
Para 5.15.

2Para 5.16.

3Para 5.17.

14988 5.18.

Para 5.19,


81

(३4) (8) On receipt of the record (from the lower court), the parties
should be intimated.

(b) The appellant in all regular first civil appeals should file copies of
the documents (listed in the Report) within four months of receipt of the record,
or such further time as the court may allow.!

(c) Within two weeks of filing {as above) of the paper books, the copies
should be supplied to counsel for the respondent-

(9) Within two months of the receipt of the above (or such further time
as the court may allow), the respondents should file their paper books, contain-
ing copies of depositions, documents, etc. upon which they wish to rely and
which have not been already filed by the appellant

(c) The respondent’s paper books so filed should, within a week, be
supplied to counsel for appellant and counsel for other respondents.4

[Reference to ‘copies’ above would include reference to translations.]$

(f) Documents exempted by the High Court for the purpose of printing
need not be included in the paper book.®

(35) The above suggestions have been made for introducing uniformity
and accelerating the process of preparation of paper books.’

(36) Powers regarding preparation of paper books may be delegated to
the appropriate officer of the High Court, subject to a provision for orders of
the court in cases of non-compliance. These orders would include dismissal
of the appeal, award of costs or direction to hear the appeal without filing of
further papers, so that the papers not filed will be barred from being referred
to at the hearing?

(37) Scrutiny by the office should see that unnecessary documents do
not burden the paper book. If the court finds in the paper book irrelevant
documents, it may order payment of the cost occasioned by their inclusion,
irrespective of the ultimate result of the appeal.?

(38) In appeals or revisions against interlocutory orders, records of the
court below should not be sent for, unless expressly ordered by the court. The
petitioner or appellant should be required to file attested copies.!°

(39) In such appeals or revisions, service may be effected on the counsel
representing the respondent in the suit or proceeding ia trial court! except in
the case of injunction.!?

6. Arguments and judgment in appeals

(40 A comparison of the English, American and Canadian system of
arguments is made.!?_ The American system of written briefs was not favoured
in England by the Evershed Committee. nor has the idea of dispensing with
oral arguments found favour with Commonwealth jurisdiction.'4

Tt would not be desirable to give up the system of oral arguments in
India.'5 Neither the Law Commission (in its 14th Report) nor the High Courts
Arrears Committee, presided over by Mr. Justice Shab, favoured the substitution
of written “briefs” in place of oral arguments.!6

'Para 5.20.
Para 5.21.
3Para 5.22,
4Para 5.22.
SPara 5.23.
Para 5.23.
Para 5.24.
SPara 5.25.
*Para 5.25.
Para 5.26.
Para 5.27 and 5.28.

"Para 5.28 (0.3, R. 43, C.P.C. to be amended).
bPara 6.1 to 6.11.

'4Para 6.12 to 6.16.

198 6.17 to 6.20.

Para 6.17 to 6.21,


82

(41) However, a concise statement of arguments filed in the High Courts
before the commencement of the oral arguments would reduce the time taken
by oral arguments and improve their quality! and is recommended. Doing
away with oral arguments is not contemplated.2

(42) Imposition of a time limit oa arguments is not favoured. It may
result in miscarriage of justice.

(43) The scheme recommended (as to filing a concise statement of
arguments) may be tried in the High Courts in regard to regular first appeals
and petitions under Article 226 of the Constitution other than those seeking
habeas corpus. The scheme will, however, be successful only if the Bar and
the Bench work it in its true spirits

(44) Judgment should be pronounced within a reasonable time. It should
he pronounced within a week of the conclusion of arguments, and the interval
should not, in any case, exceed one month. A statement of cases in which
judgments have not been pronounced within two months of the atguments
should be circulated.6

(45) When dismissing a regular second appeal or a civil revision, the
judges should write short judgments जाए,

(46) Certain points concerning judgments discussed in detail in the 77th
Report may also be seen.®

7 Grouping and fisting of appeals.

(47) The system of listing should be such that matters which require
prompt attention get it, and the situation of old cases getting older while new
cases receive priority is avoided.9

(48) (a) Cases involving common questions of law should be grouped
and posted together for hearing before the same Bench.!?

In particular, appeals in land acquisition cases relating to different parcels
of land in the same locality should preferably be put up together.!t

(b) Appeals involving points which, since the filing of the memoran-
dum of appeal, have been settled by authoritative decisions should also be
listed in one batch for disposal.!2

(49) (a) The normal system should be that of a continuous list. There
should be a ready list, containing particulars of all cases ready for hearing in
chronological order according to the date of institution.

(b) From this ready list, the daily list should be drawn up in the same
manner, and with reference to the date of institution. Cases should be taken
up from this daily list seriatim, deviation being made only in exceptional
circumstances.

{c) Adjournment of cases in the daily list should be an exception, not
a rule.3

(50) Priority should be given to certain types of cases, which, because
of their nature, require early disposal.'4

Para 6.22.

2Para 6.23,

3Para 6.24.

4Para 6.25,

SPara 6.26.

Para 6.27 and 6.28,
7Para 6,29,

8Para 6.30.

9Para 7.1 and 7.2,
1Para 7.3 aad 7.4.
UPara 7.5.

12Para 7.6,

Para 7.7 and 7.8.
“Para 7.9 to 7.11.


83

(51) Cases should be assigned to judges with experience in the particular
branches of law.t

(52) (a) Benches constituted for particular classes of cases should be
allowed to function for a reasonable length of time, so as to avoid part-heard
cases being left when the Bench is disbanded.2

(b) Cases not disposed of by a disbanded Bench should be Posted before
the successor Bench or (if that is not immediately possible), posted for hearing
without delay?

५ First appeals (including appeals from City Civil Courts) to High Conrts,

(53) Where the final hearing of an appeal is to be before a Division
Bench, it should for admission also, be Placed before a Division Bench.+

(34) Regular first appeals should be placed before a Division Bench
for admission, hearing and disposal.5

(55) Decisions of a single judge on appeal should not be appealable to
a Division Bench.§

(56) The structure and composition of City Civil Courts and the forum
of appeal from their judgments, vary from State to State. In some States,
there is provision for appeal from a judge of the City Civil Court to the
Principal Judge or Chief Judge.

(57) No change in this respect is recommended, Local Legislation can
deat with the matter, if necessary.”

(38) Dismissal of a regular first appeal in the High Court at the prelimi-
nary stage should be accompanied by brief reasons2?

9. Appeals under special Acts,

(59 As regards appeals under certain special Acts, rules made for the
purpose should be observed scrupulously.!°

(60) Typed copies supported by an affidavit may be accepted for paper
books in such appeais.!t

(61) Appeals to the High Court under matrimonial legislation should be
given priority. The present procedure under the Indian Divorce Act, 1869
fequiring confirmation of a decree of divorce causes delay and unnecessary
expense, and should be done away with.'?

10. Second Appeals,

(62) The search for absolute truth has to be reconciled with the doctrine
of finality, At some stage, the decision on facts should become final. At the
same time, any rational system of law should provide for taking cases to &
specified superior court on a question of law, so that the ‘immense unity of
the law’ may be maintained.'¢

(63) This aspect has a vital relation to the basic principle of law, namely,

that there shall be a superior court to determine questions of law, whose
decisions shall be binding precedents.

iPara 7.12 to 7.15.

Para 7.16,

3Para 7.17.

‘Pata 8.1 and 8.2.

शा 8.3,

Para 8.4.

TPara 8.5 to 8.10.

80.41, R. 11, C.P.C,

SPara 8.11 and 8.12.

Para 9.1.

Para 9,1.

‘para 9.2 and 9.3,

UPara 9.4 and 9.5

Para 102.
12-253 LAD/ND/79



84

These principles are implicit in section 100 of the Code of Civil
Procedure."

(64) The object of section 100 is to achieve certainty of law; the mere
dissatisfaction of a litigant with a judgment does not afford him a ground for
second appeal.?

(65) Practical considerations (such as, the consideration that the amount
involved is not large), have, however, necessitated a curb on the right of second
appeal}

11, Appeals against judgments of single judges.

(66) An appeal under the Letters Patent of the High Court (or corres-
ponding instrument) lies to a Bench of the High Court against the decision
of a single judge given in original proceeding, or in first appeals. In the latter
case, it is virtually a second appeal.‘

(67) The reason why hearing by a Division Bench is recommended in
an eatlier Chapter for regular first appeals is that there should be an application
of plurality of minds.* Other appeals may be heard by single judges. unless
otherwise provided by law or directed by the judge.® ee

(68) Since judgments of a single judge on second appeal from suvordinate
courts are binding, even on matters of law, it is anomalous that the judgments
of single judges lose their binding force when the matter is heard in first appeal.
5 its in first appeals decided by a single judge should be final, except
where certificate or special leave is granted for appeal to Supreme Court?

(69) Above discussion is not intended to affect the maintainability of
appeals against the decisions of single judges on the original side®

12, Civil Revisions,

(70) The scope of section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure and its
limitations should be borne in mind, since a rule nisi in revision holds up

proceedings in the lower court. Greater care should be taken at the stage of
admissioa of revisions.

(71) As recommended in an earlier Chapter, in revisions against interlocu-
tory orders, records of the court below should not be sent for, unless expressly
ordered by the High Court. The petitioner should file copies of required
pleadings, documents etc.!0

13, Certificate for appeal to Supreme Court under article 133,

(72) In the past, applications for certificate of fitness for appeal to the
Supreme Court against the judgment of a High Court were made some days
after the pronouncement of the judgment, necessitating issues of notice to the
opposite party and hearing of the application. A provision permitting an oral
application on pronouncement of the judgment would have been more appro-
Ptiate. However, now under the Constitution (44th Amendment) Act, the time
previously consumed in proceedings for obtaining the certificate would be
eliminated."!

(Para 10.3,

Para 10.6,

Para 10.7.

Para 11.1 to 11.4.
SPara 11.4.

62468 11.5 to 11.7.
7Para 11.4 to 11.7,
8Para 11.9.

9Para 12,1 and 12.2.
oPara 12.2 and 12.3.
UPara 13.1 to 13.3,


न

85
vA

“14. Criminal appeals, revisions and references.

(73) Measures for expediting the hearing of criminal appeals will have
ड़ be mostly administrative. However, on ceriain matters, amendment is need-
1

(74) A court dismissing a first appeal from conviction (whether it be the
High Court or any lower court) should record a brief order, giving reasons for
dismissal at the preliminary stage.?

(75) Single judges of High Courts should have power to dispose of all
criminal appeals against convictions, except where a sentence of death or
imprisonment for life has been passed.>

(76) The orders against which revisions may be filed are of infinite
variety.

The jurisdiction of the Magistrate to award maintenance‘ and the
powers of the High Court to revise such orders, are assuming greater importance
every day. Exercise of revisional jurisdiction in these proceedings has remedied
serious injustice?

15. Ordimary original civil jurisdiction of High Coarts.
(77) At present, the High Courts of Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Madras,
Bombay and Calcutta try suits exceeding Rs. 50,000 in value.®

(78) The debate on the utility of such ordinary original civil jurisdiction
is summarised. No change in the matter is, however, recommended.’

(79) Of the suggestions made in the 77th Report, such as are applicable
in regard to proceedings in High Courts should be adopted to eliminate delay.

16. Extraordinary original civil jurisdiction of High Courts : writs,

(80) (a) High Courts have extraordinary original civil jurisdiction derived
from a number of sources.2 Occasions for the exercise of such jurisdiction
may (in particular) arise on the withdrawal of a case by, or its transfer to, a
High Court.!¢

(0) The Constitution has now also conferred on all High Courts power
to issue writs.!!

With increased activities of the State, the writ jurisdiction has assumed
importance."?_ The existing strength of judges is obviously not enough to cope
with the pendency and to clear the backlog. Ways and means are needed to
expedite the disposal of writ petitions.!>

(81) To avoid delay in the disposal of writ petitions resulting from
service where the respondent is a Government Department, the Advocate-
General or Central Government Standing ¢ Counsel should accept notice on behalf
of the Government. Consequential itional expenditure on staff would be
worthwhile.!+

SPara 14.1 to 14.3.
2Para 14.5,

3Para 14.6.

Section 125, Cr. P.C., 1973.
SPara 14.6 to 14.8.
Para 15.1 to 15.6.
Tara 15.8 to 15.10.
SPara 15.11.

9Para 16.1,

10Para 16.2.

Para 16.3.

i2Para 16.4.

13Para 16.4.

MPara 16.5 and 16.6.


86

(82) In service matters, where a large number of individual officers are
impleaded, service of the notice of writ petition on them takes time, because
of the frequent transfer of the officers. Instructions may be issued to the various
departments of the Government that court notices, instead of being sent back to
the court with the report that the officer is transferred should be re-directed
to the new station of posting.’

(83) To facilitate quick disposal, writ petitions should be required to be
accompanied by a chronological statement of necessary facts.

(84) Dismissal of writ petitions at the preliminary stage by a one-word
order—‘dismissed’ causes delay, as later on the case is remanded on appeal.
18596 of a show-cause notice is desirable and would narrow down the contro-
versy.3

The notice should, however, be made returnable early, to avoid abuse
of the provision for interim relief.

(85) The High Court, while dismissing a writ petition, should record
a short order giving reasons.>

(86) (a) For filing the counter-affidavit in writ petitions, rules should
prescribe a time limit not exceeding three months from date of service of
notice of admission. This time limit could be extended by the court, for
sufficient cause, for a period generally not to exceed one month.’

(b) In every writ petition, the respondent must serve an advance copy of
the counter-affidavit on the petitioner. A counter-affidavit not complying with
the above requirements should not be accepted, and the case should be listed
for hearing without the counter-affidavit: the respondent should not then be
allowed to file a counter-affidavit without special permission of the court.’

(87) Rules should also provide for filing a replication (whete it is to be
filed) within four weeks from service of copy of the counter affidavit?

(88) Writ petitions should be included in the ready list of cases in
chronological order according to the date of institution, except where the petition
has, for sufficient reason, to be listed for a future date, and except petitions
belonging to a class needing priority. Apart from that, the daily list should
be prepared strictly according to the order in the ready list, subject to the order
of the court as to actual date in any matter.!°

(89) A concise note of arguments should be filed in writ petitions (except
petitions for habeas corpus before the date of hearing. Its contents should be
the same as recommended for regular first appeals.'!

(90) The above is only a suggested general pattern. High Courts may
frame their own rules with variations. The object should be to obtain a regular
procedure, conforming to natural justice and, at the same time, securing quicker
disposal.

(91) Sittings of writ Benches should continue for a reasonable length of
time.

(92) Writ petitions involving the same questions of law should be
grouped together.'*

ipara 16.7.
2Para 16.8.
3Para 16.9.
4Para 16.9.
SPara 16.10.
Para
7Para
8Para
*Para 16.13.
10Para 16.14,
Para 16.15.
\2Para 16.16.
Para 16,17.
14788 16.18.



87

(93) Listing of writ petitions should not be deferred on the ground that
other petitions of the same nature may follow. Such a petition, when filed
should be given precedence—if need be with the permission of the Chief Justice.
This would minimise the filing of similar petitions. If the petition succeeds, the
department may possibly take similar action in regard to persons similarly
aggtieved.!

(94) (a) Decision of writ petitions should be as quick as possible. The
writ Rules should be framed with that object in view.

(0) For expeditious disposal of writs, whole-hearted co-operation of the
Government is necessary. Special attention should be paid to this aspect at
Government level?

17. Jurisdiction under special Acts: Tax cases,

(95) While the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal is the final authority on
facts, a reference lies to the High Court on a question of Jaw in taxation
matters. This Jurisdiction has been extensively resorted to. But the rate of
disposal does not keep pace with institution. This situation requires to be
remedied, as early disposal is important both to the State and to the assessee.

(96) Strength of judges for dealing with these references be increased,
and also separate benches constituted where the volume of work so justifies.*
Judges having a grounding in the subject should be posted to those Benches.>

(97) A proposal for the creation of a Central Tax Court was rejected by
(he High Courts Arrears Committee presided over by Mr. Justice Shah and by
the Law Commission in its 58th Report.© The proposal was, however, favour-
ed by the Direct Tax Laws Committee (Chokshi Committee), whose Report
envisages a Central Tax Court with Benches at seven important cities, and with
judges who are to be on par with High Court Judges. According to that
Committee, amendment of the Constitution would be required. Until it is
constituted, Special Tax Benches should according to the Committee, sit conti-
nuously.?

The Commission would, however, agree with the conclusion teached in
earlier Reports against the formation of a Central Tax Court. Disposal of tax
cases can be expedited by resorting to continuous sittings in the High Court?
without creating a Tax Court. Frequent changes in the Constitution are also
not desirable? Moreover, assessees would be subjected to inconvenience if
they have to go outside their State for seeking relief against the order of the
Appellate Tribunal.!°

(98) As regards replacing references by appeal in tax cases, there are
pros and cons. Substitution of appeal would eliminate the time taken in hear-
ing before the Tribunal of the application for a reference, and obviate the
necessity of filing before the High Court applications directing the Tribunal
to make a reference.!!

But an appeal would take more time in hearing than a reference.!2
Since the matter has been already dealt with by the Law Commission

in its 58th Report, and the High Courts Arrears Committee presided over by
Mr. Justice Shah, both of which recommended substitution of appeal, this

Commission does not propose to say anything further in the matter.’

{Para 16.20.

2Para 16.21.

3Para 17.1 to 17.4.
4Para 17.5.

SPara 17.6.

Para 17.7.

WPara 17.8.

8Para 17.9.

9Para 17.10.

10Para 17.11. As to direct reference to the Supreme Court, see para 17.12.
‘Para 17.13 to 17.17.
22Para 17.13 to 17.17.
13Para 17.13 to 17.19.


88

18.  Appeais to courts subordinate to the High Court.

(99) To relieve the High Courts of their burden regarding first appeals,
the pecuniary appellate jurisdiction of District Judges should be raised. More
District Judges will, of course, have to be appointed.

Because of variable local conditions, a uniform figure for the whole
country as to the pecuniary limits of appellate jurisdiction of District Judges
is not feasible. Appeals of higher value should lie to High Courts, which inspire
greater confidence.
| These remarks apply also to the subordinate judges exercising appellate
jurisdiction.'

(100) It should be ensured that the number of appellate courts in each
district is sufficient to deal with the volume of appeals in that district. Because
of the low priority accorded to appeals, such appeals remain pending and the
parties have to go back because of the pre-occupation of the judge. To avoid
this, the courts subordinate to High Court should set apart a number of days
every month exclusively for the disposal of civil appeals. Where the workload
does not permit such a course, recourse should be had to increasing the number
of appellate courts in the district

Appeals in subordinate courts generally not being of a complicated
nature, they should not remain pending for an unduly long time, if days are
earmarked for exclusively dealing with them?

(101) Normally, civil appeals in subordinate courts should be disposed of
within six to nine months of their institution,

The problem of disposal of appeals in subordinate courts can be tackled
by just increasing the number of the appellate courts. The increase required
would be small and insignificant.4

(102) Criminal appeals too are accorded low priority. Quite often, they
have to be adjourned because the Presiding Officer of the court is pre-occupied
with other matters. The steps recommended above regarding civil appeals can
also be adopted for the disposal of criminal appeals, Increase in the number
of courts of Additional District and Sessions Ju ages would be helpful in expe-
diting the disposal of both civil and criminal appeals.

Where there is not enough work for the court of Additional District
and Sessions Judge which may be created for one district, he can look after
appeals in two a droining districts.

(103) Most often, one public prosecutor looks after cases in more than
one court. When cases are called in more courts than one, he can attend to
only one of them, necessitating either a hearing without effective representation
or an adjournment. The number of public prosecutors in each district should
be adequate to deal with cases called in different courts at the same time.®

(104) The proposed system of filing a concise note of arguments (recom:
mended in this Report for first appeals in the High Court) need not be made
compulsory for civil appeals in subordinate courts.’

19. ‘High Court for Goa, Daman and Diu.

(105) The present disparity between the Union Territory of Goa, Daman
and Diu and other parts of India in regard to the highest Court in the territory
should be removed and jurisdiction of some High Court be extended to that
territory. A circuit Bench of that High Court can sit in the territory. This
would avoid delay in travelling as well as heart-burning.®

‘Para 18.1 to 18.10,
Para 18.11,
3Para 18.12.
4Para 18.12.
S5Para 18.15.
Para 18.14,
TPara 18.15.
8Para 19.1 to 19.4.


89

20... एजलणअेंणा,

(106) To facilitate implementation, this Report confines itself to the
essentials of the problem.! However. the recommended measures will not solve
the problem for all times to come. The search for a solution has to be continuous,
It has to be a quest, not a discovery.2 Where so many complex factors operate
together, a permanent solution would be difficult, This or that aspect may, with
the passage of time, become prominent, and others may shade into insignifi-
cance. Each fresh effort must assess the progress achieved and suggest appto-
priate action for the future?

(107) A report dealing with arrears and delay can bear fruit only if
prompt action is taken thereon. It must be distinguished from a report dealing
with the review of a particular enactment. There should be no undue delay in
taking action on a report which itself deals with eliminating delay.*

8. 7. KHANNA Chairman

S. N. SHANKAR Member
T. S. KRISHNAMOORTHY FTYER reese Member
P. M. BAKSHI eevee Member-Secretary

May 10, 1979,

1Para 20.1.
2Para 20.2.
3Para 20.2 and 20.3.
4Para 20.4 and 20.5,


veep

14,

15,

APPENDIX 1
APPELLATE JURISDICTION OF फाशराटा JUDGES IN VARIOUS STATES

Andhra Pradesh. (0) छ६. 15,000 (District Judge), (Proposal
raise to Rs, 20,000 under considera-
tion).

(2) Rs. 10,000 (Subordinate Judge).

Gujarat. Rs. 10,000 (District Judge).

Haryana. Rs, 20,000 (District Judge).

Himachal Pradesh. Rs, 10,000 (District Judge).

Karnataka.

41} District Courts (Appellate Regular. execution and miscellaneous Ap-

Turisdiction). peals from the decisions of the civil judges,
involving monetary value upto Rs. 20,000.

[Civil Judges? courts in Karnataka have original jurisdiciion as follows:—

ta) All original suits with the monetary
value exeecdittg Rs. 10,000 (unlimited).
Small cause suits upto the monetary
value of Rs. 2,000. Separate smal
cause courts are existing at Bangalore
and Mysore presided over by the
officer in the cadre of civil judge. The
jurisdiction of these courts is upto Rs,
000.

0]

(2) Civil Judges ‘Appellate Jurisdiction). Regular, execution and miscellaneous ap-
9 from ihe decisions of munsiffs,
Munsif’s courts in Karnataka have jurisdiction in original suits upto the monetary
value of Rs. 10.009 and small causes suits upte Rs. 300],
Rs, 10.008 (District Judge).

Kerala,
Maharashtra. Rs 25.000 (District Judge)
(Bombay Civil Courts Act, 1869), ‘Amendment made in January, 1978)
Manipur. Rs. 5,000 {District Judge),
Nagaland. Administration of justice is governed by
special rules.
Punjab. Rs. 20,4) (District Judge).
Rajasthan Rs. 19,000 (District Judge).
. Sikkim. Rs 5.900 (District Tudge).
(In Sikkim. the original court next lower
than the District Court is the court of civil
Tudge-cum-Iudiciat Magistrate. Its juris:
diction is only Rs. 5,000. Suits of a higher
value go to the District Judge on the origi-
nal side).
. Tamil Nadu. Appellate jurisdiction.

(a) District Judge—Rs, 10,000.
19) Subordinate Tudge—Rs. 5,000.
Tripura. Rs 10,000 (District Judge).
West Bengal Rs. 15,000 (District Judge).

91


APPENDIX 2

LIST OF SECTIONS OF THE INDIAN SUCCESSION ACT, 1925, UNDER WHICH
THE HIGH COURTS HAVE TESTAMENTARY JURISDICTION
PART I
Section 2(ob)— The definition of “District Judge” includes
High Court in original Jurisdiction.
PART IX

Sections 218, 219, 222 to 225, 228, 229, 232, 236 to 243, 255 to 260, 261 to 267,
299, 300, 301, 302.
[Jurisdiction of District Judge under section 300 is concurrent with the High

PART X

Sections 371, 372, 374, 375, 383, 384, 388.
[Section 384 deals with appeals to the High Courts]


APPENDIX 3

APPEALS TO THE HIGH COURTS’? UNDER SPECIAL ACTS BESIDES THOSE
MENTIONED IN THE BODY OF THE REPORT

1, Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923.
Section 30 provides for appeals to the High Court from certain otders of the Comumic-

sioner. This is a first appeal,

2 The Copyright Act, 1957.
Section 71 provides for appeals against certain otders of Magistrates.

Under section 72, an appeal lics to the Copyright Board from the decision of the
Regiairar, ‘and a second appeal lies to the High Court from the decision of the Copyright

3. The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973.
Section 22 provides for first appeal to tie Appellate Board, from the orders of the ad-
judicating officer.

Section 54 provides for appeal to High Court on questions of law from the decision
or order of the Appellate Board.

IThis is an illustrative list only.
2For Companies Act, Trade Marks Act, Insolvency Act and Matrimonial Law, See

che body of the Repost.

93


Definition of Dvs-
trict,

APPENDIX 4
JURISDICTION OF THE HIGH COURT UNDER GUARDIANS & WARDS ACT, 1890

ans and Wards Act, 1890 defines the expression “District
as assigned to it im the Code of Civil Procedure, and

ourt in the exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction, Accord-

i 2७) of the Code of Civii Procedure, “district” means the local limits of a

(०७1 of onginai jurisdiction, and includes the local limits of the ordinary
icvon of a High Court.

Naiure ol the powers to be exercised oy the Court under various sections of the
Guardians and Wards Act, 189), can be gathered from the following illustrative list: —

Principat
एव ©

section 9: Court having jurisdiction to entertain application
with respect to the guardianship of the person
of a minor as also guardianship of the property.

decuer 1412): if simultaneous proceedings are being held in
different courts, the High Court shall determine
which court shail deal with the matter.

section 23: Title of guardian to custody of ward,
decuuu 26: Removal of ward from jurisdiction
Seerea 29: Limitation of powers of guardian. He shall not

mortyage or sell or lease the property without
the pievious permission of the court.

ection 31 Pracace with respect to permitting transfers under
section 29.

Sechon 32 Variation of powers of guardian appointed by
the court.

33: Right of the guardian so appointed to apply
to the court for opinion in respect of manage-
ment.

agchor WA Power to award remuneration for auditing
accounts.

Sections 44 and 45 of the Act are penal sections

section 47 provides for appeal to the High Court from decisions of the District
cour under the Act,

94


APPENDIX 5
ORAL ARGUMENTS IN FRANCE
The following extract from a mimeographed publication states th i
the French Cour de Cassation!: ०- era Publication stales ihe position as 10
(0) Proceedings of appeal :

Proceedings before the “Cour de Cassation” are in writing, the pleadings being
sialed in request.

vin civil proceedings +
22 अली वि Proceedings (artivies | through 20 of the decree Nr. 67-1210 as December

Ht is based on the principle that the pariies are not exempt by the law from being
assisted or tepresented by an “advocate a fa cour de Cassation”,

The jappeat is enteied by a request concerning the decision challenged and such
Jequest is filed with the Court's cetk who serves thereafter the appeal to the defendant
within fifteen days liom the 480४ of said filing,

Subject to forfeiture, the ciaimant must file with the Court's office within a maxi-
mum period of five morths ftom the filing of the appeal, a pleading called ‘memoire
antplialif’ comprising che icgal remedies against ihe conested decision; the claimant must
serve wilhin one monti ulier the filing 0: the picadings, the ‘memoite ampliati(’ (o the
defendant or to the daendant’s counsel, when such counsel has filed his authority with
tne Court’s office,

The court’s regisirar states that (he appeal has not been filed or served by drafting
a report and the fortenure is decided ipsy facto by the court.

The defendant must fie with the court's office, not later than three months from
the date of the ‘memoire ampliatil’, pleadings which’ he has to serve to the claimant's
set not later than iidteen days afier the lodging of such ‘memoire’,

In case of default of filing of pleadings within the allotted time, the Court's regis-
war drafts a report.

As soon as the defendant bas filed his pleadings and, upon expiration of such period,
the case 1s deemed ready and delivered (o the Courl’s sections,

‘Yhe case is submited by the President of the competent section to a 177९ or to
~Counsellers referendaives” who 1s appointed ag recording judge. rive parties have no
ight to add supplementary pleauings once such a report has been Ned with the registrar.
‘Thereafter, the case is submitted to the Public Prosecutor (Ministere Public) who must
draft his pleadings within the next four days and propose to enter it on the register.

‘The Court hears the repost of the juuge, the counsel's pleadings and the pleading
of the prosecution; then the Court considers the case and makes a decision.

The claimant may withdraw his appeal, provided he obtains the agreement in
writing of his opponent otherwise, the court has to state the withdrawal of, appeal in a
decision which is equivalent toa dismissal and entails a sentence of guilty against the

aimant who has to pay the Cuurt’s expenses and, if any, a fine and damages as com-
pensation to the defendant,

—proceedings without counsel :

(Articles 21 through 25 of the decree Nr, 67-1210 as of December 22, 1967 and
general rulings of articles 1 through 20 of said decree),

"The filing and the notice of appeal as weil as the lodging of the ‘memoites’ must
comply with the requirements of such decree. The period for lodging the “memoite, am:
शा and for giving notice vf said “memoire’ to the defendant are reduced respectively
to four months and fifteen days. The Court’s registrar is in charge of giving notice of
the ‘memorie’.

Proceedings before the Court are the same as in the cate of ordinary affairs.

‘The French ‘Cour de Caseation’ (Mimeographed), page 13.

95


APPENDIX 6
iTHE] U.P. HIGH COURT (ABOLITION, OF LETTERS PATENT APPEALS)

(U.P. ACT NO. 15 OF 1962)
{13th November, 1962.)
An Act tu peovide for Abolition of Letters Patent Appeals in the High Court of Judicature
at ANahabad
it is hereby enacted in the Thisteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows:

1. Short tide and commencement :

(1) This Act may be called the एज Pradesh High Court (Abolition of Letters
Patent Appeals) Act, 1962.

(2) it shall come into force at once.

2 Definition of High Court :

In this Act “High Court” means the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad as
constituted by the U.P. High Courts (Amalgamation) Order, 1948.

3. Abolition of appeais from the Judgment or order of onc Judge of the High Court
made in the exercise of appellate jurisdiction.

(1) No appeal, arising from a suil 07 proceeding instituted or commenced, whether
plior of subsequent to the enforcement of this Act, shall lie to the High Court from a
judgment or order of one Judge of tue High Court. made in the exercise of appellate
jurisdiction, in respect of a decree or order made by a court subject 0 the superintendence
of the High Court, anything to the contrary contained in clause ten of the Letters Patent
of Her Majesty, dated the 17th March, 1866, read with clause 17 of the U.P. High Courts’
(Amalgamation) Order, 194%, in any other jaw, notwithstanding.

12) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) all appeals pendin,
before the High Court on the data immediately preceding the date of enforcement o!
this Act shail continue to fie and be heard and disposed of as heretobefore, as if this
Act had not been brought into force,

96


APPENDIX 7
PENDENCY OF CASES IN HIGH COURTS DURING 1976 TO 1978
Institution of Cases in High Courts

Institution

Si. Namie of the High Court
No. 1-1-1976 to 1-1-1976 ६७ 1-1-1977 to 1-1-1977 to 1-1-1978 10 1-1-1978 to
30-6-1976 31-12-1976 30-6-1977 31-12-1977 30-6-1978 31-12-1978

(6) (2) 8) @) 6) (6) Mm (8)
1 Allahabad . + - 26,838 $6,693 22,708 57,571 32,930 64,734
2 Andhra Pradesh. ५. *« 17,319 38,903 17,152 43,956 22,064 48,760
3 Bombay . - - - 23,485 43,693 20,202 38,864 15,701 35,898
4 Calcutta . 2. -: 27,102 53,015 22,951 43,339 24,021 50,449
$ Delhi Soe 10,115 20,108 10,065 21,661 11,597 23,424
6 Gauhtti 2. + - 1,215 2,297 1,065 1,966 980 2,097
7 Gujarat  - . 5,770 15,091 6,748 13,993 7,242 14,972
8 Himachal Pradesh. 2,127 3,844 1,454 3,599 2,434 4,517
9 Jammu & Kashmir. 1,373 2,610 1,261 2,783 1,530 4,285
10 Karnataka. . + - 13,468 28,438 17,206 37,014 17,987 36,920
वा Kerala. - + : 23,991 47,001 18,429 36,540 17,854 34,275
12 Madhya Pradesh. 11,612 27,7 11,910 29,132 16,506 34,043
13 Madras. 7 -+ : 25,449 55,605 23,772 54,320 26,799 55,472
14 Orissa se 2,451 4,936 2,123 4,872 2,503 5,269
15 Patna - + पु पु 8,082* 21,0296 10,576 23,562G 10,439* 22,5¢6*
16 Punjab & Haryana. - 17,485 37,146 15,139 32,092 16,394 34,402
17 Rajsthan .  . - - 5,462 10,962 4,215 9,420 6,045 13,831
18 Sikkim न 29 67 36 49 10 NA.
ToTAL - . . 2,23,373 4,67,154 2,07,007 4,54,733 2,33,036 485,854

Disposal of Cases in high Courts
Disposal

1-1-1976 to! 1-1-1976 10: 1-1-1977 to 1-1-1977 (७ 1-1-1978 t 1-1-1
30-6-1976 31-12-1976 ~ 30-6-1977 31-12-1977 30-6. 1978. अभी

Name of the High Court = +

ay @ @) (5) (5) ©) Mm
——— ne
Allahabad... 22,327 45,593 17,283 44,844 26,364 60,020
Andhra Pradesh. . 17,235 44,266 16,210 42,459 21,216 44,597
Bombay ५. ५ + - 16,643 41,579 16,853 36,571 13,368 33,668
Calcutta =... 25,351 51,185 24,894 41,757 27,089 47,710
Dihi. 2 . - - 8,941 19,390 8,243 18,310 9,238 19,881
Gaubati +. *- 1,033 2,397 809 1,608 801 1,520
Gujarat. Lo 5,279 13,489 6,706 14,560 6,644 13,704
Himachal Pradesh =. 1,258 2,686 1,158 2995 2,890 4,255
Jammu & Kashmir. 851 1,669 163 1,952 868 2,622
Kermataka. ५» - - 9,748 20,489 12,977 24,992 12,589 29,263
Kesla. ५ - - - 13,758 37,694 17,640 36,931 23,204 42,462
Madhya Pradesh». 9,125 24,039 10,461 25,242 16,467 37,450
Mads. see 22,287 51,952 18,925 44,635 23,643 57,679
Orissa. 5 5 + -: 2,080 4,963 2,489 4,794 1,596 3,412
Patna* : so 7,610 15,807 6,616 14,510 TAAL 16,127
Punjab &Haryana. 12,753 26,009 17,116 29,565 19,864 42,193
1 मत 1 4,360 10,330 4,764 9,116 3,639 12,339
Sikkim. 2° . - 20 51 35 63 12 NA.
Toran. - ~—«:1,80,679 413,588 183,942 4,00,704 = -2,189,334,68,362

*Main cases only.

@The institutions in Patna High Court for the perie€ 1-1-1876 10 31-12-1876; 1-1-1977 16 36-6-1977 ard 1-1-1977
to 31-12-1977 include 3,457; 3,251 and 6,992. Miscellaneous cases respectively. These cases heve not tech teken inte
account by the Patna High Court while working out the pendency of cases.

97



98

Pendency of Cases in High Courts

Pendency as on
Name of the High Coust
30-61976 31-12-1976 30-G-1977 31-12-1977 30-6-1978 31-12-1978
o @ @ o Oo ~ © छत.

Allahabad. . . 1,13,428 1,20,022 1,25,447 1,32,749 1,39,315 13,6978
Andhra Pradesh - . . 19,837 14,390 15,332 15,887 16,735 20,050
Bombay . . . . 54,827 50,099 53,448 $2,592 54,925 $4,822
Calcutta . . + . 16,787 16,866 34,923 72,448 69,380 75,127
Delhi - . . . . 23,364 22,908* 25,058 26,587 28,946 40,130

Gauhati . . . . 6,472 6,190 6,446 6,548 6,727 7125
Gujarai. . . . . 13,178 12,289 12,301 11,722 12,320 12,990

Himachal Pradesh . . 4,126 4,415 4,711 5,019 4,563 5,281

Jammu & Kashmir . . 3,427 3,846 4,344 4,677 5,339 6,340
Karnataka - . . . 20,198 24,427 28,656 36,449 41,847 44,106
Kerala « . . . पु 44,056 43,130 «3,919 42,739 37,389 34,552
Madhya Pradesh - . . 41,538 492,723 44,172 46,613 46,652 43,206
Madras . . . . 41,627 42,078 46,925 51,763 52,919 50,156
Orissa - . . . . 6,362 5,964 5,598 6,042 6,953@ 7,908
Patna** . . . 26,022 30,832" 28,079 29,435 32,433 35,814
Punjab & Haryana . . 37,137 43,542 41,565 46,069 42,599 39,278
Rajasthan. . . . 20,724 20,254 49,705 20,558 + 22,954 22,050
Sikkim है. पर . पु पु 25 32° 36 at 19 i4
___ A EE

5,53,135 $,64,007 $,80,695 6,079,18 6,22,030 6,24,927

“These figures were revised by the De thi, Petna and Sikkim High Cours to 23,226; 27,375 and 35 cases respectively.
Asa result the toval pendency in the Country on 1-1-1977 we 8 revised to 5,60,881 cases.

‘@The increase of 9 cases is due to restoration of 6 second appeals and 3 miscellancous first appeals during tst half
year of 1978.

** Main cases only.

का श्र 38-253 LAD/ND/79—9-4-80—1500,,