“QONFIDENTIAL—Not far Padlication,”

LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

EIGHTH REPORT
(SALE OF GOODS ACT, 1930)

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA @ MINISTRY OF LAW


CHAIRMAN,
LAW COMMISSION,

NEW DELHI,
March ॥ 1958.
Shri A. K. Sen,
Minister of Law,
New Delhi.

My dear Minister,

1 have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Eighth
Report of the Commission on the Sale of Goods Act.

2. At the first meeting of the Law Commission held on
the 17th September, 1955, the Commission decided to take
up the revision of the Sale of Goods Act and entrusted the
task to a sub-committee consisting of Shri G. S. Pathak
and Shri G. N. Joshi. The consideration of the subject was
initjated by Shri Joshi who in consultation with Shri
Pathak prepared a Draft Report which was circulated
to all Members of the Commission and their views
invited thereon. The views together with the Draft
Report were discussed at a meeting of the Statute Revision
Section of the Commission held on the 7th December, 1957.
Important suggestions made by Members at this meeting
were accepted and it was left to the Chairman to finally
settle the Report in the light of the discussion.

3. The Commission wishes to acknowledge the services
rendered by its Joint Secretary, Shri D. Basu, in the pre-
paration of this Report.

Yours sincerely,
M. C, SETALVAD.


CONTENTS

PARAGRAPHS, PAGES
I—2 History of the Legislation . . . . . . . . I
३. Scope of the proposed revision Be जि 1

4-29 Examination of the provisions of the Act indicating the changes

required. . 2—10

APPENDIX

Proposals as shown in the formofamendments .  . . ॥*" aa


REPORT ON THE SALE OF GOODS ACT, 1930.

1. Until the first of July, 1930, the law of sale of goods
in India was governed by Chapter VII (sections 76 to 123)
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872. The Indian Contract
Act itself being based on the English Common Law, the law
relating to the sale of goods in India followed the princi-
ples of the Engl'sh Common Law, including the Law
Merchant. The English law of sale of goods was codified
in 1893 by the enactment of the Sale of Goods Act which
embodied the basic Common Law principles after adapting
them to meet the needs of a growing society.

2. In India, by 1920 it was found that the law relating
to the sale of goods contained in Chapter VII of the Indian
Contract Act was not adequate to meet the needs of the
community and that some of the provisions of this branch
of the law required alteration in the light of new develop-
ments in mercantile transactions. The accretions to the
law made by judicial decisions in England which were
embodied in the Sale of Goods Act of 1893 were not to be
found in the analogous provisions contained in the Indian
Contract Act. It was also considered necessary to embody
the law relating to sale of goods in a separate enactment.
Hence, in 1926-27 an exhaustive examination of the case-
law bearing on the portions of the Contract Act dealing
with the sale of goods was made by the Legislative Depart-
ment. As a result of this examination, a draft Bill was pre-
pared in 1928. In 1929 a Special Committee consisting of
eminent lawyers examined the draft Bill and the draft B'll,
as revised by this Committee and, subsequently, by a Select
Committee of the Legislature, was enacted as the Indian
Sale of Goods Act, 1930 (III of 1930), section 65 of which
repealed Chapter VII ‘of the Indian Contract Act, 1872.
The Act, as passed, was mainly based on the provisions of
the English Act of 1893, modified in the light of subsequent
judicial decisions in England and India.

3. Having carefully examined the provisions of the
Act in the light of judicial decisions in India since 1930,
the development of the law relating to the sale of goods
in other countries, the suggestions made by various com-
mercial bodies and individuals as well as the requirements
of the modern welfare State, we have reached the con-
clusion that the provisions of the Act do not require any
radical change.

History
of the
Legislat on

Scope of uz
proposed
rev ison.


Examination
of the provi-
sions of the

2

4. We now proceed to an examination of the sections of
the Act seriatim in order to indicate the changes which

Act, indicat- we consider necessary. The more important suggestions

ing the
changes
Teqt .

See. 1,

received from various bodies and persons are referred to
in their appropriate places, and our reasons for accepting
or rejecting them have been stated.

5. In conformity with our recommendation regarding
other Acts, we recommend the deletion of the word
‘Indian’ from the title of the Act [sub-section (1) ‘of sec-
tion 1.].

6. Suggestions have been received in regard to some
of the definitions contained in section 2.

With reference to the definition of “documents of title
to goods” in sub-section (4), it has been pointed out that
there is.a conflict of decisions with regard to the effect of
endorsement on a railway receipt. One view is that the
endorsement of a railway receipt, which is a mercantile
document of title, invests the endorsee with a right to
maintain a suit on the basis thereof. This view has been
taken by the Punjab! and Allahabad? High Courts and a
Division Bench of the Bombay High Court.*

On the other Kand, there is a decision of a Single Judge
of the Bombay High Court‘ wherein he has expressed the
opinion that though a railway receipt is a document of
title to goods, mere endorsement of the receipt by itself
is not enough to constitute the endorsee either a bona fide
pledgee for value or a bona fide transferee for value of the
goods represented by the railway receipt.

This can hardly be said to be a conflict of judicial opinion
which would justify a clarification of the law, for the view
taken by the Single Judge is contrary to an earlier deci-
sion of a Division Bench of that, High Court, and the
decisions of some other High Courts as well.

7. It has been suggested that the definition of “goods”
in clause (7) of section 2 should include electricity, gas
and water.

Pollock and Mulla in their Commentary on the Indian
Sale of Goods Act,5 have expressed the view that it is

1.
a
%
‘

गा

. Jalan & Sons v. G.G.-in-Council, 4.1२, 1949 East Punjab 190.

‘Sheo Prasad v. Dominion of India, A.LLR. 1954 All. 747.
Dolatram Dwarkadas v. B.B. 9 C.I. Railway Co., A.I.R. 1914 Bombay 178.

. Shamji Bhanji & Co. v. North Western Railway, A.I.R. 1947 Bom. 169.
. and Edition, p. 13.


3

doubtful whether the Act is applicable to such things as
gas, water and electricity. The Calcutta High Court shares
this doubt at least as regards electricity.

In England also, the position is uncertain. In (1909)
2 KB. 604,? the case was argued on the assumption that
electrical energy was to be considered “goods” for the
purposes of the law relating to sale of goods, but it was
expressly stated that the point was not being decided and
might have to be considered later. As regards water, it
was held in 11 Q.B.D. 21° that water supplied by a water
‘company to a consumer and standing in his pipes, may be
the subject of a larceny at common law. According to
the decision in (1829) 4 0. & P. 874, an agreement for the
supply of water by a water company comes within the
exemption of ‘contract for sale of goods’ under the Stamp
Act. Gas has been held to be goods by the Privy Council.5

However, in the United States of America, it has been
held that a contract to supply power is a contract of sale.®
Thus, electricity has been held to be personal property,
capable of sale.’

In India, according to section 39 of the Indian Electricity
Act, electrical energy can be the subject-matter of theft.
Article 287 of the Constitution which prohibits a State

Legislature from imposing a tax on ‘the consumption or
sale of electricity’ shows that there can be a sale of

electricity,

8. In view of the fact that contracts with regard to the
supply of electrical energy and water are common, we think
that the matter should be placed beyond doubt and an
amendment should be made in section 2(7) so as to include
power in the shape of electrical energy, water and gas
within the definition of “goods”.

9. The Stock Exchange, Bombay, has suggested that
“stocks and shares” which are included in the definition
of “goods” should be regarded as actionable claims instead
of “goods” as at present. We are unable to accept this
suggestion, as section 82 of the Companies Act, 1956 has

1 Rash Behari v. Emperor, A.I.R. 1936 Cal. 753 at 9. 766.

2 County of Durham Electrical Power Distribution Co. v. Commissioners of Inland
Revenue, (1909) 2 K.B. 604.

3. Ferens v. O’Brien, (1883) 11 Q.B.D. 21.

4 West Middlesex Water-Works Co. v. Suwerkrop, (1829) 4 0. & P. 87.

% Erie County Natural Gas & Fuel Co. Ltd., v. Carroll & anr., (1911) A.C. 105.

* Volunz XLVI, American Jurisprudence, p, 216.


Sec. 3.

Sec. 4.

Sec. 5.

4

treated “shares or other interest of a member in a com-
pany” as movable property and the existing definition of
“goods” is in accord with that section. We have carefully
examined the reasons given by the Stock Exchange but
we do not think that they justify the proposed change.

10. It has been suggested that in the definition of “pro-
perty” in clause (11) of section 2, the words “special
property” should be substituted by the words “special
interest”, on the ground that there is only one kind of
property, viz., general property, and that special property
is merely a misnomer for special interest in goods. But
the use of the expression ‘special property’ is so well-
established that we think it undesirable to alter the
definition.

11. No change is necessary in section 3.

12. There is no provision in the Act regulating a transac-
tion of hire-purchase, which is also a method of selling
goods. It is a transaction of hire at the inception with an
option to purchase.

In the English Sale of Goods Act of 1893, there was no
provision for such a transaction. Hence, provision was
made by a separate Act, namely, the Hire-Purchase Act
of 1938 (I & 2 Geo. 6, c. 53), with a view to affording
protection to the buyer of the goods on hire-purchase, or
on similar terms, against certain abuses which had become
apparent in the practice of hire-purchase trading. This
Act has been supplemented by the Hire-Purchase Act,
1954 (2 & 3 Eliz. 2, ९. 51).

In our opinion, it is desirable that a separate Act on
the lines of the English Hire-Purchase Acts and other
similar laws should be enacted in India to regulate hire-
purchase transactions. The Commission will make its
recommendations in this connection in a separate report.

13. It has been suggested that a provision should be made
for the passing of the property in an undivided share of
a large mass of fungible goods and that fungible goods
should be defined as meaning “goods of which any unit
or its nature are by mercantile usage treated as equivalent
to any other unit.”

This suggestion is inspired by a similar provision in
section 76(1) of the American Uniform Sales Act,—
approved by the National Conference of Commissioners on
Uniform State Laws, 1906. There is no such provision in:
the English Sale of Goods Act.


5

Having regard to the provisions of our Act which deal
with transactions in such goods, such as section 22, the
difficulty of framing an adequate definition of such goods
and having regard more particularly to the fact that no
difficulties have been felt by the absence of such a defini-
tion, we are of the opinion that it is not necessary to accept
the suggestion.

14. A suggestion has been made by the Bihar Lawyers’
Association that it should be provided that contracts for
the sale of goods can lawfully be made by writing on a
duly stamped paper. It is not quite clear whether this
requirement of a stamped paper is intended to apply only
to an “agreement to ‘sell’” or to a ‘sale’ also. In any case
we cannot accept this suggestion. It would impose an
obligation to reduce to writing every transaction of sale
and we do not think that any reasons exist for imposing so
drastic an obligation. The existing practice would not
seem to have occasioned any difficulties; on the contrary,
it seems to have proved useful and facilitated the transac-
tion of business. Having regard to the volume and the
frequency of transactions of sale of goods. we do not
sider it advisable to impose so rigcrous a condition.

con-

15. No alternation is considered necessary in sections 6 Secs. 6 to 12.
to 12.

16. Section 13(1) deals with voluntary waiver of a con- Sec. 13,
dition by the buyer; whereas section 13(2) deals with
compulsory waiver. A difficulty arises where the con-
tract is for the sale of specific goods, the property in
which has passed to the buyer. According to section
13(2), in such a case the buyer is compeiled to treat the
condition ag a warranty Accordirg to Pollock and
Mulla’, the language of section 13(2) is somewhat obscure:

“The language, however, is not very happy and logi-
cally comes very near to being a contradiction
in terms; for if the property passes despite the
non-fulfilment of the stipulations, the stipula-
tions are not conditions at all, whereas if the
stipulations are conditions, the property does
not pass if they are not fulfilled, unless the
buyer waives their performance by accepting
the goods or otherwise.”

According to the learned authors', section 13 (2) is prehaps
intended to express and may possibly be considered as

1 Indian Sale of Goods Act, 2nd Ed., pp. 62—63.


6

giving effect to the rule of common law as stated by
Blackburn, J. :

“Generally speaking, when the contract is as to
any goods, such a clause is a condition going to
the essence of the contract; but when the con-
tract is as to specific goods, the clause is only
collateral to the contract, and is the subject of
a cross action or matter in reduction of damages
—Heyworth v. Hutchinson, (1867) L.R. 2 QB.
447, 451.”

In Lal Chand v. Baij Nath', Amir Ali, J., commenting
on this sub-section, stated :

“I concede, therefore, that it is highly desirable that
the ‘sub-section should be couched in less equi-
vocal language. For my own part, having re-
gard to the large volume of modern business
done upon sale by sample, I would be glad
to see the sub-section omitted. That, however,
is a matter for the legislature.”

Two courses have been suggested to meet this diffi-
culty.

(a) To take away the sale of specific goods by sample
from the operation of section 13(2) to avoid the conflict?
with section 17 which provides for implied conditions in
the case of contracts for sale by sample. Property in
specific goods in a deliverable state passes to the buyer
when the contract is made (section 20). In modern times,
there is a large volume of sale of specific goods by sam-
ple. Section 17(2) (a) gives rise to an implied condition
that the bulk should correspond with the sample in
quality. However, in a case where the property has
passed to the buyer already when the contract is made
(Section 20) and the property is delivered subsequently
but it does not correspond with the sample, the implied
condition raised by section 17(2) (a) stands frustrated as
the buyer will be compelled to treat the implied condition
as a warranty. In G. Mackenzie and Co, Ltd v. Nagendra
Nath®, it was held that section 13 is not limited to a breach
of an express condition but extends also to a breach of an
implied condition. The result is that the buyer will have
ho right to reject the goods and will have to fall back

2 LLR. (1936) 63 Cal. p. 736, at 9. 745.
2 Vide Pollock & Mulla, Indian Sale of Goods Act, 2nd Ed., p. 62.
* LL.R. (1946) 1 Cal. 225.


7

upon his remedies under section 59 for breach of warranty
only. Pollock and Mulla’ point out that there may be
cases of sale of specific goods by description also if the
buyer relies on their description.

In view of these considerations it has been suggested
that in order to give relief to such buyers, the following
sub-section may be inserted as sub-section (4) to section
13:

“Sub-section (4):—Nothing in sub-section (2) shall
affect the case of sale of specific goods by sam-
ple or description”.

(b) In the alternative, it is suggested that section
18(2) should be deleted.

In our op‘nion, the better course would be to omit
from section 13(2) the words “or where the contract is

for specific goods the property in which has passed to
the buyer”.

17. No alteration is necessary in sections 14-15.

18. It was pointed out by the Deputy Director of the
Indian Standards Institution that though under sections 5
and 6 of the Indian Standards Institution (Certification
Marks) Act of 1952, persons are prohibited from making
improper use of standard marks and of certain names,
there is no provision in the law to enable the buyer to
repudiate a contract if the goods sold on the basis that
they are in accordance with the standards laid down by
Government do not conform to the Government stand-
ards. It was, therefore, suggested that a provision should
be inserted in section 16 of the Sale of Goods Act that
when Government. lays down any compulsory standard
for any products, the products sold should conform to
that standard.

We had the advantage of a discussion with the Deputy
Director on this subject.

It appears that the Act itself contains no provision
prescribing any particular standard of quality for any
of the standard marks envisaged by the Act. The Act
only penalises the use of standard marks otherwise than
in accordance with its provisions.

There are, of course, some other Acts which lay down
or provide for the making of rules to prescribe standards

Sees, 14-15.

Sec. 16,

1 Indian Sale of Goods Act, 2nd Ed., p. 62.


Secs, 17-24.

Sec. 25.

Sec. 26.

Sec. 27.

8

of quality, such as the Agricultural Produce (Grading
and Marking) Act, 1937, and the Drugs Act, 1940. The
Drugs Act prohib'ts the sale of goods which are not of
the standard quality. It is, however, not possible from
such penal provisions to imply the existence of a condition
or warrantly regarding the quality of the goods, the
breach of which may entitle the buyer to civil conse-
quences under the Sale of Goods Act.

What is necessary to achieve the object in view is a
provision which will imply in such cases a condition or war-
ranty regarding the quality of the goods, to the effect
that the goods sold are of the quality which the standard
or other mark carries with it. In the absence of an ex-
press or implied condition or warranty regarding the quality
of the goods, the purchaser would not be able to claim a
right to repudiate the contract or claim damages for
breach of the warranty. He may be liable for the penal-
ties provided under the Acts. The enactment of a statu-
tory condition or warranty may affect a large class of
merchants and middlemen. It is a matter of policy to
be decided by the Union and the State Governments whe-
ther they should undertake such legislation. In the cir-
cumstances we do not propose to make any recommendation
on the question raised by the Deputy Director.

19. No alteration is necessary in sections 17 to 24.

20, In sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 25, we pro-
pose to include the case of railway receipts. Goods are
frequently consigned by rail with the railway receipts
made out in the name of the consignor or his agent or
bank with the clear intention of reserving a right of dis-
posal to the consignor and there is no reason why in these
cases the consignor by rail should not have the same rights
as the consignor by ship.

21. No change is necessary in section 26.

22. It has been suggested by the Government of Bihar
that the words “good faith” in section 27 should be given
the same meaning as in section 52 of the Indian Penal Code.
The words “good faith” are not defined in the Act and the
definition in the General Clauses Act is applicable. We
have carefully examined this suggestion but are unable to
accept it. We do not feel that a definition which is appro-
priate to the purposes of the Criminal Law -should be
imported into the Civil Law, the considerations applicable
to the two systems being very different.


9
23. No change is necessary in sections 28 to 53.

24, It has been suggested that the following be inserted
as sub-section (5) in section 54:

“The seller is bound to exercise reasonable care and
judgment in making a resale and subject to this
requirement he may make a resale either by
public or private sale”.

This suggestion appears to be based on section 60(5) of
the Uniform Sales Act of the United States referred to
earlier. The principle contained in this suggested sub-
section has already been applied by Indian decisions and is
in our view implicit in section 54.

25. It has also been suggested that the phrase “perish-
able goods” should be defined. In our opinion, it is diffi-
cult to define this phrase with precision. The phrase is
well understood in the commercial world and judicial de-
cisions and text books have made its meaning clear.

26. No alteration is considered necessary in sections 55
to 64.

27. Section 64A was inserted by Act XLI of 1940 to re-
place s. 10 of the Indian Tariff Act, 1934. That provision
had been enacted on the lines of s. 10 of the Finance Act,
1901 (1 Edw. 7, ¢.7), which referred only to customs and
excise duty. Since then, the incidence of a purchase tax
has also been covered in England by section 24 of the
Finance Act, 1948 (11 & 12 Geo. 6. c.49), On principle,
there is no reason why there should not be a similar pro-
vision to deal with the case of the imposition or change
in the rate of a sale or purchase tax subsequent to the
making of a contract for the sale of goods.

We have, accordingly, proposed the insertion of a new
section (s. 64B of the App.) relating to sales tax, on the lines
of section 64A. We also think it desirable to make the
provisions of s. 64A and s. 64B subject to an agreement to
the contrary. That is the position in England. This can
be brought about by the addition of the words “unless
otherwise agreed” at the commencement of s. 64A.

28. It was suggested that the Indian Bills of Lading
Act, 1856 (Act IX of 1856) should be consolidated with
the Sale of Goods Act. In particular, it was suggested
that section 2 of the Bills of Lading Act should be enact-
ed as sub-section (8) to section 51 of this Act which deals

Secs, 28-53.

Sec. 54.

Secs. 5 5-64.

Sec. 642.


10

with duration of transit, and that sections 1 and 3 of the
Bills of Lading Act should be inserted in this Act as sec-
tions 64B and 64C in order to give effect to the right of
stoppage in transit or claims for freight.

In our opinion, the ambit of the Bills of Lading Act
is wider than that of the Sale of Goods Act and embodying
the provisions of the Bills of Lading Act in the Sale of
Goods Act, would result in disturbing the frame, the
structure and the unity of the Sale of Goods Act. In our
view, the proper place for the Bills of Lading Act would
be a comprehensive enactment dealing with the Law of
Carriers, in all its aspects. The framing of a comprehen-
sive law dealing with Carriers is under our consideration.

29. In order to give a concrete shape to our proposals,
we have, in the Appendix, put them in the shape of draft
amendments to the relevant sections of the Act. The
Appendix is not, however, to be treated as a draft Bill.

M. C. SETALVAD,
(Chairman)

M. C. CHAGLA,

K. N. WANCHOO,

P. SATYANARAYANA RAO,

N. 0. SEN GUPTA,

V. K. T. CHARI,

D. NARASA RAJU,

8. M. SIKRI,

6. S. PATHAK,

G. N. JOSHI,

N. A. PALKHIVALA,
(Members)

K. SRINIVASAN,

DURGA DAS BASU,
Joint Secretaries.

New DELHI:
The 1st March, 1958.


APPENDIX

Proposals as shown in the form of amendments.
[This is not a draft Bill]

In sub-section (1) of section 1 of the Indian Sale ०६7: Amend”
Goods Act, 1930, (hereinafter referred to as the “principal toe seen

Act”), omit the word “Indian”, (3 of 1930)

In clause (7) of section 2 of the principal Act, after 2. Amend-
the words “stock and shares”, insert the words “electricity, ment of sec~
water and gas”. है

In sub-section (2) of section 13 of the principal Act, dent of sec-
omit the words “or where the contract is for specific tion 13.
goods the property in which has passed to the buyer,”.

In section 25 of the principal Act—
(a) in sub-section (2), for the words “where goods 4- Amend.
are shipped and by the bill of lading” substitute tion 25.
the words “where goods are shipped or sent by
railway and by the bill of lading or railway
receipt”;
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words “bill of lad-
ing” wherever they occur, substitute the words
“bill of lading or railway receipt”.
In section 64-A of the principal Act, add the words 5. Amend-
“unless otherwise agreed” at the commencement of the ment of 8०
section.

After section 64A of the principal Act, insert the 6; Insertion
following section: tion 64-B.

“Seation 64B—Application of section 64A to
sale or purchase tax.

The provisions of section 64A shall apply in relation to
the imposition, increase, decrease or remission of any tax
on the sale or purchase of goods chargeable from the
seller as they apply in relation to the imposition, increase,
decrease or remission of any duty of customs or excise
on goods”.

१९ 1
<3MGIPND—NS—634 M of Law—17-2-58—350