EIGHTIETH REPORT
ON
THE METHOD OF APPOINTMENT OF JUDGES

i—315 LAD/ND/79


D.O. No. F. 2(12)/77-L.C.

Mr. Justice S. N. Shankar MEMBER
LAW COMMISSION
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

‘A’ Wing, 7th Floor,
Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi-110 001.
August 10, 1979.

My dear Minister,

1 send herewith the Eightieth Report of the Law Commission relating to
the method of appointment of Judges. The subject was taken up by the
Commission for consideration, pursuant to a reference made by the Union
Government to the Commission. Details of the relevant correspondence are
given in the first chapter of the Report.

The Report was mainly prepared by Mr. Justice H. R. Khanna, when he
was Chairman of the Commission. As he resigned before the Report could be
signed, the Report does not bear his signature. However, it may be stated that the
Report bears his full concurrence.

The Commission would like to place on record — its appreciation of the
assistance rendered by Shri P. M. Bakshi, Member-Secretary of the Commission
in the preparation of this Report.

With kind regards,

Yours Sincerely,
Sd./-
(S. N. SHANKAR)

Shri $. N. Kacker,
Minister of Law, Justice & Company Affairs,
New Delhi.

(iti)


Chapter Topic

1. Introductory te
2 Importance of the subject

3. Position in varlous countries... en
4. Historical background =. wae
5. Constitutional provisions and the present practice... seo
6. Recommendations as to method of appointment of High Court Judges

7 Recommendations as to method of appointment as Supreme Court
Judges oe oe wee ae we wee we we

8. Conclusion oo oa we
9. Summary of recommend:

APPENDICES
Appendix 1-—Circuit Judges Nomination Commission in U.S.A.
Appendix 2—Questionnaire issued by the Law Commission of India

Appendix 3— Tabulation of replies to the Questionnaire

Page

12
16
a
29

31
32

37
38
41


CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTORY

1.1. According to letter dated 29th December, 1977, from the Secretary, Reference
Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs, to the Member-Secretary, Law to the Law
Commission, the Prime Minister directed that the question of the appointment Commis-
of Judges of the High Courts and the Supreme Court be examined. and the “0?
Law Minister was of the view that this question should be referred to the new
Law Commission so that the Commission might study the problem in depth
and explore the possibilities of improvement. The letter also made reference
to a suggestion that there should be an informal Consultative Panel consisting.
perhaps, of three retired Chief Justices of the Supreme Court. and pointed out
that there might be constitutional difficulties in having a Consultative Panel.

There was also a reference in the letter to papers prepared by the Ministry on
the subject.

1.2, On receipt of the letter, those papers were sent for and perused by Letter of
the Law Commission. The Chairman of the Commission sent a letter on Chairman
January 24, 1978, to the Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs, containing
his view (with which the Member-Secretary broadly agreed) regarding various
points. The views of the Chairman were incorporated in five paragraphs which
read as under :

“(1) As the provisions of the Constitution stand at present, the appointment
of an Informal Consultative Panel in connection with the appointment of
Judges of the High Courts and the Supreme Court is of doubtful constitutional
validity.

(2) In case it is decided to amend the provisions of the Constitution,
we must guard against putting the whole matter of appointment of Judges
at large and thus open Pandora’s box. The attempt should be to plug the
loopholes in the present system with a view to eliminate favouritism or the
impact of any political or party consideration in the matter of appointment
rather than to make any radical changes. Radical changes would be necessary
if we find the method. devised by our Constitution for the appointment of
Judges to be basically wrong and intrinsically defective. In case, however,
we find that the scheme of our Constitution for appointment of Judges is by
and large sound but some defects or lacunae have come to surface in the
actual workng of the scheme, in that event what would be required is not
radical change but such modification as may strengthen the scheme and
climinate the defects and lacunae. As at present advised, I think that the
scheme for appointment of Judges in our Constitution belongs to the latter
category. By and large, the method devised for this purpose by our founding
fathers was well considered. Defects. no doubt, have been noticed in the
working of the scheme, but they are of such a character as can be rectified
without throwing overboard the whole scheme. Efforts should, therefore, be
made to rectify the defects and plug the loopholes.

“(3) After we have crossed the constitutional hurdles, the appointment
of the Panel referred to in the above-mentioned letter, in my opinion, is
desirable.

“(4) The Panel (or whatever be the name given to it: perhaps ii would
be better to call it Judges Appointment Committee or Judges Appointment
Commission) should consist of :

(a) Chief Justice of India (ex-officio);
(b) Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs (ex-officio): and

(c) three persons, each of whom has been Chief Justice or a Judge of
the Supreme Court.

The members of the Panel in category (c) should be appointed for a period
of four years. To prevent appointment of persons who have, with the passage
of time, lost touch with Judges and the lawyers, the persons belonging to
category (c) should be normally those who have been on the Bench of the
Supreme Court within six years of their appointment on the Panel. The
suggestion that those on the Panel under category (c) should consist only of


2

retired Supreme Court Chief Justices is not feasible because this would

circumscribe the choice within a very narrow limit which would perhaps be not
desirable.

“The sitting Chief Justice should be the Chairman of the Panel, The
Panel should express its views to the Government about the suitability of
persons to be appointed as Judges and Chief Justices of the High Courts and
the Supreme Court. In case of any difference between the members of the

Panel, the view of the majority should be considered to be the view of the
anel.

“The consultation with the Panel would be in addition to the present
Practice in accordance with the existing constitutional provisions. The
consultation with the Panel would take place at the final stage before the
President is advised to appoint a person.

“One effect of the above proposal would be that the Chief Justice of
India would come into the picture at two stages: one, earlier in accordance
with the constitutional provisions and the practice prevailing at present and,
second time. as Chairman of the Panel. This cannot, in the very nature of
things, be helped. The Chief Justice in the meeting of the Panel can apprise
the other members of facts which might have come to his notice. He might
also clarify some matters. It would be open to the Panel. in case they
consider it proper in any particular matter, to informally consult any of the
members of the Bar, including the Attorney-General, Solicitor-General and the
Advocate-General.

“(5) Apart from the above, I make the following suggestions :

(i) Tn case of the appointment of a Judge of the High Court, the Chief
Justice of the High Court, before making recommendation, should
consult his two seniormost colleagues. In the communication.
containing the recommendation. the Chief Justice should state that
he has consulted the two seniormost colleagues and what has been the
view of each of them in respect of the recommendation. Normally,
a recommendation in which the two seniormost colleagues concur
with the Chief Justice, should be accepted.

(ii) Similar course should be adopted in case of the appointment of a
Judge of the Supreme Court.

(iii) In the matter of the appointment of the Chief Justice of the High
Court, no junior Judge should normally be appointed in supersession
of the seniormost Judge.

(iv) If the seniormost Judge is considered not suitable for appointment as
Chief Justice. in that event. a Chief Justice or a Judge from another
High Court should normally be appointed as Chief Justice.

(v) Apart from that also, we should more frequently appoint a Judge
from outside’ as Chief Justice of the High Court. The disadvantage
of this proposal is that an outsider Chief Justice would not have
full knowledge about the local talent. The advantage. however,
would be that he would not suffer from any personal likes or dislikes
from which a local person having long association with others. might
suffer. It should not also take the outsider long to acquire knowledge
of the local talent. An outsider is also likely to bring greater
detachment and dispassionate approach to the office of the Chief
Justice. The advantages may thus outweigh the disadvantages,

“(vi) We should also have a convention according to which one-third of
the Judges in each High Court should be from another State. This
would normally have to be done through process of initial appointments
and not by transfer. It would. in the very nature of thines, be a
slow and gradual process and take some years before we reach the
proportion.

Once the principle of having a certain percentage of persons from cutside
the State as Judges of the High Court is accepted, the modalities to bring
about the desired result can be worked out. One suggestion can possibly be
that every Chief Justice. while pronosing the name of a person for appointment
as Hich Court Judge should mention in the communication as to whether
that person agrees to be appointed ontside the State. Tn the case of District
Judges proposed to be appointed. the prospect of promotion would, in most cases,
be enough inducement and thus outweigh the possible inconvenience of being


3

posted outside the State. As regards lawyers, some might consider it advantage-
ous to be appointed outside the State so that after retirement they can resume,
if they so desire, the practice in the State wherein they were practising earlier.
“(vii) In the matter of appointment of Chief Justice of the Supreme Court,
the normal convention should be to appoint the seniormost judge.
There should be no departure from this convention unless such a

course is approved by the Consultative Panel.

“Sse above proposals, which are of a broad character, would have the
effect of not only eliminating political interference in the appointment of
Judges, they would also more or less do away with the possibility of any
Chief Justice bringing his personal likes or dislikes into the picture.”

Towards the end of his Ie‘ter, the Chairman wrote :

“In case, however, the entire matter of appointment of Judges of the
High Court and the Supreme Court, including the Chief Justices, is to be
reopencd. and it is desired that the matter be examined in detail and at
eater Jength, in that event the matter would have to be considered in
he light of the practice prevailing in different countries. The views
of the Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Court as also of the
members of Bar and other concerned would have to be ascertained. A
detailed report can thereafter be sent in the matier. Some mater’al for
this purpose has already been collected.”

1.3. On March 1, 1978, the Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs Letter of
wrote a leer to the Chairman, Law Commission.’ the material part of which the —Minis-
reads as under :— io chain

“Thank you for your Istter dated 24th January, 1978, on the question man.
of improvement of procedures for the appointment of Judges. You have
mentioned in the concluding portion of your Jetter that if the matter is to be
considered in detail it wou'd have to be considered in the light of practice
prevailing in different countries, I shall be grateful if the matter is considered
in depth and a detailed report furnished to us.

2. T am also enclosins extracts from a memorandum received from the
Bombay Bar Association. Jn this extract there is a suggestion for the es!ablish-
ment of a Judicial Appointments Commission to consider appointment to the
office of the Chief Justice of India.”

The present report is furnished in pursuance of the above letter.

1.4. Tt may be mentioned that during the period from March 1, 1978, the suggestions
Commission invited sugeestions from all the High Courts, the Supreme Court. invited from
the State Governments and the Bar Associations abou! the appointment of judges. various
While some suggestions were received promptly. others took considerable time. (afters.

ae वि rs G 2 and await-
Some suggestions were received in June 1979. Some Courts and Governments? eq:
so refrained from expressing their views. The questionnaire which was sent

in this connection is printed as an Appendix to this Report3

1.8. As the rzceipt of suggestions was going to take time, the Commission Reports
during the period from March 1978 till the date of this Report dealt with other forwarded
matters and sent Reports about them. Two of the important Reports sent by between
this Commission during this period were the seventy-seventh Report which dealt 1998 ‘and
with delay and arrears in the trial courts and the seventy-ninth Report which present
dealt with delay and arrears in High Courts and other appellate courts. Report.

ister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs, Ist March, 1978.
. 8. 5. No, 87 in Law Commission file.
e Appendix 2,

2—315 LAD/ND/79


Role of
High
Courts
and
Supreme
Court,

Importance
of indepen-
dent judici-
ary.

Wrong
appoint-
ments—
adverse
effects.

CHAPTER 2
IMPORTANCE OF THE SUBJECT

2.1. Under the scheme of our Constitution, very important role has been
assigned to the High Courts and the Supreme Court. Apart from the ordinary
civil ard criminal cases, as also cases under special laws, these Courts have to
deal with vital issues of public importance involving interpretation of the
Constitution. The citizens have also a right to approach the courts in case
they find that any act of the State to their prejudice contravenes the provisions
of the statute or the Constitution. The variety of cases which come up before
these Courts, the constitutional issues—some having major political repercussions- -
dealt with by them, the duty laid upon them to provide protection against infringe-
ment of the citizens rights, necessitate that the Judges who consitute these Courts
should be of the right calibre. well-versed in the Constitution and the laws and
known for their independence and integrity. For this purpose, it becomes
essential that utmost care be taken at the time of initial appointment that the right
type of persons are appointed as Judges. Criticism has occasionally been levelled
that the selection has not been proper and has been induced by ulterior considera-
tions. There are also complaints of executive interference in the appointment of
Judges. Official spokesmen have also not been lacking, at least in one period
of our history, when a plea was strongly put forward for the appointment of
those who may be described as “committed Judges”. Besides that, charges of
favouritism have been levelled not only against the Chief Ministers but also, on
occasions, against Chief Justices,

2.2. It is needless to emphasise the importance of an independent judiciary.
The basic postulate of democracy is that the adjudication of disputes both
between citizen and citizen as also between the citizen and the State ought to
proceed on the basis of law and not on extraneous considerations. Justice must
be done. as the judicial oath has it, without fear or favour, affection or illwill.
Citizens must have an assurance of equal treatment under the laws. Such
assurance can only emanate from a general feeling that the forum which is to
adjudicate upon the rights and liabilities of parties would keep the scales even
and be imbued with a sense of utmost impartiality. An independent judiciary
is absolutely indispensable for ensuring the rule of law. Experience tells us that
attempt to undermine the independence of the judiciary is preceded by an attack
upon the judiciary. Such attacks are symptomatic of the feeling of indignation
and chagrin arising out of the inability to control the judiciary. Such attacks
would also reveal on occasions a design to browbeat and overawe the judiciary
As observed by a writer :!

“{And] in a free democracy like ours. the principal function of the law
is to protect the weak from the strong—whether the strong take the shape of
the Crown. feudal barons, iron-masters. muiltination corporations—or trade
unions. Whenever such groups begin to whine about the unfairness of the
law or the judges, that is a sure sign not that they are weak, but that their
power has grown to a point where the law must begin to control it— because
in the interest of the community at large, they can no longer be trusted to
exercise the necessary control themselves.”

2.3. Wrong appointments of Judges have affected the image of the courts.
They have also undermined the confidence of the people in the courts. The
stake of the community in the preservation of the courts as dispensers of justice
is tremendous. Of the three organs of the State. the Legislature. the executive
and the judiciary, the judiciary is considered to be the weake: It has neither
the power of the sword nor that of the purse. It has neither the financial
resources nor can it by itself enforce its decisions. Even for such purposes it
has to depend upon the other organs. Despite that, the courts, especially the
superior courts, have enjoyed high esteem and commanded great respect of the
people. This has been so because of the moral authority they would and because
of the role they play as dispensers of justice in any dispute between the rich
and the poor, the mighty and the weak, the State and the citizen, without fear

'Guardian, Gazette, extracted in (2nd August 1977), New Zealand Law Journal, 304.



5

or favour. Any undermining of the broad confidence of the people in the
courts or any detraction from the image of the courts as dispensers of even-
handed justice poses a grave danger for the well-being and security of the society,
for inevitably it must turn people to extra-legal methods for redress of their
grievances and for settlement of their disputes. This would not only disturb
the even flow of the life of the community, but would also in the long run erode
the democratic structure of our polity. Nothing rankles more in the human
heart than a brooding sense of injustice. Any feeling or consciousness of the
incapacity of the lawful agencies to afford relief for the wrongs and injustice,
supposed and real, takes people’s thought to dangerous channels and drives them
to seek recourse to methods which are other than legal and smack of a state of
jungle or the rule of tooth and claw. It is, therefore, essential to ensure that
nothing is done to detract from the image of the courts and the broad confidence
of the people in the courts by wrong and undesirable appointments of judges,

24. Nothing counts more for the judiciary than the confidence it commands Confidence
As observed by a writer! while dealing with a great American Judge :— command-
“What is it, indeed which makes a Judge? In the ultimate sense, the i, by the

greatest of judges are those in whom is placed the greatest confidence as judges. juderary.

And this confidence goes to the judge who inspires in his brethren on the bench,

al the bar, and among the public whom he serves, the conviction that the

decision of every question, the weighing of every argument, the resolution ot

every discretionary issue, will be made selflessly, fearlessly, wisely in so far as

wisdom is given to him, and to the best of his understanding of the law which

binds him as well as the litigants.”

2.5. A person appointed not on merit but because of favouritism or other pesnect of
ulterior considerations can hardly comimand real and spontaneous respect of the the an °
bar. Anyone who is familiar with the working of the courts, can bear testimony
to the fact that unless we have persons presiding over the courts who command
real and spontaneous respect of the bar, the court proceedings are liable to run
into difficulties. In any system of dispensation of justice, much depends upon
the personality of judges; the most well-drafted codes and laws would prove to
be illusive if those concerned with construing and implementing those laws are
lacking in right calibre. The presiding officers’ efficiency, tact, devotion, diligence,
mastery of law or lack of them can make all the difference in the way the court
proceedings are conducted and the cases are handled in courts. It is common
experience for the members of the bar to find that some case before one judge
takes two hours and before another judge two days. Indeed, in quite a number
of cases, the counsel feels more satisfied before the former judge. It would
also not be correct to assume that judges who take less time are impatient or
do not allow the counsel to put forth full arguments or present necessary facts.
While striking a note of caution against the tendency to show undue hurry or
impatience in disposal of cases, the Commission would point out that very often
the length of time taken in the hearing of a case depends upon the up-take of
the judge, his capacity to quickly grasp the points of law and facts and his
ability to wade through the maze of facts and legal propositions to the
crucial point.

2.6. In the above context, it will be pertinent to repeat what was said by Observa- in
us in the 79th Report of this Commission*>— 79th Re-

“3.15. We are also of the opinion that every effort should be made to POT
see that the best persons available are appointed to serve on the High Court
Bench, The overriding consideration for this purpose should be the merit of
the individual. All other considerations must be subordinated to the paramount
necessity of having the best available person for the post. Experience tells
us that wrong appointments not only affect the image of the courts, they also
undermine the confidence in, and respect for, the High Court amongst the
litigants, the members of the Bar and the general public. A wrong appointment
also affects the quantum of output and the quality of disposal. Cases have
also not been unknown when one wrong appointment has deterred competent
persons from joining the Bench subsequently despite the entreaties of the
Chief Justice.

ICharles A Horsky, “Augustuz Noble Hand”, in (1935) 68 Harvard Law Review,
1118, 1119.

279th Report, paragraphs 3.15 and 3.16.


Earlier

Law Com-
mission’s

observa-
tions.

Effect
wrong
appotnt-
ment.

6

“3.16. Also, with a view to attracting persons of the right calibre to the
Bench, something may have to be done to improve the service conditions.
This might also take into account the benefits, including pension, to which
they would be entiiicd atier retirement. Wiile it is true tiat the pay-scales
of the judges cannot be wholly divorced from the general patiera of pay
structure of the country ai the higher levels, it has also to be borne in mind
that bright and capabie members of the Bar by sticking to tie profession can
earn much more. In ihe eyes of som: there may be a halo around the office
of judgeship. “Lhe ialo fas, however, been geuing dimmer and dimmer with
the elliux of time, wig spiral of prices end the disparity between the
professionai income and the salary of judges. We must take ote of the
fact that some measuies dave recently oven adopted to iinprove the service
conditions of tie High Court Judges by providing them rent-free house and
giving them a conveyance allowan However, having regard to the existing
lax laws, Whe steps taken in this respect may perhaps not provide adequate
relief.”

2.7, Dealing with appoiniment of judges on consideration other than that

of merit, the Law Comnussion headed by Shri M. C, Se‘aivad in its Fourteenth
Report observed! :—

“The seleciion o: a person on considerations otier than of merit has
far-reaching repercussions. Suci a Judge would naturaliy not receive from
members of the Bar, who would be no strangers lo his capacity, the full
measure of co-vperation नी is needed for tie proper administration of
justice; nor would a Judge so appointed generally nave that amount of
contidence in himself which alone can contribute to the  cllicient discharge
of his duties, “These circumstances are bound to affect adversely the quantity
and the quatity oi the work turmed out by पा a Jud, it is axiomatic
that the lowering oi judicial standards must adversely affect the efficient
administration of justice. Ii has been stated in some quarters that the larger
the number of Judges, the iower is the proportionate Vutpui of work, We are
of the view that such a gene ation is not based on any acceptable data;
but wnat seems io fave led to lower output of work by Judges is ihe appoint-
ment of persons who are noi sauistactory. Whether a Judge of a High Court
is selected from tne Bar or from the service, he should be the fiitest person
available to hold iliat office, If this cardinai principic is over-looked in
making the appointment and persons ot indifferent capacity are appointed,
the work turned out by such persons wili naturaliy not come up to the proper
standards. 11, therefore, there has been in some cases a proportionately lower
outpul of work when a er number of Judges ure appointed, the fall in
the work is clearly atiriduiable to the circumstances tiat the persons added
were not fitted for the office. The inevitable cifect of appointments of this
character to ine High Court Bench on the disposal oi work and the mounting
arrears is obvious.”

2.8. The effec, of wrong of improper appoimtment is fi, not only for the
time being; its repercussions are ielt loag thereaf.er. tt also quite often has the
effect of dissuading o-her suitable persons from sub: Uy accep-ing offers
for appointment. 1, therefore, become. essential to eiimiiale, as far as possible,
the chances of favauritism and plug other loophoies with a view lo ensure that
in future persons of the rigni caiibte unt appointed and inai ine consideration
which might weigh should be of merit alone.

“4th Report, Vol. 1, page 70, paragraph 9


CHAPTER 3
POSITION IN VARIOUS COUNTRIES

३.1. The provisions as to the appointment of Judges in the other countries Analysis,
afford some interesting material. It would be tedious to discuss here the
position in each country in this regard. But a few major countries may be
dealt with.

3.2. Under the constitutional scheme in several countries, the appointment Appoint-
of judges to the superior courts is made by the Government in the name of the ment by
Head of the State, and there is no special provision for consultation with any Head of
other person or authority. In this category fall Ausiralia'-?, Canada and the हु
United Kingdom—to mention some of the principal examples in the Common-
wealth.

3.3. In the United Kingdom, all the superior Judges,—that is to say, the United
Judges of the House of Lords (the Lords of Appeal, who sit in the House of Kingdom.
Lords), Judges of the Court of Appeal, Judges of the High Court, Circuit Judges
and Recorders,—are appointed by the Crown acting on the advice of the
appropriate Minister. The Prime Minister nominates the Law Lords, the Lord
Justices of Appeal, the Lord Chief Justice, the Master of the Rolls and the
President of the Family Division? It is commonly assumed that the Prime
Minister is guided in this respect by the Lord Chancellor.4

The Lord Chancellor nominates ordinary (puisne) Judges of the High Court,
Circuit Judges, Recorders and Deputy High Court and Circuit Court Judges.4

3.4, In Australia,’ Judges of the High Court and other Courts created by Australia.
Parliament shall be appointed by the Governor-General-in-Council and shall
not be removed except by the Governor-General-in-Council on an address from
both the Houses of Parliament in the same session praying for such removal on
the ground of misbehaviour or incapacity.

3.5, Each State in Australia has a Supreme Court and a system of sub- Australia-
ordinate courts with a variety of names. A distinguished writer’ has stated the State
position relating to the appointment of judges in these terms :—~ Courts.

“Supreme Court judges, like High Court justices are appointed by the
executive,’ but can be removed only by the respective pariiaments..
No important party has ever advocated elective judges or magistrates.

As to State Courts in Australia, it has been stated*- -

“State courts are created by State law: their existence depends upon State
law; that law, primarily at least, determines the constitution of the court itself,
and the organization through which ils powers and jurisdictions are exercised.”

3.6. Recently, Sir Garfield Barwick, Chief Justice of Australia, made the Australia—
following suggestion? as to the manner of selection of the judiciary and as to'Views of

the need of restraint upon executive appointment of the judiciar Sir Gar-
“In my view, the time has arrived in the development of tais community feld Bar-

and of its institutions when the privilege of the Executive Government in this
area should at least be curtailed. One can understand the reluciance of a
government to forgo the element of patronage which may iniiere in the appoint-
ment of a judge. Yet I think that long term considerations in the administra-
tion of justice call for some binding restraint of the exercise of this privilege.
‘Section 72, Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act, 1900,

28566, however, paragraph 3.6, infra as to Australia,

‘Jackson, Machinery of Justice in England (1977), Pages 859-460.

‘Jackson, Machinery of Justice in England (1977). page 460.

‘Section 72, Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act, 1900.

SGeoflrey Sawar, Australian Government Today, Fifth Edition~revised (1957),
page 42.

‘Note the plural.
"Le Mesurier v. Cannon, (1929) 42 C.L.R. 481, 495-496.

आए Garfield Barwick, “The State of the Australian tudicature” (uly, 1977) Vol,
51, Australian Law Journal, 480, 494 (19th Australian Legal Convention, Sydney).


Canada.

USA—
Supreme
Court.

US.A—
Court” of
Appeal.

US.A—
State
Couns.

8

I make bold to suggest that, in all the systems of Ausiralia where appointments
to judicial office may be made by Executive Government, there should be what
is known in some systems as a judicial commission—but the nomenclature is
unimportant—a body saddled with the responsibility of advising the Executive
Government of the names of persons who, by reason of their training, knowledge,
experience, character and disposition, are suitable for appointment to a
particular office under consideration. Such a body should have amongst its
personnel judges, practising lawyers, academic lawyers and, indeed, laymen
likely to be knowledgeable in the achievements of possible appointees. Such
a body is more likely to have an adequate knowledge of the qualities of possible
appointees than any Minister of State is likely to have. Some may prefer to
pass the actual choice of appointees to such a body: others may prefer that
recommendations only may be made by it; yet others may prefer to require
the submission by that body of a short panel of names, outside of which the
Executive Government may not go: or may not go without public explanation
of the reason for doing so,

“It is not for me to express here my own preferences. It should suffice
that 1 say with a degree of emphasis that the time is here when some restraint
should be placed upon and accepted by the Executive Government in its
choice of judicial appointees.”

3.7. In Canada,! judges of the superior courts are appointed by the
Governor General and hold office during good behaviour, but are removable
by the Governor General on the address of the Senate and House of Commons.!

According to a statutory provision,* “the Supreme Court shall consist of a
Chief Justice to be called the Chief Justice of Canada and eight puisne judges
who shall be appointed by the Governor-General-in-Council by letters patent

under the Great Seal”.

3.8. In the U.S.A., the selection of the Chief Justice and Judges of the
Supreme Court of the United States is made by the President and is required
to be approved by the Senate.?

3.9. As regards (Federal) Courts of Appeal in the U.S.A., the Constitution
requires the same procedure.’ Recently, by Presidential Order, a “Circuit Judges
Nomination Commission” has been established to supply the President with
names of the “best qualified persons for appointment to the U.S, Courts of
Appeal”. Details of the relevant provisions of the Order will be found in an

Appendix.*

3.10. As regards judges of superior courts in States in the U.S.A., the
position has been thus stated in a fairly recent study :5

“Judicial Selection in the States

In the states, judges are selected by election, by appointment, or by a
combination of both methods, The practice of clecting judges was one of
the bequests of Jacksonian democracy. Prior to 1832 only one state elected all
its judges, but every state admitted to the Union from 1846 to 1959 has
provided for the election of all or most of its judges. In 1971 election was
the principal method of judicial selection in twenty-seven states (on partisan
ballot in fourteen states and nonpartisan in thirteen); the legislatures elected
the judges in four states; there was executive appointment in nine states; and
a ‘merit plan’ existed in eleven states.

“The merit plan, also called the Missouri plan, is a compromise between
appointing and electing judges. Under this arrangement several commissions
are established to nominate judges at different court levels, The appellate
commission consists of seven members; the chief justice of the state, three
lawyers elected by the state bar association, and three persons appointed by

‘Sections 96 to 99, British North America Act, 1867.

2Revised statutes of Canada (1970), Chapter S-19, section 4; Gall, The Canadian
Legal System (1977), page 107.

5Constitution of U. S. A., Article Hl, Section 2 and Article III, section 1.

‘See Appendix 1.

sMurphy & Pritchett, Courts, Judges and Politics (1974) page 163.


9

the governor, none of whom can be a public office holder or an official of
a political party. With the exception of the chief justice, these members
serve for six years, with their terms staggered so that two retire every other
year. The commission nominates three men for cach judicial vacancy. The
governor must appoint one of the three. At the first election after the new
judge has served for twelve months, his name is put on the ballot wjth the
question whether he should be retained in office. If elected, he serves a definite
term--twelve years for an appellate judge, six years for a trial judge. At the
end of this term he is eligible for re-election. Whether the Missouri plan
really recruits judges on the basis of merit is open to question. (Reading 6.8).
What is clear is that selection is no less political although the political arena
tends to be that of bar associations, rather than a public forum in which citizens
have a check if not a voice.”

3.11. In the U.S.S.R., the Constitution of 1977 provides as follows :—
“Article 151. In the U.S.S.R. justice is administered only by the courts.
“In the U.S.S.R. there are the following courts: the Supreme Court of
the U.S.S.R., the Supreme Courts of Union Republics, the Supreme Courts of
Autonomous Republics, Territorial, Regional, and city courts, courts of
Autonomous Regions, courts of Autonomous Areas, district (city) _people’s
courts, and military tribunals in the Armed Forces.

“Article 152. All courts in the U.S.S.R. shall be formed on the principle
of the electiveness of judges and people's assessors.

“People’s judges of district (city) people’s courts shall be elected for a term
of five years by the citizens of the district (city) on the basis of universal,
equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot. People’s assessors of district (city)
people’s courts shall be elected for a term of two and a half years at meetings

Of citizens at their places of work or residence by a show of hands.

“Higher courts shall be elected for a term of five years by the corresponding
Soviet of People’s Deputies.!

“The judges of military tribunals shall be elected for a term of five years
by the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the U.S.S.R. and people’s assessors
for a term of two and a half years by meetings of servicemen.

“Judges and people’s assessors are responsible and accountable to their
electors or the bodies that elected them, shall report to them, and may be
recalled by them in the manner prescribed by law.

“Article 153. The Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R. is the highest judicial
body in the U.S.S.R. and supervises the administration of justice by the courts
of the U.S.S.R. and Union Republics within the limits established by law.

“The Supreme Court of tre U.S.S.R. shall be elected by the Supreme Soviet
of the U.S.S.R. and shall consist of a Chairman, Vice-Chairman, members,
and people’s assessors. The Chairmen of the Supreme Courts of the Union
Republics are ex-officio members of the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.

“The organisation and procedure of the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
बाई defined in the law on the Supreme Court of the USSR.

“Article 154. The hearing of civil and criminal cases in all courts is
collegial: in courts of first instance cases are heard with the participation of
people’s assessors. In the administration of justice people’s assessors have
all the rights of a judge.

“Article 155. Judges and people’s assessors are independent and subject
only to the law.

“Article 156. Justice is administered in the U.S.S.R. on the principle of
equality of citizens before the law and the court.”

3.12. In France, there is provision for consultation by the head of the
State with a high-powered body, which advises the head of the State on the
appointment of judges of the superior courts.

The provisions of the Constitution of the Fifth French Republic (1958),
appearing in the Title relating to “Judicial Authority”, are quoted below in so
far as they are material :?

1As to Soviets of People’s Deputies, see Article 89.
‘Constitution of the Fifth French Republic (1958), Title VIII, Articles 64 and 65.

USS.R

France.


10

“Article 64. The President of the Republic shall be the guarantor of
the independence of the judicial authority.

“He shall be assisted by the High Council of the Judiciary.

“Article 65. The High Coun he judiciary shall be presided over
by the President of the Republic, The Minister of Justice shall be its Vice
President ex-officio. He may preside in place of the President of the Republic.

“The Hieh Council shall, in addition, include nine members appointed by
the Presiden’ of the Republic in conformity with the conditions to be deter-
mined by an organic law.

. High Council of the Judiciary shall present nominations for judges
of the Court of Cassation (Supreme Court of Appeal) and for First Presidents
of Courts of Appeal. Tt shall give its opinion, under the conditions to be
determined by an organic law, on proposals of the Minister of Justice relative
to the tiomination of the other judges. It shall be consulted on questions of
pardon under conditions to be determined by an organic law.

“The Hizh Council of the Judiciary shall act as a disciplinary council
for judges. In such cases, it shall be presided over by the First President of
the Court of Cassation.”!

West Cier- 3.13. In (West) Germany, we find two separate methods of appointment of
many. judges prescribed by the Constitution. As regards the Federal Constitutional
Cour: which is not an ordinary court of appeal but deals only with questions

to interpretation of the Constitution and the validity of laws, the
Constitution provides as follows :—

“94(1). The Federal Constitutional Court shall consist of federal judges
and other members, Half of the members of the Federal Constitutional Court
shal be elected by the Bundestag and half by the Bundesrat. They may
not belong to the Bundestag, the Bundesrat, the Federal Government, or the
corresponding organs of a Land.”

Besides the Federal Constitutional Court, there is the Supreme Court of
Germany established “to preserve the uniformity of federal law”, by deciding
cases in which the decision is of fundamental importance for the uniformity of
the administration of justice by the high federal courts. The constitutional
provisions as regards the appointment of judges of this Court read as follows}: —

“The judges of the Supreme Federal Court shall be selected jointly by
the Federal Minister of Justice and a committee for the selection of judges
consisting of the Land Minister of Justice and an equal number of members
elected by the Bundestag.”

3.34. The position in Japan is as follows:+

The Judees of the Supreme Court of Japan are appointed by the Cabinet,
except the Chief Justice (described in the Constitution as “Chief Judge”) who
is formally appointed by the Emperor after nomination by the Cabinet.

The Constitution further provides —

“The appointment of the judges of the Supreme Court shall be reviewed
by the people at the first general election of members of the House of Repre-
sentatives following their appointment, and shall be reviewed again at the
first general election of members of the House of Representatives after a
lapse of ten (10 years) and in the same manner thereafter.”

“In cases mentioned in the foregoing paragraph, when the majority of
the voters favours the dismissal of a judge, he shall be dismissed.”*

Certain 3.15. Equally interesting are the provisions in the Constitutions of some
Common. countries that have newly acquired independence from British rule—countries
wealth which were previously British colonies. In these countries, Judicial Service
countries = Commissions are provided for in the Constitution. Their functions, in general,
providing 1 are to give advice on the appointment of superior Judges (other than the Chief
Service Justice and the President of the Court of Appeal, if any), and to exercise control
Commis- in regard to inferior Judges.

sion.

Japan.

2566 also Constitution of Italy. Articles 104-105.

2Article 94(1), Basic Law of the German Federal Republic.
SArticle 95(3), Constitution of the German Federal Republic,
‘Articles 6 and 79. Constitution of Japan.

‘Constitution of Japan, Article 72(2), (3).


11

a Constitution of Malawi!-? affords an example. The relevant provisions
read :

“63. (1) The Chief Justice shall be appointed by the President.

“(2) The Judges shall be appointed by the President after consultation
with the Judicial Service Commission.

“67. (1) There shall be a Supreme Court of Appeal for Malawi which,
subject to the provisions of this Constitution, shall have such jurisdiction and
powers as may be conferred on it by this Constitution or by any other law.

(2) The Justices of the Supreme Court of Appeal shall be —

(a) the Chief Justice, “as President”;3

(b) such number of Justice of Appeal (if any) as may be prescribed by

Parliament; and
(©) the other Judges of the High Court for the time being holding office.

“71. There shall be a Judicial Service Commission which shall consist of —

(a) the Chief Justice, who shall be Chairman;

(b) the Chairman of the Public Service Commission or such other member
of that Commission as may for the time being be designated in that
behalf by the Chairman of that Commission; and

(c) such Justice of Appeal or Judge as may for the time being be desig-
nated in that behalf by the President acting after consultation with
the Chief Justice.”

3.16, The earliest precedent for Judicial Service Commission is to be found Sa Lanka)
in the erstwhile Constitution of Ceylon (now Sri Lanka). Ceylon.

According to articles 52 to 56 of that Constitution, the Chief Justice and
puisne judges of the Supreme Court and the Commissioners of Assize were
Tequired to be appointed by the Governor-General, while other judicial officers
were required to be appointed by the Judicial Service Commission consisting of
the Chief Justice, a judge of the Supreme Court and one other person.

3.17. Then, the Constitution may contemplate that the head of the State Gonsulta.,
may consult a body which does not consist entirely of the judiciary, and which Gon with
is also not a branch of the Legislature5 bodies.

3.18, It would be useful to analyse the material contained in the above Analysis.
discussion. The various provisions fall into the following broad groups :—

‘(a) no special provision for consultation before appointing judges;

(b) provision for consultation with the Chief Justice or other members of
the judiciary before appointing judges;

(c) provision for consultation with a judicial council, judicial service com-
mission or other similar body;

(d) provision for consultation with the legislature, or a body elected by it,
or approval of the legislature;

(०) provision for consultation with, or approval of, an agency not falling within
the above category; and

(f) election of the Judges.

‘Constitution of Malawi, Articles 63, 67 and 71.

See also Constitution of Uganda, Articles 90, 91, 97; Jamaica, Session 11;
Kenya, Section 174 (1); Malaysia, Article 138; Seirra Leone, Sections 76(1), (2), 80(1),
(2) and 85; Trinidad, Sections 75 and 79.

Deleted by the Constitution of Malawi (Amendment) Act No. 39 of 1966.

‘Paragraphs 52(1), 53, 54, 55, 56, Ceylon Constitution Order in Council. Peasless
Constitutions of Nations, 2nd Ed. (1956), Vol, 1, pages 464, 465.

‘Constitution of Nepal, Articles 69, 23(1) and 23(2).

3-315 LAD/ND/79.


CHAPTER 4
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
I. GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ACT, 1935

Govern- 4.1. The Government of India Act, 1935 contained no specific provisions

ment act about the persons who had to be consulted before appointment of Federal Court

Indie ’ Judges and High Court Judges. Sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 200 of the
Act, which dealt with appointment of Federal Court Judges, provided :!

“(2) Every judge of the Federal Court shall be appointed by His Majesty
by warrant under the Royal Sign Manual and shall hold office until he attains
age of sixty-five years :

Provided that —-

(a) a judge may by resignation under his hand addressed to the Governor-
General resign his office;

(b) a judee may be removed from his office by His Majesty by warrant
under the Royal Sign Manual on the ground of misbehaviour or of infirmity
of mind or body, if the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, on reference
being made to them by His-Majesty, report that the judge ought on any such
ground to be removed.

(a) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a judge of the
Federal Court unless he—

(a) has been for at least five years a judge of a High Court in British

India or in a Federal State; or

(0) is a barrister of England or Norther Ireland of at least ten
years standing, or a member of the Faculty of Advocates in Scotland of
at least ten years standing; or

(९) has been for at Jeast ten years a pleader of a High Court ih

British India or in a Federal State or of two cr more such Courts in

succession :

Provided that —

@ a person shall not be qualified for appointment as Chief Justice
of India unless he is, or when first appointed to judicial office
was, a barrister, a member 77 the Faculty of Advocates or a
pleader; and

(ii) in relation to the Chief Justice of India, for the references in

paragraphs (b) and (c) of this sub-section to ten years there
shall be substituted references to fifteen years.

In computing for the purposes of this sub-section the standing of a
barrister or a member of the Faculty of Advocates, or the period during
which a perscn has been a pleader, any period during which a person has
held judicial office after he became a barrister, a member of the Faculty
of Advocates oy a pleader, as the case may be, shall be included.”

4.2. Sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 220 of the above-mentioned Act
related to the appointment of High Court Judges, and were in the follot wid
terms :2 कर

“(2) Every judge of a High Court shall be appointed by His Majesty by
warrant under the Royal Sign Manual and shall hold office until he attains
the age of sixty years :

Provided that —

(a) a judge may, by resignation under his hand addressed to the
Governor resign his office;

“(b) a judee may be removed from his office by His Majesty by
warrant under the Royal Sign Manual on the ground of misbehaviour or
of infirmity of mind or body if the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council,
on reference being made to them by His Majesty, report that the judge
ought on any such ground to be removed.

4Section 200(2) and 200(3), Government of India Act, 1935.
'Section 220(2), and (3), Government of India Act, 1935,


13

His (०) the office of a judge shall be vacated by his being a Prem ey by
His Majesty to be a judge of the Federal Court or of another Hi; u
“(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a j

High Court unless he — a PP indge of 8

(a) is a barrister of England or Northern Ireland, of at least ten
years standing, or a member of the Faculty of Advocates in Scotland of
at least ten years standing, or

(b) is a member of the Indian Civil Service of at least ten years
standing, who has for at least three years served as, or exercised the powers
of, a district judge ; or

(©) has for at least five years held a judicial office in British India
not inferior to that of a subordinate judge, or judge of a small cause
court; or

“(d) has for at least_ten years been a pleader of any High Court,
or of two or more such Courts in succession :

indi Provided that a person shall not, unless he is, or when first appointed to

jndicial office was, a barrister, a member of the Faculty of Advocates or a

pleader, be qualified for appointment as Chief Justice of any High Court

constituted by letters patent until he has served for not less than three years
ag a Judge of a High Court.

In computing for the purposes of this sub-section thd standing of a
barrister or a member of the Faculty of Advocates, or the period during which
a person has been a pleader, any period during which the person has held
judicial office after he became a barrister, a member of the Faculty of
Advocates, or a pleader, as the case may be, shall be included.

Il. CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY AND ITS COMMITTEES

4.3 There was considerable discussion in the Constituent Assembly, and Discyscions ~
Ip the yarious Committees which were appointed in connection with the appoint-in the. Cons-
ment of Judges and other allied matters. Almost simultaneously with thetituent
appointment of the Union Constitution Committee, a Special Committee! was Assembly
set up to consider and report on the constitution and powers of the Supreme Union.
Court, This Committee consisted of S, Varadachariar, former Judge of thetion Com-
Federa} Court, Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar, B, L. Mitter, K. M. Munshi (allmittee, and
three of them distinguished advocates) and 8. N. Rau, the Constitutional Adviserad hoo
who had also earlier held high judicial office. This Committee, in its report ९०७
sent on May 21, 1947, apart trom* dealing with the jurisdiction of the Supremesupreme
Court, suggested two alternative procedures for appointment of Judges to theCourt.
Supreme Court. The Committee was emphatic in its opinion that the appoint-
Snent of Judges should not be left to the unfettered discretion of the executive.

One suggested procedure was that for the appointment of puisne judges, the
President should, in consultation with the Chiet Justice of the Supreme Court,
Make a recommendation and such recommendation should be confirmed by at
Jeast seven out of a panel of eleven persons composed of some of the Chief
Justices of the High Courts, members of the Cenira] Legislatures and some
jaw cflicers of the Union. The alternative suggestion was that the panel should
‘pyt forward threé names for every vacancy, leaving it to the President to make
be final choice in consultation with the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, The
game procedure with the necessary modification that the Chief Justice would
pat be consulted was also to apply in the matter of the appointment of the
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. In order to ensure that the panel would
be independent and would command confidence, it was suggested that the panel

should not be an ad hoc body but should function for a period of ten years.
The extract from the report of this Committee in this respect reads :

“We do not think that it will be expedient to leave the power of appointing
judges of the Supreme Court to the unfettered discretion of the President of
the Union, We recommend that either of the following methods may be
adopted. One method is that the President should, in consultation with the

348 hoc Committee on Supreme Court.

346 hoc Committee on Supreme Court (21st May, 1947), Report, being the Pee
to the Report of the Union Constitution Committee; B. Shiva Rao, The Framing ‘a
Canstitution (1967), Vol. 2, pages 587, 590.


Memoran-

14

Chiet Justice of the Supreme Court (so far as the appointment of puisne
judges is concerned), nominate a person whom he considers fit to be appointed
to the Supreme Court and the nomination should be confirmed by a majority
of at least 7 out of a panel of 11 composed of some of the Chief Justices of
the High Courts of the constituent units, some members of both the Houses of
the Centra! Legislature and some of the Law Officers of the Union. The
other method is that the panel of 11 should recommend three names out of
which the President, in consultation with the Chief Justice, may select a Judge
for the appointment. The same procedure should be followed for the appoint-
ment of the Chief Justice, except, of course, that in this case there will be no
consultation with the Chief Justice, To ensure that the panel will be both
independent and command confidence, the panel should not be ad hoc body
but must be one appointed for a term of years,

4.4, The Constitutional Adviser,' in his memorandum dated May 30, 1947

dum of Suggested that the appointment of Judges should be made by the President with

Constitu-

the approval of at Icast two-thirds of the Council of State. The Council of

tional Ad- State, according to him, was to be a body in the nature of a Privy Council for

viser.

Drafting
Commit

advising the President on certain matters on which decisions were required on
independent non-party lines, The Council of State was to include the Chief
Justice of India among its members and its composition was to be such as to
secure freedom from party bias. Such a Council of State, it was suggested by
the Constitutional Adviser, would be a satisfactory substitute for the panel
recommended by the Special Committec.?

4.5. The Union Constitution Committee? did not accept the proposal of
the Constitutional Adviser for setting up of a Council of State, and suggested that
the procedure for the appointment of judges should be that the President should
consult the Chief Justice and such other judges of the Supreme Court as might
be necessary.

4.6. It may be appropriate at this stage to refer to an amendment suggested
by the Drafting Committee.* Accoring to the suggestion, an Instrument of
1 Instructions was to be issued to the President. One of the provisions proposed
to be included in the instrument of Instructions was the setting up of an Advisory
Board consisting of not Iess than 15 members of Parliament. The procedure

contemplated for the appointment of Supreme Court Judges was :5

“(1)im the case of the Chief Justice of India, the President would consult the
Judges of the Supreme Court and the Chief Justices of all High Courts
other than those in Part HI States (the Indian States);

(2) im the case of other judges he would consult the Chief Justice of India,
the other judges of the Supreme Court and the Chief Justices of the High
Courts, other than those in Part II Siates;

_ (3) the recommendations of the judges so consulted would be placed before
the Advisory Board for its advice. The functions of the Board were
consultative and the final decision rested with the executive, but in any
case where the Board’s advice was mot accepted it could insist that its
dissent should be recorded and placed before Parliament with a memo-
randum explaining the reasons for not accepting the advice tendered by
the Board.”

47. In the course of discussion which followed in the Constitutent

Dr, Ambed: Assembly, Dr, Ambedkar? dealt with two suggestions. The first suggestion was

kar’s view.

that the appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court should be with the con-
currence of Chief Justice. The second suggestion was that the approval of
Parliament or, alternatively, of the Council of States would be necessary to
these appointments. Dr. Ambedkar did not accept any of these suggestions.
According to him, to make appointment subject to the veto of Parliament would
be cumbersome and might involve the possibility of political pressures being
exerted, He also expressed the view that to give any individual,—even an

Constitutional Adviser, Memorandum dated May 30, 1947; B. Shiva Rao, The Framing
of India’s Constitution, Main Volume (1968), pages 338, 339, 485.

"Para. 4.3, supra. है shi रे
inion Constitution Committee, Report, Clause 18; B. Shiva Rao, The Framing of
India’s Constitution (1967), Vol. 2, pages 583, 600; Main Volume, pages 335, 383, 485.

‘Drafting Committee (February 1948), Draft Constitution Article 103(2); B. Shiva Rao,
The Framing of India’s Constitution (1967), Vol, 3.

58. Shiva Rao (1968). Main Vol., page 491.

‘Dr, Ambedkar ia the C. A. Debates, Vol, 8, pages 257-260 at page 258 (24th May,
1948).



15

eminent person like the Chief Justice,—a power of veto might be a dangerous
Proposition. Dr. Ambedkar in this context observed:

“With regard to this matter, I quite agree that the point raised is of
the greatest importance. There can be no difference of opinion in the House
that our judiciary must both be independent of the executive and must also
be competent in itself. And the question is how these two objects could be
secured. There are two different ways in which this matter is governed in
other countries. In Great Britain the appointments are made by the Crown,
without any kind of limitation whatsoever, which means by the executive
of the day. There is the opposite sysiem in the United States where, for in-
stance, offices of the Supreme Court as well as other offices of the State shall
be made only with the concurrence of the Senate in the United States. It
seems to me, in the circumstances in which we like today, where the sense
of responsibility has not grown to the same extent to which we find it in
the United States, it would be dangerous to leave the appointments to be
made by the President, without any kind of reservation or limitation, that
is to say, merely on the advice of the executive of the day. Similarly, it
seems to me that to make every appointment which the executive wishes to
make subject to the concurrence of the Legislature is also not a very suitable
provision, Apart from its being cumbrous, it also involves the possibility
of the appointment being influenced by political pressure and political con-
siderations. The draft article, therefore, steers a middle course. It does not
make the President the supreme and the absolute authority in the matter of
making appointments. It does not also import the influence of the Legisla-
ture. The provision in the article is that there should be consultation of
persons who are, ex hypothesi, well qualified to give proper advice in matters
of this sort and my judgment is that this sort of provision may be
as sufficient for the moment,

“With regard to the question of the concurrence of the Chief Justice,
it seems to me that those who advocate that proposition seem to rely impli-
citly both on the impartiality of the Chief Justice and the soundness of his
judgment. I personally feel no doubt that the Chief Justice is a very eminent
Person. But after all, the Chief Justice is a man with all the failings, all the
sentiments and all the prejudices which we as common people have; and 1
think to allow the Chief Justice practically a veto upon the appointment of
judges is really to transfer the authority to the Chief Justice which we are not
Prepared to vest in the President or the Government of the day. I, therefore,
think that that is also a dangerous proposition.”

Ill. HIGH COURT JUDGES

4.8. Regarding the appointment of High Court Judges, there was general High Court
agreement that as in the case of Supreme Court Judges, the appointment of Judges.
Judges of the High Court should also not be left to the unfettered discretion
of the executive government, The Constitutional Adviser, in his memorandum
of May 30, 1947 on the Provincial Constitution,! included a general suggestion
that provisions of the Government of India Act, 1935 regarding High Courts
might be adopted with necessary changes. On the specific question of appoint-
ment of High Court Judges, his proposal was that the High Court Judges है! “का
‘be appointed by the Governors with the approval of two-thirds of the members
of the Council of State.?

4.9. The Provincial Constitution Committee? accepted this Proposal. In provincial
the meantime, the proposal to set up a Council of State was abandoned. The Constitu-
‘Committee accordingly proposed that the Judges of the High Court should tion Com-
be appointed by the President of the Federation in consultation with the Chiet ™ittes
Justice of the Supreme Court, the Governor of the Province and the Chiet
Justice of the High Court, except when the Chief Justice himself was to be
‘appointed.’

‘Constitutional Adviser, Memorandum dated 30th May, 1947; 8, Shiva Rao, The
Framing of India’s Constitution (1968), Main Volume, page 497.
"The Council of State as proposed was a body in the nature of a Privy Council. See
para. 4.4, supra.
*Provincial Constitution Committee Report, Part I, para 1; 8. Shiva Rao, The
. Framing of India’s Constitution (1967), Vol. 2, pages 656, 662, (June-July 1947),
‘For various suggestions received, see B, Shiva Rao, The Framing of India’s Constitution
(1967), Vol. 2, pages 629-630, . हु का


Articles 124

and 217.

Article 224-
Additional
and = acting
Judges.

Pragtice.

CHAPTER 5

CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS AND
THE PRESENT PRACTICE

5.1. The constitutional provisions as they finally emerged on the subject
of appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court and of the High Courts are
contained in articles 124 and 217. According to article 124, every Judge of
the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his
hand and seal after consultation with such Judges of the Supreme Court and
of the High Courts in the States as the President may deem necessary for this
purpose and shall hold office until he attains the age of 65 years, provided that
in the case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief
Justice of India shall always be consulted. The article also provides that a
person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court
unless he is a citizen of India and has been for at least five years a Judge of a
High Court or of two or more such Courts in succession; or has been for at
Jeast ten years an advocate of a High Court or of two or more such Courts in
succession ; or is, in the opinion of the President, a distinguished jurist.

5.2. Article 217 provides that every Judge of a High Court shall be
appointed by the President by a warrant under his hand and seal after consul-
tation with the Chief Justice of India, the Governor of the State, and, in the
case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice
of the High Court and shall hold office, in the case of an additional or acting
Judge, as provided in article 224 and in any other case, until he attains the
age of sixty-two years. (This age was initially 60, but was raised to 62 as a
Tesult of subsequent amendment). Clause (2) of article 217 provides that a
person shall not be qualified for appointment as a judge of the High Court
unless he is a citizen of India and has for at least ten years held a judicial office
in the territory of India; or has for at least ten years been an advocate of a
High Court or of two or more such Courts in succession ; or is, in the opinion
of the President, a distinguished jurist. The provision according to which the
President could also appoint a person who, in his opinion, was a distinguished
jurist was added in article 217 as a result of the 42nd amendment, and has
since then been deleted by the 44th Amendment,

5.3. Article 224, to which there is a reference in article 217, provides for
the appointment of additional and acting Judges of the High Court and states
that if by reason of any temporary increase in the business of a High Court
or by reason of arrears of work therein, it appears to the President that the
number of the Judges of that Court should be for the time being increased,
the President may appoint duly qualified persons to be additional judges of
the Court for such period not exceeding two years as he may specify. It is
further stated that when any Judge of a High Court other than the Chief Justice
is by reason of absence or for any other reason unable to perform the duties
of his office or is appointed to act temporarily as Chief Justice, the President
may appoint a duly qualified person to act as a Judge of that Court until the
permanent Judge has assumed his duties. No person appointed as an addi-
tional or acting Judge of a High Court shall, however, hold office after attaining
the age of sixty-two years.

5.4. The manner in which the constitutional provisions regarding appoint-
ment of Judges are worked can be best understood if we describe the present
practice. For the appointment of a Judge of the Supreme Court, whenever a
yacancy occurs, the Chief Justice of India intimates that fact to the Minister
of Law and Justice and recommends the name of a suitable person for filling
up the vacancy. If the Minister of Law and Justice agrees with the recommen-
dations of the Chief Justice of India, he, with the concurrence of the Prime
Minister, advises the President of the selection. In case the Minister has some
reservations about the person recommended by the Chief Justice of India, he
can consult such Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Court as he may
deem necessary and, after the consultation, may bring any point to the notice
of the Chief Justice of India or suggest the name of any other person not recom:
mended by the Chief Justice of India. On obtaining the views of the Chief
Justice, the Minister of Law and Justice, with the concurrence of the Prime
Minister, advises the President of the selection.


17

5.5, Whenever 2 permanent vacancy is expected to arise in the office, of
the Chief Justice of Tia, action is taken by the Minister of Law and Justice.
There has also been a convention for the outgoing Chief Justice of India to
make a recommendation regarding the appointment of his successor though,
under the Constitution, no such recommendation is required.

5.6. Regarding the appointment of High Court Judges, the present practice Summary of
has been summarised in the report! of the Study Team on Centre-State Rela- preset by
tions of the Administrative Reforms Commission and the same reads: study team.

“13.5. According to a Memorandum of Procedure drawn up as a drill
to implement this provision, when a permanent vacancy is expected to arise
in the office of a Judge, the Chief Justice communicates, as early as possible,
to the Chief Minister of the State his views as to the person to be selected
for permanent appointment. The Chief Minister, in consultation with the
Governor, forwards his recommendation to the Union Minister of Home
Affairs, along with full details of the person recommended. When the Chief
Minister or the Governor proposes to recommend a person different from the
one put forward by the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice is informed accord-
ingly and his comments invited. These comments are forwarded along with
the communication from the Chief Minister to the Union Minister of Home
Affairs? who, in consultation with the Chief Justice of India and the Prime
Minister, advises the President as to the selection. The same procedure is
observed with regard to the appointment of the Chief Justice except that the
recommendation for the appointment of a Chief Justice originate from the
Chief Minister.

“13.6. The correspondence between the Chief Justice and the Chiet
Minister and the correspondence between the Chief Minister and the Governor
is made in writing and copies of the correspondence are forwarded to the
Union Minister of Home Affairs along with the Chief Minister’s recommenda-
tion. The Chief Justice has, however, recently (and after consideration of the
Law Commission’s report) been authorised to send directly to the Union
Minister of Home Affairs and the Chief Justice of India a copy of his cortes-
pondence with the Chief Minister.

“13.7. As soon as the appointment is approved, the Home Secretary in-
forms the Chief Minister, who obtains from the person selected—

(a) a cettificate of physical fitness signed by the Civil Surgeon or the

District Medical Officers ; and

(b) a certificate of the date of his birth.

“The Chief Minister forwards the documents to the Ministry of Home
Affairs. Medical certificates are obtained from all persons selected for ap-
pointment whether they are at the time of appointment in the service of state
government or not. After the warrant of appointment is signed by the Presi-
dent the appointment is announced and the Home Ministry issues the neces-
sary notification in the Gazette of India.

“13.8. The procedure for the appointment of additional judges is sub-
stantially the same. The general policy is not to appoint members of the
Bar as acting judges and to appoint them as additional judges only if they are
likely to be appointed to permanent vacancies during their period of tenure
as additional judges.

“13.9. According to Article 163 of the Constitution, the Council of
Ministers with the Chief Minister at the head is to aid and advise the Gover-
nor in the exercise of his functions, except in those cases where the Governor
is required to exercise his functions or any of them in his discretion. In the
matter of appointment of judges of a High Court, the Governor acts not in
his discretion but on the advice of the Chief Minister.”

8.7. It may be mentioned that some variation in the practice has been Variation in
made in the case of appointment of a Judge to a High Court which is commen 17747 des
to two or more States having a common Governor as well as to a High Court regard to
which is common to two or more States, each having a separate Governor. In High Court

such cases the Chief Minister of each of such States as well as the common common to
two States,

IStudy Team of the Administrative Reforms Commission on Centre-State Relations
(1967), Vol. 1, pages 182-184, para. 13.5 to 13.9.
._ 2Minister of Law dnd Justice has now been entrusted with the howe Sanctions of the
Minister of Home Affairs in pursuance of the recommendations of istrative Reforms
mmission.


18

Governor or each one of the Governors, as the caso may be, comes in the
picture and has to be consulted.
vista oO _ 15.8. It may be mentioned that in 1947, the then Chief Justice of the Madras
Chief Jus- High Court expressed misgivings about the procedure relating to the appoint-
tice Madras ment of Judges as, according to that procedure, the Ministers were also brought
in 1947. into the picture, as against the earlier procedure in which the Governor or
Governor-General acted without taking the advice of the Minister in this matter.
Sardar Patel, who was the Home Minister, defended the change made in the
procedure in his letter dated 8th December, 1947 to the Governor-General of
India, in the course of which he observed:

...obviously the previous procedure becomes out
and in the new order of things recommendations must go from the
provincial Ministers or Prime Minister to the Minister concerned in the Cen-
tral Government. To assign those respective roles to the Governor and the
Governor-General would be casting upon them the burden of explaining pro-
posals or decisions, interim or final, with which they may not be wholly in
sympathy but which nevertheless they are bound to accept on advice. This
in my opinion is neither fair nor proper. I am quite clear in my mind that
the procedure which we have devised does full justice to the constitutional
position which obtains now and places responsibility fairly and squarely where
it should be ए18९९१.................« Indeed the procedure which has been
devised is calculated to reduce practically to vanishing point, favouritism of
all forms, be it of the Chief Justice or of the politicians, by making the final
appointment the result of deliberations between the Chief Justice, the Prime
Minister and the Governor of the province and the Chief Justice of India,
the Home Minister, the Prime Minister and the Governor-General of the
Dominion. In such a situation it is ridiculous to entertain apprehensions such
as the Chief Justice has done.”

Impression 5.9. The impression, nevertheless, has prevailed that the appointment of

about ap- the Judges to the High Court has not been always made on merit and that this

Pecpuaieond has affected the image of the High Courts. This impression was strengthened

ae” on by the fourteenth Report of the Law Commission under the Chairmanship* of

merit— Shri M. C. Setalvad sent on September 26, 1958. The Commission, while noting

14th Report. that most of the appointments had been made with the concurrence of all con-
cerned, including the Chief Justice of the High Court and the Chief Justice of
India, observed that with the prevailing procedure the Chief Justices of the
High Courts gave their concurrence to prevent awkward situations arising from
the appointment of persons not recommended by them or from the rejection by
the executive of the persons recommended by them. In the view of the Commis-
sion, many unsatisfactory appointments were made to the High Courts on
political, regional, communal or other grounds with the result that the fittest
men were not appointed. This resulted, the Commission found, in dimunition
in the out-turn of the work of the Judges. The Commission all the same ex-
pressed the view that the practice of consultation with the State executive should
be adhered to and was necessary before appointments were made to the High
Court, The Commission made in this connection the following
recommendations? :

“(11) While it should be open to the State executive to express its own
opinion on a name proposed by the Chief Justice, it should not be open to
it to propose a nominee of its own and forward it to the Centre.

(12) The role of the State executive should be confined to making its
remarks about the nominee proposed by the Chief Justice and if necessary
asking the Chief Justice to make a fresh recommendation.

(13) Tt would be advisable for the Chief Justice of a State to send a
copy of his recommendation direct to the Chief Justice of India to avoid
delays.

(14) Article 217 of the Constitution should be amended to provide that
a Judge of a Hieh Court should be appointed only on the recommendation
of the Chief Justice of that State and with the concurrence of the Chief Justice
of India.”

’Sardar Patel, letter dated 8th December, 1947.
"For summary, see 14th Report, Vol, 1, pages 105-107, para. 2.
*14th Report, Vol. 1, page 106, para, 82.



19

5.10. The Report of the Law Commission was discussed by the Parlia- Debate fa
ment in November, 1959. Intervening in the debate! in the Rajya Sabha on Savke 2 oon
November 24, 1959, the then Home Minister referred to the fact that since 1950, 14th Report.
211 appointments had been made and out of them all except one, i.e., 210 out
of 211, were made on the advice or with the consent or concurrence of the
Chief Justice of India. Of these. 196 were with the support of all persons who
were connected in the matter. The Home Minister also pointed out that there
were 15 cases in which there had been difference of opinion between the Chief
Justice and the Chief Minister or the Governor.

5.11. The Government of India considered the recommendations of the Action by
Law Commission reproduced above and mentioned as recommendations 11, 12 Govern-
and 14 and rejected all three of them. In rejecting the first two recommenda- ment.
tions, the Government relied on the fact that no nominee was considered without
taking into consideration the views of the Chief Justice of the High Court con-
cerned, and in all cases the recommendations of the Chief Justice of India had
been accepted. The third recommendation of the Law Commission that all
appointments should be made with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of India
was rejected on the ground that it departed from the spirit of the Constitution
and fettered the ultimate decision of the Government of India.

5.12. The procedure for the appointment of the Judges of the High Court Study of
was gone into again by a Study Team on Centre-State Relations of the Adminis-the  Admi-
trative Reforms Commission? This team was also headed by Shri M. C. nistrative
Setalvad. This team considered the three recommendations of the Law Com- Reforms
mission referred to earlier. The team urged that the recommendations nos. 11 on. (का
and 12 might be accepted by the Government. It was pointed out by the Study
Team that the recommendations did not amount to bypassing the _ constita-
tionally elected representatives. The President. as the head of the Executive,
it was stated, would, even in the arrangement visualised by the Commission,
make appointment on the advice of the constitutionally elected Government at
the Centre. These two recommendations, in the opinion of the Team, envisaged
a change only in the role of the State executive which was sought to be restricted
to commenting on the Chief Justice’s proposal instead of making one. The
Study Team further suggested that the constitutional provision be amended to
dispense with the obligation to consult the Governor. The fact that the budget
of the High Court was debited to the State account was not, in the opinion of
the Team, a sufficient reason for giving the State executive a say in these appoint-
ments. The Team felt that the State Government’s comment on a candidate
should be restricted to—

fa) his local position ;
को his character and integrity : and
(c) his affiliations.

5,13. Emphasisine the fact that its recommendation would strengthen the Role oot
independence of the judiciary, the Study Team pointed out that the principle State कप
underlying its recommendation was that State Governments should not have, and View of
should not insist upon having. any constitutional right in the matter of appointments Stay
to the High Courts. Nepotism by the Chief Justice, in the opinion of the Team, Team.
was still possible, but would be less likely and less frequent, as, being outside
politics, he was Jess vulnerable to pressure. The Study Team expected that if its
first two recommendations were accepted, political influence exerted at the State
level in the appointment of Judges would decline and less blame would attach
to the political executive for the unsatisfactory appointments. It would also, in
the opinion of the Team, result in greater regard being given to the professional
competence.

Regarding the third recommendation no. 14 of the Law Commission that
all appointments should have the concurrence of the Chief Justice of India, the
Study Team conceded that there was merit in the reasoning of the Government
of India in rejecting the recommendation. The Study Team, therefore, did not
support the recommendation of the Law Commission in this respect.

6 2 Rafya, Sabha Debates, 24th November, 1959, Vol. 27, Part 1, pages 285, 289 (Shrt
3. B. Pant}

Study Team on Centre-State Relations of the Administrative Reforms Commission
Report (1967), Vol. 1, page 180 et seq., Chapter 13.

4—$15 LAD/ND{79


20
View के at 5.14, The recommendations of the Study Team were considered by the
tive Re Administrative Reforms Commission.! The Administrative Reforms Commission
forme did not agree with the Study Team and felt that the existing procedure and method
sion, of appointment of High Court Judges should continue. The Administrative Re-
forms Commission, however, recommended that the role of the Ministry of Home
Affairs should be taken over by the Ministry of Law. This recommendation of the
Administrative Reforms Commission was accepted by the Government. Since
1971, a separate Department of Justice has been formed to deal, inter alia, with
matters relating to appointment of Judges. The Home Secretary is currently
designated as Secretary, Department of Justice. The Minister in charge of the
Department is, however, the Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs. The

procedure for appointment of Judges was not, however, changed.

nie of 5.15. The High Courts Arrears Committee headed by Justice J. C. Shah
Courts also went into the question and re-iterated in its report the recommendation made
Arrears by the Law Commission. The Committee also observed :2

tee. “We may recommend that the recommendation with regard to the appoint-
ment of a Judge may be sent by the Chief Justice directly to the Governor
of the State, and if, within a time to be fixed by convention, say, not exceeding
a month, no objection is received to the appointment, the Governor must be
deemed to have accepted the recommendation, and the matter may be referred
to the Central Government. The Central Government also should take
expeditious steps to clear the steps for early appointment before the date on
which the vacancy occurs. The scheme of consultation with the Chief Justice
of the High Court and the Chief Justice of India in appointment of judges of
the High Court will function smoothly if the recommendation made by the
Chief Justice of a High Court for appointment of a judge is treated as cleared
by the Governor if no objection has been raised by him within a month from
the date when the recommendation was received by him and the Central
Government will be entitled to deal with the recommendation on that footing.”

The above recommendation was not accepted by the Government as, in its
opinion, article 217 made consultation with the Governor mandatory and the
‘Governor” had been interpreted as acting on the advice of the Chief Minister.

1Administrative Reforms Commission Report (1969, June) H. 9, 24 (Ordinary) Chapter
VI, pages 39 and 40.

*High Courts Arrears Committee Report (1972), page 80, para. 128.


CHAPTER 6

RECOMMENDATION AS TO METHOD OF APPOINTMENT
OF HIGH COURT JUDGES

4. GENERAL

6.1. We have set out above the historical background of the constitutional ,,,
provisions relating to the appoinument of judges of the High Courts and the Yiews of
Supreme Court, the actual modalities which are adopted in working out those Courts as
provisions and the various suggestions which have been made off and on for to existing
making changes in the working of the scheme and the decision taken on those Scheme.
suggestions. Most of the High Courts to which a reference was made by the
Law Commission! about the existing scheme of appointment of judges have, in
their replies to the Questionnaire, expressed the view that the existing scheme is,
by and large, sound.?

6.2. Alter giving the matter our earnest consideration, we agree with the p,, t
High Courts and are of the view that the present constitutional scheme, which Schone
was evolved by the framers of the Constitution after much reflection and after sound.
taking into account the various modes of appoimtment in different countries, is
basically sound, it has worked, on the whole, satisfactorily and does not call
for any radical change. There are, however, certain aspects of the working of
the scheme about which we consider it necessary to make recommendations
with a view to bringing about what we believe to be improvement in the
working of ihe scheme, We shall make our recommendations when dealing
with dullerent aspects of the matter.

Li. HIGH COURTS: INITIATION OF THE PROCESS

6.3. So far as the appointment of High Court judges is concerned, the spitistive.
iniuaiive in the matter is to be taken, as would appear from the above, by the °
Chief Justice of the High Court. in order to prevent delay in the appointment
and keeping in view the fact that the various ५69४ take considerable ume before
the matler reaches the final stage, we recommend that in case of normal vacancies
arising as a result of retirement the mutiative for the purpose should be taken
vy the Chief Justice not less than six months before the date when the vacancy
is going to fall due, Although the period of six months may at first sight
appear to some to be too long, taking into account the past experience and the
dilliculties that quite frequently arise because of the ditierence of opinion between
diilerent authorities who come into the picture, it appears to us to be much
more realistic that the initial steps for the purpose are taken six months before
the date of vacancy. Adherence to this time schedule would obviate the possibility
of vacancies remaining unfilled for a long time afer the previous incumbent retires.

6.4, We may in this connection refer to our seventy-ninth Report, wherein Recom-
we observed : mendation

“As mentioned earlier, though the sanctioned judge strength of the High Report.
Courts in the country during the year 1977 was 352, only 287 judges on an
average were in position. Likewise, in the year 1976, even though the sanctioned
strength was 351, only 292 judges were in position, Leaving aside the judges
who were entrusted with work outside their normal duties, the fact remains
that the number of judges in position in both the years was less than the
sanctioned strength. "This disparity between the sanctioned strength, and the
number of judges in position was apparently due to the fact that vacancies in
the posts were not filled in as soon as they occurred. It is our considered
opinion that delay in filling in the vacancies is one of the major controlling
factors responsible for the piling accumulation of arrears, In our opinion,
when a vacancy is expected to arise out of the retirement of a judge, steps
for filling in the vacancy should be initiated six months in advance, The date
on which such a vacancy will normally arise is always known to the Chiet
Justice of the High Court and also to others concerned. It should be ensured

186७ Appendix 2.
*See Appendix 3.
279th Report, para, 3.10.


22

that necessary formalities lor the appomtmem of a Judge to fill the vacancy
are completed by the date on which the vacancy occurs.”

Consulta- 6.5. When making ihe recommendation ior appointmen, of a judge of the
tion by High Court, the Chit Justice, in our opinion, suvuid also consult his two senior-
Chie most Caileagues. in ihe leer coniaimmg tae recommendation for the appoint-

with two Mel, the Chief Justice suuuld slate inal he bas consulted his iwo seniormost
seniormost COllcugues and also indicaic the views of each ot those colleagues in Tespect
colleagues. of the person being recommended. We are conscious of the fact that the
Constitution does mot make & obligatory for the Chief Justice to consult his
colleagues wncn making the recommendation. Lespite the absence of such a
fequirement, we undersiund that in sume courts tne Chief Justice 9201७ making
lhe recommendation does cousule ais wo seniormost colleagues while ia other
couris ao suck practice is IM vogue. Counsulialion wilh ibe lwo seniormost
colleagues, in our opinion, would bave 4 healthy जींस: and considerably minimise
the chances of any possible favouritism, incorporation of the views of the two
semormost colleagues in Lae recommendation of the Chief Justice would alsu
emadle ihe older wutuoriiies, who Come 1000 ihe picture and who im very nature
of things would not 88४४० as much personal Knowledge about the suitability of
the person recommended, to know as to how two other semor colicagues of the
Chiet Justice feel about tne recommendation. Lt is plain that the two Sseniormost
colleagues of the Chief Justice would generaily uave as much knowledge about
the sujlapiity of ihe person recommended as would tie Chict Justice. At
the same ume, we would like io empuasise Liat the views of tie senior colleagues
of the Chici Jusiice sail be contined only 10 comments on the suitability of the
person iccommended. 1: would not be open io them 10 suggest another name
ior appoinunent.
Avy recommendation of the Ciuck Justice! which carries the concurrence
of bis 1७० semiormiosl colvuguvs siuuld aormaily be accepied.

411. AGE AND OiHER PFALiOKS RELATING 10 ELIGIBILITY

Age for 6.6. We may uext deai with ibe question of age group within which a
appoint- person may be appointed a judge of tae High Cour, While considering inis

Tien 0 aspeci, we wish lo empuasiss that miuturiy is as miuch essential in a judge as
Court. are une Kuowicdge of jaw, experiviice and olier proficiencies, Maturity normally

comes with years, wud wuile brilliance and quick up-take constilute great qualin-
vations, 0९2) cannoi provide a subdsiitute lor Lhe great faculty which eludes*
descripuon bul wiieb conics as a isult 9 maturity. Keeping m view this
fact, we ieel Lbat ibe minmum age at which a petsou should be appointed a
Judge cl we High Cou: suould be 45. We may add that normally, in our
opidion the reyuisile maluriy which is needed tor a High Court judge is acquired
mearaboul the age of 48. We are, however, recommending the mumuimum age ol
45, as we do not want to citcumscnbe within 100 aarrow limits the area of
selecuion, So far as (४० upper age Lmit is concerned, we feel that for persons
selected Irom the Bar, the 100) should be 54 years, By that age a member of
the Bar, if ne has real merit, would have already made a mark and would be
considered for selection io the Bench, 4 is, in our opinion, not desirable to
appoint members of the Bur as judges when the tenure on the Bench is going
to be less than even eight years. So iar as District and other Service Judges
are concerned, we do noi wish 10 prescribe any maxmum age limit for thew
appointment, because in some Staics their turn for appointment may not come
ull they are about to reach the age of superannuations District or Service Judges.

6.7, We are conscious of the fact thal there have been distinguished judges
in the past who were appointed at an age younger than that indicated by us
and who even at that age made a significant contribution. Those great judges,
however, constituted exceptional cases. When laying down a rule, we have to
take into account the normal and usual type of cases. We may also add that
the age limit indicated by us should, in “our view, be ordinarily adhered to.
In exceptional cases and for reasons to be stated, it should be open to the
authorities concerned to appoint persons who are not within the age group.
Other 6.8. Other points which may be kept in view for selecting persons for the
points con- august office of a High Court judge are their competence and efficiency, general
cemine eti- reputation for integrity and hard work, attitude of sobriety, balanced approach
sibility. and dignity they cxhibit and are expected to bring to the office of judgeship.

Jncome-tax returns regarding professional income for the preceding three years

~ WBee also para. 6.13, infra.



23

of the members of the Bar being selected for judgeship would also give good indi
cation of the extent of the practice they command at the Bar.

6.9. We are, in principle, against the selection of persons on grounds or Selection
considerations of religion, caste or region. In our opinion, the only consideration on ground
which should weigh should be that of merit and of the suitability of the person °f ccligion.
concerned to discharge his functions as a High Court judge. Wrong appoint- gion not to
ments of persons as High Court judges have, as already mentioned,’ not only be encour-
affected the image of the courts, the confidence they enjoy and the quantum aged.
and quality of their disposal, but have also deterred suitable persons from
joining the Bench in future vacancies. This, however, is an idcal state. Even
when matters of State policy make it necessary to give representation to persons
belonging to some religion, caste or region on the High Court Bench, every
effort should be made to select the best person, Further, as appointments on
grounds of religion, caste or region make an inroad into the Principle of selec-

Yon on pure merit, we recommend that the number of such appointments to
the exalted office of the High Court judgeship which calls for great qualities
of head and heart should, if unavoidable, be as few as possible.

IV. CONSIDERATION BY THE GOVERNMENT

6.10. According to the existing practice, the recommendation of the Chief Forwarding
Justice for appointment of the person to the office of the High Court judge is of the re-
sent to the Chief Minisicr. The Chief Minister, on receipt of the letter containing woo or
the recommendation, either agrees with the Chief Justice, or sometimes disagrees dation Chiet
or has some other reservation. He can in such a contingency call for some justice.
further information or express his disagreement. He may also Suggest a name
otber than that recommended by the Chief Justice. In such an event he has
to inform the Chief Justice and the latter’s comments on the name proposed by
the Chief Minister are invited. In our view, the Chief Justice, while sei nding
the name to the Chief Minister, should also state the views of his two seniormost
colleagues as already recommended by us.*

6.11, Complaint has on occasions been made that the Chief Ministers sit ‘Suggestion
Ught over the recommendations made by the Chief Justices and this results in in 79th Re-
considerable delay in the appointment ‘of judges. One consequence of that Port reite-
is that the vacancy for the office of the High Court judge remains unfilled for "4.

a long time, To obviate such delays we would like to re-iterate the recommen-
dation which was made by us in the seventy-ninth Report wherein we observed:3

“Complaints have been heard that sometimes a Chief Minister sits tight
over the recommendation made by the Chief Justice for the appointment o!
Judges, and this fact results in delaying the appointment. In this regard, it
would, in our opinion, be necessary to ensure that whatever may be the view
of the Chief Minister about the particular recommendation of the Chief
Justice, the recommendation of the Chief Justice should engage the prompt
attention of the Chief Minister and should not be kept pending for more
than a month. Sometimes the recommendation of the Chief Justice necessitates
the exchange of correspondence between the Chief Minister and the Chief
Justice. In such an event, efforts should be made to see that because of such
exchange of correspondence the matter does not get stuck up. It would perhaps
be appropriate that necessary reply to a letter received be sent within a week
of its receipt. We feel that the outside limit of six months which we have
indicated above should be sufficient to take into account the various bottlenecks
and delays which take place at different stages.”

11 may be mentioned that the Chief Justice has, pursuant to the recommen-
dation of the Law Commission,* been authorised to send directly to the Union
Minister of Home Affairs and the Chief Justice of India a copy of his recommen-
dation to the Chief Minister.

6,12. It has become a practice in some States> for the Chief Minister and Meetings
the Chief Justice to meet together either before the Chief Justice makes a between
recommendation for appointment of a person to the office of the High Court Chiet Jor
judge or after he has made the requisite recommendation. Criticism has been Cie Mi
levelled against the adoption of such practice by some persons. It is stated that jister.

‘Chapter 1, supra,
258९ pata. 6.5, supra.

879th Report, para. 3.11.

‘Chapter 5, supra.

5Cf. 14th Report, Vol. 1, page 73, para. 16. _


24

sometimes what may be called a bargain is struck between the Chief Justice and
the Chief Minister. The Chief Minister, it is stated, concurs with the recommen-
dation made by the Chief Justice in return for the Chief Justice agreeing in
another vacancy to sponsor the name suggested by the Chief Minister. It has,
therefore, been suggested that such personal meetings between the Chief Justice
and the Chief Minister should be avoided and that the whole thing should be
conducted through correspondence. We have given the matter our consideration
and are of the opinion that no rigid rule should be laid down. Many difficulties
which sometimes arise and which would otherwise take long to be resolved can
be sorted out by a personal mecting between the Chief Justice and the Chief
Minister. It would essentially depend upon the personal equation between the
Chief Minister and the Chief Justice. We also find it difficult to subscribe to
the view that every such meeting would result in some kind of bargaining
between the Chief Justice and the Chief Minister. A Chief Justice conscious of
the fact that his recommendation is based upon pure merit should have no
hesitation in repelling any andue overture. At the same time, a Chief Justice
should have no hesitation in paying due heed to the suggestion of the Chief
Minister if he finds the same to be based upon merit.

Recom- 6.13, At this stage, we would like to re-iterate what we have mentioned
mendation earlier! about the evolution of a convention that a recommendation made by
made _by the Chief Justice with which both his seniormost colleagues agree should normally

Chief 7
Fee and two 00 accepted.

‘seniormost
colleagues.
Role of 6.14. Another question which has engaged attention is as to whether the
Chief Jus- role of the Chief Minister should be that of commencing on the name recommended
tice by the Chicf Justice, or whether, in case he disagrees with the recommendation
Of the Chief Justice, he (the Chief Minister) can also suggest another name. This
question was agitated in the past, and after due consideration it was decided?
that the Chief Minister would be entitled, in case he disagrees with the recom-
mendation of the Chief Justice, to suggest another name, The Chief Minister
in such an event has to invite the comments of the Chief Justice and send the
matter thereafter along with the comments of the Chief Justice, to the Union
Minister of Law and Justice. In view of the fact that a decision referred to
above has already been taken after due consideration, we need not say anything
further in the matter.
Suggestion 6.15. A suggestion has been made that the Chief Justice of the High Court,
as to. num- while making the recommendation for filling a vacancy on the High Court
ber of Bench,? should suggest, instead of one name, a panel of names. We 85 against
पाक व be the acceptance of this suggestion, for it would inevitably have the’ effect of diluting
we the the recommendation of the Chief Justice. It would also result in robbing the
Chiet Jus. initiative which now vests in the Chief Justice of its efficacy. We feel that
tice not jt is undesirable to impose a compulsion on the Chief Justice to suggest a panel
accepted. of names instead of a single name for a vacancy on the High Court Bench.

Forwarding 6.16. After the papers have been finalised at the level of the Chief Minister
of papers to and the constitutional requirement about the consultation with the Governor is
Union Mi: completed, the papers are forwarded to the Union Minister of Law and Justice.
Law & jug. The Minister, unless he has some reservations in the matter, sends the papers to
i the Chief Justice of India, who then expresses his view and sends the papers back
to the Union Minister of Law and Justice. Thereafter the papers, in consultation
with the Prime Minister, are forwarded to the President.

Subsequent 6.17. Whatever we have said about the avoidance of delay* at the level
Bae to be Of the Chief Minister should hold equally good at the subsequent stages also.
avoided. V. APPOINTMENT OF CHIEF JUSTICE
Chief _Jus- 6.18. We may now deal with the question of the appointment of the Chief
tice of High Justice of the High Court. It has already been mentioned? that recommendation
Court for this purpose emanates from the Chief Minister. Normally, we think that
gions the seniormost judge of the High Court should be appointed as the Chief Justice
mally to be Of the High Court. It would not be desirable, in our opinion, to recommend or
appointed. — -
1562 discussion as
2Chapter 5, supra.
Cf, Law Commission file, S, No, 87.
‘Para. 6.11, supra.
5506 Chapter 5, supra.

to consultation with two seniormott colleagues, para. 6.5, supra.


25

appoint a junior judge of the High Court as Chief Justice in the presence of a
senior judge. In case we countenance the recommendation for appointing a
junior judge to the office of Chief Justice, it would lead to the undesirable
practice of junior judges cultivating and developing some kind of personal
relationship with the Chief Ministers. It would also have the effect of undermining
the independence of the judiciary. In any case, the image of the court would
be considerably affected if some of the judges of the court start hobnobbing
with the Chief Minister. We feel that the role of the Chief Minister should
be continued only to taking the initiative in the matter of the appointment of the
Chief Justice and expressing views about the suitability of the seniormost judge
for the office of the Chief Justice.

6.19. It would not be a healthy practice, in case the seniormost judge is Appoint-
considered not suitable for the office of Chief Justice, to appoint a junior judge ment of
from the same court as Chief Justice. In such an event, the proper course, in ti hiet om
our opinion, would be to appoint some judge from outside the State. It should 50०.
also be ensured that the judge so appointed as Chief Justice should have been
on the High Court Bench for a sufficiently long time and should have that much
seniority as a judge as not to cause resentment in the senior judges of the
High Court that someone junior in service has been appointed in supersession
of their claim. While appointing someone from outside the State as Chief Justice
of the High Court. care must also be taken to see that his tenure as Chief
Justice is not so long as to block the chances of not only the seniormost judge
but also of other judges in the High Court. By the words “blocking the
chances”, we mean not only preventing the appointment of a person as Chief
Justice but also substantially reducing the length of his term as Chief Justice.

Of course, arithmetical exactitude and precision in these matters cannot be
insisted upon.

6.20. One aspect which needs consideration in the appointment of ChiefTenure of
Justice of the High Court is about the desirability of ensuring that no incumbent Chief  Jus-
of the Office of the Chief Justice normally holds that office for more than six 77
years. There can be no doubt that long tenures of Chief Justice gives an element
of continuity to the court. There can also be no doubt that we have had Chief
Justices like Chagla and Rajamannar in whose case the lustre they shed to their
office was in no way dimmed by the long years they occupied that office, still
we feel that in a majority of cases the long term has the effect of introducing
certain weakresses and undesirable traits which are not good for the health of
he court.

VI. JUDGES FROM OUTSIDE

6.21. We may next deal with the question of having in each High Court Appoint-
about one-third of judges from outside the State. Recommendation for _ this ment a
purpose was made by the States Reorganisation Commission. The Law Com- judges from
mission presided over by Mr. Setalvad in its fourteenth Report observed in outside
this connection :! State.

“The recent creation of various zones in the country and the efforts to
treat the States forming part of these zones as one until for various purposes
would. we hope, lead to the States forming part of each zone to be recruiting
ground for appointments to the High Court from the members of the Bar in
these States. It is hoped that in this manner the expectation of the States
Reorganisation Commission that at least one-third of the High Court Judges
would be persons drawn from outside the State will be realised.”

Likewise, the Study Team? on Centre-State Relations appointed by the
Administrative Reforms Commission also suggested that so far as practicable.
one-third of the number of judges of a High Court should be outside.

We have given the matter our earnest consideration and are in substantial
agreement with the recommendations mentioned above. In our opinion. there
should be a convention, according to which one-third of judges in each High
Court should be from another State. This would normally have to be done
through the process of initial appointments, and not by transfer. It would also
in the very nature of things be a slow and gradual process and take some years
before we reach the proportion.

tLaw Commission of India, 14th Report, Vol. 1, page 100, para. 74.

*Administrative Reforms Commission Study Team on Centre-State Relations Report,
page 190, para. 13-20 (September 1963), Vol. 1.


26

Benefit ~ 6.22. Evolving such a convention would. in our opinion, not only help in
accrue. the process of national integration but would also improve the functioning of

various High Courts. It would secure on the Bench of each High Court the
presence of a number of judges who would not be swayed by local considerations
or affected by issues which may rouse local passions and emotions. As observed
by us in one of our earlier Reports. one of the essential things for the due
administration of justice is not only the capacity of the judges to bring a dis-
Passionate approach to cases handled by them, but also to inspire a feeling in
all concerned that a dispassionate approach would underlie their decision. quite
often, cases which arouse strong emotional sentiments and regional feelings come
up before courts of law. To handle such cases, we need judges who not only
temain unaffected by local sentiments and regional feelings, but also appear to be
so. None would be better suited for this purpose than judges hailing from
other States. It is a common feeling amongst old lawyers that apart from
cases with political overtones, the English judges showed a sense of great fairness
and brought a dispassionate approach in the disposal of judicial cases handled
by them. We in India are in the fortunate position of having a vast country.
There can. therefore, be no difficultv in having a certain percentage of judges
who hail from other States. The advantages gained by having persons from
other States as judges would be much greater compared with any disadvantage
which might result therefrom.

Attracting 6 4 * .

competent .23, Doubt is sometimes raised as to whether we would be able to

persons attract competent persons on the Bench of the High Court if at the time of

from out: their appointment they are conscious of the fact that they would be posted not

side lit in their own State but in another State. So far as this aspect is concerned, we

bs Y may mention that though quite a number of persons would be reluctant to be
appointed outside their State, there would always be, in our opinion. a certain
percentage of persons being considered for High Court judgeship who would
have no objection to being appointed outside the State. In the case of District
Judges being appointed, the prospect of promotion would in most cases be enough
inducement and will outweigh the possible inconvenience of being posted outside
the State. As regards the members of the Bar. some might consider it advantage-
ous to be appointed outside the State. so that after retirement they can resume,
if thev so desire, the practice in the State High Court wherein they were practisine
earlier. The bar against practising in the High Court in which one was previously
a judge would not thus stand in the way.

Modality of

implement- 6.24. Question then arises as to what should be the modalities for imple-

ing. menting the above recommendation There was. it may be mentioned. at one
time a proposal to have a common panel of names considered suitable for
appointment as High Court judges and to appoint judges to the different Courts
from that common pool. View was expressed in the Chief Justices’ Conference
held in October 1957 that while it was quite possible to have an all-India panel
of service District Judges from which selection could be made, all-India panel
of advocates presented considerable difficulty. In the Conference held in
January 1960 the Chief Justices expressed the unanimous opinion that main-
tenance of an all-India panel containing names of advocates suitable for appoint-
ment as High Court judges was not only not feasible. but also highly undesirable.
The Law Ministers’ Conference in June 1960. while considering the question
of the appointment of judges from outside the State. referred to the decision
taken in the Chief Justices’ Conference of January 1960 and requested the Union
Home Minister to initiate such discussion as he might think necessary with
the Chief Justice of India and the Chief Ministers. This matter was further
considered in the Chief Justices’ Conference held in March 1961. The Conference
expressed the opinion that in view of its recommendation in Tespect of recruitment
by competition of certain proportion of the higher judicial service on all-India
basis, it was not necessary to have a panel of names for appointment as High
Court judges either from amongst the members of the Bar or from amongst the
members of the State judicial service.

Recommen-

dation for 6.25. The Law Commission in its seventy-seventh Report! had recommended
All Indian the creation of an all-India judicial service. The recommendation of the Law
Judicial Commission in this respect was turned down by the Government of India, as
Service not would appear from the reply given in Parliament on behalf of the Home
accepted »Y Ministry. In our opinion, turning down of that suggestion makes it all the more
ment imperative to find out other modality to ensure one-third of the judges in each

‘71th Report.


27

High Court from outside the State. The outside States from which such persons
be appointed should normally be in the same zone. as mentioned in section 15
of the States Reorganization 80, in which the State in which a person is to
be appointed judge of the High Court is situated. For this purpose, the Chief
Justices in the same zone may meet as and when it becomes necessary or, as a
result of correspondence with each other, ascertain the names of members of the
Bar and District Judges considered fit for appointment. Such of the persons from
other States in the zone as are found to be suitable may be recommended for
appointment as judges. Care should, however, be taken to see that reciprocity
in numbers in matters of appointment of judges from other States is maintained
as far as possible and that no State gets undue advange in the actual working
of the scheme.

6.26. There is, however, nothing rigid about the modality indicated above, Proposed
Once the principle of having one-third of the judges from outside the State isintended not
accepted. there should, in our opinion, be not much difficulty in devising somebe rigid,
method to bring about the desired result and to work out the details of
the method.

जा. CONSULTATIVE PANEL

6.27. The question of appointment of a consultative panel may next engage Consulta
our attention. As mentioned earlier? the Secretary. Ministry of Law, Justicetive panel.
and Company Affairs, Department of Leeal Affairs in his letter dated December
29, 1977, to the Law Commission, had referred to the susgestion about having
an informal consultative panel consisting perhaps of retired three Chief Justices
of the Supreme Court. The letter also pointed out the constitutional difficulty
about having such a panel. The Chairman of the Law Commission thereafter
sent a letter incorporating his views in the matter. Those views have already
been reproduced earlier.3 Letter dated March 1, 1978 was thereafter received
from the Ministry of Law. Justice and Company Affairs by the Chairman of
the Law Commission. A note was then prenared.¢ A copy of the same was
sent to the Supreme Court and the various High Courts and others concerned
for expression of their views on the suggestion contained in the note. In para-
graph 3 of that note, it was stated :

“(3) After we have crossed the constitutional hurdles, the appointment of
the Informal Consultative Panel (perhaps, it would be better to call it ‘Judges
Appointment Commission’) (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Commission’) is
desirable.”

6.28. Most of the High Courts which have sent their views have expressedProposal
themselves against the formation of a Judges Appointment Commission.  Itfor Judges
would seem that the word “Commission” gave rise to the reaction that whatAPpoing.
was sought to be established was something like the Public Service Commission. mission not
even though the appointment was to such august office as that of a High Courtfavoured.
Judge We can understand and well appreciate the reaction and in deference
to that. we drop the suggestion about the appointment of the Judges Appointment
Commission. While doing so. we would like to add that the idea behind the
suggestion was not to have a body like the Public Service Commission, but to
associate a high level panel consisting of persons known for their integrity,
independence and judicial backeround in the matter of appointments with a view
to eliminating the sway of political or other extraneous considerations and
ensure scrutiny of appointments by a dispassionate body.

6.29. At the same time. we recommend that whenever it is proposed to PassPanel of
over the seniormost judge for appointment to the office of the Chief Justice ofChief Jus-
the High Court. the matter should be placed before a panel consisting of thetice and
Chief Justice of India and his four seniormost colleagues. The claim of thefour, श््गीः
seniormost judge for appointment to the office of the Chief Justice of the Hizhagues to be
Court should not be ignored unless the aforesaid panel finds sufficient cause forconsulted
such a course. In case of difference of opinion among those constituting the panel,in case of
the view of the majority should be taken to be the view of the panel. We are superses-
making this recommendation because criticism has been levelled on occasions that 7:
seniormost judges have been passed over in the matter of annointment of the Chief
Justices of the High Courts on extraneous considerations. This has understandably

iSection 15, States Reorganisation Act, 1956,
3866 Chapter 1, supra.

396९ Chapter 1, supra.

‘See Appendix 2.

5—315 LAD/ND/79,



28

created flutter and caused discontent. It is necessary to ensure that appointment
to the exalted office of the Chief Justice of the High Court does not become the
subject of controversy, This objective can be substantially achieved if, before
passing over the seniormost judge for the office of the Chicf Justice of the High
Court, the matter is scrutinised by a high level panel consisting of Chief Justice
of India and his four seniormost colleagues. Avoidance of controversy is also
necessary to preserve the image of the High Court.

Transfer of 6.30. We may now advert to the question of transfer of judges of the High

High
Court
Judges.

Constitu-

tional = as-

pect.

Desirability
76 panel.

Court. Regarding this question, we would like to emphasise that we are normally
against the transfer of judges of the High Court from one court to the other as such
power is liable to be abused and impinges upon the independence of the judges.
Normally. a judge should continue in the court to which he is appointed, except
where he is appointed Chief Justice of some other High Court. But there are
occasions —- we hope rare — when the image and good name of the judiciary make
it incumbent that a judge posted in a High Court be transferred to some other
High Court. Although by and large the judges of the High Court have evoked
great respect for maintaining high standards, complaints have sometimes been
heard against one or other individual judge. The facts of the case may not be
such as might warrant resort to the extreme remedy of impeachment; still the
requirements of the situation may call for the transfer of the judges concerned.
The transfer of a judge in such an event should not be looked upon as something
taboo. All that has to be ensured is that the power of transfer be not abused and
that the transfers be not motivated by extraneous considerations. To prevent anv
abuse of the power of transfer, we recommend that no judge should be transferred
without his consent from one High Court to the other unless a panel consisting
of the Chief Tustice of India and his four seniormost colleagues finds sufficient
cause for such a course. In case of difference between the members of the panel,
the view of the majority should be taken to be the view of the panel.

6.31. A auestion which might also ensage our attention is whether there is
any constitutional hurdle to the creation of the consultative panel mentioned
above.!’ So far as this aspect is concerned, we may mention that according to
a decision of the Supreme Court, if the Constitution or law requires consultation
with A. B and C and the avpointing authority, in addition to consulting A, B and C
also consults D, the appointment suffers from an infirmity and, as such, is liable
to be struck down. Reference in this connection may be made to the case of
Chandra Mohun v. State of U.P2

As long as the rule laid down in the above case holds the field. it would not
be permissible to appoint the consultative panel without amendment_of the
Constitution. Tt may. perhaps, be necessary to insert a provision in the Constitu-
tion that consultation with someone other than those mentioned in the Constitution
would not invalidate an appointment.

6.32. We may add that we are normally averse to making a suggestion as
may necessitate amendment of the Constitution. Despite our general reluctance on
this score. we still feel it desirable to have a consultative panel with a view to
preventing the sway of extraneous considerations in the matter of supersession or
transfer. Occasions have arisen in the past when transfers on extraneous considera-
tion have been made. or when the seniormost judges have been passed over in the
matter of appointment to the office of Chief Justice. This has understandably
created flutter and caused discontent. It is necessary to ensure that such acts in
respect of high judicial offices do not become subject of controversy. This objective
zan be substantially achieved if. in case of transfer and also in case of ignoring
the claim of the seniormost judge in the matter of appointment of Chief Justice
of the High Court. the matter is scrutinised by a high level body of persons wha
are known for their integrity and have also judicial backeround. Avoidance of
controversy is also necessary to preserve and keep up the image of the High Courts.

"Para. 6.30, supra,

"Chandra Mohun vy. State of U.P.. ALR. 1966 S. 2. 1987, 1990: (1967) 1 S. ८. R. 77
See also Baldeo Rai v. High Court of Puniab के Harvana, ALR. 1976 5. 0. 2490.


29

CHAPTER 7

RECOMMENDATIONS AS TO METHOD OF APPOINTMENTS
TO THE SUPREME COURT AS JUDGES

7.4. The Supreme Court of India is the highest court of the land. It is Amplitude
vested with powers which ate exercised by iew other courts in the world. Itof jurisdic
constitutes the highest of appeal im civil and criminal matters, Appeals.tion of the
agaist ihe order of aay tribunal can aiso be ent.rtained by the court by speciai Supreme
leave. Petilions questioning the validity of me election of the President and the ©°U™
Vice-Presidemt aie exclusively uiable by the Supreme Court. The court has
exclusive jurisaicuon in any dispuie between ihe Government of India and one
or more states, or between ine Goverament of india and any Staie or States on
one side and one or more other States on the other; or between two or more
States. ihe court also eacrcises advisory jurisdicuon, inasmuch as the President
may reler ior consideration to tne court any question of law or fact of public
importance that has arisen or 15 likeiy 10 arise. A right has further been guaranteed
to every citizen, and im some cases to non-citizens also, by article 32 of the
Constitution io approach the Court in cases of infringement of any of the funda-
menial rights meouoned in Part LIL of 6 Constriution. The court has been vested
for this purpose with power to issue directions, or orders or writs, including writs
in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certi-
orarl. ‘tne Constitution aiso provides that the law deciared by the Supreme
Couri shall be binding on ail courts within the territory of India.

7.2. का view of the importance of the role which 145 been assigned to the Neeg to ap-
court under ihe scheme vi cur Constitution, 1 is necessary inat persons of the point — per-
tghest calibre suould be appomicd judges of this court and no other considerationsons of the
except that of merit should weign im Wie matter of appotutment. ihe tact that the highest
Supreme Court siis as a cuurt of appeal against the judgment of the High Courts calibre.
wakes ib umperalive uae पाए judges of the Supreme Court should be persons of
such iigii stature and couuand sucin great esteem Wat even when the judgment
Of पार High Couii 1 reversed oa appeal by the Supreme Court, tue judges of the
Higa Court should nave a cecumg tat it nas been done by a court which is not
only higher m the legal sense of the term but which, because of the acumen of
lie judges Composing 1i, is ulnerwise also superior to the High Court. In one of
118 Ciassic judgments Unni Justice Patanjain Sasiri compared the role of the
Supreme Court to tat oi div senudal on the qui vive. Both on this account and
on account of the fact thai ine law laid down by tie Supreme Court becomes tne
aw of the land, i is essentai (० ensure that tne cream of the judicial talent 0
tne couniry is represented on the Bench of the court.

7.3 Another imporiant iactor which should not be lost sight of in the Reputation
appoiiment of judges to wie Supreme Court is the need 10 ensure tat ONiy PersODSfor indepen-
Who chjoy पाए 10५६ repuauon ior independence, dispassionaie approach anddence and
detachment are cievared wo uae Bench of the court. The reveiation of any tendency detachment
or Jaclination to AObnob wil Munusicrs and poliuical personages stiouid be consider- palmer:
ed as disqualification for oemg considered for the job. ‘this becomes essential .
because of the iact that cases having political overtonts and involving high political
personages trequenty come up oelore ine Supreme Court. 11 is plain tat persons
who hovnob wiih munisiers and otber political personages would not inspire
confidence when dealing with sucn cases.

74. Quesiion, then, arises as to whether persons who once had affiliations persons
with a political pariy should be debarred altogether from consideration for appoint- with _ politi-
ment 10 the Supreme Court. We have given the matter our consideration, and 2 affilia~
are of the view that aifiliation in remote past of a person otherwise suitable should ०3
not disqualify him for this purpose. ihe position should, however, be different if
the person has til recently been active in political life. After having considered
the various pros and cons, we are of the view that no one should be appointed to
the Supreme Court as a judge uuless for a period of not jess than seven years he
bas snapped all afliliations with political parties and unless during the preceding
period ot seven years he has distinguished himself for his independence, dispas-
sionate approach and freedom from political prejudice, bias as Jeaning. ‘this
would provide a sufficient assurance that his past political aililiation would not
colour his judicial pronouncements.


30

Impor- di 7.8. We are aware of the fact that in the United States, the United Kingdom
tance of dis- and some other countries, persons who were active in political life and were ap-
peproach pointed judges, distinguished themeselves on the Bench, Taking into account the
Pre conditions as they are in india and the importance that we attach to independence
and dispassionale approach of une judges and the role wiich the Constitution has
assigned to the court, we consider il mecesary Lo insist upon tie above safeguard.

Consulta- 7.6. As in the case of tiie High Court judges’ appointment, so in the matter

tion byot appointment oi a judge ० the Supreme Court, we 1९७ wat the Chief Justice

Chief Jus-ot india, wile niaking a iecommendation, should also consult bis seriormost

tice of Indiacojicagues. 100 number OL Colleagues 10 be coNsultcd for this purpose should be

Mormest ~ three, The Cniet Justice of India in ue communication incorporaung his recom-

colleagues, Mendation should specuy tiat be has consulted his three senlormost colleagues and.
also reproduce We view vi cach of Wem regarding his recommendation. The roie
of the semiormost colivagues would be contined oniy io making their comments
on the recommendation 01 ihe (यारा Justice; ney would not be entiled to initiate
4 separale name lor the purpose. Lie consultauon wiih tree seuiormost colleagues
by the Cmict Justice wouid muunuse tue chances ७ any possible arbitrariness
or iavouriuism.

Age for ap- 7.1, We may now deai with tie quesiion of age ior appointment to the office

pointment Ol Supreme Court Juage. As mentioned carier, the cream of the judicial talent

toSupreme Of tne Country should, in vur vicw, be repicseited om पाए Supreme Court. Apare

Court. from the fact thai te judges suouid oe persons Possessing iega: acumen aud a
sound knowicdge ० copstiiuuonal and oiler iaw, it 15 essenual that iney shoud
Have within Wem inai great quality which ciudes description, but which comes
wilh ihe passage of years and as a resuli of loug coutempiation and refiection, —
the quality which gives depth lo the juagmeai and wich is known us mauutiiy.
More than in any other court, it is i tae Supreme Court thai we cannot do wili-
out that quality. io ensure wal, we recommend that tie Proper age ior appoimt-
ment to the oliice of Supreme Court Judge sould be between 54 and 60. The
upper age jumit would ensure iat judges appomied to the court would have a
tenure Of at least 5 years.

7.8. We ave conscious oi the fact that there have been juages who have been
appointed im te past to tie court al an age Jess than 54 years and who have
disunguished taemselyes. Luoking, however, to all the facis and keeping in view
the general rule, we cousider tat in luture no appoimiment should be made of a
Person to the benca of ihe Supreme Court at an age 1055 than 54,

Principle 79. We teei that the principle of seniority should be observed in the appoint-
of senio- ment to the oliice of the Chuef Jusuice. Past experience 1015 us that wuenever there
Tity. bas been a depatture from this principle, the appoimtment has roused considerable

controversy. it nas thus aiiected the umage of ihe 010० of (यार Justice. ibe
vesting of unbridled power in the execulive to depart trom tne principle of seniority
in the matter of appoiutment io the vilice of (काल Justct is habie to be abused.
it is also likely 10 make inroads into tae mdependence of the judiciary and the
approach oi the judges. in case the Government considers it Proper in some
individual case to depart iroui the principle ot seniority ior appomlment to the
Post of Chief Justice, in sucn au event, in our opinion, the matier should be re-
ferred by the Government to a panel consisting of all ihe silting Supreme Court
Judges. The principle of seniority should be departed from only if the above
Panel finds suihcient cause tor such a course. In case of difference ‘of opinion, the
decision of the majority shali be taken to be the decision of the panel.

Represen- 7.10. One other point may also be mentioned. We are conscious of the fact
tation of re- in the matter of appointment io the Supreme Court, despite the need for selection
gion. On the basis of merit, regard is also had for representation of different regions.

Even s0, consistently with tat also, it can be ensured that the best person from
the region is appointed to the court.

‘See para. 7.2, supra.


CHAPTER 8
CONCLUSION

Our recommendations in this Report have been inspired by our desire to Qualities
maintain publ’c contidence in Judges and the highest standards in the Judiciary. of a
The qualitics required of a Judge were described by Mr. Justice Tom C. Clark, Jee.
former Associate Justice of the United Staics Supreme Court.! in words which
cannot be bettered :—

“Judicial independence, of course, has its corvilary of judicial responsibility.
The judges must be of stuff that goes to make a good judiciary. What is
this अप of which 1 speak? Legal kiiowledge? Yes, and of sufficient quality
to be abic to determine the applicable rule of jaw in a given case together with
the wisdom to apply it with ciarity and dispatch. Ability to discover the facts?
Yes, and an open mind to recognise the truth and separate it from the chaff. A
firm but understanding heart? Yes, and the courage to declare a just decision
and enluice it. Integrity? Yes, above all other attributes; and a public and
private deporunent that is above reproach. A conscience? Yes, but rather
than being one that breeds fear and negative action it must be a conscience which
at the close uf each day’s work may whisper softly. ‘Today you were truly worthy
to wear the robe and enjoy tie appellation of judge’. To maintain such a status
in the pubiic mind judges, like Cacsar’s wife, must live above suspicion.”

ict us express the hupe that our recommendations will, to some degree,
facilitate the attainment of these high ideals,

We may conclude this Report by citing the words used by John Rutledge,
Jr. in 1802 on the floor vi the U.S. House of Representatives to describe the
“shield” ot the judiciary :?

“As long as this buckler remains to the people, they cannot be liable to
much or permanent oppression. The Government may be administered with
indiscretion and with violence; oflices may be bestowed exclusively upon those
who have no other merit than taat of carrying votes at elections; the commerce
of our country may be depressed by nonsensical theories, and public credit may
suffer from bad intentions; but, so long as we may have an independent Judiciary,
the great interests of the people will be safe.. Leave to the peopie an
independent Judiciary, and they wiil prove that man is capable of groverning
himself; they will be saved from what has been the fate of all other Republics,
and they will disprove the position that Governments of a Republican form
cannot endure.”

~“*Tom C. Clark, Former Associate Justice, ए, 5, Supreme Court, “Judicial Self-Regula-
tion. The Potentiai” (Winter, 1970), 35 Law and Contemporary Problems, No. 1, pages
37, 38, 39.
21 Annals of Cong. 739-40 (1802), dated by trying R, Kaufmann, “Judicial Indepen-
dence" (March 1979), Vol. 88, No. 4, Yale L-J. 681, 716



32

CHAPTER 9
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS

We may summarise our recommendations as follows :—-

GENERAL
(1) The present constitutional scheme as to the method of appointment ot
judges is basically sound; it has, on the whole, worked satisfactorily and does not
call for any radical change. But tnere are certain aspects of its working about
which recommendations are necessary in order to bring about an improvement.!

APPOINTMENT OF HIGH COURT JUDGES

(2) In case of normal vacancies in the High Court, the initiative (for filling
up the vacancy) should be taken by the Chief Justice at least 6 months before the
expected date of the vacancy,’ in order to obviate the possibility of the vacancy
remaining unfilled for a long time alter the retirement of the previous incumbent.*

(3) When making a recommendation for appointment of a judge of a High
Court, tite Chief Justice should consult his two seniormost colleagues. The Chief
Justice, in his letter recommending the appointment, should state the fact of such
consultation and indicate the views of his two colleagues so consulted.*

(4) Any recommendation of the Chief Justice which carries the concurrence
of his two seniormost colleagues should normally be accepted.>

(5) In a judge, maturity is as much essential as are other proficiencies.
Maturity normally comes with years, brilliance and quick up-take being no sub-
stitute for it. In view of this, the minimum age at which a person should be
appoinied a judge of the High Court should be 45.

For persons selected irom the bar, there should be an upper age limit of 54.°

Though there have seen distinguished judges in the past who were appointed
at a younger age, they constituted exceptional cases.

‘the age limit indicated above should be ordinarily adhered to; a departure
can, however, be made in exceptional cases and for reasons to be stated by the
authorities concerned.’

(6) Other points to be kept in view for selecting persons as High Court
judges are their competence, reputation for integrity and hard work, attitude of
sobriety, balanced approach and dignity.

Income tax returns for tie last 3 years (in case of members of the bar) would
also be relevant.*

(7) The Commission is, in principle, against selection to the High Court
Benen on ground of religion, casie or region. Merit should be the only considera-
uon. Even when matters of duie policy make it necessary to give representation
(© persons belonging to some rehgion, caste or region, every effort should be
made to select the best person. The number of such appointments should be as
few as possible.”

(8) While sending the name to the Chief Minister, the Chief Justice should
also state the views of his two seniormost colleagues,’ as already stated.

(9) There should be an outside limit of 6 months (as already recommended
in the 79th Report, paragraph 3.11) within which the recommendation of the
Chief Justice should be processed and completed in the State Government. The

‘Paragraphs 6.1 and 6.2.

2Recommendation in 79th Report, para. 3.10, referred to.
“Paragraphs 6.3 and 6.4,

‘Paragraph 6.5.

‘Paragtaph 6.5.

Paragraph 6.6.

"Paragraph 6.7.

sparagraph 6.8.

*Paragraph 6.9.

‘Paragraph 6.10.


33

recommendation of the Chief Justice should engage the prompt attention of the
Chief Minister, and should not be kept pending for more than a month. If ex-
changes of correspondence becomes necessary, efforis should be made to see
that because of such exchange, the matter does become stuck up.!-?

(10) No rigid rule need be laid down as to whether personal meetings
between the Chief Justice and the Chief Minister to discuss appointments to the
High Court should be avoided. The difficulties that sometimes arise can be
sorted out more quickly by a personal meeting than by correspondence. It
would essentially depend upon the personal equation between the Chief Justice
and the Chief Minister. Every such meeting would not result in some kind of
bargaining, as is sometimes assumed.3

(11) At the same time, as already indicated, a recommendation made by the
Chief Justice with which both his seniormost colleagues agree should normally
be accepted.4

(12) On the question whether the role of the Chief Minister should be that
only of commenting on the name recommended by the Chief Justice. or whether
the Chief Minister can also suggest another name. a decision has already been
taken and nothing further need be said in the matter.

___ (13) The suggestion that the Chief Justice. while making the recommenda-
tion. should suggest a panel of names is not accepted, as it would have the effect
of diluting the recommendation of the Chief Justicc.*

(14) Whatever has been said above about the avoidance of delay at the level
of the Chief Minister should also hold equally good at the subsequent stages.7

(15) In regard to the appointment of the Chief Justice, normally the senior-
most judge of the High Court should be appointed. Recommending a junior
judge for appointment as Chief Justice would lead to the undesirable practice of
junior judges cultivating a personal relationship with the Chief Minister and
would undermine the independence of the judiciary and affect the image of the
court. The role of the Chief Minister should be confined to taking the initiative
for appointment of the Chief Justice and expressing views about the suitability
of the seniormost judge for appointment as Chief Justice.’

(16) If the seniormost judge is not considered suitable for the office of Chief
Justice, a junior judge should not be appointed, but the proper course would be
to appoint some judge from outside. The judge so appointed should have been
on the bench of the court for a long time and should have that much seniority
(as a judge) as not to cause embarassment to the other judges. Care should
also be taken to see that the appointment of outside judge as Chief Justice does
not block the chances not only of the seniormost judge, but also of the other
judges of the High Court. Of course, arithmetical exactitude in these matters
cannot be insisted upon.?

(17) 16 is desirable to ensure that no incumbent of the office of Chief
Justice of the High Court normally holds that office more than six years.!@
While long tenures may give an element of continuity to the court, yet in a
majority of cases it has the effect of introducing certain weaknesses and
undesirable traits.

(18) There should be a convention according to which one-third of judges
in each High Court should be from another State. This would normally be done
through initial appointment, and not by transfer. The process will have to be
gradual: it would take some years before the proportion is reached.'!

‘Paragraph 6.11.
*Recommendation in 79th Report, para 3.11 re-iterated
SParagraph 6.12.

‘Paragraph 6.13 read with paragraph 6.5.
SParagraph 6.14.

SParagraph 6.15.

"Paragraphs 6.16 and 6.17.

"Paragraph 6.18.

*Paragraph 6.19.

*Paragraph 6.20.

MParagraph 6.21,


34

Such a convention would not only foster national integration, but would
also improve the functioning of High Courts. It would inspire a feeling that a
dispassionate approach underlies their decisions The advantages gained by
having persons from other States as judges would be much greater compared with
the possible disadvantages.!

(19) Though a number of persons would be reluctant to be appointed outside
their State, a certain percentage of persons would have no objection to such an
appointment. In case of District Judges. the prospect of promotion would be
enough inducement. In case of members of the bar, they can practise in the
State High Court wherein they were practising earlier2

(20) Since the suggestion for All Indian Judicial Service, made earlier?
has been turned down. it is all the more imperative to find out some other modality
to ensure the appointment of one-third of judges from outside the State. The
outside, States should normally be in the same zone‘ in which the State in which
a person is to be appointed is situated.5

(21) For this purpose. the Chief Justices may meet when necessary. or settle
the name of the person to be appointed by correspondence.6

(22) Care should. however. be taken to see that reciprocity in numbers (in
matters of appointment of judges from other States) is maintained as far
as possible.”

(23) There is nothine rigid about the above modalitv. Once the principle
is accepted, there should be no difficulty in devising a method for bringing out
the desired result.

(24) The proposal for constitutine a consultative nanel — which had been
described in the Questionnaire issued by the Law Commission as a “Judges
Appointments Commission” -- has not been favoured by most of the High Courts
in their replies to the Questionnaire issued bv the Commission and is accordinely
dropped. It mav. however, be stated? that the idea was not to have a body like
the Public Service Commission, but to associate a high level panel consisting of
persons known for their integrity, independence and judicial backeround in the
matter of appointments. to eliminate extraneous considerations and to ensure
dispassionate scrutiny.!°

(25) At the same time. the Law Commission recommends that whenever it
is proposed to nass over the seniormost judge for appointment to the office of
Chief Justice of the High Court. the matter should be placed before a panel
consisting of the Chief Tustice of India and his four seniormost colleagues.

The claim of the seniormost judge should not be ignored unless the aforesaid
panel finds sufficient cause for such a course. In case of difference of opinion
amongst the panel, the view of the majority may be taken as the view of the
panel. Such a procedure will avoid discontent and controversy, and preserve the
image of the High Court.!!

(26) Normally a judge should continue in the High Court where he is ap-
pointed. except where appointed Chief Justice of another High Court. But there
are oceasions — though rare —- when the image and good name of the judiciary
make it incumbent that a indge should be transferred, though the extreme remedy
of impeachment may not be called for.

(27) To nrevent abuse of the power of transfer. it is recommended that no
judee shontd be transferred withont his consent from one High Court to another
unless a panel consisting of the Chief Justice of India and his four seniormost

‘Paragraph 6 22
*Paracraph 6.23

*77th Renort

Section 15. Stites Reorganisation Act, 1956
SParagraph 6.25
®Paragraph 6.25.
‘Paragraph 6.25.
*Paragraph 6.26
sParagraph 6.27.
‘paragraphs 627 and 6.28
MParagraph 6.29,


35

colleagues finds sufficient cause for such a course. In case of difference between
members, of the panel, the view of the majority be taken to be the view of
e panel.

(28) Constitutional amendment may be required to implement the above
recommendation for consultation with a panel consisting of Chief Justice of
India and his four seniormost colleagues (in the matter of supersession or transfer
of a High Court judge).?

Normally, the Law Commission is averse to recommending a constitutional
amendment. But such a panel is necessary to ensure that controversy does not
arise in regard to such action (as is indicated above) in respect of high judi-
cial office.

APPOINTMENT OF SUPREME COURT JUDGES

(29) Having regard to the importance of the role assigned to the Supreme
Court under the Constitution and the nature and amplitude of its jurisdiction, it
is necessary that persons of the highest calibre should be appointed judges of
that court and no other consideration except that of merit should weigh in this
regard. The fact that the Supreme Court sits as a court of appeal against the
judgments of the High Court makes it imperative that its judges should be persons
of such high stature and command such great esteem that even when it reverses
a judgment of the High Court, the judges of the High Court should feel that
the reversal has been done by a court which, because of the acumen of its judges,
is superior to the High Court.4

(30) Only persons who enjoy the highest reputation for independence, dis-
passionate approach and detachment should be elevated to the bench of the
Supreme Court and any revelation of a tendency to hobnob with Ministers should
be a disqualification.‘

(31) While affiliation in the remote past with a political party should not
constitute a bar in itself, no one should be appointed to the Supreme Court,
unless, for a period of not less than seven years, he has snapped all affiliations
with political parties and unless, during that period, he has distinguished himself
for independence and freedom from political bias or leanings.*

Taking into account Indian conditions and the importance which we attach
to independence and dispassionate approach and the role of the Supreme Court,
this safeguard is necessary.”

(32) The Chief Justice of India, while recommending the name of a person
for appointment as a judge of the Supreme Court, should consult his three senior-
most colleagues and should, in the communication incorporating his recommenda-
tion, specify the result of such consultation and reproduce the views of each of
his colleagues so consulted regarding his recommendation. The role of these
colleagues would be confined to commenting on the recommendation of the
Chief Justice. Such consultation would minimise possible arbitrariness
or favouritism.8

(33) Persons appointed as judges of the Supreme Court should not only
have iegal acumen and sound knowledge of law, but also have within them that
great quality which eludes description but which comes with the passage of
years and after long contemplation and reflection — the quality imparting
maturity. Therefore, the proper age for appointment as judge of the Supreme
Court should be between the age of 54 and 60 years. Though, in the past, there
have been judges who were appointed at an age less than 54 years and who have
distinguished themselves, yet looking to the facts, no appointment should be
made to the bench of the Supreme Court at an age less than 54 years.”

1Paragtaph 6.30.
*Paragraph 6.31.
sParagraph 6.32
‘Paragraphs 7.1 and 7.2.
sParagraph 7.3.
Paragraph 7.4.
"Paragraph 7.5.
‘Paragraph 7.6
*Paragraphs 7.7 and 7.8.

6—315 LAD/ND/79.


36

(34) The principle of seniority should be observed in the appointment to
the office of the Chief Justice. Departure from this principle in the past has
aroused controversy and has affected the image of the office of the Chief Justice,
The vesting of unbridled power in the executive to depart from this principle may
be abused, and may also make inroads into judicial independence and affect the
approach of the judges. Where, in an individual case, the Government Proposes
to depart from this principle, the matter should be referred to a panel consisting
of all the sitting Supreme Court judges, and the departure should be made only
after this panel finds sufficient cause for such a course. In case of difference of
opinion, the decision of the majority would be the decision of the panel.!

(35) Even where, in the matter of appointment to the Supreme Court, regard
is had for representation of different regions, the best person from the region
should be appointed to the Court2

S. N. SHANKER

T. S. KrisHNaMoorTHY IvER

P. M. Baxsar 2 sescessee Member-Secretary.

August 10, 1979.

“iparagraph 7.9.
*Paragraph 7.10.


Functions

of the

Panel
cy

U.

Standards
for
selection.

ies)
x

APPENDIX 1

Circuit Judges Nomination Cenmission in U.S.A.

1, In U. S.A. Presidential Order 11972 has established a circuit judges nominating
commission to supply the President with names of the “best qualified” persons for
appointment to the United States Courts of Appeal?

The Order provides for a commission of thirteen panels, one for each of the federal
circuits, excep! the Fifth and Ninth circuits, which will have two each,

The Panels will be appointed by the President when a vacancy exists on a court of
appeals, and their purpose will be to recommend to the President for nomination “persons
whose character, experience, ability and commitment to equal justice under law fully qualify
them to serve in the federal judiciary”.

Each panel will have not more than cleven members, including its Chairman, and

must include “members of both sexes, members of minority groups, and approximately
equal numbers of lawyers and non-lawyers”.

2. The functions of the panels are outlined in the Order as follows: —

“A panel shall begin functioning when the President notifies its Chairman that he
desires the panel’s assistance in aid of his constitutional responsibility and discretion to
select a nominee to fill a vacancy on a United States Court of Appeals. Upon such
notification, the panel shal] :—

(a) Give public notice of the vacancy within the relevant geographic area,
inviting suggestions as to potential nominees;

(b) Conduct inquiries to identify potential nominees;

(०) Conduct inquiries to identify those persons among the potential nominees
who are well-qualified to serve as a United States circuit judge; and

(@ Report in confidence to the President, within sixty days after the notifica-
tion of the vacancy, the results of its activities, including its recommendations as
to the five persons whom the panel considers best qualified to fill the vacancy.”

3. The Order sets these standards for the selection of proposed nominees: —

(a) Before transmitting to the President the names of the five persons it deems best
qualified to fill an existing vacancy, a panel shall have determined : —
(i) that those persons are members in good standing of at least one state bar,
of the District of Columbia bar, and members in good standing of any other bars
of which they may be members;

(ii) that they possess, and have reputations for, integrity and good character;
iii) that they are of sound health;

(iy) that they possess, and have demonstrated, outstanding legal ability and
commitment to equal justice under law;

iv) that their demeanor, character and personality indicate that they would
exhibit judicial temperamount if appointed to the position of United States circuit
judge.

(0) In selecting persons whose names will be transmitted to the President a panel
shall consider whether the training, experience, or experience of certain of the well-

Qualified individuals would help to meet a perceived need of the court of appeals on
which the vacancy exists.

(० To implement the above standards, a panel may adopt such additional criteria
or guideliness as it considers approprite for the identification of potential nominees and
the selection of those best qualified to serve as United States circuit judges.

No commission member may be considered as a potential nominee while serving or
for one vear after service. Members will receive no compensation but may be allowed
travel expenses.

4. Appointment to panels will end thirty days after submission of the panel’s report.
‘The President will appoint a person to fill the vacancy on a panel “within a reasonable
time after termination of an appointment or the creation of a vacancy for any other
reason”.

The Commission had initially an ending date of December 31, 1978, but this was
extended by the President® upto December 31, 1981.

5. A similar Order3 appears to have been issued in regard to Federal Judicial Officers.

Note in (April. 1977) American Bar Association Journal, 554, referring to Executive
Order 11972, “U. S. Circuit Judges Nomination Commission”; Presidential Documents,
Vol. 13, No. age 214, dated 21st February, 1977.

"Information as to extension of date orally obtained from U. 5, International Commu-
nications Agency, New Delhi.

3Executive Order No. 11992, “Committee on Selection of Federal Judicial Officers”
Presidential Documents, Vol. 13, No. 22, page 810, dated 30th May, 1977.



38

APPENDIX 2

Questionnaire Issued by The Law Commission of India

NOTE

The Law Commission has been asked to study the question of the appointment of
Judges of the High Court and the Supreme Court in Depth and to explore the possibilities
of improvement in the existing method of appointment. Reference has also been made
to a suggestion that there should be an Informal Consultative Panel consisting, perhaps,
of three retired Chief Justices of the Supreme Court.

View in this respect has been expressed containing various suggestions as under: —

“(1) As the provisions of the Constitution stand at present, the appointment of an
Informal Consultative Panel in connection with the appointment of Judges of the High
Court and the Supreme Court, is of doubtful constitutional validity.

(2) In case it is decided to amend the provisions of the Constitution, we must guard
against putting the whole matter of the appointment of the Judges at large and thus open
Pandora's Box. The attempt should be made to plug the loopholes in the present system
with a view to eliminate favouritism or the impact of any political or patty consideration
in the matter of appointment rather than to make any radical changes, Radical changes
would be necessary if we find the method devised by our Constitution for
the appointment of Judges to be basically wrong and intrinsically defective. In case,
however, we find that the scheme of our Constitution for the appointment of Judges is,
by and large, sound, but some defects or lacunas have come to surface in the actual
working of the scheme, in that event, what would be required is not radical change but
such modifications as may strong then the scheme and eliminate the defects and lacunae.
The scheme for appointment of Judges in our Constitution, prima facie, belongs to the
latter category. By and large. the method devised for this purpose by our founding
fathers was well considered. Defects, no doubt, have been noticed in the working of
the scheme but they are of such a character as can be rectified without throwing over-
board the whole scheme. Efforts should, therefore, be made to rectify the defects and
plug the loopholes,

(3) After_we have crossed the constitutional hurdles, the appointment of the Informal
Consultative Panel (perhaps, it would be better to call it “Judges Appointment Commis-
sion”), (hereinafter referred to as the “Commission”) is desirable,

(4) The Members of the Commission should consist of :—
(a) Chief Justice of India (ex-officio);
(0) Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs (ex-officio); and

(c) Three persons, each of whom has been the Chief Justice or a Judge of the Supreme
Court.

‘Tne members of the Commission in category (c) should be appointed for a period of
four years to prevent appointment of persons who have, with the passage of time, lost
touch with the Judges and the lawyers. The persons belonging to category (c) should be
normally thcse who have been on the Bench of the Supreme Court within six years of
their appointment to the Commission under category (c) should consist only of retired
Supreme Court Chief Justice is not feasible because this would circumscribe the choice
within a very narrow limit which would, perhaps, be not desirable.

The sitting Chief Justice should be the Chairman of the Commission. The Commis-
sion should express its views to the Government about the suitability of persons to be
appointed as Judges and Chief Justices of the High Court and the Supreme Court, In
case of any difference between the members of the Commission the view of the majority
should be considered to be the view of the Commission.

‘The consultation with the Commission would be in addition to the present practice
in accordance with the existing constitutional provisions. The consultation with the
Commission would take place at the final stage before the President is advised to appoint
a person.

One effect of the above proposal would be that the Chief Justice of India would
come into the picture at two stages one, earlier in accordance with the constitutional
provisions and the practice prevailing at present and, second time, as Chairman of the
Commission, This cannot, in the very nature of things, be helped. The Chief Justice
in the meeting of the Commission can apprise the other members of facts which might
have come to his notice. He might also clarify some matters. It would be open to the
Commission, in case they consider it proper in any particular matter, to informally consult
any of the members of the bar, including the Attorney-General, Solicitor-General and
the Advocate-General.

Apart from the above the following suggestions are made:

(i) In case of the appointment of a Judge of the High Court, the Chief Justice of
the High Court, before making recommendation, should consult his two seniormost
colleagues. In the communication containing the recommendation, the Chief Justice
should state that he has consulted the two seniormost colleagues and what has been
the view of each of them in respect of the recommendation. Normally, a recommen-
dation in which the two seniormost colleagues concur with the Chief Justice, should
be accepted.


39

(ii) Similar course should be adopted in case of the appointment of a Judge of the
Supreme Court,

(ii) In the matter of the appointment of the Chief Justice of the High Court, no
Junior Judge should normally be appointed in supersession of the seniormost Judge.

(iv) If the seniormost Judge is considered not suitable for appointment as Chief
Justice. in that event, a Chief Justice or a Judge from another High Court should
normally be appointed as Chief Justice.

(v) Apart from that also, we should more frequently appoint a Judge from outside
as Chief Justice of the High Court. The disadvantage of this proposal is that an out-
side Chief Justice would not have full knowledge about the local talent. The advantage,
however, would be that he would not suffer from any personal likes or dislikes from
which a local person having long association with others, might suffer. It should not
also take the outsider long to acquire knowledge of the iocal talent. An outsider is
also likely to bring greater detachment and dispassionate approach to the office of the
Chief Justice. The advantages may thus outweigh the disadvantages,

(vi) We should also have a convention according to which one-third of the Judges
in each High Court should be from another State. This would normally have to be
done through process of initial appointments and not by transfer. It would, in the very
nature of things, be a slow and gradual process and take some yeats before we reach
the proportion.

Once the principle of having a certain percentage of persons from outside the State
as Judges of the High Court is accepted, the modalities to bring about the desired result
can be worked out. One suggestion can possibly be that every Chief Justice, while
proposing the name of a person for appointment as High Court Judge should mention
in the communication as to whether that person agrees to be appointed outside the
State. In the case of District Judges proposed to be appointed. the prospect of promo-
tion would. in most cases, be enough inducement and thus outweigh the possible
inconvenience of being posted outside the State. As regards lawyers, some might
consider it advantageous to be anpointd outside the State so that after retirement they
can resume, if they so desire, the practice in the State wherein they were practising
earlier.

(vii) In the matter of appointment of Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, the normal
convention should be to appoint the seniormost Judge. There should be no departure
from convenion unless such a course is approved by the Commission,

It is requested that your views may be expressed on the following points :

(1) Is the scheme of our Constitution for appointment of Judges of the Supreme
Court and the High Court. by and large, sound or does it require to be thrown overboard
and substituted by an altogether new scheme?

(2) Have some defects or lacunae come to the surface in actual working of the scheme
of our Constitution for appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court and the High
Courts?

3) Do vou think that these defects and lacunae are of such a character as can be
rectified by plugging the loopholes and without throwing overboard the whole scheme?

(4) What is vour view regarding the appointment of a Judges Appointment Commission
(or whotever be the name given to it)?

(5) In case you are of the view that it is desirable to have the above-mentioned Com-
mission. do vou agree with the view Teproduced above regarding the composition of the
Commission? If yon do not agree with the above view, who, in your opinion should be
the Chairman and the members of the Commission? ’ Also’ please specify as to what
should he the strength of the Commission in such an event.

(6) What is your opinion about havine practising members of the bar, including
Government counsel, as members of the Commission?

(7) Wonld you consider it preferable for the Commission to informally consult the
members of the Bar. including the Attornev-General. Solicitor-General and Advocate-
General. in the matter of the appointment of Judges instead of having members of the

bar as members of the Commission?

/) What is vour view reearding the surcestion that the Chief Justice of the High
e making a recommendation should consult his two seniormost colleagues and
‘one of them in respect of the recommendation? What
mmendation with which the two senior-

Court. befor:
should state the views of each one
is also vour view about the suggestion that a recor
most colleagues agree. should normally be accepted?

he suggestion that in the matter of appointment of

(9) What is your view regarding tl in 0
rustice, no Junior Judge should normally be appointed in

the Chief Justice of the Hieh Court,
supersession of the seniormost Judge ?

(10) What is your view with regard to the suggestion that if the seniormost Judge
is nd contilered ‘suitable for appointment as. Chief Iustice of the High Court, in that
vent. the Chief Justice of a Judge from another High Court should normally be appoint-

ed as Chief Justice?


40

(11) What is your view with regard to the suggestion that we should more frequently
appoint a Judge from outside the State as Chief Justice of the High Court?

(12) What is your view with regard to the suggestion that we should have a conven-
tion according to which one-third of the Judges in each High Court should be from
another State?

(13) What is your view with regard to the suggestion that in the matter of the
appointment of Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, the normal convention should be
to appoint the seniormost Judge and that there should be no departure from this conven-
tion unless this course is approved by the Commission?

(14) Should the Commission have the power to initiate a new name not hitherto
recommended in the matter of the appointment of—
(a) High Court Judge;
(b) Chief Justice of the High Court;
(c) Supreme Court Judge;
(d) Chief Justice of the Supreme Court?

If the answer be in the affirmative in respect of some of the categories and in the negative
in respect of other categories, the same may also be indicated.

(15) What is your view regarding the suggestion that the consultation with the Com-
mission should be in addition to the present practice in accordance with existing constitu-
tional provisions and that consultation should take place at the final stage before the
President is advised to appoint a person as a Judge?

(16) Should the recommendations of the Commission be binding upon the Government?
What suggestions would you make for a situation in which the Government disagrees with
the recommendations of the Commission?

(17) If you think that the scheme of appointment of Judges should be thrown over-
board and be replaced by an altogether new scheme, what, in your opinion, should be
the new scheme?

(18) What is your opinion about having a common panel or pool of persons for
appointment as High Court Judges who have given consent to be appointed outside their
State?

(19) What, in your opinion, should be the age group out of which persons should
be normally appointed Judges of —
(a) the High Court; and
(b) the Supreme Court?
(20) Any other suggestion you would like to make in the matter.


4i

APPENDIX 3
Tabulation of Replies to the Questionnaire

The Questionnaire issued by the Commission has already been quoted.'| Of the replies
to the Questionnaire, those received from High Courts, High Court Judges, eminent jurists
and State Governments,’ are very briefly tabulated below, questionwise,

Question No. 1.

(a) Seven High Courts regard the present scheme as, by and large, sound.

(b) So do some Judges of one High Court and the Chief Justice and two Judges of
another High Court.

(०) A very eminent jurist is of the view that the present scheme is not adequate, and
changes are called for.

(७) Four State Governments and one Law Secretary regard the scheme as sound,
while one States Government favours an “altogether new scheme”

Question No. 2

(a) According to four High Courts, some defects nave been seen in the present scheme
though they are not serious enough to jusuly changing the scheme. Two High Courts,
however, see no substanual devects in the working of ihe present scheme. Letecis
menitoned are—appoiiment on political or caste basis, and suggesting of names by the
State Government.

| (b) According to some Judges of one High Court and the Chiei Justice of another
High Court, some defects or lacunae have been seen. {hey have menuoned, as an example
ola deiect, the suggestion of a new name by the State Government, aud also delaying the
matter by keeping ine matter pending for a long ume in the State Government.

(०) A very eminent jurist is of the view that some lacunae exist.

(d) Three State Governments and one Law Secretary also see some defects in the
present scheme. Une State Government states that there afe no major detects in the
present system.

Question No. 3

(a) As regards two High Courts, Question 3 does not arise in view of their reply to
Question 2. One High Court has not deait with question 3. Four High Courts Lave
expressed the view inat ine detects can be recufied by plugging 0० loopholes without
ihiowing overboard the whole system.

{b) Some Judges of a High Court and the Chief Justice and a few other Judges of
another High Court, are also of tne view that the defects cau be so remedied.

(७) This is also the view of a very eminent jurist.

(d) Three State Governments and one Law Secretary take the view that the defects
can be recutied, while one State Government is of the view that radical cnanges should
be brought about.

Question No. 4
(a) One High Court favours the proposal for Judges Appointment Commission. Six
High Courts are opposed to having a Judges Appointment Commission.

(b) Chief Justice and five Judges of one High Court are opposed to it. One Judge
of another High Court favours it,

(०) A very eminent jurist agrees with the proposal for having a Judges Appointment
Commission. (He nas made detailed suggestion in this behalt).

(d) Two State Governments consider it to be desirable. Two State Governments and
one Law Secretary regard it as not desirable.

Question No. 5

(a) Six High Courts have sent no reply to Question 5, in view of their reply to
Question 4. According to one High Court (which has, in its reply to Question 4 favoured
the idea), the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court and the Law Minister should be ex-
officio members. It suggests that three more persons who have been Chief Justices or
Judges of the Supreme Court, may also be appointed as members,

(b) Chief Justice of one High Court (not having favoured the proposal in Question
4), has not replied to Question 5, A Judge of another High Court (in view of his affirma-
tive reply to Question 4) has stated that the three members should be in service, Ttather
than retired.

(©) A very eminent jurist is of the view that the body of persons to be constituted
(whether unofficial or constitutional) should not be a mixed one of both Judges and
lawyers. It should not also be unwieldy.

\Appendix 2.
2In the case of one State, the reply is of the Law Secretary.


42

(d) One State Government is of the view that the composition of the proposed
Commission may be suitably devised, and its strength may be seven or nine. Two State
Governments and one Law Secretary are opposed to the very idea of a Commission.
Another State Government is of the view that—

(0) instead of the Minister of Law, a retired Chief Justice should be made a member;
(ii) the sitting Chief Justice of India would have already had his say and so, the retired

Chief Justice of India should (instead of the sitting Chief Justice of India) be
made Chairman of the proposed Commission.

Question No. 6

(a) As regards six High Courts, Question 6 does not arise in view of their teply to
Question 4. One High Court is of the view that Government Counsel and practising
members of the Bar should not be included in the Commission.

(0) Five Judges of a High Court are of the view that practising members of the bar
should not be members.

(०) A very eminent jurist is of the view that the unoflicial body should consist of the
Attorney-Generai of India and Advocates-General of ali States, Judges and lawyers
should not be mixed, as most lawyers would not express their opinion freely in the presence
of Judges. Representatives ot Bar Associations need not be included, as the Bar Associa-
tions are split on the lines of legislatures and are moved by considerations of casie and
religion.

(d) Two State Governments and one Law Secretary are opposed to the proposal for
Commission, According to one State Government, practising members of the bar or
Government counsel should not be made members of the Commission. According to
another Staie Government, one practising member of the bar may be included in the
Commission, but not always.

Question No. 7

(a) In the case of six High Courts, this Question does not survive in view of their
opinion on Question 4. One High Court is of the view that the Commission may informally
consult the Attorney-General, the Solicitor-General and the Advocate-General.

(७) In the case of the Chief Justice and five Judges of one High Court as weil as
some Judges of another High Court aiso, question 7 does not survive.

(०) A very eminent jurist has, under Question 7, referted to his opinion on Question 6
(supra).

(d) Four State Governments and one Law Secretary do not favour the appointment of
a Commission, and for them Question 7 does not survive. One State Government is of
the view that the members of the bar should not be consulted at any siage, whiie, according
to another State Government, one practising member of the bar may (as suggested in its
reply to Question 6) be included (though not always). But if that is not Practicable, the
Attorney-General be consulted informally.
Question No. 8

(a) Three High Courts agree with the suggestion in Question 8. ‘They are also in
general agreement with the view that a recommendation of the Chief Justice of the High
Court with which the two seniormost Judges agree should normally be accepted. Accord-
ing to one High Court, there should be a provision for consulting—

(i) seven Judges, where the High Court consists of (at least) 14 Judges, and
(ii) five Judges, where the High Court consists of less than 14 Judges,

However, the recommendation of the Chief Justice (of the High Court) should normally
be accepied.

Three High Courts do not agree with the suggestion in Question 8. Such a course
may spoil the harmonious atmosphere in the High Court and encourage lobbying and
groupism. The matter should be lefi to the Chief Justice in his discretion,

(b) Some Judges of one High Court agree with the suggestion, but the Chief Justice
of that High Court does not agree, as it may encouraye lobbying and groupism. In
another High Court, some Judges agree with the suggestion, out one Judge does not agree.

(c) A very eminent jurist is of the view that the present provision in Article 217 is
“totally inadequate”. A High Court Judge, in his opinion, should be appointed after
consulting the Chief Justice of India and other Judges of the High Court, or three Chief
Justices, or all the Chief Justices of the other High Courts.

(d) Four State Governments and one Law Secretary agree that the seniormost
colleagues should be consulted and that the recommndation of the Chief Justice supported
by them should be normally accepted. Some of them further add that the Chief Justice
should also state the views of his colleagues, along with his own recommendation.

Question No. 9
(a) Seven High Courts agree with the suggestion,

(b) Chief Justice and six Judges of one High Court and some Judges of another High
Court also agree.

(©) A very eminent jurist is of the view that junior Judges should not be normally
appointed in ‘supersession, until article 124 is amended or a permanent Commission
appointed,

(d) One State Government and one Law Secretary agree with the suggestion. According
to one State Government, when the seniormost Judge is not considered fit for Chief


43

Justiceship, then approval of the proposed Commission should be necessary. Two State
Governments are opposed to the suggestion, one of them stating that seniority is not
sacrosanct and merit alone may be the consideration,

Question No. 10

(3) One High Court agrees with the view put forth in the Question, but adds that
the Chief Justice or Judge of another High Court, who is appointed as C! Justice, should
be senior to the seniormost Judge of the Court (in the all-India cadre of High Court Judges).

Six High Courts are opposed to the suggestion put in Question 10. It has been stated
by some of them that before the appointment of a High Court Judge, his suitability is
judged at various stages, and it is difficult to think that the seniormost Judge is not suit-
able as Chief Justice. One of these High Courts adds that if the seniormost Judge is
considered unfit, an outsider should not be appointed, but the next seniormost Judge should
be appointed.

(0) “As regards individual Judges who have sent replies, in one High Court four Judges
are opposed to, the suggestion, while the Chief Justice and two Judges ate agreeable, “In
another High Court, some Judges agree.

(०) A very eminent jurist agrees with the suggestion, but adds that there should be
no inflexible rule and even an outstanding member of the bar should be considered.

(d) One State Government agrees that if the seniormost Judge is not suitable, the
Judge of another High Court be brought as Chief Justice, but in that case the seniormost
Judge of the High Court should be considered for Chief Justiceship in another High Court.

One State Governmint accepts the suggestion only to a very limited extent, The
Chief Justice should be from the State where the High Court is ‘situated. i, under any
extraordinary circumstances, any outsidc judge is appointed as Chief Justice, such Judge
should be a person proficient in the isnguage of the State,

Two State Governments are opposed to the suggtstion to appoint a Judge from another
High Court, One of them has stated that the bringing of Judges from other High Courts
is merely a metlowing factor, adding that the next seniormost Judge be appointed as
Chief Justice.

One Law Secretary agrees with the Suggestion in the Question, but the outside Judge
should be brought oniy on the choice of the Chief Justice of India, who should consult
hus two seniormost colleagues,

Question No. 11

(a) According to one High Court, a Judge from outside be appointed as Chief Justice
only in the circumstances mentioned’ in Question 10. In another High Court, the Chief
Justice agrees with the suggestion, while other Judges are opposed. Five High’ Courts are
opposed to the suggestion.

(b) Jn regard to individual Judges, some Judges of one High Court, and some Judges
of another High Court, are opposed.

(c) A very eminent jurist agrees with the suggestion.

(d) One State Government agrees with the Suggestion, but stresses that considerations
of regional language claim should be kept in mind

One Law Secretary is of the view that an outsider be appointed as Chief Justice, but
only when the seniormost Judge is unsuitable.

One State Government has not specifically dealt with this Question, Two are opposed.
Question No. 12
(a) Three High Courts agree with the Suggestion, but out of them-—

(i) one has expressed agreement only in Principle, stating that practical difficulties (for
example, the proceedings being in regional language) may come in; and

i) another has qualified its agreement with the suggestion by stating that one-third
Judges of each High Court should be “initially” appointed in another State on a
reciprocal basis,

Three High Courts are opposed to the suggestion. In their view, it is impracticable,
In one High Court, the Chief Justice agrees with the suggestion, but not the other Judges,

{b) In regard to individual Judges the opinion in one High Court was equally divided:
the Chief Justice was of the view that the suggestion wili not bring forth the result enviseg:
od out anviher High Court, one Judge agrees with the suggestion, while one Judge ss
opposed and iour Judges state that only willing Judges should be’ transferred, but thar
there should be no convention.

(० A very eminent jurist has expressed himself as wholly in favour of the suggestion.

(d) Two State Governments and one Law Secretary are in agreement with the sugges-
tion. Besides this, one more State Government is of the view that one-fifth of the Judges
may be from outside ihe State; that State Government has also expressed the view that
one-fiith of the Judges appointed from the Bar should be from among Advocates practis-
ing in Mofussil District Courts, Finally, one State Government, though not in favour of
the suggestion for appointment of Judges from outside the State in any fixed ratio, favours
measures calculated to induct Judges from outside the State.

Question No. 13

(a) Seven High Courts agree with the suggestion in the Question (that the normal
Eenvention should be to appoint the seniormost Judge as the Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court), Of these, five High Courts state (or imply) that there should be no departoc mene


44

the convention, according to the sixth High Court, there should be no departure unless
approved by two-third of the Chief Justices of the High Courts. According to the seventh
High Court, there should be no departure from the convention unless approved by the
proposed Commission.

(b) As to the replies of individual Judges, some Judges of one High Court agree witb
the suggestion in the question. In the other High Court, two Judges agree with the
suggestion in the Question, but they add that in case of a departure from the convention,
other five seniormost Judges should be consulted.

(c) A very eminent jurist is of the view that in the context of the situation where the
Government of the day cannot be trusted to act in accordance with the spirit of article
124(2), at least five seniormost Judges should be consulted. Further when appointment of
the Chief Justice of India is to be from outside the Supreme Court, all Chief Justices of
the High Courts should be consulied. As to appointment of a Supreme Court Judge, all
Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts should be consulted.

Question No. 14

(a) The only High Court that has favoured the proposal for a Judges Appointment
Commission is of the view that the proposed Commission should not have a power to
initiate any new name for appointment of Judges of High Court or Supreme Court or
Chief Justice of the High Court. As regards Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, when
all other Judges of the Supreme Court in the order of seniority are unsuitable, then a
new name for the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court may be initiated by the proposed
Commission,

(b) One Judge of a High Court is of the view that the proposed Commission should
have no power to initiate new names,

(c) According to a very eminent jurist, the proposed Commission should have power
to initiate new names for Judges, but not for the Chief Justiceship.

(d) Of the two State Governments that favour a Commission, one is of the view that
the Commission should have power to initiaie a new name, while the other is opposed
‘on the ground that the Commission is a consultative body,

Question No. 15

(a) The only High Court that has favoured the proposal for a Commission is of the
view that consultation with it should be at the final stage and in addition to the present
constitutional provision.

(b) This is also the view of one High Court Judge,

(c) A very eminent jurist has expressed the view that consultation with the Commis-
sion should be in addition to the present p-actice and in accordance with existing constitu-
tional provisions.

(d) Of the two State Governments that have favoured a Commission, one is of the
view that consultation with the Commission should be in addition 10 present constitutional
position and at the last stage. ‘The other State Government has simply stated that the
view of the Government may prevail.

Question No. 16

(a) The only High Court that has favoured the proposal is of the view that the
recommendation of the Commission shouid be binding on the Government.

(b) This also is the view of one Judge of a High Court,

(0 A very eminent jurist is of the view that for some time the working of the
Commission should be tried. Even if consultation with it is made a part of the Constitu-
tion, it is not, at the present stage, possible to make its recommendation binding, since,
as the matter stands, even the recommendations of the Chief Justices are not binding.
However, an appropriate provision shouid be made in the relevant article to the effect
that the Government shull not appoint any person who is not supported by the majority
of the Commission and the Chief Justice and Judges of the Supreme Court or of the High
Court, as the case may be.

(d) Of the two State Governmnis which favour a Commission, one is of the view that
its recommendation should be of a persuasive character, while the other answers the
question in the affirmative.

Question No. 17

(a) Of the High Courts, only three have specifically answered this question, One
has stated that ii should be the “invariable convention” that the seniormost Judge be
appointed as Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. According to another High Court, this
should be the “normal convention”. and the question of approval by the Commission
does not arise. According to the third, the existing scheme should not be thrown over-
board.

(b) According to one High Court Judge, the existing scheme should not be thrown
overboard.

(c) A very eminent jurist who has replied to the Questionnaire in great detail has
made no suggestion for any new scheme for appointment of Judges,

(d) Of the State Governments that have dealt with Question 17, one is opposed to
any such convention while the other has sy iggested that for one appointment, there should
be a panel of three names for consideration appointment of a Judge before the Govern-
ment. Choice must be left open to the Government, who will select one out of those
three,


45

Question No. 18.

(a) Six High Courts have specifically dealt with this Question. One is in favour of a
convention for appointing one-third Judges from outside the State subject to its observation
on Question 12 (supra). Another High Court favours a common pool but has pointed
out that outsiders will have difficulty of language. The remaining four High Courts are
opposed to the suggestion put forth in the Question.

(b) Some Judges of a High Court are opposed, and so are five Judges of another
High Court, four of them adding that second-rate persons will get in (if the suggestion
is implemented).

(ले A very eminent, jurist is, however. in favour of having a common panel or pool
of persons who have given their consent to being appointed outside the State,

(d) Of the State Governments, three welcome a commen pool; one is against it, A
Law Secretary is also against it.

Question No. 19
The replies on Question 19 reveal wide variety. The following are the ages suggested :
(a) High Courts

One High Court . —. HighCourt Judges = 4750 years.
Supreme Court Judges — 55—58 years.
One High Court . High Court Judges. — 40 years (lower age limit).
One High Court . . HighCourt Judges — Round about 50 years.
Supreme Court Judges — 5 years for direct recruitment.
One HighCourt . —.- High Court Judges > 40__SO years.
Supreme Court Judges — 5060 years.
One High Court . . HighCourt Judges  _ 4555 years.
Supreme Court Judges — 5060 years.
One HighCourt . High Court Judges. __No age consideration for High

Court Judges.
Supreme Court Judges — 45—55 years (for members of
the Bar only).
One High Court . . High Court Judges — 0) 4555 years (for members
of the Bar).

(ii) 5S_58 years (for members
of Judicial Service).

Supreme Court Judges — 5060 years.
(9) High Court Judges

Chief Justice of a High = High Court Judges 50 years (minimum)

Court. Supreme Court Judges — 55 years (minimum).

Some Judges of a High High Court Judges lower age limit 42 years

Court. (No upper age limit in the case

of those persons in service).
Supreme Court Judges — 50 years (lower age limit).

One Judge of a High Court High Court Judges —45_—55 years.
Supreme Court Judges — 5560 years.
One Judge of a High Court High Court Judges — 47_55 years.
Supreme Court Judges — 55-62 years.
Four Judges of a High Court. High Court Judges — 4052 years.
Supreme Court Judges — 50.58 years.
(०) A very eminent jurist. . High Court Judges — 50 years (minimum).
Supreme Court Judges 55 years (minimum).

Both relaxabel in case of extra
ordinary qualifications.

(d) State?Government

One State Government . High Court Judges — 45—50 years.
One State Government . Supreme Court Jucgcs  50—55 years.

— 45—58 years normally.
One State Government . — Should have completed—

@ 35 years for High Court.
Gi) 45 years for Supreme Court.


46

One State Government. _— The minimum age for appoint-
ment of Judges must be 50 years:
Certainly younger persons may
not be selected for the High
Court. | For Supreme Court,
the minimum age should be 55
years.

Question No. 20

(a) One High Court has suggested that the recommendation of the Chief Justice of
the High Court for the appointment of a Judge should be sent directly to the Justice
of India and not through the Chief Minister or the Governor. The initiation of a
proposal for appointment of the Chief Justice of the High Court should be from the
Chief Justice of India, and not from the State Government.

Another High Court is of the view that there should be a time-bound procedure for
the appointment of High Court Judges, particularly in regatd to the stage of the Chief
Minister sending comments on the names recommended by the Chief Justice for appoint-
ment as High Court Judge. The time limit should be one month, and if no comments
are received within the period of one month, it should be assumed that the names recom-
mended by the Chief Justice have the approval of the State Government.

Another High Court has suggested that the appointment (to the High Court) must be
made within 6 months of getting the consent of a member of the bar. If the authorities
to not give their opinion within a stated period, they should be deemed to have agreed
with the Chief Justice. It is also suggested that the Members of the Bar should be entitled
to full pension after 7 years of service as Judge. That High Court is opposed to a fixed
quota for appointment from services, and suggests that merit alone should be considered,
irrespective of seniority,

(b) The Chief Justice of a High Court is of the view that the Chief Justice of the
High Court should send his recommendation to the Chief Justice of India. In his opinion,
consultation with the Chief Minister and the Law Minister is an extra-constitutional practice.
Some Judges of another High Court have also stated that the State Government should
have no say in the matter of appointment of Judges and that the provision regarding
consuitation with the Governor should be deleted. But the Chief Justice of the same High
Court is not in favour of deleting the provision regarding consultation with the Governor.

According to some Judges of a High Court, there should be no transfer of a High
Court Judge without his consent. They are also of the view that no person should be
appointed as a Judge of the High Court unless recommended either by the Chief Justice
of the High Court or by the Chief Justice of India and that no person should be appointed
as a Judge of the Supreme Court unless recommended by the Chief Justice of India.

A Judge of another High Court has expressed the view that the appointment of High
‘ourt Judges should be made on the recommendation of the Chief Justice of the High
Court, who should have a preponderating voice.

(ले. A very eminent jurist who has sent a reply to the Questionnaire has no further
suggestions to make,

(d) As regards the State Governments, one of them is of the view that there should
be one-third of the Judges of the High Court from the subordinate judiciary to attract
better talent while another State Government suggests that at least 60 per cent of the
Judges should be appointed by promotion of District Judges as a fillip to the lower
judiciary which decides the fate of the common man.

One Law Secretary would like half of the vacancies in the High Courts to be filled
from amongst District and Sessions Tudges.

Consultation with the Chief Justice of India and bis two seniormost colleagues for
the appointment of Judges in the Supreme Court has been suggested by a State Government.

A State Government has suggested that 6 months before a Judge is to retire, the
process for selection should be initiated. Another State Government would like the names
of the candidates considered for appointment to be duly published 6 weeks in advance, so
that if any candidate. has unsatisfactory or unsavoury past, it may be brought to the notice
of the members of the public. It says that the Government would make secret inquities
about the truth or falsity of the allegation against any aspirant before a final decision is
taken.

One Law Secretary suggests that at least 10 members should be considered for the
post of High Court Judge and selection should be on seniority-cum-metit basis.

The proposal from the Chief Justice of the High Court after consultation with two
seniormost colleagues and agreed in by the State Government should, he says, be accepted.
He has emphasised that in the confirmation, extension and transfer of High Court Judges,
the Chief Justice of India should have a decisive voice.

GIPN--SS—315 LAD(ND)/79—5-3-80--2000.