January, 1980.


Justice P.V¥. Dixit

New Pelhi-110001,
2nd February, 1986

Wy dear 'Ninister,

T am herewith forwarding the Righty-Second Repor
of the Law Comaiseion strassing the urgent necessity of
amendnents in certain respects of section 59 of the
Tneurencd Act, 1938.

the primary conmsern of this Report involves the
question of the rights of the nominee, heirs, creditors
legatees eto. of the insured, in the money secured by
policy of life insurame after it is paid by the ineure
to the nominee, The relevant sub-section ie sub-s9ectio
४6) of section 39, ‘his sub-section says:

"(6) where the nominee or, if there are more
nominees than one, @ nominee cr nominees surviv
the person whose life ie insured, the -anount
seoured by the policy shall be payable to such
sarviver or surviwors.”

faturally thie does not provide whether on the money
BSife paid to the nominee he ७७० ०७७७ the beneficial
owner thereof, or vhether money forms pert of the estat:
of the insured person so that his heira, creditors,
legatees all have clains on the money. ‘This is because
the object of the sub-section is to enable the ineared
to obtain a good and walid discharge after payment of
the money secured by the polioy to the nominee.

thers 18 no agreement in the decisions af the
various “igh Courts on the question whether seotion 39(¢
confers on the nominees merely the right to collect and
receive from the insurer roney or whether the nosines
is not merely @ recipient of tha money but is also the
beneficial owner thereof. It is clearly undesirable


“Ze

that there should be any uncertainty in regard to

thie matter which is of vital importame not only te
the insured but also to his heirs, creditors, legatees
and nominee,

In order to reduce yt not to eliminate this
undertainty, the Commission's recommendation is that
a new sub-section should be inserted in section 39
providing that where the holder of the policy of life
insurance or his om life nominates his parents, or
his spouse or his children, or his spouse and children
or any of them, the nominee or nominees shall be bene-
ficially entitled to the amount payable by the insurer
to him or them under sub-section (6), unleas it 1s prove
that the holder of the policy having regard to the natur
of his title to the policy, could not have conferred any
such beneficial title on the nominee. The Commission
bas also recommended the insertion of other two mubq-
seotions in section 39, one 2 ioviding that nothing in
the proposed sub-sections shall operate to destroy or
empede the right of any oreditora to be paid out of the
proceeds of any policy of life inesurame and the other
saying that the provisions, the addition of which is
intended, shall apply to all policies of life insurance
maturing after the coming into forsee of the Amending Act
Elaborate reasons have been given in the Report in
aupport of the modifications suggested by the Commission

lastly, the Commission is auch indebted to
Sri P.M.Bakehi, Member Secretary for help during the
course of the Commission's deliberations and in prepara-
tion of this Report. Sri Vase's ansiatane has also

been valuable, aan +
With kind regards, ee

Shri P.Shivy Shanker
Minister of Iaw, Juatioe 4 C.A., CP. Ve. DIXIE )
WeW  DEDHT-~-1


= @) «०

SQORTSRTA
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTORY .
CHAPTSR 2, PRRIENT LAW ANG SAHLIEZR POSETION.
CHAPTER 3, HE ASPRCT OF sOClaL JusTICK.
SHAR 4५ LOGISLATIVE PRECEDENTS .
CHAPTER S. MWOLIGH AND AMERICAN IAW.
CHAPTER 6, AMOOKMENDATION.
APPEROIX SELECT LIst OF STATOTORY AND

OTHER REFERENCES UGING THE
BXPRESSION °REWEPICTALLY
MNTITLEO" GR COMPARABLE
PURASROLOOY .


Seove of
tha Revert.

“tiple
naAPtiou.

40% शा
3५1७ The subjest matter of this Report eoncerns a
single seetion - section °° of the Insurance Aot, 1998,"
which relates to ths mote and effect of nomination in
regar? to a life insuFance pelisy. hile the rest of
the Ingufance Aet is mainly of a technigal nature and
orimrily concerns tho-¢ who carry on the business of —
in. @ 7234 thi. particular sestion 1s of*vital interest
to every caitisen who tekes out Hite insurance.

Certain problems that have arisen in the
interpretation of the section and the injustice vation
seems to reault from the present position, constitute
the orimry Justification for taking up this subject,
mazely, the legs] effect of a nomination made itn regara हे
to & life insurance policy,

let. In bread general term, a life insurance
eontract 19 | legnliy enforceable agreement betwean
the applicant (proposer) ani the insurer. Payrent _
the insurer in aecordance with the sontract (subfect
to statutory requiresents, 17 any) fulfils the basic

१० The Act will be hereafter referred to a5 the
*Inguvanee Act".

% Para 2.1, intra.
Se Chapter 2, dats.
4, Chapter 3, intra.


promise ani dicseharges the insurer from the contrectual
obligations.

Bat sugh payment joes not necessarily 0105७ all
legal controversies, ‘here the insured person hes
dealt with the policy in any one of the modes of dealing.
with it as permitted by lav ~ oF, even vhere he hes not
resorted to any of these miss + more than one party
ray, from the legal point of view, be interested in
wha concy madd or to become payable. In‘ the first
place, there 15 the insured pe@Fson, How fapregented
ty his legal representative.  ecomily, the persons
entitled to the ostste on intastacy or otherwise my
be legally interested. Thirdiy, there ere veraons who
elaim the right conferred by the particular me of
dealing, 1f any, adoptel by the insured person before
his death. and finally, there 13 the insurer.

Ag to the insurer, payment caie by hiz under
the policy ts not a matter with which we are concsefned
in the present Report. The provisions of the Lnsurance
Aet as Applicable to each moie of iealing with the sum
payable unier the policy may, for our purpose, be
treated as aiegistely taking eafe-of the matter from
the point of view of the insurer. We are orimrily
sonserned with the sesond and third groups of parties
nentiom4 above.

le Porn 1.5, inte.


The miltiplicity of parties co Lavelved leads
to the posaitdlity of confliet of interests arongst
them, ani a desire on the part of the Legislature to
avoid suth conflicts so far as noxcible has necessi-
tated the emactment of > set of pFovisions in the
statute law. It 15 obviously desirable that logis-
_ation dealing with the respeetive rights of the
parties should, from tine to tine, be reviewed, in
हवा 29 to take it eonforr. to the ohanging needs of
society :n‘ :xpectations of its members.

\ si goment है In order to anierstand the question in its
77०३2 किक proper persvective, it way be useful to refer to the
various modes of detling with the benefits that might
arise unier a 1176 insurance policy.
Asti gnnett in 1.4. In the first place, an saat gment of the policy
ne ae 1s permissible uniter section 28 of the Tneurance Act.
Under that sestion, the insured person may, if he so
ehooses, assign al) benefits unter the policy. Pro-
wWdet the statutory formilities are obyerved, sush an
assignment raises no sePicus preblems, The rt gits
unier the policy stand transferred te the asi gnee oF
acsignees. It is net necessary that the assi gnee
mast be the spouse or 4 chili of the insured peraon,
although 10 is usually so. On maturity, payment of
the amount due unter the policy is made to the azsignee.

oer ८१ ५कफान-बन+कक- कमान बन नमन मनन 3 enn etn tn SARA ERIC AERO
le seotion 3%, Insurance Act, 1938.


declaration
aplee section
6, Yarrie’ do-
men's Property
ast, 1974.

No other person has a right to participate in the

°
proceeds under a title purporting to be derived from
the insured af®er the assignment.

1.5. Secondly, in regard te 4 person who has or
contemplates a furdly, section 6 of the Married Women's
Property aot, 1874, creates another special mde of
nealing with the benefits to accrue under a policy.
Mnier that seetion, the assured can make what my be
conveniently called » “declaration” of trust in favour
of his wife or children or both. Where that seotion
is utilised, the wife or children or both, as the

ease my be, become entitled to the benefits under

the policy, without an asalgnment of the nature 60115
templated by sestion 38 of the Inawrance Act. This
mole of lesling with the policy also need not detain
ua. Sestion 6 of the Married Women's Property Act
has, no doubt, created certain quéstions of interpre~
tation which the Law Commission has already dealt with
in an earifer Repert entirely dewted to that het.”
For the present putpose, those questions need not be
gone into.

1, Para lod, sUDKB.-

2. Law Commission of India, 66th Report (Marriod
Women's Property Ast, 1874).


Rord mtion
unter -ection
30, Insurance
het, 1978.

Problem for
con: lieration
relating to
the effect of
nomi mtion.

1.6. Thirdly, another mode of dealing with the
policy of life insurance is ty way of nomination under
section 39 of the Insurance Act. This mode of dealing
with the poliey, though less form than the other two
mentioned above, has certain special features. For
example - to refer to only one important feature of
-onination - if the insured person, havi ng made e
nomination, survives the nominee, the nomination be-
coves ineffective, The nomimtion under section 39
can ४150 be defeated by a later asst gment of the
policy made under sestion 38 of the Insurance Ate

In these respects, 8 nomination my be YFegarded as

a weaker form of dealing “itn the policy than the other
two modes mentioned above.

1.7. This legal position 1s well understcod, but

the problem which arises is this. Assuming that a
nomination 1s walid in form and in substance, and
subsisting at the time of jeath of the insured person,
and further assuming that the nominee survives the
insured person, and that the insurer makes payment of
the amount to the nominee, 1.5 the nominee entitled to
retain the moneys so paid, or is he merely an “agent"
जन aneneneneeneaettaeneneeentninentetanteian teenie
1. For text of seetion 39, see para 2.1, infra.

2, Para Ld, supka.

a, Para 1.4 and 1.5, gamma.


of the insurei person, 88 has beon described in some
of the judieisal iieet stonsy 80 that he must held the
money for the benefit of the estate of the insured?

so put the query in different words, 13 the nominee
entitled to regari himself 25 the ‘bene ficial ovwner*
of the amount paid, or is he merely the nominal owner
of the voney? This Report 1s eonserned with that
problem, and seeks to examine the present Law on the
subject and to Teconmend certain amendments which seem

to be tasiratle in the 1toterests of soeial justice.

Le Pare 2.4, infra.


Seation ~ ,
Insurmince «ct.

2५3. The present law as to nomination in regard
to a nolicy of life insurance and its effect as
Sontained in seetion 39 of the Insurance Act, 1938

is as under:

"33, (1) fhe holder of a policy of life
insurance on his own life my, when effecting
"the policy or at any time before the policy
matures for payment, nominate the person oF
persons to whom the money sesured by the policy
shall be nalé in the event of his death:

Provided that, where any nominee is a minor,
1४७ shall be lawful for the policy holier to
appoint in the preseribed mamer any person to
receive the money secured by the policy in the
event of his death during the minority of the
nominee.

(2) Any such nomination in order to be
effestual shall, unless it 45 ineorporated in
the text of the policy itself, be made ty an
endorsement on the policy comaunieated to the
insurer and registered by him in the records


wTelating te the poliey and any such nomination
my at any time before the policy mtures for
payzent be @andelled or changed ty an endo?seent
or a will, S@ the case sey be, but unless notice
in writing of any such cancellation or change
has been ielivered to the insurer, the insurers
shull not be liable for any payment under tho
policy sade boma 13७ by his to 4 nominee men-
tioned in the text of the policy or registered

tn 78०07 १७ of tha insurer.

(3) fhe insurer-shell furnish to the pelicy
holier a written acknovladgonerit-ef having regta~
tered a nomimtion or a cancellation or change
thereof, and my eharge a fee not emeeliing one
rupee for registering such eanpelletion or change.

(4) A transfer or assignment of a policy rade
in accordance with section 38 shall aatomtically
canes] & nomination:

Provided thst the assignment of a policy to
the insurer who bears the risk on the policy at
the time of the assignment, in sonsideratt on of
& loan gtante’ ty that insurer on the security
of the policy within tts surrender wlus, ot ita
Fe-asa{ gnment on repayment of the lean shalt net
cancel & nofiination, but shall affest the rights
of the nomines only to the extent of the insurer's
interest in the policy,


($) Woere-the policy matures for payment
during the life time of the parson whose iite is
insured of where the nominee or, 1f there are mre
nominees than one, 41] the nominees tie before the
policy matures for payment, the amount secured ty
the volicy shall be payable to the poltoy holder
or hig helfs or legal representatives or the
holier of a succession certifioete, aa the ease

may de.

(6) shere the nominee or, if there are more
nominees then one, 4 nomines 07 nouineas survive
the person whose Life is insured, the amgunt secu-
red hy the policy shall be payable to such survive

or survivors,

(7) The provisions ef this gestion shall not
apply to any policy of lifo insurance to which
section 6 of the “arriel Woren's Property Act,
1874 applies or has st any tine &9 931 ७31

Provided thet where 8 nomination made whether
before or after the commencement of the Insurance
(amendment) Act, 1946 in fawur of the wife of the
person who has insured his life or of his wife and
children or any of thom 1s expressed, whether or
not on the fase of the poliey, as being sade under
this seotion, the said section 6 shall be deemed
not te apply or not to have applied to the policy.


vestion “2(6),
Imgaranes Act.

१2७ for our purpose, it 15 aub-seation (6) of ~
section 29 of the Insurance aot that is paterial.

he effect of that aub-sestion is that where the
nemines, or if there are 2079 nominees than one, 4
nodnee or corinees, sutvive the person whose life

13 insured, the amount assured by the poliey shall be
sayable to such survivor or surviwrs. This provision
00s not, however, lay down whether, on the money being
paid te the nominee thereunder, the nominee beeomes
the beneficial ovner thereof, or whether the aoney
shell form part of the estate of the insured peraon

80 that his heirs (or the legatees sentioned in that
regeri ip the wlll, 553 the ease my be), have any
61923 ४5 thereon.

There 15 sonsiierable case law on the subject,
to whieh a detailed reference will be made in later
paragraphs. Yor the precent, 1t vill be suffiotent
to say that there is a conflict of 3801 34019 - though
not vety formidable - on the subject. One viw is
that soetion 3:(6) of the Insurande Act confers on

ere ae eereeennertnamennnentegneamncmanencecaneninansitete teint नल ननिननन न +- न नन++ कनभ««-नक«न.
le Pare ‘el, 2375.

* Paragraphs %5 to 7.8, otra.

Re Paragraphs 2०) to 366, infra.


Anthr:n view.

JQuyjrit view.

the nominee nerely the right to receive the insurance
money sa between the Loauzance company ani the nosinee,
bat it 4oas not provide for the title or ownership of
the money. The second view regards the nominee not

39 a mere recipient of the mney but also as the
penefieisl owner thereof.

23 Thug, in an Anithra case of 1997, 40 was held
that the nominmse gets the property in the poltay
subject to 211 liabilities of the pelicy holier ani
the amount 13 subjeet to the alaims of erediters of
the deces sed. ,

a"
Bete The Gujarat High Court bes also held that
wheve @ policy holder, sfter mking « neminetion in
the policy, dies intestate, the rightful claimants te

“the sum aseured under the coliey of insurance are the

legal heirs of the deceased policy holder, and not
the noctnee tn the insurance poliey.

fhe Gujarat iecision te based on the theory
that the nominee 1s a collection agent, having only -
६ right to recelwe and collect the moneys on behalf of
sears कनिन-+नन न नन-न करन मनन न न-+न सा कम जज--कनञन-न मनन नमन नानक न >जनाननभानन- नमन aera
i. Paragrephs २10 and 2.11, infta:

2. Ma RARER २-० Ke Tenkataramta Bia, ATR. 1957
A.P. 757, 758, para 3,

°. Aimarag ve Qammnkihen, A.lefs 1977 Ouj. 14
(3.P. .esal & MP. Thakinr JJ.) (reviews case law).


vaLentta view.

origiml claimnts. If there is 8 will (made ty

the policy holier), the legatee under the will woul 4
get the amount. If the policy bolder bas died intes-
tate, his legal 38125. vould got it, accorling to the
Gujarat judguent.

3, 5% In a Caloutts ease of 1056, ६६४ was held that
the neminse acquires no title. ‘The title to raselve
the roney does pat paasagarily create ० title in iam
“0 that coney which can be sald to be gocd as against
the whole world",

In 8 later Jileutts case ‘of 1270, the moneys
to be jue under the policy were payable not on the
lgath of the assured, but on a fixed date. The
assured nooimtei his younger son &s the nominees.
Soon व thereafter, the assured ifed intestate, before
the date so fixel, leaving Miz widow and two sons as
hie heirs ani legal representatives, Under the policy,
she sum Was says ble on the date mentioned ateve, but
there vac a clause under which, after one year from
the date of the policy, the policy would acquire 4
Gash surrenier value. The question te be considered

te Bammalia v. Gangadhar, AIH. 1956 Cal. 275,
276, paragraphs 8 to lL. है

2. 13.19. .1.1512:2409..:07::: 4 6:..3:1:2 v. United
Henk of Imila Lhde, # «| «१७ 10770 Cal, 513, S15,
S17, S18, paragraphs 12 and 15.


Karnitals
Ker? oan
Crisaa view.

ws whether the nominee could validly assign the olaim
in respect of the policy, in view of the teath of the
१01 ७७ of the policy before the maturity of the policy.
There also arose a larger question, namely, whether
the nominee sould surrenjer the policy. Both the
questions vere answered in the negative.

The qase actually 714 not fall within section
39, Ingurance 8050, since it “= not technically #
gontract of life insurance", The diseuseion in the
judgment about the position cf a noainesa 1s, therefore,
otiter.

24Ge According to the Kernatake vow, the nominee
has no other right exsept ‘a bare right to collect
the policy money without affeoting the title te (of)
other claimants, if any".

a
The Kerala High Court also helds the seme view.

4
This 15 also, in substance, the Grissa view.
Agsording to the Orisa view, the emphasis in geation

le Page 518 in 8«1 «१५ 1970 dal, 513,

2 dite deregwuathl Bal v. jmte Malet, Ale. 1978
Karn. 8, 709 para 6,

*. Samadipl sma रन Heglkanta Pillai, 4.7.8. 1962
Kerala 196 (7.3.).

4. Halide v. ganchan Pram devi, Ati. 1975
Orism 83, 84, para 3 (G.K. Mera o.J.).


allay.bal view.

~M-

8(6) 1-5 on the expression “payuble* and the nominees
aoquiras no title to the amount to the exoluaton of

ali other heirs.

The latest case on the subjeat is a Punjab
one, which also takes the view that the nominee does
not get title to the property in the policy or its
proceeds. The following observations in the Punjab
Judgment are pertinent: 5

"s eombinel reading of sub-sestions (5)
and (6) of seation 39 of the Insurance Ast
shows that a neminee 15 in the nature of s
trustes who reeeives the soney due under a
poliey ant keeps it for the benefit of the
legnl heirs of the jJeceaset,"

207% It my, however, be stated that aacerding to
the Allahabad Aigh Court (fudgment of 1962), the
money belongs to the nominee ani he is not to be
treated as a trustee for the heirs of the insured

or as & mere agent on thalr tohalf. In reaching this
vonslusion, the High Court considered the clause in
the policy, the statutory proviztons, the Snglish
and Indfan cese law and other relevant aspects,

te Site Hal ve yah matt ml, (1975) 81 Punjab Law
Reporter 223 49 Company Cases 361 (ist Jum, 1979).

% Resxi levi v. Dhatm vavi, 6«1 «8. 1४63 ALL. 955,
756, para 4 (Desal 2,7. & Ramabhadran J.). :


In the first place, as to the clause in the
policy, the High court pointed out that the monays
were payable to. the tnaured @ fon his prior death)
to “hic nominee, executors, administraters, asst gus
oF other represmmtatives, ss the case my be", subject
te proof being given of the title of the slsimants
uaier the policy. It ws not, therefore, open to the
insurance oompany-to say that 1t sould not pay the
vonay to the nominee's hetrs. (In that 0889३ the
nemines hai ited before astually reseiving the money).
since 8 nominee had been nominated, the company mst
pay the money to hin or (if he hes diel in the man-
while) to his astute.

Jevomlly, ag to the statutory provisions,
the lich Court pointed out that sestion 39(1) of the
Inguranee Act, 32.9 82 ampover s the insured to make a
nemination and seetion 77९6) lays down that if the
nominee survives the insured, the nominee ९४ anti tied
to receive the money. The High court als peinted
out that seetion 3°(5), which deals with the situstion
where the nominee dies before maturity, evidently mikes
a distinction between (4) death of the nominee before
maturity and (11) ieath after maturity but before
Yrecaiving payment. In the former case, the money 19
payahle to the insured or hic heirs or legal

ee eeemendemeaneinmnnemeamnantammemeendtmmemeneneeneeeeneeanmenen anaes emnne nea

ie Para 21, gupta.


ropresentatives, ond 4४ impliedly fellows that in
the letter o2se, the nomay woul’ be payable to the
estate of the noninee.

2eBe Ag Tegerds English cases and those Indian
@sees which followed the snglim judielal decid ona,
the Allshabed Bi gh Court observed:

"We do not think itis the wed versal rate
or rule of justice, eutits anh seed eonacienns
Wikeh mist be gid-te be iinding upon this court
thet the pekiepoemmey that 15 paid te « nominees
चांद section 39(6) of the Insurance Act 18 held

i bie.te0 tress fer the legal representative
of the ao sured."

The principal resson im the Aliehabad judguent
18 कक ॥8 the following passage

“There is nothing tn seetien 39 "६0 suggest
that he reesives the sonef screly as a trustee
oF agent of the assured’s Legal representatives.
Sestion 39 dees not lay down that he is under
any liability to secount for the money received
te any person. the obvious seantng of the
langwge used in: subsections (1) ani (6) is
that the insurance tompany must pay the soney

ee merce omen नननननननननन न नमन pumeenrianune assis
1... Raphasis supplied.


#17 -

“to him and he is left free to deal with it in-
1
apy mnner he Likes, *

2
Sormmanting on thin, the Gagerat Righ Court,
in 1६55 judgment alreaity referred to, has observeds

“4th respect, there fs no warrant for the
conelusion that the nosinee 15 left free to
deal with it in any manor he likes. It ‘oes
net follow fron any provision of law or from
first principles. It is mere ipze dizi of
the learned Juiges. It does not take into
account the reasoning unfol led in the 349«

q@assion hereinbefore."

The Allahabad Judgment La the fMlilewing
passage extracte! from para 6 gave snother reason ~

“Men the money becomes payable on the
‘eath of the assured and on aceount of the
death, we do not understand how it can be
mid to form part of his estate.”

Commenting on this the Gujarat High Court
obser vet:

is Baaatiulexi v- Dbatm devi, A.t.8. 1962 All.
355,

2, Abmeram v. Guamptinan, ह०7 ० ० 1977 duj. 1344
137, 138.

7७ Para 2.4, gupma-


‘The Oivisiom Sench has assumed that the
amount does not form an estate of the policy
hol:ar, If the benefit aristng unier the
sontract of insurance formed = part of the
estate of ch: solicy 03 87 Juring ais life tine
‘or thi reasons iLseussed earlier, namely, that
he couli have transferred 1t, assigned it of
rat-ei 8 loan on it, how dees it cease toe be
avr करी hig estate on his death ani become
a part 07 an astate of the nominee? By virtue
of operation of vwiich prinsipis of law ani ty

what proces: of ratiocimtion?®

Purther, the Allahabed Bigh Court had ७1380
plaen? reliance on paagraph 1157 of 46 Corpus Juris
seoundus for buttressing the sonelusion Feachet ty
them. The passage in qiestion reads as unter:

"1157. Raliax oyable to thing peraons
The procesis of a polfoy naming a third person
as beneflolary belong extlusively to such bene-
fielary as an iniividual, they are not the
property of the heirs or next of kin of insured,
are not subject to administration or the laws
of daseent governing the iiatribution of tn-
surei’s persoml property, and generally do not
constitute any part, or an asset of his estate,

le Vol. 44, Corpus Juris secundum, paragraph 1157,


lata

-~We

"If the procweds are collected ty the aduinis<-

trator, he holis them in trust for the beneficiary.

Commenting on this, the Gujarat High Court

observel:

‘Ch a bare perusal of the aforesaid passage
it leaps to the eye that the aforesaid proposi~
tion of law has been stated in the context of a

4a insuranee policy in weish a third parson

18 masoi as 60 ‘benefieiary’. We are concerned
with a policy where a person has been named as
a ‘nominee! unter section 3° of the Insuranese

Act. + proposition of law stated in tha 0011"

text of the foreign law and in the light of «

different insurance policy wherein the person
we Tamei as pone fietary {and not nominee)
cannot buttress the view which found favour
with the Allahabad High Court.*

2५9« Besides the 41190 08) case of 1962 nantl oned
above, the Allahabad High court bad in 1972 oceasion
to deal with the effect of nomination via-a-vis the
creiiters of the deceased. After considering the
pYovidions of sestions 38 and 39 of the Insurances
Aat, the High Court halde

1. BadaRas ve Hata Prasad, 41-8. 1972 All. 167,

169, para 15 (F.Be)e


Raghts of nom-

gee secoriing to

410.

- 0-

‘he result of our survey of tha material

provistons 15:

(1) The pelisy holier continues to bold

ee

(an) imterest in the policy till the

moment of his Jeath;

The nominee under section 39 acquires
no interest in the policy in the 11 fetine
of the policy holder.

The benefit seeurel by the peliay forus
pert of the estate of the decansed
policy holier, 90 as te be available

to the creditors, As it is part of his
astate, hLo orediters can realize their
loans from the money paid to the nominees.
He will be the ‘legal representative’

of the 16598 883 policy holder.”

It may bs added that the Allahabad judgment

Mianate! view. of 1972 does not expressly overrule the judgaent of

It would appear that the or esent position in
the Allahabed High Court is that vis-a-vis the hoirs,
the nominee is absolutely entitle! to the proceeds
of the policy, but the oreditors ean anfores against
the nominees their 31818 agsinst the estate,

Ee eee 33 -भ 9 -++क++-+क29०५++++नमकन नरक.

Judgment of 156°, pars 2.8, sunta.
Tadgment of 1972, pare 2.9, supma.


elt. tho eurront 83259 trend elso represents the
pecom: view. In an earlier Madras sese, it vas held
that - nocination (unlike an assignment) does not
involve $ transfer of the rights unier a policy. In
another Madras case, relating to the rights of the
repince with reference to the Sstate Duty act, it
“ms eld that nomimtion ices not invwlve « transfer
of the rights.

3
1.1% 10 9 later drag case, however, ¢ different

view was taken. The tie in that case was between the
wife who was the nominee of the decessei (1.0. of the
life assurei)}, tue daughter of the ieceased and the
mother<Ln-law of the Jeseaset. It was held that the
wife, solng the nominee, was alone entitled to the
inswance arount. ‘his ruling, being 8 later Jeci-
ston, must prevail as against the earlier rulings”
noted above.

nn ne een EnEEnnnsenemmeneniemmmunaenentl

le Reta Hudaliar v. Indien Logutenee and Dankine
Gnxnoration Lhdes dalams AoI-R, 1/57 Yad. 11S
(9०8५) «

३०. Seethelagel ve Gollestor of tatete Duty, Medras,
(1968) 61 IeTeR. 317 (Yai.), quoted in Atm Raz
ve Qunwantiban, 4.1-R. 1977 091: 124, 139, para 6,

. Earuppa Gounier v. falaniammal, ४०7 «४० 1967 Had.
WS (9«8«) « ः

te elle Jovinliag v- Indian :&12:704..43:0..29121:4
Gorneration, AeIeli. 1957 wad. 115 (2०६) «

3e Fata 2eliy SURER-


Pesttion in
frurlar’.

१1१७ Ts my के noted that of the gases cited in
the earlier Madras judgsent, many relate to assign-
ments sii not te nominations.

ITI, Sha sootiies.

14. The above brief rasume of the case law shows
the aonfliet of views om the question of the rights
of the nominee vis-a-vis the rivil hairs of the
insured parson. The Allahabad gudgment of 1962 and
the later “iadrae ouse are in direst conflict with the
view taken by the Anthra, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala
and Oriesa Bich Courts. The Calsutta view takes a
diway position,

2.15. We shall in ‘ue coutse dt seuss &nglish tases
Telating to the effect of nomination. But at the
present stage it is legitimate t state thet in
England, there is po general stetutery nrovi slon of
the nature containei in section 39(6) of the Insurance
Aat, ani the matter 12 to be dtseassed on the basis

le dauediadabier v. Indian Ingrence and jenkdios
Soxyneratian, १७758 1957 “ad. 115. (sce
Ramswamdi J.'s judgnert).

१०. Kartuune Sounder 7 Palaniauma]l, AIR. 1°63 Mad.
45 (Beds

", Paragraphs Sel to 3.6, infra.

4, 39७ Jp pe ughehemn, (147) : all GR. SBT, 260
(Uthwatt J.) (14७ between wi iow ont trustee in


#७-०1 01071
wefora 1958.

of the ntesenae or sbsence af avidense of a trust.
lgenily ereated or other 16851 obligation. ‘oreover,
what is relevant for our purpose 1s not what iu the
aorrect view of the present statutory provisions, bt
what onght to be the law fron the point of view of
gects] justiee and the expectations of or‘iinary
yeTsons.

Iv. 2 posision.

3.16. Before we deal with the aspest of social
justice, ve may note that the statutory law before
1938 444 not contain a general provision for nonim-
tion in regard to poltetes of insurance, The legis-
lation in force iid not specifically provide for >
nomtration, though an assignment was legally valid
(andi waa at teat time governed ty the Transfer of
Property det), Before 1938, the question wheather
the person nentioned in the policy (ag one for whose
benefit the policy was obtained) was beneficially
entitled te the proceeds or whether the amount
formed part of the estate of the deceased was app-
roached ty the Courts in India with reference to the
question whether the petson mamt desigmited could

le See pata Sel, Anfia.-
’. Inte Arran idle scsasiation, 4.1.%. 1908 Som. 182.

%e section 1%, Transfer of ?renerty act, 1982,


* 34 «»

sue the insurer. che lather question itself was
deterained on the baste of the sti? sere gpeewel-
question vertaining te the lav of eontraets, namely,
when ean «© persen net party te 4 contract sue theresnt

2.17. (a) dome High dourts (before 1038) took the
view that the petapn so designated inthe pelfay,
not being 8 party to the contract, sould not sue,
apart from statutery provisions sush as those ¢on-
tained 10 the Herried women’s Property set, 18%,
ani if there.was 20 evidence of an intentien t
arente a trust.

If the persen designated wes entitled to sus
the insurer, then there was ap doubt that the noney
belonged to that person and fernet no part of the
estate of the decensed.

In & Rangoon cose, belding thet the wife
obteined np rights under the paliey of insurance,
on the death of her hugbend (ty reseon of the fact
that her name was mentioned in the poliey as the
person to whom it should be paid), it was observed:

i. For ease law as to third parties’ righta, sea

Rabrad_Dineks v- Man Sobinda, 2०1०६ 1034 Gal.
683 (reviews cases).

2. Rilshonlal २* Peagila Dalaieal, Alef, 1938
Cal, 618. (Jee infts).

Se दा... v. dunbife Assutante Cons Camda, &.1.K.

3035 Re noma FIT. 71%.


"The healing 9858 on this subjeat is (43.2)
1 ५ eJe 147, 18 which it wes held that, apart
fron the p¥evisions of the Married voments
Property «ot, the right to san on sush a policy
wWoull sass to the legal "872 88 78.1 representatives
of she ieveasei, and the debt would be a debt
due to thom 88 representatives of the teceasei:
thet aa between them ani the insurers « nomina-
tion in the peliey of 4 person to whom the
amount should be payable would have no effect
veesuse gUAb.# naRaon waa not a party te the
Sontpact of ingursges; umd that the insurers
wouli te bound to pay the legal representatives
of the 16088 880 and mo one else,

“Consequently, unless and until some
person has established his title to represent
the deceasei, no debt becomes due from the
insurers unier the policy.

"fo the same effect 15 an earlier Sonbay
case, where, in the case of a poliay of
insurance effected ty the assured upon his
own life and expressed to be for the benefit

1. Glaawer v. dutupl iesetw fund Lite dssosiation,

(1882) 1 ७७७०० - 147,

7. dbnpkar Yighwapath v- Jmabal dadashiy, (1°13)
TeLeoR. 37 Bom. 471.


Yof hig wife, tt was held that the polioy on

his teath formed part of his estate, the Fight
of action against the insurance company being

in his exeouters oF other rerresentatives
untramelloi by any trust in favour of his wife.*

1
In a Calouttea case reported in 1028, it

was observed:

“Ma cuestho: Apo oauebebber the

dni_formuethof the sisete of She eahehe of

the jeceasei. Tho plaintiff was, no doubt,
She mupime ol the Jesetseds nuk she waa ne

Inaukanentnsiety. OUnier the English law, if
A eontracts with 8 for a benefit to be given

‘to 0, although that was the ebjest and purpose
of the contract, C may not sue on that contract
unless in certain oxcepted omses. ‘The excepted
eases are these:

1. Sxidhoatal ve Mb. mmlla la tat, 4.1K.
1998 dal, 538, 519-570,

2. Suphasie added.


Anpreach
silosted by
each Hitch
court.

*gharae you oan read on the whole of the
deed oF contract thet the contracting

party Tenlily was a trustes for a third
person, then the third sersen my sue.*

(b) At tho sage time, there were High Courts
whieh reachel 9 4ifferent consi usion, either because
they considered that in such cages the nominee vas
really tntenied to be a beneficlary vor because they
were of the view that a near Felative had a right to
sue an: that the rule that @ stranger to the aontract
cannot sue eould not apply in such oases.

21B- «= The «first group of High Courts viewed the
matter by starting the inquiry with some such questior
ag this ~ Is the vatsen designated entitled to sue th
insurer? If he was entitled te sue, there was no
jJoubt that he would get title to the essets. If not,
then he wonl? not get title.

5
The second group of High Courts took the
view that a peFson for whose benefit the pelicy was

a caetneernnstibenetameatnmeanteteenenemtomasenann tnenmensnenemeteesengeemmeneeneseet eT

1. Matin v- Mahomed Matin, 4.I.R. 1923 Lah. 145.

S. Belagha v. Epishoayya, (1913) I.L-is 37 Mad. 493,
491, 498, 500,

Para 2५17७), gupkn.
4e Slab bal ४« Proghle Bala, *«1 «४५ 1988 Cal, 515,
Para 2,17(b), आफ्रय

“so
कं

पा


ature of the
Pantie
ou Towne

View: of
Shri 3en.

expreseed to te taken could claim title to the
amount.

1,12. Thus, the controversy related to the right of
the nominee to cue the tniurer. 1 ऐ 15 conmewhat
surious thet thouwh this very question (right of the
romince to claim payrent) was settled ly the Act of
1:78, the position of the nominee yig-a-wia the priya)
Glitmens: remined the subject mtter cf debate even

2220. de have not been able, in spite 0? the best

efforts, to get the Legislative department proesedings
Telating to the M1l. One writer who published a took
on the Aat in 1938, had this to say on the point under

Aiseus sion:

"Bichts of nomination. - fy asation 29 every
policy holder has bean given the right to nomt-
nite tha nePson of sefsons to whom the coneys
payable unia? the poliey will be paid in the
event of his death. The effect of this will be
to avold the expense ani troubles om the part of

le Susll 0७ 3en, “Inidan Insurance Act, with a
sytopsie™, page ATV. Shri Jen was placed on
special duty to examine the material which was
oolleated ty Government concerning the anandment
of company law in geners] and tnsurance law in
particuler.


‘uterta2 in
the Jdebates.

‘the nordnee to aPecure a represantution fron a
Court of Law. The policy holier has also been
tiven the Fight to change the noxmimtionat any
time bafore the policy matures by aniorserant
oF by % will, thereby giving him a free has
till the end.*

Re does sot, however, specifically deal wth
the position of the nominse viswaevis others on vhich

there had been a controversy.

teZl, AS FegaTds material in the debates, 1४ appears
tat the thrust of Legislative Asseahly Oebates we
directed towards regulation ७६ the foreign insurance
companies which then held the tad. Points ts-
oussel concerning rights of policy holders ani yersens
teriving title from thom wete very fow., In any ¢asoy
the effect of nomination was not discussed, a
Buropean Member from Madras (7५ 8५, James) - who was
primarily coneerned with safeguarding interests of
the foreign comanies ~ inal sted upon the aidition

of the woris ‘named (0 tho notice” after the word
“acai 11897 in what 13 now seetion 38(5) (assi gment
ani transfer of insurance policies). [ho obdjoot was
to mke it clear thet the insurer's liebility 45 to
the person from whom he bhai recel ved notice, whether

1. Legislative assembly Debates, Yol. 6, 21st septen-
ber, 1937, page 2157.


he Wag the person named in the endersement oF

instrument or not.

the R111 &s introiueed contained no definition
ef the expression “policy holier" ani “r. Kh. Amantha-
sayarman Ayyangar proposed a definition on the lines
of section 7(7) of the Indien Life Assurance Compantes
aQty 11% HP. ‘Ayyanger thought that there should be
no confusion &s to whether फ assignee would be deemed
to ben volicy hol‘ere The Law Member, oir Nripendra
lath virear, first opposed the aneniuent on the ground
that persons who had becone asaigness after advansing
te the insured small loans of, say, & 30 or 2७300
mizht start olaiming to be the nolicy holders’ repre-
sentatives, lowever, “re iulathot J, vesad pleaded”
with the Law Member that he might at least consider
the inmalusion of an absolute aselgnee in the 39173 -
tion of “policy holder". The Law Member witimately
agreei. thet 45 how section 2(2), Jefining a policy
holder gane to have 4 provision including an absolute
agsi goee.

oemenetemnenerneneomtedet timespan tenienhttnsneatednasti cease teenies

le Legislative assembly Debates, Vol. 6, 7th
September, 1937, page 1263.

2» Legislative Assertly Debates, 7th september,
1937, page 1263.


Pal 11 1६907

of 19211 78९५७
axmacinttions
anl co.ittion of
near relitivese

* 31-

Shara 2
THEAMEGAL CE JOCTAL Sua IEg

Dele dq bave so far dJisoussed the present lay as

to the effeet of nomination in regard to a policy of
life ingurance sn! evolution of that law. That there
is a confliet of deaiatons under the present act is
obvious,» But we are not, in this Report, sonserned
with the question of merely suggesting a solution thet
wult mit sn end to tha conflict of decisions. Hather,
we spproach the matter froma differant ant a broader
angle ~ Wutemsht tp be the lay as to the effest of
& nomination? shouli the nomdme be regerted as a
mre agent, or should he be regarded as having title?

It appears to un that dn demling with this
question, 07009 on legitimately munks & itstinetton
between eases where the nouines ६5 a near relative
of the poltay bolder and eases where the nominse is
& distant relative or a stYanger to the family. This
Ustinstion is of relevange for the basic reason that
the ordinary person, when be rales a nomination in
fawur of a near relative, may be taken as intending
to mike 4 beneficial provision for hiz and would not
eentemplate his being a «wre agent. Although the
statute uses the expression “nominees”, that expression

१७७७७७७७७७७॥७७७७७७७७७७७/शशशशशशाशााााााा आइना aan TO
1. Paragrapha 2.14 and 15, gupta.


Social
Justics.

= 32 =

toes not, in ragerd to mar relatives, siequately
sum up all that the ordinary pereen has in mind.
when he wakes the nomination, he doos not view the
oor ralatives so ‘nomimted" as 2 ‘nominal ovner",
3@ looks far shead «ni, bearing in mind the future
noeis of his near relative, sets out to Adopt a
levice which, while not divesting him of his own
rights in ease be survives the "nominee", would be
nleqaate enough te make an effective floanei«l sro-
vislon for the nerson desigoted ty hin.

Viewed in this licht, the present law falls
te falfil the lecitimate expectations of the citisen,
ani needs amendment.

“ale Anart from the above approach + the approad:
of realism ~- there is the consideration of seetal
justice that would seem to justi fy an amandoent.
Where | nomination is tn favour of a near relative,
and the Legislature is faced with the quastion of
choosing betweon (1) a striotly legal approach of
Tegarding the nominee ag a nerson vho collects the
monsy on behalf of others (and therefore only a
nomimel owner), and (14) & beneficial approach mich
wouli Tegeri the nominee of such & 61853 ag baneficl-
ally wtitlet, ४७ think thet the latter course sught,
ag a catter of social justi ae, to be preferred. We


29078 07

’

near
relatives".

shall presentiy ical in somewhat greater 20547

with the position of women and the neet for afforiim
them financial protestion after the ieath of the
person insured, and wuch of vimt we sre going to say
will apply to cther near relatives as wall.

ee che next question to be considered, then,

is - who are the persons who can be appropriately
rosaries: within the ranca cf these laserving

snoci .1 -rotaction unier the category of ‘near
Telatives’? It appears to us that having regard to
condi tions in India, the law ought to resomise the
special postition of parents ani childron as well as
of spouses. By and large, thoy are the persons vho
woul! expect. to be previled for. Life ineuranee,

in its essence, is tesigned te be a cushion agai nat
unexpeeted finaneial disnstars. A contract of
ingurance is a contract to pay on the happening of
some event ani is generally intenied to cover a risk.
The risk in this ease is of death, - though the
contract @arries the euphemi stie appellation of life
insurance", In the ease of parents, spouses and
children, the risk facter 13 the most prominent,

ani laath ts Lilly to have the Jeepast impact on
their pePsomal lives.

le Para 304$ dota,


Fo fifon af
married women.

Provi stons
for widow.

all this tends to ४0 in fawur of adopting 4
different anproash as to the effect of nomination
from thit alopted by the majority of the High Courts
unier the present Law, 4s Pevaris the relatives nen=

tioned above.

ede हे would also 14189 to state that in ieelding
what ought to be the Law, the vosition of women is of
जज 01 का | छा drpertanes. “arrioi women as & class afte
rei oc yall uz owe! Mth gupdtal as their husbands.
‘an जाये to be the capital mers, while women tend

to acquire it as their suscessors. ‘the question
which gives sn<ious thought to many a husban? 15 how
to nfovi ie for the widow so that on his (husbandt 8)
388 ५03॥ cha los 67 Als earned Lacone or pension rights
shatl not lexi to < drastic reduttion in the widow's
standard of living. Harrie!) women for the 202४ nart
2Pe not faced with a similar problem regerding पेड:
banses; they have less to leave, and, on death,

thelr ingome has probably not contributed to the
mintenahee of the family home to an appreciabie
extent. Sovever, in those gases where they are faeed
with that problem, the answurs whioh apply to men apply
equilly te them.

Fede Provi sions for a widew my be mate either

during het husband's lifetime by means of rifts and
polietes of insurance om his 1179, or, so as to take
effect after nis death, by his will. “hat mist nen


- 35 -

wish to seaure is a roof over the widow's head and

an adeqmte inoome for its upkeep afd her maint ennees.
If nothing 4s dene during the hustand's Life to sm-
vile for the widow, and she is left to take under his
will, the result wili be that the husband's available
eatate vhich should ultinately dewlve on the heirs my
be substantially reduced ty estate daty.

Therefore, the recommendation which we pre-
po 9 to tke is aminently neeted for the protestion
of married women - though i¢ is not confined to them

Speech of 3५6५ Whdle on this point, we would like to quote
Mr. Hothouse.
& passage from the speesh of bre Hothouse on the
Married Yonen’s Property 211 (whi@ le@ to the det
of 1874) -

"de must renember that a wife's eontri bution
to the family wealth did not usually consist in
paywonts of money. jhe wy bring to her husband
BO money at 41] ani yet aay be a very treasure
to him even if measured by 4 mere pecuniary
standard, If the wife kept the housshold to-
gether, brought up the children, governed his
servants, conducted all his petty dealings with
tradesmen, ind performed other similar domestia

i. Pate 3.3, sama.
% Gasette of India, ixtra supplement, dated 6th
Septenber, 1873, page 12.


~ 36 »

Niuties, Ths husbani alcht be 8 fur richer
man for her serviees, although he might provide
all the actual money thet comes into the family.
Then, 1f he shoge that hi. wife should take

avery year 350 such out of the cocmon stock, oF
out of ht stock, ani spend 1६ in an insurance
for herself or her children, why should she not
4o so. Tf the tustand choce thet thet should

be jane with his pro-arty from time to time, Mr.
Hobhou-a ‘11 not 536 Lt was a matter for legal
question, or that thera should be any legal
aiffieulty placed in the way of the wife's
enforcing the contracts. It might be the most
pruient, the rost wkf vise, and the most bere-
Steicd arrancerent for the whole family, the
vary best oe of making a provision for them,
and it also 76 हो: bo, and often Was, 3..:%४ ८:
ofabsolute Justices 2s batvasn bushend and ifs,
which he of his arediters ought not to dispute
at any future tine, '

3.70 The aspest which we have stressed is also
WALL 1
substitute. = enit with ina fairly resent publication. It has

pe menenanrentess st eaten La Ee ALON LTCC ALCL न-नननन> कक नमन.

i. Kimtll, ‘fhe Functions of Jesignations of
Pemfietaries in “odern Life Insurances «8५ 8« 7,
in Hellner के G, ford (sditors), Life Insurances
an Tnternation:L Perspective (1969) 74, 76, cited
in Langbeln, ‘Substantial Compliance with the
W211" (1975) 88 Harvard Law Review 489, 508.


one articia.

BeBe

- 37 -

been pointe? out that the dominant “will substitute"
17 aoiern practice 15 life Lneurance, ani it has been
observed 2s follows in that publica‘ ont-

“The only simmifiesnt assets of tha estates
ef mst psonlo ate the proceeds of one or mre
life insurance polieies. Yer such people,
coustituting 4 mjority of the population,
deterefmation of the listribution of that
‘oronarty’ through the designation of a bene-
Mciary unier the insurance eontrast not only
has preelsaly the sams function as awtil, but
sonesti tutes 8 "uch more important ‘testament!
than the Will. In view of the numbers of people
involyot, the Life insurance boneficiary Jest c-
nation 1s the principal ‘last will an] testament?
of ow legal systeme...+.» A properly iecignated
baenefiolary will reesive the proneedz of the
dugurance without regard to comiliance with the
formalities required in the law of wills.*

1
We my &1s0 mention that one writer, in an

artiole published on the subject, has iiseussed in
detail the realistic pesition concerned with the
intention of the policy holder (who makes a noml-
mation) ani has highlightel the di ffloulties felt

T.A. Vardhara jan, “Justice to the Polioy-holder*
(1078) Vol. 1, H.LJ. (Journal) 41, 43, 45,


Nead for
ehange ir
the low.

at present. Mo has pointed out that it ts too fare
fetehed and impossible of acceptance that vhen 8
life asewod enters into a contract with the insurer
(tha Life Insurance Corporation of India), and exer-
eises his chotce of nomination under section 39, by
making 4 ‘most oniearing" persen of Ais, he does it
with the sole idea of making that person « trustee
of eolleetion agent with no yersonal or beneficial

1 torent Yor him (nomince?, bub only with the onerous
liabhlity to account to the heirs, etc. for the eid
nonsy, ané hand 4% ever to then.

3५9०७ Having regard to the various considerations

sat out in this Ghepter, there seems to be enough ~

३9505 १ ०३ ८६०४ fer considering the nsed for 8 change
in the law 90 95८ to provi te that the nominee, when
belonging to the class mntioned atove, ‘shell te
wneficially entitled to the amunt that may fall
due under the policy. Before, hovever, cmicing our
precise recommendatians on the subject, wa consider
it proper to take note of certain legislative prece-
dents whieh might be useful.

le Para 3.2%) same.


Legi slatize Asle It may be of interest to note that there
precetants.
are lagislative precedents containing provisions
substantially giving a beneficial right ‘to a
nominse in antlogous situations.

tom ant tere seetion >, ?rovitent Panis act (३० of 1925)
vy in ५ 1

3 Ath.

L
Teais ss follows +-

“Se Bighha of oomineas. - (1) ४६४१ ५४-
standing anything contsined in any lew for the
tima being in forse or in any disposition,
whether testamentary or otherwisa, by 4 subs-
eriber to, oF ‘epociter in, a Government or
Railway Provi.ent Suni of the sum staniing to
his credit in the Pund, or of any pert thereof,
where any nordnation, duly maie in sécordance
with the rules of the “ani, purports to coafer
upbn any person the Tight to recalve the whole
or any part of sueh sum on the 106५8 of the
subsert ber of lepositor, occurring before the
eum nas 90508 payable or before ths sum, having

becone payable, his bean palit, the said verson

1. section 5, Proviient Funds Act, 225,


i.

*shali, on the Jeath as aforesaid of the sube-
eribar or jepositor, Tasond entitled toto
axtlusien.of all ethos pekmas, to receive sudh

gum oF part thereof, 2s the case my be unless -

(4) such romimtion is at any time
varied by another nomination made in like
manoer oF expressly cancd led by notice
given in the manner ani te the authority
srescribed by those rules, or,

(bd) such nomimtion at any time becomes
inwalid ty reason of the happening of some
sontingeney speoiflei therein, -

ani if the said person predecesses the subsoriber
or ‘aposttor, the rorinates shall, so far ag it
Pelates to the right conferred upon the said
parson, become wid and of no effects

Sea ~
(a) Talungly ve Sareanps, 401-8. 1967 a.P. 10.
(४) Man Singh ve Moti oad, ४ «1०8, 1056 Mad,
477, 479. :
(७) Inthe eoola of utaniy, A.I.R. 1939 Cal. 642,

- — - Toy AGRE Peden oF,


-41-

(2) Notwithstanding anything conteined in
the Initan succession aot, 1925 ar the Bombay
Regulation VIII of 1827, any person who becomes
entitled as aforesail sy be grante! & certif-
ante unler that «ct, or thet regulation, ss the
85 49 ray be, entitling him to receive paynsnt of
such cum of nart, and such certificate shall not
be deemed to te invalidated or superseled by any
grant to any other verson of prebate or letters

of atministration to the estate of the iecesseal.

(7) ihe provizions of this seetion as anemied
by sub-section (1) of seation 2 of the froviient
Fands (Amenimen? act, 119, shall anply alco to
all cuch noxinations msie before the iste of the

soumancasent of that act:

Proviied th.t the orovisions of this
section 43 go amapiel shall not operate to
nffeet any case, in which before the 3817 date
any sum his bew peii, or has under the rules
of the fund becore cayable in pursuance of any
nomination iuly meaig in aeeordanece with thosa

rulas."


Case lew on
77691 1670
Paris Aet.

3138 law on
Provi ‘ant
Fanis ict.

- 42 -

40. A few rulings unter the Provident Punds Act,
1925 my be citei. Ina Calcutta ease, e subscriber
bed nominate his wife as. the sole nomiase. subse-
quently, he took a second ४६16 who bore him two sons,
५० fresh nominations were "aia, It was held that as
between the first wife and cons of the sesoni wife,
the former wag absolutely entitled to the noney
stamiing to the subscriber at hic death.

In a 9 ifas o33@, it was hela that the
opoviient fund ules cake no restriction with regard
to persons in whose favour « decleration 07 nomination
my be mde, The Jepositer had made a declaration
nominating + lady ae bis norines. fhe lady @lained
the ‘oposit on his death as the widow of the dopositor
It was held that she was entitlei to it tn preference
i the son of the jiepesitor, even though it wes found
that she was not legally rarrie? to the depositor.

4040 It should also be stated that section 5 of
the ?rovident Funis Act, even at a time when it ala
not sontain the woris "*becone antitled to tbe amlusio
afall_other persons’, but seraly oroviied that the

le Yor the text of sestion 5, Frovicent Funds act,
see pars 4.2, gimme.

2, Keshab del v. Lyraniiudma, a-I«B. 1717 Cal, 176.

‘. प्र, २० aBbRaganarag, कनों बी० 1039 Fad. 489.


Jovernrant
ऊक व ४-7
“ant vote

= 43 «

nominees 30911 ‘become absolutely entiitiei’, had been
vonstruel in cany vulines” "0 the effect that the
nominee was venefMialally entitle: to the amount in
the Provident Fund.

6
he Se Then, the Governient savings Bank act

proviies that mux notwithstanding anything contoined
1n any isw for the time being In forge, oF in any
iisposition, whether testamentary or otherwise, wy

a Jevositer in Tespoct of his deposit, vhere any
norinmetion ६१29 in the preseribei manner purports

to confer on any person the right to regeive tho
deposit. on death of the jepoaitor, the nominee shall,

a

1. cite Amthateep v» salu Kebim, sfeH. 1°57
All. 562 (Sulaiman S.J. % Sonnet Jo).

2. sbmid_abiul Hagesk * २७78... ulin “ehdi, dI.K.
1975 Som. 234 (nephew).

". Reahab dal v- dwaram dudhta, Alen. 147 Cal.
176, 178, ३४79, paragraphs B, 9, 10 (F.5e),
WUrsenting from औैन ७71, UMO val, 3295,

+e Gurdjel v. dapki adage, Aoleli, 288 1028 Lah. 773.

Se (a) Ya sy ay ve Boas, #«7 «४« 1619 Rang. 54
(sister ag nominee, defeated title of widow).

(b) :8 31 bay ve Shuuay, ४०१५४ 199 Rang. o4

Ge The “nvernment dsvings Gcnk Act, 1893,


न 44 -

on the death of the depositer moome antiilal, to

danai ie « ,
Cther 4eGs It is neelless to multinly Logislative
pPecotants. 23

precedents, which can be looked for in legislation
relating to certain sehemes. of national savings anid
sMmlogous matters.

le seotion 3, PeC. Cash Cartifiestes Act, 1217.
2. segtion 938, Public debt ict, Lodi.

%. veetion 6, Governrent savings Certifioates Act
(46 of 1:59).

4. Contrast section 39A(l)ia), Init Trast of India
ast (52 of 1263),


Assumption is
te nosition fn
ungland and
observations
relating
thereto.

* 45 -

I. Smgliab law. ~ general nestitjan.

Sele Tt will be convenient to refer now te the
Snelish lew and the american law as to the effect
f nomimtion umler a policy of life insurance.

&t the outset, a proliminary observation
my be mole, In snglami, there 15 no ganeta)l avates
of nomination in regard to ordinary life insutfance
policies of the natura pfevitel in sestion 35 of our
Agte There ara systens of norimtion anpliexblie only
in regara to policies unteg (1) “erried soman' 8
Proparty Act, and (11) Friendly socketies act.

4 Rowinmetion under the Marria!l women's
R
Property Act stanis on a special footing, and need
net ve considered in detail.

We shall presently ded with nominations under
3
ths friendly societies act.

le “lalabury, 4th sdition, Vol. 25 (Insurances),
deals only with 5581 gmments.

2. See para 5.6, Lnfta.
3% seetion ll, Married Women's Property act, 188 7

4. See Law Commission of [mifa, 66th Report (Marrled
Honen’s Property act), pages 37-38, paragraphs
8.7 ani 8५2५


Statutory See A helpful discussion of the background may
framework 1
am its be quoted ~
bask ground.
"30, Somination under life poligies. -he

primry intention of life ~olicles is to provide
for lapeniants. This overriding purpose is
srotectel by the ability to arrange life poli-

61 98 30 that vhen paysent i ine the policy
moneys afe 50:21 18783 separate from the assured's
astate., The -oneys sre then available for the
dependants and not for any oreditors; in ajiition,
eertain tax 07 estate inuty my be avoided in

Tespect of the proceeds of policies so arranged.

“The 7Pocelure for sich policies is for the
assurei to nominate a beneficiary (er nominee)
when effecting the ascuranca, uth beneficiary,
who naei not be the legal resresentstive of the
assured, alone has the right to enforce any clain
an ine course, fhe regulating legislation for

nominations osonsists of:

(a) The “Marriei Woman's Property set, 165%,
with the earlier “srrisd “omen's 09311 61 85

of Asswance (Jeotland) Act, 1285.

1, Hansell, elements of Insurance (1974), page
142, para 20.


tb) the Prienily vociocies Act, W355, which
limited the total asount for nominations

1
to £300,"

TI, Ephondly societies in imelish Jaw.

friendly Bete In the system of limited insurance tk en

sosioties.
sat with (riently octeties fas regulatet by the
‘aplanily sogletios act, 1274), nomimtion hag a
witer effect. the friendly sociaty must, on recel-
ving antisfactory sfocf of the jesth of ths nominator,
nay to the nominee the amount tue te ths iecesse!
member, subject to 8 certain -rescri bed 11:1६
"There is a pede facie rresumtion that the rominze
is intesies to take benefit, but, it 15 a qiestion
Aepanient on evisencs, and the menbers! -eraoml
Tepresentative may, in 4 nrover Ouse, demand rapay-
meant from the nominee, subject to gi arpendel ty
the nominee for 781 641 fees get funetal axoanses
in respect of the nominator.”

Sante ay Bete this legislation has now a histery of core

soelatio: act han a century. Jnder the Wrianmily sostieties Act,
in anglan:.

W775 Gas amen igi ty the act of Isa‘), a cember of a

ene

1. 30a now the Frienily soeleties act, 1-74.

2. section 66(1) ant section 87५ Friendly societies
AGhy 1U74 (Ch. Gis Balsbury, 4th Ste, ४01. 1,
mare 243, pera 266 ani pares 1४००1465॥ rere 7,

o Halobury, (th se, Yole 2%, pave 136, carn 274,


न कै +»

4001 00ए eoul! 707 धर ७७ any person to receive & sum
fet exoseding £2100, out of the money payable at his
death. It has been held that such a nomination cannot
be rewked by will, but dan be revwked only in the
manner laid down in the Act, ind that the sum so

wade payable is not part of che resiiuary estate of
the teceasel, ‘mt ina case reportel in 1901, when
vhe nominee died before the nominator and his
(nominee's) reprosentetive claimed the money, the
deeiston of Kekewloh, J., Las

न eannot see why the estate of a nonince
who 7163 before the nomimtor shouli be ‘eprived
of the benefit intended to 0 conferred, even
&lthough his death say be unimown to the nomi-
MtOPessseese I 20 not see anything in the
worting of the tule to prevent thea solicy money
being ive to the legal representative of the

‘noninee."

Tas obrervetions of Acl. Smith, Led. in an
earlier anglish case, my also be cormared -

फू may in the first place remark that

where there bas bem 5 .omimetion, ac in the

Le Bampet ve dakar, (३701 1 Kobe 45,
’. Redman, Inne sorton 7 58828 (1°01) 3 ch. 471.
५. Bennet v. dlater, (1880) 1 eH. 451.


~ 49 -

“syegent case, until that nomination has bean
Tewkei, T think that the nominee ani not the

1
nominator 1s the nergon hapafiaially interested

dots sonay.” .... tbe. pone, "
Stteat of 5, 5५ In fact, with referance to nouinmations umier
novimtion. हि
the Friendly २055 ७६1७8 Act, 1575, 1t was speci 174 6७379
a
weld that the property curried ty 4 nominetion passes
direetly to tho nominee by force 67 the norinatian
an? does not form part of the astate of the noni nator.
Salish esse 39% In sore of the Judgments of the fizh Jourts.
of yursha se
in tha name in India, reference 15 raie te the anglish case of
of another. 4

Baran seusington. In that case 5 policy of insurance

was taken out by one Jaaierson on his own life on
behalf of his wife's sister, ‘iss stiles, and the
policy vroviied that “fies stiles, ter executors,
aiministrators ani assigns, moult be entitled to
reeelve the policy soney: on his desth. sandermwn,

who survivel iss tiles, Teta nel the policy, ond

le Note the worig ‘bone Picially interested".

१, Semeth v. glater, (18.7) 1 4.8. 451, referred
to in fe deplsh jisgonla witet? veosion Fund,

(1071) 1 ALL 5५४७७ $86॥, 40d.
“e Reta dudiliar २५ loilsa Tosteuse and tanking

Jarmoration, 4.[.%. 1°97 Met, ३15, 116, -sra 7.

Tikenimsiagton, (1°02) 1 30५9 M3.


paid the premiums til] his death; snd the question
for desision was whether the 39 gal nersoml] repre~
sentatives of Fics otila: were trustees for the
poliey moneys for the legal netsoml renresentatives

of sanderson,.

doyte, Je, qaoted the following statemant of
7
tori Romily in Garrisk v. Tayler t-

"If a purehase be sale by ope ta the nam
afLemnthar, the -resurption 18 that the latter
44. 4 krustas for the ooarsen who 9678 the soney,
uMless the narties stant In the relation of
parent and child.

lows in the -resent case a policy was taken
oat by Mr. sanierson 4 great muny years‘ago, and
the name of ‘iss stiles apnears in the polisy as
the nerson to whom the coney is to एस nati. The
policy was never hanied te her, and she ic pow
defi, ani the premiars were always pafi, and were
paid for mny years after her laath, by Jandorson.
Thaty retily is a ease of 4 oan taking the polisy
out in the name of another, that other narsan
batons slater of his wife, and therefarss nat
abanling in any peleadon to bigs ‘bat would
meal the presumifon’, as iri cldon expressed it.

1. Merrick v. Tazher, (1360) 29 3889६ 79, 83.


का है . 56786 really to thiss a purchase by one tn
the name of anouber with no oblar ciraumitanses
ah all pgevel. “herefore, in ry opinion, s1-
though the legal nefsem1 representative of the
कर in this ease woull be the nerson eatitlel to
Yeesive the money at low omi to give w revaint
for it, in equity the domey belongs to the legal
persoml representative of “re sanietson, who

took out the policy.”

It aay be noted that the nominee was not
stumiing Lo sach @ Pelationship 1s to Yaise a pre~

1
sumtioa of un intention to benefit the nominoe.

Ill. Amepinan lay ~ nosiiion 1p general.

Focktton Se7e The pradtice in the Jnited states scemsa
to be to allow the insured por gon (in life insurance)
to ‘desigrmate™ a beneficiary. assignrent of the
policy is also pormissi bie.” The expression “nomi -
mtion” is not, howevar, generally use? in. legal

parlance in thia context In the Jos.

1. d@a exsaa in para 6.4, Lott.

> Paragranhs 3.8 to 3.14, Infta.

S. Pare 5.15, infra.

Se Tor general iissussion, see sncyclopaedia of the

Social satences (1967), Yol. 7, pages 107-108};
"Ingurance*.


Fosition of
pene Miclary.

Classes of
hene Plotaries
- The Privary
Beneficiary.

8०84 The position of the beneficisry under & 11876
Lasuranee policy in the U.s.s. my ba thu: stated in
1

brief:

the benefictary 45 the pefson named in a
life insurance policy to reerive the benefit payable
on the death of the insured. ‘het person 15 not a
pontracting party an'l ordinarily oannot exercise any
contractual richts srier to the ieath of the in:wel,
Nevertheless, the policy 1s acplied for ani kept in
forse prisatily for the benefit of the benefictary,
Naming the beneficiary, therefore, is one of the most
important actions the anplionnt takes, 207 his right
to change the jesignation later if he wishes, anil as
often as ho wishes, is one of the most significant

rights he acquires unier the sontract.

5०9७ There ara two min 819 3899 of beneficiaries -
primry an} contingent - in the JeSen.

The snpliaant jesienates the beneficiary
simply hy stating 17 the :oplioation the name or
rates of the patsons to vhom he wishes the sompany
to nay the peneMt ine at hts seath, He my 3०901
that it be pefi to one cersen Jlone, ar thit it be

share, by several persons in prorertions as he may

le Graiier & Bealles, Law ani the Lite Insurance
Jontrast (1968), pace 140.

2 Parn Sil, init.


Jaath of
banefictary.

~ SO -

7

indtieate. These are the gpigary beneficiaries.

In the days when the policy was agplied’ for
an? doused to the penetietam, his TMghts uaier it
were of such a sature that they beeume an asset in
his eatate in tha evert of his death prior to the
कब. of th: insutel, In facts even where tha

nsurei himself applied for ani owned the policy,
the beneMictary was often cencidered to have a
vested interast subject to baing divested, This
ereate! oractical srotlome, particularly where the
insured. survived the Uonefielary ly many years, for
the estate of the senefielary aight have keen 0516 9891
long before the insurance became एस्जुछ 91.9... Yet the

grosesis would 35411 os capable to the estate.

5.0. Por thut Peiuon, cbout the beginning of this
century, companies begun pPoviiing in their policies
that if the beneficiary 1104 before the insure}, the
death tonafit woul? te payable to the estate of the
insured, hic eliminated the possibility thet the

igath bermsfit enul] beeone sayahle & the estate of
sorRone sho had diel cany years wore, ani itis

the cenersal sraatice olay.

i, Gelder © Seatlies, Lay snd the Life Ingutanse
Gontract (1668), caces 1440145,

2, Greiier के Beadles, Law and the Life Insurance
Sentract (25°€8), erages 144-145,

४५. Wottsr sn Beatles, Law ond the Lite Ingarante


fontingant
penefictary.

settle vent
agreement 5
succes sor
Tmyees

& 13. at the same time, the new policy provision
sreated a new contingeney that might be proviied
against - the possibility that the first-nanel
bonefietary ight de before the insured anit the
Aeath benefit become payable to the estate of the
insured, lw 1४ becane vossible for the insured to
name & gontdogent beneficiary, who wouli have the
right to receive the ieath benefit 1f the prinary
beneficiary iid not survive the insured, Aad since
the eontingent beneficiary sight को s0 prelecease the
ingurel, most companies today sermit the insured to
name a seconi contingent beneficlarye settlement
will be made to this person if there is no surviving
primry or Mrst contingent beneficiary at the death

of the insured,

5.12. A special procedure available in the UsecA.
under ‘gettlenent agreement" shoul alse be 80081.
The applicant for & polfey will oriinarily nase a
contingent or suesessor sayce unier a settlement
agreement, whose rights correspond to, but are
oriimrily considerably more extensive than, thore
of the contingent or successor bem ficlary in a

one-sum designation.

fhe rights of the contingent densfioiary in
a one-sun deaigmtion ate determined as of the ment
the insure? Wes. Tf, at that tine, the firitenamed


or primary beneficiary 1. living, the rights of the
eentingent or vuccessor benefiotary are automatically
extinguishet. fhe primary beneficiary takes all.

If the primary beneficlary ales inmediately there~
after, payment wil be mais to the natsonal zeora:
sactatives of the primary beneficiary.

‘Inder a settlement agreement, on the othur
hand, the contingent payce my also be sale o gugaasanr
payeaa. Tis rights are not necasgrily extl ngul shed
by the death of the insured while the primary bene~
fistery 15 living. Often, ty the provisions of the
Settlement agreement, such a successor sayee is
entitled to take any ammaid amounts of instalments
Yemining unpaid at the Jeath cf the primary beneft-
elary or payee. Thus, if tho primary benefictary
lives to receive 411 the payments srovidei fer (or to
withiraw the total sroceeds if the rights of withirawal
4s granted), the succecsor payee's rignts will be
x terminatoi. However, if the primary beneficiary
does not exhaust the sroseeds during her lifetime,
the suceesser payse or payees "sucesed™ (33 their 5
mame sugsests), to any funds remaining at her ‘ieath. :

i जनक

1. Getder ते Seadies, Law and the Life Insurance
Contract (1968), page 151.

2 Grefder & Besdias, Law and the Life Insurance
Gontras! (1966), page 151.


Statutory
schene «

Ma tlons2
service Life
Ingurance,

9० 33७ fo have a sore conarete sicture of the Amarican
lw, it wuli also te useful to refer, ty way of
Lilustration, te one of the statutory schemes of

12279 insursnes in force in the Usced. = tha Nathoml
Sseryioe Life Insurance (primarily meant for menbers

of tha armed forees and veterans). «e quate the
mterial statutory provisions from the U.5. 204७ =

"geatlon 712. lasutancs ie maturing 2y
ar.afier August 1, 1246.

(aJ The insured shall have the richt to
designate the beneficiary or benefielarias of
ingutfance mituring on or after August 1, 1946 ,
ani shell, subject to reculations, at all tines
bave the right to change the baneficlary or bene-
Motaries of such insurance without the aon: ent
of snvh beneficiary or bansftslaries,

६७३ Insurance maturing on or after august 1,
1946, shell be raysble in scenrdance wich the
following optional soles of sattlenents

sevens enetee oteres
a ecanemntetitienenenmnamenesmenemenemamnetennmnenamnaeneeneentenenee tease का ५«५ ५२० +५०५५>++ २2५० “उनका

i. “nited States Sole Annetatei, Title 38 (107: 3,
page 397: National service Life Insurance,
seotion 717.


wf Portion relating to option: modes
of settlement not quoted 7,

(q) Unless the insured elects som otner
mole of settlement, such insurance shall be
payable to the Sesignatet benefl alary or bena-
flelaries in thirty-six equal monthly tnatal -
ments, The first benefleisry say slest to
78284 ४8 paysent unier any option which provi jes
for payment over 9 longer period of time than
the ention eleste! by the insuret, or 10 no
option has been elected by the insurei in excess
of thirty-six months.

fevewe ००००० ७७७७७ +

(4) If tha benefietary of such insurance is
ontitied to lump sum settismeat bat élects sone
other mode of settlement ant lies before recel ving
811 the benefits jue and payable under such mote
of settlement, the present value of the romdning
umplid amount 25811 bs sayable te the estate of
the beneficiary. If no benefictery 15 dest enated
by the insured, or if a ‘esirnated bem ficiary
dogs not survive the tnsurei, or if a designated
benafistory aot entitled to 3 lumpium settlement
survives the insurei, sni ifes tefore receiving
all the benefit: jue amt paychle, then the

esommute? value ef the remaining uspeii Eneutance


Aight of
१854 718 ऐ ७1
bone flefary.

Assignment.

(whether aserued or not) shall be pals in
one sup to the estate of the insured. In no
eveit shall thore be any payment to the estate
of the insured or of the beneficiary of any
sums unless it १5 shown that any sum paid will
net ascheat.

eoteae १+००३४+०५ foeeee

Selte ‘The right of the designatet bers ficlary in
UeSede 48 regarded as « vested property git. In
view of the fact that the law reserves to the insured
the right to ehange the beneficiary of a National
dervies Life Insurance policy, the bone ficiary named
has no vestei right in volicies prior te the death
of the insured, but, when the insured dies without
having changei the ber flolary, the rights of the
named beneficiary becomes vested.

5,15५. Jo much @s Tegatis a "desigmted” beneficiary.
AS to assignzeant in Vedgiey tho following statutory
provision apriicable to national service 188 insorance
policies would be of tnateresti-

le Pare 5०13; aMDKE

i. MeGellun.v. 2450 (0००४० Minn.) (1954), 211,
F.2d 708, @ibed in Jesse. (1979), Title 384
page 361, unier "National service Life Insurance".

१, Wedelede (19790), Yol. 98, saotion 718, page 384.


‘yeotinn TIA. sashements

(a) Assigaments of all or any part of the
beneflolary's interest may be sade by a desi g-
rated beneficiary to 8 wijow, widower, child,
father, wzther, grandfather, grandmother, brother,
ov stater of the tnsared, when the designated
eontingent benefisiary, if any, joins the bene-
fleiary in the assignment, and if the assignment
ig deliverei to the Veterans! alvin stration
before any nayments of the insurane shall bave
been maie te the beneflelary. However, an
intorest in any annuity, when assigned, shall be
payable in equ] aonthly instalments in such
maltiple of twelve as “ost nearly equals the
nusber of instalments certain unier suoh annuity,
oF in two hundred ant forty instal ments, which-
ever is the lesser. The provisions of this sub-
Bestion shall Not be applilaable to insurance
maturing on on after the date of ensetment of

this sentence.

(b) Becapt a9 to ingurance granted under the
provisions of section 72(b) of this title, any

("8008 to whom insurance waturing on or after

Le 28 UeSeCode (1979), section 718.


*the date of enactment of this sentence is
payable my asaign all or any portion of his
interest in such insutance to a widow, wi dover,
child, father, mother, grandfather, grandmother,
brother oF sister of the insured when the 108७1 85
mated aontingent beneficiary, if any, jola the
beneficiary in the asst gneent. duch joinier
#211 not bs Fequired in any ease in whieh the
inaurance proceeds are payable in 4 lump sum.


Degi ४७ ४1.1.
of cannon .

48220:25:758

Gale In view of what wa have stated in the earlier
Shapters, we recommend that the nominee (if ha sur
sixna tha ingured st the date of maturity of tha policy
ayi if he is a parent, spouse oF child of the holder

af the policy of life insurance), should be bensfictally
entitled to the amount secured by the poltey. The
Yeasons justifying such an amendment have been already
mentioned eariier, but my be reeapitulated for

vonvenienss ~

(a) Such an aneniment would earry out the
Teal intention of the parties.

(bd) Tt would be esizeble from the point of
view of soctal justice.

६8) The Legislature has, in several ensectients
connected with provitent funds and the Like, acceptet
the prinainle of secial justice referrei to above and
hag male provision: conferring dene ficial rights on
the nominees. There (५ no need to treat amounts tue

le This 15 subject to pera 6.7, infa.
2. Para 306, gupta.

T, Pere 3«6५ MER.

t, Pata 4.2, gupta.

5. Ohapter 4, summa.


Consiterations
of sooial
justice,

As sf grvent.

not a satic-
factory sole
in oll 85 80५9 «

unier a life insurance policy differently trom, say,
amounts plaged in $ provident fund in this respact
im the caso of relatives belonging to the class
mentioned above.

6५ 32% We are not unaware that our recommendation
te treat certain nominees as benefisially entitled
apounts to changing the legal position as umerstood
in many Tigh Courts. 300 wo venture to point out
that in terms of human needs ani grpeatations, and
in the context of social justica, what we are reco-
mmaniing should be mre acceptable than the present
position.

8, 3५ ty way of antiaipating a 9985६ 019 counter~
argument, we my state that it 1. true that the
ineured serson oan always “ake an assiensent under
section 38 of the Ingurense sot’ However, in cur
opinion, this would not be a saticfaetery method ia
every case. A pePsen who makes a nomination micsht
destra to retitn the benefit & of the policy, in

@age he survives the nominee. If he makes an acsi gn=
ment of the policy, he loses this facility. Moreover,
an assignment oannot be reywoked, while * nomination

le Pare 6.1, gipta.
५. ४5७७ Chapter 7, आओ
50. See Chapter 5, &075
4, Pare 1.4, supra.


ean, We do not, therefore, see any reason shy 2
person should be driven te making an assignment,
when he does not intend thet the transfer should be
operative ag an asslgmgent which 15 trreweablie and
Alvestitive.

wethe auetiee. Gade w@ may add that our approach, which fevours

appPoech ag to + pecial nrovisions for nominations saie in favour of

near relatives.
certain nesr relatives, while supported oy modern
social notions, is not a total innowtion. Very early
Jwilels2 4०७७६ stons dealing with amalesous af tuations
have shown cubstantially the same appreash. In this
context y we may refer to one of the leadiag Sngligh
eases, 19861 161 in the Ith esntury on the subject of
resulting trusts. after making the statement that a
Temilting trust my be remitted by clreumstancas in
evidence (in the case of a Legal estate taken in the
name of another r4Puon), the judgment of Ayre ¢.3,

observes:

"The cases go one steo further, and prove
thet the airsumatance of one or more of the
Meminees being a chil! or ehildren of the nur-
chaser, is to operate by rebutting the resulting

ie QUMR ve yar, (1788) 2 Cony Eq. Sas. 92, OF, O4,
(ayre 27,9५2, quoted in Egttits ve Patiith, (1969)
2 Weekly Law Reports S66, 290 (Hele).


“trusty ani it has been determined in so muny
eases that the nominee being 3 child shall have
such operation as « eireanstance of evidence,
that ve should be iiaturting lamiqmarks 4 7 vo
sufferei either of these prepositions to be
ealled in que atl on, momly, that such olrcums-
tance shall rebut the resulting trust, and
that it shall do so as a cirounstance of

evi dence," हि 1
6५ 5. In a recent judgment of Nouse of Lords,

Lord Upjohn, after reproducing the passage fron
the judgnent of Eyre ०७8, quoted above, observed

as followsi-

"the remarks of fyre ¢.B, in relation to a
child. being 4 nominee ere equally spplicabie to
‘the ease where a wife is the nominee. ‘Thowh

rormlly referred to as a presumption of a-
wareerent, 1t 43 no mere than a eiroumstanse of
¢videnge whieh my rebut the presumption of
resulting trust, and the learned editers of
White and Tulor vere careful to raxind their
readers at pe. 763 that ‘all resulting trusts
Wiech arise simply from eqaitable presumptions,

le Pabigti v- Eabtith, (1969) 2 weekly Law Reports

966, 290.

to बडा: ve के pore 6.4, gunte.


Rights of
survivors
of newinaes,

Rights of
2 4 fot

"gay be Pebuttei ty perol evi 70700७ ७ ५०००० * «
This dootrine applies equally to personalty.*

6.6. So mch as regards the merits of the proposed
amaniment, Lat us nov address ourselves to some
satters of detail. striotly speaking, the amendment
that we have recommended 12 onough to lead to the
“urther position that if, after the mturity of the
policy ani tefore the actual payment, the nominee or
nominees die, then the heirs of the nominee ahall be
entitled to the proportionate amount. However, in
order to avoii doubts in future, it should also be
further provided that the: heirs of the nominee ४१11
in such & situation be entitled to the amount.

GT Tt 18 obvious that where a person makes a

nomimtion, he eannot confer on the nominee any right
higher than what he himsalf has. For example, in tho
ease of & policy whieh would form part of the property
of a eoparcenary, the nomination (07 any other roje of
oonferring derivative title) amnnot change the
eoporcemary eharacter of the poltays” As is often
said, the stream canopt tise higher than the source.
This position is imlteit. However, to avold doubts
in this regsrd, we have considered 40 prover, by way

1. abjdea Neth v. Meena Revi, ief.h. 1976 ALL. 64
(Joint famtly).


Testamentary
a sposttion.

Rights of
ioker 28

of aburyiant saution, to mike it clear in the amendment
reoopmendel by us that the nomines will be beneficially
entitled unless 10 15 proved that the holder of the
policy, having regari to the nature of his title to

the policy, sould not have conferred any such bene-
fiatal title on the nemime.

6५8. The right flowing from the amended provialon
(waether ६६७ be a right of the nominee or of his neirs)
should be subject to any testanentary a4 sposition of
the amount tc which the nomination relates, wilidly
made ty the 067 900 making the nominetion, subsequent
to the nomination. This qulifleation (though not
found in the enactments Telatine to the Proviient 2
fund and the 1414) 18 alreaty contained in the Act,
and my be reteinel, at least until the working of
the proposed ameaniment is seen.

6०५9५ We my mention that the subject of the ras-
peotive rights intar ae of various persons who booone
veneficially entitled under a policy is om outaite
the seope of the limited question te which we address
ourselves, and we need not express any opinion in the
matter. The qiestion {s a general one, not confined
te nominees only ami coult (for examle) arise as

i. Chapter 4, gunka.
१५ Section 39(2), Insurance Act, 193%; pare 2.1, gInER.


Reeonmendation
te revise
section 20,
Taguranve
det, 1998 ty
insertin: new
sub-sestions.

petween arsignees aloo, oF as betwaen eny other

parvons having के tartvtive title.

6,10. In the light of the above dfusussion, ve
Tesonmend thut in section 329 of the insurance ict,
the following new subesegtions should be inzerte:

after sub-section (628-

"(Ga) dubleet to the ether nrovistons of

te Yer the nresent ceetion 2), see pars tel, gan.


etete weoat

de

Be

gk. the wording of ssotion 3965), Insarance
ast, 1738,

Contrast Harrled voments Property iat, 1874,
section 642), last paragraph.

aa to testamentary Msseslticns, soe section
39( 30, Ineurense aot, 1°38.


Seation 2907),

agty 1998 -
Hon’ nation
ani Trust.

= 6B =

Gil. In orier to comilete the discussion, we my,

at this stage, aluo refer to the Report of the Lew
Comal sion on the “erried Women's Property Acts 874५
by which a few shanges wore recomseniel in the Insuranse
Aet, 1998. ‘<The first potnt 4eait with ic that Report
eoncsrned seotion 37072 of the Insurance Ast which,

at present, exoludes the application of the provisions
vf section 32 to any policy of life inmmrance to vhich
seetion 6 of the Married women's Property Act, 1374
applies, oF hes, at any tins, applied.

‘The Law Commission pointed out that a person
who Jectdes to create 8 trust unier sestion ह ef the
Margied women's Property Act, 474) my, by 8 mise
understanding of the law or through slip or i morance,
enfetolm p nomination in the polisy. In such a
case, what should prevail is the trust unler section
6, and not the nomination. The Josmisslon noted that
as the proviso to seation 39(7) of the Insurance Act,

te Law Commission of India, 66th Report (Marriei
Women's Property Act, 1882), Chapter 2.

4, Lay comission of India, 66th Report (Marriot
women's froperty Act, 189%), paragraphs 15.15,
15.16 and 15.17.

3, Law Commission of India, 66th Kepert (Married
Women's Property Act, 1882), paragraph &.54.


Seetion %3(7)
= Position
of chiliran,

Section “24 -
Insertion of
note in every
poltey,

1998 now stands, 40 ts pessible to take the view
that the nomination overriies the trust. It was
jesfrable to prevent such a situation from arising.
An ameniment to section 38(7), proviso, Inswance
Ast, on this point was accordingly reeomeniead by
the Commission.

Rl% In the same Report, a recommendation has

been mate to aii, in seetion 5°(7) of the Insurance
Aat, a vention of 'ehildren’. This change Was conge-
qQuential on the regemsendation to expend the scope of
section 6 of the ast of 1874 20 as to suthorise a
Skuat tor shilizen.

3
Glc. A redemmendation was 4330 unde to insert,

in every poliey of life insurance, a specifics note
4mpressing it upen the insured that if he creates a
trast unier section 9 of the arried vomen's Property
Ast, he shall not mike + tomimation under section 39
of the Insurance Act. Por this purpose, the insertion.
in the Insurance Act of 4 new section - section 294 «

was ratommaniod.

de Taw Commission of india, 68th Revert Cverried
Women's Property act, 1874),

% Law Commission cf Indio, 66th Repert (Harrie.
Women's froperty Ast, 1874), para 15,7.


“71 5

pression 6,145. Since the smeninent reeounenied by us uses
sone Ticially

witled and the expression "beneficlally entitled’, wa give in
wlegous

typressions. an Appeniix 2 list of statutery and other references
using the expression “pene figially entitled* or
epmparable phraseology.

PAV. Dixit Chairman

S.%. Shanker ember

Gangesiwar Prasad Mouter

Palle Dakshd Hem bar -Seoretary
Jammry, 1930.

le Sea Sppendt x,


le

ट्री

7

-72-

neice the exmression “bpefielaliy antl tled”
og _somarable nhgassnlosy.

Section 15(c), speeific Relief Act, 1963.

Ania ve s@gthan Uaehl, (1965) 11 Hebe Cas. 257,
ATL (bord Wensleydale).

Rawdankson's Wil), (1879) 49 LJ. ch. 8a, 85

(Jessel “.H.).

demal v. slabar, (1899) 1 ६४७ 452.

Mare ve Mithh, (1966) 28 ९५६०४, 228, 207, 248,

2७:४53 v- cebibi, (196) 2 +«1 «0५ 966, 971.
(tera Reid), 980 (Lerd “orris), 982 (Lord Morris),
on sppaal from (1968) 1 Wel eR, 443%

९३0६६ v. Labtits, (1963) 1 WLR, 443, 4468 (0.३. )
(Almer Leda)

Case law on seation 5, Provident Funds sot, 1925.
Cate law on partition.

‘the ordinary rule {3 that if persons are

entitled beneficially to shares in en estate, they
1

my have a partition."

००००... न«>->न मनन ननननननननननननेन+-मननन- Ce LLL CLOG LL LOCC LC LEN

1. ghankax fakeh v- danlao,s (1888) I.beR, 16 Cal.

one ans (rele).