LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

EIGHTY - THIRD REPORT
ON

THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890
AND CERTAIN PROVISIONS OF THE HINDU
MINORITY AND GUARDIANSHIP ACT, 1956.

April, 1980.


Dated the 26th April, 1980.

My dear Minister,

Tam herewith forwarding the Fightythird Report of the Law Commission
containing proposals for amendment of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890, and
Section 6 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956.

2. The Guardians and Wards Act. 1890, was enacted 90 years back. At the
time of its enactment women had scarcely any rights: for them there was only
social and legal degradition, materia! insecurity and other manifestation of
dominance and false superiority of nen. The Act while providing the appointment
of the guardian kept in view the we!fare of the minor but laid emphasis on the
superiority of the father or male member in the matter of appointment of
guardians of minors and their custody.

3. In the social conditions that exist today, it is very necessary that parents
must regard as their foremost responsibility to bring up their children as healthy,
happy. and useful individuals of an all-round standard of education and as active
builders of society. The purpose, therefore, of the law of the guardianship should
be to ensure this development of the child and to safeguard its interests. This can
be done only if, in the appointment of the guardian of a minor, the welfare of
the minor is made the first and paramount consideration, and no other considera-
tion, such as the superiority of the mother or father is taken into account. Jn
appointing a guardian the Court must also see which of the claimants is best
suited by his or her educational competence and influence, and by his own
example to provide the requisite care in upbringing the child. The Commission,
therefore, feels that it is necessary to overhaul and revise the existing Guardians
and Wards Act, 1890, so as to embody the idea of the welfare of the minor being
the first and paramount consideration in the appointment of a guardian and in
other related matters. Even as it is the working of the Act has revealed a
number of defects and deficiencies which hamper the administration of the Act.
Some of the legal provisions of the Act require elaboration and clarification,
while others require tightening up.

4. The Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 recognising the
advancement in the status of women in all spheres gave them the right to be
appointed as guardians. It also made the welfare of the minor the paramount
consideration in the appointment of a guardian. Further while postponing the
mother as a natural guardian to the father, it laid down at the same time that
the custody of a minor who has not completed the age of five years shall ordi-
narily be with the mother. Section 6 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship
Act, 1956 requires to be altered so as to allow the mother the custody of a
minor till it completes the age of 12 years. It is necessary to allow the mother to
have the custody of a child till it attains the age of 12 years in order to prevent
the father from using the child as a pawn for securing complete submission of
his wife. where the husband on the instigation of parents or sister or on his own
has adopted the ‘pawn’ method when the wife insists on the husband having his
own establishment which he can well afford or when a wife has not served well
the mother-in-law or when the wife has not brought a handsome dowry.

Gy


di)
5. The amendments suggested by the Commission seek to embody in the

Guardians and Wards Act, 1890, and Section 6 of the Hindu Minority and
Guardianship Act, 1956, all the ideas narrated earlier.

6. We are grateful to Shri P. M. Bakshi, Member Secretary, of the help
and assistance given to us in the preparation of this Report. We are also grateful
for the assistance given to us by Shri V. V. Vaze, Additional Secretary of the
Commission.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,
(Sd.) P. V. DIXIT
Shri P. Shiv Shankar
Minister of Law, Justice &
Company Affairs,
Government of India,
New Delhi-


CONTENTS:

Chapter Topic Page
Chapter {Introductory 1
Chapter 2-- Brief history 7
Chapter 3—Present law and scheme of the Act of 1890 - . . . . . 8
Chapter 4 —Pyeliminary provisions, including definitions: sections | to4 . . 11
Chapter 3 --Lmpowerment of subordinate judicial officers: section 4A, . . . 15
Chapter *—-Appointment and declaration of guardianship: sections 5 to 19 : . 16
Chapter 7. -Dutics. rights and liabilities of guardians: sections 20to 370. 43
Chapter &-—Termination of guardianship: sections 38 to 42 56
Chapter 9--Supplemental provisions: sections 43 to 51 59
Chapter 19-—Suniniary of recommendations 63

APPENDICES
Appendix 1-—Position as to custody of children in personal law 67
Appendix 2—History of the law in India 68
sl

App:ndix 3—English law as to guardianship and its evolution. . .

(iii)


CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTORY

1.1. This Report is concerned with the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890.
ihe sociological importance of such legislation and its relevance to the welfare
of children hardly need elaboration. Further, a number of provisions of the
Act have led to controversies in their interpretation and require clati jon i
the interests of uniformity of law. The Commission has, therefore, as a part of
its function of revision of Central Acts of general importance, considered it desi-
rabic to take it up for revision suo moto. It is also’ proposed in this Report
to deal with certain analogous provisions of the Hindu Minority and Guardian-
ship Act, in which reform appears to be needed.

1.2. Although the Act was passed about a hundred years ago, no compre-
hensive revision of its provisions seems to have been undertaken since it was
passed. The Legislature, when it considered the law’ relating to maintenance
and guardianship applicable to Hindus had occasion to deal with some matters
germane to the law of guardianship. but there was no opportunity for consider-
ing reform of the Act of 1890. Some of the provisions of the Act are in need
of reform in the light of present day conditions. A number of important ques-
tions arising from conflict of judicial decisions or from certain deficiencies in the
present expression of the law have also necessitated a review of the law. Clarity,
always desirable in legislation, is especially necessary in this field. As has been
said! “The lives of the young are at stake ”

1.3. It is unnecessary to underscore the social significance of legislation deal-
ing with children. It was Sophocles who said that children are the anchors that
hold a mother to life. This puts beautifully the elementary proposition that
the bond between the mother and a child of tender years is one that should be
regarded as sacrosanct. Unfortunately. some of the provisions of the Act do
not reflect this attitude to the fullest degree. These provisions will therefore
occupy our serious attention.

1.4. It is common-place that family life, when it is running a smooth silent
course, presents no serious Icgal problems. Small ripples that create transient
tensions. pass the parents by. But a major crisis in the family that causes emo-
tional conflict, sooner or later creates a rift which, in modern times, often reaches
the Courts. The Act with which we are concerned purports to deal with such
a crisis, in so far as the crisis may affect the lives of minor children. How far
the Act deals with the matter adequately by providing a sound legal framework
will be an important consideration in making our recommendations.

1.5. Children usually present two problems to a system of law. They must
be prevented from squandering away the property through inexperience: and if
either or both of their parents die or if the parents disagree in matters concerning
the children, provision must be made for their proper upbringing and for the
management of their property.

Briefly. “the Act”.

Chapter 6, infra. para 6.50.
Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act. 1956.

F.A.R. Bonnion, “First consideration” (1976) 126 New L.J. 1237.

Genesis and
scope.

Need for
revision
of the Act.

The child
in society.

Cc in
family life.

Problems
presented
by children.


We

Shelley's
Guardianship.

Various
competing,
considerations

2

1.6. As the welfare of the child is the paramount consideration, such wel-
fare would prevail over parental rights. Parental rights would enter into a con-
sideration, as one of the factors in considering the welfare of the child, but not
as a dominating factor, where they would conflict with the welfare of the child.
As Scrutton L.J. said' in his picturesque language, “proceedings for obtaining
custody are being used ‘not for the body, but for the soul of the infant’.”

1.7. This is the modern approach, though this position has been reached
after some struggle. For example, in England the two children of the poet
Shelley from Harriet were left in the care of a guardian other than himself*
by an order of the Court--though not without some difficulty. To Shelley and
his friends, the decision appeared an example of the “tyranny of priests and
Jaws”; impelling him to leave England permancentiy. But the Court had to pro-
nounce the decision because Shellcy’s moral and atheistic ideas were considered
a serious disqualification for exercising the rights of the father.

1.8. Jt would be pertinent to observe that a number of competing considera-
tions' has been mentioned by the Legislature or the judiciary in determining
questions of guardianship or custody or both. In the first place, there is the
criterion of personal law and the “right” of the father or (in some cases) of the
mother thereunder. In the second place, there is the question of the fitness (or
unfitness) of the person who is proposed to be appointed a guardian or to whom
custody of the child is proposed to be given. In the third place, there is the
question of consulting the wishes of the minor. Last, but not the least, is the
consideration of the welfare of the child—or, to put it in a different phraseology
—“the best interests of the child”. One or the other of these criteria has, in
the course of history, come into prominence and the other has shaded into com-
parative insignificance.

Thus, the law relating to custody is still evolving. As Lord Upjohn ob-
served,’ the rules here “have developed, are developing and must, and no doubt
will, continue to develop by reflecting and adopting the changing views, as the
years go by, of reasonable men and women, the parents of children, on the pro-
per treatment and methods of bringing up children”.

This is not to say that the concept of “welfare of the child” is totally new.
It is sometimes stated that in the historically famous dispute decided by King
Solomon, the matter was decided by way of rough and ready justice, or in a
crude manner. ‘This, however, is not strictly accurate. The approach of the
King was based on a shrewd psychological judgment, which itself (rightly) assu-
med that the love of the mother would transcend any desire to assert “her right”.
A question of fact (matemity), otherwise difficult to decide, was decided on the
basis of instinct.

1.9. As to the criterion to be adopted in such matters, Cardozo, siting as a
judge in the New York Court of Appeals.’ made the following observations perti-
nent to the “best interests” theory :—

“The Chancellor, in exercising his jurisdiction, does not proceed upon
the theory that the petitioner, whether father or mother, has a cause of

+ Re Carroll, (1931) 1 K-B. 317, 331.
1 Shelley v. Westbrook. (1817) Jac. 260 and Shelley v. Westbrook, (1821) Jac. 266 followed
in Thomas v. Roberts, (1850) 3 De G. & 5. 758.

Chambers Encyclopaedia, Vol. 12, page 471.
See further para 6.37, infra (section 17).

J. ve 0., (1970) A.C. 668, 722H-723A.

Finlay V. Finlay, (1925) 148 N.E. 624, 626 (N.Y.


3

action against the other, or indeed against anyone. He (the Chancellor)
acts as parens patriae to do what is best for the interest of the child. He is
not adjudicting a controversy between adversary parties, to compose their
private differences. He is not determining rights as between a parent and a
child, or as between one parent and another............ Equity does not concern
itself with such disputes in their relationship to the disputants. Its concern
is for the child.”

The concept of “welfare of the child” does find a mention in the Act of
1890. However, it is like a thread that is visible at some places, but gets
blurred elsewhere by being entangled with others.’ It needs now to be painted
in glowing colours.

1.10, The possible opposition of interests between parents and child is now Clash of
regarded as almost commonplace in domestic relations law and juvenile law. interests
It is illustrated by proceedings for paternity and child support, parental neglect parent and
and abuse, brought against the parents for the welfare of the child. In fact, a “Hild.
separate counsel for the child has been regarded as necessary ** in some coun-
tries.’

1411. These aspects impose a particularly heavy burden on the Judge. Any Role of
Judge with experience of dealing, at first instance, with cases concerned with Judge.
the care and custody of children must be well aware of the necessity to treat the
matter with the utmost discretion and tact. Where there is a serious dispute
between the parties involved, it may on occasions be inevitable that an assess-
ment has to be made of the character of one or more of them from the point
of view of suitability to have care of, or access to, a child. But such an assess-
ment can rarely be made satisfactorily by anyone who has not heard all relevant
evidence and, in particular, has not had the opportunity of observing the parties
in the witness box. The assessment should always be expressed in moderate
language, lest the dispute should be exacerbated and there should be impairment
of the prospects of securing that all concerned contribute as much as may be
within their power towards promoting the welfare of the child?

A Judge usually can decide with self-confidence the legal and factual issues
in litigation over who should have the custody of a child. Where he needs help,
however, is in evaluating which of the available alternatives will best satisfy the
psychological necds of the child. Attempt to provide guidelines, based on
psychoanalytic theory, to govern the Judges decision in all types of child place-
ment cases would be futile. The attempt would be seductive, but impossible:
because the amalgams of factors to be appraised in custody contests are too
complex.

1.12. Students of family law are well aware of certain interesting develop- Legislative
ments in that sphere of law. Recognition of the peculiar nature of proceedings fends law
involving disputes concerning the family,’ and the emergence of a new set of values and in
with reference to the equality of status’ of women along with increasing emphasis t° children.

on the rights of the child, have led to certain important developments in family

7866 para 6.40, infra.
Cf. Matter of Gault, (1963) 387 U.S. 1, 27, 34-42.

‘Nanette Dembitz, “The Good of the Child v. The Rights of the Parent” (1961) Vol. 86, Pol.
Science Quarterly, 389, 395,

48०० also para 1.15, infra.
38. ४. W., (August 17, 1979, Part 31), 1 W.LR. at 1053.
"Para 1.11, supra.
Para 1.18, infra.


Legislative
trends,

<riminal law.

Developments
in procedure—
Experts to
assist the
Court.

4

jaw. So far as the subject of guardianship and custody of children is concerned,
the trend of legislative and judicial attitudes in recent times may be briefly ad-
verted to.

1.13. In the first place, there has been an incicasing emphasis on giving the
mother, the right to apply for custody. in england, Uhis trend took the shape
of legislation passed in 1829, 18/3 and 1925, giving increasing recognition to
the mother’s right and culminating in the statutory provision bow to be found
in the act of 1973, which specifically provides that “in relation to the custody
or upbringing of a minor and का relation to the administration of any property
belonging to or held in trust for a minor (ण the application of income of any
such property, a mother shall have the same rights and authority as the law
allows to a father, and the rights and authority of mother and father shall be
cqual and exercisable by cither without the other, If they disagree, cither may
apply to a court for 15 discreuon™.

This is certainly a far cry from the nineteenth century attitude when Courts
were persuaded only with some difficulty to decline to enforce the father’s claim
to custody.

1be second trend,- which was a logical consequence of the — increasing
powers which the Courts had come to acquire,—was the evolution of a princi-
ple upon which to adjudicate such disputes. Here we have the principle of the
child's welfare which, in the course of time, was held to override considerations
such as the father’s “right”. Thus, equality was created between the two parents
and the welfare of the child was placed in the forefront.

Thirdly, with increasing complexity in family relations, it has become neces-
sary in certain countries to give persons and bodies outside the family unit
powers to intervene in the interests of the children. In the competition between
parents and non-parents, again’ the welfare of the child is the first and para-
niount consideration.

Fourthly, we come across legislation vesting in local authorities certain func-
tions in relation to the care of children. Such authorities may be ordered by
the Court to care for, or supervise, a child whose home circumstances, upbring-
ing, education or behaviour have been found unsatisfactory. Such provisions,
while appearing to be qualifications and restrictions on the rights of the parent,
really act as a useful inducement for the observance of parental responsibilitics.

1.14, While these topics belong to the field of civil law, the criminal law has
also kept pace with the times in order to protect children from a wide varicty
of evils-—such as, employment in hazardous occupations, purchase of dangerous
substarces, sexual exploitation and so on. More direct are the provisions design-
ed to protect children from various forms of neglect or ill-treatment at the
hands of their parents.

1.15. These developments in the substantive sphere have been matched by
the evolution of certain procedural devices which are mainly intended to ensure
that the guiding principle that the welfare of the child is paramount, is properly
applied and adequately implemented in practice. To some such belief may be
attributed the movement for the appointment of experts to assist the Court in
assessing the welfare of the child and the movement for appointing a child ad-
vocate."

iection 1(1), Guardianship Act. 1973. See further Chapter 6, infra and Appendix 3.
2Cf. J. v. C., (1969) 1 All E.R. 788 (House of Lords).

१5७७ also para 1.10, supra.


5

In England, for exumjpic, ail courts have power to call for an independcat
report on matters relevant to the welfare of the child. This service is provided
ia the High Court and the divorce court by the welfare oflicer, who is generally
the principal probation officer for the area. Although the service is utilised
mostly in proceedings ancillary to divorce, it is not so contined.

1.16. As to the seperate representation of children, there is vast and expan-
ding scholarly material in the United States calling for the appointment of a
child advocate or course’ for the child: iv contested case:
presentation of children has beer

+. Separate fegal  re-
suggested’ on the ground that the carlier the
attorney is appointed in a contested custody ease where a real dispute is appa-
rent, the more efiectively can the principles be put into practice.

Recently, in England, in regard to certain “care proceedings”, the Court has.
been given a power to appoint a person to represent the interests of a child."

117. Thus. over a period of years there can be discerned a steady trend
which reflects the view of successive generations. as to what the public interest
demands in this particular ficld of law. Development of legislation in this field
in India ought to proceed upon a parallel. rather than on a diverging, course.

1.18. Finally, it may be mentioned that the need for equality of treatment
as between the sexes nas been stressed not only by international bodies concerned
with the status of women’ but also in India*

1.19, The U.N, Declaration on Rights of the Child enunciates this principle:’

“The child, for the full and harmonious development of his personality,
needs love and understanJing. He shall, wherever possible, grow up in
the care and under the responsibility of his parents. and. in any case. an
atmosphere of affection and of moral and material security: a child of tender
years shall not, save in exceptional circumstances, be separated from his
mother. Society and the public authorities shall have the duty to “extend
particular care to children without a family and to those without adequate
means of support. Payment of State and other assistance towards the
maintenance of children of large families is desirable.”

1.20, Recent legislation in England also emphasis in positive terms the
equal »asitions of cach parent.” In France,” the former “paternal power” (puis-
sanee paternelle) has been replaced by the new “parental authority” (authorite
prventale).

IGoldstein and others. “Beyond the best interests of the child” (1973). page 66,
*Note “Lawyering for the child” (1978 May) 87 Yale Law Journal 1126.

3Statutory refer es collected in Note “Lawyering for the child” (1978 May) 87 Yale Law
Journal 1126 footnote 8 (19 jurisdictions using the term “attorney or counsel for the child”
and 5 jurisdictions using the term “guardian ad litem”).

‘Note “Lawyering for the child” (1978 May) 87 Yale Law Journal 1126.

‘Section 64 Children Act 1975 inserting section 32A in the Children and Young Persons
Act 1964.

8§ee also Alec Samusts “Children’s Advazate’? (1977), NIL. 133
7ULN. Commission on Status of Women, 20th Session (1967).
*Committce on Status of Women (din) Report (1974), pages 126-128 paragraphs 4.143

and 4.144,
9ULN. Declaration of Rights of the Child, “Principle 6.
Guardianshin of Minors Act 1971 and Guardianship Act, 1973.

MLaw of 4th June, 1970 (France) as briefly summuarised in Alexandre. “Women in France”
(1972) 20 American Journal of Comparative Law 647, 651.

Independent
legal repre-
seniative,

Steady trend,

Equality
of sexes.

U.N. Dec-
laration,

Position in
elsewhere
and on the
continent.


Treatment by

society of
its children.

Relevance
of survey.

6

The modern approach is also illustrated by the position as it prevails in
Sweden.’ The parents are joint guardians of the children of the marriage, and, on
the death of the one parent the other becomes the sole guardian. During separation
or after divorce, the parent with custody is the sole guradian. Of illegitimate child-
ren, the mother is the sole guardian unless she is unsuited to act on behalf of the
child, Until the twentieth birthday. a child remains in the custody of the parent or
the guardian. During the cohabitation of the parents, parental custody is joint. In
the event of separation or divorce, the Court determines which parent shall be the
custodian, In practice, the mother is often preferred when the child is of tender
age, while there is a preference of the father in the case of teenage sons.

1.21. Iv England, the philosophy underlying the Children Act, 1975 was thus
summarised by David Own M.P!

“A nation’s children represent a nation’s future. How society treats
its own children is a good reflection of the overall health and stability of
that society.”

1.22. Opinions differ as to the efficacy of the various legislative and other
measures. But this bricf survey is relevant to show that the legal relationship
between parents and children cannot be quite like that between adults, because
here we are concerned with the upbringing of someone who is too young to
bring himself up and too young to force others to do it for him.

Law, 622, 626.

aWallin, “Women in Sweden” (1972) 20 American Journal of Comparative
4David Owen M.-P.


CHAPTER 2

BRIEF HISTORY

2.1, The historical evolution of the law in India may be briefly dealt with.’ Introduction.
Before the Act of 1890, while the law relating to age of majority was codified?
there was no all-India Act dealing with the guardianship of minors. The matter.
in so far as the law was codified, was governed by certain Acts or Regulations
in force in certain local areas and there were also in operation certain uncodified
tules of personal law dealing with guardianship.

2.2, Briefly speaking, the statutory law before 1890 on the subject of guar- stamtory
dianship (apart from legislation relating to Courts of Wards), consisted of Acts '@W-
separately in force in the three Presidencies, certain Regulations in force in the
Presidency of Madras, one fragmentary legislation (Act 9 of 1861) amending
the law relating to minors and the European British Minors Act (13 of 1874)
which provided for the guardianship of European British minors.

2.3, The general Jaw of guardianship, however, remained unaffected, in 80 Uncodified
far as the legislation referred to above did not, except as regards European law
British subjects. purport to deal with natural guardians, their rights and duties.

These matters were left to be dealt with by uncodified rules in the sphere of
personal law. So also was the subject of testamentary guardianship, as regards
Hindus and Muslims.

2.4. Of the Acts in force before 1890, one—the Bombay Minors Act, 1864 Origin. of 80
——had caused serious difficulties in practice. This was the immediate factor that °

induced the Government of the day to take up the question of enacting suitable
legislation on the subject of guardianship. However, it was felt that there was
need for an all-India law on the subject.”

2.5, It was in this background that the draft Bill was drafted, circulated for
comments, revised and introduced and further processed. Details of the rele-
vant discussions will be found in an Appendix

*For a detailed historical discussion, see Appendix 2.
*The Indian Majority Act, 1873.

3866 Appendix 2 (Historical discussion).

« Appendix 2.


Minority,

Litigation

Testamentary
guardianship,

CHAPTER 3

PR

ENY LAW AND SCHEME OF THE ACE OF 1890

3.1. We propose to deal in this Chapter in bricf with the present law on
the subject of guardianship in India as contained in the Act of 1890 and cer-
tain allied Acts.

3.2. Guardiansiip, as envisaged by the Act, is a concept integrally linked
with the Iegal concept of “minority”. At the outset, therefore. the position as to
minority may be briefly adverted to. The principal enactment on the subject is
the Indian Majority Act. 1875.

In Indian law, in the main, three periods of guardianship of minors with
reference to the age of the minor fall to be considered. In the first place, a minor
is a person under the specified age in revard to matters falling within personal
law. This age varies. but in the case of Hindus (under the uncodified law), it
was 15 years or 16 years (according to the school by which the minor was gov-
erned), According to Muslim law, minority extends upto the age of 15 years.

For Hindus, by statute,’ it is now 18 years.

In the second place, a person is a minor in matters governed by the Indian
Majority Act* till he attains the age of 18 years. That Act does not extend to
the capacity of any person to act in certain specified matters,—-mainly, marriage,
dower, divorce and adoption and matters governed by the religion or Teligious
rites and usages of any class of persons.

In the third place, in the case of a person who has a guardian appointec!
by the Court or who is under the superintendence of the Court of Wards, mi-
nority extends upto the age of 21 years."

The statutory minimum age of marriage is now 21 years for males and 18
years for females.' However, marriage in contravention of the prescribed age is
not void for the purposes of civil law. though it may attract criminal liability.

3.3. Guardianship of a minor for the purpose of litigation is dealt with in
the Code of Civil Procedure.”

3.4. Testamentary guardianship is regulated hy certain statutory provisions’-"
and (as regards Muslims) by the Muslim law.

'Section 4(a). Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956
*The Tndian Majority Act. 1875.

"The Indian Majority Act. 1875.

“Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 as amended.

50. 32, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

6(a) Section 9, Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956
(by Section 60, Indian Succession Act, 1925.

7866 para 345, infra.


9

3.5. The statutory law of guardianship in India is to be found principally—
but not exclusively—in the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 (18 of 1890) and in
the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 (32 of 1956). Besides these, the
Chartered High Courts' have special jurisdiction conferred on them by their res-
pective Charters or Letters Patent. Courts of Wards-- principally concerned with
Revenue paying estates. are governed by State Acts wherever such legislation
still exists, Testamentary guardians can be appointed under the Succession Act?
or under the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act."

3.6, The Act of 1890 does not deal with the entire law relating to guardian-
ship. It does not, for example, contain provisions as to who are to be the natural
euardians of minors. The Act. in the first place, deals with the jurisdiction of
Courts in regard to guardianship, such as—

(i) appointment and declaration of guardians,
(i) removal of guardians.

Gii) control of guardians by the Court, and
tiv) orders as to custody.

Secondly. it deals with the duties and liabilities of guardians of all classes.

3.7. The Act is divided into four chapters. The first chapter (sections 1 to 4A)
deals with certain preliminary matters. such as title, extent and commencement.
savings, definitions and power to confer jurisdiction on subordinate judicial officers
and to transfer proceedings to such officers.

Chapter 2 (sections 5 to 19) deals with the appointment and declaration of
guardians. A pretty large number of questions has arisen with reference to

certain provisions contained in this Chapter, particularly, sections 7, 17 and 19.
Section 5 which dealt with guardianship by will or other instrument in the case
of Enropean British subjects. has been repealed.’ The power to appoint a

guardian in other cases is saved by section 6, which now applies to all persons.
Section 7 is the operative provision in this Chapter. dealing as it does with the
power of the Court to appoint the guardian of the person or property or both.
Sections 8 to 16 mostly deal with procedural or other minor matters, but section
17 is of great imnortance. It is concerned with the matters to be considered by
the Court in appointing a guardian. Section 18 provides that a Collector, if
appointed or declared a guardian, is so appointed by virtue of his office. Section
19 prohibits the appointment of a guardian in certain cases. Although negative
in form. this section has given rise to a number of problems in interpretation
and to the auestion of the interrelationship between section 17 and section 19.
We shall deal with this question at the appropriate place.

3.8. Chapter 3 (sections 20 to 42). which is the longest Chapter in the Act, is
concerned with the duties. rights and liabilities of guardians. The first four
sections (sections 20 ta 23) deal with matters of a general character, such as the
fiduciary relationship of guardian to his ward, the capacity of minors to act as
guardians, the remuneration of guardians, and control of the Collector when he
is appointed as the guardian. Guardianship of the person is dealt with in sections
24 to 26, of which the most important is section 25 dealing with restoration of

3(a) In re Dattatrava. 1.L.R. 58 Bom. 519.

(6) Mahadeo Krishna, ALR. 1937 Bom. 1932.
*8ection 60. Indian Succession Act. 1925.
3Section 9. Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act. 1956.
“See para 3.4, supra.
sSection 5 followed the European British Minors Act (13 of 1874)

Statutory
provisions

Act not
exhaustive,

Scheme of the

Act of 1890.


Sections
considered,

10

the custody of the ward to the guardian. This is the section most frequently
resorted to in practice, and as may be expected, case law on this section is prolific.

Guardianship of the property is the subject matter of sections 27 to 37.

With sections 38 to 42. the Act again reverts to matters of a general character,
namely, survivorship amongst joint guardians, removal of a guardian, discharge
of a guardian, cessation of the authority of a guardian, and appointment of a
successor to a guardian who is dead, discharged or removed.

These operative provisions of the Act are supplemented by Chapter 4
(sections 43 to 51), which are primarily concerned with matters in the nature of
enforcement, appeal, costs, rules and other topics of a miscellaneous or residuary
character.

3.9. After these veneral observations, we proceed to consider the Act section
by section.


CHAPTER 4

PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS: SECTIONS 1 TO 4

4.1, Sections 1 16 3 dea! with cort.in preliminary matters and do nct. in gene- Spore of
ial raise any serious contreversies. The changes required are minor.
Section 2.

4.2. Section 2 has hee venealed.

43. Section 3 saves the jurisdiction of Courts of Wards and High Courts. Section 3.
Court of Wards are now regulated mostly by provincial or State legislation,
wherever such legislation still exists. The need for saving the jurisdiction of High
Courts arose from the fact that the letters patent or charter of certain High
Courts confers special jurisdiction on those High Courts in regard to guardian-
ship. This jurisdiction is not exercisable by other High Courts. We shall have
occasion 16 deal with th's icrisdictien in detail, at <2 anprotriate place.’ It may
incidentally be mentioned that the jurisdiction of High Courts has been specifi-
cally saved by a provision of the Bindu Minority and Cvardianship Act also.

4.4, Some instances of the power of the High Court which is saved by section Section 3—
Instances of

3 may be mentioned High Court's
{a) special power to appoint a guardian for an infant or his “estate’-- jurisdiction.
which includes a minor's interest in undivided property;

(9) power to appoint a guardian even where there is no property, if a
proper case in made out for such an appointment;* and

(c) power to appoint a guardian for an infant residing abroad® (in view of
sections 41-42 of the Supreme Court Charter).

45. Section 4 contains defisitions of certain expressions, namely, ‘minor’, Section 4—

‘guardian’, ‘werd’, ‘district’, ‘the court’, ‘Collector’, and ‘prescribed’ arranged.

Following current legistative practice. the definition should be re-arranged
in the alphabetical order. We recommend accordingly.

4.6. The definition of ‘minor’ in section 4(1) adopts by reference that in the Section 4(1)

Indian Majority Act, 1875. However, that Act is confined to persons domiciled Mor
ia India. As regards peryo:s not so domiciled, the matter would presumably be

governed by rules of private international law as applied in India.
Tn this connection, we may refer to the position as to capacity to contract.
The Indian Contract Act’ provides as follows :—
“Every person is competent to contract, who is of the age of majority

according to the law to which he is subject and who is of sound mind and
is not disqualified from contracting by any law to which he is subject.”

iscussion relating to scction 7. infra (para 5.12).

21 12. proviso, Hindu Minority and Guardianship Aci, 1956.

5(a) In re Lovejoy. ALR. 1944 Cal. 433.
(9) In re Vasudevan, ALR. 1949 Mad. 260.

“Inve Jegannath Ramji, (1893) LL.R. 19 Bom. 96, 98 (Stariing J.)

3In re the Estate of H.G. Meakin, LL.R. 21 Bom. 137 (minor residing in England). Contrast
Jairam Tuxmor  ULR. 16 Bom. 634.

*Section 11 Tndian Contract Act, 1872.

2-2 M of L & J/CA/ND/80


Section 4(2)—-

Whether
justistic
person can
be ‘guardian’.

Section 4(2)
applicable to
all guardians.

De facto
guardian.

Section 4 of
Act of 1956
and its inter-
relationship
with Act of
1890,

12

The words “law to which he is subject” leave the field open for applying a
tule of foreign law, if our court so decides as a matter of private international
law. In other words, the age of majority would be determined by resort to that
system of law which the Indian rules of private international law recognise as
relevant in the particular field of law in regard to which the controversy arises.
The matter is (as regards some fields of law) regulated by statute,’ but in other
fields not so regulated. It is unnecessary to go into this vexed question. For

example, contractual capacity in regard to persons not domiciled in India is
governed by the law of domicile according to one view,’ but by Tex loci con-
tractus according to another view.

4.7. Comments in somewhat greater detail are needed in section 4(2). which
defines “guardian” as a person having the care of the persons of a minor or of
his property or of both his person and property. The question has arisen whe-
ther one other than a natural person can be appointed as a guardian. The Cal-
cutta view on the subject is that a charitable society cannot be appointed as a
guardian.’ According to this view, the definition of “person” in section 3(42) of
the General Clauses Act, 1897 becomes inapplicable in view of certain provisions
of the Act of 1890—such as, sections 43 and 45.

The Calcutta case has been dissented from by one Court.>

We are of the view that the Court should have a power to appoint a juristic
person as a guardian subject to certain safeguards. The point is proposed to be
considered further’ in a subsequent Chapter.

48. It is now fairly well settled’ that the definition of “guardian” is applicable
to guardians of all classes—natuval testamentary and certificated. though, of
course, the definition does not include a guardian for marriage (wherever such

guardianship continues under personal law), or a guardian ad litem. This much
is clear from the present wording of the definition, since it is requisite in the

definition that a person, in order to be a “guardian”, must have the “care” of the
person or proporty of the minor. The emphasis placed on “care” seems to have
been derived from the original. Anglo-Saxon word “weardian” (to watch or to
guard).

4.9, Text book writers, when dealing generally with personal law. discuss the
“de facto guardian”. In regard to the Act of 1890. much of the controversy that
has arisen relates to persons who, by legal right, claim guardianship or custody
of a minor.’ It is, however. necessary to consider the position as to de facto
guardiens as applicable to Hindus after the Act of 1956.

4.10. In the Act of 1956, section 4(b) defines a guardian as under:
“4, In this Act.—

(b) ‘guardian’ means a person having care of the person of a minor or of
his property or of both his person and property, and includes—

3E.g. as to negotiable instruments. see Law Commission of India, 11th Report (Negotiable
Instruments), paragraphs 27 and 29.

%a) Kashiba v. Sripat, UL.R. 19 Bom. 697 (Law of domicile).
(0) Rohilkhand and Kumaun Bank Ltd. v. Row, (1885) LL.R. 7 All. 490.
(३) T.N.S. Firm v. Mohammad Hussain, A..R. 1933 Mad. 756.
(b) Baindail v. Baindail, (1946) 1 All E.R. 342, 346.
(a) Smt. Ashalata vy. Society for Protection of Children in India, A.1.R. 1930 Cal. 397.
(b) M.C. Sweoney v. Arbithnot, ALR. 1931 Cal. 563.

Lakshman Singh v. State. A.LR. 1955 V-P. 3, 4, para 5 (Jagat Narayan J.C.) (Registered
society).

"See discussion relating to section 18A, infra.
"Ratan v. Bishan, A..R. 1978 Bom. 190 (Chapter 6).
*Para 7.14, infra


“(i) a natural guardian;

(ii) a guardian appointed by the will of the minor’s father or mother;
(iii) a guardian appointed or declared by a court; and

(iv) a person empowered to act as such by or under any enactment relating
to any court of wards:

Tt will be noticed that the Act of 1956 does not specifically include a de
facto guardian in section 4(b) quoted above, though the words “having the care”
seem to cover de facto guardians. A controversy has arisen as to whether, as
regards Hindus, the definition in section 4(2) of the Act of 1890! would cover
de jacto guardians. The Bombay High Court has answered the question in the
affirmative The Kerala High Court* however, takes a different view.

4.11, The position obviously needs clarification. The concept of “de facto The concept
guardian” has been discussed at length in a judgment of the Federal Court where De facto
Kania 0. J. observed: हु

“There can only be a de facto manager, although the expression ‘de
facto guardian’ has been used in text books and some judgments of Courts.
If that description is adopted (and I consider it to be the correct description

of a person generally managing the estate of a minor without having any
legal titie to do so) the powers of a natural guardian are not brought into

cousideration in defining the position of such a manager.”

4.12. The concept of de facto guardian’ is not peculiar to Hindus. It is familiar Cencept of
to Muslim law as administered in India,’ though the powers of de facto guardians oe ane
as regards the disposition of property of Muslim minors are narrower than those recognised
that were recognised by Hindu law before the Act of 1956. In fact, the concept is branches of

born out of necessity, and necessity knows no boundaries of race or religion. law.

Nor is the concept confined to civil law. For example, the Explanation to
section 361 of the Indian Penal Code also gives a wide meaning to “lawful
guardian”. and runs as follows:*

“The words ‘lawful guardian’ in this section include any person lawfully
entrusted with the care or custody of such minor or other person......... ”

This shows that the concept of a person acting de facto is not new. The
above definition, it may be noted, is inclusive.

4.13. In this position, and on a consideration of all aspects of the problem, we Recommendation
recommend that the law should be clarified by adding, below section 4(2) of the tion HO) o
Act of 1890, a suitable Explanation which would make it clear that a de facto add de facto

guardian is included within the definition of “guardian”. guardian,

We do not propose to define a “de facto” guardian. In a Bombay case’
Crump J. said: —

“T must admit that J am not precisely enamoured of the term ‘de facto

guardian’. because it appears to me to be debatable in the extreme, and

incapable of exact, definition. “I take it to mean, so far as it can be defined,
a person who, being neither a legal guardian nor a guardian appointed by

"Para 4.7, Supra.

*Ratan v. Bishan A.LR. 1978 Bom. 190 (B.S. Shah J.)

3Ramchandra v. Annapurni Ammal, A.I.R. 1964 Ker. 269.
4Sriramulu v. Pundarikakshayya, AR. 1949 F.C. 218, 221, para 13.
Musa Miye v. Kadar Bux, (1928) 55 LA. 171, 179 (P.C.).
*Section 361, Indian Penal Code.

*Harilal v. Govardhan, (1927) 1LR. 51 Bom. 1040, 1047.



Element of
“care” in
other statutory
provisions.

Definition in
other Acts,

English
definition.

Effect of the
expression
“having the
care”.

14

court, takes it upon himself to assume the management of the property of

the minor as though he were a guardian. But if that be the real meaning of the
term, I agree with the learned Chief Justice that it implies some continuity

of conduct, some management of the property beyond the isolated act of
sale which comes into question in this suit.”

The same idea can be expressed more briefly by stating that a de facto
guardian” means a person who, as a matter of fact, has custody and care of the
person of a minor or of his property.

4.14. Reverting to the present definition of “guardian”, it would be interest to
note that the same element of “care” as is emphasised in the Act of 1890 is also
emphasised in the Medical Termination of Pregnancy’ Act. which defines a
guardian as meaning “a person having the care of the person of a minor or a
lunatic” and (though in somewhat wider phraseology in the Children Act,’ which
provides that “guardian” in relation to a child, includes “any person who......has
for the time being the actual charge of, or control over, that child”.

Under the Vaccination Act. section 2(3), “guardian” includes any person
who has accepted or assumed the care or custody of any child.

Under section 2 of the Children (Pledging of Labour) Act, 1933, “guardian”
includes any person having legal custody of or control over a child.

4.15, We need not multiply precedents, but we may mention that the following
Central Acts contain (or contained) definitions of the expression “guardian”: —

(a) European British Minors Act (13 of 1874) (repealed).
(0) Vaccination Act (13 of 1880, section 2(3).
(c) Children (Pledging of Labour Act (32 of 1933), section 2.

(d) Section 9, Explanation (ia), Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act,
1956 (inserted by Act 45 of 1962), which reads—

“(ia) ‘guardian’ means a person having the care of the person of a

child or of both his person and property and includes—{a) a guardian
appointed by the will of the child’s father 0: mother, and (b) a guardian

appointed or declared by a court;”
(०) Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act (32 of 1956), section 4.°

(f) Children Act (60 of 1960), section 2.°
(g) Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act (34 of 1971), section 2.°

4.16. In one of the statutory definitions in England, “guardian”, in relation to
any child or young person, has been defined as meaning the person having the
legal right to the guardianship of the person of that child or young person” In
another statutory definition in England, ' guardian” has been defined as including
anybody who has for the time being charge of or control over a person?

4.17. An important question arises from the expression “having the care”
used in the definition. Does it mean that if a person, though legally vested
with guardianship, never actually had the care of a minor, he cannot take pro-
ceedings under the Act? This question becomes of practical importance with
reference to section 25, and will be considered thereunder.’

3ection 2(a), Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act (34 of 1971).
Section 2(k), Children Act (60 of 1960).

*gection 2(3), Vaccination Act, 1880.

“Para 4.14, supra.

SPara 4.14, supra.

*Para 4.10, supra.

Section 106(4) Education Act 1944 (Eng.)

Section 126 Magistrate’s Courts Act 1952 (Eng.)

*See dircussion relating to section 25 (para 7.14, infra).



CHAPTER 5

EMPLOYMENT OF SUBORDINATE JUDICIAL OFFICERS: SECTION 4A

5.1. While jurisdiction under the Act is in the first instance vested in the
District Judge, section 4A(1) empowers the High Court to confer such jurisdic-
tion on “any officer exercising original civil jurisdiction subordinate to a District
Court”. The object of the provision is to reduce the load on the District Judge.
The section was inserted in pursuance of a recommendation of the Civil Justice
Committee.’

5.2. The section seems to require modification in one respect. The exercise
of jurisiiction under the Act—particularly, in adjudicating questions of custody—
requires mature judgment and often involves the balancing of delicate considera-
tions, It is therefore desirable that the powers should be vested only in senior
judicial officers. As the nomenclature of the subordinate judiciary varies from
State to State, it is not possible to make a provision confining ii to judicial
officers of a particular designation, but it would be appropriate if the jurisdiction
is confined to judicial officers who exercise unlimited original civil jurisdiction.
Such unlimited jurisdiction is in all States exercised only by senior judicial
officers. Accordingly, we recommend that in section 4A, in sub-section (1), for
the words “exercising original civil jurisdiction”, the words exercising unlimited
original civil jurisdiction” should be substituted.

4Statement of Objects and Reasons, Gazette of India (1926), Part V, pages 11-12.

15

Section 4A.

Amendment
recommended
in section 4A,


Section 5—
Powers of
parents to
appoint in
case of
European Bri-
tish subjects
(Repealed).

Section 6.

Section 7(1)—
Criteria for
exercise of
the power.

CHAPTER 6

APPOINTMENT AND DECLARATION OF GUARDIANSHIP: SECTIONS
5 TO 19.

I. Introductory

6.1. The appointment and declaration of guardians is a subject spread over
fifteen sections (sections 5-19). Of these, at least three sections—sections 7,17
and 19-—have raised important questions of principle or detail.

6.2, The first section in this group, though repealed, is of interest. It read
35 follows:—

“5. (1) Where a minor is an European British subject, 2 guardian or
guardians of his person or property, or both, may be appointed by will
or other instrument to take effect on the death of the Person appointing,—

(a) by the father of the minor or,

(b) if the father is dead or incapable of acting, by the mother.

(2) Where guardians have been appointed under sub-section (1) by
both parents, they shall act jointly.”

We are quoting this section as an interesting example of the legislative

attitude as to the equality of the parents of both sexes in regard to a certain
class of persons.

6.3 Section 6 provides that in the case of a minor nothing in this Act shall
be construed to take away or derogate from any power to appoint a guardian
of his person or property or both which is valid by the law to which the minor
is subject. The “power to appoint” which is saved by the section would, inter
alia, include the power to appoint a guardian by will! This power has been

recognised by the Legislature? and the Courts in India on more than one
occasion.*

HI. Appointment and declaration of guardian

6.4. Section 7(1) empowers the Court to make an order as to guardianship,
and may be described as the pivotal section in the entire Act. The power is
to be exercised only for the welfare of the minor: for this reason, the introduc-
tory words of the section have been described as the key note of the Act.t The
Court must be “satisfied” that the order should be made for the welfare of the
minor. Its satisfaction must be based on some material, and must not be
illusory. In making an appointment of a guardian under the section, the Court

मल, (8) Section 9, Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956.
(b) Section 60, Indian Succession Act, 1956.

%E.g. (ay Bengal Regulation 5 of 1799.
(b) Sections 18 and 19, Madras Regulation 5 of 1804.
(०0 Section 8, Bombay Minors Act (20 of 1864).

%a) Pirthee Lal v. Doorga Lal. (1867) 7 W.R.C.R. 74, 75.

(0) Alimodeed Moallen v. Syfoora Bibee (18/66) 16 W.R.MLR. 125.

(©) Alikhan y. Panibai (1894) LR. 19 Bom. 832.

“Sarat v. Girindra, (1911) 15 Cal, Weekly Notes 457, 459, 460,

16


17

will, of course. have to bear in mind the fact that the effect of an appointment
would be to extend the period of minority,'

6.5. The power of the Court under sub-section (1) of section 7 is either Power to

to appoint « guardian or to declare a person to be a guardian, Such guardians declare or

are, in common parlance, called “certificated guardians”. The Power to declare guardi
a person as a guardian possesses some utility—as, for example, in cases where guardian’
a guardian has been appointed under a testamentary instrument ard the Court,

by a declaration, gives effect to the appointment.

Sub-section (2) of section 7 sets out the consequences of the appointment
or declaration of a guardian by the Court. Without a formal order of removal,
such an order implies the removal of any guardian who has not been appointed
by will or other instrument or appointed or declared by the Court. The object
is to avoid conflict of authority between two or more guardians? The powers.
of the certificated guardians are exclusive.

Sub-section (3) of section 7 requires the Court to ensure that an order
under this section shall not be made where a guardian has been appointed by
will or other instrument or appointed or declared by the Court, until the powers
of such guardian have ceased.

6.6. We now proceed to deal with certain important points concerning sec- Questions to
tion 7. Broadly, these questions pertain to the following topics:— be considered
to section 7.

(a) the persons who can be appointed as guardians:

(b) the property in respect of which a guardian may be appointed;‘ and

(c) the nature of the order can be passed.

y 6.7, Commentaries on the Act discuss at some length the question whether Section 7
a person residing out of India can be appointed as a guardian. The general oe gfuardian
consensus at present’ scems to be that the matfer is in the discretion of the side India,
Court.and a very rigid rule prohibiting the appointment of such a person would

not be recognised. Although many of the judicial decisions in this context relate

to an application for custody under section 25, the principle would presumably

be the same in relation to the wider jurisdiction to appoint a guardian under

section 7. In this position, we do not consider it necessary to recommend any
amendment on the subject. As to the appointment of institutions, the point

will be considered later.’

6.8. Coming to the points concerned with property for which a guardian Section 7 and
can be appointed, the expression “property” in section 7 has created a certain Pe nor
amount of controversy with reference to the question whether the hereditary
trusteeshin of a religious institution is “property” within the meaning of the
section,

‘Section 4(1). read with section 3 of the Indian Majority Act, 1875.
*Argunan v. Duraising. A.LR. 1914 Mad. 648, 649.

SPara 6.7, infra.

{Para 6.8 to 6.17, infra.

Para 6.18, infra.

5, Williams vy. P.C. Martin, A.I.R. 1970 Mast. 427.

Para 6.56, infra.


Conflict of
decisions as
to hereditary
‘usteeship.

Recommendation
to insert an
Explanation
below section 7.

Section 7 and
interest in
undivided
property,

Jurisdiction
of High Courts,

Earlier Jaw.

18

6.9. The Madras‘ and the Patna’ decisions take a restricted view of the
matter.

This view, however, has been dissented from in Andhra Pradesh in a Full
Bench decision,* which holds that the word “property” in section 7 is com-
prehensive enough to take in all types of proprietary rights. The term “property”
is used in a generic sense. It has a wide connotation and is not restricted to
a kind of property in which the minor has a beneficial enjoyment. The section,
according to the Andhra Pradesh view, contemplates the appointment of guar-
dians to minors in regard to all types of property. The hereditary trusteeship
of a religious ivsiitution theiefove corstit.tes “prope:ty” wiihin the ambit of
the section, according to the Andhra Pradesh view, and a Court is competent
to appoint a guardian to a minor in respect of trust properties of which the
minor happens to be a trustee. The Andhra Pradesh judgment points out that
the principe that the office of hereditary trustceship follows the line of succession
has beer embedded in Hindu law and judicially recognised. A reasonable inter-
pretation has to be given to section 7, so as to harmonise it with the concepts
of Hindu law.

6.10. In our opinion, it is desirable to adopt the wider view by legislative
amendment. It is necessary that the expression “property”, at least in an Act
vitally effecting personal law, should be given an interpretation that will be in
harmony with the concepts of personal law. Accordingly, we recommend that
an Explanation should be inserted below section 7, somewhat in these terms:

“Explanation.—The expression ‘property’ includes the hereditary trustee-
ship of a religious institution.”

6.11. The next question—also relating to the scope of the expression “pro-
perty” in section 7—concerns the interest of a minor in undivided property of
a Hinds coparcenary.’ Sxch an appointment is now restricted to Chartered
High Courts.

6.12, The Chartered High Courts have an independent power to appoint a
guardian—the power derived from the Charter of the Supreme Court! (sections
41 and 42), which gave that Court the powers of the Court of Chancery; especially,
the power “to appoint guardians and keepers for infants and their estates”.
Section 9 of the High Courts Act, 1861 continued this power of the Supreme
Court to the High Court. Sections 3 and 6 of the Act of 1890 preserved the
pre-existing powers of High Courts.‘

6.13. Pesition under earlier legislation may be dealt with. In Soobane Singh
v. Juggeshur Koer. the High Court of Calcutta observed:—

“Ft is not clear ............ >> that under Act XXXV of 1858 (the Bengal
Minors Act) a manager under no circumstances could be appointed if a
lunatic be a member of a joint Hindu family under the Mitakshara law
possessed of no separate property.”

Ma) Alagapp.: v. Mangulhai, VLR. 40 Mad. 672.
(0) Venkatachalapothi v. Thirugnana, 33 MLL.J. 297;

(c) Varadachuriar y. Raja Ramkrishnan. A.LR. 1923 Mad. 497.
*Kinyy v. Bahuria, ATR. 1933 Pat. 527.

°K. Sustralu ९. M. Ven cara Rao, ATR. 1959 A.D. 232 (ER).
‘Section 12, Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956.

"gee para 6.12, supra.

See

(a) Roja of Vizancerem v. Secretary of State, ALR. 1937 Mad. 51
(0) Sham Kuar v. Mohanunda. (1892) LL.R. 19 Cal. 301.

?Soobane Singh v. Juggeshur Koer, 13 C.L.R. 86 (Cal.). See Sham Kuar v. Mohanunda, (1892)
LL. 19 Cal. 301, 307.



19

In Bhoopendra urain Roy v. Greesh Narain Roy, Pointfex, J., said,
with reference to this Act (the Bengal Minors Act 35 of 1858):—

“It appears to us that there may be cases where it is essentially neces-
sary that a guardian should be appointed for a member of a Mitakshara
family as much as for any other family.”

Under the Bombay Yinors Act of 1864 (26 ef 186%), which was similar in
its provisions to Act 40 of 1858, the Bombay High Court had held, apparently
on the authority of the Privy Council case of Durgapersad v. Keshopersad Singh?
that a certificate of administration may be granted for the share of a minor who
was a member cf an undivided Hindu family;* and the Allahabad High Court
held that under Act 40 of 1858 a certificate may be granted in the lifetime
of the father.

6.15. So much as regards the earlier law and the present position. It is Power of as
a . . Parra ares other ts,
now time to consider the question whether this jurisdiction should be extended

to ocher Courts,

6.16. in this context we have taken note of the following observations made "ombay case.
im a Bombay case’ a few years ag. ~

“In my opinion earlier decisions of this Court establish clearly that
the Court has jurisdiction in a case of this sort to make the order asked
for. That jurisdiction was established definitely by a decision of a Full
Bench in Rom. 5 i it was heid that onder its geieral jurisdic-
tion, and apart from the Guardians and Wards Act, the High Court has
powe: to anpoini a guardian of the property of x minor who is a member
of a joint Hindu family ard where the minor’s property is an undivided
share in the family property. The applicant in ihat case also sought sanc-
tion of the Court for a sale of the family property in which the minor “was
interested and that sanction was given. That decision confirmed a practice
which nad been adopted in previous cases: 16 Bom. 634 and {> Bom.
96° and svch practice ies since been followed in this Court and by the
Csteutta High Court in 50 Cat. 141° ard 59 Cal. 57

“Bowever, in the year 1932. Kania, p34 Mom. «2. 17557 steted
his view that although the Court had jurisdiction in a case of this sort
to make the order, the Court ought not to exercise that jurisdiction except
in very special circumstances. The learned Judge pointed out correctly that
the manager of a joint Hindu family has power to sell or mortgage for legs}
necessity or for the benefit of the estate, and that the burden is upon the
purchaser or morteagee to prove that the sale or mortgage fulfils those
conditions. and smed Judge took the view that the psrchaser o> mort-
gagee had no right “to cast that obligation on the Court. 1 do not find

*Bhoapendra Narain Roy v. Greesh Narain Roy, (1878) LI.R. 6 Cal, 539.
*Durgapersad v. Keshopersad Singh, (1881) TLR. & Cal. 656; LR. 91.4. 27 (०.2).
*Babaji v. Sheshgiri, U.L.R. 6 Bora. 593.

*Dhiraj Koer v. Adjoadiya Bux Singh. 3 M-W.P. (511.), 91. cit
(1892) LR. 19 Cal. 701, 303.

Yin re Mahodeo Krishna Rupji, ALR. 1937 Bom. 98, 99 toer Beaumis C5).
“in re Munilal Hurgovan. (1901) LL.R. 25 Bom. 353; 3 Bom. LR. 41! (F.B.).
Vairam Laxmon, (1892) LLR. 16 Bom. 634.

*Re Jagannath Ramyi, (1895) LLR. 19 Bom. 96.

*In re Hari Norain Das, A.LR. 1923 Cat. 409; LL.R. 50 Cal. 141.

In kumar Singh Buder. ALR. 1932 Cal. $02: LLR. $9 Cal. $70.
Ja ve Datiatdsa Govind. ALR. 1932 Bom. 537; LL.R. 56 Bom. 519.

9 Sham Kiev ५



No change
recommended
as to minor's
interest in
undivided
property.

Section 7 and
conditional
orders.

20

myself able to agree with that reasoning. The attitude of a purchaser or
a mortgagee is that unless he can get a good title, he is not going to enter
into a contract of purchase or mortgagee. He does not seek to cast any
burden upon the Court; he merely says that he is not going on with the
transaction unless he gets a good title. Now, it is very difficult in many
cases 10 a purchaser or a mortgagee to satisfy himself as to the existence
of legai necessity, or benefit of the estate. It is very difficult for him to
check the truth of the story told to him which is alleged to give rise to such
necessity or benefit, and not only has he to do that, but he has to preserve
evidence which will be available when the transaction may de attacked in
years to come by a minor son of the manager. Experience in appeals from
the mofussil has satisfied me that this burden which is cast on purchasers
and mortgagees is a very heavy and often an unreasonable one. A sale or
morigage is often impeached some twenty years after the date of the trans-
action, and it is set aside because the purchaser or mortgagee, or those
claiming through him, cannot, at that distance “of time, when material
witnesses are no longer available, discharge the burden of satisfying the
Court of the existence of legal necessity or benefit to the estate. 1 am not
at all surprised, therefore, that legal practitioners in Bombay decline to
advise their clients to enter into a transaction with the manager of a joint
Hindu family unless they get an order of the Court, binding minor mem-
bers, and it seems to me that as the Court has jurisdiction to make an order
ctioning the transaction, it ought in a proper case to do so. Whether a
similar power ought not to be vested in mofussil courts is a matter which
might well engage the attention of the legislature.' The petition in this case
suggests that the money can be obtained on mortgage on much better terms
if an order of the Court is obtained, than would be the case if an order is
not obtained. Therefore the making of the order may well be for the benefit
of the minors, and if the requisite facts are proved, in my opinion, the Judge
should not hesitate to make the order. But undoubtedly a Judge has to
exercise great care in seeing that the case is a proper one. “As Kania, J.
points out, the evidence of the manager himself is generally interested, and
it may not always be easy to check; but if the Court is not satisfied that the
transaction is really for the benefit of the minor, it ought to refuse its
assent.”

6.17. No doubt, having regard to the object of guardianship proceedings,
namely, to protect the child, there is something to be said in favour of a specific
power to appoint a guardian of the interest of a minor in undivided property.
However, it appears to us that the extension of the jurisdiction to all Courts may
be fraught with certain risks. Appointment of a guardian for an interest in
joint family property requires the delicate weighing of several factors. Preser-
vation of the power of the High Court is regarded as beneficial for all concerned
—the minor as well as the other sharers. as was observed in one of the Bombay
cases.’ 3ut we are not inclined to confer a similar jurisdiction on other Courts,
who may not be able to brine to bear the mature judgment and delicate balancing
of conflicting considerations which may be needed in such cases.

6.18. This disposes of the points concerning the “property” coveted by sec-
tion 7. As to the nature of the order to be passed under section 7, there seems
to be some controversy on the question whether a conditional order for guardian-
ship cen passed. According to the Madras view.’ a conditional order to the
effect that “upon petitioner furnishing security he is appointed guardian of

Note the suggestion for law reform.
*Jairam Luxmon, (1892) V.L.R. 16 Bom. 634, 636.
3In re Nattia Vanketesa Perumal, A.1.R. 1927 Mad. 36(F.B.).


21

minor’s property” is bad from the very beginning, but according to the Bombay
view,' this is permissible, and this also appears to be the Lahore view.?

6.19, In the Madras case, where conditional orders were described as “gus- Observations
pensory” orders, the following observations were made:— in Madras case,

“The mischief of these suspensory orders, apart altogether from the
question as to whether they are legal or invalid, is that the matter goes
before the Judge who makes these suspensory orders and then the papers go
into the office “where it is nobody's business to see what is being done
about it. The order is not complied with, and then somebody finds out
that the minor, whom it was desired to protect, has attained his majority,
and the Court is powerless because the guardian has failed to carry out
its directions and the Court has kept no control over the matter by reason
of the nature of the order so as to summon the guardian and ask him:
‘Why have you not furnished the security?’.”

6.20. In the Bombay case‘ on the subject, on the other hand, the matter was Bombay view.
thus dealt with—

“in all matters connected with the welfare of minors the predominant
motive of the Court is to pursue a course of action which will be for the
minor’s benefit, and the consideration of the appointment of the guardian of
a minor’s property is no exception to this rule. There are three alternatives
as to security in relation to such appointments: (1) To make the appoint-
ment without requiring the giving of any security; (2) To require the pros-
pective guardian to enter upon security before coming to “the Court for
his appointment; (3) To make a condition that upon security being given the
appointment shall operate.

“I cannot think that the first course is for the benefit of the minor, and
it would be wholly contrary to the practice of this country and to R. 5 of
the Civil Manual mentioned above. The second course is hedged around
with difficulties, in that security would either have to be given conditionally
upon the Court making the appointment, alternatively it would have to be
actually given, with the consequential unnecessary expense of its vacation,
should the Court for some reason decide against making a particular ap-
pointment. The third course is the most practical and convenient one,
namely, to make the appointment upon security being given. If security be
given, a question may arise in some future case as to whether the appoint-
ment relates back to the date when the original order was made, but that
does not arise here, nor do we decide it. There being nothing wrong or
invalid in my judgment in this form of order, the effect of it is, 10 my opinion
not open to serious doubt; the Receiver has no right to take possession of the
minor’s movable property until security has been furnished; were it otherwise,
the whole object of the Court giving directions for security might be defeated.
It follows, in my judgment, that if security be never given, the order never
becomes operative, so far as the appointment of the prospective guardian
is concerned. In my opinion, such an order cannot be ‘cancelled’ by the
Judge who made it. If it is desired to get rid of an order if security be
not given, the order can take the form of requiring security to be given on
or before a specified date, so that if the time runs out the order automatically
lapses. That prevents the difficulty envisaged by the learned Chief Justice
Sir Murray Coutts Trotter in 49 Mad. 809 and would be in accordance with

Yay Singh v. Pratap Singh, A.LR. 1945 Bom. 243, 245, 247 (reviews cases).
*Sham Das v. Umer Din, A.LR. 1930 Lah. 497 (F.B.).

"In re Natha Venkatesa Perumal, A.LR. 1927 Mad. 36, 37.

“Jay Singh v. Pratab Singh, A.LR. 1945 Bom. 243, 246, 247.


Need for
amendment
as to condi-
tional orders.

Section 8.

Recommenda-
tion to add
clause (bb).

Section
8 (bb) to be
inserted.

Recommendation,

22

R. 7 of the Civil Manual which appears to be honoured at present only in
its breach.”

6.21. It appears to us that practical considerations justify the adoption of
the wider view in the matter of power to issue conditional orders. Accordingly,
we recommend that a suitable provision in this regard should be made by amend-
ing section 7.

Jn an appropriate case, the Court should have power to make an appoint-
ment conditional on the performance of a condition by the guardian within a
specified period. It should also be provided that the order shall not be opera-
tive until the condition is satisfied.

We recommend that insertion of the following new sub-section in section 7,
to achieve this object:—

> (4) In an appropriate case, the Court may make an appointment of a
guardian conditional on the performance by the guardian of a specified
condition within a specified period and where such an order is passed, the
order shall not be operative unless the condition is performed by the guardian
within ihe period initially specified by the Court or subsequently extended by
the Court.”

Ill. Application. and steps to be taken thereon

6.22. This takes us to section 8, which provides that an order shall not be
made under section 7, except on the application of the persons entitled to apply
for an order, as enumerated in the section. These are, in brief, the person
desirous of being or claiming to be the guardian. any relative or friend of the
minor, the Collector of the district or the Collector having authority with respect
to the class to which the minor belongs.

The expression “relative or friend” in section 8(b) really means a person
who, being a relative or friend, has a beneficial interest in the minor.’

6.23. The section does not, however, give the minor himself a right to apply
to the Court. The general view’ is that without an application under section 8
the Court cannot proceed in the matter. It may be noted that in England, a
minor possessing property, if his parents are dead and if there is no testamen-
tary guardian, may, after attaining the age of 14 years (male) or 12 years (female),
himself “elect” a guardian.®

6.24, Though we need not, in India, go to that length. yet it would be
useful if the minor is at least given a right to apply for the appointment of a
guardian, since it is not inconceivable that the minor may be seriously prejudic-
ed if no third person takes an interest in his welfare.

6.25. On this reasoning, we recommend that the following clause should be
inserted in section 8:—

“(bb) the minor. if, being a male, he has attained the age of fourteen
years or, being a female, she has attained the age of twelve years.”

\Thangupandian y. K.B. Naicker, A.1.R. 1965 Mad. 368.
%a) Sakina v. Mohomed, A.1.R. 1928 Lah. 456.
(b) Jaiwanti v. Gajadhar, (1921) 1.L.R. 38 Cal. 783, 785.

3Halsbury, 4th Ed. Vol. 24, page 224, footnote 5, citing Ex parte Edwards (1747) 3 A. & ६.
519, and Re Brown's Will, (1881) 18 Ch. D. 61, 72, 76 (C.A.) and other cases.



23

6.26. Section 9 reads— Section 9—

Court having
i

“9. (1) If the application is with respect to the guardianship of the jurisdiction
person of the minor, it shall be made to the District Court having jurisdic- ele
tion in the place where the minor ordinarily resides.

(2) If the application is with respect to the guardianship of the property
of the minor, it may be made either to the District Court having jurisdiction
in the place where the minor ordinarily resides or to a District Court having
jurisdiction in a place where he has property.

(3) If an application with respect to the guardianship of the property
of a minor is made to a District Court other than that having jurisdic-
tion in the place where the minor ordinarily resides, the Court may return
the “application if in its opinion the application would be disposed of more
justly or conveniently by any other District Court having jurisdiction.”

The “ordinary place of residence” of a minor is a pure question of fact.
Notions of constructive or legal residence do not enter into the picture at
all. There is no presumption that the residence of the guardian is the
residence of the minor, although usually that may happen to be the case.’

The matter being one of fact, the case law on the expression ‘‘ordinarilly
resides”, though abundant, does not appear to necessitate any change in the
section.

6.27. Section 10 deals with the form of application for guardianship and Section 10.
needs no change.

6.28. Section 11 deals with the procedure on admission of an application for Section 11.
guardianship, and does not need any change.

6.29. Section 12 reads— Section 2—
Power to make
“12. (1) The Court may direct that the person, if any, having the interlocutory
. + ५ order for pro-
custody of the minor shall produce him or cause him to be produced at such quction of minor
place and time and before such person as it appoints, and may make such and Jnterim
order for the temporary custody and protection of the person or property person and

of the minor as it thinks proper. property.

(2) If the minor is a female who ought not to be compelled to appear
m public, the direction under sub-section (1) for her production shall require
her to he produced in accordance with the customs and manners of the
country.

(3) Nothing in this section shall authorise—

(a) the Court to place a female minor in the temporary custody
of a person claiming to be her guardian on the ground of his being her
husband. unless she is already in his custody with the consent of
parents, if any, or

(b) any person to whom the temporary custody and protection of
the property of a minor is entrusted to dispossess otherwise than by due
course of law any person in possession of any of the property.”

a) Choudhury v. Choudhury, (1974-75) 79 C.W.N, 784 (reviews oases).
(0) Harihar v. Suresh, ALR. 1978 A.P. 12, 18, para 6.


Section 12—~
Interim orders
in cases under
section 25—

Recommendation,

Section 13.

Consultation
with child
welfare
experts.

Section 14—~
Recommendation
to revise sub-
section (3).

24

6.50, Where the preceeding is not for the appointment or declaration of a
fuardivn, but for custody under section 25. there is some uncertainty on the
questic: whether th jaterim orders for the protection of minor and interim
order for protection of person and property described in section 12 can be legally
made. Section 10, by its terms, is confined to the pendency of “guardianship”
Proceeding. according to one view:' but according to another view. it is not so
confined. Cne of the High Courts’ has, in order to advance the cause of justice,
found out a wia media by resorting to the inherent juridiction of the Court.

In ovr opinion, it is desirable to make an express provision, in section 12,
Tecognisi:: such a power (that is, a power of the nature provided for in section
12), in regard to proceedings under section 25.

We recommend accordingly.

6.31. Section 13 provides that on the day fixed for the hearing of the ap-
Piication or as soon afterwards as may be, the Court shall hear such evidence as
may he a:lduced in support of. or in opposition to, the application.

The section does not, of course, rule out the taking of evidence by the
Court. In this connection it is to be noted that the Law Commission has, in its
Report on the Code of Civil Procedure, emphasised‘ the need for an enquiry by
the Court in matters concerning the family. The amended Civil Procedure Code!
Provides that in suits or proceedings relating to matters concerning the family.
“it shail be the duty of the Court to enquire, so far as it reasonably can. into
the facts alleged by the plaintiff and into facts alleged by the defendant”.

6.32. The Act docs not, at present, contain provisions empowering the Court
to consult Child Welfare Officers before appointing a guardian. But such a
provision” has been made in the Code of Civil Procedure.

633. Section 14 deals with simultaneous proceedings in different courts. It
may be noted that the section applies also to an application for appointment of
guardian of the property of a minor?

Sub-section (3) of the section, dealing with the case where the Courts are
not subordinate to the same High Court, provides that the Court shall report
the case (0 and he guided by such orders as they may receive from their respec-
tive State Governments. The conferment of this power on the State Govern-
ment is not in harmony with the independence of the judiciary and, in fact, later
legislative practice in India indicates a different approach® in regard to analogous
situations. [t would be more appropriate if the power is given to the High Court
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the court in which the earlier pro-
ceedings were taken is situated. We, therefore, recommend that section 14(3)
should be revised as under:—

“(3) In any other case in which proceedings are stayed under sub-sec-
tion (1). the Courts shall report the case to the High Court, and the High

Under Singh v. Kartar, A.UR. 1929 Lah. 487, 488.

1957) M.P. Cases 202; (1957) Jabalpur Law Journal, 336, relying on Nazir Begum v. Guam
Quadir. R. 1936 Lah. 313.

*Ruxmaniben v. Narmada. A.UR. 1962 Guj. 227, 228, paragraphs 5, 6 (Bhagwati I.).
‘Law Commission of India, 54th Report, Chapter 32A.

Order 32A. Rule 5(4), Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

“Compare Order 32.4, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

कफ, Pullama y. M. Venkatasubbaiah, A.1.R. 1963 A.P. 92

356० section 23(3), Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.



25

Cou:t within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the Court in which the
proceedings were first taken is situate shall determine in which of the Courts
the proceedings with respect to the appointment or declaration of a guardian
ef the minor shall be bad.”

TV. Separate guardians

6.34, Section 15 deals with the appointment or declaration of separate Section 15.
guardians. Sub-section (1) authorises the appointment of two or more guardians
if permitted by the personal law, while sub-section (4) itself empowers the
Court to appoint or declare separate guardians of person and property. Sub-
section (5) further empowers the Court, if the minor has several properties, to
appoint a separate guardian for any one or more of the properties.

6.35. In this context, it is of interest to note that it has been held’ that there Section _15—Joint
is nothing in the Hindu law which prevents the Court from appointing more guardians.
persons than one as guardians of the person of a minor. On this principle. in a
Calcutta case? the Court appointed a joint guardian in order to ensure that the
undertaking taken from one guardian (mother) to bring up the children in the
Hindu faith was properly carried out!

It is not clear whether any provision of the Act of 1890 expressly provides
now fer joint guardians. However, joint guardians may conceivably come into
existence under an appointment made under a will.

In a recent English case.‘ it was laid down that where there were two un-
impeachable parents who could be reasonably contemplated as capable of co-
operating sensibly with each other over the children whom they both love, it
would be in the interests of the children that a joint custody order be made.

We have no change to recommend in section 15.

6.35. Section 16 deals with the appointment or declaration of a guardian for Section 16.
the children that a joint custody order be made property beyond the jurisdiction
of the Court. In such a case the Court having jurisdiction in the place where
the nroperty is situated shall, on production of a certified copy of the order,
accept the person appointed as duly appointed and give effect to the order.

The section needs no change.

Y. Consideration to be teke1 into account in appointing a guardian
under section 17 and under the Act of 1956 and the English law.
Section 17—
6.37. We now come to a section of the Act which is perhaps the most im- Matters so be
portant provision in the Act—section 17. The section deals with the matters the Court in
to be considered by the Court in appointing a guardian. ताकि a
The subject matter has assumed greater importance because of the modern
debate as to the relative importance’ to be attributed to each of the various
factors that come up for consideration—the welfare of the minor, his or her
personal law and rights of the guardian thereunder and the fitness of the parent
or other person claiming to be the guardian. Certain aspects of the matter are
dealt with in section 19 also.

3Chironjt v. Punam Chand, 48 Indian Cases 75 (Nag).
1 Dwijapada v. Baileau, 20 Calcutta Weekly Notes 608, 620.

*Konthalathammal v. Rangaswami Pillai, A.IR. 1924 Mad. 327.

“Jussa v. Jussa. (1972) 2 All E.R. 600, 603-604, 695, following W (JC), (1963) 3 All E.R. 459
*Para 1.8, supra.


Need for
harmony.

Section 17-Matters
to be considered by
the Court in
appointing — guar-
dian.

26

Jt should also be noted that legislation passed in 1956 and applicable to
Hindus on the subject of guardianship has a provision indicating a slightly
different approach in this context.’ Even that legislation, as viewed in the light
of current notions, seems to be inadequate in certain respects.’

6.38. In order that the Indian legal. system—in regard to statutory rules
relating to the criteria for guardianship—may reflect an approach which is sound
on the merits, adequate in its coverage and integrated and harmonious in its
structure, it is necessary that the matter may be examined in some depth. Ac-
cordingly. in the present discussion, while concentrating on section 17 of the Act
of 1690, we shall also have occasion to consider section 19 of the same Act and
analoscus provisions of the Act of 1956.

० first quote section 17 of the Act of 1890.

“17. (1) In appointing or declaring the guardian of a minor, the Court
shall, subject to the provisions of this section, be guided by what consistent-
ly with the law to which the minor is subject, appears in the circumstances
to be for the welfare of the minor.

(2) In considering what will be for the welfare of the minor, the Court
shall have regard to the age, sex and religion of the minor, the character and
capacity of the proposed guardian and his nearness of kin to the minor, the
wishes, if any, of a deceased parent, and any existing or previous relations
of the proposed guardian with the minor or his property.

(3) If the minor is old enough to form an intelligent preference, the
Court may consider that preference.

* * * *

(5) The Court shall not appoint or declare any person to be a guardian
against his will.”

Section 19 of the Act of 1890 is as follows: —

“19, Nothing in this chapter shall authorise the Court to appoint or
declare a guardian of the property of a minor whose property is under the
superintendence of a Court of Wards, or to appoint or declare a guardian
of the person—

(a) Of a minor who is a married female and whose husband is not,
in the opinion of the Court, unfit to be guardian of her person, or

(b) Of a minor whose father is living and is not, in the opinion
of the Court, unfit to be guardian of the person of the minor, or

(c) Of a minor whose property is under the superintendence of a
Court of Wards competent to appoint a guardian of the person of the
minor.”

Under section 6 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act of 1956, the
father is the natural guardian of a minor, but section 13 of that Act expressly
provides that while appointing or declaring any person as guardian by a Court,
the welfare of the minor shall be the paramount consideration.

1Section 13, Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 (para 6.42, infra)-
*para 6.50, infra (section 6).


27

Section 13 is quoted below:'

“Welfare of minor to be paramount consideration.

13. (1) In the appointment or declaration of any person as guardian
of a Hindu minor by a Court, the welfare of the minor shall be the para-
mount consideration.

(2) No person shall be entitled to the guardianship by virtue of the
provisions of this Act or of any law relating to guardianship in marriage
among Hindus, of the Court is of opinion that his or her guardianship will
not be for the welfare of the minor.”

Some difficulty is. no cannot, caused by section 2 of the Act of 1956, which
provides that the nrovisions of the Act shall be “in addition to those of” the
Act of 1890. The General view, however. is that the provision of section 19 of
the Act of 1890 and those of section 6 of the Act of 1956 should be construed
together.*

Questions for
consideration.

6.39, This is an outline of the statutory provisions that will fall for consi-
deration in the course of our inquiry into the need for reform of the law relating
to adjudications on guardianship in the context of section 17.

The questions that we propose to consider in connection with section 17 and
allied statutory provisions mentioned above may now be mentioned—

(1) appointment of guardian — the relative importance to be attribut-
ed to the concept of “welfare of the minor” and other considerations men-
tioned in the various provisions:*

(2) welfare of the minor — elaboration of this expression, as employ-
ed in the two Acts, so as to reflect the modern concept of the welfare of the
child:®

(3) procedure —- vesting of a power in the Court to call for reports from
the guardian or person vested with custody.®

(4) custody — the age upto which the custody of the minor should re-
main with the mother. in so far as the matter is regulated by a specific statu-
tory provision.’

6.40. As to the first question posed above. it is proper to note the gombin- Effect of,
ed effect of sections 17 and 19 of the Act of 1890. Consistent with the law to Sion, V en
which the minor is subject (section 17). the welfare of the minor should be taken together.
into account in appointing a guardian (section 17). However, according to the
text of the Act. -- section 19(a) and 199) — the preferential right of the husband
or father cannet he ignored unless, the opinion of the Court, the husband or

father is unfit to be the guardian.

'Section 13, Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956.
*Cf. Ratan v. Bishan, A.1.R. 1978 Bom. 190.
aLalta Prasad v. Ganga Sahali, ALR. 1973 Raj. 95.
“Paragraphs 6.40 and 6.48. infra.
®Paragraphs 6.41 to 6.48, infra.
*Para 6.50. infra.
*Para 6.49, infra.
*Para 6.39. supra.
*Para 6.38. supra.
3 — 2 Mof LI&CA/ ND/80


English law.

28

It should be noted that Courts have taken a liberal view in the matter. For
example, the Supreme Court in a recent ९४5९, keeping in view the welfare of a
male child of eleven years, declared the mother as his guardian. In this case,
there was nothing against the father to disentitle him to be a guardian, but the
Court felt that the “child’s welfare is financially and affectionately safe in the
hands of the mother”. There are other judicial decisions following the same
approach and thus advancing the cause of justice. In this position, it is appro-
priate that the text of the law should be amended by ensuring that the considera-
tion of the welfare of the minor shall be paramount.

Such an amendment will settle the position for all times to come, eliminating
the possibility of any arguments’ being taken to the effect that the father must be
appoint if he is not “unfit”.?

641. In this context, we may refer to the English law on the subject of
guardianship and custody of “minors” -- an expression now used in place of the
earlier expression “infants”.* The principal legislative measure on the subject is
the Guardianship of Minors Act, 1971 supplemented by the Guardianship Act,
1973. Besides these Acts, elaborate legislation relating to children has been
passed in recent times, particularly the Children’s Act, 1975.

The principle on which questions relating to custody, upbringing etc. of
minors are to be decided, is thus laid down in the English Act of 1971.‘ appli-
cable to judicial proceedings:—

“1, Where in any proceedings before any court’ (whether or not a
Court as defined in section 15 of this Act)—

(a) the custody or upbringing of a minor; or

(b) the administration of any property belonging to or held on
trust for a minor, or the application of the income thereof,

is in question, the court, in deciding that question, shall regard the welfare of
the minor as the first and paramount consideration, and shall not take into consi-
deration whether, from any other point of view, the claim of the father. or any
right at common 189 possessed by the father, in respect of such custody, upbring-
ing, “administration or application is superior to that of the mother, or the claim
of the mother is superior to that of the father.”

The Act of 19736 provides for the equality of parental tights in these
terms: —

“1—(1) In relation to the custody or upbringing of a minor, and in
relation to the administration of any property belonging to or held in
trust for a minor or the application of income of any such property, a
mother shall have the same rights and authority as the law allows a to
father, and the rights and authority of mother and father shall be equal and
be exercisable by either without the other.”

Then there is the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court in regard to ward-
ship.

18m. Mohini V. Virender Kumar, ALR. 1977 S.C. 1359.

°2Cf. Snehlata v. Mahendra, A.1.R. 1979 Raj. 29, 34, para 10 (Feb.-March).
3For detailed discussion of the English law and its evolution, see Appendix 3.
‘Section 1, Guardranship of Minots Act, 1971.

*Emphasis added.

Section 1(1), Guardianship Act, 1973.


29

Finally, the law telating to Habeas Corpus, in so far as it deals with the
recovery of minors below the age of discretion, is also relevant’

Side by side with these legislative developments as to guardianship and
custody, legislative measures for the welfare of children have come in quick
succession. With the passage of the latest Act on the subject — Children Act,
1975 — this branch of the law has become a fairly complex one in England.

The object of legislation relating to children is to provide for the care, protec-
tion, maintenance, welfare, training, education and rehabilitation of neglected
and delinquent children and for the trial of the latter. Accordingly, the Children
Acts initially made elaborate provisions for the establishment of a specialised
machinery for dealing with such children.

However, the range and coverage of the legislation has now expanded. The
Children Act, 1975 introduces certain provisions. One new concept concerns
“custodianship”. The Act provides a means whereby (as an alternative to adop-
tion), relatives and others looking after children on a long-term basis can apply
for, and obtain, the legal “custody” of the children. A “custodianship” order
under the Act vests “legal custody” of the child in the applicant. who becomes
known as the child’s “custodian”. A custodian appears to be in a similar posi-
tion to a parent having custody of his child, but is not called his “guardian”.
“Custodianship” may be said to be a new form of guardianship, though giving
less rights and powers than guardianship, and to be similar to, but not identical
with, custody.

In England, Habeas Corpus has aJso long been used to gain the custody of
infants. The writ is issued on the application of the party seeking custody and
is directed against whoever has the control of the infant. Though, in theory, it
still rests on the idea of relieving an illegal restraint, the ordinary rules of family
law apply in custody cases, and the matter is heard in the Family Division (pre-
viously, the Chancery Division). An application for custody is a proceeding

which involves “not a question of liberty, but of nurture, control and educa-
tion”?

6.42. This disposes of the first question. As to the second question posed
above‘ (welfare of the child). section 17(2) of the Act of 1890 states the matters
to which the Court shall have regard in determining whether the appointment of
a person as guardian would, or would not, be for the welfare of the minor. These
matters are age, sex and religion of the minor and the existence of previous
relations of the proposed guardian with the minor or his Property. These are
all matters personal to the minor. If the minor is old enough to form an intelli-
gent preference, that preference may also be taken into account.

A oan. The Act of 1890 contains no separate provision as to preference to be
given to any particular parent as to custody, although it does contain a provision®
whereunder questions of custody may come up for adjudication.

In this context, the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956, may be
noted, since its provisions mark a departure in some respects. The Act is supple-
mental to the Act of 1890, and save as expressly provided in the Act of 1956.

2see infra.
*Sharpe, Law of Habeas Corpus (1976), pages 168, 169.
*Barnardo v. McHuge, (1891) 1 0.8. 194, 203 (Lord Esher M.R.).
“Para 6.39, supra.

"Section 25.

Second
question—
Elaboration of
“welfare of
the child”.

Act of 1956
and its rela~
tionship to
the Act of
1890.


Effect of
sections 6
and 13, Act
of 1956,

Modern
sociological
developments
and their
Televance,

30

is not in derogation thereof.’ Where, therefore, the Act of 1956 is silent, the
Act of 1890 operates. There are. however, some matters on which the Act of
1956 is not silent and makes a specific provision. Sections 6 and 13 of the Act
of 1956 are of particular relevance. Under section 6, the natural guardian of a
Hindu minor is the father, and after him, the mother (The specific mention of
the mother may be noted). The father’s guardianship is subject to the provisio
that the custody of a minor who has not completed the age of five years shall
ordinarily be with the mother — a provision very material to the third question®
formulated by us.

Section 13, it may be recalled? provides that in the appointment of any
person as guardian of a Hindu minor by a Court, the welfare of the minor shali
be the paramount consideration. Here. it must be noted that section 17(1) of
the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890, while speaking of “the welfare of the
minor”, does not make the welfare of the minor the paramount consideration in
the appointment of any person as guardian.

Wes. If section 6 and 13 of the Act of 1956‘ are read together — as they
must be -- then it will be seen that neither the father nor the mother can, as of a
right. claim to be appointed by the Court as the guardian of a Hindu minor, un-
less such appointment is for the welfare of the minor. The welfare of the minor
is the paramount consideration. So, in tegard to being granted the custody of
a minor by the Court, the mother cannot, as of tight, claim it merely because a
minor is be;ow the age of five years, nor can the father get the custody as of
tight soley on the ground that the minor has completed the age of five years.
This is plain from the fact that section 6 provides only that the custody of a
minor who has not completed the age of five years shall ordinarily be with the
mother and section 13, which relaxes the rigour of section 19 of the Act of
1890 in the interest of the minor’s welfare, also makes the welfare of the minor
the paramount consideration. The approach adopted by the Act of 1956 is thus
somewhat different from that adopted by the Act of 1890, which is tilted to some
extent in Favour of the father,

645. This difference in anproach is understandable. The Guardians and
Wards Act, 1890 was enacted 90 years ago. At the time of its enactment women
had scarcely any rights for them: there were only social and legal degradation,
material insecurity and other manifestations of the dominance and false superio-
rity of man. That is why the Act of 1890 lays an emphasis on the preferential
claims of the father or male member in the matter of appointment of guardian
of minors.» The Act of 1956 marks a distinct progress in this respect.

There is another matter in respect of which the Act of 1956 marks a Pro-
gress. Recognising the advance in the status of women in all spheres and chan-
ged concepts as to child welfare, that Act has given women the right of guardian-
ship (after the father} and also provided that the mother should ordinarily have
the custody of the minor child till the age of five. More important is the pro-
vision of the Act which has made the welfare of the minor the paramount consi-
deration in the appointment of guardian.’ though it has kept intact the concept
of “minor’s welfare” as adumbrated in section 17 of the Act of 1890, without
spelling it out for its own purposes.

1Section 2, Act of 1956.
2Para 6.39, supra.

8For the text of section 13, see supra.

*Para 6.42. supra.

®Section 19.

“Section 13, Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956.


31

646, 11 so iar as the Act of 1956 marks a progressive approach, it is wel-
come. but certain further comnmients would be im order. The social condi-
Uons existing today are allogeilier Giuerent trom tose that prevailed in 1890 or
even in 1950. ‘Lhe goal of social justice envisages conditions conducive to free-
ing family relations from distortions and deformations associated with the ex-
ploitation of man and with ihe social and legal degradation of women and their
material insecurity. Women have now a status of equality with men in all
spheres of life. ‘Lhe social signiticance of the family is now being recognised.
it should develop into a unit supporting and promoting those talents and human
qualities which foster the development of the individual. Parents must regard it
as their foremost responsibility to bring up their children as healthy, happy and
useful individuals and of an ad-.ound standard ol education, so as to enable them
to blossom as active buiders of society and the guardian miust ensure this deve-
lopment of the child and safeguard its interest. in appointing a guardian for
a child, the Court must determine which of the claimants is, by his or her educa-
tional competence and infiuence and his or her own example, best suited to
provide the requisite care in bringing up the child.

6.4. Quile 4 9841 41011 tie consiueiauions of weil being, wellaie, education
auu Gevelopmient ui tac cid which weigh m favour ot allowing the mother a
night 10 lie custody ण a child 01 he is at least tweive years of age, it is Deces-
sary to give this rignt to the mother in order to prevent the father from using the
child as 8 pawn 107 sccucing complete supmission of nis wile, who may be mde-
pendent and spirited, to his none too laudable plans. instances are common
where lie husband, either at the instigation of his parcats or sisters or on own,
has adopted “ue pawn method”, when the wife insists on the nusband having
his own estabiishment which he can well ailord, or when the wife has not served
well the mothez-in-law or has not brougit a handsome dowry. in such cases
the husband sends away his wife to ber parents’ house, keeping the custody of
their child with him. Such instances occur frequently in the early years of
marriage,» when generally there is a minor child. {t is not unreasonable to
predict that with the liberalisation of marriage and divorce laws and the enact-
ment of anti-dowry measures, “the child pawn” weapon would be too often used
by the husbands who have failed to make their marriage a success and who are
out to exploit the situation and pursue their object at any cost.

All these considerations are very material to the questions that we have for-
mulated.*.
6.48. In view of what we have stated above, we recommend that sub-section
(1) of section 17 should be replaced by the following sub-sections : —
“(1) In the appointment or declaration of the guardian of a minor, the
welfare of the minor shall be the paramount consideration.
(14) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Court shall, in
appointing or declaring the guardian of a minor, have due regard to the
law to which the minor is subject:

Provided that nothing in chis sub-section shall atjcct the provisions of
section 13 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956"

Sub-section (2) of section 17 should be replaced by the following sub-
sections :—-

(2) In considering what will be for the welfare of the minor, the Court
shall have regard to the age, sex and religion of the minor, the character

+See further para 6.50, infra.
2Cf, the facts in Harihar Prasad ९. Suresh, A.T.R. 1978 A.P. 13.

*Para 6.39, supra

Present
conditions
ifferent
from those
existing in
1890 or 1956.

Need to prevent
father from
using child

1s pawn,

Recommendation
for amending
the Act of 1890,
section 17.


Insertion

of new sub-
section—
Periodical
teports

Recommendation
for amending
the Act of 1956,
section 6.

Need for
amendment
as to custody.

32

and capacity of the proposed guardian, his educational competence and
capacity jor making the minor a healthy, happy and a useful individual of
an all-round standard of education and his nearness of kin to the minor

and any existing or previous relations of the Proposed guardian with the
minor or its property

(2A) The wishes, if any, of a deceased Parent may also be taken into

consideration, ‘but not so as to subordinate the factors mentioned in sub-
section (2)”

6.49, We have so far covered of the questions formulated by us in con-
nection with section 17, The third question’ concerns a matter of procedure.
In our opinion, there should be a Provision empowering the Court to call for
periodical reports from the guardian appointed by the Court about the health,
education and welfare of the minor. The period for submission of the Teports
may be fixed according to the circumstances of each case. To achieve this

object, we recommend that two new sub-sections may be inserted in section 17
as follows’: —

“(6) The Court may require the person appointed or declared to be the
guardian under this section or the person to whom custody of the minor is
entrusted under this Act to furnish to the Court, at such intervals as the
Court may, in the circumstances of the case, deem fit, periodical reports
regarding the health and education of the “minor and such other matters
relating to his welfare as the Court may specify.”

+(7) The Court, on receipt of the reports under sub-section (6), shail
consider them as soon as possible and may issue such directions to the guar-

dian or other persons furnishing them as the Court may, in the interests of the
minor, think fit.”

6.50. Taking up the fourth question, we are of the view that section 6 of the
Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 should also be amended’ so as to
allow the mother the custody of the minor, ordinarily till he or she completes
the age of 12 years.’ We may state in brief our reasons for this view. The
period upto the age of twelve represents the formative years in the life of a
child. It is in these formative years that a child develops such qualities as
Patience, modesty, honesty, readiness to help and respect for others. The
education that the child receives in these years should be designed to make him
or her a healthy individual of high intellectual and moral standard, capable of
playing an active role in the development of the State and society. Now, it can-
not be disputed that it is the mother’s influence which moulds the character and
qualities of a child. Men are what their mothers make them; no fondest
father’s fondest care can fashion the child’s heart or shape his life. It was

Napoleon who said “The future destiny of the child is always the work of the
mother”.

6.51. Legislative history of the provision® in the Act of 1956 relating to cus-
tody is of interest. Though the mother, in regard to her position as a natural
guardian, is postponed to the father, yet the Act lays down, as already stated, that

*Para 6.39, supra.

*If considered apnronriate, the matter can be dealt with by a separate section to be inserted
in the procedural provisions, say, as section 43A..

*To be carried out under section 6, Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act. 1956.

48०९ also para 6.47, supra.

"Para 6.45, supra.



33

the custody of a minor upto five years shall ordinarily be with the mother. In
the original Bill, the age proposed was three years, but the Select Committee
raiscd it to tive years.’ Even this enhancement did not satisfy all persons. Some
Members of Parliament felt that the age should be further raised. A lady mem-
ber of the Select Committee wanted the custody of the minor to be with the
mother till the minor attained majority. Another lady member wanted it to be
raised to twelve. The two other male members wanted it to be raised to ten
and thirteen respectively. Our proposal’ that ‘he age of custody should be
raised to twelve is, therefore, not new

6.52. Development in Engiand reiative to the question may be noted. In
cugiand, as tar back as 1839, the mother was given a right to the custody of
कण Gwn chiidren tili they were seven years oi age.' By subsequent legislation
Passcu in te latter वा or Lyth century’ (Guardianship 01 Intauts Act, 1886), she
obiainca the right to tie custouy till the children were sixteen years of age. Sec-
tion i of the Act of 1925 extended the provisions of the Guardianship of Infants
Act, 1880 and laid down that the rights of the mother in the matter of custody,
care, guardianship etc. of the children shall be equal to that of the father, and
that tue welfare of the child should be the first and paramount consideration.
It also provided that the Court shall not take into consideration whether, from any
point of view other than the welfare of the infant, the claim of the father in
respect of custody, upbringing etc. is superior to that of the mother or the claim
of the mother is superior to that of the father. The Act of 1971 adopts the same
principle. The Act of 1973 lays down complete equality of sexes as to matters
concerning children.

6.53. The child under twelve years of age needs a tender affection, a caress-
ing hand and the company of his mother, and neither the father nor his family
relations, however close, well-meaning and affectionate towards the minor, can
appropriately serve as a proper substitute for the minor's mother. It should
also be borne in mind that physical needs and comforts alone are not enough
for the proper and healthy development of a child. Parental affection is indis-
pensable for this purpose and in the case of a conflict between the parents when
the child is unde: twelve years of age, the mother should have a prefeeatia!
claim in regard to the child’s custody. It is for these reasons that we have’
recommended an amendment of the Act of 1956 as to the age upto which custody
should ordinarily be with the mother.

6.54, bor the sake of convenient, we may at this stage record briefly how
the recommendations made above dispose of the questions that we had formu-
lated’ while commencing our discussion of section 17:—

(i) On the first question (relative importance of each consideration), we
have preferred the progressive approach (minor’s welfare to be paramount)
and recommended its incorporation in the Act of 1890.

(ii) On the second question (elaboration of the concept of “welfare of
the minor”), we have considered it proper to add to the content of section

Yoint Commitice on the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Bill (March, 1955) Report, clauses,
2E.g. Shreemati Seeta Pramanand (List of amendments).

8Para 6.50, supra

3छ९० Appendix 3.

»Para 6.50. supra.

*Para 6.39, supra.

English law.

Need of mother's
care for child
of tender age.

Questions
formulated
at the outset

how disposed of


Section 18,

Appointment
‘of juristic
persons as
guardian.

Section 19—
Guardian
not to be
appointed

by the Court
in certain
cases.

34

17 of the Act of 1890, (This amendment will presumably become applica-
ble to the Act of 1956 also!

(iii) On the third question (procedure), we have recommended an im-
provement in the Act of 1890.

tiv) On the fourth question (custody), we have recommended an amend-
ment in the Act of 1956, taising the age to 12 years.

6.55. This takes us to section 18 of the Act of 1890, wiich provides that
where a Collector is appointed or declared by the Court by virtue of his office
to the guardian of a mimor, the order shall be deemed to authorise and require
the person for the time being holding the office to act as guardian. In fact,
this follows from the principle that the Collector is deemed to be appointed in
his capacity as Collector.’

The section may be retained as it is.

v.00, As lo Une persous wo can be appoinled as guardians, we nave already
telerred’ 10 the need for clariucation of the position in regard 10 the appointment
of juristic persons. A speciuc provision on the subject is, in our view, needed.
At the same time, certain safeguards are desirable in the interests of proper
management oi ihe property of the minor and proper care of his person, ‘To
achieve this object, we recommend that ihe yollowing new section should be
inserted as section 18A:—

“ISA. ihe Court may, ij it is not practicable to appoint an individual
as a guardian, appoim, as a guardian of the person or of the property or
both of a minor, a person who is not an individual, provided that such per-
son is an institution or organisation recognised for the purposes of this sec-
tion by the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette, and is,
by its constitution, empowered to undertake such guardianship.”

Vi. Restrictions as to appeintment of guardian.

6.37, Waile, in general, the power of the Court to appoint a guardian—where
such an appointment is required for the welfare of the minor—ought not to be
subject to any restriction, the Legislature has considered it proper to impose a
prohibition against an appointment by the Court in certain special cases, enu-
merated in section 19. In part, the section is intended to avoid a conflict bet-
ween the general law relating to guardianship (the Act of 1890) and the special
Jaw relating to Court of Wards. The opening paragraph and clause (c) of the
section can be explained on this basis. The other part of the section seems to
be based on the assumption that by personal law. the husband of a minor
married female and the father of a minor are vested with guardianship of the
Person of the minor, and the guardianship so vested ought not to be interfered
with except where the guardian is unfit. Clauses (a) and (b) are based on some
such assumption. How far the assumption as to the rule of personal law is ac-
curate, and how far the hesitancy of the Legislature to interfere with such guar-
dianship should be allowed to continue in the changed conditions, will be con-
sidered in due course. It will be convenient to quote the section. Section 19
is in these terms :—

“19. Nothing in this chapter shall authorise the Court to appoint or
declare a guardian of the property of a minor whose property is under the

1Cf. section 2, Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956.

*Narasingray Ray v. Luxmanray Ray, (1876) UL.R. 1 Bom. 318, 320. (Decision unde sections
11-15, Bombay Minors Act, 1864).

*See para 5.6, supra.


35

superintendence of a Court of Wards, or to appoint or declare a guardian
of the person—

(a) of a minor who is a married female and whose husband is not,
in the opinion of the Court, unfit to be guardian of her person, or

ib} of a minor whose father is living and is not, in the opinion
of the Court, unit to be guardian of the person of the minor, or

(०) of a minor whose property is under the supcrintendence of a

Court of Wards competent to appoint a guardian of the person of the
minor.”

6.58. It will be noticed that section 19 lays down restrictions as to— Analysis of

हु section 19.
(1) cases in which a guardian cannot be appointed of property, and

(2) cases in which a guardian cannot be appointed of the person.

As to property, it bars the appointment or declaration of a guardian where
(he minor's property is under the superintendence of a Court of Wards. We
have no particular comments on this part of the section.

As to the person of the minor, there are three restrictions contained in
clauses (a) (0) and (c), Here again, clause (०) is conce:ned with a minor whose
Property is under the superintendence of a Court of Wards, and needs no
comments. But clauses (a) and (0) require consideration. We shall first deal
with certain points that are relevant to the entire section or to a major part of
it, and then proceed to discuss points contined to particular clauses,

6.59. The first and most fundamental question to be considered is how Section 19 to

much of section 19 should be retained. In this connection, we would like to be either

हि रे हि गा deleted or
teiterate' the approach which we have indicated—that the minor’s welfare ought to be made
to be the paramount consideration in proceedings for the appointment of a subject है]
guardian. Section 17, understood in the above light and particularly after the section 17
amendment recommended by us, is intended to leave the discretion of the Court
untrammelled by any other consideration—or, at least, to make other considera-
tions subordinate to the minor's welfare. In contrast, section 19 is intended to
fetter the discretion of the Court in certain respects. The case where there is a
Court of Wards may perhaps be regarded as a special one. But in other respects
the restriction in section 19 needs modification.

In this position, one alternative would be to delete section 19 altogether.
But if that course is considered too radical or not acceptable for any other reason,
certain modifications are required so as to ensure that section 19 is at least

subject to section 17 and to effect certain other improvements which appear to
be needed

6.60. One important modification is required in the Jaw in order to main- Section 19
tain harmony with section 25. The latter section, dealing with applications for to pe made
the custody of a minor, regards the welfare of the minor as the sole consideration. section 25,
Even now, this is mentioned in section 25 and we propose to emphasise this
aspect in dealing with section 25.2 No doubt, it is true that section 19 is con-
cerned with the appointment or declaration of guardianship—a wide area-—while
section 25 deals with only one particular aspect of guardianship, namely, cus-
tody. However, for the sake of clarity, it is desirable to ensure that the welfare
of the minor is the paramount consideration.

3866 discussion as to section 17, supra (paragraphs 6.40 to 6.48).
*Sce discussion as to section 25, paragraphs 7.16 to 7.19, infra.


Welfare
paramount

section 25.

Section 13(2)
of the Act
of 1956.

Case law

36

6.61. It is not as though, in all cases
of the child should be left with the father.!
paramount?

where the father is not unfit, custody
It is the welfare of the child that is

‘The correct approach is that takeu in a Tecenit Kerala case, in which it was
held that the only consideration that was paramuunt was the welfare of the
child and it could not be correct to talk o1 the + pre-eminent position” of the
Parents or their exclusive “right to the custody of the children when the future
welfare of the children was beg considcied ‘The fact that the father was not

found to be untit to be a guardian did not necessarily mean that he was entitled
to the custody of the child

The position has been largely claritied by the Supreme Court‘ in a judgment
to which we shall revert later also.’ ‘ihe Supreme Court observed:

“The father’s fitness from the point of view just mentioned cannot over-
ride considerations of the welfare of the minor children. No doubt the
the father has been presumed by the statute generally to be better fitted to
look after the children-—being normaily the earning member and head of the
family—but the Court has in each case to see Pptimarily to the welfare of the
children in determining the question of their custody, in the background of
all the relevant facts having a bearing on their health, maintenance and edu-
cation. The family is normally the heart of our society and for a balanced
and’ healthy growth of children it is highly desirable that they get their due

share of affection and care from both the parents in their normal parental
home.”

662. The Supreme Court was making these remarks in relating to a dis-

pute that arose between the father and the mother regarding the custody of their
minor son.

Section 13 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 is more specific
and has, in categorical terms, provided in sub-section (2) as follows: —

“(2) No person shall be entitled to the guardianship by virtue of the
Provisions of this Act or of any law relating to guardianship in marriage
among Hindus, if the Court is of opinion that his or her guardianship wil!
not be for the welfare of the minor”

6.63. In Chander Prabha v. Premnath,’ the Delai High Court, while award-
ing custody of a male child below jive years to the mother, observed : —

“The child under five years of age, in our opinion, needs most the ten-
der affection, the caressing hand and the company of his natural mother and
neither the father nor his female relations, however close, wellmeaning and
affectionate towards the minor, can appropriately serve as a proper substitute

“for the minor’s natural mother,. --This is consistent with

the role of nature and, in normal circumstances, deserves to be noted and
acted upon”

Occasionally, however, section 19(b) does receive the construction that if the
father is not unfit, he cannot he deprived of custody.?8” For this reason, it is
desirable to amend section 25 as indicated above.

*Babubhai Patel v. Madavi Pute), (1979) 1 M.L.J. 244, 250. para 13.
*Ainunnisa ए. Mukhtar Ahmad, ALR. 1975 All. 67 (reviews cases).
*Sebastian v. Thomas, (1979) Kerala Law Times 536. 537 (30 July 1979),
‘Rosy Jacob v. Jacob, ALR. 1973 S.C. 2090, 2100; (1973) 1 S.C.C. 840.
*Para 7.16, infra.

“Chander Prabha ५. Premnath, ALR. 1969 Dethi 283.

*Snehlata Mathur v. Mahendra Narain, AJR. 1979 Raj. 29.

*Reginald v. Sarojam, A.I.R. 1969 Mad. 365.



37

6.64. Apart from this, section 19 creates difficulties in the case of children Section 19
whose custody is, by personal law, entrusted not to the father, but to some other and proposed
person —— for example, maternal relations as in the case of Muslims.’ ing custody.

Though the father is the guardian even of a Muslim girl who has not attai-
ned puberty,” it is the mother or mother’s mother who is entitled to custody
until puberty, amongst Hanafi Muslim.’ This applies even to married girls, untii
Puberty.‘

For this reason also, it is desirable to amend section 25 as stated above.

6.65. We now proceed to a consideration of points concerning particular Section 19 and
clauses of section 19. These clauses prohibit the appointment of a guardian in 'estamentary
specified circumstances. Such a prohibition may arise from other rules also. suardians,
For example, where a testamentary guardian has been properly appointed under
a will duly executed, an order appointing another guardian cannot be made*
until the powers of the guardian appointed under the will have ceased under the
provisions of the Act.

6.66. It may also be mentioned that in the case of Hindus, section 19(b) is Effect of
controlled" by section 2 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956. Hinde Minority
However, we are at the moment concerned only with the specific prohibitions in ape ‘Guardian-

the section. Act

6.67. Coming first to clauses (a) and (b), there is a controversy as to whether Section 19,
the person to whom preference is given by clause (a) or clause (b) (husband or clases (a)
father, as the section stands at present) can himself apply for being appointed Application
or declared as a guardian. Many judicial decisions have taken the view that by father

हि naan husband,
section 19 bars an application by such preferred persons. °-12 or husbany

6.68. Nevertheless, we see force in the view expressed in certain other judi- Object of
cial decisions” to the effect that all that section 19 means is that if a third party SOR ज10-
applies, he shall not be appointed or declared a guardian of the person of a minor per scope.
and that™ the section does not restrict the right of the father or husband to be
appointed as guardian, because such an appointment may confer on him higher
rights than what he has as the natural guardian and because, in dealing with the

44a) Fatima v. Shaikh Peda, A.1.R. 1941 Mad. 944 (mother’s mother v. father).

(b)Nur Kadir v. Zuleikha, (1884) LL.R. 11 Cal. 649 (mother’s father v. husband)

*Fatima Bibi v. Shaikh Peda, A.1.R. 1941 Mad. 944.

"See Md. Shafi v. Shamin Banoo, A.I-R. 1979 Bom. 56, 159, 165 (May).

*Karban v. K.E., (1904) LL-R. 32 Cal. 444, 446.

*Section 7(3).

*Lalta Prasad v. Ganga Sahai, A.LR. 1973 Raj. 93 (reviews cases).

7 (a) Sukhdev v. Ram Chander, A.L.R. 1924 All. 622.

(b) M1. Siddiq unnisa v. Nizanuddin. A.LR. 1932 All. 215, 217.

Bai Tara v, Mohanlal, A.1.R. 1922 Bom. 405.

(a) Lakshamau v. Alla Vira, ALR. 1925 Mad. 1085 (Baneaan & Jackson JJ.).

(0) Re Dakshinamurthi, (1969) 1 M.L.J. 845.

3०. Dhan Kumari v. Mahendra, A.LR. 1923 Nag. 1919, 200.

M1. Taj Begum ९, Ghulam, Rasul, A.\.R., 1923 Lah. 250 (father cannot be appointed).

12 (a) Mt. Chandra Kaur Vv. Chotey Lal, A.L.R. 1925 Oudh 282 (father cannot be appointed).
(0) 5. Ahmad Agha v. Mt. Zohra, A.LR. 1925 Oudh 421 (father cannot be appointed).
(©) Mad. Saddig v. Wafati. ALR. 1948 Oudh 51, 53 (father cannot be appointed).

33. Raghavaiya पर. Lakshmiah, A.L.R. 1925 Mad. 398 (Venkatasubba Rao & Jackson JJ.).

74. Kamini Mayiv. Bhushan, A.1.R. 1926 Cal. 1193 1194.



Need for

amendmeiit,

Comment
in legal
Journal.

Section 1७०)

38

outer world, the certificate of the Court confers a greater importance on his power
than he possesses as the natural guardian. In fact, in the Madras case’ of 1925,
there is a hint that the drafting of the present section is defective.

6.69. The position is therefore in need of clarification, On the merits, it is
in the interests of justice to provide that clauses (a) and (0) do not apply where
the hustand or father’ is the applicant for guardianship. Even where such a
Person is the natural guardian, he may well consider it desirable to be declared
as a guardian, for reasons mentioned above.’

6.76. In this connection, we may mention that long ago, an editorial in the
Calcutta Weekly Notes,* commenting on the famous Privy Council decision relate
ing tu guardianship,’ made the following suggestion for a reform of the law:—

“af the District Court can entertain an application by a stranger to dec-
fare a father unfit to be his children’s guardian, there is nothing in reason
to eaclude its jurisdiction to entertain a complaint by the father seeking to
recover custody of his own children. If no application under the Guardians
and Wards Act is competent, surely a suit would lie in the Court of the
District Judge for a declaration of the father's tights and for such relief as
may be necessary to work them out.

“That is really the substance of the decisions of the High Courts in India
to the cliect that Act ०111 of 1890 did not repeal the general jurisdiction of
District Courts to entertain suits relating to the guardianship and custody of
minors, and we should be sorry if the judgment of the Privy Council should
be understood as definitely negativing that jurisdiction. If it has, then
surely the legislature should step in and do away with this anomaly! The
District Court should have jurisdiction to entertain a father’s suit or appli-
cation for declaration of his rights as guardian and for recovery of custody
of his minor children as against persons interfering with his rights. Such
jurisdiction would, of course, have to be exercised in accordance with princi-
ples so lucidly explained in their Lordships’ judgment. What we contend
for is that a father whose rights of guardianship over his minor children
have been interfered with should not be left in doubt either as to the Court
whose protection he is to invoke, or as to the procedure he is to adopt to
vindicate his rights; nor, if he is a resident in the Mofussil, should he be
“compelled in every case to come up with his plaint to the Original Side
of the High Court for remedies which the local courts are perfectly com-
petent to give to persons other than the father.”

The amendment suggested by us will substantially remedy the anomaly.

6.71, Incidentally, section 19(a) appears to be based on the assumption that
after marriage the right of guardianship of the person and property of a female
minor devolves upon her husband (if not unfit), even though the husband be a
minor.

» Raghavaiya ५. Lakshmiah, A.1.R.1925 Mad, 398.
. Also the mother if para 6.66 is accepted.
* Para 6.68, supra.

' Editorial note, “Father's remedy against deprival of custody of children” (1914) 18
Calcutta Weekly Notes (Journal) 209, 210.

* Annie Besant v. 6, Narayaniah, (1914) 18 Calcutta Weekly Notes 1089: I.L.R. 38 Mad:
807 (P.C.).

* Emphasis added.


39

6.72. The provision in section 19(a) is reminiscent of the earlier English Earlier

. पु cgi, English
rule, under which, as soon as the daughter married, the father’s natural jurisdic- rule as to
tion over her, and his right to her custody during infancy, determined. husband's

control
over wife.

“For the happiness and the honour of both parties, it (the law) places
the wife under the guardianship of the husband, and entitles him, for the
sake of both, to protect her from the danger of unrestrained intercourse with
the world by enforcing cohabitation and a common residence.”

This was the view taken by Coleridge J. The authority of this view
was shaken by a later case? where it was stated that a husband had no such
right to “custody” as a parent has over his child. In that case a wife was.
by her own desire. living with her son (and apart from her husband). The
Court refused to restore her to his custody.

Clause (a), if construed literally, would create an anomaly,—for exam-
ple, where the husband himself is a minor. In an carly Punjab case? which
was a suit for the custody of a wife when both the husband and the wife
were found not to have attained puberty. the decree was refused and it was
held that in Muslim law. a husband is not entitled to custody of the minor
wife too young for intercourse. The case was not decided under section
19. _ If the matter arose under section 19, the Court can refuse the order
only by regarding the husband as “unfit”.

6.73. This shows the right of the husband to custody is not an absolute Right not
one. This naturally raises the question whethe~ clause (a) of section 19 should absolute,
be allowed to continue in its present sweeping form. We would have made a
specific recommendation on the subject so as to avoid conflict with personal
law, particularly in a matter where the present law goes beyond the best interests
of the child. However. if our recommendation‘ to save the jurisdiction of the
Court in regard to custody on a consideration of the welfare of the minor is

accepted, the conflict referred to above would cease to have any practical im-
portance.

Incidentally. this particular problem does not arise in England, since the
“law to which the minor may be subject” is superseded by the mandatory sta-
tutory rule which regards the welfare of the child as paramount.

6.74. The question may he raised whether clause (a) is needed at all the Utility of
present day. when persons below 18 years of age are prohibited from marrying sfause Pre
by the Child Marriage Restraint Act. 1929 as amended in 1978. If the present of child
law relating to minimum age of marriage in India is complied with throughout एड:
India, there would not, in future, be any minor who is a female married in

India.

But there could still be minors who are married outside India (who are not
Indian citizens) and who have come to reside in India. and there may also be
minors married in India before 1978 (when the Cihld Marriage Restraint Act was
amended so as to make 18 years the minimum age of marriage).

Hence clause (a) of section 19 cannot be deleted.

Re Cochrane, (1840) 8 Dowe 633.

R. v. Leggatt. (1852) 18 0. B. 781.

Dinu v, Abdulla, (1894) Punjab Record 97-98 (Civil Judgement No. 351).
Paragraphs 6.59 to 6.61 supra.


Section 19(b)
—Equil
status to be

conferred
on mother.

Section 19,
clauses (a)
and (b)
overlapping-
Amendment

recommended.

Personal law.

Megitimate
children.

40

6.75. The next point is concerned with clause (b) of section 19. The pre-
ference given by section 19(b) is confined to the father. In view of the changed
approach which we have recommended! in relation to the rights of each parent,
it is necessary that the preference given in this clause to the father should be
extended to the mother also, and she be placed on an equal footing with him.
Accordingly, we recommend that in section 19(b), after the existing word “father”,
the words “or mother” should be inserted.

It may be noted in this context that the principle underlying section 19(b) has
been held even now to apply to a mother as well as to a father, though with lesser
force?

6.76. There also seems to be some obscurity as to the exact inter-relationship
between clause (a) and clause (b) of section 19, inasmuch as a minor who is a
married female may fall under both the clauses. The point requires to be at-
tended to. In our view, it would be better to confine clause (0) to persons other
than married females. We recommend a suitable amendment for the purpose.

6.77. We would also like to point out that in some respects. section 19(b)
might conflict with personal law. in so far as clause (b) has the effect of giving
pre-emptory preference to the father even where the father is not the natural
and legal guardian by personal law.

6.78. For example, in the case of an illegitimate child, the assumption under-
lying section 19(b) totally breaks down. The reason is that the father has no
legal right of guardianship over such a child.

This was the position under uncodified rules of Hindu law’ and is also the
position under its codified version* In Muslim law also, the position is the
same. In fact, the right of the mother to custody can be enforced by hab-as
corpus.>

The position was settled long ago’ in India for persons of both the commu-
nities. So long ago as 1864. Holloway J. made the following observations:”

“AIl the analogies of Hindu law. as we have already shown. are against
the view of a bastard taken by the law of England. There is an element
in that law, the doctrine of Christianity. which would render anv areument
drawn from its provisions merely deluding. There is, and can be. no ana-

logy.”
Tn the case of persons of other communities also, there is fairly recent autho-

titv’ specifically holding that the mother is the natural and legal guardian of the
iNegitimate child.

7868 discussion relating to section 17. supra (paragraphs 6.40 to 6.48). Also see para-
graphs 6.66 and 6.69.

*Sumitra Bai v. Subhadra Bai, A.1.R. 1925 Nag. 178, 179.

’Mahabir v. Raghubar, A.1.R. 1933 Oudh 312, 313.

‘Section 6(b), Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956.

5Gohar Begum v. Suggi, A.LR. 1960 8.0. 93.

"(a) In the matter of Saithri, (1891) 1.1२, 16 Bom. 307, 317.

(0) Venkamma v. Savitramma, (1888) LLR. 12 Mad. 67, 68.

(c) Shahjehan ५. Munro, 5 $.D.A. N.W.P. 39.

1Mayna Bai v. Uttaram, (1864) 2 MH.CR. 196, 203.

8Pamela v. P.C. Martin, ATR. 1970 Mad. 427,428,429, paragraphs 5 to 7 (Anglo-Indians)


41

6.79. In fact, the rule rests on certain fundamental considerations based on
the natural bond. In the Madras case already referred to,' Holloway J., turning

to Roman law, gave a quotation from Gaius (which we need not reproduce) and
made the following observations :

“This great master (Gaius) considers, that, in not denying the natural
guardianship between the erring mother and her sons and of the sons with

one another, and admitting heritable tic octween them, the praetor was
moved by natural equity.”

Paternity is a matter governed by ‘jus civile’ and maternity by ‘jus nature’.
The creative forces of nature itself have bound the mother to her issue, whether
born in lawful or unlawful wedlock, in a manner wholly or utterly different from
the bond between the father and his sons. This natural relationship and these
inescapable facts are reflected in ancient Hindu law governing succession to the
Stridhana property of women. and in the rules recognised almost everywhere as
to custody and guardianship of illegitimate children.

Thus, the provision in section 19(b) is not in tune with the general law in
regard to illegitimate children.

680. There may be other cases where the rigid rule in section 19(b) would
be inappropriate as conflicting with personal law. For example, in the case of a
foreigner governed by another system of law, the Court will have tegard to the
system of law by which he is governed, which may not necessarily recognise any

preferential status for the father.’ though the best interests of the child are para-
mount?

6.81. In view of what is stated above, it appears to be desirable to exclude,
from the scope of section 190), cases where, under personal law, the father is
not the natural and legal guardian of the minor. This will also apply to the
mother, if she is added in clause (b) as recommended above.

6.82. To summarise recommendations made above in the discussion relating
to section 19, amendment is required on the points enumerated below :--

(i) amending section 19 so as to apply the provisions of section 17 rela-
ting to welfare of the child:’

Gi) making it clear that in cases under section 25 in relation to orders
as to custody,’ welfare of the minor is the paramount consideration. (This
amendment’ will be made in section 25).

™Mayana Bai v. Uttaram. (1864) 2 M.H.C.R. 196, 203.

*Nugent v. Vetzera, (1861-1873) All England Reports (Reprint) 318.

a) Re Kernot, (1964) 3 All England Reports 339. 343, 344 (Buckley J.).
(b) Re B’s Settlement, (1940) Ch. 54.
(©) Re P., (1964) 3 All E.R. 977, 983 (C.A.).

“Para 6.66, supra.

*Para 6.59, supra.

“Para 6.61, supra.

"To be carried out under section 25. See para 7.22, infra.

Rationale.

Foreigners.

Amendment of
section 19(b)
recommended.

Summary of re-
commendations
relating to
section 19.


Recommendation
for revising
section 19,

Restrictions as
to appointment
or declaration
of guardian.

42

(ii) clarification that clauses (3) and (b) do not apply to the husband

or father or mother’ making an application’ for being appointed or declared
a guardian;

(iv) addition of the mother in clause (b):*
(v) excluding from clause (b) married females; and

(vi) excluding from clause (b) cases where. by personal law, the
father or mother® is not the natural and legal guardian of the minor.‘

6.83. To carry out the points made above, we recommend that section 19
should be revised as under: —

Revised Section 19

19. (1) Nothing in this Chapter shall authorise the Court to appoint or
declare a guardian of the property of a minor whose property is under the
superintendence of a Court of Wards, or to appoint or declare a guardian of
the person of a minor whose property is under the superintendence of a Court
of Wards competent to appoint a guardian of the person of the minor.

(2) Nothing in this Chapter shall authorise the Court to appoint or declare
a guardian of the person—

(a) of a minor who is a married female and whose husband is not, in
the opinion of the Court, unfit to be guardian of her person, or

(b) of a minor. who is not a married female, and whose father or
mother is living and is not, in the opinion of the Court. unfit to be guardian
of the person of the minor;

Provided that—

(i) in determining the question whether a person is unfit to be a guar-
dian with reference to clause (a) or clause (b) of this sub-section, the welfare

of the minor as explained in section 17 shall he the paramount considera-
tion;

(ii) nothing in clause (a) or (को of this sub-section shall apply to a cave
where the husband or the father or the mother. as the case may be. applics
for being appointed or declared a guardian; and

(iii) nothing in clause (b) of this sub-section shall apply to a case where
the father or the mother, as the case may be. is by the law to which the
minor is subject, the natural guardian of the person of the minor

1This is consequential on para 6.65, supra.

*Para 6.65, supra.

sPara 6.66, supra.

“Para 6.68, supra.

*Addition of the mother is consequential on para 6.65, supra.
"Para 6.71. supra.

"Besides this amendment of section 19, section 25 will be amended to ensure that the provisions
of that section (section 25) apply notwithstanding anything contained in section 19.


CHAPTER 7

DUTIFS, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES OF GUARDIANS: SECTION 20 TO 30

7.1. The duties, rights and liabilities of guardians are dealt with in sections
20 to 37. These sections are riot confined to guardians appointed by the Court, Scope.
but apply to all guardians.' है हु

7.2. Section 20 deals with the fiduciary relation of the guardian to the
ward, and needs no change. Section 20,

» 7.3.,Scction 21 provides that a minor is incompetent to act as guardian of .
any minor, except his own wife or child, or, where he is managing member of an Sacto 2
undivided Hindu family, the wife or child of another minor member of that “child”,
family. A doubt has arisen as to whether the expression (‘child” in this section
includes an adopted child).” We think that the expressiop should be widely con-
strued. ४० change. however, is required on this point.

74. It is not clear whether “guardian” in this section is confined to the
guardian of the person, or whether the section covers property. If the section
is taken as extending even to guardianship of property, certain anomalies may
varise.

Anomalies as
to property.

In the first place, the last few lines of the section assume that a minor can
be a managing member of a Hindu family where he is the seniormost male mem-
ber... However, on this point, the query raised by Sadasiva Aiyar J. in a Madras
ase (to be referred to later’ on) should be noted.

Jn the second place, if the first 17 words of the section, ending with “his
6wn wife or child” are taken’ as covering the guardianship of property also, the
result would be that a minor can be guardian of the property of his family.
though his own property would be subject to the guardianship of another person
a +

As to Hindus, it is now specifically provided that 2 minor shall be incompe-
tent to act as guardian of the property of any minor.

75. The following observations of Sadasiva Aiyar J. in a Madras case’ are Pbservations
pertinent in this context :-- i ras case.

“I am. very doubtful whether a minor can at all be the managing mem-
ber of a Hindu family, though he is the senior male member. ‘Guardian’
in scction 21 is evidently intended to include the guardianship of both per-
son and property. Tt does seem anomalous that a minor could be the
guardian of the person of his wife and children. that is. entitled to the cus-
tody of their person and the management of their properties, while his own

77 7 nerson is sitbiect to the custody of the leeal guardian of his person. and (while)
his properties aré under the management of the lesal guardian of his vroper-
ties. But this particular section 21 cannot, in my opinion, be held to dero-

‘WJiban Krishna v. Sailendra Nath, A.LR. 1946 Cal. 172.
®Sindermoni v. Cokulanand. 18 C.W.N. 160, 164.

*Para 7.5. infra.

‘Section 10. Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956.
Ibrohim y. Thrahim, AR. 1917 Mad. 612, 615.

43

4-2 M of LI&CA/ND/80


Need for
amendment
of section 21.

Recommenda-
tion as ६0
section 21.

Section 22,

Section 23

Section 24.

44

gate from the rights of the legal guardian of a minor’s own person. J might
venture to suggest that the Legislature should amend section 21 by omitting
the portion following ‘child or and by confining the rights of a minor
guardian over his wife and child to the control of their persons so far as it
is necessary to exercise his conjugal right and the right of fondling his
child, so that he might have no power to interfere with the management of
their properties and so that the guardianship of their properties might be
vested in the guardian of his own properties.”

=

“Some High Courts have taken the view [that a minor can be a managing

member of a Hindu undivided family.

7.6, lt is unnecessary to express an opinion on this point. However, so far
as section 21 is concerned, it is, on principle, anomalous that the same person
{minor managing member) would be competent to act in matters concerning the
property. while, in matters concerning the person, he is subject to the guardian-
ship of another person, The need for an amendment of section 21 is obvious.

7.7, On a careful consideration of various aspects of the matter, we recom-
mend that section 21 should be revised as under. ta remove the anomaly men-
tioned above:

“21, (1) A minor is incompetent to act as guardian of any minor except
as provided in sub-section (2),

(2) A minor is competent to act as guardian of the person of his own
wife or child so far as it is necessary to exercise “his conjugal right and his
rivht in reeard to the upbringing of the child.”

7.8, This takes us to section 22, which deals with the remuneration of the
guardian and permits him certain allowances. “Allowances” referred to in the
svction seem to cover only reward for the “‘care and pains in the execution of
his duties”, Tf does not seem to cover expenses to be incurred for the maintenance
and education of the minor’ (in the case of guardianship of the person), Such
expenses are, at present, governed by rules. It is. however, desirable that this
shovld be expressly covered by the section, so as to make the section compre-
hensive. Accordingly. we recommend that the following sub-section should be
added 16 section 22:—

“(3) The Court may, in the case of a guardian of the person. also deter-
mine from time to time the amount to be allowed to the guardian for the
cnport, health and education of the ward.”

7.9, Section 23 provides that a Collector appointed or declared to be the
guardian is subject to the control of the State Government or of an authority noti-
fied bv the State Government in this behalf. The section needs no change.

7.10. Section 24 provides that a guardian of the person of a ward is charged
with the custody of the ward and must look to his support. health and education
and such other matters as the law to which the ward is subject requires.

The section needs no change.

mbak Raoji v. Lonkaran, A.LR. 1948 Nag. 324.
Thy Bodh Te T.R. 1958 Orissa 7.
(0 Mila, Hindu Law (1974), page 974.

*Section 24.

Section 50.



45

TAL. Section 25, bearing the marginal note “Title of guardian to ‘custody
of ward”. contains three sub-sections. Sub-section (1). which is concerned with
the ward leaving or being removed from the custody of a guardian of the rerson,
empowers the Court to make an order for the return of the ward to the custody
of the guardian, if such order will be for the welfare of the minor. It also empowers
the Court to “cause the ward to be arrested and to be delivered into the custody
of the guardian”. हु

Sub-section (2) confers on the Court, for the purpose of “arresting the ward”,
the powers of a Magistrate of the first class under section 100 of the Code of Cri-
minal Procedure, 1882-—-now section 97 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

Sub-scction (3) provides that the residence of a ward apainst the will of the
guardian with a person who is not the guardian docs not, of itself. termina the
guardianship. '

7.12. A number of questions arise with reference to section 25. In the
first place. case law as to Court having jurisdiction under the section needs exa-
mination.’ In the second place. it is not clear whether the power under this
section can be exercised where the ward has never lived with the guardian who
now applies for custody. In the third place, the languase of certain provisions
of the section (where it speaks of “arresting the ward”) is archaic." In the
fourth place.‘ although sub-section (1) of the section. itself lavs down th= test
of welfare of the ward, yet attempts are. from time to time. made—thonsh mostlv
unsuccessfully——to argue’ that the riehts of the guardian should also influence the
decision.

Then. since the section deals with a matter vitally affecting the intevests
of the minor, it is desirable to make a specific provision as to the extent to
which his wishes should be respected.

Finally.’ there is also one addition in a matter of procedure that we would
like to make. so as to emohasise the need for associating women with the pro-
ceedines. wherever practicable.®

713. The first queseion concerns the Court having jurisdiction under the
section. Although section 25 does not specifically lay down which is the com-
petent Court. it seems to be the general policy of the Act to vest jurisdiction in a
Court having jurisdiction in the place where the ward for the time being ordi-
narily resides. However. the auestion seems to have arisen in regard to section
25. and it has been held" that whether the application is under section 9 (apoli-
cation for guardianship of the person or property) or under section 25 (anplica-
tion for restoration to custody). if is the district Court having iurisdiction in the
place where the minor ordinarily resides that would have. iurisdiction.

We do not consider it necessary to recommend an amendment on this noint

"Para 7.13, info
"Para 7.14, infra.
SPara 7.1, infra.
*Para 7.19, infra.
See arguments in Margarate v. Chacko, A.LR. 1970 Ker. 1, 10, para 22 (F.B.).
"Para 7.19 infra.

*Para 7.20, infra. न

"Cf. Order 32A, Rules 4-5, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

*See section 4(5b)ii).

"Chimanlal v. Rajaram, A.LR, 1937 Bom. 158, 159; 30 Bom. L-R. 44.

“Maung Ba v. Ma Than, A.ILR. 1929 Rang. 129.

“Tak Raj v. Asha, ALR. 1979 Raj. 128. हि a

Section 25-
Title of
suardian
to custody
of ward,

Section 25-
Questions to
be considered.

Section 25—
‘The competent
Court.


Persons not
having actual
custody.

Judicial
decisions
based on
constructive
custody.

46

7.14, The second question to he considered with reference to section 25 is.
whether a person who never had actual custody of the child’ can take procecdings
under the section. है

According to the Allahabad, Bombay! Nagpur' and Patna’ view. such
Proceedings cannot be entertained.

Other High Courts.’.” however, adopt a more liberal interpretation and hold
that even if a child has never been in the actual custody of a guardian, yet the
guardian has constructive custody, and also, that refusal by a person fo return
the minor to such guardian amounts to “refusal to return” within the meaning
of the section.

According to a recent Andhra case,* the word “removal” is not limited to
physical removal constructive removal clearly falls within its ambit. In a Punjab
case’ where both the parents lived together and subsequently a minor son of 6
years was taken away by the mother, it was held that there was a constructive

removal of the child from the father’s custody and the father had a ripht to apply
under section 25,

Some of the earlier decisions on the subject are reviewed in the undermen-
tioned ruling.” The confiict as to the scope of “custody” in section 25 was also
noted in a recent Delhi case," but the question was not decided, not being necessary
for disposal of the case.

As we shall mention later.” the interpretation relying on “constructive cus-
tody” has received the implied approval of the Supreme Court. _

7.15. The judicial decision which take the wider view" have. at present. to
rely on the doctrine of (‘constructive custody”— a doctrine which has received
the indirect approval of the Supreme Court." While the wider view on the sub-
ject would seem to do substantial justice, the result has not been achieved without
straining the present language to some extent. Indeed. this was admittet! in one
of the earlier Madras cases on the subject. It is pe‘haps for this reason that the
Rangoon High Court.* while not accepting the liberal construction, hinted! at
the need for legislative action. हु

*Para 5.12, supra.
*Latif v. Shakoora, AIR. 1973 AN. 441.
*Achratlal v. Chimanlal, ALR. 1916 Bom. 129.
“Dhan Kumari ए- Mahendra. AAR. 1923 Nag. 199, 200.
SAhassi Regu v. Mustafe, 521.0. 998, 1001 (Pat.).
(a) Jwala Prasad v. Bachu Lal, ATR. 1942 Cal. 215.
(6) Basant Kaur v. Gian Singh. AR. 1939 Lah. 339.
(गे Ibrahim v. Ibrahim, AAR. 1917 Mad. 612.
(d) Geeta v. Ratan, ALR. 1966 M.P. 221, 222, para 5.9.
*See also Punjab and Andhra cases, infra.
"Kota Karrenna v. Kota Paravathamma, (1978) 1 An. W.R. 425.
"Sunita Devi v. Rajpat Kaushal, (1978) 80 Punj. LR. 143.
teSushita v. Kunwar Krishna, ALR. 1948 Oudh 226, 266, 270 para 18.
2 .Akhtar Begum v. Jamshed Munir, ALR. 1979 Dethi 67, 70, para 10 (March) (Prakash Narain 3.)
‘Para 7.15, infra.
*Para 7.14, supra.
MJacob v. Jacob, ALR. 1973 5.0. 2090, 2098. See para 7.16, infra.
brahim v. Ibrahim, A.LR. 1917 Mad. 612.
\«Manoo Ali v. Mawabi, A.LR. 1936 Rang. 63, 64.


41

7.16, It appears to us that it is desirable to expressly amend the language Need for
of the section in this regard, so as to reflect the true and just position. There #™endment of
can hardly be any doubt about the soundness of such an aproach. It would be Parte .
strange if the law, while providing for and insisting on the due discharge by a 7१० custody.
guardian of his duties towards his ward, should deny him the means of discharging
those dutics.' In this connection, we may refer to the following observations of
the Supreme Court? : —

jw ०७३ 0.॥110॥, scuun 25 of the Guardians and Waids Act coutcm-
pitted गण uly actual [5०81 Custody but also constructive custody of Ue
रू Bua which (एक 18९00ए७ ail Categories of guardians. Lhe object aud
purpose of 115 provision being ex facie to ensure the weltare of the minor
wat, which uccessarily volves duc protection of the right of his guardian
to properly look afte: the ward's health, maintenance and education, this
scchon demands reasonably liberal interpretation so as to effectuate that
object. Lyper-technicalities should not be allowed to deprive the guardian
vf the necessary assistance from the Court in effectively discharging his
duties and obligations towards his ward so as to promote the “latter's wel-
fare. Mf the Court under the Divorce Act cannot make any order with respect
to the custody of Ajit alias Andrew and Maya alias Mary and it is not
open to the Court under tne Guardians and Wards Act to appoint o:
declare guardian of the person of his children under clause 19 during his
lifetime, if the Court does not consider him unlit, then, the only provision to
which the father can have resort for his children’s custody is section 25.
Without, therefore, laying down exhaustively the circumstances, in our
opinion, on the facts and circumstances of this case the husband’s application
under section 25 was competent with respect to the two elder children. The
Court was entitled to consider all the disputed questions of fact or law
properly raised before it relating to these two children. With Fespect to
Mahesh alias Thomas, however, the Court under the Divorce Act is at
present empowered to make suitable orders relating to his custody, main-
tenance and education. it is, therefore, somewhat difficult to impute to the
Legislature an intention to set up another parallel Court to deal with the
questions of the custody of a minor which is within the power of a competent
Court under the Divorce Act.

“We are unable tu accede to the respondent's suggestion that his appli-
cation should be considered to have been preferred for appointing or
declaring him as a guardian. But whether the respondent's prayer for cus-
tody of the minor children be considered under the Guardians and Wards
Act or under the Indian Divorce Act, as observed by Maharajan J., with
which observation we entirely agree, ‘the controlling consideration govern-
ing the custody of the children is the welfare of the children concerned and
not the right of their parents’. It was not disputed that under the Indian
Divorce Act this is the controlling consideration. The Court’s power under
section 25 of the Guardians and Wards Act is also, in our opinion, to be
governed primarily by the consideration of the welfare of the minors con-
cerned. The discretion vested in the Court is, as is the case with all judicial
discretions. to be exercised judiciously in the background of all the relevant
facts and circumstances. Each case has to be decided on its own facts and
other cases can hardly serve as binding precedents, the facts of two cases in
this respect being scldom—if ever-—identical. The contention that if the
husband is not unfit to be the guardian of his minor children, then. the
question of their “welfare does not at all arise is to state the proncsition
a bit too broadly and may at times be somewhat misleading. It does not

LCF. observations in Musheb Hussain v. Mt. Jawaid, AAR. 1918 0940 376.
4. Jaci ४. Jacoh, 4.1.R. 1973 5.0. 2090, 2098.


Detect in
present
funguage.

Section 11)
and 2512) -
The rrest
of the ward.

Welfare
of minor

48

take full notice ol the real core of the statutory purpose. /n our opinion, the
dominant consideration in making orders under section 25 is the welfare of
the minor childhen' and the considering this question due regard has, of
course, to be paid to the right of the father ‘to be’ the guardian and also
to ail other relevant factors having a bearing on the minor's welfare. There
is a presumption that a minor's parents would do their very best to promote
their children’s welfare and, if necessary, would not grudge any sacrifice
of their own personal interest and pleasure. Ibis presumption arises be-
cause of the natural, seliicss allegtion normally expected from the parents
for their children. trom this point of view, in case of conflict or dispute
between the mother and the father about. the custody of their children, the
approach has to be somewhat different from that adopted by the Letters
Vatent bench of the righ Court in this case, ‘here is no dichotomy between
the fitness of the father (० be entrusted with the custody of his minor children
and considerations of “their welfare. The father’s fitness has to be consi-
uvied, determined and weighed predominantly in terms of the welfare of
his minor children in the context of all the relevant circumstances. if the
custody of the father’cannot promote their welfare equally or better than the
custody of the mother, then, he cannot claim indefeasible right to their
custody under section 25 merely becayse there is no defect in his personal
character and he has attachment for his children—which every normal parent
has.”

7.4%. {he present language of the section does not carry out the intention,
The word “remove” in its literal meaning means “take off or away from the
place occupied, convey to another place, change situation of, get rid of, dis-
miss”. There is no particular definition given in the Act. Doubt will persist as
to its exact scope, if it is not clarified. The language of section 25 should, there-
fore, be widened to provide an adequate remedy for the guardian of the minor
to have his right declared to the custody of the minor and to have his right
enforced by adopting the machinery provided in the Act.

7.18. Thirdly. sub-section (1) of section 25 should be modified to remove
that part of it which contemplates “arrest” of the minor. This is archaic.

As regards sub-section (2), which empowers the Court to exercise the powers
of the Magistrate of the first class under section 100 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1882, it may be mentioned that the Code of 1882 has been repealed
and replaced by successive later legislation. The corresponding provision in the
Code of 1898 was section 100, and the corresponding provision in the present
Code (of 1973) is section 97. Necessary substitution (which is only a verbal
change) may be made in sub-section (2).

We recommend that section 25(1) and 25(2) should be amended accordingly.

7.19, Fourthly, it should be emphasised. that the minor’s welfare is the para-
mount consideration? in proceedings, under section 25. This criterion is already
indicated in sub-section (1) by the words “if . it will be for the
welfare of the ward to return to the custody”. However, it would be proper to
re-emphasise this aspect.*

v. Jacob A. Chakramakkal. AUR. 1973 8.0. 2090; para 7.16, supra.
(b) Harichand v. Virbala, (1974) 15 G.L.R. 499.
(©) Manjit Singh v. Bakshish Singh, A.ILR. 1952 Punj: 129 (reviews cases,

*See also discussion relating to section 19 (Chapter 6, supra)


49

7.20, In our opinion, it would also be proper to provide that the Court shall
not make an order contrary to the wishes of a child of 14 or over, unless the
Court is satisfied that such an order is necessary by reason of special circum-
stances,

7.21. Tinally, the association of women in procecdings under section 25
will, we think, be a healthy improvement. This is already permissible under the
Code of Civil Procedure,’ but it should be made obligatory, where practicable,
in proceedings under the section.

In this connection, it would be of interest to note a provision recently intro-
duced in the Children Act’—

“(3) Every children’s court shall be assisted by a panel of two honorary
social workers possessing such qualifications as may be prescribed, of whom
at least onc shall be a woman, and such panel shall be appointed by the
Administrator.”

7.22. in the light of the above discussion, we recommend fiat section 25
should be revised as under :—

“25. (1) If a ward leaves or is removed from the custody of a guardian
of his person, or is not in the custody of the guardian though the latter is
entitled to such custody, the Court, if it is of opinion that it will be for
the welfare of the ward to return to the custody of his guardian or to be
Placed in his custody, may make an order for his return, or for his being
Placed in the custody of the guardian, as the case may be.

(2) For the purpose of enforcing the order, the Court may exercise the
power conferred on a Magistrate of the first class by section 97 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

(3) The residence of a ward against the will of his guardian with a
person who is not his guardian does not of itself terminate the guardian-
ship.

(4) In making an order under this section, the Court shall regard the wel-
fare of the ward as the first and paramount consideration.

(5) The Court shall not under this section make. an order contrary to
the wishes of a child of fourteen years or over, unless “the Court is satisfied
that such an order is necessary by reason of special circumstances.

(6) In a proceeding under this scection, the Court shall, wherever prac-
ticable, make an endeavour to secure the services of a woman, whether
related to the parties or not, including a woman professionally engaged in
promoting the welfare of the family, for the purposes of assisting the Court
in discharging the functions imposed by the law on it.

(7) The provisions’ of this section shall apply notwithstanding any-
thing to the contrary contained in section 19.”

7.23. This taken us to section 26, which provides that a guardian of the
person appointed or declared by the Court, unless he is the Collector or a guardian
appointed by will or other instrument, shall not remove the ward from the
jurisdiction of the Court which appointed or declared him without the Icave of

1Cf. 0. 32A, Rule 4, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
Section 5(3), Children Act, 1960, as amended in 1978-
3800 discussion relating to section 19, supra and para 7.19, supra.

Guardian

il
above 14,

Association
of women,

Recommendation,

Proceedings
for custody
of ward.

ection 26


Section 27

Section 28,

Transfer
of valuable,
movable
property.

Need for
amendment of
section 29
as to movable
property.

50

that Court, except for the prescribed purposes. The leave may be ‘general or
special and may be defined by the order granting it.

The section needs no change.

7.24, Section 27 deals with the duties of the guardian of the property.
Carrying out the principle laid down in sectidh’ 20 (fiduciary relationship), it
provides that the guardian is bound to deal with the property of the ward, as cdte-
fully as a man of ordinary prudence would deal with it if it werc his own, arid
subject to the provisions of this chapter, he may do all acts which are reasonable
and proper for the realisation, protection or benefit of the properiy.. Although
there is abundant case law on the section, it is mostly concerned with the appli-
cation of the section in the innumerable situations of infinite variety that present
themselves in actual life No serious problems arising from the substance or form
of the section have come to notice ahd we do not theréfore recommend any
change in the section.

7.25. Section 28 deals with the powers of the testamentary guardian ‘in res-
pect of property. In brief, it provides that the power to alicnate immovable
property of the ward is subject to any restriction imposed by the will or other
instrument under which he is appointed, unless he has been declared by the
Court to be the guardian and the Court permits him by written order to dispose
of any immovable property in a specified manner notwithstanding the restrictions
imposed by the instrument. रु

The section needs no change.

7.26, Section 29 imposes certain limitations on the power of a “guardian
of property (not being the Collector or testamentary guardian) appointéd or
declared by the Court, in relation to the alienation of immovable property. Per-
mission of the Court is required for the specified classes ‘of transfers

We notice that the section is silent as to the disposal of movable property.
being concerned exclusively with immovable property. So far as movable property
is concerned, the Act docs not directly impose any restriction on the powe:s of
the guardian, except such as may flow from the general fiduciary position of the
guardian' or from obligatons imposed by the Court under sections 32 to 34
and similar general or residuary provisions.

Authority on this subject is scanty. In a Bombay case’ decided under the
Bombay Minors Act, 1864, it was held that the general rule was that a Hindu
guardian could pledge the property of the ward for benefical purposes, and in
respect of movables, there was no provision in section 18 of the Act of 1864.
However, the incurring of marriage expenses was specifically prohibited by that
Act.

The Act of 1890, as stated above, contains no direct provision on the sub-
ject. ४

7.27, The question to be considered is whether this position should bc
allowed to continue. It is conceivable that the property'of the minor may corfi-
prise valuable movables, and prima facie, a specific Ptovision safeguarding ‘#e
interests of the minor in relation td such property appears to be needed. 1

1$ection 20, Guardians and Wards Act, 1890. .

°*Maharana Shri Ranmal Singh v. Vadilal Vakhatchand, (1894) LL-R. 20 Bom. 61, 71, overruled
on another point in LL.R. 26 Bom. 221


St

While we do not consider it necessary to lay down any tigid restrictions
on the investment of funds of the minor of the ‘nature contained’ in the Indian
Trusts Act, it is, in our opinion, desirable to make specific provisions as to the
alienanon of movable property exceeding certain value. In modem times, im-
portant classes of transactions may take place as to movables—such as shares;
bank deposits and the like, and even’ jewellery'and antiques. Leaving the dis-
posal of such property entirely to be govented by the general or residuary pro:
visions«.referred to above might~sometimes: seriously prejudice the interests of
wards. है

7.28. We Urcrelure reconimend that while retaining the substance of section
29 in so far as it governs immovable property, the following further provisions
should be added in that section. [The present section may be re-numbered as sub-
section (1)]. . ला

Sub-section to be added in section 29 (after re-numbering presem
section 29 as sub-section (1).

(2) Such person shall not, without the permission of the, Court--

(a) mortgage, pledge or charge, or transfer by sale, gift, exchange
or otherwise, any part of the movabic property of his ward, being—
G) money (whether in cash or invested in any form) exceeding
rupees two thousand in value, or
(ii) other movable property exceeding rupees two thousand in
value, or

(9) vary any investment exceeding rupees two thousand. in value:

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any transaction
undertaken by tie guardian on behalf of the minor in the ordinary course
of business or for meeting daily needs or for the immediate  preserva-
tion and protection of the property.

7.29, The जीरत of contravention of the statutory restrictions as to the dis-
posal of property by a guardian is dealt with in section 30. The section pro-
vides that a disposal of immovable property by a ‘guardian in contravention of
section 28 or section 29 is voidable at the instance of any other person affected
thereby. The view taken in the majority of the judicial decisions seems to be
that a proceeding to set aside the transfer — made in contravention of the above
testriction®-’ is not needed. ‘

7.30. We do not consider it necessary to recommend any amendment in
this regard. However, the word “immovable” should be deleted. from section 30,
sc that it can apply to the disposal of-mavable property” as well—an amendment
that is consequential on the proposed expansion of the scope” of section 29. We
recommend that section 30 should be amended accordingly.

ICf. section 20, Indian Trusts Act. 1882...

*Abdul Rahman v. Sukhdaval Singh, (1906) LLL.R. 28 All. 30 (Banerji & Richards II.).

3Jai Narain v. Bachu Lal, A.L.R. 1938 Cal. 369, 372.

“Jagarnath v. Chuani, ALR. 1940 All. 416, 421 (Mohammad Ismail & Verma JJ.).

®Mem Chandra v. Lalit Mohan, (1912), 16 C.W.N. 715.

“Lalit Kumar v. Nagendra Lal, A.L.R. 1940 Cal. 589, 591.

TMuthukumara Chetry v. Antony Udayar, (1915) LL.R. 38 Mad. 867, 877 (Sadasiva Ayyar &

*Sivanmalai v. Arunachala, A-LR. 1938 Mad, 822 (Venkatesubba Rao & Abdul Rahtan JJ.).
*Jagadamba Prasad v. Anadi Nath, A.L.R. 1938 Pat. 337, 349 (Wort & Manohar Lall JJ.)
2Ghulunt Hussain v. Ayesha Bibi, A.L.R. 1941, Mad. 481, 482.

U§ce recommendation as to section 29, supra.

Recommenda-

tion as
section

Section 30—

to
2a

Recommendation.

Recommendation

to amet
section

%.

oe


Section 31.

Recommendation
to amend
section 31(3.)

Section 32.

Section 33.

Section 34.

Section 34—
Need for pro-
vision as to
interest and_
for disallowing
remmmeration.

52

7.31. This takes us to section 31, Section 31 is a very detailed section,
laying down with great care in what circumstances the Court ought to grant
permission to the guardian to do the acts mentioned in the section. It provides
that the permission shall not be granted except in case of necessity or for an
evident advantage to the ward. Detailed provisions as to the form of the order
and its contents are contained in the section, which also provides that the Court
may cause notice of the application for the permission to be given to any relative
or friend of the ward who should, in its opinion, receive notice thereof and shall
record the statement of any person who appears in opposition to the applica-
tion. Such a person may not necessarily be the relative or friend.'

7.32, In our view, it is desirable to add, in sub-section (3) of section 31, 8
specific provision to the effect that a Court may direct sale by public auction or
private negotiation, We therefore recommend that in section 31(3), clause (aa)
should be inserted as follows after clause (a): —

“(aa) that the sale shall be by public auction or private negotiation.”
In consequence, section 31(3Xb) should be revised as under: —~

“{b) that where the sale is to be by public auction, it shall be.
to the highest bidde:
in the present section).

. before the Court or some person etc. (rest as

7.33. Section 32 deals with the variation of powers of guardians of property
appointed or declared by the Court, such variation to be for the advantage of
the ward and consistent with the law to which the ward is subject.

The section needs no change.

7.34, Under section 33, a guardian appointed or declared by the Court may
apply to the Court for its opinion, advice or direction on any “present question”
respecting the management or administration of the property of the ward. The
section also requires the Court to give notice to such person interested in the
application as the Court thinks fit. The principal object of the section is to
protect the guardian who statcs in good faith the facts and acts upon the opinion,
advice or direction given by the Court. This is made clear in sub-section (3).

The section needs no change, case law on the section being mainly con-
cerned with its application.

7.38. Section 34 imposes certain obligations on the guardian of property
appointed or declared by the Court, not being the Collector. Though the matters
dealt with may appear to.be of an administrative character, some of them are
important. In particular, the scope of the expression “balance due” in sectiqn
34(d) seems to have been the subject matter of some controversy, and will be
discussed at the appropriate place.”

7.36. We may first deal with a point of substance. There appears to be need
for a provision conferring on the Court power to award interest. At present.
there is no such power in the Court, even though the guardian has retained
the moncy improperly beyond the period for which he should have retained it,
or has failed to account for the money and such failure is deliberate.

Raja Venugopal v. Kadir Veluswami, (1911) U.L.R. 35 Mad. 743, 744.
2966 para 7.39, infra.


53

The need for a power to award interest has been pointed out in a Madras
case! On a careful consideration of the matter, we are of the view that such a
power is needed. The justice of an order for the payment of interest in such cir-
cumstances is obvious. There should also be a power to disaliow remuneration
for failure on the part of the guardian to submit accounts or to. make payment in
time.

7.37. We, therctore, recommend that a suitable provision on the subject
should be inserted-- say, as sub-section (2) वा section 34. after e-numbering the
present section as sub-section (1). Phe new sub-section could be-somewhat on the
following lines:—

“() Uf a guardian to whom sub-section (J) applies
(a) fails to maintain regular accounts; or

(b) fails to exhibit his accounts in the Court on the due date without
Proper cause; or

(c) unduly delays exhibiting his accounts by failing to appear
before the Court without proper cause; or

(0) improperly retains any moncy or other property in his hands,
whether or not he has been directed by the Court to make payment
in respect thereof under clause (व) of sub-section (/).’

the Court may, if in its view the justice of the case so requires,—

(i) disallow the whole or any portion of the remuneration due to
the guardian for the period of the account with reference to which
default is committed, and

(ii) also charge interest at such rate not exceeding twelve per cent
per annum as the Court thinks just in the circumstances of the case,
on the money or monetary value of the property in respect of which
default is committed or which has been improperly retained by the
guardian, for the period of such default or retention, without prejudice
to any other proceedings which may be taken against the guardian.

738. Clause (a) of section 34 requires the apprication to be Vin’ the: pres-
cribed form”. Such phraseology often receives a technical construction, so that
minor departures from the “prescribed” form raisc controversies. It would be
better to substitute the words “according to the prescribed form”. We therefore
recommend that in section 34(a). for the words “in the prescribed form”, the
words “according to the prescribed form” should be substituted.

739. There seems to be a conflict of decisions of the question whether,
in section 34(d), the “balance due” means the balance due as shown in the
accounts exhibited by the guardian. or whether it mens the balance due as
found by the Court on an examination of the accounts. The former view has
been taken by a few High Courts. namely, Calcutta.’ Tahore.' Madras* and
Nagpur In the Lahore case. however, the High Court + gretted the position.
because the sum was unquestionably due from the guardian.

1Kasipathy v. Venugopal, A.LR. 1950 Mad. 596, 507, 508 (Krishnaswami Naidu JD.

Section 34 is to be re-numbered as sub-section (1).

2Yagannath v- Mahesh, (1916) 21 CW.N. 688, 691: ATR. 1016 Cal, 459,

Hakim Ray v. Khandli Bai, ATR. 1930 Lah. 420, 421

sHarikrishna vy. Govindarajulu, A.L.R. 1926 Mad. 478, 479, 480 and Gopalaswamy v. Ramaiah
ALR. 1944 Mad. 396, 397.

*Ramlalsao v. Tan Singh, A.1.R. 1952 Nag. 135, 136. para 6 (Kaushalendra Rao & Deo JJ.).

Recommendation

10 insert
section 342),

Section 34(a)—
Recom:

Section 3
‘balance १८


Reasoning
examined.

Amendment of
section 34(d)
recommended.

Section
34(3) to be
inserted.

Section. 348

Section: 35.

54

The latter and the wider view has been taken by the Allahabad’ and Patna’
High Courts. Incidentally, the later Lahore view seems to fall jn ihis category,*

7.40, Some of the judicial decisions taking the narrower view haye stated.
that the matter could be dealt with by the procedure laid down in sections 35
and 36, which contemplate a suit against the guardian, where an administration
bond has or has not been taken, respectively. That proccdurc, however, is some-
what cumbersome and we do not see any reason why, in a proper case, the
Court itsclf should pot have power, under section 34(d), to direct payment:
{t is, no doubt, true that the inquiry under section 34 is, in general, of: assem;

nary nifure—a reason advanced in support of the narrower view in.one of

tne earlicr Lahore cases.‘ However, as was pointed out in a later decision of the
same Hish Court.s on such a view, the scrutiny of the accounts practically
becomes a farce.

7.4%. Whatever be the true construction of the present wording of clause
(d), we are of the opinion that it will be in the interests of justice to expand
the scope of the expression “balance due” in the context under consideration.
We may mention that in the Madras case, a hint as to need for amendment
of the section was given. We therefore recommend that in section 34, at the
end of the clause (d), the words “and also the additional balance found due by
the Court on an examination of the accounts, though not shown in the accounts
exhibited by him, or so much thereof as the Court directs” should be added.

An apncal may be provided against the order’ under section 34(d), in
view of its important?

7.42. We are also of the view that before an order is passed under clause
(d) of section 34, the guardian should be given a reasonable opportunity of being
heard. This may be regarded as implicit in view of the adverse conseqrences of
such an order. but we would like it to be made explicit. To achieve this object.
we recommend the insertion of a new sub-section in section 34 on these lines:

“(3) The Court shall, before an order is. passed under clause (व) of sub-
section (1), give the guardian a reasonable opportunity of being heard.”

7.43. Section 34A confers power on the Court to award remtneration for
auditing accounts. The section was inserted by an amendment made in 1928?
since it was considered that an adequate audit of accounts was desirable ahd
had not been provided for in the law as it then stood. The same amendment in-
serted clause (ff) in section 50.

The section needs no change.

7.44, Section 35 deals with the procedure for filing @ suit against the guardian
where an administration bond has been taken from the guardian. .

The section needs on change.

‘Sita Ram v. टिका, A.LR. 1924 All. 593, dissented from in Ranganath v. Murarital. ATR,
1936 .

*Mahomed Fariduddin vy. Ahmad Abdul, ALR. 1928 Pat. 255, 258

Chuan Singh v. Hor Kaur, A.1.R. 1933 Lah. 484, 485.

(कद, Mohammed vy. Bhari, A.V.R. 1932 Lak. 306.

sChanan Singh Sto Har Kaur, A.ULR. 1933 Lah. 484. 485.

*Gopalaswamy v. Ramayya, ALR. 1944 Mad. 397, 398.

7C1. Radha Krishan v. Khushy Ram, (1921) 671. 0, 309 cited in ALR. 1926 Mad. 478,
396९ amendment recommended in section 47, infra.


55

stration bond was not taken as contemplated hy section 35, 16 empowers
any person with [cave of the Court to institute a suit as next friend against the
fuardian or his, representative.

Sub-section (2) of the section contains a reference to section 440 of the Code
of ‘Civil Procedure, which should now be read as Order 32, rules 1 and 4(2) of
the Code of 1908. We recommend that the sub-section should be suitably revis-
ed for the purpose.

We are further of the opinion that where the Court has passed an order un-
der section 34) requiring the guardian to pay in the Court the balance duc. it
Should not give leave for the institution of a suit under this section in so far as
the sult relates to that amount. The question of liability of the guardian would
already have been dealt with in proceedings under section 34 and there should
be no necessity for duplicating the proceedings so far as that amount is concern-
éd. An exception may, however, be made where recovery otherwise than by
suit is not practicable.

Accordingly, we recommend that a new sub-section (3) should be added
to section 36, as follows:—

o “{3) Where the guardian has been required by the Court to make pay-
vement ef the balance due under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 34,
the Court shall not grant leave under this section for the institution of a
suit against the guardian in so far as such a suit relates to the amount so
required to be paid, unless the court is satisfied that recovery of that amount
otherwise than by a suit under this section is not reasonably practicable in

the circumstances of the case.”

7.46. Section 37 deals with the general liability of the guardian as trustee.
The principal object is to save the right of the ward or his Tepresentative to pur-
sue’ any remedy against the’-guardian or his Tepresentative which, not being ex-
pressly provided in either section 35 or section 36, would be legally available
agiinst a trustee or the representative of the trustee. The opening part of the
Section contains the words “of the two last foregoing section”. It is necessary
to substitute. for these words, the words and figures “section 35 or 36” (in con-
formity with current legislative practice), and we recommend accordingly.

7.45. Section 26 deals with the filing of a suit against the guardian where Section 36—

Recommendation.

Section 37-

Recommendation

for verl
amendment

ea


ection 38.

Section 39.

Section 40.

Section 41(1)-
Recommendation.

Section 41
ad its appli-

sability to
Jeath of ward.

CHAPTER 8

INATION OF CLUARDIANSHIP: SECTIONS 38-42

8.1 Five sections in the Act deal with the termination of guardianship. These

are—
Section 38 Right of survivorship among joint guardians.
Section 39, —- Removal of guardian.
Section 40 -— Discharge of guardian.
Section {1 — Cessation of authority of guardian.
Section 42 — Appoiatment of successor to guardian dead, discharged

or removed.

8.2. Section 38 deals with the right of surviorship among joint guardians. A
surviving guardian is allowed to continue to function as such, till the vacancy is
filled up. The rule as incorporated in the section possesses practical utility.

The section may, therefore, he left undisturbed.

8.3. Scetion 39 provides for removal of the guardian by the Court on the
specified grounds, Although there is considerable case law on the section, most
of the reported decisions raise questions concerned with application of the sec-
tion, rather than with the principle of the provision. In this position, we have
no change to recomend in the section.

8.4. Section 40 deals with the discharge of a guardian, and seems to need
no change.

8.5. The circumstances in which the powers of are guardian ceases are dealt
with in section 41. A few matters require discussion under the section.

In the first place. section 41(1) provides that the. powers of a guardian of the
person cease on the death, “removal” or discharge of the guardian. The expres-
sion “removal” has been construed! as including an implied removal under sec-
tion 7(2). We are of the view that in order to avoid future controversy, it is
desirable to add, in section 41(1), the words “express or implied” after the word
“removal”. We recommend accordingly.

8.6. The sccond question is concerned with the death of the ward. Section
4103) provides that when “for any cause” the powers of a guardian cease, the
Court may require him or, if he is dead, his representative, to deliver as it may
direct any property in his possession or control belonging to the ward or any
accounts in his possession or control relating to any past or present property of
the ward.

There is. however, some doubt as to whether sub-section (3) of section 41 is
applicable where the minor himself dics. The controversy hinges on the cons-
truction of the words “any cause” appearing in sub-section (3). The Allahabad
High Court takes the narrower view in this respect.” In a Bombay case,’ the

Yiban v. Sailendra. A..R. 1946 Cal. 272.
*Chandra Bhukhan v. Sajan Kumar, (1920) UL.R. 42 All. 1, 4, 5.
*Murlidhar y. Vallabhdas, (1909) I.L.R. 33 Bom. 419, 421.

56


57

Court granted a discharge to the guardian on the death of the minor, thus im-
Pliedly adopting the wider view. The Lahore High Court’ also takes the wider
view,

8.7. We think that the wider view should be incorporated by an express Recommendation
amendment of the section. Even at present, the language of section 41(3) is wide fo amend
enough to include the case of a guardian ceasing to be such by reason of the and 40).
death of the ward? However, a doubt has been expressed as to whether the
Court has any power in such a situation—the suggestion being that the parties
must be left to litigate in an ordinary Court? The position should be made clear
by a suitable amendment recognising the wider scope of the section.

Accordingly, we recommend addition of the following words at the end of
section 41(1)(c) and 41(2)(0) : --

“or by the death of the ward”.

8.8. Assuming that section 41 applies to the case of the death of the ward,‘ Section 413)—
there is some obscurity as to the precise order to be passed by the Court in such se order.
a situation under section 41(3). Should it be an order for—

(a) delivery of the property to the heir of the minor. or
(b) filing of an inter-pleader suit£ or

(c) directing any other course?

8.9 Delivery to the heir would prima facie be an expedient alternative. Recommendation
However, there is no specific provision permitting delivery to the heir. The aay section
absence of power to direct delivery of the property of a deceased ward to an
heir is likely to lead to serious hardship in certain cases. In our opinion, justice
requires that the Court should be given’ a wide discretion in the matter. To
avoid needless controversy, the law should be amended to recognise by express
enumeration the powers of the Court in this respect so as to obviate the doubt
expressed in some decisions.”

8.10. In this connection, we would like to quote the observations of Shadi View of Shadi
Lal C.J. in a Lahoure case.* The observations are as follows:— Tal CJ.

“It is also conceded that these powers can be exercised when the guar-
dianship of the property is determined by any of the causes specified in sec-
tion 41(2). Why should be Court become functus officio, if the cause deter-
mining the guardianship is the death of the ward? Is there any reason for
making this differentiation? Surely, the Court which has appointed the guar-
dian and is acquainted with his dealings with the property is in a much
better position than any other Court to settle various matters relating to his
stewardship of the property. This method of deciding disputes about the
nature and the extent of the property and the liability of the guardian with
Tespect to that property provides not only an efficacious but a cheap and

1Shibcharan v. Bhawani, ALR. 1928 Lah. 495, 496.
*Kullappa v. Palaniappa, A.UR. 1951 Mad. 574, 575 (Vishwanath Shastri J.).
"Tulasidas v. Madhavdas, A.1.R. 1926 Mad. 148, 149 (Srinivas Ayyangar J.).
‘Para 8.7, supra.

§See discussion in Mr. Sugrabi v. Mustakem Khan, है. तर, 1944 Nag. 334, 335.
*Kullappa v. Palaniappa, A.L.R. 1950 Mad. 574 (Vishwanath Sastri J.).
"Tulasidas v. Madhavdas, A.LR. 1926 Mad. 148, 149 (Srinivas Ayyangar J.)
"Shiv Charan Lal v. Bhawani Shankar, A.1R. 1928'Lah. 495, 496.


Recommendation
tavinsert -sub-
section (3A)

in section’ 41.

Section 42.

7 jatter section?

58

expeditious remedy. There is no reason why the Court should be deprived
of this jurisdiction when the guardianship is determined by the death of -the
ward’

8.11. In view of the points made above, we recommend that in section 41,
8 new sub-section, somewhat on the following lines, shou!d be inserted:

“(3A) Where the powers of a guardian cease by reason of the death of
the ward,,the Court may, without prejudice to the powers conferred omit by
suth-section (3), require the guardian, or if he is dead, his representative. to de*
liver the property or accounts referred to in sub-section (3) to such person at
the Court may, after a@ summary inquiry, determine to be the person legally
cntitted thercto by reason of the death of the ward:

“Provided that any determination by the Court shall be limited
tc the orders to be passed under this section and shall not affect the title of
any other person claiming to be so entitled;

“Provided further that the Court may, in an appropriate case, direct
any person claiming to be so entitled to take appropriate legal proceedings
for the establishment of his title and make such orders as the Court thinks
fit for the custody of such property or accounts pending the result of such
legal proceedings.” .

8.12. This takes us to section 42, Which provides for the appointment by
the Court of a successor to a guardian in two cases:—

(i) where the guardian is discharged. or, under the law to which the
ward is subject, ceases to be entitled ta act; or

(ii) where the guardian is remayed or dies.

In the first case, the power of the Céurt is confined to a guardian appointed
or declared by thé Court. Ih the sécond case, the power extends also to a guar-
dian appointed by a will or other instrument. The procedure in Chapter 2 tnust
be followed.’” The terms of the section have created no problems, but a question
has arisen as to how far an order appointing a second guardian under section 42
is appealable under section 47. We propose to consider the matter under ‘he

786९, in particular, section 11
3866 discussion as to section 47, infra (para 9.7).



CHAPTER 9

SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS: SECTIONS 43-51

9.1. Supplemental provisions are contained in sections 43 to 51. These are—- Sections

Section 43. Orders for regulating conduct or proceedings of guar- Brosh
dians and enforcement of those orders.

Section 44. Penalty for removal of ward from jurisdiction.

Section 45. Penalty for contumacy.

Section 46, Reports by Collectors and Subordinate Courts.

Section 47, Orders appealable.

Section 48, Finality of other orders.

Section 49. Costs.

Section 50, Power of High Court to make rules.

Section 51. Applicability of Act to guardians already appointed
by Court.

9.2. With reference to section 43, it is only sub-section (4) that needs some Section 43—
comment. This sub-section contains references to sections 492 and 493 of the Recommendation.
Code of Civil Procedure, which should now be revised so as to read as reference
to Order 39. rules 1-2, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. We recommend necessary
amendment of section 43.

9.3. In section 44, the amount of maximum fine needs revision in view of the Sections
decline in the purchasing power of the rupee since 1890. The section at present 44 to 46.
provides as under:—

“44. If, for the purpose or with the effect of preventing the Court from
exercising its authority with respect to a ward, a guardian appointed or
declared by the Court removes the ward from the limits of the jurisdiction
of the Court in contravention of the provisions of section 26, he shall be
liable. by order of the Court. to fine not exceeding one thousand rupees, or
to imprisonment in the civil jail for a term which may extend to six months.”

Our recommendation would be to substitute, for the words “one thousand”,
the words “five thousand” rupees.

The amounts of fine mentioned in section 45(1), last paragraph also appear
to need revision in view of the changed economic conditions. This paragraph
mentions three amounts, in this context—

(i) the amount of fine as fixed initially must not exceed one hundred
rupees:

(ii) in case of recusancy, a further fine may be imposed for a continuing
default, but it must not exceed ten rupees for each day after the first during
which the default continues;

(iii) the amount of the fine should not exceed five hundred rupees in the
aggregate.

It would be appropriate to increase the first and third amounts tenfold.
having regard to the decline in the purchasing power of the rupee since 1890.

59
5-2 M of LI&CA/ND/80


Section 47.

Section 47 and
orders under
section 340).

Section
47(ff)—Re-
commendation,

Section 47 and
orders under
section 42.

60

As to the second amount, since it is a further fine for a continuous default,
व fivefold ineresse will do.

Accordingly, we recommend that the last paragraph of section 45(1) should
be revised as under:

“the person, guardian or representative, as the case may be, shall be
liable, by order of the Court, to fine not exceeding one thousand rupees, and
in case of recusancy to further fine not exceeding fifty rupees for each day
after the first during which default continues. “and not exceeding five
thousand rupees in the aggregate, and to detention in the civil jail until he
undertakes to produce the minor or cause him to be produced. or to compel
his return, or to deliver the statement. or to exhibit the accounts or to pay
the balance. or to deliver the property or accounts, as the case may be.”

Section 46 needs no change.

9.4. The list of uppealable orders is given in section 47. We need not enume-
tate them, but shall confine ourselves to the points that need consideration.

9.5. The first point concerns orders under section 34, clause (d), which are.
Al present. not appealable. In our view, an order under this clause, even as the
clause now stands, is an order of some importance und should be appealable.
Observations of eminent Judges' have indicated the need for providing an appe:
against these orders. After the amendment? which we have recommended in sec-
tion 34(d), an appeal is all the more necessary against such orders, as their scope
will now be much wider than at present.

An order refusing to pass a direction under section 34(d) should also be
appealable. Of course, the appeal should be against a final order, and not a
merely interlocutory one, whether it be one directing payment or one refusing
to direct payment.

9.6. Accordingly, we recommend that in section 47, after clause (f), the fol-
lowing new clause should be inserted:

“(ff) under clause (वी! or [Sub-section (I) of] section 34, requiring the
guardian to make payment into Court of the balance due as specified in
that clause or refusing so to require him, not being an interlocutory order in
either case.”

9.7, The next point relating to section 47 concerns orders under section 42.
There seems to be a certain amount of obscurity’ on the question whether an appeal
lies against an order appointing a second guardian under section 42. The order is
not specifically mentioned in the list of apnealable orders as given in section 47.
The Chief Court of Sind has taken the view* that the order under secton 42 really
falls under section 7 and is therefore appealable. On the other hand according to
the Calcutta view.’ an appeal does not lie against an order under section 42, but
if the Court, before passing such an order, has not complied with the procedure
for removal of the guardian under section 39, then an appeal would lie against
the order of removal.

1E.g. Gopalaswamy v. Ramayya, A.1.R. 1944 Mad. 397 (Leach C.J.).

*Paragraphs 7.34 to 7.36, supra.

'Section 34 will be re-numbered as section 34(1) see Chapter 7, supra.

“Para 8.12, supra.

*Ghulam Hyder v. Abdul, (1914) 7 Sind Law Reporter 90; 23 Indian Cases 776.
“Mahabir v. Bidhi Chand, (1914) 20 Calcutta Law Journal 298; 27 Indian Cases 28.


61

Tn our opinion, this is a matter on which the position should be specifically
laid down in the “ct. particulariy in view of the we'll recognised rule that a right
of appeal must be given expressiy. Having regard to the nature and effect of
the order, there cun hardly be any doubt as to the need for a right of appeal.

9.8. Accordingly, we recommend that in section 47, a new clause (k) should Section 4700--
be inserted at the end of the section, in these terms:-— Recommendation.

“(k) under section 42, appointing or declaring, or refusing to appoint or
declare, a guardian as successor to a guardian in the circumstances specified in
that section.”

As a consequential change, in clause (j) of the section, the full stop at the

end should be replaced by the word and punctuation mark: “:or’

9.9. This takes us to section 48, which reads as under:~-

“Save as provided by the last foregoing section and by section 622 of Sect
the Code of Civil Procedure, an order made under this Act shall be final, Section 48.
and shali not be liable to be contested by suit or otherwise.”

{Section 622 of the Code of Civil Procedure of 1882 corresponds to
section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908].

9.10. The wording of the section is peremptory. But orders under the Act
are intended for the protection and welfare of the minor, and the proceedings Effect of the
are not adversary in the usual sense. In a number of cases,' orders as to cus- थाई
tody. sanction of alienations and the like have been cancelled or modified by construed.
the Court to suit changed circumstances’. The “finality” of the order is
confined to a suit or any other form of litigation of a substantive character,
and dces not bear cancellation or modification of the order in appropriate
cases,

1. . it is oni a
9.41. In particular, it is recognised that orders as to custody are temporary. ‘Temporary

हे . a . nature of
A possible exception would be an order appointing a guardian’—~an order orders.

which can either be contested on appeal’ or (in effect) be set aside by taking
proceedings for the removal of the gurrdian. But apart from such special situ-
ations, courts have, in general, attempted tc achieve substantial justice by
allowing review in suitable cases.’ In an exceptional case, even an order of an
appointment of a guardian has been recalled.

9.12. In our view, the language of the section ought to be modified to

bring it in harmony with the demands of justice and with actual practice of Need fre
the courts:

9.13. It may be noted that the provision in section 48 is, to a large extent. History of
derived from the Act of 1874° relating to European British minors. Section 9 section 48.

1See Harnam Singh v. Komala Devi, AAR. 1971 H.P. 25 (review cases).

2Ram Harakh v. Jagannath, ATR, 1932 All. 5, 8.

5 Nagardas v. Anand, (1907) LL.R. 31 Bom. 590.

37. Munisamappa v. Krishnamma, A.1.R. 1959 Mys. 150.

5Furid v. Mitho, '43 P.R. 1906 followed in Shai fan v. Vholi, AAR. 1922 Lah. 395.
*Section 47.

7Rashmoni v. Ganada, ALR. 1915 Cal. 49; 19 C.W.N. 84. 88

*Walmia Khatoon v. Kabiruddin, और, 1958 Pat. 410.

°Section 9. European British Minors Act (13 of 1874).


Recommendation
to revise
section 48.

Section 49

Section 49A
(New}—
Recovery as
arrears of
Jand revenue.

Section 50

Section 51--
To be repealed

62

of that Act provided that “Save as provided by section 8. no order passed under
this Act in respect to the guardianship of a minor's person or property shall
be liable to be contested in any other proceedings”. However, it should be
noted that by section 8 of the same Act, it was, inter alia, provided that “in
cases instituted under this Act, the Court shall be guided by the procedure pres-
cribed in the Code of Civil Procedure in so far as the same is applicable. ra
Thus, in the scheme of the Act of 1874, the provision of the Civil Procedure
Code relating to review became applicable to all orders under that Act.

9.14. Tn the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section 48
should be revised as under: —

“48. (1) Save as provided by section 47 of this Act or by section 115
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. an order under this Act shall be final
and shall not be liable to be contested by suit or otherwise.

(2) Nothing in this section shall affect the jurisdiction of the Court to
vary, by way of modification, addition or omission, “an order passed wnder
this Act, where the Court after due notice to the parties is satisfied that it
is necessary or expedient to do so.”

9.15. We have disposed of section 48. Section 49 provides that the costs
of any proceeding under the Act, including the costs of maintenance of a guar-
dian or other person in the Civil Jail, shall, subject to rules made by the High
Court, be in the discretvon of the Court in which the proceeding is held. Al-
tbongh the corresponding provision’ in the Code of Civil Procedure is more
specific, it does not appear to be necessary to be so elaborate in the Act under
consideration. The section may therefore be left as it is.

9.16. At present, the Act contains no direct provision for the recovery of
vatious amounts that might become due under its provisions from guardians.
Sections 35, 36, 43(4) and 45 do contain certain provisions which could be
pressed into service. but these are indirect or secondary and the procedure is not
expeditious. We are of the view that there is need for an express provision
authorising the recovery of such amounts as arrears of land revenue.

Accordingly, we recommend that a new section—say, as section 49A—should
be inserted in the Act on the subject as follows: —

“49A. Any amount that becomes due under the provisions of this Act
from a guardian by virtue of an order of the Court, without prejudice to
any other mode of recovery be recoverable as arrears of land revenue.”

9.17. Section 50 enumerates the matters with reference to which rules can
be made by the High Court.’ Tt needs no change.

9.18. Section 51 deals with the application of the Act to a guardian ap-
pointed under any enactment repealed by the Act. These enactments were enu-
merated in a Schedule which was annexed to the Act 1890 as originally enacted
and referred to in section 2. Section 2 and the Schedule were revealed in 1938
by the Repealing Act. By now, all such guardians must have been dead and
the wards also must have either attained majority or died. We therefore recom-
mend that section 51 should be repealed.

‘Section 35, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (costs).
°Cf. section 232, Income Tax Act, 1961 and Jagdish Pratap v. State of U.P. A.LR. 1973 S.C.
1059.

See 7150 sections 10(1) (6), 11(1)(b), 31, 34a) and 49.


CHAPTER 10
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS

We summarise below the recommendations made in this Report.

Chapter 4—Definitions.

(1) The definitions contained in section 4 should be re-arranged in the al-
phabetical order.'

(2) The definiton of “guardian” in section 42) should be amended by add-
ing an Explanation to cover a de facto guardian?

Chapter 5—Empowerment of subordinate judicial officers.

(3) Section 4A(1) should be amended by substituting, for the words “original
civil jurisdiction”, the words “unlimited original civil jurisdiction”, so that dele-
gation of powers of the Court under the Act may be made only in favour of
senior judicial officers.*

Chapter 6—-Appointment and declaration of guardian.

(4) In section 7, an Explanation should be inserted to provide that “property”
includes hereditary trusteeship.‘

(5) In section 7, a new sub-section should be inserted to ensure that the Court
can make an appointment of a guardian conditional on the performance of a
condition by the guardian.’

(6) In section 8, a new clause—clause (bb}—should be added to entitle the
minor himselt to apply to the Court for the appointment of a guardian in certain
088९5.

(7) In section 12, a provision should be added in express terms regarding
power to make an interlocutory order (for production of the minor) in respect to
proceedings under section 257

(8) In section 14, the present provision requiring Courts to send a report to
the State Government (in case of multiple proceedings filed in Courts which
are not subordinate to the same High Court) should be altered. Instead. this
repert should be submitted to the High Court in whose jurisdiction the proceed-
ings were instituted. The High Court having jurisdiction over the place where
they were first instituted should decide where the proceedings should continue."

<9) Section 17 should be revised so as to make the minor's welfare the para-
mount consideration in the appointment of a guardian and to equalise the posi-
tion of the mother with that of the father and to spell out the considerations re-
levant for determining what order will be for the minor’s welfare.’

Para 4.5.

*Para 4.13.

Para 5.2.

‘Para 6.10.

‘Para 6.21.

“Paragraphs 6.24 and 6.25.

63


64

(10) In section 17, a new provision should be inserted to empower the Court
to call for periodical reports from a guardian appointed by the Court.’

(11) Section 6 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 should be
amended as to the age upto which the custody should ordinarily be with the
mother. The age should be revised from five to twelve years.*

(12) A new section - section [8A---should be added as to the appointment
of a juristic person as guardian, subject to certain conditions.’

(13) Certain amendments shouid be made in section 19 10 ensure that the
welfare of the minor becomes tie paramount consideration — in appointing a
guardian.*

[As to making welfare of the minor paramount under section 25, sec
point concerning section 25, infra].

(14) It should be provided in section 19 that clauses {a) and (0) of the sec-
tion do not apply where the husband or the father {or mother) is the applicant
for guardianship.

(15) In section 19(b), after the word “father” the words “or mother” should
be added.’

(16) Section 19, clause (b), should be confined to persons other than married
females.’

(17) Where, under personal law, the mother or the father is not the natural
guardian of the minor, then he or she should also be excluded from the pre-
ferential position given by clause (b) of section 19.

Chapter 7—Rights, duties and liabilities of guardians.

(18) Section 21, which empowers a minor to act as a guardian in certain
cases. should be modified as recommended.’

(19) Section 22 should be amended to empower the Court to authorise the
grant of expenses for the maintenance of the minor.”

(20) Section 25 should be revised—
(i) to make verbal changes in regard to the archaic phrase “arrest”,
(ii) to make welfare of the minor paramount, and

Gii) to add a provision for consulting the wishes of the minor in
certain cases.”

(21) In regard to proceedings under section 25, welfare of the minor should
prevail notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in section 19."

Para 6.49.
*Paragraphs 6.50 and 6.53.
§Para 6.56.
“Paragraphs 6.59 and 6.83.
"Paragraphs 6.59 and 6.83.
Paragraphs 6.75 and 6.83.
>Paragraphs 6.76 and 6.83.
Paragraphs 0-81 and 6.83.

"Para 7.7,

Para 7.82.

Para 7.22.

Para 6.61


65

(22) In section 29, provisions restricting the disposal by the guardian of
movable property exceeding rupees two thousand in value, or variation by him
of investments exceeding that value, without the permission of the Court, should
be added. Exception may be made for certain specified cases.’

(23) Section 30 should be amended to delete the word “immovable”, so
that the section will apply to all property. This is consequential on the recom-
mendation to expand the scope of section 292

(24) In section 31(2), an express provision authorising the Court to direct
4 private sale of property should be added?

(25) Section 34 should be amended to confer power on the Court to direct
the defaulting guardian to pay interest and to disallow remuneration for failure
to submit accounts by the guardian.

(26) In section 34(a), for the words “in the prescribed form”, the words
“according to the prescribed from” should be substituted.*

(27) In section 34(d), an amendment should be made to provide that the
balance as found by the Court may be ordered to be paid by the guardian in case
of default.®

(28) In section 34, a new sub-section should be inserted to require that the
guardian should be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard before an
order requiring payment under section 34(d) is passed.’

(29) In section 36(2), the reference to “Code of Civil Procedure” should now
be suitably revised as a reference to 0.32, R. | and 4(2) of the Code of 19082

(30) A new sub-section (3) hould be added to section 36 as follows:—

“(3) Where the guardian has been required by the Court to make Day-
ment of the balance due under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 34,
the Court shall not grant leave under this section for the institution ofa
suit against the guardian in so far as such a suit relates to the amount so
required to be paid, unless the Court is satisfied that recovery of that
amount otherwise than by a suit under this section is not reasonably prac-
ticable in the circumstances of the टक्कर?

(31) The opening words of section 37 should be replaced by a reference
to sections 35 and 36, in conformity with current practice in legislative drafting.”
Chapter 8—Termination of guardianship: sections 38-42.

(32) In section 41(1)(a), after the word “removal”, the words “express or
implied” should be added.”

‘Para 7.28.
*Para 7.30.
*Para 7.32.
‘Para 7.37.

Pat 2.
“Para 7.45.
*Para 7.45.
Para 7.46.
UPara 8.5.


66
(33) In section 41(1)(0), the case of the ward’s death should be added)
(34) In section 41(2)(c) also, the case of the ward’s death should be added.*

(35) In section 41, a new sub-section should be inserted to ermapower the
Court to give certain directions as to the delivery of property on the death of
the minor?

Chapter 9—Supplemental provisions :
Sections 43—S1

(36) In section 43(4), a reference to Order 39, Rules 1-2, Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 should be substituted.‘

37) In section 44, the amount “one thousand rupees” should be rsised to
“tive thousand rupees”.

(38) In section 45, the various amounts of maximum fine 81000 be in-
creased as recommended.’

(39) In section 47, a new clause (ff) should be inserted to provide for an
appeal against an order directing or refusing to direct the guardian under section
34(4) to make payment of the balance due.

(40) In section 47, a new clause (k) should be inserted to make appealable
orders for the appointment of a successor guardian under section 42. Asa
consequential change, in clause (j), the word “or” should be added at the end,
and the full stop should be replaced by a comma’

(41) Section 48 should be revised so as to make an express provision for
the variation of an order by the Court on certain grounds?

(42) A new section 49A should be introduced to empower the recovery of
various amounts due from a guardian under the Act as arrears of land revenue.

(43) Section 51 should be repelaled.""

POV. Dixit 2, Chairman
S.N. Shankar. Member
Gangeshwar Prasad Member
P.M. Bakshi... Member-Secretary

22nd April, 1980.

‘Para 8.7.
*Para 8.7.
*Para 8.11.
‘Para 9.2.
*Para 9.3,
*Para 9.3.
"Para 9.6.
*Para 9.8.
*Para 9.14.
‘Para 9.16.
Para 9.18.


APPENDIX 1
POSITION AS TO CUSTODY OF CHILDREN IN PERSONNEL LAW

Custody of children in Hindus is governed by the following statutory pro- Custody in
vision: —' Hindus.

“6. Natural guardian of a Hindu minor: ‘The natural guardians of a
Hindu minor, in respect of the minor's person, as well as in respect of the
minors — property (excluding his or her undivided interest in joint family
property), are—

(3) in the case of a boy or an unmarried girl—the father, and
after him, the mother:

Provided that the custody of a minor who has not completed the age
of five years shall ordinarily be with the mother;

(0) in the case of an illegitimate boy or an_ illegitimate unmarried
gul—the mother, and after her, the father;

“(c) in the case of a married girl—the husband;

Provided that no person shall be entitled to act as the natural guardian of
a minor under the provisions of this section—

(a) if he has ceased to be a Hindu, or

(b) if he has completely and finally renounced the world by be-
coming a hermit (vanaprastha) or an ascetic (yati or sanyasi).

Explanation.—In this section, the expressions ‘father’ and ‘mother’ do
not include a step-father and a step-mother.”

As to Muslims, under Hanafi law, the mother is entitled to the custody of a Custody in
male child until the child attains the age of seven years and of a female child vain Taw
until puberty." If the mother is absent or disqualified during the age of the
child mentioned above, the custody of the child belongs, in Hanafi Law, to the
specified female relatives. If the mother and the female relatives are all dis.
qualified, then the father and (in his absence) the specified male relatives become
entitled to custody.’ After the ages mentioned above (ic., in respect of a
male child above the age of seven years or of a female child who has attained
puberty). the father becomes entitled to the custody.”

Among Shias. the first right of custody jis that of the parents, and priority Shia Law.
between them is determined on the basis that the mother should be entitled
during infancy. i.e. in the case of male till the age of two years and female till
seven years. Later on. the father has the right to custody.’ Among Shias
failing the parents, the grand-father is entitled to the custody, and failing him,
certain specified relatives are entitled.*

1Section 6, Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956.

For history of Hindu law, see Appendix 2.

*Tyabji, Muslim Law (1968), page 216, paragraph 238.

‘As to husband’s rights, sec discussion as to section 1.

“Vyakji. Muslim Law (1968), page 217, paragraph 239, and page 218, paragraph 241.
STyabji, Muslim Law (1968), page 218, paragraph 242.

7Tyabji, Muslim Law (1968), page 228, paragraph 249, Summary.

sTyabji, Muslim Law (1968), page 221, paragraphs 245 to 249.

67


Impact of the
British rule
and nature
ot carly
legislation.

Judge—made
law.

Fragmented
structure

APPENDIX 2
HISTORY OF THE LAW iN INDIA

1. introductory

Evolution of the law of guardianship in India is eae of the most interesting
chapters in Indian Jegal history, The earlier developments in this field are
vitally and integrally connected with the British rule and its impact on Indian
legal institutions.

The British Government's original--and most important—-non-trading acti-
Miy in India was the collection of land revenue. Yo facilitate the collection of
revenue वा minors’ estates, tion became necessary. The second most
Importint function of the British Government was the administration of justice.
For the iepresentation of minors in ligation, again, legislation was necessary.
Litigation in those times was concerned mostly either with revenue or with pro-
prietary matters Early legislation relating to minors and guardians was there-
fore preduminaatly concerned with Proprietary aspects. There was also an
immediate need for regulating the affairs of European British subjects. This

need resulted in the passing of a specific Act' applicable to European British
minors.

However, side by side with this legislative development, another silent
change was taking place through judge-made law. The West was gradually
having its impact on some parts of personal law of the Hindus who,—first in
the Bengal Presidency and later in big towns of the Bombay and Madras Pre-
sidencies~-were coming into close contact with the ruling class, thereby imper-
ceptibly imbibing some of their customs and practices. It was
through this process that the practice of making wills (a practice which itself had
travelled from the Roman Jaw to the common law) came in vogue and gained
recognition as part of the Hindu law as administered in British India.

Roman law had a system® of appointing testamentary guardians, and the
appointment of a guardian by will also came to be recognised amongst Hindus.
In a case of 1807 referred to by Strange,’ the Pandit recognised, apparently as
4 matter of course, that the father’s testamentary nomination of his brother as
guardian should prevail against the claim of the natural guardian, the widow.
The power of a father to appoint a guardian for his minor son by will was
again recognised in a case reported in 1867.

All these developments supplicd the material that formed the content of
the law of guardianship as it existed in the latter half of the 19th century.

However, social and political conditions—and the accidents of history--were
responsible for a fragmented structure of the legislation on the subject. Unifor-
mity and coherence were to a large extent lacking. For example—-speaking of
want of uniformity—the following peculiar features of the position before 1890
may be mentioned:

(a) different laws’ were in force in different local areas, such as the
Bengal Presidency, the Bombay Presidency and the Madras Presidency;

'The European British Minors Act (13 of 1874).
Roman law. see Appen
agurange, Hindu Law, Vol. 2, pa
‘Soobah Doorgah Lul Jha v. Rajah Neelanand Singh, (1867) 7 W.R. 74 (Cal.).
SDetails will be found infra.

68


69

(0) there were differences as regards the rules applicable to European
British subjects and the rules applicable to others;

{c) there were also differences as between the jurisdiction exercisable
by Chartered High Courts and the jurisdiction vested in other Courts--a
difference which, to some extent, is continued’ even by the Act of 1890.

व, Hindu Law

Rules laid down in the fegal system on this subject are not new to India.
In ancient India, infants and students were entitled to the special protection of
the king, until the attainment of majoriy by he former and until the completion
of study by the latter, The properties of minors were to be protected’. The
duty of the king to protect his subjects thus especially extended to such persons.

According to the manusmriti,’ the king shall protect the inherited (and
other) property of a minor until he (the minor) has returned (from his teacher’s
house) or until he has attained majority.

“The minority ends with the sixteenth year”.*

In one of the comments on the Bill which led to the present Act, the role
of the Courts in regard to appointment of guardians has been beautifully deduced
from the duties of the king. and also sought to be supported by reference to
some of the ancient Indian law-givers. A verse of Baudhayana has also been
quoted—

“The King is beund to defend his subjects. their goods and chattles,
lands and tenements.”

The comment has further observed - २.

“Infants are incapable of taking care of themselves and are therefore
peculiarly under the protection of the king. It is impossible for the king
to do so per se in cach individual case. He therefore delegates this care
to his courts of law and equity, who exercise it by appointing guardians or
curators, by guiding and controlling their acts and limiting may-—abrogat-
ing-~the rights of natural guardians in some instances. Besides this,
though the law imposes upon the father a duty in connection with his children
and gives him credit for ability and inclination to execute it, yet that pre-
sumption, like all others, would fall in particular instances, and if an ins-
tance occurred in which the father was unable or unwilling to execute that
duty or was actively proceeding “against it, of necessity the Crown must
place somewhere a superintending power over those who cannot take care
of themselves—vide Powell v. Cleaver.”

Dr. Rattigan's views are also of interest* as to the position in ancient India-~-

“Looking at the question from a legal aspect, it is to be observed that
under beth systems (Hindu and Muslim law), the ruling power is recog-

‘Section 1. Act of 1890; Section 12, Proviso, Hindy Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956.
4U.C. Sarkar, Epochs in Hindu Legal History (1958), pages 58 and 7.
*Manusmriti, VIIT. 27; Vol. 25 S.B.E. (1967), page 237, and footnote 27.
¢Kulluka on Narada, IT. 37.

*National Archives. File relating to Act 8 of 1890, page 92/correspondence.

Pr. Rattigan (in his comment on the BiH), National Archives, Legislative Department Papers
relating to Act 8 of 1890. Appendix Y, pages 5-6.

Ancient
Hindu Law

The parents
patrae and
its rationale,

Dr. Rattigant’s
view.


Testamentary
guardians.

Position
before 1890.

10

nised as the supreme or universal guardian of all incapacitated persons,’ and
it is only a nautral corollary from this principle that in both systems we
should also find a certain power of interference permitted to the sovereign
in regard to the marriage of minors. Thus, in a text cited in the Nirnaya
Sindhu (the highest authority in the Benares and Mahratta schools on ques-
tions relating to marriage). Chapter HI, page 32, and attributed to Manu,
a girl who has no relatives competent to give her in marriage is commanded
to repair to the ruling power. And Narada in his Institutes (Capter XII,
22) lays down the same rule in these words: ‘If there be none of these (ie.,
relatives competent to give in marriage) the girl shall apply to the king,
and, having obtained his permission to make her own choice, choose a hus-
band for herself’. So also in the Muhammadan Law in default of the
agnales, certain uterine relations, and the moula-al-mawalah, the power of
giving in marriage is vested in the ruler and the kazi (see Bailey's Muham-
madan Law, page 46; Amir Ali's Personal Law of the Muhammadans,
page 192).”

का. Mustim Law

In Musiim law also, in default of the de jure guardians, the duty of appoint-
ing a guardian for the protection and preservation of the infant’s property de-
volves on the Judge as the representative of the sovereign,”

It may also be mentioned that the capacity of Hindu and Muslim fathers
to appoint, ty their wills, guardians for their children after death has been re-
cognised by the legislature in India since the date of the Permanent Settlement.*

We do not, however, propose to embark upon a detailed discussion of the
tules of Hindu and Muslim law, as those rules do not seem to have furnished
to any noticeable degree the source material for the content of the rules en-
acted in the Act of 1890.

IV. Position before 1890--The Acts and the Regulations.

It is now time to discuss the position in India before the Act of 1890.
Before 1890, there was no all India Act dealing with the guardianship of minors.
The matter was governed, in part, by several scattered Acts or Regulations and,
in part, by certain uncodified rules of personal law. The principal legislative
measures may be enumerated:

(1) Act 40 of 1858 (The Bengal Minors Act), originally applicable to
the Bengal Presidency, but later also extended to the Punjab, Oudh etc.
This Act did not apply to minors who were European British subjects, nor
10 persons under the superintendence of the Court of Wards.

(2) Act 9 of 1861 (An Act to amend the law relating to minors). This
Act made certain provisions supplementing the legislation relating to
minors. It was not applicable to European British subjects.

‘Authorities in Hindu Law—
(i) Colebrooke’s Digest, Vol. 1 (London Ed.), page 542.
ii) Manu, Chapter VIH, verse 27.

Muhammadan author
(i) Macnaghten’s Principles of M.L., Chapter VITI. paragraph 6: 12 Suth. W.R. 337.
(ii) Das Moslemische Recht von Micolans v. (Tornauw. page 153 leipzig, 1855).
*Imambandi v. Mutsuddi, (1918) LL-R. 45 Cal. 892, 893 (C.P.C.).

sTrevelyan on Minors (1912), page 63, refers, inter alia, to Bengal Regulation 5 of 1799 and
Bengal Regulation 1 of 1800.


7

(3) The Bombay Minors Act (20 of 1864) applicable to the Bombay
Presidency. 1 did net apply to European British subjects,

(4) (a) Madras Regulation 5 of 1804 and certain other Regulations of
the Madras Code. which were applicable to the Madras Presidency. These
did not apply to European British subjects, or to persons under the super-
intendence of the Court of Wards.

(b) Madras Minors Act (14 of 1858).

(5) The European British Minors Act (Act 13 of 1874), relating to the
guardianship of European British minors. Tt did not apply te territories
within the jurisdiction of the Chartered High Courts.

(6) Provisions in the charters of the Chartered High Courts.

The legislation of 1858, (864 etc. merely conferred expressly a certain juris-
diction on the courts and defined exactly the position of those who availed them-
selves of, or were brought under those Acts.’ ?

The genesis of these Acts is of interest. Soon after the establishment of Aisory of
the Court of Wards in Bengal." it was found necessary to give to the Civi} Courts !egislation |
Powers to nominate guardians of minors over whom that Court possessed no on guardianship.
power.

The first major step in this direction was the enactment of Bengal Regula-
tion 1 of 1800, which authorised Zillah Judges, where there were no testamen
tary guardians. to nominate guardians to disqualified landholders not subject to
the authority of the Court of Wards. This Regulation, with others relating to
the same subject, was repealed by the Bengal Minors Act (40 of 1858), which
provided a machinery for the appointment of managers of the estates’ and guar-
dians of the person of minors (not being European British subjects)’ residing in
Bengal outside the limits of the original civil jurisdiction of the High Court.

Similar provision was made for the Madras Presidency by Madras Regula-
tion 5 of 1804, section 20, and 10 of 1831, section 3, and for Bombay Presidency
by Act 20 of 1864, which was in terms similar to Act 40 of 1858.

The Bengal Minors Act (40 of 1858) was the result of certain practical Act of 1858—
difficulties which had been revealed by the case law or otherwise in the working Genesis.
of the law. For example, a Hindu guardian, even if he acted honestly, was in diffi-
culty as to how he ought to deal with a minor’s property under circumstances of
pressure. The family might be very seriously in debt, but it was often doubt-
ful whether the minor was liable for a portion of the debts, or whether the neces-
sity was sufficiently urgent to justify the sale or mortgage of the immovable pro-
perty of the minor. Sometimes, the guardian was a purdanashin lady or other
member of the family, ignorant of the law, and might be influenced by the mem-
bers of the family whose interests were adverse to those of the minor. In this
state of the law, the estates of the minor were constantly sold or mortgaged with-
out legal necessity—sometimes sold on ruinous terms. Purchasers as well as
minors were found the victims of fraud and ignorance, and dealing with the

4Ram Chander v. Brojonath, (1877) UL.R. 4 Cal. 929, 939.

2Sham Kuar v. Mohanunda, (1892) 1.L.R. 19 Cal. 301, 308.

‘Bengal Regulation 10 of 1793.

‘Trevelyan, The Law relatis.g to Minors (1912), page 75.

"Bengal Minors Act (40 of 1858), section 1.

3562९ Callychurn Mullick \. Bhuggobuttychurn Mullick, (1872) 10 B.L.R. 231.
Sikher Chund ए Dulputty Singh, (1879) ¥-L.R. 5 Cal. 363, 380. 381.


Act of 1858 -
section 4,

Act of 1861

72

property of minors had proved a source of litigation. It was to remedy these
evils that one of the provisions. -section 18 was enacted. the intention being
not only to protect the interest of the minor, but also 10 throw upon the civil
courts a large share of the duties and responsibilities which had previously
been thrown upon the guardiaas and to which the guardians had, as a rule, been
found to be unequal.

Section 3 of the Bengal Minors Act provided that no guardian could insti-
tute a suit or defend a suit connected with a minor without a certificate of
administration.

Section 4 of Act of 1858 ran thus!

“Any relative or friend of a minor in respect of whose property such
ceriificate has not been granted, or, if the property consist in whole or in
part of land or any interest in land, the Collector of the district may apply
to the Civil Court to appoint a fit person to take charge of the property and
person of such minor.”

Tn 1861, there was passed an Act to amend the law relating to minors. The
principal provisions are to be found in sections 1 and 2, which are quoted below?

“t. Any relative or friend of a minor who may desire to prefer any
claim in respect of the custody or guardianship of such minor may make
an application by petition, either in person or by a duly constituted agent.
to the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in the district by which
such application, if preferred in the form of a regular suit, would be cogniz-
able, and shall set forth the grounds of his application in the petition. The
Court. if satisfied by an “examination of the Petitioner or his agent, if he
appear by agent, that there is ground for proceeding, shall give notice of the
application to the person named in the petition as having the custody or
being in the possession of the person of such minor, as well as to any other
person to whom the Court may think it proper that such notice should be
given. and shall fix as early a day as may be convenient for the hearine of
the petition and the determination of the right to the custody of guardian-
ship of such minor.

“If. The Court. may direct that the person having the custody or being
in possession of the person of such minor shall produce him or her in Court
or in any other place appointed by the Court on the day fixed for the hearing
of the petition or at any other time, and may make such order for the tem-
porary custody and protection of such minor as may appear proper.”

The rest of the Act of 1861 (from section 3 onwards) was mainly concerned
with matters of a procedural nature. Section 3 required the Court, after hear-
ing the statements of the parties. to make an order regarding custody or guardian-
shin. Section 4 required the Court to be guided by Act 8 of 1859 (Act for sim-
nlifying the procedure of Courts of Civil jurisdiction not established by Royal
Charter) as far as applicable. Section 5 provided for an appeal to the sudder
court from an order of the lower court under the Act. and section 6 provided
that “any order passed under this Act in respect to the custody of guardianship
of a minor shall not be liable to be contested in a regular suit”. Section 7 saved
certain laws, as also the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and Court of Wards.

Section 8 defined the term “Sudder Court”.
*Bengal Minors Act, 1858, section 4.
*Act 9 of 1861’(An’ Act to amend the law relating 10 minors).



73

The Bombay Minors Act of 1864 was passed in these circumstances:" Act of 1864

“Iwas deemed expedient by the Bombay Government, on certain repre-
sentations from the Judges of the late Sudder Adawlut, to make provision
for the better protection of the property of minors. The judges sug-
gested that an enactment was required analogous to Act XL of 1858. Such
an enac!ment was accordingly framed with such alterations as the different
circumstances of the Bombay Presidency demanded, and was passed by
the Court of the Governor of Bombay. The Act provided that proceedings
of the Zillah Judges with reference to minors “should be open to appeal
to the High Court of Judicature in Bombay. But it is stated in the Letters
Patent of the High Court that the appellate jurisdiction of that Court is
confined te cases already subject to appeal to the Sudder Adawlut, and
to cases which shall become subject to appeal to the High Court by virtue
of such laws and regulations relating to civil procedure as shall hereafter
be made by the Governor General in Council.

“Tt was thus clear that. consistently with this provision in the Letters
Patent, the Government of Bombay in its legislative capacity was not compe:
tent to give an appeal to the High Court in a new class of cases. Assent to
the Bill was accordingly withheld by the Governor General. and the
Government of Bombay has requested that an Act to secure the attainment
of the objects in view may be passed by this Council. The proposed Act
is founded on Act XT. of 1858 with certain necessary alterations as to the
agency by which the law is to be administered.”

Neither Act 40 of 1959 (Bengal Minors Act) nor Act 20 of 1864 (Bombay Acts of 1858
Minors Act) was intended to alter or affect any provisions of Hindu or Maho- gad 18687
medan law, as to guardians who did not avail themselves of those Acts. The .
scope of these enactments was merely to confer expressly a certain jurisdiction
and to define exactly the position of those who availed themselves of, or were
brought under. those Acts, Jeaving persons to whom any existing rules applied.
unaffected. The Legislature did not mean to sweep away all ancient law on the
subject or to subject to one inflexible rule the property of all minors. For
example, a Hindu widow (as mother and natural guardian of her minor son),
could dispose of property belonging to the minor, even though she had not ob-
tained a “certificate” of administration under those Acts.?

As regards legal proceedings taken on behalf of minors, in Bengal, no Legal
guardian could institute or defend a suit connected with the estate of a minor, कहर
unless he had obtained a certificate of administration? Tn this respect the law ”
has undergone a change in the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890. Under the
Act of 1858 (Bengal Minors Act). a “certificate” was essential, but under the
Act of 1890. it is not required.

As was observed in the Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to
the Bill which ted to the Act of 1890—

“One effect of the assimilation of the law will be to do away with the
tule, which obtains in the Presidencies of Bengal and Bombay, that no
person shall be entitled to institute or defend any suit connected with a
minor’s estate of which he claims the charge until he has cbtained a
certificate of administration.”

National Archives, File relating to Act 8 of 1890, notes portion. pages 2, 3.
%(a) Ram Chander v. Brojonath. (1877) 1-L.R. 4 Cal. 929, 939.
(b) Honapa v. Mhalpi, (1891) T.L.R. 15 Bom. 259, 261.
(c) Murari ९. Tayana, (1896) T.L.R. 20 Bom. 286, 289.
3866 section 3 of Bengal Minors Act (40 of 1858).
‘Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Bill of 1886.



Leuistation
in force in
Madras.

Aot of 1874

Tmmediate
occasion for
the Bill,

Act xx of
1864, Section 2.

74

So much as regards the Presidencies of Bengal and Bombay. In Madras,
besides Regulation S of 1904, the following Regulations and Acts contained
a part of the law on this subject, vizt: —

Regulation 3 of 1802,

Regulation 10 of 1831.

Act 19 of 1841.

Act 21 of 1855.

Act 14 of 1858 (Madras Minors Act).

Act 9 of 1861 (An Act to amend the law relating to minors).

It remains now to notice the European British Minors Act, 1874 passed to
provide in the Punjab and elsewhere for the guardianship of European British
subjects.

Section 2 dealt with definitions. Appointment of a guardian by the parent
was provided for in section 3. Incidentally, section 3 of the Act of 1874 is the
genesis of section 5 of the Act of 1890 (The section is now repealed).

Under section 4. if the Court within whose jurisdiction the minor resided
found that a guardian of his person or property had not been provided for under
section 3, the Court could appoint a guardian of his person or property or both.

Sections 5 to 9 of the Act of 1874 dealt with procedural matters. Section
10 contained claborate rules for awarding custody. The guardian's duties, rights
and liabilities were dealt with in sections 10 to 25, An interesting provision was
that contained in section 12, to the effect that a ward is presumed to be of his
father's religion and the guardian, in the absence of a direction of the Court 16
the contrary, must train the ward in such religion. However, if the ward is old
enough to form an intelligent preference for any religion, the Court in giving
such direction “shall attend to such preference”. Another interesting provision
was that contained in section 21, which provided that on the death of one
or two or more joint guardians. whether appointed by a parent (section 3) or by
the Court (section 4), the power continued to the survivor or survivors until a
further appointment is made by the Court. It would also be interesting to note
that amongst the causes for removal of guardian was one mentioned in section
22(g) of the Act of 1874, under which the Court could remove a guardian on
the arrival within the local limits of the Court “of some person whose guardian-
ship the Court may think likely to be more beneficial to the minor than the
guardianship of the person so removed”.

५. State of the law and difficulties felt

The legislation mentioned above constituted the background of the Act of
1890. The immediate occasion for undertaking the legislation that culminated
in the Act of 1890 was furnished by certain practical difficulties that had been
experienced in the working of the Bombay Minors Act, 1864. These difficulties
had been brought to the notice of the Government of India by the Bombay High
Court through the Local Government. The difficulty was thus described’—

“Any person may assume the charge of a minor’s property without any
sanction from the civil court. No one need take out a certificate “unless
for the purpose of enabling him to institute or defend a suit connected
with the estate of which he claims the charge. If he does not profess to
claim the charge of the property, he may dispense with a certificate even

*National Archives, File relating to Act 8 of 1890, page 37/correspondence.
!National Archives, File relating to Act 8 of 1890, page 6/Notes.


15

“for the purpose of litigation. He may institute a suit as next friend, or defend Act_XX of 1864
‘it as guardian for the suit. If he takes out a certificate he carnot deal with section z 1877,
any immovable property without the sanction of the civil court previously Chapter XXXL

ained: Rane ae विकसित ‘XX of 1864,
obtained: and every alienation made by him without such sanction is abso- section 18,
lutely invalid; while an alienation made with such sanction cannot, except LER 2 Cal.

‘under special circumstances, be impeached. Qn the other hand, a person पाए, 4 Cal
who does not take out a certificate is absolutely beyond control, and can 929.

deal with the minor's property as he pleases.”

“It can hardly be said that this state of the law is favourable to the
interests of the minor. There is nothing to compel a self-constituted admini-
Sstrator to apply to the Court for a certificate; but on the contrary, there
is every inducement to him not to do so, Now I think that, in the case
ef every considerable estate, and especially when it consists of “immovable
property, it is desirable that every administrator should be obliged to satisfy

' the Court of his fitness before he meddies with the property.”

Though the suggestion pertained only to the Bombay Act, it was, on an Need felt
examination of the subject in the Legislative Department, thought that since i Bengal.
the Bengal Minors Act, 1858 was drawn on the same lines as the Bombay Act,
the improvernents suggested in the Bombay Act would be needed in that Act
also. It was further pointed out that the European British Minors Act, 1874
had also created several anomalies. For example, its provisions were confined
to “European” British subjects, and were inapplicable to Eurasians.

Some problems had arisen in Madras also. The minute of the Chief Justice Position
of Madras’ is of interest in this context— in Madras.

“Although the Acts XL of 1858 and XX of 1864, which gave rise to
the present reference, do not apply to this presidency, and the difficulties
arising on construction of these Acts in connection with Chapter XXXI
of the Code of Civil Procedure have consequently not been “experienced
here a review of the Jaw relating to minors obtaining in this presidency will
show that it is, as interpreted by the courts. defective in that it leaves
cértain minors without adequate protection and fails to provide sufficiently
for the representation and protection of minors whose property becomes the
subject of jitigation. .

“Regulation V of 1804 created for this presidency a Court of Wards.
By section 3, it was enacted that, where property charged with direct pay-
ment of rents or revenue to Government should devolve by inheritance on
persons incapacitated by age, & c., from taking charge of the said property
on their own behalf, the Collector should transmit to the Court of Wards a
report stating the circumstances, and that the Court of Wards shovld there-
upon state the case with their opinion and judgment to the Governor in
Council to the end that the decision and orders of the Governor in Council
might be passed thereon.”

The following is another interesting comment* dealing with the position in
Madras : —

“{ think there can be little doubt that the present is a most favourable
opportunity for dealing with the question of the ‘care of the persons and

!Minite of Chief Justice of Madras: Nationn! Archives, File relating to Act 8 of 1890, pages
7, 38 etc. (coresnencence).

4Na:ional Archives. File relating to Act 8 of 1890, page 124 /correspondence.
6—2 M of LI/CA/ND/80


Cor
law considered
desirable,

‘Request
‘or all
ndia Bill.

Bill and

76

property of minors in India’, The flaws and defects pointed out by the
Bombay High Court in Act XX of 1864 exist in a great measure in Act
XL of 1858, and probably they are also to be found in Madras Regulation
V of 1804, The advantages of effecting a general improvement in all these
laws by passing one general consolidated Act applicable to the whole of
India are so self-evident as not to need much discussion. The principle of
codification has been adopted by the Government of India, and is being
carried out. The present proposal is one step more in the same direction. Thus
the passing of one general Act will not only be in accordance with this
principle, but it will enable the Legislature to remedy the defects that are now
found to exist. The Bengal Act was passed a quarter of a century ago. It
was inevitable that defects and omissions should come to the light in this
interval. These require to be remedied, and the rulings passed in this time by
the High Courts require to be engrafted in the positive enactment.
I am therefore of opinion that a sufficient case has been made out to
warrant the matter being taken in hand for “the purposes of further legis-
lation, It may be pointed out that there are at present the Majority Act,
Act IX of 1861, the Court of Wards Act and others, all relating to the
differeut branches of the same subject. If the law is to be codified. all these
Acts might be taken up, and one genera! Act passed on th: subiect appli-
cable to the whole Empire, thus forming an additional chapter to the
Indian Stitutes Book on the Law of Guardian and Ward.”

In view of this position, it was suggested’ that it may be considered generally
whether the best plan would not be to consolidate and amend the law relating
to minors for all India. There were defects in Act 40 of 1858, and it might be
useful to invite all Local Governments to report what amendments if any, were
required in the law prevailing in each province.

Because of the difficulties felt, the Legislative Department was requested to
be good enough to prepare and introduce into the Council of the Governor
Genera! jer making Laws and Regu’aticns a Bill prepared (on the line suggested).
applicable to all classes, extending to the whole of British India, embodying such
of the provisions of Act 40 to 1858, and Act 13 of 1874, as were suitable and
repealing the Acts and Regulations which related to the appointment of guardians
by the civil courts. It would be for the Legislative Department to consider what
further detailed provisions may usefully be inserted in the Bill, in order that
the proposed measure may be made as complete and comprehensive as possible.
A second Bill might be necessary in order to make the amendments required in
Chapter 31 of the Code of Civil Procedure then inforce’

On the whole, therefore, it was considered proper to propose a comprehensive
and self-contained law that would apply to the whole of British India.

A draft Bill prepared by the Legislative Department was, under the autho-
rity of a Government Resolution, circulated for comments to local governments,
judges, the bar and the public.

It was in this background that the Bil! was introduced’ in 1886 in the Council
of the Governor General.

TNationa! “chives File relating to Act 8 of 1890, Pages 7—8/ notes.
sNational Archives, File relating to Act 8 of 1890, page 3/correspondence.
’Statement of Objects and Reasons, Gazette of India (Jan.-June 1886), page 76.


W
VI The Bill of 1886 and proceedings thereon

The following abstract of the proceedings of the Council of the Governor- proceedings

General of India relating to the Bill are of interest’: — of Governor
General in
“GUARDIANS AND WARDS BILL Counell.

The Hon'ble Mr. Scoble presented the Report of the Select Committee
on the Bill to consolidate and amend the law relating to Guardian and Ward.
He said?:—

“This Bill was introduced nearly four years ago by my hon’bie friend
Mr. Ilbert,? and, as the constitution of the Council has changed considerably
since its introduction, I think it desirable, in presenting the Report of the
Select Commiitee, to say a few words as to the objects of the measu e and the
general scope of its provisions.

“The Hindu and Muhammadan, as weil as the “English, law lays down
certain general principles regarding the relationship of guardian and ward.
aad the application of these general principles has been regulated by several
enactments of the Indian legislature. Besides the numerous local Regula-
tions and Acts constituting Courts of Wards for the different Provinces, and
defining their powers and duties, there are several Acts of this Council
making provisions for the care of the persons and property of Hindu and
Muhammadan minors not brought under the superintendence of these Courts.
Act XL of 1858 was passed with this object for the Bengal Presidency, and
its operation extends also to the North-Western Provinces and Cudh, the
Punjab, Lower ma, the Centra! Provinces 2nd Ajmere. Act XX of 1864
reproduces for the Bombay Presidency, with some variations, the Bengal Act
of 1858. Act IX of 1861 amends the law for hearing suits relative to the
custody and guardianship of minors in British India generally. As regards
minors who are European British subjects, the Supreme Courts, and after-
wards the High Courts, had jurisdiction under their Charters; and Act XIII
of 1873 provided for minor of this class resident in those parts of the country
to which the Jurisdiction of the Chartered High Court does not extend.

“In 1881 the Bombay Government drew attention to certain defects in
Act XX of 1864, and suggested an amendment of the Act in order to remove
difficulties which had been experienced in the administration of minors’
estates under its provisions. Examination showed not only that the Bombay
criticisms were sound as regards the particular Act in force in that Presi-
dency but that several of them were applicable to the Bengal Act also, end
that there was room for material improvement both in the form and in the
substance of the Acts generally. Before taking action, however, Local Gov-
ermments and other authorities were consulted, with the result that the Bill
now before the Council was introduced by Mr. Ilbert on the 12th March,
1886.

“In his speech on that occassion my hon’ble friend indicated with great
clearness the lines on which the Bill had been framed.

~*Nothing’ he said, ‘can be further from my intention than to interfere
with Hindu family customs or usages, or to force Hindu or Muhammadan
family law into unnatural conformity with English law. But, on looking into
the European British Minors Act, which was framed with special reference

"National Archiv afive. Depai ६26. -
Guardians and Wards Act 1890—App
*Gazatte of india, January iv Jane 1890, Part VI, page 36.

Statement of Objects and Reasons: Gazette of india, January to June 1886, page 76.

nt (कार, 1890), Proceedings Nos. 1 io
ix A23.


8

to the requirements of what may be “called English minors, it appeared to
me that almost all its simple and general provisions were applicable, or might
with a little modification be made applicable, to Hindus and Muhammadans
as well as to English guardians......Accordingly, what I have done has been
to take as my model the European British Minors Act, which is the latest
and fullest of the indian Acts relating to guardians, and to frame on its
lines an Act applicable as a whole to all classes of the community, but con-

taining a few provisions limited in their application to particular classes
..It is not intended by this measure to make any alteration in Hindu or

Muhammadan family law’.

“In the second place, my hon’ble friend stated'—

“The Bill will not repeal or supersede the enactments relating to the
different Courts of Wards. The provisions of those enactments, he said,
‘are intimately connected with the administrative machinery of the different
Provinces; and it would be either impossible, or at least very difficult, to

* supersede them by a general Act applying to the whole of India. “They will
accordingly be left outstanding. The Bill will relate only to such guardians
as are appointed or recognised by the ordinary Civil Courts, and there will
be an express saving for the jurisdiction and authority of the different Courts
of. wards.”

“Lastly, my hon’ble friend proposed,

‘in deference to what appear to be the views of the High Courts on
this point,...... that the jurisdiction of the High Courts under their Charters
is to be maintained alongside of their jurisdiction under the Act’.

“Since the Bill came into my hands the principles thus laid down have
been carefully adhered to. Its provisions have been most attentively ccnsi-
dered by two Select Committees, and it has been twice referred for opinion
to Loca] Governments. If it now fails of completeness as a consolidation of
the law on the subject to which it relates, it is not for want of consideration,
but because consideration has shown the difficulties which stand in the way
of complete treatment of so complicated a subject. Ad ea quae frequentius
accidunt jura adaptuntur: exceptional cases must be left to be dealt with
by the Courts of Law, as they arise.”

Vii. Enactments repealed.

‘The Act of 1890 replaced the pre-existing enactments. or so much thereof
as was surviving. The following enactments were repealed? by the Act:—

Num'er and year Title or subject Extent of repeal

Acts of the Governor General in Council

14 of 1858 Minors (Madras) The whole.
40 of 1858 inors (Bengal) So much as had not been repealed.
20 of 1864 Minors (Bombay) The whole.
9 of 1861 Minors The whole.
कण 1870 Couri-fees Section 19 H, and article 10 of Schedule 1.
4of i872 Punjab Laws So far as it related to Act 40 of 1858.
19 of i873 -Provinces. Scetion 258.
IMr. Ibert.
National Archives, Legislative Department Papers relating to the Act, Appendix 0, page 14.



79
Number and year Title or subject Extent of repe:
13 of 1874 European British Min The whole.
15 of 1874 Laws Local Extent So far as it related to any enactment re-
pealed by this Act.
17 of 1875 Burma Courts Section 96.
20 of 1875 Central Provinces Laws So far as it related to Act 40 of 1858.
18 of 1876 Oudh Laws So far as it related to Act 40 of 1858.

Madras Regulations

Sof 1804 Court of Wards Section 20, and so much of sections 21 and,
22 as related to persons and property of
minors not subject to the superintendence
of the Court of Wards.

10 of 1831 Minors’ Estates Section 3.

VIII. Age of majority

History of the legislation relating to majority in India is also a fascinating History of legis-
topic! The Hindu and Muslim laws current in Bengal with reference to the !ation on majority.
age of majority were recognised in Bengal by the Bengal Regulation 10 of 19732

which declared that minority with respect to both Hindus and Muslims was limited
to the expiration of the fifteenth year. That scction was, however, rescinded by
Bengal Regulation 26 of 1793, by which" the minority of Hindu and Muslim pro-
prietors of estates paying revenue to Government, was declared to extend to the
end of the eighteenth year.

The next enactment. affecting the age of majority of Hindus and Mahomedans
in Bengal was Act 40 of 1858 (the Bengal Minors Act), which provided for the

care by the Civil Court of the persons and property of minors (not being European
British subjects), who had not been brought under the superintendence of the
Court of Wards. For the purposes of that Act the age of majority was fixed

at eighteen years.' Act 40 of 1858 has since been repealed.*

By the Bengal Court of Wards Act’, which placed under the superintendence
of the Court of Wards all mino- proprietors of entire estate (other than pro-
prietors who were subject to the jurisdiction as respects infants of a High Court),
the word “minor” was defined’ as a person under the age of eighteen years.

This Act was repealed in 1879, and the repealing Act* defined a “minor”
as a person who had not completed his age of twenty-one years.

Madras Regulation 5 of 1804, which inter alia constituted a Court of Wards? Madras |
for the Madras Presidency, provided" that “where minors may succeed to herit- Regulation
able property. they shall not, in any case. be competent to take charge of, or to

administer their own affairs during the period of their minority, and for the better
understanding thereof the duration of minority shall, without exception, continue
until the completion of the eighteenth yeur of age.”

‘Trevelyan. The Law relating 16 Minors (1912), pages 4-5.
*Section 28, Bengal Regulation 10 of 1793 (which established the Court of Wards).

“Section 2. The unrepealed portions of Regulation 26 of 17903, were repealed by Act 29 of
1871, save as therein provided.

‘Section 26, Act 40 of 1858.

*Guardians and Wards Act, 1890.

“Act 4 of 1870 (Bengal Court of Wards Act).

"Section 2. Bengal Court of Wards Act (4 of 1870).

‘Section 3, Benga! Court of Wards Act, 1879 (Act 9, Bengal Coce of 1879).
*That Regulation was repealed by section 2, Madras Act 1 of 1962.
Section 4 Madras Regulation 5 of 1804 (Coust of Wards).

4-2 M of LI & CA/ND/80



Rombay law and
Madras law.

Age of majo-
rity for spe-
cial purposes.

Controversy
as to Bengal
Minors Act.

Indian
Majority
Act. 1875,

Uniform age
adopted in
1890.

80

The Bombay Minors Act (20 of 1864) which was in force in the Bombay Pre-
sidency contained provisions similar to these of Act 40 of 1858, ‘The Madras
Minors Act (14 of 1858) contained somewhat similar provisions.

To add to the complications of the law as to the age of majority before
the passing of the Indian Majority Act 9 of 1875, there were several other
cnactments fixing the age of majority for the specia! purposes of such Acts.’ The
enactnents pointed in different directions for different purposes.

In the Bengal Mino s Act (40 of 1858). the definition of the word “minor”
was contained in section 26, which laid down, “for the purposes of this Act,
every person shall be held to be a minor who has not attained the age of 18
years”. This section had been the subject of conflicting interpretations in Cal-
cutta. According to one view, 18 was the age of majority only in cases where the
estate of the minor had been brought under the charge of the Civil Court. Accor-
ding to another view, whether or not the intervention of the Civil Court be in-
voked. 18 was the limit of minority.

For example, Mr. Justice Phear held that the expression “for the purposes”

in section 26 “meant relative to all that forms the subject of this Act.” ic., the
protection ot the person and property of infants. He thus made 18 years the
limit of minority for all purposes of contract. Mr. Justice Jackson carried this
even further, holding that the age of minority was for all purposes extended to 18

years. The discussion on this point is contained in the undermentioned rulings:
1 WRGR. 75
5 WRCR.
10 W.RE.B.

कक W.R.G.R. 452.
5 B.L.R. 81.

TW] W.R.G.R, 561.
7 B.L.R. 607.
8 B.L.R. $79.
10 B.L.R. 240.

The law respecting majority thus remained in an unsettled state untit the
Indian Majority Act of 1875 wes passed. That Act (as its preamble states) was
passed for prolonging the peroid of non-age and attaining more uniformity and
certainty respecting the age of majority in case of persons domiciled in British
India.

The Act of 1890 adopted a uniform age for all purposes for appointing a
guardian. This was achieved by adopting. by reference, the definition of “minor”,
as given in the Majority Act, 1875. The age as given in that Act was 18 years.
Once a guardian was appointed, the age of majority was extended to 21 years.
The latter result was achieved by amending the Indian Majority Act, 1875—an
amendment effected by the Act of 1890.

1$ee—

(वो The Indian Succession Act (10 of 1865). section 3, applied to Hindus by the Hindu Wills
Act (21 of 1870), section 6.

(b) The Limitation Act (9 of 1871). section 3.
(०) The Government Saving Bank Act (5 of 1973).
(व) Indian Christian Marriage Act (16 of 1872), section 3.
(०) The N.W-P. Land Revenue Act (19 of 1873), section 3(12).
National Archives, File relating to Act 8 of 1890, page 91 correspondence.



APPENDIX 3

ENGIISH LAW, AND ITS EVOLUTION

I. Introductory

English law on the subject of guardianship of minors and custody of children
is not to be found codified in one single enactment. So much of it as is statutory
is scattered in several enactments. Part of it is stil] non-statutory. Broadly speak-
ing, the sources of the English law on the subject are the following: —

(1) Legislation on the subject of guardianship and custody (including
testamentary guardianship).

(2) Legislation relating to children.

(3) The law relating to inherent jurisdiction of the High Court in rela-
tion to wardship.

(4) The law relating to habeas corpus, in so far as it deals with the
recovery of custody of minors below the age of discretion.

Legislation on the subject. particularly the statutes passed during the last
half a century or so, shows that mvch of the field has come to be regulated by
the State. The “rights” of the parents have receded into the background, while
the welfare of the child has come into the foreground. This stage has rot, how-
ever, been reached without considerable experimentation. Even now, the comp-
lexity of the legislation relating to children and the frequency with which it has
been subjected to amendment, rather shows that the final solution to the problem
of securing the welfare of children is not within easy reach.

A very brief history of the manner in which the law has evolved would not
be out of place.

The law on the subject of guardianship of infants has undergone great
changes in recent years.’ Originally based largely on the patriarchal and feudal
theories of the family. it was readjusted to modern conditions on the abolition
of feudal tenures in 1660; and again, with the increasing recognition of the equa-
lity of husbands and wives before the law, in 1886 and 1925. The key-note of
the law is, however, not the traditional rights of the father, nor the abstract rights
of the mother. but the welfare of the child: and this principle was expressly affir-
med by the Act of 1925 as the ‘first and paramount consideration’.

The principle has been reiterated’ in the Act of 1971, and again in the
Act of 1973.

In this process, the two great instruments of law reform—equity and legisla-
tion—have played a notable part. The role of judicial decision in common law
courts has been limited. because of the constraints that attach to improvement
in the law by the judicial process,

1enks, The Book of English Law (1953), pages 229-230.
2The Tenures Abolition Act, 1660.
*The Tenures Abolition Act, 1660.

al

Introduction.

Evolution
of Jaw.

Evolution in
recent times.


Significance.

Patria potestas
and development
of puardian-
ship.

Concept of
Tutela,

Roman law as
to puberty.

Persons above
puberty.

Statutory
provisions

as to persons
above puberty,

82

वा, Roman law

Before we deal with the history of legislation in England, it would be appro-
priate to refer briefly to certain interesting features of Roman law. Much of the
modern law of guardianship owes its genesis—if not in the content, at least in
its concepts to the Roman law. For example, the classification of guardians
into legal, testamentary and certificated guardians, which we find in modern Tegal
systems, ha: a striking parallel in the scheme of the Roman law relating to tutela.
So have the topics of powers of guardians, legal safeguards and many other

matters. The very expression “minor” is ultimately derived from the ph:aseology
of Roman law.

In Roman law, by virtue of pairia potestas, the father was not only the iad
of the family. but had extensive powers. “Children begotten in lawful wedlook
are in the power of the parents.”' Guardianship in Roman law began as a
projection of the patria potestas into the future, with a view to protection of the
family property after the death of the testator? Protection of the person came
later, and did not assume importance until the institution of the “dative guardian”
{guardian appointed by the Magistrate) came into prominence.

There were two kinds of guardianship, distinguished as tutela and cura
(curatio) in Roman law.

Tutela was defined as “a right and power exercised over a free person who,

on account of tender years, cannot take care of himself, given and allowed by
civil [8७7४

Where the father was alive, patria potestas was in operation and the ques-
tion of tutela did not arise, in general. The father could also make a testamentary

appointment of guardianship. In certain situations, where the above types of
guardians did not exist. certain Roman Magistrates had power to appoint magis-
terial guardians (twtela dativa). In the city of Rome, there was a special praetor
for the purpose.

Tutela was integrally linked with puberty. In the theory of the Roman
law, 8 person came in the full enjoyment of his personal and proprietary rights
on the attainment of puberty (14 years for boys and 12 years for girls). Upto
the age of pube ty. his or her interests were looked after, and protected, by the
“tutor” in the absence of the father. The essence of tutela consisted in the assis-
tance which the tutor had to give to enable juristic acts to be performed by the
person below age. This was because of the doctrine that as such persons were

not legally independent persons (sii juris), their transactions required the ap-
proval of a guardian (tutor).

Tutela ceased at puberty, but certain other developments relevant to the
protection cf persons who had attained puberty should be noted. By an “inter-
dict”, the Praetor could nullify transactions into which a person under 25 had
centered because of his lack of business sense.*

An early statute allowed persons above the age of puberty (14 for males
and 12 for females as stated}, and below the age of 25 years, to be placed under

the femporary control of curators, without whose consent certain alienations of

‘Justinian, Institutes, Book 1, title 9, section 86.

*Lee, Elements of Roman Law (1955), page 91. para 137.
Servius (Consul B.C. 51, First Commentary on the Edict), quoted by Justinian.
‘*Encytopaedia Americana, “Roman Law—-Law of Persons—Guardianship”.
‘Derrett, Introduction to Legal Systems 1968, page 25.



83

Property could not be made. At a later date, Emperor Marcus Aurelius initiated
the practice of allowing the minor to get a permanent curator appointed.’

The parallel institution of cura minorium was thus developed, to save young
Persons from the consequences of their own lack of judgment at an age over
puberty. This was meant for peisons below 25. (Minor XXV Anniis). In the
beginning, the praetor exercised certain powers in individual cases to prevent over-
reaching of the minor. Later, a curator was appointed on the minor's applica-
tion’ In tater law. the distinction between. tutor and curator was progressively
blurred.

The tutela impuberum (upto puberty) in the classical law corresponds broadly ‘rutela in
to the English concept of guardianship of infants, but its original purpose was Roman iaw |
हि दि am , «sche compared with
somewhat diflerent from the modern one of guardianship. Modern guardianship present Eng-
is concerned exclusively with the interest of the ward, Primitive tutela was con- lish doctrine.
cerned more with the rights of the guardian,

As to the persons who could be gua‘dians, the earlier rule’ in Roman law Right of |
was that the nearest male agnate was the guardian in the case of a person under *¥#Mlanship.
puberty (11 for males. 12 for females, as already stated), if the minor was not
under pattia potestas.” Later. cognates were substituted by Justinian, Being
based on a rule of law, this guardianship was called tutela legitima—an expres-
sion derived from the lex of the Twelve Tables (450 B.C.). But the father could

appoint a testamentary guardian—rusor testamentarius—and in later times, failing
both of such guardians, a magistrate would appoint a tutor.

Women could not be “tutors” in Roman law. In fact, they themselves had
to be under a “tutor” (if they were not under patria potestas), except in certain

special cases (e.g. vestal virgins). This position slowly underwent modification
and was abolished in 410 A.D.

The Roman Jaw had many provisions for protecting wards against mal-admi- Provisions
nistration by, or misconduct of. tutors, Any person other than the ward could Ter Protec.
take proceedings for the removal of a tutor on the ground of mis-conduct--a pro-
vision originating in the Twelve Tables. After the te-mination of guardianship,
the ward or his heirs could file an action for liquidation of accounts and could
claim double damages against a tutor who had been guilty of embezzlement--also
a provision dating from the Twelve Tables.” In the later Republic, a more general
remedy cailed the actio tutelae could lie after the termination of the guardianship.

Guardians were sometimes required to furnish security, and this security could Security.
be demanded even from legal guardians in appropriate cases." If the Magistrate.
in a case requiring security, failed to take it, he exposed himself to a subsidiary
action for consequential damages." The tutor had to make an invento:y of the
estate of the pupil and his own property was subject to a general “hypothec”-—

"Lee, Elements of Roman Law (1955), page 93.

*Lustinian, Institutes, Book 1, Title 23, sections 139-141.
*Nicholas, Roman Law (1975 reprint), pages 93-94.

‘Nicholas, Roman Law (1975 reprint), page 90.

*Nicholas, Roman Law (1975 reprint), page 90.

neyclopacdia Britannica— “Roman Law-—Law of Persons--Gnardianship”.
*Lee. Elements of Roman Law (1955), page 87, para 128.
*Nicholas, Roman Law (1975 reprint), page 95.

"Lee, Elements of Roman Law (1955), 9885 90, para 136.

“Lee, Elements of Roman Law (1955), page 90, para 136, item 4.
“Lee, Elements of Roman Law (1955), Pages 90-91, para 136, item 4.



Lunatics,

Crown
as feudal
overlord.

View of
Pollock and
Maitland

Father's right
after end of

feudal system.

Position upto
the sixties

bd

a charge which law created in favour of a pupil or a minor over the whole
of the estate of the tutor or curatot.

The Roman law had also a provision for the appointment of curators of
as well as an institution for the guardianship of the spendthrift (cura
prodigi:.* The latter institution is understood to be still in force in the civil law
system in some countries. By tie law of The Twelve Tables, mad men (furiosi)
were placed under the curatorship of the nearest agnate.

ALL, ॥॥९ Asiddie Age--Judicature Act

40 pesilou in England way uow be dealt with, lo tie Middle Ages the
Crown as feudal overlord cxcicised a guardianship over the person and estate of
jis iutant teuanis-m-chicl” its guardiansitip, which was exceedingly profitable
to tue guardian, was enforced im tie Cowi of Wards, but on the abolition of that
court and of ie system of miliaiy icaures, at the Kestoration, the feudal aspect
of this jurisdiciion vanished. ihe Crown, aowever, did not abandon the infant
when it ceased to be able to make a profit out of him. On the contrary, it came
to claim, as ‘paresis paririuc”’ protective jurisdiction over all infants in the king-
dom, and this jurisdiction was entrusted to the Court of Chancery. It would be
impossible to go into the details of the jurisdiction here, but we may notice that
the court could appoint guardians of the infant whenever, through the death
or misconduct of the parents this course was necessary; and even though no
guardian was appointed, it was possible by taking the appropriate steps to con-
stitute the infant a ward of the court, with the result that no important step in
connection with his upbringing could be taken without the court’s sanction. This
jurisdiction in cases of infancy still exists, and was exercised by the Chancery
Division of the High Court’ till recently. It has now been transferred to the
new Family Division.

Pollock and Maitland make this observation’ as to the state of the law in
earlier times :—

“This part of our Jaw will scem strange to those who know anything
of its next of kin. Here in England old family arrangements have been
shattered by seignorical claims, and the King’s Court has felt itself so strong
that it has had no need to re-construct a comprehensive law of wardship.
That the King should protect all who have no other protector, that he is
the guardian above all guardians, is an idea which has become exceptionally
proniinent in this much governed country. The King’s Justices see no great
reason why every infant should have a permanent guardian because they
believe they can do full justice to infants.”

When the feudal system came to an end, the position changed. Where the
Court did not appoint a guardian, the father’s right to control and custody of his
children was, except as limited by statute (e.g. section 4, Custody of Children Act,
1891), absolute --cven against the mother.

IV. The position before the Judicature Acts

Upto the sixties of the last century, the father's right was. by and large, predo-
minant in England. To some extent, the rigour of the law was softened by the

Lee, Elemeats of Raman Law (1955). page 177. para 263 and page 91, para 136, item 5.
neyclopaedia Tritannica~ + Roman Law- Law of Persons—Guardianship”.
*Radeliffe and Cross The English Legal System (1971), page 144.

G. Cross. “Wards of Court” (1967) 83 L.Q.R. 200-14

sPollock & Maitland, History of English Law, Vol. 2, page 312.



85

jurisdiction exercisable by the Court of Chancery in regard to infants. The
doctrine of “welfare of the child” was slowly iinding its feet, in so far as, along
with the right of the father, it was considered relevant to consider the welfare
of the minor whenever the circumstances of the case so justified it.

The parent, it has been said’, is guardian by nature and nurture—a view Guardianship

taken bol, by the Court of Chauecry and by the courts of common Jaw.i—2 OY nature

View of
Canoutcal

Jhis doctiine of guardianship “by nature and nurture” would appear to be
based upon the docirine of natural justice as derived fiom antiquity : --

“Le pics ou la mich, ines un elanger ue peut justilice Je pois d'un enfant
per mason de norture” (Tbe father or ie mother may take possession
of a child by tason of nurture but not a stranger”; per Danby, J., Year
Book. हे bdw. 4, Wich 21. 2).

‘The carly canon law (with which equitable views are closely associated)
exhibits the same view:

“Infants iniidelium licite haptizatur, si parentes idest pater, mater, avus,
avia val tutores, consentant”: Codex, Juris Canonici, Can. 750, paraphrased.

the Summa iheoiogica reveals the same mediaeval attitude concerning the
righis (both as to religion and as 10 custody) of parents over their children, in
an extreme case, thus:

“It is against natural justice if a child before coming to the use ot
reason were to be taken away from its parents’ custody, or anything done
10 it against its parents’ wish.” “A son before coming to the use of reason is
under his father’s care”. [Part II (second part), question 10, art. 12]; as to
religion “Conira justiiiam naturalem esset, si pucri invitis parentibus bapti-
zarentur”; (Summa Theologica, 3, Question 68, art. 10).

The Custody of Infants Act, 1839 (Talfourd’s Act), empowered the Court |.
of Chancery to give the mother,"| -

4i) custody of her children untif the ase of seven, and

(ii) access to them until the children come of age.

But a mother guilty of adultery was excluded" from these rights. The domi-
nance of the father continued.

‘See Carroll (1.30) All E R Rep at page 219.
*£x parte Hopkins, (1732) 24 E.R. 1099, L.C.
8StilemanV Ashdown, (1742) 2 Atk. 177: 26 BAR. 688, L.C.; Sir
‘De Maneville V De Mat 2
3 Re Marquis of S: ical Comrs., (1876) 2 Ch. D. 29 (C.A.).

SEx parte Skinner (1824) 9 Moore, 0.72, 278 (Rule at common law).

7R. ve De Manneyille, (1804) 5 East, 221; 1 Smih. K.B. 358; 102 E.R. 1054. (Child an infant

at the breast).

हाल Hakewill, (1852) 12 0.8, 223; 138 E.R. 888.

3/९. ४. Greenhill. (1836) 4 Ad. & El. 624.

MR. ५. Clark», Re Race. (1957) 7 E. & B. 186; 119 E.R. 1217.
"Rv. Howes. Ex parte Borford. (1860) 3 UTR. 467.
(वाह ४. Cartlidige (1862) 2 Sw. & Vr. 567; 164 ER. 1117.
"See Re Carroll. (1930) AN E.R. at page 218.

Custody of Infants Act, 1839.

wTalfoutd’s Act, 1839 (2 & 3 Vie. ०. 54).

von on Tafan's (1926), page 91



Case of
Agra Ellis

86

The cases of Agar-Ellis' furnish a strong example of the vigorous enforce-

ment of the rights of the parents—especially, the father. The conflict there was

between a Protestant father and a Roman Catholic mother, the father asserting
his rights in a way in which members of the Court as men disapproved of. Cotton,

Lids,

> expressed his view thus in one of the cases :°

“It has been said that we ought to consider the interest of the ward.
Undoubtedly. But this court holds the principle that when, by birth, a
child is subject to a father, it is for the general interest of families and for
the general interest of children, and sally for the interest of the particular
infant, tat the court should not, cacept in very extreme cases, interfere with
the discretion of the father, but leave him io responsibility of cxercising
that power which nature has given him by the birth of the child.”

and Bowen, LJ. (24 Ch. 9. at page 337 Agar-Ellis) observed:

Legis‘otive

“Lhe court must never torget, and will never forget, first of all, the
rights of family life, which are sacred. 1 think all that could be said on
that subject has been said far better than 1 could repeat it by Kindersley.
V.C., in the case of Re Curtis,’ and the cases to which he there, refers.
Those are as to the rights of family life. Then we must regard the benefit
of the infant; but then it musi be :emembered that if the words ‘benefit of
the infant’ are used in any but the accurate sense, it would be a fallacious
test to apply to the way the court exercises its jurisdiction over the infant
by way of interference with the father. It is not the benefit to the infant
as conceived by the court, but it must be the benefit to the infant having
regard to the natural law which points out that the father knows far better’
as a rule what is good for his children than a court of justice can.

*But in that case the court was so slow to decide anything as to religion
adverse to the possible views of the parent that, whereas “Malins, V. C.,
had made an order that the children should be brought up as members of the
Church of England, the Court of Appeal, while arriving at the same result,
struck out the declaration, leaving the matter to the decision of the father.”

These cases, which excited strong feeling at the time owing to the rival

devel: pments claims of father and mother, were probably one of the causes which led to the

8 to custody

insertion of section 5 of the Guardianship of Infants Act, 1886, which provided :*

“The court may, upon the application of the mother of any infant
(who may apply without next friend), make such order as it may think fit
regarding the custody of such infant and the right of access thereto of either
parent. having regard to the welfare of the infant, and to the conduct of
the parents, and to the wishes as well of the mother as of the father
and may alter, vary, or discharge such order on the application of either
parent, or, after the death of either parent, of any guardian under this Act,
and in every case may make such order respecting the costs of the mother
and the “liability of the father for the same or otherwise as to costs as it
may think just.”

ए. Lasictles, (1878) 10 Ch. ए. 49; (18893) >व Ch, DL 317.
ch. 317, 334

2Re Curtis, (1839) 28 LJ. Ch. 458; sub nom. Curtis ४- Curtis. 34 1..1.0,5$. 10.
“Emphasis added.

*Section 5. Guatdianship of Infants Act, 1886 (49 & 50 Vic. 6. 27)-



87

Court and (since 1886) by country courts was extended (subject to certain limita-
(as to religion of the child): --

“Upon any application by the parent for the production or the custody
of a child, if the court is of opinion that the parent ought not to have the
custody of the child, and that the child is being brought up in a different
religion to that in which the parent has a legal right to require that the
child should be brought up, the court shall have power to make such order
as it may think fit to sccure that the child be brought up in the religion in
which the parent has a legal right to require that the child should — be
brought up. Nothing in this Act contained shall interfere with or alfect
the power of the Court to consult the wishes of the child in considering
what order ought to be made, or diminish the right which any child now
possesses to the exercise of its own free choice.”

¥. Position after the Judicature Acts

After the Judicature Acts. the Court of King’s Bench, which had previously
acted on the strict common law views of parental rights, was enabled, by the
fusion of law and equity prevailing, to add to its powers the equitable view of
the Court of Chancery representing the King as parents patriae.* The Judicature
Act expressly provided that equity shall prevail. But, the court still vigorously
enforced the right of the parents, especially of the father, to control the religious
education of a young child.’

However, since the middie of the nineteenth century, Parliament has inter-
vened in a series of statutes, the effect of which has been to whittle down the
father’s rights further and also to give the mother positive rights to custody
which even equity did not accord to her.‘

The process of reform initiated* in 1839 was gathering momentum.

Custody of Infants Act, 1873.—-This Act extended the principal of Talfourd’s
Act of 1839. by empowering the court’ to give the mother custody until the
child reached the age of 16. It did not, however, repeat the proviso relating
to her adultery. Section 2, which is still in force, introduced a further reform,
which had long been overdue, by enacting that agreements as to custody or
control in separation deeds (which had formerly been void as contrary to public
policy) should be enforceable so Jong as they were for the child's benctit.

Guardianship of Infants Act, 1886.—This further extended the provisions of
the earlier Acts by empowering the Court to give the mother custody of her
children until they reached the age of 21. Furthermore, the father was now
stopped from defeating the mother’s rights after his death by appointing a testa-
mentary guardian, for it was enacted that the mother was to act jointly with any
guardian so appointed, and for the first time she herself was given limited powers
to appoint testamentary guardians.

Custody of Children Act, 1891.—This Act was passed as the direct result
of a number of cases in which parents had succeeded in recovering from Dr.

'Seetion 4. Custody of Children Act. 1891 (15 & 16 Geol 5 ०. 45).

°F. section 44, Supreme Court of Judicature Consolidation Act, 1925.
जल Carrell. (1930) AN E.R. Rep. at pages 200-201

‘Bromley, Family Law (1971), pages 269-270.

Custody of Infants Act, 1839,

*Bromlcy, Family Law (1971), pages 269-270.

Act of 1891.

Position
after Judi-
cature Act,

Provisions
as to claims
lor custody.


How far wel-
fare of child
paramount in
Chancery.

Father
as Tegal
guardian,

88

Barnardo children whom they had placed in his now famous “homes”, or whom
they had abandoned and he had taken. It provides that if a parent has aban-
doned or deserted his (or her) child, the burden shall shift to him to prove that
he is fit to have custody of the child claimed and that the court may refuse to
give him possession of the child altogether (section 1). Moreover, if at the
time of the parent's application for custody the child is being brought up by
another person, the court may now, upon awarding custody to the parent. order
him to pay the whole or part of the costs incurred in bringing it up (section 2).

Guardianship of Lifants Net, 125. Mt may be noted that the Act of 1925
gave statutory effect to the rule that im any dispute relating to a child the court
must regard its welfare as the first and paramount cor ation. — It also com-
pleted the process of assimilation of the parents’ rights by enacting that neither
the father nor the mother should from any other point of view be regarded as
having a claim superior to the other and by giving to the mother the same right
to appoint testamentary guardians as the father. Jurisdiction to make orders
relating to custody etc. which had formerly been exercisable only by the High
Court and {since 1886) by county courts was extended {subject to certain limita-
tions) to magistrates’ courts.

There is some controversy as to the extent to which the principle of “wel-
fare was regarded as paramount in Chancery. Speaking of the Guardianship
Act, 1925, Lord Donovan remarked in 1969, that it seems “incredible” that
Parliament should have passed such an enactment as section 1 of the Act of
1925, if the position were that it “made no difference at all to the law as already
expounded by the judges”. He did not agree that the Act “enacted no new iaw”.

On the other hand, Lord Upjohn maintained that the Act “enshrined the
view of the Chancery Courts’? and Lord Guest apparently agreed with him?

On balance, it would seem that there was some lingering uncertainty (when
the Bil was drafted, as to the extent to which the “welfare” principle had cn-
croached on basic parental rights.

In the Act of 1925, the language of the opening section—‘Where in any
proceeding before “any court . the custody or upbringing of an infant
न is in question, the court, in deciding that question, shall regard the welfare
of the infant as the first and paramount consideration... .”--seemed to place
the matter beyond all doubt. Yet, astonishingly, this did not prove to be so.
Another forty-four years were to pass' before it was settled that welfare consi-
derations really must predominate in all custody proceedings.

VI. Modem developments
The position in 1953 was as follows :-—*

“Subject to this fundamental principle (welfare of the child) an infant’s
father still remains his sole legal guardian during his (the father’s) life-
time; but this fact, of course, adds little, if anything, to the father’s primary
position as a parent. On the father’s death, the infant’s mother becomes,
either sole guardian, or guardian jointly with a guardian appointed by the
deed or will of the father, or, in default, by the Court. And, even during
Av. C. (1970) A.C. 668. 7270: (1969) 1 AILE.R. 788, 834. 835.

Sv. € (1970) A.C. 668, 7247: (1969) 788. 832.

ay. ७. C., (1970) A.C. 668, 697F,

4J. ७. ८., (1970) A.C. 668.

‘Jenks, Book of English Law (1953), pages 229-230.



89

the father’s lifetime, the mother has the same right to apply to the Court in
respect of any maticr wiecling the infant as the father has, and an equal
right to appoint by deed or will a guardian to act after her death as co-
guardian with lier surviving husband, or, if he is dead, the guardian appointed
by him. In the event of diilerences of opinion between the surviving parent
and the guardian appointed by the deceased parent, the Court may award
sole custody of the infant to either, as it may consider best for the welfare
of the infant.”

VIL. Present position

Lhe punciptes on which quesuous relating to custody, upbringing vtec. of Custody—

minors are (0 be decided, 18 thus aid down in the Liguish Act of 1971's -- हि Act

“1. Where in any proceedings before any Court (whether or not a
court as deiined in section 15 of this Act)

(a) the custody or upbringing of a minor;

(09) the administration of any property belonging to or held on
trust for a minor, or the application of the income thercof,

is in question, the court, in deciding that question, shall regard the welfare
of the minor as the first and paramount consideration, and shail not take
into consideration whether, from any other point of view, the claim of the
father, or any right at common law possessed by the father, in respect of
such custody, upbringing, administration or application is superior to that of
the mother, or the claim of the mother is superior to that of the father.”

Section 1(1) of the Guardianship Act, 1973 now provides as follows :-- Act of 1973.

“1.—(1) In relation to the custody or upbringing of a minor, and in
relation to the administration of any property belonging to or held in trust
for a minor or the application of income of any such property, a mother
shall have the same rights and authority as the law allows to a father, and
the rights and authority of mother and father shall be equal and be exercisa-
ble by either without the other.

In proceedings for custody etc. such equality was already provided in 1971.1
But in the absence of such proceedings, the father’s rights prevailed” That posi-
tion is also now modificd by the Act of 1973 referred to above.

This would seem to have practically abolished the rule of the common law Father as

. wee हि tural
whereunder the natural guardian of legitimate child? was the father, and the naatdian
mother did not share the guardianship as such while he is alive. gad. mether's

VILL. Custody

Coming specifically to the topic of custody of children, the father’s right History of
to custody of his legitimate children was complete and exclusive in England in right dy.
the middle ages. It was only in the 19th century‘ that the mother could be .

‘Section |, Guardianship of Minors Act. 1971.

"Tenures Abolition Act. 1660.

पाए, p. Hopkins, (1732) 3 p. Wins. 152, por Lord King L.C.; Re-Agar-Ellis, (1883) 24 Ch.D.
317, 335.

‘Custody of Infants Act, 1839 (2 & 3 Vie. ७. 54) (Repealed in 1873).


Iicgitimate
child.

Testamentary
suardianship.

90

awarded access to a child until the child reached the age of seven years. The
Act is said to have been passed after the judgement in R. V. Greenhill’ [See
Warde v. Warde, (1849) 2 Ph. 786]. Where there was no testamentary or Court
guardian, the mother was, in cquity, guardian for nurture: Later. the mother
could be awarded custody of a child until it reached the age of sixteen years.
In 1925,' the mother was given an equal right through the court to the custody of
the child and in 1971,° the mother was given exactly the same rights and autho-
rity as the law allows to the father in England.

As regards the illegitimate child, tie position was just the reverse in England.
Jn the middle ages, such a child was regarded as a filius nullius.” By the end of
the [9th century, the mother had the right of custody over her illegitimate child.”
The father had no right to custody even though the legislation imposed on him the
duty to maintain the illegitimate child. Upto 1971 this position continued, subject
to one modification, namely, that in certain cases the orders for custody could
not be passed without the father’s consent. Now, both the parents have the saine
equal right to apply to the court for custody of the illegitimate child.

1X. Testamentary guardianship

Testamentary guardianship in England is based on statute. The earhest
statute’ was passed in the time of Charles the Second. It conferred power on the
father to appoint a guardian by deed or will for an infant upto the age of 21
years. The father himself need not be a major (under the Statute as originally
enacted). Later, however, this concession was restricted to deeds" and only a major
can now appoint a guardian by will in England.

‘The testamentary powe: was hotly opposed by the King and his officers,
while it was dedulously supported by the Church and its dignitaries. Finally. the
Church triumphed. Until recently, the Ecclesiastical Courts dealt with all testa-
mentary matters and granted probate. So it was necessary, in the time of Charles
Il, to have a statute empowering the father to appoint a guardian.

This does not mean that under the Common Law the father had not the
right of guardianship. but under the peculiar tenures obtaining in England and
the law of primogeniture. the power of the father to appoint a guardian for his
heir was resisted till the legislature intervened.” The power to appoint a testa-
mentary guardian was later given to the mother also (in 1886).

X. Children’s Acts

Side by side with these developments as to guardianship and custody,
legislative measures for the welfare of children have come in quick succession, With
the passage of the latest Act—Children Act, 1975—this branch of the law has be-
come the most complex.

IR. ¥. Greerhill, (1836) 4 Ad. & El. 624.

2R. v. Clarke. (1857) 7 El. & 81. 186.

3Custody of Infants Act. 1873 (36-37 Vic. c. 12) and Guardianship of Infants Act, 1886 (40-
50 Vic. ¢. 27).

‘Guardianship of Infants Act, 1925 (15-16 Geo. 5 ०. 45).

8Section 1, Guardianship «f Minors Act, 1971.

Law Commission of India. 62nd Report (Workmen's Compensation Act)
2.4 to 2.6.

ardy Laws Amendment Act, 1872 (35-36 Vie. ०. 65).
*Scetions 9 and 14, Guardianship of Minors Act, 1971.
*Tenures Abolition Act, 1660. 12 Charles IT, ०. 24.

wThe Wills Act, 1837 (1 Vict. ०. 26, section 7).

UPgllock & Maitland, History of English Law, Vol. 2, page 312.



91

Originally, legislation for children provided for the care, protection, main-
tenance, welfare. training. cducation and rehabilitation of ncelected and delinqu-
ent children and for the trial of the later, The Children Acts contain claborate
provisions for the establishment of a specialised machinery in terms of juvenile/
children’s courts, remand/observation homes, certified/approved/special schools.
probation and after-care services. Besides, the Acts envisage an effective utilisa-
tion of voluntary welfare agencies at various stages of apprehension, treatment
and rehabilitation of children in need of care and protection.

The Children Act, 1975 expanded the scope of this legislation. Its provisions Children Act
may be thus summarised, so far as they concern the position in England. 0! 1975.

(i) The Act provides a means whereby, as an alternative to adoption, rela-
tives and others looking after children on a long term basis can apply for and
obtain the legal custody of the children. Such persons may apply for, what is
called, a “custodianship” order and this vests “legal custody” of the child in the
applicant, who becomes known as the child’s “custodian”. The Act thus introduces
a new concept. A “custodian” appears to be in a similar position to a parent
having custody of his child. but the Act deliberately refrains from giving him
the designation “guardian”. “Custodianship” may be said to be a new form of
guardianship though giving less rights and powers than guardianship, and to be
similar to. but not identical with. custody.

(ii) Section 33 provides that, on the application of any qualified person who
is not the mother or father of the child, the court may make a custodianship
order vesting legal custody of the child in the applicant. “Legal custody” is
defined in section 86. A person is “qualified” when (i) he is a relative or step-
parent and he has the consent of a person with custody and the child has had
his home with him for the three months preceding the application (though step-
parents are not qualified in certain circumstances [See section 33(5) and (8)]. or
(ii) he is anybody else, has the same consent and the child has had his home with
him for 12 months. including the three months preceding the application, or (iii)
he is anybody with whom a child has had his home for thee vears including
the three months preceding the application. So, where a child has lived for three
veats away from a person who has legal custody of him. the person. if anv. with
whom he has lived for that period is entitled to ask the court to make him the
custodian and sive him leeal custody. though such legal custody is not equivalent
to the legal custody the first person had.

(iii) Provision is made for certain snnplementarv orders to accomnanv a
“custodianship” order. Orders for access and maintenance may be made (section
24). Custodianshin orders may be revoked and varied (section 35).

(iv) A court is empowered. in cases where the reavirements for making an
adoption order have been satisfied. to make a custodianshin order instead. if it is
of the opinion that such an order would be more arpropriate. A custodianshin
order mav also be made in favour of someone where a narent has aonlied for
custody under the Gnardianshin of Minors Act. 1971. section 9 (see section 37).

{v) Section 38 provides a means whereby disnntes between inint custadians
ahout a child’s unbrineing can be resolved by the court making an order.

Provision is made for local anthority investieation of annlication for custo-
dianship orders, and for welfare reports to be obtained by the courts (sections
39-40).

(vi) Section 41 restricts. nending 2 court decision. the removal of a child
from an applicant for custodianship who has looked after him for three vears.


Habeas Corpus.

Nature of the
writ and its
unenforceability,

Age of
discretion

92

Further provisions deal with enforcement and effect of custodianship orders
(sections 42.43 & 44). Custodians are empowered to apply for affiliation orders in
certain circumstances (section 45).

XI. Habeas Corpus

In England, Habeas Corpus has also long been used to gain the custody of
infants. The writ is issued on the application of the party seeking custody and
is directed against whoev.-r has the control of the infant.’ Though. in theory. it still
rests on the idea of relieving an illegal restraint, the ordinary rules of family law
apply in custody cases. and the matter is heard in the Family Division (previously
the Chancery Division).

An application for custody is a proceeding which involves “not a cuestion of
liberty, but nurture. control and eduction”? As Scrutton ¥.J. said in his pictures-
que language! proceedings (hy way of habeas corpus) for custody are being used
“not for the hody. but for the soul of the infant”.

The essence of the writ habeas corps has always been to free the infant
from any unlawful restraint or ill-usace. and the court has never heen bound to
deliver him to anyone. Jf, therefore. the infant had reached years of discretion and
escaned beyond the control of the father. he would not be delivered to the father
without examination. hut would he allowed to elect where he should go.t Tn other
words. the right of the father to custady in such cases became unenforceable by
the father.—at any rate hy habeas corpus proceedines in a court of law—once the
infant had reached years of discretion. though the right continued to exist in
theory until the infant attained the age of twenty-one!

However, so long as the infant remained in the actual custody of the father,
the father’ had a legal right to the control of his infant children. and if the
infant were of the vears of discretion, the court would interfere only on the same
grounds as it would have interfered if the infant were under that age (though it
was recognised that a young child requires verv different treatment from an
older one. and conduct of a father which might he tolerated in the case of one
might be perfectly intolershle in the case of the other.

The ave of discretion was apnarently fonrfeen vears in the case of a male!
but, by arevment from the provisions of one statute® it was sixteen in the case
of a femate infant.

So far as concerned an iooitimate child. if seems that the infant could elect.
or at least its wishes won'd he taken into consideration. 88 soon as it had nassed
the age of nurfure! thouah the position was. of course, basically different in that
no one appeared to have had any rieht to the custody of an illegitimate child
after it had attained the coe of nurture.

‘Sharpe. Lew of Haheas Corpus (1976). pages 168, 169.

*Barnsrdo v. McHuge. (1891) 1 O.B. 194, 203 (Lord Evher M.R.).

®Re Carrol (1931 1 KB. 317, 331.

4. ९. Greenhill. (1836 4 A. & E. 624.

"See Hargreaves’s nute to Coke upon Littleton. 88b and Re Agar-Elfis, (1883) 24 Ch.D. 317.

*Re Agar-Fllis, (1882) 24 Ch.D. 317.

AR. v. Clarke. (1857) 7 FI. & BU. 186: Thomasset v. Thaorasset. (1894) p. 295.

The statute (1557) (4 & 5 Phillip & Mary 6. 8) relatcs te cbéuctior. .

Re Eland. (4841) 3 Man. & Gr. ©47; Rev. (क्राक RST PL & का. 186: Re White, (1848)
1OL.T. 349.



93
XU. Wards of Court

A minor can be made a ward of court only upon the making of an application procedure,
for an order to that effect. Prior to 1949, an infant became a ward automatically
when an action or other proceeding relating to his person or property was com-
menced in the Chancery Division, but now a specific application is required.

The court has an extensive and special jurisdiction over wards of courts in Jurisdiction.
respect of both their person and their property, and exercising that jurisdic-
tion it acts in a parental and administrative manner. Thus, the court will
decide who is to have the custody, care and control of the ward and who is
to have aceess to the ward and what access is to be allowed. It will control
where the ward is to live and will not permit him to be removed from the juris-
diction of the court without leave. It follows that it can make orders for his
maintenance. and supervises his education and religious upbringing and investi-
gates proposals as to marriage? Of the recent English cases illustra this
jurisdiction. the most important is that in which the court refused permission to

allow the sterilisation of » girl of about 11 yeas of age, who was supposed to be
mentally defective.’

In the exercise of this jurisdiction also, the welfare of the minor is the
paramount consideration.’

'Section 9(1), Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1949.
*Halsbury, 4th edition, Vol. 24, page 266, para 597.

®Re Re D. (Minor) (1976) 1 AILE.R. 326.

१. v. Cf, (1969) 1 All ER. 788. (E.L.)

MGIPCBE—S4—2 M of LJ & CA/ND/80—23-6-81—2000,