LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

EIGHTY - FOURTH REPORT

ON
RAPE AND ALLIED OFFENCES: SOME
QUESTIONS OF SUBSTANTIVE LAW,
PROCEDURE AND EVIDENCE

1980


Justice : P. V. Dixit

No. F2(4)/80 LC/C
New Delhi
Dated the 25th April, 1980.

My dear Minister,

By his letter No. PS/LS/LA-80 dated 27th March, 1980, addressed by the Law
Secretary to Shri P. M. Bakshi, Secretary of the Law Commission, the desire of the
Government that the Law Commissior should make a special study of the law relating to
tape and assaults on the modesty of women and related matters was communicated to the
Commission.

2. In response to that request I am herewith forwarding the report of the Law
Commission, which is the result of careful consideration and deep study of the problem
by the Commission.

3. The Commission is indebted to Shri Bakshi for his invaluable assistance in the
Preparation of the Report in the short time at its disposal. We also thank Mr. Vaze,
Additional Secretary, for his help.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,

Sd/-
कै, V. DIXIT

Shri P. Shiv Shankar,
Minister of Law, Justice
and Company Affairs,
Government of India,
New Delhi.

(i)
8/5 M of Law/80—1


CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 2
CHAPTER 3
CHAPTER 4

CHAPTER 5

CHAPTER 6
CHAPTER 7

CHAPTER 8

APPENDIX 1

CONTENTS

Introductory

Rape and indecent assault: the substantive law
Arrest and investigation

Medical examination of the accused and the victim .

Procedure for trial, including trial in camera and publication of court
proceedings पु पु : : : : . - :

Publicity on conviction
Evidence

Conclusion

APPENDICES

Copy of letter No. PS/LS/LA/80 dated 27th March, 1980 from the Secretary,
‘Department of Legal Affairs to the Member-Secretary, Law Commission of
India : . . . . . . . पु : +

APPENDIX 2 List of persons and organisations interviewed .

(iii)

Pace

13
22

28
32
33

41

42


CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTORY

1.1. During recent years, the impact of the criminal justice svs:em on victims of rape and
other sexual offences has received considerable attention, both in legal circles and amongst
organisations and individuals connected with the welfare of women. In the field of criminology,
an increasing interest is being shown in the victim and his or her positioa in the criminal justice
system. In consequence, greater attention is now being paid to the female victim of a sexual
offence. Psychologists have, for some time past, been studying the effects of rape and other
sexual offences upon women or girls and their personality.

1.2. It is often stated that a woman who is raped undergoes two crisis—the rape and the
subsequent trial. While the first seriously wounds her dignity, curbs her individual. destroys
her sense of security and may often ruin her physically, the second is no less potent of mischief,
inasmuch as it not only forces her to re-live through the traumatic experience, but also does
so in the glare of publicity a totally alien atmosphere, with the whole apparatus and
paraphernalia of the criminal justice system focused upon her.

In particular, it is now well established that sexual activities with young girls of immature
age have a traumatic effect which often persists through life, leading subsequently te disorders,
unless there are counter-balancing factors in family life and .n social attitudes which could act
as a cushion against such traumatic effects.

Rape is the ‘ultimate violation of the self’.' It is a humiliating event in a woman's life
which Jeads to fear for existence anda sense of powerlessness. The victim needs empathy and
safety and a sense of re-assurance. In the absence of public sensitivity to these needs, the
experience of figuring in a report of the offence may itself become another assault.

Forciblz rape is unique among crimes, in the manner in which its victims are dealt with
by the criminal justice system. Raped women have to undergo certain tribulations. These
begin with their treatment by the police and continue through a male-dominated criminal justice
system. Acquittal of many de 12०० guilty rapists adds to the sense of injustice.

In effect, the focus of the law upon corroboration, consent and character of the prosecutrix
and a standard of proof of guilt going beyond reasonable doubt have resulted in an increasing
alienation of the general public from the legal system, who find the law and legal language
difficult to understand and who think that the courts are not run so well as one would expect.

1.3. In view of the recent discussions that have taken place im the press and in other forums
tegarding the inadequacy of the 159 to protect women who have been victims of rape or assaults
on their modesty, Government inas asked the Law Commission’ to make a special study of the
law relating to rape. Government has also requested the Commission to consider certain
material’ relevant to the subject, which was referred to in the letter of reference, and forwarded
to the Commission by a supplementary letter. The material so forwarded includes a letter
addressed by a lady Member of Parliament, a newspaper cutting containing report of a meeting
at which some suggestions for reform were made, extract from the L.P.C. Amendment Bill, as
also certain administrative instructions issued by the Government of India in the Ministry of
Home Affairs on the subject of arrest and interrogation of women.

It has been suggested in the letter of reference that the study should cover not only the
substaative law relating to rape, but also the rules of evidence and procedure and other related
matters. The Commission has been requested to forward its Report within as short a period
as possible.

lation of the Self" (1976) Vol. 133, No. 4, Am. J. Psychiatry, pages

1, Hilbermen, “Rape : The Ultimate
436-437.

2, D.O. letter No. PS/LS/LA/80, dated 27th March, 1980, from the Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs,
Ministry of Law to the Member-Secretary, Law Commission of India (Letter of reference).

3, D.O. letter No. 1482/80A, dated 31st March, 1980 from Joint Secretary & Legal Adviser, Department of
Legal Affairs to the Member-Secretary, Law Commission of India (Supplementary letter).

1

The criminal
justice system and
the offence

rape.

The crisis of rape.

Reference by
Government.


Suggestions for
amendment.

Role of the
criminal law.

2

Later, on 15th April, 1980, certain other materials,’ namely, copy of a petition addressed
to the Lok Sabha by Smt. Lata Mani and a copy of the un-corrected record of the discussion
in the Lok Sabha on the 27th and 28th March, 1980 on a motion (relating to rape on women)
moved in the Lok Sabha by Smt. Gecta Mukherjee were forwarded to us) We bave carefully
considered the points made in the petition and in the Lok Sabha Debatcs,

1.4, Besides the reference made by the Government, the Commission has alsa received a
suggestion’ for considering certain changes in the law of rape. The points made in the suggestion
have been duly considered by the Commission.

The Commission has alsc made au attempt to ascertain the views of organisations interested
in the subject, as also of one of the Members of Parliament who had in a letter addressed to the
Government suggested reforms en certain points which we © carcfully consilered. The
Commission is grateful to them for their co-operation.

While our consideration cf the question was in full progress, we also received from the
Ministry of Law’ a copy of a letter addressed by the Bhagini Samaj, Bombay to the Minister
for Law, stating that wemcn in villages and Harijan women were molested and that cases of
rape of women were increasing in the country. The Samaj had, in the letter, also made
suggestions for amendment of the law on certain points, including a suggestion that women
police should interview and interrogate women who were molested, that the trial should be held
ut_cairera and that well-known women’s associations should be selected to “examine and deal
with” such cases. The various points made in the fetter of the Samaj have been duly taken by
us into consideration.

The Ministry of Law has also forwarded to us a लाश of the Maharashtra State Women’s
Council, enclosing copy of a resolution passed by that body as to the increasing incidence of
rape, and making certain suggestions in brief for amendment of the law. The suggestions in
the main are that the law should be radically altered, that the burden of proving innocence

should be on the accused, and so on.

Certain recent judicial decisions’ in India have also provoked a debate as to the deficiencies—
real or supposed—of the law relating to rape and allied offences.

15. It is elementary that the criminal law is the chief legal instrument for preventing
anti-social acts of a serious character. This object is sought to be achieved, in the first instance,
by the legislative command embodying that aspect of punishment which is called “general
deterrence”. Once a crime--whether sexual or of any other category-—-has been committed,
this valk yy at least for the time being, exhausted in regard to that particular criminal act.
t the particular crime has been committed shows that the object of deterrence has
event the particular criminal act.

lowever, one can still cxpeci of the legal system that it should make reasonable provisions
to ensure that the criminal act already committed is dealt with adequately—consistently, of
course, with the general norms of the judicial process, so that the legislative command is enforced,
the object of deterrence is rcalised and (if the accused is found guilty} the punishment to be
imposed is such as to deter others also—thus bringing the aspect of “general deterrence” again
in play. .

In this field, thus, the main cbiective of legal reform would be to promote justice after the
offence is committed.

It is in this background that reforms in the law have been considered in this Report.

1. D.O. letter dated 14/15 April, 1980 addressed by Shri P. K. Kartha, Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser to
Member-Secretary, Law Commission of India.

*, Suggestion made by ihe Lawyers Collective, Bombay, Letter No. 1J/ES/22/80, dated 18th March, 1980.

+, Endorsement No, 1807/80-Adv. A, dated [6th April, 1980 from Shri P. K. Kartha, Joint Secretary & Legal
Adviser, Department of Legal Affairs forwarding a copy of letter dated 7th April, 1980 addressed by the
Bhagini Samaj, Bombay to the Minister for Law.

‘Letter No. 233/80, dated 8th April, 1980 from Maharashtra State Women’s Council to the Minister for Law,

Tukaram v. The State of Makarasthra, A.I.R. 1979 $.C. 185 (January).


3

1.6. At this stage, it is proper tc mention that some of the matters that now fail for Earlier reports of
consideration have been dealt with by the Law Commission in its Repor: on the Penal Code! the Law Commi-
and in its Report on the Indian Evidence Act, wherein certain recommendations were made for .

reform of the law. We shall, at the proper place, make a reference in detail to those
recommendations, and also indicate cur views as to whether any further changes in the law

are needed.

However, it would be appropriate to mention here a very important recommendation made
by the Commission in regard to the Penal Code. In order tc deal with cases where the
circumstances are such that a maic may be able to take undue advantage of the situation and
seduce the woman to illicit intercourse, the Commission recommended the insertion in the Code
of three specific sections, interided respectively to deal with illicit intercourse—

(i) by a person having custody of a woman, with that wornan,
(1) by superintendent of an institution, with an inmate of the institution, and

(iii) by a person in charge of a hospital, with a mentally disordered patient,

‘These recommendations,* made after careful consideration and intended to deal with social
problems af some seriousness that were anticipated by the Law Commission, have assumed
still greater importance during the period of nine years that he: elapsed since the Commission
forwarded its recommendations. The substantive law relating to the offence of Tape and sexual
exploitation of women would, to a large extent, be fortified and improved by implementing these
recommendations.

1.7. Reverting to the matters that fall to be considered in the present Report, we may state Method adopted,
that the reference made by the Government to the Law Commission—and also the suggestions

that the Commission, has received-—raise a variety of questions. It will be convenient to deal

with the various questions separately under appropriate headings, so that aspects of the substantive

Jaw, of procedure and of the law of evidence, may all be dealt with.

1.8. It should, however, be pointed out that on several matters ihe present statutory law is Desultory implo=
adequate, in so far as the matter could be dealt with by legislation and the need is for effective mentation,
implementation. Hardship and injustice arise because implementation of the law is desultury.

1.9. In the views cxpressed by the representatives of several women’s organisations with Steps to be taken
whom we were able to hold discussions, great emphasis has been placed on the need to take /511/0/77
adequate precautions for the protection of women who, being the victims of rape, are required ’
to make their statements to ihe police for the purposes of investigation. There seems to be a
strong feeling that the present arrangements are not adequate and do not ensure that no
opportunities arise for complaints against male police officers of harassment or molestation of
such womien. This feeling is universal and intense. We are aware that the matter is primarily
one which should be, and can affcctively be, dealt with by appropriate executive steps, and it
nay not be practicable to bedge in the functioning of the polic2 with too many restrictions.
Nevertheless, we consider it proper to make certain recommendations for an amendment of the
Jaw in order to safeguard the legitimate interests of such women—being amendments which, we
. hope, will not unduly hamper the efficient functioning of the police force.

1, Law Commission of India, 42nd Report (Indian Penal Code).
+ Law Commission of India, 69th Report (Indian Evidence Act, 1872).

3, Law Commission of India, 42nd Report (Indian Penal Code), pages 275—280, paragraphs 16.113 to 16,123,


CHAPTER 2
RAPE AND INDECENT ASSAULT : THE SUBSTANTIVE LAW
I. Present law as to rape

Scope. 2.1. We propose to cansider in this Chapter the substantive law relating to rape and indecent
assault.

Section 375, 2.2. Section 375 of the Indian Penal Code defines rape as under :
Indian Penal
Code. “375. A man is said tc commit ‘rape’ who except in the case hereinafter excepted,

has sexual intercourse with a woman under circumstances falling under any of the five
following descriptions :

First,—Against her will.

Secondly.—-Without her consent.

Thirdly —With her consent, when her consent has been obtained by putting
her in fear of death, or of hurt.

Fourthly —With her consent, when the man knows that he is not_her
husband, and that her consent is given because she believes that he is another
man to whom she is or believes herself to be lawfuily married.

Fifthly—-With or without her consent, when she 1s under sixteen years of
age.

Explanation.—Penetration is sufficient to constitute the sexual intercourse neces-
sary to the offence of rape.

Exception.~-Sexual intercourse by a man with his own wife. the wife not being
under fifteen years of age, is not rape.”

II. Recommendation in 42nd Report

Earlier Report. 2.3. Here, it would be appropriate to reproduce the re-draft of the relevant sections as
recommended in the 42nd Report of the Commission :

Re-draft of sections 375 to 376E as recommended in 42nd Report

“375. Rape—A man is said to commit rape who has sexual intercourse with a
woman, other than his wife—

{a) against her will; or
(b) without her consent; or

(c) with her consent when it has been obtained by putting her in fear of
death or of hurt, either to herself or to anyone else present at the place; ot

(d) with her consent, knowing that it is given in the belief that he is her husband.

Explanation [Penetration is sufficient to constitute the sexual intercourse
necessary to the offence of rape.

Explanation 11.—A woman living separately from her husband under a decree '
of judicial separation or by mutual agreement shall be deemed not to be his wife for
the purpose of this section.”

4


2.4.

5

°376. Punisiiment for rape-——Whoever commits rape shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourtven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.”

“376A. Sexual iniercourse with child wife —Whoever has sexual intercourse with
his wife, the wife being under fifteen years of age, shall be punished—

(a) if she is under twelve years of age, with rigcrous imprisonment for a
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; and

(b) in any cther case, with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years or with fine, or with both.”

“376B. Illicit intercourse with a girl between twelve and sixteen.—Whoever has
illicit intercourse with a girl under sixteen years, but not under twelve years of age,
with her consent, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

It shall be a defence to a charge under this section for the accused to prove
that he, in good ‘aith, believed the girl to be above sixteen years of age.”

“376C. Illicit intercourse of public servant with woman in his custody.—Whoever,
being a public servant, compels or seduces to illicit intercourse any woman who is in
his custody as such public servant shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.”

“376D. Illicit intercourse of superintendent etc, with inmate of women’s or
children’s institution—Whoever, being the superintendent cr manager of a women’s
or children’s institution or holding any other office in such institution by virtue of
which he can exercise any authority or control over its inmates, compels or seduces
to illicit sexual intercourse any female inmate of the institution shall te punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to twe years,
or with fine, or with both.

Explanation.—In this section ‘women’s or children’s institution’ means an
institution whether calied an orphanage, home for neglected women or children,
widow’s home or by any other name, which is established and maintained for the
reception and care of women or children, but does not include—

(a) any hostel or boarding house attached to, or controlled or recognised
by, an educational institution, or

(b) any reformatory, certified or other school, or any home or workhouse,
governed by any enactment for the time being in force.”

“376E. Illicit intercourse of manager etc. of a hospital with mentally disordered
patient.—Whocver, being concerned with the management of a hospital or being on
the staff of a hospital, has illicit sexual intercourse with a woman who is receiving
treatment for a mental disorder in that hospital, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with
both.

Explanation.—It shal! be a defence to a charge under this section for the accused
to prove that he did not know, and had no reason to believe, that the woman was
a mentally disordered patient.”

Jt would be noted that these recommendations of the Law Commission in the earlier

Report deal with forcible and fraudulent sexual intercourse as well as with illicit sexual intercourse
by way of seduction, in all their ramifications. We are, however, for reasons to be stated later,’
¥ adopting a different and wider scheme.*

1

See paragraphs 2.17 to 2.20, infra.

See para 2.21, infra.

S/5 M of Law/80—2

Recommendation
in earlier Report
as dealing with
force and fraud.


Absence of
consent.

The concept of
free_consent—
section 375, 3rd
clause and section
90.

Consent known
to be given
under fear or mis-
conception.

Consent of in-
sane person.

Consent of child.

Effect of re-
commended
amendment.

Effect of modi-
fications re-
commended as

to fear of injury
and criminal inti-
midation.

6

UI. Consent ; its significance

2.5. The statutory definition! of rape in India emphasises ‘he element of absence of consent.
In fact, absence of consent is an important aspect of the actus reus of the offence. Barring cases
where ccnsent is irrelevant and the age of the girl is the only crucial factor (because of the
Statutory requirement of minimum age), want of consent becomes, in practice, a determining
factor in most prosecutions for rape. It is also the factor to which the law has devoted the
most detailed attention,—as is manifcsi from the elaborate rules and refmements that are te be ©
met with in various clauses of the statutory definition of rape, and from the richness of matzrial
to be found in case law and lengthy discussion on the subject to be found in academic writings.

2.6. Consent is the antithesis of rape. Even if some may find any discussion on consent as
too complicated, the matter cannot, consistently with the needs of ihe subject, be put in simple
one-phrase formulation. When circumstances in life present an infinite variety, the law must
be well-equipped to deal with them. Nuances of consent are therefore, unavoidable.

1V. Reality of consent : section 90

2.7. The most important question of substantive law relates, then, to the concept of consent
in the context of the olfence of rape. Consent must be real. Glten, it is vitiated by circumstances
that take away the freedom of choice. Taking note of this aspect, the third clause of seciion 375
(definition of “rape”) provides that sexual intercourse with 2 woman amounts to rape if it is
“with her consent, when her consent has been obtained by putting her in fear of death or of
hurt”. The vitiating factor here is duress or coercion, but only one specific aspect of it is dealt
with. In contrast, the matter is dealt with more comprehensively in section 90, which is too often
overlooked by courts. The section reads as under :—

“90. A consent is not such a consent as is intended by any section of this Code,
if the consent is given by a person under fear of injury, or under a misconception
of fact, and if the person doing the act knows or has reascn to believe, that the
consent was given in consequence of such fear or misconception; or

If the consent is given by a person who, from unsoundness of mind, or ५
intoxication, is unable to understand the nature ard consequence of that to which
he gives his consent; or

unless the contrary appeers from the context, if the consent is giver by a person
who is under twelve years of age.”*

V. Free and voluntary consent

2.8. We shall indicate later the changes that we are recommending to section 375, particularly
those on the issue of consent. It wili be seen that the amendments recommended by us in the
second and third circumstances enumerated in section 375 considerably widen their scope. The
substitution of the expression “free and voluntary consent” for the werd “consent” in the second
clause makes it clear that the consent should be active consent, as distinguished from that consent
which is said to be implied by silence.

Under the amendment 2s recommended, it would not be open to the Court to draw an
inference of conseat on the part of the woman from her silence due to timidity or meekness or
from such circumstances without any more,—as that the girl meekly followed the offender when
he pulled her, catching hold of her hand, or that the woman kept silent and did not shout or
protest or cry out for help.

2.9. The modifications recommended by us in the third clause vitiate consent not only when
a woman is put in fear of death er hurt, but also when she is put in fear of any “injury” being
caused to any person (including herself) in body, mind, reputaiioa or property and also when
her consent is obtained by criminal intimidation,’ that is to say, by any words or acts intended
or calculated to put her in fear of any injury or danger to herself or to any person in whom she
is interested or when she is threatened with any injury to her reputation or property or to the
reputation of any one in whom she is interested. Thus, if the consent is obtained after giving
the woman a threat of spreading false and scandalous rumours about her character or destruction
of her property oc injury to her children or parents or by hold‘ng cut other threats of injury to
her person, reputation or property, that consent will also not be consent under the third clause ¢

as recommended to be amended:

1, para 2.2, supra.
+, See also section 7, Indian Penal Code.
3. Cf. section 503, Indian Penal Code.


VI. Use of wtoxicants and stupefying substances

2.10. We may now mention one situation which should also, in our view, be dealt with in
section 375. Medico-legal literature furnishes cases of intercourse being attempted or
consummated not only with the help of intoxicants—a situation covered by section 90, though
not expressly by section 375, Indian Penal Code—but also by the use of stupefying subsiances.
It is obvious that conscni to intercourse given in such cases is aot real conseni. Such intercourse
would possibly constitute rape if the requirement of “free and voluntary” consent is introduccd—
as is going. to be our recominendation. However, it may be desirable to cover it specifically in
section :

VIL Violence not necessary

2.11. While these are the main amendments on the point of ccuseni, we may also mention
३3 few points that have been raiscd during the suggestions made to us, concerning the concept
of consent. There is a suggestion that the definition of “rape” should make it clear that the
crime can take place without overt violence. We have given carc‘ul thought to this aspect, but
we do not think that the law needs any clarification in this regatd. Overt violence, or, for
that matter, viclence of any particular category, is not a necessary clemcm of rape as defined
in section 375. The cardinal fact is absence of consent on the part of the woman.'

«

There can be cases of consent even when there is no viciencz. Vivience- -or, for that
matter, marks of 1esistance—are nut conclusive of consent. [In apy case, after a clarification is
made in section 375 en the Jincs 1ecommended by us, this point would lose much of its practical
importance.*

2.12. It would, of course, be realistic to state that most women in our society are not equipped
to repel an attempt at rape, even ir, self-defence. When attacxed, they might submit in terror
and are unable to muster cnough physical strength for offering effective resistance. We have no
doubt that cuurts will continue to attach due weight to this consideration and we hope that the
amendment recommended by us in section 375 will be a reminder 13 all concerned of the true
) Position.

VIL. Subniission not amounting to consent

2.13. It has been represented to us during our oral discussions with women’s organisations
that the law should enact that submission does not amount to consent. in the context cf offence
of rape. We are recommending changes in section 375, particularly in relation to the requirement
of “free and voluntary” consent.’ In view of these changes which define the legal quantity of
consent, we do not propose to make any such clarification as Aas been suggested.

2.14. In the course of the oral discussions which we held with the representatives of the
women’s organisations, it has Leen suggested that in order to cover cases of submission to
intercourse, there should be added below section 375 of the Indian Penal Cade a suitable
Explanation on the following lines :—

“A mere act of helpless resignation in the face of inevitable compulsion,
acquiescence, non-resistance and passive giving in when volitional faculty is cither
2 clouded by fear or vitiated by duress cannot be deemed to be consent.”

Onc can have no objection 16 the principle underlying tne suggestion. However, two
observations may be made ua the subject. In the first place, the requirement of “free and
voluntary” consent which we are goire to add in section 375 imgiies an active mental participation
of the woman in the transacticn and a qualification of the nature suggested would not be required.
In the second place, it would not be correct to deal with only certuin aspects of submission ot
certain varietics thereof, because then there is the risk that other situations to which the qualifying
epithets do not apply would be left out. It is better to have a simpler but more comprehensive
provision. Our recommendation to cover fear of “injury” or se of criminal intimidation mects
the point.

IX. Recklessness

2.15. It has further been suggested that it should be provided in sectien 375 that rape can
take place when the man does not care whether the woman conserited or not. It is difficult

1, See also para 7.8, infra.
+, See discussion as to “free and voluntary” consent, supra.
3. See discussion as to “frez and voluntary” consent, supra.

Drugs, intoxi-
cants and anaes-
thatics.

Overt violence, if
necessary.

The proof of
violence.

Submission and
consent.

Cases of helpless
resignation.

Recklessness.


Suggestion to add
cases of reprisal
by person in
authority.

Fear of agony.

Section 375, fifth
clause.

History.

5

to see how the incorporation of this suggestion in section 375 will improve the present legal
position. It must be remembered that a person out to commit rape is motivated by a <trong
uncontrollable passion or the lust of a savage. He will have bis desirz satisfied at any ८००, no
matter whether the woman consents छा not, or whether or not hie is being reckless in committing
the act or in assuming consent. His approach to the act of rape is mechanical, nun-emctional
one. A rapist cannot be Jikened to a person wooing a lady with boastful phrases like “I came,
I saw and I conquered” or by saying “you may strive, you ‘nay struggle for a while, bu’ you
too will ultimately fall like the lady in Don Juan”. The crucial question is of consent; and
on this question, the feelings of recklessness of a person about to commit rape have no bearing
whatsoever.

X. Other suggestions relevant to coitseat

2.16. It has been suggested! that the following amendment should be made to clause thirdly
of section 375 of the Indian Penal Code :—

Add after “or of hurt”, the words “or of any reprisal by any authority or
person who may have authority over her”.

A second Explanation to sectien 375, which would read thus, has also been suggesied—

‘authority’ herc would mean and include any police official, village kotwal,
village panch, or landlord or empioyer.”

In view of the wider amendment that we are recommendiag in section 375—in particular,
the amendment covering fear of any “injury’—this point is subsiantially met.

2.17. With reference 10 section 375, third clause of the Indian Penal Code, a suggestion has
been made to add the following words :—

“or of physical or mental agony to herself 1 to her nearest blood relations,
including her husband if she is married.”

We are of the view that the expansion of the third clause which we contemplate, namely,
its extension to cover any “injury”, amply takes care of the type of case; for which this suggestion
is intended. “Injury” as defined in section 44 includes, infer alia, harm. illegally cause in body
os mind.

XI. Rape of girls below minimum age

2.18. The discussion in the few preceding paragraphs was concerned with rape constituted
by sexual intercourse without consent. The fifth clause of section 375 may now be considered.
[६ is concerned with sexual intercourse with a woman under 16 years of age. Such sexual
intercourse is an offence ixrespective of the consent of the woman.

2.19, The age of consent has been subjected to increase more than once in India. The
historical development may, for convenience, be indicated in the form of a chart as follows? :—
CHART

Year Age of Age men- Minimum age
consent tioned in of marriage
under s. 375, the Exception under the
5th clause, (0 5. 375, Child

PC. LPC, Marriage

Restraint

Act, 1929
1860, . : : . . पु . . : » years 10 years ad
3891 (Act 10 of 1891) (after the amendment of 1.P.C3.) . 12 years 32 years _
1925 (after the amendment of I.P.C.) . पु पु . 14 years 13 years -
1929 (after the passing of the Child Marriage Act) पु . 14 years 13 years 14 years
1940 (after the amendment of the Penal Code and the Child 16 years 55 years 15 years

Marriage Act)

1978 + . . पु : . . . : . 16 years 15 years 18 years

1, Mrs, Sushila Adivarekar, M.P. (Rajya Sabha).
*. Position as on 31st March, 1980.

3. Amendment Act 10 of 1891 amending the I-P.C. was the result of the Calcutta case of Queen Em npress Vv.
Hurree Mohan Mythee (1890), 1.L.R. Cal. 49, in which the accused caused the death of his child wife, aged about 11
years and 3 months, by having sexual intercourse with her. The accused was convicted under section 338, I.P.C.
(causing grevious hurt by act endengering life etc.), since the law of rape asit stood then was inapplicable to intercourse
with a gir! above the age of 10 years.



9

४ 2.20. The question to be considered is whether the age should be increased to 18 years.
The minimum age of masriage now laid down by law (after 1976) is 18 years in the case of
females and the relevant clause of section 375 should reflect this changed attitude. Since
marriage with a girl below 18 years is prohibited (though it is not void as a matter of personal
law), sexual intercourse with a girl below 18 years should also be prohibited.

XII. Comments on earlier Repurt

2.21. Here it would be pertinent to refer to the recommendaticn that the Commission, in
its 42nd Repcrt on the Indian Penal Code, had made for re-structuring section 375, 1.P.C. by
splitting it up into three categeries, namely,’—

(a) rape proper,
(b) rape with a child wife, and
(c) statutory rape.

It is not necessary to repeat here the reasons which the Commission gave to support this
recommendation. Suflice to say thet the Commission now feels that such a re-structuring would
be out of tunc with the current thinking on the quesion of trial of offendezs for rape and, therefore,
the structure of sectiun 375 shouid not be altered. Since the making of the recommendation by
the Commission in its earlier Report, there has been a radical and revolutionary change in the
approach to the offence of rape; its enormity is frequently brought into prominence and heightened
by the revolting and gruesome circumstances in which the crime is committed; the case law has
blurred the essential ingredients of the offence and introduced instability into the previously
well established law bearing on the offence of rape. The Commissica feels that re-structuring
‘will produce uncertainty and distortion in section 375, which should, in its opinion, retain its

3 present logical and coherent structure.

2.22. As to the relationship between section 90 of the Code (which lays down what is not
consent for the purposes of the code) and the specific factors vitiating consent in relation to
the offence of rape which ere to be considered as relevant under section 375, the Commission, in
its earlier Report, as already stated,’ considered the position at some length and also made
recommendations for specifically adding certain situations in section 375. Since this aspect
of the matter has, during the last few years, assumed even greater importance, we are not only
incorporating whatever was recommended in the earlier Report, but, pursuing the same approach,
we are suggesting amendments which" would fot the concept of “free consent” for the purposes
of section 375 and spell it out more clearly in its application to several conceivable situations
that represent the varicty of flaws in consent.

« 2.23. In its earlier Report, the Commission also recommended the inclusion (in the Chapter
on “Offences against the body”) of three other sexual offences—-(i) A public servant compelling
or seducing to illicit intercourse any woman who is in his custody as such public servant, (ii) 9
superintendent or manager of 8 women’s or children’s institution compelling or seducing to
illicit intercourse any female inmate of the institution, and (iii) a person on the management
or staff of a mental hospital having illicit intercourse with a woman who is receiving treatment
for a mental disorder in that hospital, should be punishable.‘-*

We endorse’ and adopt those recommendations.

1, Law Commission of India, 42nd Report (Indian Penal Code), pages 275-280, paragraphs 16.113 to 16.123,
2, See para 2.3, supra.

3... Para 2.24, infra.

4. we Commission of India, 42nd Report (Indian Penal Code), pages 359, proposed sections 376C, 376D

5. Para 2.3, supra.

6, The numbering of sections, however, differs.

Increase in mini-
mum age.

Earlier Report.

Freedom of
consent as dealt
with in earlier
Report.

Sexual offences
besides rape.


10

XII. Recommendation

Recommendation 2.24. In the light of Use above discussion, we recommend that section 375 of the Penal Code
" should be revised as under :—

Revised section 375, Indian Penal Code

Rape. “375. A man is said to commit ‘rape’ who, except in the case hercinafter
excepted, has sexual intercourse with a woman under circumstances falling under
any of ihe six folluwing descriptions :—

{Bx 375, first Firsi.-—Agairst her will.
[Ex 5. 375, second Secondly.—Without her free and voluntary consent.

clause amplified}

[Ex 5. 375, third

Clause amplified} Thirdiy—With her consent, when her consent has been obtained by putting

her in fear of ceath or of hurt or of any injury either to herself or to any
other person er by criminal intimidation as defined in section 503,

(Ex So pas Fourthl; —With her consent,

amplified) (a) when the man knows that he is not her husband, and that her

consent is given because she believes that 12 is another man to whom she
is or believes herself to be lawfully married, or

(0) when her consent is given under a sviscunception of fact, when
the man knows or has reason to believe thet the consert was given in
consequence of such misconception.

[New] Fifthly—-With her consent, if the consent is siven by a woman who, irom
unsoundness of mind or intoxication or by reason cf the consumiption or
administration of any stupefying' or unwholesome substance, is unable to under-
Stand ine narure and consequences of that to whica she gives consent, or 15
unable to offer eftective resistance.

(Ex s. 375. fifth Sixthly—With or without her consent, when she is under gighteen years
clause modified) of age.

{ age.
[Ex s. 378. excep Exception.-—Scxual intercourse by a man with his own wife, the wife not
tion modified) being under eighteen years of age, is not rape.
(Ex s. 375, Ex- Expianuiion 1_—Penetration is sufficient to constitute the sexual intercourse
planation} necessary to the offence of rape.
[New] Explanation 2—A woman living separately fron: her husband under a

decree of judicial separation or by mutual agrzement shall be deemed not to be
his wife for the purposes of this section.”

[As to the second Explanation, see the earlier Report’).

XIV. Punishment for rape

Section 377— 2.25... 1 has been suggested that in section 376 of the Peaal Code, which deals with the
Minimum punish” Sunishment for rape, the situation where more than one person join in the act should be dealt
by more than one with by stringent provisions, by previding, say, a minimum punishment of 10 years’ rigorous
person—Sugges- nprisonment.
tion not accepted हे है
Aspect of group 2.26. The offence of rape is, in law, a single act of sexual intercourse. That being so, if
liability conside- more than one person rape a woman one after another, cach one cf them would be punishable
red. under section 376, L.P.C. ‘When one person commits rape and oth 5 abet the act by instigation
or aid, the principal would be guilty of rape, and others would be punishable for abetment under
section 109, Indian Penal Code. It is, however, doubiful whether, when the members of an
unlawful asscmbly* attacking a village or a section of people rape several women during the
course of the raid or attack, they can be punished under section 376 with the aid of section 149,

Indian Penal Code.

Cf. section 328, Indian Penal Code.
Law Commission of India, 42nd Report (Indian Penal Code), pages 277-278.

1
३, Section 141, Indian Penal Code.


i

2.27. Be that as it may, it should be noted that a rule prescribing a certain minimum Minimum Puni-
punishment would not be in consonance with the “modern penology” which has been of late परे, nO
expounded in many cases by the Supreme Court. The circumstances in which the offence of

tape is committed differ from case to case. Section 376, Indian Penal Code peimits the Court

to award life imprisonment or imprisonment upto ten years. The discretioa of the Court in

the matter of punishment should not be fettered by prescribing a certain minimum sentence.

If the sentence awarded is heavy or light, it can always be corrected by the appellate cr revisional

court.

XV. Assaults, citraging modesty of women and indecent assaults

2.28. We have so far discussed the offence of rape. We now deal with a few allied but Section 354 and
less heinous offences. What is generally known as the offence of indecent assault is dealt with praposed section
in section 354 of the Penal Code. This section punishes a person who assaults or uses criminal ~~”

force to a woman with intent to outrage her “modesty”. The Law Conimission,' in its Report

on the Penal Code, had occasion to refer to a judgment of the Supreme Court’ in which it was

held that even a baby of seven and a half months old has “modesty” that can be “outraged” by

the use of criminal force within the meaning of this section.

The Commission was of the opinion that (ap art from assault to cutrage “modesty”), acts
of indecency with children should be made specifically punishable by a new section, reading as
follows :—

“354A. Indecent assoult on a minor—Whoever assaults any minor under
sixteen years of age in an indecent, lascivious or obscene manner, shalt be punished
with imprisonment of cither description for a term which may extend to three years,
or with fine, or with beth.”

We agree with the recommendation quoted above from the earlier Report, in so far as it
goes.

2.29, However, we would like to make one addition. An indecent assault otherwise punish- Consent not to
- able under section 354 would presumably escape punishment if the assault is committed on the be a defence.

girl with her consent. The reason is, that if a girl consents,’her “modesty” cannot be outraged,

and one of the essential requirements of the section would not then be satisfied. This, at least,

has been the judicial construction’ of the section.

Moreover, an act done with consent may not fall within “assault”, unless the law, in a
particular case, provides expressly te the contrary.

2.30. We are of the opinion that the law should expressly so provide in the case of indecent Need for change.
conduct with girls below 16 years. Having regard to the current thinking on the subject, it

appears to be desirable to deal sgecifically with such indecency (with girls below 16, cven with

their consent).

In our opinion, besides incorporating section 354A in the Indian Penal Code, it is
also necessary to further ensure by an express provision that the section will apply even where
there is consent. In other words, consent of the woman should not prevent an act from being
an assault for the purposes of this section and should not be a defence to a charge under this
section.

2.31. Accordingly, we would recommend that, while incorpcrating section 354A in the Indian Recommendation
Penal Code, after the words “obscene manner”, the words “with or withou: ihe consent of the a8 to section
minor” should also be added. 354A, Indian Pe-

XVI. Indecent gestures

2.32. We may mention here that acts which do not amount to an “assault’—acts such as Section 509,
indecent_gestures and acts that have come to be known as “eve teasing”—are amply covered by |P.C.
section 509 of the Indian Penal Code.‘ The matter strictly does not ‘all within the purview of

rape or assault, but we refer to it because one of the women’s crganisations with whom we held

discussions was anxious that the law should penalise such behaviour in public places or on

public transport vehicles particularly.

1, Law Commission of India, 42nd Report (Indian Penal Code), pages 264-265, paragraphs 16.85 to 16.87,
4, State of Punjab v. Major Singh, A.1.R. 1967 S.C. 63, 65, 67, Cr. L-J.L.: (1966) Suppl. S.C.R. 286.

3. Sadananda Borgohin v. The State, (1972) Cr. L. J. 658 (Assam).

4, Section 509, Indian Penal Code.


Eve teasing in
Delhi and char-
ges under the
Police Act.

Recommendation
as to police
practice.

Section 294,
LP.C.—Obs-

cene telephone
calls.

Recommendation
to amend section
294,

12

Where there is physical contact or threat of physical contact, the offender can be charged
under sectiun 354 of the same Code, punishing a person who “assaults or uses criminal force
to any woman, intending to outrage or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cutrage her
modesty”. The punishment is imprisonment of either description upto two years or fine or
both. Both the offences are, as the law now stands, cognizable.

2.33. We should now deal with one point concerning the mischief of what has popularly come
to be known as “eve teasing”. We have been given to understand’ that practice of the Delhi
Police is to take or suggest action under sections 91 and 92, read with section 97 of the Dethi
Police Act? for such mischief. These provisions, so far as they are material to the point under
discussion, punish indecent exposure. indecent and obscene conduct and the like in a public
place.

2.34. Unfortunately, the provision: of section 509, Indian Penal Code hive been lost sight
of by the police in almost all the States. The attention of the police should be drawn’ to that
section and they should be asked te proceed under section 50) or section 354, Indian Penal,
Code, as the case may be, wherever an incident of “eve teasing” is reported or takes place.

The offences under sections 509 and 354, Indian Penal Code ave cognizable. as already
stated above.

XVII. Obscene telephone calls

2.35. In the context of offences against the modesty of women, a suggestion has been made
that the making of obscene telephone calls should be made an offence. We have examined the
relevant statutory provisions (including the Indian Penal Code and the Indian Telegraphs Act)
in this connection.

Although section 509 may cover it, it is desirable to make an express provision. We find
that section 20 of the Indian Post-cffice Act, 1898 punishes the sending of postal communications
bearing on the cover indecent, obscene, seditious scurrilous, threatening or offensive matter.‘
There is no corresponding provision in the Indian Telegraphs Act with reference to the sending
of such messages on telephone. It is for this reason that a specific provision on the subject*
appears to be needed.

2.36. We would, therefore, recommend the insertion of the following clause in the Indian
Penal Code under section 294 to deal with the mischief of obscene telephone calls :—

“(c) sings, recites or utters on the telephone any obscene song, ballad or words
or any abusive woras.”

Discussions with the representatives of the National Federation of Women Lawyers (15th April, 1980).
Delhi Police Act, 1978 (34 of 1978).

Matter may kindly be looked into by Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs.

Section 20, Post-office Act, 1898.


CHAPTER 3
ARREST AND INVESTIGATION

I, Introductory

3.1. We propose to deal in this Chapter with the provisions as to arrest cf women end certain
aspects of investigation into cficnces. We also propose to consider the question how far workers
of social organisations should be associated with the process of investigation?

As 10 arrest, our discussion wili cover certain matters concerning the arrest of women and
their detention--these would apply to arrest and detention for any offence.

As regards investigatiun, some of the matters to be discussed in this Chapter are confined
to rape and allied offences.‘

Some of them would, owever, be applicable to the interrogation of women in general.*

Some’ have a still wider application, concerned as they are with the duties of Police officers
concerning the recording of information relating to offences in general or charges against police
Officers.

3.2. The letter of reference’ requests us to go through the instructions issued by the
Government of India in, the Ministry of Home Affairs on the subject of arrest and interrogation
of women and to consider the question whether any of them couid be placed on a statutory
footing.

We have carefully gone through all the instructions, and we feel that while some of them
“can appropriately and conveniently be in the form of executive and administrative directions,
the others should be placed on a statutory footing as rules and regulations under the Police Act,

3.3. It has been strongly impressed upon us by all the women’s organisations, and also by
those who sent us suggestions ia writing, that whenever a woman is called to a Police station for
interrogation or when she is arrested or detained in a police station, she feels insecure and
always apprehends that the police will subject her to bodily pain, suffering and harassment and
may even rape her. The feeling is held too strongly not to have some basis of fact. In any
case, the very fact that such a feeling exists is, in itself, a sad commentary on the uprightness
and credit of the police. It is not one born of the events in the comparatively recent past,
but is one which has grown up over the years on account of the conduct and atiilude of the
police towards the women with whom they come in contact during the course oF investigation
of offences.

In our view, as criminal activities involving women grow, the need for an elimination of
this feeling of apprehension and of giving adequate protection against police misdeeds to women,
whenever they are called to police stations, becomes far more insistent.

3.4. Eliminaticn of this apprehension, so far as possible, may be achieved by remedies both
administrative and Iegal. Under the former, we recommend that it should be strongly impressed
on the police that their attitude and outlook towards women at the time of interrogation and
investigation is entirely wrong and contrary to the traditions of the service. It should be
impressed upon them that their behaviour towards women should be one of civility and courtesy
and not one of harassment; with every desire to help in the: detection of crime. ~ The necessity
for cultivating such an attitude should form part of their training.

33 and 3.34. infra.
aphs 2.5 to 3.10, infia.

infra and. paragraphs 3.26 and 3.27, infra.
infra and paragraphs 3.34 and 3.35, infra.

कीच,

Paragraphs
Teg. pa
E.g. paragraphs 3.11 to
8.8. paragraphs 3.16 to 3
E.g. paragraphs 3.28 to
Chapter 1. supra.

5,

13
S/S M of Law/80—3

Scope.

Instructions
issued by
Ministry of Home
Affairs.

Feeling of in-
security.

Need for chan
in attitudes of tl
police.


Arrest—Section
46, Code of Cri-
minal procedure,

Recommendation
as to section
46), Cr. B.C,
1973.

Section 46—Time
of arrest.

Recommendation
to amend section
46.

Section 417A,
Cr. PC. (Pro-
posed) Deten-
tion in women’s
institutions,

4

So fi
presenily

the Jaw andl legai processes are concerned, 2;
shoul:l be carried out in the Code of Criminal Procedui

ai amendments, 10 be stated
ec.

JI. Arrest of women

3.5. Taking, first, the subject vf arrest, the material provision of the Code of Criminal
Procedure is contained in section 46, which reads as under :--

“46. (1) In making an arrest the police officer or other persen making the
same shall actually touch or confine the body of the person to be arrested, unless
there be a submission to the custody by word or action.

(2) If such person forcibly resists the endeavour to arrest him, or attempts to
evade the arrest, such police officer or other person may use all means necessary
to effect the arrest.

हे (3) Nothing in this section gives a right to cause the death of a persun who
is not accused of an offence punishable with death or with imprisonment for life.”

The section requires a police officer making an arrest to actually touch or confine the body
of the person to be arrested, unless there be a submission to custody by word or action. We
are of the view that a provision should be added to the effect that in the case of women, their
submission to custady shail be pres: J unless proved otherwise, and that unless the circumstances
otherwise require or unless the cflicer arresting is a female, the police officer should not actually
touch the person of the woman for making an arrest.

3.6. Accordingly. we recommend that the following proviso should be addec: to section 46(1)
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 :—

“Provided that where a woman is to be arrested, then, unless the circumstances
indicate to the contrary, her submission to custody on an oral intimation of arrest
shall be presumed, and unless the circumstances otherwise require or unless the
police officer arresting is a female, the police off shall not actualiy touch the
person of the woman for making her arrest.”

3.7. With reference to this provision [section 46(1)] of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, we are further of the view that a provision should be inserted to the effect that, except
in unavoidable circumstances, 10 woman should be arrested after sunsct and tefore sunrise.
Where such unavoidable circumstances exist, the police officer must, by making a written report,
obtain the prior permission of his superior officer, or, if the case is ene of urgency, he must,
afier making the arrest, report the matter in writing to his diate superior officer without
delay with the reascns for arrest and reasons for not taking prior pemissian,

3.8. Accordingly, we 1ccormmena that the following new sub-section should be inserted in
section 46 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 1973 :—

“(4) Except m unavoidable circumstances. 20 women shall be arrested after
sunset and before sunrise, and where such unavoidable circumstances exist, the
police officer shall, by making a written report, obtain. the prior permission of his®
immediate superier cificer for effecting such arrest or. if the case is one of extreme
urgency, he shall, after making the arrest, forthwith report the matter in writing to
his inunedi superior officer with the reasons for arrest and the reasons for not
taking prior perniission as aforesaid.”

वा, Detention of women

3.9. There are certain matiers concerned with detention of women which require discussion.
Where a woman is arrested and € are no suitable arrangements in the Iccality for keeping
her in custody in a place of detention exclusively meant for women, it is, in our view. desirable
to send her to an institution c*tablished and maintained for the reception, care. protection and
welfare of women ot children, licensed under the Women's and Children’s Institutions (Licensing)
Ast. 1956 or an institutien recognised by the State Governme: In cascs where any special
Act (such as the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women aad Girls Act, 1956) requires that
she should be sent fo a protective home or other place of detention authorised for the purposes
of such special Act, this will rot apply. It is desirable that the law should be amended for the

Para 3.5 ef sea. infra


15

purpose by inserting a new section—say, section 417A—in the Code of Criminal Procedure.
‘The --followiag Bee -very_ rough -drafts—

A (14178: Where a wenn is arrested and there are no sutiabie arrangements in

the lGcality for keeping her in custody in a place of detention exclusively meant for
women, she shall be sent to an institution established und mieaitiiained for the
reception, care, protection and welfare of women or children, licensed under the
Women’s ard Children’s Institutions (Licensing) Act, 1956 or an institution
recognised by the State Government, except in cases where any special law requires
that she slivild be sent to fal tas मु or “tier place of detention authorised

for the purposes cf such special law.”

3.10. During our oral discussions with various women’s organisations,' it has been suggested.
that when women are detained in police custody or in judicial 100४ up, a male relative of the
woman should be alluwed io remain at a place close to the lock up, 50 that ke may be able to
keep vigilance over what is happeaing in the lock up to the female inmate.

While we do not consider it practicable to make it a mandatory siatutory requirement, we
do recommend that it should be included in the executive instructions on the subject. The
reascn why we do not, at the moment, feel inclined to suggest a slaiulory provisicn is that we
are not sure if such arranyemunts can be made at every police station. The shape and size of
a police statien and its nets voul’ vary from area to area; so would the facilites thai could
be provided for the purpose.

IV. literrogation of female victims of sexual offences

3.11. These matters concera the arrest and detention of women ia
with certain matters peculiar to women who are victims of sexval offences.
been raped are reluctant to repurt it. parly because of the embarrassment cf c'scussing the
details with male policemen, and partly because of the very fear of the ever more painful
humiliation of being a witness in Court.

They get scared and become confused when, in the strange environment of ihe Courtvoom,
they have to conduct themrelves in a manner forcign to their custom and under a i int not
conducive 10 clear coherent thought or to free expression.

other sexual oflence
1. cfiicers It is presumably
ested that the investigation of such offences should be done

3.12. A woman is often discou ४ ६ charge cf rape
by the fact that she usually encounters only male police and prosecut
for this reason that it has been su
by women police officers only.

We would be happy if the questioning of female victims uf sexual offence
by women police officers caly. We are not. however, inclined io recommend a statutory provisics
in this regard. A moncaicry provision to that effect may prove to be wiwerkabie. The mumber
of women police officers in rural areas is very small. Even in urban arcas, unless a centralised
cell (with the status of a police station) is created for investigation into sexual offences against
women, such a provision may net be practicable.

would be done

We regard this difiiculty as a ir one. An alle
sufficient number of women pol who could be Gra
interrogaticn and invesiigation, stiould be made.

effort for the recruitment of
ted Jor police duties of

3.13. Till then, in metropolitan cites or big cities where
women police officers, a praciice should be established that women
sexual offences and interrogate the victim.

nt number of
fone investigate

We are, therefore, not in favour of any statutory prov

. sion being made in this respect,
subject to what we are recommencing in the next paragraph.

3.14. The practice as sug:
But there is one matter which 1s of importance for the whole count S.
the case of girls below a certain age-—say. below twelve years- who are victims of rape, there
should be a sfaturery provision to ensure that the girl must ce interrogated only by a woman.
A woman police officer would be preferable. But, if a woman polce oficer is not available,
an alternate procedure as detailed below should be followed

ested above’ could be adopied in metropalitan id big cities,
y. [tis necessary that in

1 Discussions held on the 1th April, 1980.

2. Para 3.13, supra.

Suggestions re-
garding presence
of male relative
near the lock
up.

Reporting and in-
vestigation.

Investigation by
female police—
No statutory
change recom
mended.

Practice to be

Tnterroga’
child victim of
rape—-Statutory
provision re-
commended.


16

The alternate procedure that we contemplate is this. Where a woman police oflicer is
not available, the omicer in charge of the police station should forward a list of questions to a
qualified female (we shail suggest details later) who would, after recording the intcrmation as
ascertained from the child victim, return the papers to the officer in charge of the police station.
If necessary, further questions to be put to the child may be scat by the police to the interrogator.

For the present, this procedure may be applied to female victims of offences below 12 ycars.
It could later be utilised for child witnesses in general, if found practicable.

The “qualified female” whom we have in mind should be one who is a sccial worker
belonging io a recognised social organisation. If she possesses some knowledge of law and
procedure, it wouid be all the more useful, but that need not be a statutory requirement.

८ of 3.15. In view of what is stated above, we would recommend the addition of the following

commended by  Pfovision—say, as new sub-sections—in section 160 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 :—
insertion of sub- r
sections (3) to _+(3) Where, under this Chapter, the statement of a girl under the age of
0). twelve years is to he recorded, either as first information of un offence or in the
b Qs course of an investigetion into an offence, and the girl is a person against whom an
\w

~* offence under section 354, 354A or 375 of the ladian Penst Cvde! is alleged to have
been conunitted or «tienipted, the statement shail be recorded cither by a female
police officer or by a person authorised by such orgasisatica interested in the welfare
of women or children as is recognised in this behalf by the State Government by
notification in the official gazette.

(4) Where the case is one to which the proviscans cf sub-section (3) apply,
and a female police officer is not available, the officer in charge vj the police station
shail, in order to facilitate the recording of the statement, forward ta the person
referred to in that sub-section a written request setting oui ihe points on which
information is required to be elicited from the girl.

(5) The person tc whom such a written request is ferwarded shail, after
cording the statement of the girl, vansmit the record to the cffecr in charee of the
'€ station.

46) Where ihe statement recorded by such person as
sub-section (5) appears in any respect to require ctarificetivn or amuli
officer in charge of the police station shall returii the papers to the persen by w
it was forwarded, with a request for clarification or amplification on specified matters;
and such person shall thereupon record the further statement ¢f the girl in conformity
with the request end return the papers to the officer in charge of the police stat

(7) The statement of the girl recorded and jowarded under suh-sections (3)
to (6) shall, for the purpose of the law relating to the adnessibility in evidence
of statements made (५ any person, be deemed ti be @ st nent recorded by a
police cfficer.”*

५, daters

sgation of women at the place of residence

Section 160(1) 3.16. There is another aspect of investigation which in need of reform. Under

Proviso, Cr. PC. section 160(1) of the Code of Crimiral Procedure, 1973 a police ofticcr making an investigction
under Chapter 14 of the Code may, by order in writing. requir: the attendance before himsel?
of any person “being within the limits of his own or any adjoining siation” (for the purposes cf
investigation). The proviso to this sub-section provides that “no male person under the age of
fifteen or woman sball be required to attend at any place other than the place in which such male
person or woman resides”.

The proviso has been iaken over by the present Code trom the earlier Cede of 1898, In
that Code, it was inserted by an omending Act of 1955 in response to the observations made
in a number of earlier judicial decisions, suggesting that women should not crdinarily be called
to the police station."

1, Proposed sections 3764, 3738 and 376C, Indian Penal Code could also be added
2, See further infra.

5 Compare the observations made in Haldar y. Sub Inspector of Police, 9 C.W.N. 199, 201, Ist Column. See
also (1905), 2 Cr. L. J. 51, 53. .


7

_ 3.17. Though it is clearly the policy of the law to ensure that the interrogation of the persons

in question (women and young boys) should be done at their residence, the object is not, at

1 present, fully reflected in the words employed for the Purpose in section 160(1), proviso. The

expression “place” is a wide onc. Its definition’ in the Code is also an inclusive one, and in

any case, docs not indicate very clearly that in the context of scciion 160(1), proviso, “place’
means a place where the person resides.

It is a mistake to think that section 160(1), proviso enjoins the police officer to interrogate
‘ a woman at the place where the woman resides. This is not so. _ “Place” means the locality
in which the woman resides and ever which the Police officer has jurisdiction.

In order to reflect the Iegisiative policy more fully and to fortily the protection sought to
be enacted in the proviso, the phraseology, in our opinion, requires a slight altcration.

¥€ 3.18. Accordingly, we recommend that section 160(1), proviso of the Code ef Criminal
Procedure, should be revised as under :-—

To be substituted for section 160(1), proviso, Code cj Criminal Procedure.

“Provided that no mie person under the age of fifteen years er woman shall
be required to attend at any place other than his or her dwell: 1g place,”

3.19. Another point arising out of section 160(1), proviso of the Code of Criminal Proecdure
may now be discussed, namcly, penalty for violation thereof, The posiiion in this regard is

है not satisfactory. At present, the mere summoning of a person in violation of the statutory
mandate’ would presumably be purishable as wrongful restraint under section 341, Indian Penal
Code® (imprisonment upto one month or fine upto five hundred rupees).

In our view. the punishment under s

clion 341, 1.P.C. is, inadequate for an offence of this

“nature. Perhaps, a charge of an offence under section 166, Indian Punal Cuce (public servant
disobeying direction of ‘aw with जाता to cause injury to any person) could be made for the
violation of the prohibition in gucsticn. But, in our opinion, it wevld be better 16 have a specific

| provision—say, as section i66A---in the Indian Penal Code to cover such viol: ions. The
provision could be eppropriat fy placed in the Chapter on “0; es by or against public
servants”. The proposed cifcnee should be cognisable, bailable and triable by any Magistrate.

3.20. The following is a reugh dr

1 of the provision that we would recommend to be inserted
in the Indian Penal Code on t!

xe Subject mentioned above ;—

(To be inserted in the Indian Penal Code)

“166A. Whoever, beiig a public servant—

(a) 1.09: disobeys any direction of the law profubiting him from
~~ requiring the attendance at any place of any person for te purpose of investiga-
ton into an offence or other matter, or

(b) Anowinely disobeys any other direction’ of the law regulating the
mantier in wkich he shall conduct such inve gation, to the prejudice of any
person, shail be punished with imprisonment for a@ teri which may extend to
one y or with fine or with both.

VI. Interrogation of women—time of

3.21. The last few paragraphs were concerned with the

1 हे ¢ place of interrogation of women.
We should now deal with the tine of interrogation,

In the viows expressed before us by a
FS 1. Section 2), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
Section 160(1), proviso, Code of Criminal Precedure, 1973,
Raja Rai v. State of Haryana, (1971) 3 $C. C., 945, 94५.

Cf. sections 162(1), 163, 171. Code of minal Procedure, 1973.

Consequential amendment to be made in the Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, so as

to provide that the proposed offence shall be cognisable, bailable and triable by any Magistrate.

Defect in drafting.

Recommendation
to revise section
160(1), proviso,
Cr. 0.९.

Punishment. for
violation of sec-
tion 1601) not
adequate.

Section 166A,
LP.C. recommen-
ded.

Interrogation of
women after sun-
set and before
sunrise.


18

representative of one of the women’s organisations, it was suggested that women, even when they
are not the persons accused or victims of the offence and are merely witnesses to the crime,
should not be interrogated by the police after sunset and befure sunrise. It seems to us that
if the statutory provision for interrogating women at their residence,’ as proposed te be clarified
by us,’ is properly and adequately implemented, there should be no need for a turther and
additional provision totally barrirg the imterrogation cf women afier sunset and belore sunrise.

After all, the principal object sought to be achieved by such restrictions is to ensure that
no opportunity arises tor the molestation of women, That ob; is, in a large measure, achieved
by the statutory provision referred to above.

VII. Social workers

Association of 3.22. Another aspect of investigation on which emphasis has been placed by जाए. of the
Workers social women’s org tions during our Gra! discussions with them is the necd to associate women
vestigation, social workers with investigation into cases relating to rape and allied offences, Aiter giving

. we find it difficult to accede to the suggestion.

the matter deep thou:

Under our system of procedure, investigation is primarily in the hands of the police officer.
Cognisance of offences can, no doubt, be taken by the competent Magistrate directly on a
complaint’ made by any persen (generally speaking, ihat person need not oven be the victim of
the offence). But even ihe Magistrate to whom such a complaint is made would not have
adequate investigative machinery at his disposal. He will also have to depend gencrally’ on the
police for the purpose, the only ciftcrence being that an fivesil n so directed by the
Magistrate who has taken cognisance on a compiaint remains -m ce ts- -subject to
the orders of that Magistrate.

3.23. That apart, mvestigaiios
and respect for women’s iriellig गए and competence. yet we feel that they may not be
able to cope with the arduous duties whi i gating police officer is required to discharge. *
There is also the danger of a male police officer completely abdicating his duties if a sacial
worker is asscciated oa an equal footing with him for inv: of an offence. If the
investigation is successful and विवादों, then the male police r wili fake all the credit for
it, but if it fails, he will fry to cscepe the liability for the failure by throwing the entire blame
on the female associate.

eht duty. We have the highest ©

n offence is not a

Investigation an
arduous task.

3

a] workers any

This being the position, it inay not be practicable to confer on wore soe

specific legal status.°

Recommendation 3.24. However, in our view, it would be useful to provide that a female social worker should

fo amend Sce- be allowed to be present whenever the victim of rape is inter ed by the police, We recommend

tion 160, (1. PLC. that in section 160 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, a suitable amendment should be
made for the purpose. The social worker must belong to an organisation recognised by the State
Government.

Amendment of — 3,25 In view of what is stated above, we would yecommend ihe insertion of the following
section 16010. brovision-—say. as a nes sub-section— in section 160 of the Code cf Criminal Procedure, 1973 :—
commended by )

insertion of sub-
section (8).

SES) Where, कचरा this Chapter, the statement of a mate person under the

ace of fifteen vears or of a woman is recorded by a mate police officer, either as
of an offence or in the course of ar it estigation inte an offence,

च relat ad of suck male person or womait, and also a person authorised by
such organisation inierested in the welfare of waren oF children, 63 is recognised
in this belalf by the State Government by notification in the official gazette, shall
he allowed to remein present throughout the period curing which the statement is

being recorded.”*

3, Section 16001, Proviso, Cr. P.C., 1973.

2 Pura 3.18, supra.

_ Section 190(1}, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

4 Section 202(1), Cade of Criminal Procedure. 1973.

5, See also para 3.34, infra.

6. For sub-sactions (3) to (7) to be inserted in section160, see para 3.15, supra.


19

ज़रा, Police report to be accompanied by medical rzports

3.26. The process of investigation gencrally culminates in the report of a police officer.
The report cf a police oficer on which a Magistrate usually takes cognisance is the subject
matter of section 173 cf tne Code of Criminal Procedure. Alongwith such report, certain
documents are to be forwarded as provided in sub-section (5) of that section, quoted below :

“173, (5) When such report is in respect of a case to which section 170
applies, the police cfficer shall forward 10 the Macistrate along with the report—

(a) ail documents or relevant extracts thereof on which the prosecution
proposes 10 rely other than those already sent to the Magistrate during
invesiigation;

(b) the statements recorded undcr section 161 of all the persens whom
the prosecution proposes to examine as its witn ,

3.27. Our recommendations relating to medical reports to be made in a later Chapter®
contemplate the forwarding of the medical reports to the police oflicer investigatmg the offence.
As a consequence of those emeniments, it is necessary to amplify sub-section (5) of section 173.

Accordingly, we recommend thet in section 173(5) of the Cede of Criminal Procedure,
1973, after the words “on which the prosecution proposes to rly”, the following words, figures
and marks should be inserted :—

“including the report of medical examination of the arrested person aceused of
rape or attempt 10 commit rape forwarded to the police officer under section 53,
and the report of medical examination of the victim of such an offence jorwarded
to the police officer under section 164A,”

IX. Investigation where police officer is the accused

3.28. We may note that duting the debates on a motion in the Lok Sabha on the subject
of rape of women,’ it was suggested that where a police officer is the accuscd, the investigation
into the offence alleged to have been committed by the police officer should be by some other
agency, as otherwise it would be wet h impossible to convict the accused.

It is not clear what 1s nicant by ‘some other agency’. the idea is that where a
police officer is involved in 1ape, then the investigation should be by 2 officer of the
district or arca other than the dis posted at the time
of the crime. We commend the suggestion for the consideration of Government.

6

X, Nenrecording of information relating to comnisubie offences

3.29, We now come to enother matter concerning the stage of investigation. During our
oral discussions with the sepresentatives of women’s organisations, it was stated that in some
cases the police fail (0 register a case of rape reported to them even when the full facts are
communicated to them. We have not been able to gather sto sof the number of such
cases, as the collection of tke relevant figures would take coms ble timc and the present
Report deals with a maticr of urgency. We hope that the percentage of such cases would not
be nigh. Nevertheless, we do take the view that in principle. the law should contain a specific
provision dealing with refusal (or failure without sufficient caus?) t register such cases. The
offence of rape is a cognisable offence and if the police fail to register it. it is a clear violation
of the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 in this regard.’ Cognisable offences
reported te the police arc “registered”—as the popular usage gocs—under section 154(1) of
the Code of Criminal Procedure. If the officer in charge of a police station rcfuses to record
the information reported relating to a cognisable offence, there is a remedy already provided’
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, the relevant provision being in the following terms :—

“(3) Any person aggrieved by a refusal on the part of an officer in charge of
a police station to record the information referred to in sub-section (1)

1, For other points concerned with medical reports, see Chapter 4. infiw.
2 Chapter 4, ifia, para 4.7 and 4.10.

4. Lok Sabha Dehates. 27th March, 1980. column $349

4. See Chapter 1. sup

S. Cf. Kurukshetra Univ
6. Section 15463), C

sity v. State of Haryana, AAR. 1977 S.C. 2220,
of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

Section 173(5),
Cr. P.C.—Report
of a police officer
tobe accompa-
nied with certain
documents.

Section 17365),
Cr. P.C.--Amend-
ment recom-
mended as to
medical reports,

Investigation into
cases where a
police officer is an
accused.

Section 167A,

LP.C.—Refusal

to register case
of rape.


Penal sanctions
needed.

Present law,

Insertion of sec-
tion 167A, Indian
Penal Code re-
commended.

Other points ma-
de in suggestions.

3.30.
penal chai

20

[of section 154] may send the substance of such information, in writing and by post.
to the Superintendent of Police concerned who, if satisfied that such information
discloses the commission of a cognisable offence, shali either investigate the case
himself or direct an investigation to be made by any police officer subordinate to
him, in the manner provided by this Code, and such officer shall have all the powers
of an cflicer in charge of the police station in relation to that offence.”

The provision of ihe Code of Criminal Procedure quoted above, however, is not of a
racter, though, no doubt, when the matter is reported to the Superintendent of Police

thereunder, a departmental action can be taken. We have, therefore, examincd the question
whether there is need for any penal sanction and, if so, whether the present law is adequate in
this regard. In our opinion, and having particular regard to the fact that we have been given
to understand during our oral discussions that administrative action docs not prove very effective.

prima fact

3.31.

ie there is need for a

able penalty.

As to the present Iaw on the subject, it would appear that the matter is not very

specifically covered ty the substantive criminal law. No doubt, there are provisions in the
Indian Penal Code punishing public servants for the malicious exercise of their powers in
certain cases, which it is uanccessary to discuss for the present purpose. Many Police Acts also
contain provisions punishing a police officer for “violation of his duty”! or provisions similarly

worded.
Act it is
presumabl

The punishment Jaid dewn is, however, usually mild; for example, in the Delhi Police
imprisonment upto three months or fine upto Rs. 160. The punishment is mild
ly because such provisions are of a general character, embracing “violations of duty”

of various degrees and shades.

3.32.
a specitic

Having regard to what we have stated above, we would reccmmend the insertion of
penal provision, say, as section 167A, in the Indian Penal Code on the subject. In

view of the general scheme adopted in that Code, the proposed provision would not be confined

to refusal

The following is a rough draft of the provision that we recommend :—

3.33.

to register the offence of rape and would cover otlier cognisable offences as well.

“167A.—Whoever, being an officer-in-charge of a pélice station and required
by law io record any information relating to the commission of a cognisable offence
reported to him, refuses or without reasonable cause fails to record such information
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to one year, or with fine. or with both.”

XI. Other points concerning investigation

At this stage, we may also note a few other points concerned with investigation on

which improvements have been suggested in the views expressed orally before us cr m written
points handed over to us. These may be enumerated briefly—

First, offences of rape etc. should be promptly registered.

Seccndly, in such cases the officer-in-charge of a Police Station must proceed to
investigate the offence in person and shall not depute any subordinate of his to make
the investigation.

Thirdiy, a copy of the information lodged must forthwith be forwarded to the
nearest Magistrate whether such Magistrate is empowered to take cognisance or
not.

Fourthly, such Magistrate on receiving the information should be empowered
10 issue directions regarding investigation of the case unti!_cognisance is taken by
a Magistrate who is empowered to take cognisance of the offence.

1, Compare section 122(f ) (iv). Delhi Police Act, 1978.

2, The pi

roposed offence should be cognisable, bailable and triable by any Magistrate. Complaint of any parti-

cular police officer should not be required for taking cognisance.


21

Fifthly, in Presidency towns and district towns or Sub-Divisions, investigation
should be made by an officer not below the rank of a Deputy Superintendent of
Police.

Some of these points have been already dealt with.’ The rest seem to be concerned with
matters proper for admin.stiative action, rather than for legal amendment.

3.34. It has also heen suggested that certain Magisterial Powers and limited police powers
may be conferred on educated and respected ladies in villages nearby, like social workers or
school teachers. It has been suggcsted* that suitable amendments may be made in the Code of

Criminal Procedure in this behalf.

We would Icave this matter for appropriate action by the authorities competent to appoint
Magistrates. Conferment of police Powers on ladies, however, docs not appear to be practicable.

The question of associating social workers with investigation has already been dealt with.?

3.35. An impottant part of investigation into cases of race is in the shape of physical
examination of the accused and the victim by medical experts. This topic deserves separate
treatment, and will accordingly be discussed later.‘ We may, however, mention that one of the
amendments that we have recommended in the present Chapter (documents to be forwarded
with a police report) is concerned with medical reports.’

1, 8.8. para 3.28, supra.

2, See also paragraphs 3.22 and 3.23., supra.
3. Paragraphs 3.25, supra.
4. See Chapter 4, infra.

5. Para, 326, supra.

S/S M of Law/80—4

Conferment of
Magisterial and
Police powers on
women.

Questions _ relat-
ing to medical
examination,


CHAPTER 4
MEDICAL EXAMINATION OF THE ACCUSED AND THE VICTIM
व्‌, Importance of Medical Examination

Scope. 4.1. We propose to deal in this Chapter with the medical examination (of the accused and
the victim) in cases relating to rape. The medical report in such cases is a document of vital
importance. The matter has Louth medical and legal aspects, deserving of attention.

Position of exam- 4,2, An eminent writer en egal medicine’ has observed tha! the situations in which the

ining doctor. practising clinician may find himself involved in the examinaticn of either the alleged victim
or the alleged assailant in sexval offences are unique in regard to the degree of emotional tension
that may be generated in all the persons involved in the situation “Here, possibly more than
in any other medico-legal situation, it behoves a clinician to remember the general principles of
detail, suspicion, impartiality and observation”.

He has pointed out that many of the examinations required in suc’ cases will take place
late at night, or in the early hours of the morning when the doctor himself is likely to be tired,
and the value and ‘mportance of a set routine becomes very important indeed.

Importance from 4.3, From the legal point of view also, it is well recognised tnat the medical cxamination
the legal point of report of the accused in a case of rape or attempt to commit rape is a very important document.
दर Of that part of the actus reus of the offence which consists of sexual intercourse by the accused,
there cannot ordinarily be a better evidence than the medical repor’, so far as the male party

is concerned.

Proper examina- 4.4. It has been pointed out that the proper and thorough investigation of an alleged rape
tion—conditions depends on 2°
for.

Early notification ic the police;
Full co-operation between the victim and the various investigating agencies;

An experienced and understanding police officer in charge.

Any delay in reporting an elleged rape will result in delay in the commencement of the
investigation, with the 1058 of trace evidence on the victim, ihe accused and the scene. It is
for these reasons ‘hat the victim must be interviewed at some Iength as soon after the offence
has taken place as is possible, and before she has had a chance tu wash, clean or sepair her

clothing, or change her clothing.

‘fhe medical examination mus! be a complete one, and must include the complete medical
history of the victim, a detailed history of the alleged assault, a complete body examination and
the taking of ail relevant biological samples.

Il Examination of the accused

Provision in the 4.5. The Code of Criminal Procedure has, in section 53, a general provision on the subject
Code—Necd for of medical examination of the accused in all cases where such examination would afford evidence

timely examiaa- of commission of offence.’
tion. . _ __ oo _ _ 7 a . 7 _
1, David M. Paul, Department of Forensic Medicine, Guy's Hospital, London : “The Medical Examination

in "Sexual ‘Offences (1978 July), Vol. 15, No. 3, Medicine, Science and the Law, pages 154—162.

3, British Academy of Forensic Sciences, Memorandum on rape (uly 1976), Vol. 16, Medicine, Science and pw
the Law, pages 154, 156, 157.

3, Section 53, Cr. P.C. 1973.
22


23

It is, however, seen that the report of the medical examinat:on is often cursory, or is not
sent in time, in cases of rape ci attempi to commit rape.

In a recent Calcutta case,‘ the High Court was constrained to observe—

“It is also striking that the appellant, though arrested on that very night
(9th May) was not produced before Dr. Pal (P.W. 11) who examined P.Ws, 1
and 10 on 10-5-1970."

4.6. It 15 also desirable that the report should (besides containing the usual forma! particulars)
deal specifically with—(i) the age of the accused, (ii) injuries to the body of the accused, and
(iii) other material particulars in reasonable detail. It should also note the precise time of
examination. It should be sent without delay by the registercd medical practitioner to the
investigating officer and the latter should file it before the Magistrate empowered to take cognisance
along with the documents sent with the challan under section 173(5) of the Code*

AT, vA very important that reasons should be given for the opinion expressed in the report.
Accordingly, we recommend the insertion in section 53 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, of the
following sub-sections :—

“Section 53(1A), (1B), (1C) and (1D), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
to be inserted.

(1A) When a person accused of rape or an attempt to commit rape is arrested
and “an examination of kis person is to be made under this section, he shall be
forwarded without delay to the registered medical practitioner by whom he is to be
examined,

(iB) The registered medical practitioner conducting such examination shall
without delay examine such person and prepare a report specifically recording the
result of his examination and giving the following particulars :

(i) the name and address of the accused and of the person by whont he
was broughi,

(ii) the age of the accused,
(iii) marks of injury, if any, on the person of the accused, and

(iv) cther material particulars in reasonable detail.

(160) The report shall state precisely the reasons for each conclusion arrived
at,

(iD) The exact time of conunencement and completion of the examination shall
also be noted in the report, and the registered medical practitioner shall, without
delay, forward the report to the investigating officer, who shall forward it to the
Magistrate referred 10 in section 1973 as part of the documents referred to in
clause (a) Gf sub-section (5) of that section.” 7}

Ul. Examination of the victim

4.8. We next deal with the victin. In many cases, the report of the medica! examiner as
to the examination of the female victim is also found to be somewhat cursory and does not give
adequate information about the materia] particulars which are necessary for an adjudication as
to the various ingredients of section 375. Further, it is sometimes noticed that the medical
examination report is not sent promiptly. to the investigating officer. As a result, the possibility
of tampering with the report remains.

3, Narayan Dutta v. State (1980), Cr. L. J. 264, paragraphs 1-2 (March 1980) (Calcutta).
3, See Chapter 3, supra.

Particulars to be
entered and rea-
sons to be given.

Recommendation
as to section 53,
Cr. B.C,

Section 164A,
Cr. P.C. (To be

added).


Wa है 24 .
In our opinion, the report of the examination of the victim in a cas2 of rape should
(besides containing the usual formal particulars) deal specifically with--
(i) the age of the victim,
(ii) the question whether the victim was previonsiy uscd to sexual intercourse,
(iii) injuries to the body of the victim,|
(iv) genetal menta' condition of the victim, and

(५) other material particulars in reasonable deta'l.

It is also necessary that the rcport should note the time of examination and be sent without
delay to the inyestigating officer. It is very important that the report should state reasons for the
conclusions recorded.

Need | 4.9. Ordinarily, such matters arc left to be dealt with by executive instructions. “However,

Li * {having regard to the importance of the subject, it would be proper to insert in the Code of

Criminal Procedure, at an appropriate place, a provision incorporating the guidelines that we

JS have suggested above. In the light of practical working of the provision, further improvements
could be made in the relevant provisions.

Section 164A, 4.10. Accordingly, we recommend that the following new section should be inserted in the

commended. { Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 :

64A. (1) Where, during the stage when an offence of rape or attempt to
commit rape is under investigation, it is proposed to get the person of the woman
with whem rape is alleged to have been commitied or attempted, examined by व
medical expert, such examination shall be conducted by a_ registered medical
practitioner, with the consent of the woman or of some person competent to give
such consent on her behalf and the woman shall be forwarded tc the registered
medical practitioner without delay.

(2) The registered medical practitioner to whom such woman is forwarded
shall without delay examine her person and prepare a report specifically recording
the result of his examination and giving the following detail :

(i) the name and address of the woman and of the person by whom she
was brought,

(ii) the age of the woman,

(ii)

(iv) marks of injuries, if any, on the person of the woman,

whether the victim was previously used to sexual iniercourse,

(५) general mental condition of the woman, and

(vi) other material particulars, in reasonable detail,
(3) The report shall state precisely the reasons for each conclusion arrived at.

(4) The report shall specifically record that the consent of the woman or of
sonie person competent to give such consent on her behalf to such examination had
been cbiained.

(5) The exact time of commencement and completion of the cxcmination shall
also be noted in the report, and the registered medical practitioner shall without
delay, forward the report to the investigating officer, who shali forward it to the
Magistrate referred 16 in section 173 as part of the documents referred to in
clause (a) of sub-section (5) of that section.

(6) Neihirg in this section shall be construed as rendering lawful any
examination without the consent of the victim or of any person conipetent to give
such consent on her behalf.”""

6


¥

s

25

4.11. Min regard to the cxamination of the person of the accused, section §3(2) of the Code
of Criminal Procedure provides that whenever the person of a female is to be examined under
that section, the examination shall be made only by, or under the supervision of, a female
registered medica! practitioner.

The question whether a provision should be inserted to the effect that where a femaie victim
of a sexual offence is 10 be examined, the medical examination shall be conducted only by a
female medical practitioner has been carefully considered by us. We think that a statutory
Provision is not necessary, for two reasons. In the first place, this is almost the invariable practice
in India and a statutory mandate is not needed. In the second place, if a female victim Goes not
wish to submit to examination by a male doctor, there is no legal obligation on her part to do so.
For that reason also, a statutory provision is not necessary. It may be mentioned that such
medical examination cannot be jawfully made without the consent of the woman or of some
person competent to give consent.’

1V. Chronology and modes

4.12. We have so far dealt with matters on which legislative provisions have been suggested
by others or recommended by us, on the subject of medical examination. It would be useful
now to refer to certain other aspects.

As to the chronological stages of the examination and the mode of conducting it, there is
interesting material availuble.

A distinguished writer suggests* that date, time and place of examination should be noted
at the commencement of the caamination and the time at which the examination terminated
should also be noted.

Further, he adds, history of the person examined is important. Full gencral history must
be taken and ihis must include a’] previous illness, operation and accident. It should also include
the time and nature of the Jast meal eaten, the amount and nature of the alcoholic drink consumed

« and the time it was consumed and the amount, nature and time of any medication taken.

Specific history should be taken, preferably from the complainant and before any account
is heatd from the police authority, instructing ‘solicitor or parent. This history is an essential
part of the clinical examination and full notes must be made of it because one of the essentials
of physical examination is to decide if the physical findings are compatible with the history takea.

4.13. Each sysiem of body should be examined and “all the examinatior findings should be
noted even if they are normal fincings”. Skeletal deformity or injury, he points out, may reduce
the effectiveness of any resistance; intoxication may reduce the power to resist or the ability to
form an intention. Natural discase may affect the behaviour. The general examination must,
therefore, include the skin, teeth, finger, nails, cardio-vascular system, respiratory system,
abdomen, skcletal system and central nervous system, for only in this way can the examining
doctor be sure that he has not missed any relevant feature.

4.14, As to injuries, the description must include an accurate description. of the site of the
injury with special reference to fixed body points, a measurement of the size of the injury; a
general description of the type of the injury; a detailed description of its shape; and a description
of the colour of any bruising or exudate present.

V. Rapid reference sheets

4.15. The distinguished expert ir legal medicine* (to whose writing we have already referred)
ha» prepared the following “rapid reference shect” for the examination, of the person accused and
the victim of rape : .

Accused
(1) Consent: to examination.’

Para 4.10, supra.

David M. Paul, “The Medical Examination in Sexual Offences”. (1975 July), Vol. 15, No. 3, Medicine,
Science & Law, pages 154, 162.

3, David M. Paul, “The Medical Examination in Sexual Offences’ (1975 July), Vol. 15, No. 3, Medicine.
Science and the Law, 154, 158, 159.

4. In India, this is governed by a statutory provision in section 53, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

Medical exami-
nation of the
victim of rape.

Chronology and
modes of exami-
nation.

Examination of
various body
sheets.

Injuries.

Rapid reference
sheets,


26

(2) Detailed general history : past illness, surgery, accident, food, drink and
drugs.

(3) Observe : manner, clothing.
(4) Examine all clothing: remove in presence of doctor; inspect each item

separately; retain each item in a clean bag; ultra-violet light on trouser-shirt, vest,
under pants.

(5) Full general clinical examination: examine the whole body; record all
findings; record all injuries, old, new, location, size and description.

(6)Examine the affected portions : injury to various parts (details are given).

(7) Specimens of substances from the body : Blood; urine; saliva; avulscd hair;
loose hairs, avulsed pubic hair; matted pubic hair; finger nail scrappings; clippings; (
areas of soiling; pubic hair combings; swabs from «rcthral orifice; prepuce etc.

(8) Equipment : sterile swabs; sellotape; glass slides; syringe; large bore
needles, tape measures; clean paper bags; labels.

Victim

(1) Consent to examination.

(2) Detailed genera! history : past illness, accident, cperation, food, drink and
drugs.

(3) Detailed specific history : obstetric; menstrual etc.; past sexual experience;
details of present incident.

(4) Observe : manner, dress; make-up.

(5) Examination of clothing : remove in presence of doctor, inspect each item a
separately, retain cach item in a clean bag; damage, staining, soiling; ultra-violet light
on pants, tights, pantragirdle.

(6) Full geveral clinical examination: examine the whole body: record all
findings; record all injuries; old, new, location, size, description.

(7) Exainine the affected parts (details given).

(8) Specimens (details given).

(9) Equipment: Sterile swabs; hypodermic syringe; needles, gloves, slides;
labels, speculum; tape measure, sello tape; clean paper bags.

VI. Conditions in which examination is conducted
Conditions for 4-16. We have so far discussed the contents of medical reports. Certain matters concerning
physical examina- the conditions for physical examination are also of interest. Justice cannot be done to either,
tion, parties (the prosecution or the defence) or to the doctor, if adequate conditions for examination

of the victim are not available. It is, therefore, necessary that the equipment and environment
of the examination should he adequate: in particular, the premises should be well-lit.

In order to put the victim at ease, it would be desirable (unless the victim is an adult woman
of mature years), to examine orally first the mother or other older relative by whom she is
accompanied. The circumstances in which the offence is alleged to have been committed should
be first ascertained from such relative.

Order of exami- 4-17. As regards the actual exarrination of the victim, the general physical examination
nation. should be first commenced, in order to induce a feeling of relaxation in the victim. The parts of
the body more directly affected could be examined later on.

4.18. There have been wany learned discussions as to the conditions in which such™*
examination should be made and as to the equipment that may be used. For example, one
expert in legal medicine has stated his experience thus\—

Conditions and
equipment.

1, K.F.M. Pole, Letter in (January 1970) Medicine, Science and the Law, page 73.


27

. “Examination with an ultra-violet lamp I consider to be very useful and the
police put a mains’ model at my disposal whenever I need it—that is, in every reasonably recent
case. Details depend on the history of baths and ablutions since the incident, but I would rather
err on the side of using it too cften than too rarely.”

VII. Colour photographs

4.19, It is also desirable to take colour photographs of injuries, for these are the only
photographs that give a true picture of the age and extent of many significant injuries, such as
bruises and abrasions. It is these comparatively minor injuries that are often of the greatest
importance in reaching a medical diagnosis in a case of alleged rape.’

41, British Academy of Forensic Sciences, Memorandum on law regarding rape (July 1976), Medicine, Science
and the Law, pages 154, 158,

Colour photo-
graphs,


Scope of Chapter

Section 198(6),
Cr. P.C., 1973-—
Amendment re-
commended.

Court competent
to try.

Procedure for
trial—the chrono-
logy.

Trial in camera—
Section 327, Cr.
ए.८.

be held in camera.

CHAPTER 5
PROCEDURE FOR TRIAL, TRIAL IN CAMERA
AND PUBLICATION OF PROCEEDINGS

I. Cognisance of offences

5.1. We propose to deal in this Chapter with certain aspects of procedure relating to the
trial of rape and allied ofiences.

5.2 We first deal with the cognisance of offences, Section 198(6) of the Code of Criminel
Procedure, 1973 requires a complaint to be filed within one year in case of rape constituted by
sexual intercourse by husband with a wife under 15 years. The portion referring to “wife under
15 years” should be deleted from this sub-section. The reason is that under the umendments
recommended in the 42nd Report! to the Indian Penal Code, the scope of section 375, 1.P.C.
would be expanded, so as to cover not only intercourse with 3 child wife, also, in certain
circumstances, intercourse with the wife (irrespective of her age) if the wife is living separately.

Accordingly, we recommend thet section 198(6) of the Cede of Criminal Procedure, 1973
shouid bz revised as under *—

Revised section 198(6), Code of Criminal Proce:lure, 1973

“(6) No Court shall take cognisance of an oficnce under section 376 of the
Indian Penal Code, where such offence consists of sexual! intercourse by a man with
his own wife, -if more than one year has elapsed from
the date of the commission of the offence.”

5.3. The offence of rape can be tried only by the Court of Session. The position in this
regard needs no change.

I. Stages of trial

5.4. Under the Code of Crirainal Procedure, 1973, the procedure for trial in Courts of Session
js goverred by provisions contained in a separate Chapter devoted to such trials, which does
not seem to need any change so far as the various stages of trial in regaré to the offences dealt
with in this Report are concerned.

का, Trial in camera

5.5. There is, however, one matter of procedure in regard to which there is scope for reform.
A trial for rape, like other criminal trials, is, in general, conducted in public. This is in accordance
with the statutory provision in the Code of Criminal Procedure on the subjeci.*

The reasons why trials are held in public (subject to specific statutory exceptions) have
been discussed judicially’ and otherwise, more than once, and we need not set them out.
However, in the case of sexual offences, there is an overriding consideration which justifies_an
exception being made to the general rule of public trial. Certain details of an intimate character
may have to be narrated in court in such trials. It is not only embarrassing for the victim to
narrate them in the full glare of publicity. Often, by reason of such embarrassment she may
not be able to give all the factual details, ‘and the cause of justice may ultimately suttc! fer. It is,
therefore, on the wider ground of interests of justice, that we would recommend that in the
absence of special reasons to be recorded by the Court, a trial for rape or allied cffences_must

1, See para 2.24, supra.
2, Section 327, Cr. P.C., 1973.
3, Naresh v. State of Maharashtra, AJR. 1967, 5.0. 1.

28

a.


29

5.6. We may state that the broad principle of publicity can be modified where the Court Need to modify
thinks that justice could not be done at all if it had to be done in public.' tule.

The proposition that ‘where secrecy begins justice ends’ is one held by most lawyers as
sacred. However, in the area cf rape, and indeed of all the serious sexual offences, there is a
particular burden on the complainant and on the accused with the real risk of courtroom
defamation repeated in the press, which may subsequently be found py the Court to be totally
unjustifiable.

It is for this reason that in England, the National Council for Civil Liberties’ in their pamphlet
on The Rape Controversy, said—-

“The law should recognise the fact that there is still a stigma attached to rape
from which the victims may suffer for years afterwards.”

We would wish to extend this view to include the stigma that may attach itself to the
accused for years afterwards even following an acquittal. In this context, it should be remembered
that the making of an allegation of rape against any man imposes upon him an equally unpleasant,
humiliating and embarrassing experience in respect of which he should be entitled to the same
protection as may be accorded to the alleged victim.

5.7. A the light of the above discussion, a specific proviso should be added to section 327 Recommendation
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, as under :— 1S amend zection

Proviso 16 be added to section 327 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

“Provided further that unless the presiding judge or magistrate, for reasons to
be recorded, directs otherwise, the inquiry into and trial of rape or allied offence shall
be conducted in camera,

Explanation.—in this sub-section, the expression ‘rape or allied offence’ applies
to—
(a) an affence punishable under section 354 or section 354A of the Indian
Penal Code;*

(b) an offence punishable under section 376, section 376A, section 3768
or section 376C of that Code;*

(c) an attempt to commit, abetment of or conspiracy ta commit any such
offence as is mentioned in clause (a) or (b) of this Explanation.”

Further, the following sub-section should be added to section 327 :—

Sub-section to be added to section 327, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 after
re-numbering present section as sub-section (1).

“(2) Where any proceedings are held in camera, it shall not be lawful for any
person to print or publish any matter in relation to any such proceeding except with
the previous permission of the Court.”.

1, Scott v. Scott, (1913) A.C. 417, 437.

2, British Academy of Forensic Sciences, Memorandum on rape (July 1976), Medicine, Science and the Law
154, 155.

3, National Council for Civil Liberties, The Rape Controversy (1975).

4, Section 327, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

5, Section 354A was recommended to be inserted by the Law Commission in the 42nd Report (Indian Penal

de).

6. The section references are according to the proposals made in this Report.

7, For violation, penalty may be introduced as section 228A, LP.C. (fine upto Rs. 1000). para 5.13, infra.

8, Jurisdiction of the High Court under contempt of court is already saved by the Code.

815 M of Law/80—5S


Publication of
names of parties.

Special provisions

Preserving
anonymity of
complainant and
accused in sexual
offences.

Anonymity at the
stage of investi-
gation.

Publicity at_ the
stage of trial—
Trial in camera
and penalty for
illegal publicity
to court proceed-
ings.

Section 228A,
1.9.0. (New)—
Recommended.

30

IV. Publication of proceedings

5.8. Connected with the question of holding the proceedings in camera is that of publication
of the names of the victim and the accused in cases of charges of rape.

As the law stands at present, the names and details of the victim as well as the accused as
disclosed at a trial for a sexual cffence can be legally published in the press, unless the proceedings
were held in camera.’ This is in view of the general rule about the reporting of judicial
proceedings. ‘hat takes place ia the Court is public, and the publicaticn of proceedings merely
enlarges the area of the Court and gives to the trial that added publicity which is favoured by
the rule that the trial should be open and public. It is only when the public is excluded from
audience that the privilege of publication also goes, “because then the public would have no
tight to obtain at the second hand what it cannot obtain at first hand”?

5.9 This general rule, however, sometimes causes embarrassment. Realising the need for
modification of the gencral fosition, the legislature has enacted, in regard to proceedings of a
special nature, special rules on the subject. We need not enumerate here Central Acts and a
few State Acts that contain such provisions.

5.10. On a careful consideration, we are of the opinion that there is need for legislation to
preserve the anonymity of the complainant and the accused in the case of rape and allied offences
(subject to exceptions in regard to certain specified cases).

The principal object of the amendment would be to save avoidable embarrassment to the
victim and to the accused. The justification for such a provision need not be spelt out. Restrictions
on the reporting of judicial proceedings are not unknown to our law,’ though such restrictions
should be imposed only for the weightiest reasons. The present seems to be such a case.

5.11. We have considered the question of anonymity under two heads—

(i) anonymity of the victim and the accused at the stage of investigation and

before the trial commences; ~

(ii) anonymity of the victim and the accused as regards proceedings in Court
at the irial stage.

As regards the stage of investigation, we do not propose to make any recommendations for
statutory amendment or for the enactment of separate legislation. Though we do appreciate
that the victim and the members of her family find it embarrassing that the name of the victim
is given publicity, we would leave the matter to the good sens2 of the journalistic profession—
and to such provisions of the cxisting law as may be applicable.

5.12. As regards anonymity at the stage of trial, some special provisions are, in our view,
called for. Here again. we do not propose the enactment of separate legislation. We have
recommended‘ that the trial of cases relating to rape (and allied offences) should be held in
camera. On the enactment of such a provision, the publication (witkcut permission of the Court)
of proceedings so held in camera would be a contempt of Court,’ for which the High Court can
take appropriate action.

5.13. However, to fortify the present law, we recommend that there should be insetted, ing
the Indian Penal Code, a new section’—say, as section 228A—in the following terms :—

Section 228A, I.P.C.
(To be inserted)

“228A. Where, by any enactment for the time being in force, the printing or
publication of any matter in relation to a proceeding held in a Court in camera is
declared to be unlawful, any person who prints or publishes any matter in violation
of such prohibition shall be punished with fine which may cxtend to rupees one
thousand.””

Naresh v. State of Maharashtra, A.1.R. 1967 S.C. 1.

Naresh v. State of Maharashtra, A.1.R. 1967 S.C. 1, 27, para 97; (1966) 3 S.C.R. 744.

See para 5.9, supra.

See para 5.27, supra.

Naresh ९. State of Maharashtra, A.I.R, 1967 S.C. 1.

Section 228A, Indian Penal Code (proposed).

. Proposed offence to be non-cognisable, bailable and triable by any magistrate. Complaint of the Court
holding the proceeding or its superior Court to be required.

AO eee


i
!

31

5.14, The proposed provision will cover every case of violation of any statutory provision
which declares unlawful the printing or publication of such matter. If our, recommendation is
accepted, it will be possible to delete. at a convenient time, similar provisions in special
enactments so as to prevent duplication.

5.15. We may make it clear that publication of the name of the convict as a punishment is
a matter which will be dealt with later?

V. Examination on commission

5.16. 4 suggestion was made by some of the representatives of women’s organisations
(during our cral discussions with them) that women should be examined on commission and
should not be made to come to Court (in criminal cases). We have carefully considered the
matter, but we do not consider any such statutory provision to be practicable.

In important cases, so many persons (and not merely the Judge) have to take part in the
trial. Moreover, the accused may have to be identified, or the property in dispute may have

to be shown to the witness. All these arrangements cannot, in many cases, te made when the
examination is on commission.

5.17. The issue of a commission is generally a time-consuming process. Save in exceptional
cases of hardship and the ‘ike, the procedure of examination on commission may, if made
mandatory by law, be productive of injustice in most cases.

If the object is to save embarrassment, that object would amply be secured by holding
the trial in camera, as recommended by us.’

We are not, therefore, in a position to accept the suggestion.

VI. Participation in trial

5.18. It has been suggested bv one of the women’s organisations with whom we had oral
discussions that there should be a provision entitling an organisatioa interested in ctiminal matters
to intervene in a criminal trial, so ६६ to enable it to put forth its point of view. The suggestion
was made without elaborating the value, object and purpose of the intervention of ‘interested
parties’ in the trial of the perscn alleged to be the offender. On the face of it, the suggestion
appears to us as one having dangerous potentialities and implications.

5.19. It may be that the idea behind the suggesion is to keep a watch on the working of the
courts, the judges and the lawyers and to prevent them from straying away from the path of
justice. If that be so, the suggestion is one down-grading the presert judicial system, the judges
and lawyers and expressing a lack of faith and confidence in them. It is not known whether
the suggestion has been made with the ideology of a judiciary under ‘pepular control’. It is all
right to say that the intervention of third parties is necessary in the public interest. This sounds
good so far as the words go.

The interests of the prosecution and the accused in a criminal case are well protected by
theic relations, lawyers and the court. But an utter Stranger seeking intervention in a criminal
trial cannot have any joint or common interest with the accused or the person aggrieved in a
criminal case. A body of persons cannot claim to have this joint or common interest merely
because it is an organised budy interested in criminal matters.

5.20. It must be remembered that in cases relating to rape, where the raped woman belongs
to one caste or community or group and the accused belongs to any other caste or community,
the feelings between the two parties run high. It is easy to see that if, in such cases third parties
claiming to be interested in the woman raped or in the accused are allowed to intervene, the
proceedings in the Court will be reduced to a trial of the accused by the public and the Court
will be turned into a forum for a class or caste or communal warfare. Tise trial will thus become
a farcical one, prejudicing one party or the other. We have, therefore, no hesitation in refusing
to accept the suggestion.

1, 8.8. section 23, Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.
* See Chapter 6, infra.

3 See para 5.7, supra.
S/S M of Law/80—6

Consequential
amendment of
other laws.

Publication after
conviction.

Examination on
commission.

Participation by
organisations &
suggestion con-
sidered.

Risks attendant

on acceptance of
the suggestion.

Peculiar features
of a case relating
to rape.


Suggestion to
give publicity,

Discussion in
earlier Report.

Suggestion not
act .

CHAPTER 6
PUBLICITY ON CONVICTION

6.1. In the course of our oral discussions, a suggestion has been made that in cases of
conviction of murder and other serious offences, suitable publicity in newspapers and other
media should be given, so shat tke public may come to know of the state of crime in the
country and it might also act as a deterrent. While we appreciate the object underlying the
suggestion, we should point out that there are certain other countervailing considerations that
might require to be taken rote of. It is true that the object of deterrence may, to some extent,
be achieved by such publicity; bet, as against that, it should not be overlooked that modern
penological theery places emphasis or. the rehabilitation of the criminal as well. Where there
is no possibility of a repetition of the offence by the convicted person, such publicity might have
no utility from the point of view cf deterrence of that particular individual, and might come in
the way of full rehabilitation being achieved.

6.2. In this context, we may also note that the question of giving publicity to convictions
was considered at some length when the Law Commission dealt with the Indian Penal Code.
After an examination of the pros and cons of the matter the Commission recommended the
introduction of publicity as a type of punishment in certain cases—-mainly those were cases of
anti-social offences which are indulged in persistently by “whit>-collar criminals” and in regard
to which publicity might act as a real deterrent. Likelihood of repetition of such offences is
very high, having regard to the nature of the activity. The same may not necessarily be true

of rape.

6.3. We are not, therefore, inclined to accept the suggestion which, in any care, is concerned
with serious offences in general and is not confined to sexual offences.

31, Law Commission of India, 42nd Report (Indian Penal Code), pages 55-57, Paras 3.21 to 3.25.


CHAPTER 7
EVIDENCE
I. Introductory

7A. We propose to consider in this Chapter certain matters pertaining to the law of evidence
in so far as its provisions or vales are relevant to the offences with which this Report is
concerned. Although, in general, 1ules of evidence occupy a subordinate pesition in legal
literature, in this particular case. they seem to have a very important bearing on the subject of
this Report.

7.2. When one views the miter exclusively from the point of view of the victim, the difficulties
which confront a woman who alleges she has been raped, become apparent. First, she must
convince the police, then be subyecied to a medical examination aud fially undergo an cmbarrassing
and humiliating cress-examination in Court. In rape cases, evidence about the victim's past

sexual or gynaecological experiences is presumed to have a bearing on the outcome of the
trial.

73. In the field of evidence as relevant to the offence of rap, the main issues that are
usually discussed are complaint, proof of want of consent,’ the need for cciroboration of the
testimony of the victim,’ and evidence of character of the victim,‘ and other iraproper questions.*
Besides these, we shall also deal with one suggestion as to evidence of character of the accused.’

74. The Law Commission, when it examined the Indian Evidence Act some time ago, had
occasion to consider the difficulties faced by a witness who has to undergo cross-cxemination as
to character, and made certain recommendations on the subject’

However, these recommendations were concerned with witnesses in gencral. As regards a
woman who is 2 victim of a sexual offence, no change of substance was considered. In
section 155(4) of the Evidence Act—which permits evidence of ‘general immoral character’ of
the prosecutris—a verbal change was recommended.

This being the position, a few aspects relevant to evidence of character of the victim
which did not then come up before the Commission® will have to be gone into, in the present
Repost.

वा, Complaints

7.5. On the subject of cvidence, we may first mention a rule which is of special relevance
to the offence of rape—the rule governing the admissibility of a complaint made by the female
soon after an alleged sexual offence. This is based on the principle that the complaint is a part
of the same transaction, and also on the reasoning that the law considers a complaint as a natural
expression of the feelings of the victim, thereby lending credibility. While, on the one’ hand,
long delay or failure in making the complaint is regarded as a suspicious circumstance, on the
other hand, a prompt complaint is regarded as evidence confirming or corroborating the allegation
of the victim, and repels any possible doubt that the story was a mere fabrication.

It may be that the rule permitting evidence of complaist is a survival of the aricient
requirement that the injured woman should make a “hue and cry” as a preliminary to her
“appeal of felony”. But the rule, in its present form, does not operate to the detriment of the

Paragraphs 7.5 and 7.6, infra.
Paragraphs 7.7 to 7.13, infra.
Para 7.14, infra.

Paragraphs 7.15 to 7.28, infra.
Para 7.29, infra.

Para 7.30. infra.

Law Commission of India, 69th Report (Indian Evidence Act, 1872) (May 1977), pages 826-834, Chapter 87.
Law Commission of India, 69th Report (Indian Evidence Act, 1872), pages 831-832, paragraphs 87.18 to
87.24.

9, See Black, Law Dictionary (1979), page 667, Left-hand column and stroud, Judicial Dictionary (1972), Vol. 2,
page 1270.
10, As ta “appeal of felony”, see Stephen, History of Criminal Law, Vol. 1, page 244.

33

Scope.

Disadvantageous
position of the
victim.

Issues in the field
of evidence.

Earlier Report on
Evidence Act.

Complaint (sec-
tion 8) and the
doctrine of “hue
and cry”.


Matter needing
change.

Burden of proof
of want of con-
sent.

Section 114, Evie
dence Act.

Signs of violence.

34

female. The rule enables cvideace to be given to confirm ins credibility, and operates as an
exception to the 1ule against hearsay as incorporated in section 60 of the Evidence Act.

7.6. There are, howe’ certain oiher matters in regard to which there is need for change in
the law of evidence. We shall address ourselves, in particular, 10 certain questions concerning
the past character of the weman. The law on the subject is unduly hersh against women who
are victims of sexual offences,

पा, Want of consent—how proved

7.7. Want of consent being a cardinal clement of rape under section 375, second clause
of the Indian Penal Code, it is for the prosecution to prove it. Now, it is commen experience
that many prosecutions for tape tail for want of such proof, There लीला arise situations wiiere

the probability is that the woman did not consent, but sufficient legal proof of want of consent
is not forthcoming.

For example, the woman may ke physically too weak or mentally too dazed to resist (so
that no marks of violence could come into existence). Or, the venue of the offence—e.e. the
secluded place in which rape is committed,—may totally take away the inclination te tesist,
even if there is a physical capacity tc do so, because resistance in such circumstances would be
futile. Same would be the case where the woman about to be attacked knows that the offender
is well armed, or where what has come to be known as “gang rape” is committed. In such
cases also, resistance would te futile, and may even cause moze harm than passive submission.
In such situations, marks of resistance or other visible signs of “no consent” cannot be insisted
upon,

In our opinion, it should be obligatory for the Court to draw prima facie inference of
want of consent, once the woman who is alleged to be the victim states in the witness box before
the Court in her evidence that she did not consent.)

7.8. Even now, if due regard te had to the provisions of section 114 of the Indian Evidence
Act, the Court is competent to presume want of consent in such special circumstances as are 7
mentioned above’—provided, of course, the other circumstances are consistent with want of
consent,

The extent to which the victim may resist is for her to determine, and there are naturally
no minima or maxima in this regard. The woman is required to go no further than is necessary
to make manifest her unwillingness tc yield to the attack. The amount of visible resistance, if
any, must depend on the facts. Resistance is important only as evidence of non-consent. The
crime does not hinge upon the woman’s exertion?

7.9. It is a peculiarity of the offence of rape that usually there are no witnesses excepting
the victim herself. Proof of the offence, therefore, primarily depends on the credibility of the
allegations of the victim. It is mainly for this reason that a statement 07 the womar. that there
was intercourse without her consent is often not accepted unless there is some overt evidence
of want of consent. Bruises, scratches or other marks of struggle may constitute such evidence,
but that would, at best, be a feeble evidence of want of consent.
v
Unfortunately, such marks of struggle are sometimes regarded as constituting the only
evidence of want of consent. Such an attitude, though deeply regrettable, has no basis in the
statutory provisions constituting the law of evidence in India. In fact, th Indian Jaw of evidence
does not, in general, lay duwn that a particular species of evidence should be insisted upon in
proof or disprocf of a pardcular fact. The Evidence Act lays down certain general rules which
indicate the nature of facts that can be proved. If a fact to be proved is a fact in issue. its
consequences (effects) are, no doubt, relevant. But proof of those consequences or effects is
not limited to particular species of evidence. Thus, if want of consent is the fact in issue, its
consequence—the physical resistance or struggle—is, no doubt, relevant; and so is the consequence
of that physical struggle. namely, marks on the body, But the law does not lay down that only
that piece of evidence can be given.

The point. in fact. need not be laboured further.

1 For draft see para 7.11. infra.
*, Para 7.7, supra.
See also para 2.11, supra.


35

7.10. We would have left the matter at that. However, having regard to the modus operandi
of committing rape that has become more frequent during recent years, it would be useful if,
by a specific statutory provision, the statement made in evidence by the prosecutrix is regarded
as raising a presumption of want of consent. As life becom2s more complex and the ways of
criminals more sophisticated, situations of the nature that we have mentioned above might
become more frequent, ard the necessity of invoking some such presumption as is suggested above
may become more apparent. We are, therefore, of the view that where rape is alleged to have
been constituted by sexual intercourse without the consent of the woman—i.e., in the case
contemplated by section 375, second clause—the court shall presume that there was want of
consent, provided the prosecutrix has stated so in her evidence.

It may be mentioned that uncer the Evidence Act, the use of the expression “shall presume”
does not bar rebutting evidence in regard to the fact about which a presumption is made.

TAL. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend thc insertion of the following new
section in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 :—

“ILIA. In a@ prosecution for rape or attempt to commit rape, where sexual
intercourse is proved and the question is whether it was without the consent of the
woman ard the woman with whom rape is alleged to have been committed or
attempted staies in her evidence before the Court that she did not consent, the Court
shall presume that she did not consent.”

7.12. One of the points made in the Debates on the motion in the Lok Sabha’ cn the subject
of rape of women was that if intercourse is proved, it should be presumed that it was an act
of rape against the consent of the girl.

7.13. In the course of our oral discussions? with women’s organisations, it was stated that
in the case of a person in autiurity who has sexual intercourse with a woman under his authority,
the burden of proof of consent should be placed on the accused.

The amendment just now recommended by us’ would, in substance, achieve the object
uaderlying these suggestions.

IV. Correboration

7.14, During the debates' on the motion in the Lok Sabha on the subject of rape, it was
also pointed out that for a crime committed some time in the dark hours of night or in the dark
corner of a house, it was impossible to get corroboration. It was also Suggested that it was
time to change the practice in this regard. We have taken note of this aspect, and hope that the
amendments recommended by us in the law of evidence, together with the law as expounded by
the Supreme Court on the subject of corroboration in two important judgments,* will serve
the purpose and advance the cause of justice. The judgments were pronounced in 1952 and
1958, and were followed in later judgments’-* of 1972 and 1973.

V. Past sexual history

7.15. We now deal with a very vital question of evidence related to prosecutions for Tape.
The question is this—how far should the past sexual history of the victin: of rape be allowed to
be given in evidence in Court on behalf of the accused? More than any other point of evidence,
this has been the source of the very grave dissatisfaction with the legal system and of the feeling
of alienation of the general public from the law and its processes, to which we have made a
reference in the introductory’ Chapter.

1, Lok Sabha Debates, 28th March, 1980, column 8975.

2, Oral discussions held on 1501 April, 1980.

3. Para 7.11, supra.

4. Lok Sabha Debates, 28th March, 1980, column 8972.

5. Rameshwar v. State of Rajasthan, AJR, 1952, 5.0., 54; (1952), S.C.R 377; (1952), Cr. LJ 547

6. Sidheswar Ganguly v. State of West Bengal, A.I.R. 1958 S.C. 143; (1958) $.C.R. 749; (1958) Cr. LJ. 273,
7

8

9,

Gurcharan Singh v. State of Haryana, A.ULR. 1972 S.C. 2661.
Madho Ram vy. The Stote of U.P., ALR. 1973, S.C. 469,
Chapter 1, supra.

Need to change
the law.

Recommendation
to add section
1114 in the Evi-
dence Act.

Presumption of
want of consent.

Burden of proof
in case of a
person in autho-
rity.

Corroboration.

Past character as
a relevant fact—
Sections, 8, 9,, 11
and 14, Evidence
Act.


36

In the first place, where the issue is one of consent, evidznee of past intercourse with the
accused may become relevant under the omnibus provision in section 11 of the Evidence Act,

under which a fact is relevant if it renders highly probable or improbable the existence of another
fact in issue ov relevant fact.

Secondly, evidence cf past acts of intercourse with the accused may become admissible as
showing passion (a “state of mind”—-section 14).

Thirdly, sections 8 and 9 of the Evidence Act could arguably be invoked to render past
acts of sexual intercourse relevant as showing conduct influenced by’ a fact in issue or a relevant
fact.

7.16. Of course, the sections! of the Evidence Act referred to above? would be material only
on the issue cf consent, and the evidence that can be Permitted thereunder must also relate to
specific acts of sexual intercourse with the accused (or undue sexual familiarity with the
accused).

Section 155(4), 7.17. Besides these sections, however, there is a more specific provision in section 155(4)

Evidence Act. of the Evidence Act, under which, in a prosecution for Tape or attempt to iavish, evidence can
be given of the “general immoral character” of the “prosecutrix”. This provision, it will be
noticed, is not confined to past sexual familiarity only with the eccused. It is wide cnough to
cover sexual immorality in y¢lation to others. We need not, at the moment, concern ourselves
with the question whether particular sexual episodes can be given in evidence under this provision,
What needs to be emphasised is that matters in which the accused is not at all concerned can
also be brought on ihe record under the head of “general immoral character” by virtue of
section 155(4). This means that even if the charge is one of sexual intercourse with a gir]
below the age of sitecn vears---section 375, clause fifthly, Indian Penal Code—which is
punishable irrespective of the gitl’s consent, evidence can be given of her “general immoral”
character.

Section 146, 7.

8. Finally, there is the general provision as to impeaching the credit of witnesses by
Evidence Act,

juring their character”, and ofher modes of impeaching credit mentioned in section 146 of
the Evidence Act. Of course, this section is not confined to sexual offences or to the “prosecutrix”,
Jt _is a general provision applicable to all trials. But, since this Report is concerned with sexual
offences and since the present discussion is concerned with the position of women who are the
Victims of such offences, it is Proper to mention that under this scction, questions are, in
practice, often put relating to the past character of the prosecutrix in sexual offences.

General approach 7.19. We shall indicate, in duc course,’ our precise recommendations on the relevant provisions
adopted, mentioned above.

But it would be arrrcpriate to mention at this stage that these recommendations are all
connected by a common thread. The connecting guideline is this—in a case of rape or attempted
rape, even if past immoral character of the “prosecutrix” is technically permissible as substantive
evidence or in cross-examination under the Present Jaw, that positioa needs to be modified and
such evidence or cross-examinatior should be Prohibited except as regards sexual relations with
the accused.

‘The reasons for such an approach may be thus stated :

(a) in sc far as such evidence relates to the issue of consent, there are social
evils resulting trom the tendering of such evidence and those evils. counter-baiance
the possible probative value of the evidence,

(b) in so far as such evidence does not relate to the issue of consent and is
offered merely to injure the character or shake thy credit of the woman, it is not
Proper for the law te countenance it—when such evidence cannot be given against
men who are victims of sexual offences.

We are happy to mention here that the gencral approach that we have adopted in Tegard
to the purposes for which, and the extent to which, the past sexual history of the “prosecutrix”
may be permitted to be raised as substantive evidence (or in cross-examination) is in broad ang.

'. Sections है, 9, 11 and 14, Evidence Act.
Para 7.15, supra.
3, See infra.


37

substantial harmony with the views expressed during our oral discusstons by some social
organisations, including an crganisation of women lawyers.’

7.20. Having indicated the connecting guideline that constitutes the common thread underlying
our approach to various provisions under which the question of the scxual history of the
prosecutrix may be raised, we new proceed to indicate more concretely, and in regard to each
section of the Evidence Act, the amendment that we have in mind so as to carry out the gencral
approach mentioned above.

With reference to section 155(4) of the Evidence Act, it is pertinent to point out that
the rule -which permits evidence of previous sexual history of the complainant should be
considered under two headings, namely, (i) previous sexual relations with the accused. and
(ii) such relations with other persons.

So far as sexual relations with the accused are concerned, the assumption underlying tie
admissibility of such evidence would appear to be that once a woman has consenied to a sexual
relationship with a particu’ar man, she is unlikely to dissent at a later stage. Though such an
assumption may not be necessarily realistic in every case, it could occasionally be true. There
is, therefore, justification for retaining it.

7.21. So far as previous scxual relations with other persons are concerned
opinion, strong justification for change in section 155(4). The case for admitting such evidence
is totally weak, if not completely without foundation. Such an evidence is not permissible as
regards male victims,’ or cven in the generality of cases not involving sexual Jt scems,
therefore, hardly defensible, et leas: ai the present day, to continue a legal provision whereunder
the character cf a female witness can be impeached merely because she happens to be a
“prosecutrix” in an ofience of rape or attempt to commit rape.

there is, in our

Evidence of acts of intercourse with persons other than the accused indicates a mmote cr
faint likelihood of the woman having consented to the particular act. Even when a larlot or
a prostitute is raped, her consent at the time of the commission of the crime mus‘ be proved by
evidence aliunde.

For all these reasons, section 155(4) requires modification so as to exclude evidence of
sexual relations with persons cther than the accused.

7.22. We find that another aspect of section 155(4) also requires to be Jooked into.
Section 155(4) is, at present, applicable even where consent is not matcrial. The section is
wide enough to apply not only where rape is charged under the category of “want of consent”,
but also where it is charged under some cther head,—for inple,—where the offence is
committed in respect of a girl below the statutory age. The fact that the prosecutrix is a
person of “general immoral character” cannot have significance whalsoever where the prosecution
is not based on the want of consent. As regards the credibility cf the girl as a witness, that is
to say, leaving aside the issue of consent, there does not seem to be any reason why the law
should contain a rule discriminating against women. If “general immoral character” is regarded
as shaking the credit of the femele, it can as well be regarded as shaking the character of a male
witness. But there is no corresponding provision applicable to a male “prosecutor”.

It is wrong to assume that a female witness is less likely to tell the truth when she has a
generally immoral character. Evidence of sexual immorality cannot be admitted in other cases
as substantive evidence.

7.23. These are not mercly theoretical arguments. The provision in section 155(4) some-
times causes scrious hardship. The victim of rape, questioned at length, very often feels
humiliated, particularly at home or amongst neighbours or at work or at school.  Sclf-consciousness
and shame, resulting from queries and adverse comments, might even resvit in a permanent
scar on her peace of mind and psychic well-being. In this respect, the provision in section 155(4)
may be regarded as deserving of serious re-considcration.

7.24. There can hardly be any doubt that an unrestrained questioning on such maiters can
amount to a destruction of the reputation and self-respect of the woman. There must be struck
a balance between the demands of fair trial and the dignity of the woman. The law should
reflect an approach which protects her interests, without compromising those of fair trial.

1, Discussions from 9th to 15th April, 1980.
3, See supra.

Sections 155(4),
146 and 53A
(proposed), Evi-
dence Act—Re-
commendation.

Section 15584)
and sexual rela-
tions with other
persons.

Section 155(4)—
another point for
amendment.

Difficulties caused
by section 155(4).

Harm to reputa-
tion—danger of.


38

Amendment of 7,25, On a careful consideration of the matter, we have come to the conclusion that

section fn Prine section 155(4) of the Evidence Act should be amended as suggested above.’ In brief, it

mime * should be confined to sexual relations with the accused and that too only where consent is in
issue.

Section 146, Evi- 7.26. But this amendment cf section 155(4) of the Evidence Act would not be an adequate

dence Act. measure for reforming the law. Theoretically, it would still continue to be permissible to give
evidence about the “character” of the female prosecutrix under the general provision in section 146
of the Evidence Act. The possibility of such an alternative being open to the accused in
cross-examination of the female prosecutrix in a prosecution of Tape or attempt to commit rape
ought, in our view, to be totally eliminated, for the reasons stated above.

One effective method of doing so would be to insert a Provision in the Act by way of
addition to section 146, to ike eflect that in a prosecution for rape or attempt to commit rape,
where the question at issue is the consent of the woman, it shall not be permissible to adduce
evidence or to pat questions in the cross-cxamination of the prosccutrix gs to her general immoral
character, or as to her prior sexual experience with any person other than the accused.

Amendment of — 7.27. Accordingly, we recommend that the following sub-section should be added to section
section 146, 146 of the Evidence Act :—

“(4) dita prosecution for rape or attempt to conunit rape, where the question.
of consent to sexual intercourse or attempted sexual intercourse is at issue, it shall
not be permissible to adduce evidence or to put questions in the cross-examination
of the pre ix as to her general immoral character, or as to her previous sexual
experience with any person other than the accused for proving such consent or the
quality of consent.”

Section 533 (pro. 7-28. Even this emendmeni of the law, however, would not be enough.
posed) to exclude is also necessary to exciude the possibility of evidence of genera] inumora! char:

evidence as to under the sections’ of the Act which relate to substantive evidence.’
character.

Jn our opinion, it
icter being tendered

Accordingly, we recommend that the following new section should be inserted. in the
Evidence Act, say—as section 53A :—

“S3A. [it 6 prosecution for rape or attempt to coni rape, where the question
of consent to sexual intercourse or attempted sexual intercourse is at issue, evidence
of the character of the prosecutrix or of her previous sexual experience with any
person other than the accused shall not be relevant un the issue of such consent or
the quatity of consent.”

VI. dinproper questions

Section 150. 7.29, So much as 1egards evidence of sexua} history. We now deal with the position as to
Evidence Act improper questions in general. The Evidence Act has a catenna of provisions whose object
Amendment re- is to ensure that questions intended to shake the credit of witnesses by injuring their character
commended, are kept within legitimate bounds. Nevertheless, it is sometimes seen that such questions are 2S
put indiscriminately in the lower courts. It then becomes the duty, though unpleasant, of the’
presiding officer of the court to report the matter to the appropriate authority for action, if the
question is put by a legal practitioner. The Evidence Act has a specific provision in this regard,
to be found in scction 150. The object of the provision is that the authority to which the
matter is reported may take suitable action. With this end in view, the section provides that
“if the court is of opinion that any such quetsion was asked without reasonable grounds, it
may, if it was asked by any barrister, pleader, vakil or attorney. report the circumstances of the
case to the High Court or other authority to which such barrister, pleader. vakil or attorney is
subject in the exercise cf his profession’.

Various amend y ing to the various categories cf “legal practitioners” ar
ments suggested 7.30. So far as the words teferring to the various legories gal p ition are

in section 150. concerned, they should now be replaced by the word “advocate”, and such a recommendation
was, in fact, made by the Law Commission, in its Report on the E

1, Para 7.21 and 7.22. supra.
2 Sections 8, 9, 1! and 14, Evidence Act.
3, See paragraph 7.15, supra.
4. Law Commission of India, 69th Report (Indian Evidence Act, 1872), page 814, para 84.33 and footnote 3.


39

The Law Commission, in its Report on the Act, also recommended deletion of the words
“or other authority” from this section. This would mean that che matter would be reported
to the High Court. We would, however, recommend that instead of the matter being reported
to the High Court, it skould be reported to the State Bar Council, which (under the present
statutory set up) is empowered to take appropriate disciplinary action in such cases. We,
therefore, recommend that section 150 of the Evidence Act should be revised so as to read as
under :—

Revised section 150, Evidence Act

“150. If the Court is of opinion that any such question was asked without
reasonable grounds, it may, if it was asked by any advoraie, report the circumstances
of the case to the State Bar Council.”

VII. Character of the accused

7.31. One of the women's organisations with whom we have held oral discussions has
suggested that the Evidence Act should be amended suitably by providing that evidence of
character of the accused shall be relevant in all cases of rape and molestation of women. Since
we are recommending’ amendment of the provision in section 155(4) of the Evidence Act which
at present permits evidence of the “general immoral character” of the prosecutrix, we do not
propose to recommend the change contemplated in the suggestion.

1, 56९ recommendation as to section 155(4), idence Act, para 7.25, supra.

Characte: of the
accused.


Effect of our pro-
posals.

Changes whether
going for enough
or too far.

Effect of films and
the real challenge.

CHAPTER 8
CONCLUSION

8.1. We have come to the end of the task committed to us. We believe that we have made
proposals to sccure that no person who has committed rape escapes punishment, that women
who become victims of rape are not harassed during the course of investigation and trial in the
Court and that the trial of persons charged with rape is speeded up, to ensure tnat the police
discharge ctliciently and promptly the manifold and complex problems that confront them in rape
cases, and to assure the free movement of women by giving them protection when thcy move
cut, as also to the inmates of women’s lodgings and hostels.

8.2. There may be some who feel that the changes recommended by us are likely to be
for the worse. Such persons are too complacent for our taste. Ther> may be still others, who
may regard our recommendations as nothing more than an attempt 10 patch-up the system of
criminal justice, which, according to them, is so defective as to be beyond redemption. We
do not delude ourselves into thinking that our proposals will bring into the investigaiion and
trial of cases of rape a stale of perfection. Sometimes 0105 best endeavours go awry. What
we have attempted is to strike a balance between the interests of the accused and those of the
victim in a case relating to rape, and thus to protect the interests of the society.

8.3. During the course of discussion with us, a lady Member of Parliament! pointed out the
pernicious influence of Indian films highlighting rape and its attendant violence. The real
challenge, therefore, in dealing with the problems of rape and its horrors lies in rousing public
consciousness against it. and in preventing the publicaticn and exhihiiion in any form of that
trash material, which only corrupts the minds of the youth and of the depraved. Te this problem
we commend Governments carnest and immediate attention.

P. V. Disit Chairman
S. N. Shankar Member
Gangeshwar Prasad Member
P. M. Bakshi Member-Secretary

25th April, 1980.

3, Mrs. Sushila Adivarekar, M. P. (Rajya Sabha).

40


APPENDIX 1

Copy of Letter No, PS/LS/LAI80, dated 27th March, 1980 from the Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs 10 the Member-
Secretary, Law Commission of India.

P. 8, VENKATASUBRAMANIAN 0.0. No. PS/LS/LA/80
SECRETARY
Government of India
Ministry of Law, Justice & Co, Affairs,
Department of Legal Affairs.

New Delhi, the 27th March, 1980
My dear Bakshi,

You would be aware that recently there has been a considerable amount of discussion in the Press and in other Forums regarding
the inadequacy of the law to protect women who have been victims of rape or assaults on their modesty. There has also been a certain
amount of criticism that the law does not contain enough safeguards to protect the women who might be summoned to police stations
or other like places for the purposes of interrogation or investigation, or who might be taken and kept in custody.

2. In view of the strong public opinion on this point, Government desires that the Law Commission should make a special study
of the subject. The study should cover not only the substantive law relating to rape, but also the rules cf evidence and the procedure
followed in criminal trials wherein a person is charged with the offence of rape or for assult on the modesty of a woman and other related
matters. The existing practice and the administrative instructions with regard to interrogation and arrest of women might also be gone
jnto.

3. Government would like the Commission to give the top most priority to this work and to submit an urgent report within as
short a period as possible.

4. In this connection, a copy of a letter addressed to the Prime Minister by Shrimati Sushila Adivarekar, M.P. and the recent
instructions issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs which might be of use to you are being sent separately.

With kind regards,

Yours sincerely,
Sd/-

(P. 8. VENKATASUBRAMANIAN)
Shri P. M. Bakshi.
Secretary
Law Commission,
Government of India.
New Delhi.

41


APPENDIX 2

List of persons and bodies with whom discussions were held
9th April, 1980.
1. All India Women’s Conference, New Delhi.
Represented by :
(a) Mrs. Raksha Saran,
Patron.

(6) Mrs, Urmila Kapoor,
Member-in-charge of Legislation.
(०0 Mrs, Padma Seth,
Member-in-charge of Publicity & Public Relations.

. Young Wome:

Represented by

(a) Mrs. Prem Wati Thaper,
Vice-Chairman.

(b) Mrs. Nirmal Malhotra,
Secretary,

(Mrs. Promila Gupta,
Member, Executive Council.

Association, New Delhi.

10th April, 1980.
3. Young Women's Welfare Association of India, New Deihi.
Represented by :
(@) Mrs. Raj Usha Chopra,
President.

(b) Mrs. 5. Nagia,
Secretary (Social Welfare) of the Association.

4. National Federation of Indian Women, New Delhi.
Represented by :
(@) Mrs. Vimla Faroogi,
General Secretary.
(6) Mrs. Manmohini Sehgal,
Secretary

(c) Miss Anima Chatterji,
Treasurer.

th April, 1980.
5. Nari Raksha Samiti, Delhi.
Represented by :

(a) Mrs. Sarla Mudgal
President.

(6) Mrs. Krishna Kumari Sharma,

Secretary.
lsh April, 1980
6. Stri Sangharsh, New Delhi.
Represented by :
(a) Mrs. Subhadra Butalia.

15th April, 1980

7. Mrs. Sushila Adivarekar,
Member of Parliament (Rajya Sabha).

8. National Council of Women in India, New Delhi.
Represented by

(a) Mrs, Vimla Virmani,
Convenor.

(0) Mrs. S. Dhawan,
Secretary (Delhi Branch).

9. National Federation of Indian Women Lawyers (Delhi Branch).
Represented by :

(a) Miss Scita Vaidyalingam.
Advocate, Supreme Court.

MGIPRRND—S/5 M of Law/80—TSS-I—6-10-80—2,000.