LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

EIGHTY - FIFTH REPORT

ON
CLAIMS FOR COMPENSATION UNDER
CHAPTER 8 OF THE MOTOR VEHICLES
ACT, 1939

1980


Justice P. V. Dixit D.O. No. F. 2(4)/79-LC

NEW DELHI
Dated, the 30th May, 1980

My dear Minister,

I am forwarding herewith the eighty-fifth Report of the Law Commission
containing proposals for amendments of certain provisions contained in Chapter
VII of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, bearing on the question of insurance of
motor vehicles and adjudication of claims for compensation in respect of the
accidents by motor vehicles.

2. Under the Jaw as it is, a Claims Tribunal can pass an award with regard
10 payment of just compensation only after finding that the accident of the
nature specified in sub-section (1) of Section 110 was the result of the negli-
gence on the part of the driver or owner of the vehicle (Vide Sinu Vs. Bal
Krishan (1977) SCR, Vol. 11, page 886). Since this case was decided, the
Supreme Court has been suggesting with some persistence that the Motor
Vehicles Act should be amended so as to incorporate in it the principle of “no
fault liability” in road accidents. (Cencord Insurance Company Vs. Nirmla Devi
1979 (3)S.C.R. 694; Rattan Singh Vs. State of Punjab S.C.W.R. d. 10/1/1980
Vol. 35, Part I, page 29).

3. The incorporation of the principle that compensation should be obtain-
able without the necessity of proving negligence on the part of the person who
caused the accident, no doubt, involves an alteration of the existing laws. But
the alteration is both just and necessary. The persons generally involved in motor
accidents are pedestrians, children, women and illiterates. Some of them are
too poor to have the help of a competent lawyer in establishing negligence in
claim cases. These cases are contested strenuously by the insurance companies
raising all sorts of technical objections for minimising their own liability. The
result is that proceedings before the Claims Tribunal drag on for a long time
before any award is passed. Sometimes the time consuming costly litigation
makes the award of compensation, when and if it is made, virtually meaningless.
Claims Tribunals are constituted for expeditious disposal of motor vehicles
claims but in actual practice there is no expeditious disposal. The inordinate
delay in the disposal of these claims is mainly on account of the difficulty and
the time taken in trying the issue of negligence in the use of the vehicle. The
principle of “no fault liability” is not a novel. One is familiar with the consept
of absolute liability for payment of compensation under the Workmen’s Com-
pensation Act, 1923. The principle has already attracted attention in many
countries like U.K., Australia, New Zealand and many States of the United
States of America.

4. The Commission has, therefore, suggested that a new provision should
be inserted in Chapter VIII of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 providing that in
“claim cases”, the claimant third party shall not be required to plead and estab-
lish that the injury or damage suffered by him was the result of wrongful act
or neglect or default in the use of the vehicle, and further the claim for com-
pensation shall not be defeated or reduced by reason merely of any wrongful act,
neglect or default of the party suffering injury or damage. The Commission has
taken advantage of this opportunity for suggesting other amendments for securing
speedy disposal of claim cases, for early payment of the amount of compensation
awarded, for restricting the right of appeal against an award only to those cases
where the amount in dispute in appeal exceeds Rs. 5,000, for award of interest
on the compensation amount and placing a monetary limit on the liability of the
insurer. Some other amendments have also been suggested. They are of a minor
nature. All these amendments have been fully explained in the Report.

80-M/B(D)457MofLI&CA—1


5. The Commission is grateful to Shri P. M. Bakshi, Member Secretary
for his valuable assistance in the prepara of this Report. The Commission
would also like to thank Shri Vaze, Additional Secretary, for his collaboration.

With kind regards.

Yours sincerely,

Sd/-
(P. V. DIXIT)

Shri P. Shiv Shankar,
Minister of Law, Justice & Company Aflairs,
Government of India.


CONTENTS

Pace
Cuarten 1. Introductory 6 eet 1
Carrer 2. The present Jaw, and general recommendation astoChapter8 =... 6
Cuarrer 3. Liability without fault: section 92A (new) . . . . . . 8
Cuarrer 4. Beneficiaries of compulsory insurance: section 61)... 29
Cuartes 5. Limits on liability of the insurer : section 95(2) . . . .
Cuaprer 6. Duty to furnish particulars of insurance and accident : section 109 ana sectiuns
109A and 109B (new). : oe . 35
Cuarter 7. The Claims Tribunal: section 110... + . . . . . . 38
Cwarrer 8. Applicationforcompensation:section WA. ee al
Cuarter 9. Effect of death, and meaning of “Legal representative” : section 110A (1) (b)
and section 211) (proposed)... Soe 42
Cuarrer 10. Option regarding claims for compensation: section OAS. 6 ee 45
Carter 11, Parties: seetion HOB. . . . . . . . . . . 46
Onarrer 12. Appearance of parties : section 11088 (proposed). - eee 49
Cuavren 13. Evidence and proceduro: section MOC. eee 50
Caarrer 14. Interest : section 11000 . + . - . . . . . 51
Cuaprer 15. Appeal and oxcoution : sections 1100: and 1100 and new section OEE . 54
Cuaprer 16. Limitation : section 1103 (3) Be 56
Cuarrer 17. Rules : sections 111 and HLA . . . + . . . . 59
Caarrer 18. Summary of recommendations =. + + eee 60
APPENDICES
Aspendix 1, Extracts from the Indian Railways Act, 1890 - . . . . . 63
Appendix 2, lstracts from the Workmon’s Compensation Act, 1923. . . . 64
\opendis 3. Extracts from the Carriage by Aic Sot, 1972. ५ + «+ 65

Position in selected countries as to compensation for accidents caused by

Appendix 4.
m motor vehicles. . rare 66


Scope of the
Report.

Observations of
Supreme Court,

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTORY

1.1 This Report is concerned with an important matter dealt with in
Chapter & of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939—compensation to be awarded in
respect of death of, or bodily injury to, persons arising out of the use of motor
vehicles or damage to the property of a third party so arising.’ The subject has
becn taken up by the Law Commission in view of its vital relavance to social
justice and delay in the administration of justice.

Certain hardships and practical difficulties that have been experienced in the
working of the Act render it desirable that the law should be revised. These hard-
ships and difficulties, broadly speaking, relate to the principles on which liability
of the various parties arises, the jurisdiction of tribunals constituted under the
Act and the smooth working of those tribunals—those tribunals being the machi-
nery created by the Act for determining the amount of compensation to be
awarded for death or bodily injury arising as above.

1.2. In one recent case” of claim by a widow for compensation for the death
of her husband who had been run over by a truck, the Supreme Court observed
that the case had brought out all the defects in the present law under the Motor
Vehicles Act.’

(1) The law as it stands today requires the claimant of compensation to
prove that the driver of the vehicle was guilty of rash and negligent driving. This
becomes impossible, as records of the police investigation are not made available
to the Accident Claims Tribunal and officers who investigate the accident are
seldom available to give evidence.

(2) The company which has insured the vehicle—and hence is liable to
pay the compensation—raises untenable pleas and drags the claimants for years.
(This case had dragged on for 18 years).

Long litigation is beyond the financial capacity of the claimants, who have
to borrow money to see the litigation thorough. In the end, the compensation
money goes to those who have been assisting the litigation, instead of the depen
dants of the victim

Tn this case, the insurance company had filed a written statement before the
Tribunal that the truck involved in the accident had been stolen prior to the
accident and hence neither the owner nor the insurance company was liable. The
owner later filed a written statement that the truck had not been involved in any
accident. The Tribunal (and, on appeal, the High Court) acce led the story of
the insurance company that since the widow could not establish the identity of
the driver, she could claim no compensation. The Supreme Court reversed this
decision of the High Court on the basis of the contradictions in the written state-
ments of the insurance company and the owner, along with other evidence.

(3) The Supreme Court observed that the principle of “no fault liability
for motor accidents” must be incorporated in the law against insurers and owners
of vehicles. The dependants of victims can then claim an absolute minimum com-
pensation without having to prove rash and negligent driving on the part of the
driver. The following suggestions were made on this point:

(a) The minimum payment could vary with the number of dependants of
the victim and with the period of their dependency. These payments
could be made monthly through one of the nationalised banks nearest
to the residence of the dependants.

Chapter 8, sections 93 to 97 and 110 to 111A, Motor Vehicles Act, 1939.

® Bishan Devi Vs. Sirbaksh Singh, A.I.R. 1979 8,0, 1862 (November); (1980) 2 8.C.C. 373 (Febrauary
1, 1980).

3866 also para 3.29, infra.
“Seo further para 3.3, infra,


Scope

Claims under the
Motor Vehicles
Act.

Objects of Chapter
8,

Compulsory insu-
Trance.

2

(b) A monthly payment (instead of a lump sum, as under the present law)
would substantially reduce the burden on the insurer and consequently
on the insured.

(c) If the dependents are dissatisfied with the minimum payment, they may
be allowed to pursue their remedies before the Tribunal.

We shall, in due course, examine the niatters referred to in this judgment.

1.3. We may make it clear that this Report does not deal with the whole
of the Motor Vehicles Act. It is primarily concerned with compensation for acci-
dents, and certain questions relating to the machinery for the adjudication of
claims for such compensation.

1.4. For understanding the importance of the statutory scheme! relating to
claims for compensation for accidents caused by motor vehicles, it is necessary to
go into history of the legislation on the subject.

At common law, even where there was an insurance in respect of an accident
caused by a motor vehicle, the injured party could not sue the insurer (directly
or indirectly) in the name of the assured, to compel the insurer to pay the
insurance money to him. The reason was that under the common law, a stranger
to a contract could not sue upon it. In England, the Third Parties ( Rights against
Insurers) Act, 1930, was enacted to confer on third parties rights against the
insurer of third party risks in the event of an assured becoming insolvent and in
certain other events. But this Act could not come to the aid of a person injured
by an insolvent whose vehicle was not insured. The Road Traffic Act, 1930,
was then enacted, prohibiting the usc of a motor vehicle on a road, unless the
owner or other person using it took a policy of insurance or gave security against
liability to third parties. Yet another lacuna was detected in the legislative scheme.
The insurer and the insured could, while satisfying the requirement of compulsory
insurance, introduce stipulation in the policy, the breach of which would render
it void and by this device the insurer could escape liability to third parties. There-
fore, the Road Traffic Act, 1934, was passed to prevent the insurer from escaping
the liability under the insurance policy by compelling him to satisfy the judgment
obtained against the assured, and also by rendering ineffective certain clauses in
the policy which might be aimed at avoiding the liability arising under it. This
was the position upto 1939, in England.

1.5. In India, the provisions of Chapter 8 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939,
particularly sections 94 to 96, were modelled on English statutes then in force.
The objects of the Chapter were: (1) to enable a claimant to recover the what-
ever sum he is in law entitled to, despite the inability of the owner or the driver
to pay; (2) to prevent the insurer from escaping liability on the ground of breach,
on the part of the insured, of any term of the contract; and (3) to entitle the
claimant to recover compensation directly from the insurer.

Hitherto, legislation on the subject of compensation for death or injury from

accidents caused by motor vehicles has proceeded mainly on two lines.

(i) Insertion of provisions for enforcing liability towards third parties
against the insurer, even though the contract of insurance was between
the owner and the insurer, thus modifying the general rule of the law
of contract that a third party cannot sue on a contract.

(This change was effected in 1939 and came into force in 1946).

(ii) Creation of a special forum for the trial of claims for compensation,

thus modifying the jurisdiction of the courts within the general hierarchy
of courts.

1.6. Insurance against liability incurred to a third party could have been
effected even before the Act. But before the Act, the third party, ie. the party
injured by the accident had no right to obtain the benefit of motor insurance from
the insurer, there being no privity of contract between the third party and the
insurer. The Act for the first time conferred this benefit. The provisions for the

insurance of motor vehicles against third party risks actually came into force in
46.

© *Paagraphs 2.3 0025, infra, ——~SSCSCSCSCSCSS


Forum for ad-
judication.

Object of amending Bill
Of 1955,

Aemendment of
1956,

Amendment of 1969.

3

1.7. Until 1950, however, there was no adequate machinery for the adjuch-
cation of claims for compensation for such accidents. It was in 1956 that certain
important amendments were made in the Act which completely changed the
complexion of the proceedings that might be taken under the Act.

1.8. In introducing the Amendment Bill’ of 1955, the then Minister of
Transport thus explained the object of the Bill:—

“The State Governments are being empowered to set up tribunals to
determine the award of damages in cases of accidents involving the death of,
or bo injury to, person arising out of the use of motor vehicles and also
to adjudicate on the liability of the insurer in respect of payment of damages
awarded. At present, a court decree has to be obtained before the obliga-
tion of the insurance company to meet the claims can be enforced. The
amendment is designed to remove the existing difficulty experienced by
persons of limited means in preferring claims on account of injury or death
caused by motor vehicles,”

1.9. To carry out the above object, the amendment of 1956 introduced
sections 110A to 110F. Prior to this amendment, the claimant had in every case
to sue the insured person in the ciivl courts’, and notice had to be given to the
insurer if the claimant desired to avail himself of the benefits of section 96. By
the amendment, the legislature substituted, for the ordinary remedy of a civil
suit, a special remedy which is summary in nature.

The amended Act provides for the constitution of a Claims Tribunal and
confers jurisdiction on it to adjudicate upon claims for compensation in respect
of accidents involving death or bodily injuries to persons arising out of the use
of motor vehicles.’ Section 110A provides for the procedure for putting up a
claim for compensation. Section 1108 provides for an award of. the Claims
Tribunal to be made after giving the parties an opportunity of being heard, and
after an inquiry into the claim.

Under section 1100, subject to any rules that may be made in that behalf,
the Tribunal may follow such summary procedure as it thinks fit. Section 110D
provides for an appeal from the award made by the Claims Tribunal. Under sec-
tion 110E, compensation money awarded by the Tribunal can be recovered from
the insurer, as arrears of land revenue. Section 110F excludes, where a Claims
Tribunal has been constituted for any area, the jurisdiction of the Civil Court
to entertain any question relating to any claim for compensation which may be
adjudicated upon by the Claims Tribunal for that area. The Civil Court is also
debarred from issuing any injunction in respect of any action taken or to be
taken by or before the Claims Tribunal in respect of a claim for compensation.

These provisions show the importance attached by the legislature to the
need for prompt disposal of such claims, while leaving unaffected the principles
of substantive law as to liability.

1.10. By the Amendment Act 56 of 1969, a proviso was added to section
110 of the Motor Vehicle Act, besides making a substantive amendment in the
main paragraph of that section. Originally, section 110 permitted petitions before
the Claims Tribunal only for compensation for death or bodily injury arising out
of the accident. Now, after the amendment of 1969, the third party can make a
claim for damage to property also when caused by the accident. The substantive
provision creating a minimum statutory liability,—section 95—has also been
amended so as to provide that an amount not exceeding Rs. 2,000 in respect of
the damage to property of the third party, can be recovered from the insurance

company.

1Lok Sabha Bill No. 57 of 1955 which became the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act (100 of 1956)

*Statement of Objects and Reasons; Gazette of India, Extraordinary Part II, Section 2, No. 47
November 12, 1955, pages 555, 626.

*Para 1.7, supra.

‘See, further, para 2.4, infra,


Motor car as
the cause of con-
gestion.

Various alternati-
ves adopted.

Deviees adopted
in various count-
ries to effect re-
form.

Strict liability and
common law.

4

The amount for which the insurer would be liable was also raised by the
same amending Act. It was also provided that where the death of, or bodily
injury to, any person gave rise to a claim for compensation under the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1939, and also under the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923, the
person entitled to compensation could claim compensation under either, but not
under both of these cnactments. Further amendments were made in 1978.

1.11. These amendments have substantially served their purpose, but the
time has now come to have a fresh look at the law. Rapidity of the growth of
motor vehicles has created certain problems, outstripping the means employed to
cope with the problems. The motor car has created congestion, not only on the
roads, but also in the courts, For this reason there has, in almost all countries,
been deep dissatisfaction as to the handling by courts of claims for compensa-
tion in respect of death or bodily injury caused by motor vehicle accidents. The
common law rule of liability based on fault and compensation payable only by
the person committing the tort (or a person who is liable for his default), is
believed to be working injustice.

1.12 In order to modify the common law rules of liability and the machi-
nery for determining compensation as to accidents caused by the use of motor
vehicles, numerous measures have been suggested in various countries.’ Many
of them have been implemented by legislation. For example, there has been
legislation in some countries under which, in the case of such accidents, fault
need not be proved. Such legislation has come to be known as providing for “no
fault” liability.*

In some countries, schemes have been enacted, whereunder the State would
take over the liability for compensation, which is to be awarded irrespective of
fault, though subject to a pecuniary limit’. In such schemes other consequential
measures are contemplated for providing the necessary finances to the State.

Then, there have been moves for shifting the burden of proof. While the
requirement of fault may be retained, the burden of proof—that is to say, the
burden of disproving fault—may be shifted to the owner of the vehicle. Measures
have also been enacted in certain countries giving the victim a direct remedy
against the insurer (and not merely against the wrong-doers). This is, in essence,
a modification of the common law rule, whereunder privity is required to create
liability.

1.13. The devices adopted to effect reform on the subject also vary from
country to country. In some countries, such reform has been effeced by judicial
decisions. In some other countries, on the other hand, it has assumed the shape
of legislation. England has effected it in part by legislation, and, in part, by
certain administrative arrangements, particularly, those constituting the Motor
Insurers Bureau.

The content of the reform effected in various countries also varies as will
be evident from the detailed study* that we append.

1.14. Imposition of strict liability for death or injury caused by motor
vehicles is admittedly a departure from the general approach of the common law.
No doubt, the common law does furnish certain examples of special rules creating
strict (absolute) liability in particular situations, e.g., fire (though later modified
by statute).* Further, by statutes passed from time to time,—for example, statutes
relating to workmen’s compensation, nuclear installations and the like—important
amendments have been made, eroding the common law rule of liability based on
fault. But the common law itself has never gone so far, in the case of accidents

1Chapter 3, infra and Appendix 4, infra,

3866 further para 1.14 and 3.14 infra.

3E.G. Now Zealand Accident Compensation Act, 1972 (see Appendix 4, infra).
42.6. France (Seo Appondix 4).

"Appendix 4.

Fires Prevention (Metropolis) Act,1774.


Question of climi-
nation of fault.

Commpensation by
the State not
discussed.

Reforms relating
to ‘Tribunals and
procedure.

Lsst Reports of
Law Commission.

5

caused by motor vehicles. The reason is that Anglo-American law does not
classify the driving of a motor vehicle as a “dangerous activity”. Even the driving
of a defective vehicle is not an abnormally dangerous activity that can be made
subject to strict liability.

1.15. The present legal framework in India combines the aspect of com-
pensation with some degree of personal liability, in order to deter the teckless
and the careless. A solution based on a re-assessment of the significance of the
law of tort within the cxisting legal concept would, of course, be easily acceptable
to all concerned, But a more radicel rcform—elimination of fault—need not be
ruled out? Accordingly we propose to consider in detail in this Report* the ques-
tion of elimination of fault as an clement of liability.

1.16. We do not, however, propose to consider the question of compensa-
tion by the State to all victims of accidents caused by motor vehicles. Even the
very limited recommendation for such compensation made by the Law Commis-
sion in one of its earlier Reports for “hit-and-run” cases has not been impte-
mented so far.’ In this position, we do not think that any more comprehensive
scheme of compensation by the State stands a reasonable chance of acceptance
in the immediately foreseeable future.

What is proposed in the present Report is a detailed examination of
Chapter 8 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, in so far as it is concerned with
claims for compensation for death or injury caused by accidents arising out of
the use of motor vehicles. Our principal objective will be to suggest rationalisation
of the provisions as to liability, improvement in the machinery for adjudication
of compensation and other reforms intended to tidy up the relevant provisions.

1.17. Realising that it is desirable that cases arising out of the use of the
motor car should not chcke the ordinary channels of litigation, the legislature in
India has already provided special tribunals in the Motor Vehicles Act for the
expeditious disposal of such litigation. However, in order that this objeet may be
effectively achieved, it is necessary that the tribunals contemplated by the Act
should be constituted in adequate nambers, and also that their procedure should
be streamlined and made as speedy as possible, consistent with the demands of

justice. Our recommendations to te made in this regard will bear this aspect aiso
in mind.

1.18. Before we proceed to discuss in detail various aspects of the subject,
we may refer, in brief, to some of the past Reports of the Commission which are
relevant to the subject of compensation for accidents caused by the use of motor
vehicles. As already stated,’ compensaton for injury caused by automobiles in
“hit-and-run” cases was the cubject matter of a Report forwarded by the Law
Commission several years .° The need for expediting the trial and disposal
of claims instituted before Tribunals constituted under the Motor Vehicles Act,
1939, was stressed by the law Commission in its Report on arrears in courts,

dealing, respectively, with trial courts’, and High Courts and other appellate
courts.®

{Phillips Vs. Britannia Hygienic Oil, (1923) 2 K.B. 832, Soe further pata 3°14, infra.

*Chapter 3, infra.

*Chapter 3, infra.

‘Law Commission of India, 51st Report (Compensation for injury caused by automoblles in
hit-and-run cases) (September, 1972),

*Para 1.16, supra.

*Law Commission of India, 51st Report (Compensation for injury caused by automobiles in hit
and-run cases) (September, 1972).

7Law Commission of India, 77th Report (Delay and Arrears in Trial Courts}, page 37,
10.3 and 10.4. ), page 37, paragraph

*Law Commission of India, 79th Report (Delayand Arrears in High Courts and other Appellate
Courts), para 7-10, category III (b). See also para 7-9, infra.


Analysis of Cha=
ter

Substantive prow
visions.

Grouping of — pro-
visions.

Scheme of  geetions
94-111.

CHAPTER 2

'T LAW, AND GENERAL RECOMMENDATION AS TO
CHAPTER 8.

THE PRE:

2.1. Chapter 8 of the Act, entitled “Insurance of Motor Vehicles against
third party risks”, deals not only with insurance against such risks, but also with
liability in respect of death or bodily injury resulting from an accident caused
by the use of motor vehicles. The Chapter contains provisions of a substantive
character, as well as provisions of a procedural character. Amongst the important
bstantive piovisions may be mentioned provisions relating to liability of the
insurer and quantification’ of that liability. Amongst provisions of a procedural
character may be mentioned those concerned with Claims Tribunals.

2.2. The substantive provisions in this Chapter posses certain peculiar and
interesting features. The legislature has not attempted to codify the principles on
which liability may be fixed, this matter being left to the rules otherwise applicable,
that is (o say, the Law of Torts. In general, in the Law of Torts, in the absence
of special rules creating absolute liability, the wrong-doer is liable only for
intentional or negligent wrong-doing.' This position remains unaffected by
Chapter 8. The impact of Chapter 8 lics in this, that the liability becomes
enforceable at the victim's instance not only against the persons otherwise liable
(owner of the defaulting motor vehicle or his servant or agent, as the case may
be), but also against the insurer. (The liability is enforceable, in case of the
victim’s death, at the instance of certain other persons}. The owner of the
motor vehicle is, by law, compelled to insure himself against the risk of liability
that may be incurred to a third party, and the insurer, within the limits laid
dewn in the Chapter, is made liable to the third party even though there is no
contract between them.

2.3. The provisions in Chapter 8 can be grouped as below :-—

Section Topic

Section 93-95A. The requiroment of insurance of motor vehicles against
third party risks,

Sections 90-102. The liability of the insurer vis-a-vis the person
alleged to have su‘fered death or bodily injury
arising out of the use of the insured motor

vehicles.

Sections 103-107. Provisions relating to the certificate of insurance, its
effect, production and notification.

Section 108, Co-operative insurance.

Section 109, Duty (of certain authorities) to furnish particulars of
vehicles involved in accidents.

Sections 110-110F. Claims Tribunals.

Sections 111-1114. Rules,

2.4. The scheme of the present provisions, in so far as they are relevant
to the subject matter of this Report, may be briefly stated. Section 93 contains
certain definitions. Section 94 makes it imperative that there must be an insurance
policy in relation to a motor vehicle to cover third party risk before the motor
vehicle can be used or allowed to be used in a public place. Section 95 deals with
the requirements of the insurance policy. It also Jays down the limits of the
insurer’s liability. Section 96 imposes on the insurer an obligation 100 satisfy a
judgment which might have been passed against the insured in respect of a third
party risk. It also enumerates the grounds of defence available to the insurer.

896 further para 3°4, infra, é


‘Tripartite charae-
tor.

Definitions.

Chapter 8 — Re-
commendation too
r heading.

7

| Section 97 deals with the rights of third Parties against the insurer on the
insolvency of the insured. Section 98 casts a duty on a person against whom the
claim is made to give information as to the insurer. Section 99 telates to settlement
between the insurer and insured persons. Section 100 assigns meaning to the
expression “liabilities to third parties . ”. Section 101 relates to
insolvency of insurer. Section 102 deals with effect of death.

_Sections 103 to 108 deal with certain matters of detail, concerning insurance.
Section 109 imposes a duty on the registering officer or on the officer in charge
of a police station to furnish particulars of a vehicle involved in an accident.

Then follow a number of provisions "(sections 110 to 110E) concerned with
Claims Tribunals, their composition, applications before them, their awards,
appeals, powers and procedure. Jurisdiction of the Civil Court is barred if a
Claims Tribunal is created (section 110F).

Sections 111 and 111A deal with rules.

2.5. It should be pointed out that as a result of the provisions made in this
Chapter, a transaction of insurance assumes a tripartite character. Normally,
insurance, like any other contract, creates a legal link only between the parties
to the transaction. The rights of third parties are only against the person insured,
there being no direct cause of action in favour of the third parties against the
insurer. To this, an exception is created by Chapter 8, the principal provision
material in this regard being section 96(1), which deals with the duty of the
insurer to satisfy a judgment against persons insured in respect of third party
risk. Of course, this broad proposition is to be read subject to the limits of
liability as imposed in section 95(2), and is applicable only in respect of that
liability which is within the fold of scction 95(1). But the point to be noted is
that sections 94—96 make an inroad on the common law rule that a third party
cannot derive benefit under a contract.

2.6. Chapter 8 itself does not contain definitions of general application.
The principal expression “motor vehicle” has been defined in section 2(18).
Certain other expressions not material for the present purpose are also defined
in section 2.

2.7. The present heading of Chapter 8 of the Act—“Insurance of motor
vehicles against third party risk”—is inadequate, and should be suitably revised.
The sections contained in the Chapter do not deal only with insurance (as the
present heading would indicate); they deal also with several other matters, some
of which are of great legal as well as of social significance’. We therefore recom-
mend that the heading should be revised so as to read “Insurance of Motor
Vehicles and Adjudication of Claims for Compensation in respect of accidents

caused by motor vehicles”.

1ee also para 1-9, supra.
*See also para 2-1, supra.


motor vehicles.

Time taken in
proof of — negli-
gence.

Traffic accidents.

Scope of the
Chapter.

Statutory
tions to
ple of fault.

CHAPTER 3
LIABILITY WITHOUT FAULT
[Section 224 (New)]

1, Fault as a condition of liability.

_ 3.1. We propose io consider in this Chapter the question whether liability
for injury from accidents caused by motor vehicles should continue to be governed
by the traditional doctrine of fault (which is the present law),’ or whether there
is need for abrogating or modifying that doctrine. This inquiry becomes desirable
im view of certain practical difficultics that have been experienced under the
present system.* While, with the increasing use of motor vehicles, accidents are
also on the increase, yet experience shows that proof of the actionable element
required to create tortious liability also becomes increasingly difficult in view of
the peculiar circumstances of an accident on the road.

3.2. The question is important, as the persons generally involved in motor
accidents are pedes'ris illiterate persons, children or women. Some of them
are too poor to afford the help of a competent lawyer for establishing negligence
in claim cases’, These cases are contested strenously by the insurance company,
raising all sorts of technical objections for minimising its own liability. As a result,
proceedngs before the Claims ‘Fribunal drag on for a long time before any award
is passed. Sometimes, the time- consuming and costly litigation makes the award
of compensation, if and n it is made, virtually meaningless. The Claims
Tribunals are constituied for the expeditious disposal of motor vehicles claims;
but in actual practice there is no expeditious disposal. The jnordinate delay in the
disposal of these claims is mainly on account of the lifficulty and the time taken
in trying the issues of negligence in the use of the vehicle.

3.3 Traffic accidents have developed into one of the great economic and
social problems of today. The personal sufferings and economic losses of survivors
and disabled persons are great and so are the economic losses and the inconveni-
ence caused to the socicty, through loss of production, increased social expenses,
and strain on the capacity of hospitals and other institutions. These considerations
have, in many countries, Ied to the evolution of special rules applicable to liability
for motor vehicles accidents.

3.4, Tortious liability for injury caused by an accident is, at present, subject
10 proof of fault, except in certain special situations.

ations are governed by common law rules familiar

Some of these special
to students of the Jaw of torts.

Some of them are governed by special statutory provisions‘.

3.5, 11 may, for exampic, be noted that in a proceeding governed by the
Carriage by Air Act, the plaintiff need not prove negligence. It is for the air
carrier to disprove it, by showing either that he had taken all measures to avoid
accident, or that it was impossible to take such measures’.

a. 106,

sCanggeam Vs. Kamatabii, MIR. 1079 Kau
2For the present scheme of the Act, see United India Vs, Union of Initia, (1979) 1 M.L.J. 487.

A§oe para 1-2 supra.
4(a) Section $2. Inlian Railways Act. 1890,
(0) Section 3, Workmpa’s Compensation Act, 1923,
(०) Tho Carriage by Air Act. 1972, First Schedule, (See Appendices)
aCartiave by Air, 1972 (69 of 1972), section 5(i) read with the Schedule, Chapter 3, para 56.

8


Burden of proof
in special cases.

Presont position.

Remedies attemp-
ted to mini
mise litigation.

Difficulties of
proof.

Legislative servi
to avoid disputes
as to fault

9

It appears’ that Montreal Protocols Nos. 3-4, 1975, which amend the
Warsaw Conventions on the subject, make elaborate provisions as to certain
other matters, But the principle of strict liability remains unchanged.

In fact, liability is exonerated only if death or injury has resulted solely from
the state of health of the passenger or if the carrier proves contributory negligence.
In the latter case, there is some relaxation in favour of the carrier.

3.6. 1 may also be noted that though the determination of liability is subject
to the law of torts, yet the burden may shift to the driver in special cases, e.g., a
taxi topping on its off side in corcumstances from which unduly high speed can
be inferred’.

3.7. Apart, however, from special rules or statutory provisions, and leaving
aside special situations, and according to the position generally understood at
present, fault is required, before liability can be established * | either against the
oerson driving a vehicle causing an accident or against any other person alleged
to be vicariously liable. This principle has noi been abrogated by the statutory
provisions making the insurer liable to third parties, as enacted in the Motor
Vehicles Act’.

3.8 This position has, by many persons, been regarded as not satisfactory.
Legislatures in many countries have addressed U.cmseives to the task of finding
out a suitable remedy that would minimise [litigation and its attendant evails of
delay and arrears in this field. It is realised that accidents by motor vehicles take
place suddenly—sometimes in a split second. Very often, there are no witnesses
to the occurrence. Even if there are witnesses, they are not able to recollect with
accuracy the details of the accident in a manner that would enable the court
to fix liability on common Saw principles. {t therfore becomes diflicult to establish
the facts necessary for a determination of the question whether the person driving
the vehicle was at fault.

3.9, Difficulties of proof, of course, do not necessarily justify a relaxation
of the actionable clements of jiabi in every case. Bui it is the view of many
persons that* because of these dilficulties which are peculiar to modern highway

traffic, justice suffers, in as much as the person who could have recovered com-
pensation is unable to do so, not because fault did not exist, but because it could

not be proved.

Added to these considerations is the aspect of delay and arrears in courts
and tribunals. By the time the injured person (or if he is dead, his legal represen-
tatives) can recover compensation, considerable expenses has to be incurred by
him, At the end, the amount recovered becomes inadequate and, by reason of
intervening inflation, totally unrealistic.

वा, Strict liability.

3.10. Many of the solutions adopted in this context were inspired by the
urge to reduce the adverse impact of delay and arvears in this field. A legislature
may remove the core of confiict from an established type of dispute by the simple
expedient of defining the right in such absolute terms that it can no longer be
seriously challenged. For example, a law giving the passenger an absolute “no
fault” right to recover economic loss makes it needless to argue whether the
driver or anyone else was negligent in causing the injury. It thus eliminates one
of the important causes of delay in the particular field.

10f, Carciage oy Air and Road 3०0 1979 (०- 28), First Schedule, Chapter IIL, Articles 17 and 23.
sGangaram Vs. Kamalabia, ALR, 1979 Karn, 106.

Babu Singh Vs. Champa Devi, ALR. 1974 All, 90, 92.

sdagiit Singh Vs, Ram Chand, A.1R. 1969 Delhi 183.

sKamla Deri Vs. Kishan Chand, ALR. 1971 MP, 113,

eshte of Punjab Vs. V- Kalia, ALR, 1969 Punjab 172.

*Seotion 95.

38७० further para 3:43, infra.



Strict liability.

Legislative device
to avoid dis-
putes as to
quantum.

Common law.

Liability for motor
vehicles.

Scope of _ reforms
based on “No fault”
liability.

No-fault system.

Jo

3.11, On this basis, strict liability in the realm of torts has been created'—
to give only a few examples—in regard to :— '

(1) product failures;

(2) automobile accidents.

In family law, it has been created for :—~
(3) marital break up.

Strict liability has also been created in criminal law for certain offences—a
matter which the law Commission of India had occasion to consider at length a
few years ago.”

3.12.Imposition of strict liability focusses itself on the saving of judicial
time by eliminating one of the issues that may otherwise arise. A similar approach
could ‘be adopted to liquidate contentions over how much the victim’s loss is
worth. This can be done:—

(a) by prescribing for each injured victim a flat sum (regardless of how
much he suffered), or

(b) by installing a scheme by which the pecuniary value of benefit in regard
to each specific type of injury sustained is assessed—as in the Work-
men’s Compensation Act.

3.13. To revert to the question of liability, at common law, strict liability
existed only in a few special cases, for instance, with respect to the maintenance
of dangerous animals, for defamation and under the rule in Rylands v. Fletcher.’

In addition, a rebuttable presumption (known as the doctrine of res ipsa
loquitur) deduced fault or negligence from the nature of the thing or act itself,
such as defective construction or negligent use.

3.14. However, Anglo-American law at a critical period of legal develop-
ment missed the chance of classifying the driving of a car as an abnormally
dangerous activity subject to strict liability‘, *.

WII. No fault system.

3.15, There has been an endeavour towards reform which seeks to find more
just solutions for ordinary claims based on negligence, particularly with respect
to the great number of automobile accidents. These reforms seek to abolish the
fault principle in tort law and to award compensation without proof of fault
(“No-Fault”).

Further reform movements, although yet in their infancy, seek to extend the
“no fault” principle to almost all claims,—principally to products liability, but
also to other kinds of liability, such as medical malpractice.

3.16. In a “No-fault System”, compensation is granted for certain injuries
without proof of fault. “Compensation” in this context means compensation for
actual losses, but not for intangible damage. The injured person will, under 9
“no fault” system, be in a better position, compared with traditional tort law,
since he will be entitled to receive immediate compensation for his actual 1058
(expenses, loss of profits or wages) without lengthy litigation or proof of fault.

Agee (July 10, 1977) Economist.

sLaw Commission of India,— ह
1a) 29th Report (Proposal to include certain social and economic offences in the .P.C.), and

{b) 47th Report (Trial and punishment of social and economic offences).
aRyland Vs, Flocher, (1868) LR. 3 HL. 330.
ephittips Ve. Britannia Hygeinie Laundry, (1923) 1 K.B, 39; (1923) 2 KB. 832.

scf. para 1:14. supras.


Various systems of
compensation for
harm.

Liability based
on fault.

Qualification to
fault theory.

English and Ameri-
can law.

11

1V. Compensation systems—Varieties of.

3.17. We do not propose to go into details of the different compensation
systems in force for providing benefits to victims of accidents. But it is important
to bear in mind that several systems for the compensation of harm exist. Their
very existence shows that the law has not hesitated to adopt a special approach,
wherever special reasons seemed to justify It. These special reasons would, of
course, include considerations of social justice and the practical necessities of the
situation.

_ 3.18. As to the variety of systems, there may be'—(1) a pure system of neg-
ligence law (this is the traditional common law rule), or (2) a system of
negligence law supplemented by liability insurance (i.e. the position under the
present Motor Vehices Act in India)’.

Then, there may be (3) a system of strict liability (but_without insurance
covering the liability), or (4) strict liabifity, ‘also supplemented by liability
insurance’.

In these cases, the tort-feasor remains liable and his liability constitutes the

initial basis of actionability,—though the liability can be shifted to the insurer,
or may even be required by law to be so shifted.

(5) Besides these systems, there may be a “loss-insurance” system, such as
the workmen’s compensation law.

In the systems just now referred to, the victim provides for himself for the
future (or is made to so provide).

(6) Finally, there may be a system of social security. The primary liability
in such a scheme is on the State or on another agency officially created.

V. Developments as to insurance.

3.19. In general, the western law of liability for unlawful harm is based on
the principle of fault. The conceptions of dolus (fraud or bad faith) and culpa’
(fault or negligence) inherited from the Roman law, run through the centuries
and remain the basis of the modern law,—though their practical effect is greatly
broadened in recent times by the development’ of the law of negligence, both in
the common law and in the civil law’.

3.20. In the major western legal systems. however, the principle of fault
has, in general, been qualified in some form by giving the principle of absolute
Jiability, in respect of dangers created by the respondent, a substantially wider
application than was known to Roman Law’.

3.21. In English law, we have the rule in Rvlands Vs. Fletcher,’ in American
law, the principle of liability for ultra-hazardous activities; in. French law’, the
theorie du resoue cree; in GOrman Jaw, the principle of responsibility for risks."-

TAdapted from Keoton & Keeton, Cases & Materials on Tort (1977), page 776.

2For Engilish law, see para 5-4, infra.
30. reeammenclation in para 3:62, infra, read with section 95.
tNocholas, Introduction to Roman Law (1975), page 170.

ction to Roman Law (1975), pages 170 and 225.

2Nicholas, Introdu
of Negligence in the Law of Torts” (1926) 42 Law Quarterly

sp.H. Winfield, “The History
Review, pages 184-201.

aJenks, Common Law of Mankind (1958), page 160.

scf. Buckland and MacNair, Roman Law and Common Taw (1936), pages 313-314,

oRylands Vs. Fletcher, (1868) L.R. 3 ELL. 330. ;

toPloniol, Traite elementaire du droit civil (3rd ed . by Ripert, 1949), Vol. 2, pages 315-317

जाप, Common Law of Mankind (1958), page 160.

HU K Foreign Office, Manual of German Law (1950), Vol 1, pages 108, 110.


Emphasis on in-
surance.

Need for reform.

ronouncements of
High Coutts.

Flow in patna
ruling.

Supreme Court
decision.

View of Supreme
Court.

12

In some systems, however, it has been very sparingly accepted—for instance,
in Roman-Dutch law as applied in South Africa, though apprantly not to the
same extent in Roman-Dutch law as applied in Sri Lanka’.

3.22. All these relaxations of the rule limiting liability emphasise, more
than ever, the problem of what is to be done with the damage which, as between
the parties, is made to “lie where it falls”. The obvious answer is that it should
be covered by insurance,—voluntary, compulsory or governmental,—according
to the policy of the State concerned’.

VI. Indian law-need for reform.

3.23. So much regards the general trends on the subject of liability for acci-
dents caused by motor vehicles. We now turn more specifically to the need for
reform of Indian law.

3.24. Difficulties and impediments in the expeditious disposal by Claims
Tribunals of claims for compensation under the Act have been adverted to by
some High Courts, since 1969. The Patna High Court® went to the length of
ruling that in claim cases it was not essential to allege and prove negligence for
making the Insurance Company liable for payment of compensation and that the
fiability of the Insurance Company was absolute, though limited to the extent
provided in the policy. As against this view, many other High Courts held that
the liability to compensation arises only on the finding of negligence. The later
view was upheld by the Supreme Court', But need for reform was noted in
Kesavan Nair Vs. State liasurance Officer’ Krishna lyer J. (as a Judge of the
Kerala High Court), while holding that the insurer is liable to pay only if the
insured is liable to pay, observed :—

“Out of a sense of humanity and having due regard to the handicap of
the innocent victim in establishing the negligence of the operator of the
vehicle a blanket liability must be cast on the insurer, instead of its being
restricted to cases where the vehicle operator has been shown to be negligent.
This is more a matter for the legislature and not for the court. But this is
a Jacuna in the law which I think it would be just to rectify.”

3.25. This plea for reform of the law itself shows that the present position
js different. The flaw in the Patna decision’ referred to above (which dispenses
with proof of fault) lies in the assumption that car insurance policy covering third
party risk is a contract of indemnity even as between the insurer and the third
party. This is not so. The policy is ‘a contract of indemnity only as between the
owner of the vehicle and the insurer. The liability Of the assured to pay compen-
sation in respect of death or bodily injury to a third party—and thus the right
of the third party against the insurer—can arise only out of some tortious act of
the assured. There is, therefore, no strict liability on the part of the Insurance
Company to pay compensation, as the law now stands.

3.26. It is not necessary to go further into the question whether, under the
existing provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, proof of negligence is necessary
for award of compensation, as the matter is now concluded by a decision of the
Supreme Court’.

3.27 According to the Supreme Court* :—

“The owner’s liability arises out of his failure to discharge a duty cast
on him by law. The sight to receive compensation can “only be against a
person who is bound to compensate due to the failure to perform a legal
obligation. If a person is not liable legally he is under no duty to compensate

361 R.W. Lee, Introduction to Roman-Dutch Law (3rd ed, 1931), pagos333-334,

2Lawson, Negligence in the Civil Law (1950), page 64.

8New India Assurance Co. Ltd, Vs. Sumitra Devi, (1971) A.C.J. 58 (Patna),

बढ B, Mehta, pata 3-27, infra,

SKesavan Nair Vs. Stae Insurance Officer— (1971) A.C.J. 219 (Kerala).

‘New India Assurance Co. Lid, Va. Sumitra Devi, (1971) A.C.5. 58 (Patna) (para 3-24, supra).

2Ménu की. Mehta Vs, Balkrishma Ramchandra Nayan, (1977) 2 8.C.R, 886; 8.1.18. 1977 8.0. 1248.

8Afinu B. Mella V8. Balkrishna Ramchandra Nayar, A.LR. 1977 5.0. 1248, 1257, 1259,
(1977) 2 S.C.R. 886.


Suggestions made
by later deesions
of the Supreme

13

anyone else. The Claims Tribunal is a Tribunal constituted by the State
overnment for expeditious disposal of the motor claims. The general law
applicable is only common law and the law of torts. If, under the law, a
person becomes Icgally liable, then the person suffering the injuries is entitled
to be compensated and the Tribunal is authorised to determine the amount
of compensation which appears to be just. The plea that the Claims Tribunal
is entitled to award compensation which appears to be just when it is satis.
fied on proof of injury to a third party arising out of the use of a vehicle
on a public place without proof of negligence, if accepted, would lead; to
strange results,”

3.28. Since the decision of the Supreme Court in Minu के, Mahta’s case 7-8

the Supreme Court has been repeatedly emphasising the need for amending the

Court. Motor Vehicles Act so as to incorporate in it ine rinciple of “no fault liability”
in regard to road accidents. In a subsequent case, "Krishna Iyer J. has observed :—

Judgment of Sus

“An explosive escalation of automobile accidents, accounting for more
deaths than the most deadly diseases, has become a lethal phenomenon on
Indian Roads everywhere. The rural impact of this tragic development on
our legislatur>s. courts and law enforcing agencies is insufficient, with the
result that the poor who are, by and large, the casualty in most of these
cases, suffer losses of life or limb and are deprived of expeditious legal reme-
dies in the shape of reasonably quantified compensation promptly paid—
and this, even after compulsory motor insurance and nationalisation of
insurance business .. .. Medieval roads with treacherous dangers and
total disrepair. explosive increase of heavy vehicles often terribly overloaded
and without cautionary signals. reckless drivers crazy with speed and tipsy
with spirituous “potions, non-enforcement of traffic regulations designed for
safety but offering opportunities for systematised corruption and little else
and, as a cumulative effect, mounting highway accidents, demand a new
dimension to the law of torts through no fault liability and processual celerity
and simplicity in compensation claims cases. Social justice, the command of
the Constitution, is being violated by the State itself by neglecting road re-
pairs, ignoring deadly overloads and contesting liability after natonalising the
bulk of bus transport and the whole of general insurance business. The juris-
prudence of compensation for motor accidents must develop in the direction
of no-fault liability and the determination of the quantum must be liberal.
not niggardly, since the law values life anc I'mh in a free country in generous
scales.”

The learned Judge has re-iterated this view in many cases decided later.

29. It will be appropriate to quote from a judgment of the Supreme Court,

preme Court Diffi- ‘where some of the difficulties experienced in the present system have been adverted

culties enumerated

in a other judgment. to, at some length® :—

“14. The instant case brings into focus the difficulties experienced by
dependants in obtaining relief before the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal.
The victim in this case Bhagwan Das was ran over by a motor vehicle on
the night between 8th and 9th July, 1961 leaving behind him his wife Bishan
Devi and four minor children. For eichteen long years they have been before
courts asking for some compensation for the death of their bread-winner
due to rash and negligent drivine of a motor vehicle.

“One is tempted to remark that they would have been better off but
for their hope of getting some relief in courts. They not only had to spend
their time in courts but fo borrow to (लि for their rights. It is common
knowledge that such heloless and desperate condition is exploited by un-
scrupulous persons who manage to get away with the bulk of the compensa~
tion money if and when the claimants succeed in getting it.

“T Minw B. Mehta Vs. Balkrishna Ramchandra Nayan, (1977) 2S.C.R. 886; 4.1.8. 1977 8.0.

80-L/BQDASTMofLI&OA—2

1248. 1257.

*Para 3-27, supra.
3Concord Insurance Co. Vs. Nirmala Deri. (1979) 3 S.C.R. 694; A.T.R. 1979 S.C. 1666, 1667.

paragraphs } and 3 (October).
‘Bishan Devi Vs. Sirbaksh Singh, ATR, 1979 S.C, 1862, 1866, 1867 (November) (Kailasam J.),

"Spe also para 1-2, supra.


Recent judgment
‘of the “Supreme
Court.

Justification.

14

“15. The law as it stands requires that the claimant should prove that
the driver of the vehicle was guilty of rash and negligent driving. The burden
thus placed is very heavy and difficult to discharge by the claimant. The
records of police investigation are not made available to the Tribunal. The
officers who investigated the accident are seldom available to give evidence
before the Claims Tribunal and assist in coming to a proper conclusion. The
insurance company in quite a few cascs, as in the present one, takes an
unreasonable stand and raises all sorts of untenable pleas just to thwart relief
to the dependants, In many of the claims it turns out to be beyond the
capacity of the claimant to maintain his claim in a court of law.

“16. Due to the inordinate delay in disposal of claim petitions before
the Motor (Accidents) Claims Tribunal the badly needed relief to the
claimants is not available for several years. Further time is taken in appeals.
All along, the dependants will have to carry on without any relief. It has been
time and again pointed out by courts that insistence of proof of rash and
negligent driving causes considerable hardship on the claimants.

“17. We may point out that repeated suggestions have been made by
this Court and several High Courts expressing the desirabilty of bringing a
social insurance which would provide for direct payment to the dependants
of the victim. This Court in Minu के, Mehta Vs. Balkrishna Ramchandra
Nayan' has referred to the decision of the Kerala High Court in Kesavan
Nair Vs. State Insurance Officer, where the High Court expressed thus :—

“Out of a sense of humanity and having due regard to the handicap
of the innocent victim in establishing the negligence of the operator of
the vehicle a blanket liability must be cast on the insurers.”

“The Madras High Court in M/s. Ruby Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. V.
Govindaraj, A.A.O. Nos. 607 of 1973 and 296 of 1974 decided on
13-12-1976 has suggested the necessity of having social insurance to provide
cover for the claimants “irrespective of proof of negligence to a limited extent,
say, Rs. 250 to Rs. 300 a month.”

3.30. The following observations made in a recent judgment of the Supreme
Court? may also be noted in this context :—

“This petition for special leave under Art. 136 is by a truck driver whose
lethal hands at the wheel of a heavy automobile has taken the life of a
scooterist—a deadly spectable becoming so common these days in our towns
and cities. This is a case which is more a portent than an event and is symbolic
of the callous yet tragic traffic chaos and treacherous unsafety of public trans-
portation ...... .. the besetting sin of our highways; which are more like
fatal facilities than means of mobility. More people die of road accidents
than by most diseases, so much so the Indian highways are among the top
Killers of the country. What with frequent complaints of the State’s misfea-
sance in the maintenance of roads in good condition, the absence of public
interest litigation to call state transport to order, and the lack of citizens’
tort consciousness, and what with the negelect in legislating “into law no-
fault liability and the induction on the roads of heavy duty vehicles beyond
the capabilities of the highways system, Indian Transport is acquiring a
menacing reputation which makes travel a tryst with Death.”

3.31. It is needless to add that we have borne these observations in mind
when making our recommendations on various matters in this Report.

VII. Need for reform as to fault principle.

3.32. Coming, first, to the matters that fall to be considered, the most
important question relates to the principle of liability. In our opinion, the incor-
poration of the principle of liability without fault in the Motor Vehicles Act by
an amendment is essential in the interests of justice. He who creates a risk must
bear the consequences.

TMinu DB. Mela Vs. Balkrishna Ramchanda Navan, (1977) A.CJ. 119; ALR. 1977 8.0. 1248,
1269.

2Keaavan Nair Vs. State Insurance Officer, (1977) A.C.J. 219.

spattan Singh Vs. State of Punjab, (10-1-1980) 8.0.W.R. Vol. 35, Part 1, pages 29, 31,


Redustion of delay.

15

3.33. It is perhaps, unnecessary to set out elaborately the arguments in favour
of the introduction of no fault liability. In the course of the discussion of the
position elsewhere, we have already mentioned most of the arguments relevant
to the subject. We have also made a refrence to judicial pronouncements in India
which strongly support reform of the law on the subject. However, for convenience,
it may be stated that two major considerations justify the introduction of no fault
liabilly in this particular sphere—namely, social justice and practical necessity.

In a sense, social justice would be the inspiring principle of all such legisla~
tion. But here that aspect becomes of particular importance. The motor car is
productive of death or bodily injury more frequently and more intensely than
most other activities, The harm that is caused by its operation is, in its magnitude
and frequency, peculiar and of an extraordinary character. One could even put
the rationable of the matter by stating that “fault” comes into being from the
very use of the motor vehicle, and existence of fault need not be proved again
separately on each individual occasion when an accident is caused by the use of
the motor vehicle.

In England, the Select Committee, to which the U.K. Bill proposing no fault
liability was referred, considered that a motor-car on the road could properly
be regarded as falling within the rule '" in Rylands Vs. Fletcher and that the
obligation to compensate innocent pedestrains ought to be regarded as a duty of
the motoring community as a whole, rather than of the individual motorists who
cause the damage’.

These are facets of social justice. In addition, there is the practical aspect.
The practical necessity for reform of the law by introducing no fault principle
lies in the almost insurmountable difficulties of proof that are encountered by
every victim of an accident caused by a motor vehicle, when he is called upon
to prove fault as a pre-condition of such liability.

3.34. The incorporation of “No-fault liability” principle will considerably
reduce the delay that occurs in the disposal of claims cases by the Claims Tri-
bunal, making it easy for the person sustaining injury in an accident of the nature
specified in section 110(1) (or the heirs of a person killed in such an accident)
to obtain compensation without being required to fight a long-drawn battle for
obtaining it. The difficulties of litigants have been judicially adverted to, and we
have already referred to some of the pronouncements on the subject. As late as
May, 1980, a reported judgment of the Supreme Court refers to them’, and also
makes certain (not very charitable) comments on the manner in which a public
transport corporation conducted its defence in that particular case.

This aspect of difficulty of proof has been well stated in a recent English
article-—

“There is the notorious difficulty of ascertaining the facts, especially
after a long lapse of time There is the unreliability of witnesses (if indeed
they are available) to events which are often of spilt-second duration. And
there is the difficulty—and consequent uncertainty—in distinguishing negli-
gent from non-negligent conduct in a context where, we are told, even a good
driver (whatever that may mean) makes on the average a mistake every
two miles or, according to another study, nine mistakes every five minutes.

“All these factors make the bringing of a tort-action for a motor vehicle
injury a precarious undertaking, especially for the plaintiff who cannot claim
Legal Aid.”

388 H.L, Deb. 5th Series, Col. 1046.

274. 18 ntoresting tonote that the Bill wassupported by Viscount: Sankey and Lord Buckmaster:
.L. Deb. cols. 551, 562.

3Cf. Douglas Payne, “Compensating the Accident Victim’ (1960) 13 C.L.P. 95, 93, 94.

486० paragraphs 3:28 to 3-30, supra.
‘Rajasthan State Road Transport Corp. Vs. Narain Shanker, A.I.R. 1980 8.0. 696, 696, para 3 (Moy)e

*Norman 5. Marsh, “The Pearson Report” (Oct, 1979) 95 L.Q.R. 513, 524,



Position —_else-
where as to no
fault.

Speeches in the
House of Lords.

16

3.35. These, then, are the major considerations for reforming the law on
the lines suggested. The principle of “no fault liability” has already attracted
attention in many other countries,! where the soundness of the majo! yr reasons
advanced in the preceding paragraphs has, in substance, been accepted.

The developments are not so recent as may appear at the first sight. In
England, a Bill, which would have made motorists strictly liable to pedestrians,
without proof of fault, was, in fact, given a third reading by the House of Lords
in 1934, though it was not proceeded with in the House of Commons.

3.36. It would be of interest to quote some of the speeches made in the
Debates in he House of Lords on the Bill of 1934. Lord Danesfort said—

“The object of the Bill is to enable non-motoring users of the road,
such as pedestrains “and pedal cyclists, when they are injured on the roads
by a motor vehicle, to obtain compensation, and in the same way for com-
pensation to be obtained when a pedestrian is killed. My Bill proposes that
this compensation should be obtainable without the necessity of proving
negligence on the part of the person who caused the accident, provided—and
this is a most important proviso—that the death or injury was not caused
by the negligence of the person so killed or injured. If it is shown that the
accident was caused by the negligence of the person killed or injured then,
under the Bill, no claim for compensation arises.

“This is admittedly an alteration of the existing law, but I hope to
show your Lordships that the alteration is both a just and necessary. May I
say a few words about the dangers of the 10; today ? The position is
really an intolerable one. The injuries on the roads have reached a figure
which imposes intolerable suffering on tens of thousands of pedestrains and
their relatives, and the figures have stirred the conscience of the nation.”

* * * * *

“Such being the appalling toll of the roads on pedestrains, may 1
shortly call your Lords! pee attention to the difficulties under the existing
law in the way of pedestrains—and in the term “pedestrains” I include
pedal cyclists—obtaining compensation ? The first fundamental difficulty
arises from this fact. The motorist is always insured; he is bound to be by
Act of Parliament; the pedestrian is rarely if ever insured; and the result
is that the pedestrian, at his own cost, has to fight powerful insurance com-
panies, who in cases of death or serious disability, will raise all possible
defences. I do not blame them for that. In minor cases I believe it is true
that the insurance companies often behave generously enough, and pay
compensation, though perhaps it may be inadequate, without bringing the
injured person into Court, but in the more serious cases they feel bound
in their own interest to fight them and to raise every possible legal defence
that is open to them.

“Let us see what those legal defences are. The padestrian goes into
Court to claim compensation. The first obstacle which he has to surmount
is the duty which is thrown upon him of proving negligence on the part of
the driver. That is no “easy task. If the pedestrian is killed then, of course,
the main witness in support of the claim is not available. If, on the other
hand, the pedestrian is seriously injured, his recollection, no doubt, is
confused and is not very perfect, and he has to try to get outside witnesses
in support of the claim om the ground of negli igence against the motorist.
it is exceedingly difficult and expensive to get those outside witnesses, and
it is not at all easy for a pedestrian who is fighting his own case to go to
that expense. The result is that in many cases the pedestrian is compelled
to take what compensation the insurance company chooses to give him rather
than indulge in a terribly costly litigation which his resources are unable
to meet. I believe it is not too much to say that the dice are loaded against
the pedestrian when he seeks compensation.

1For details, see Appendix 4.
3Vol. 84, H.L. Debate, ooles. 543, 544, 084..



M7

___“But let me assume that the pedestrian has got over the first difficulty
in the Law Courts and has successfully proved negligence on the part of
the motorist. What happens then? It is open to the insurance company to
say : ‘True it is that the driver was negligent, but you were also negligent’.
In others they raise what is called in law, as your Lordships know, the
defence of contributory negligence. The claimant has “rebut that defence.
If he succeeds in doing so, well and good. If be fails, his claim is very liable
to be defeated in toto. I doubt if there are many branches of the law on
which there has been more litigation, and more very costly litigation, than
this question of contributory neglince.

* * * * *

“The justification for this Bill does not rest solely on the sufferings
and the helplessness of the victims. There is a broader basis of justification
for the Bill. It is this. Parliament has altered the law of this country in order
to enable the motorists to travel at speeds and under conditions which,
without that legislation, would have been utterly impossible. The result of
this change in the law has brought about appalling dangers to pedestrians.
The highways, instead of being reasonably safe places for pedestrians, have
become almost the most dangerous places in the country. As compared
with railways, of course, they are infinitely more dangerous. I need hardly
remined your Lordships that a pedestrian has a Common Law right to use the
roads: a Common Law right in common with all His Majesty’s subjects,
to use the roads in a reasonable manner. Now, “however, if he uses the
roads in a reasonable manner he gets killed. Is not the truth of the matter
that a resolution has been effected in road traffic by legislation in favour
of motorists? I ask your Lordships whether it is not reasonable that the
law should be altered in favour of the pedestrian to the extent—I think the
moderate extent—which I propose.

“The principle of the alteration which I propose—namely, that the
injured person should get compensation without having to prove negligence
on the part of the driver—is no revolutionary proposal. It involves a princi-
ple which has already important legal and legislative analogies.”

“As regards legislative analogies I need only refer to the Workmen’s
Compensation Act where the employer is bound by law to pay compensa-
tion to his workmen who are injured, although there is no negligence on
the part of the employer, and the only exception is where the workmen has
been guilty of serious and wilful misconduct.”

* * * * *

पु will now refer very shortly to the provisions of the Bill itself.”
Clause 1 provides that :

“Where bodily injury is caused by or arises out of the use of a
motor vehicle on a road, damages shall be recoverable in respect of
such injury from the person using the motor vehicle or from any person
causing or permitting him to use it unless the injury was caused by
the negligence of the person so injured.”

“That is the exception which I think it is proper to make, and possibly
a further exception might be made in Committee by introducing, as in foreign
countries, the accident which arises under force majeure. Then the clause
proceeds :

“Provided that this section shall not apply to bodily injury suffered
by a person who at the time of the occurrence of the event out of
which the bodily injury arose was using or being carried in or upon
a motor vehicle.”

“The effect of that is that the Bill does not apply to an accident caused
by one motorist to another.


18

“The reason for leaving out such a case is that it simplifies the Bill
and, further, that where one motorist causes injury to another the case is
essentially different from that in which a motorist causes injury to a pedes-
train. Where one motorist causes injury to another both are insured, and
an action for compensation is fought out by the insurance companies, and
no difficulties exist of the extent of character which arise in the case of a
pedestrian.

Clause 2 of the Bill provides :

“The liability imposed by this Act shall be a liability within the
meaning of Part II of the Road Traffic Act, 1930.”

“The effect of that clause is that the motorist will have to insure against
the liability imposed upon him by this Bill. No doubt, some increase of
premium may have to be paid, but it ought not to be excessive. I have been
told that it is not fair that the careful motorist should have to pay a premium
because other motorists are reckless, but that is the existing law. There is
no exemption from insurance in the case of the careful motorist. Every
motorist, careful or “not, has to insure, and properly so, and so it would
be under this Bill”.

Clause 3 is merely a definition clause, saying that—

‘motor vehicle’ and ‘road’ in this Act have the same meaining
as in the principal Act and the expression ‘bodily injury’ includes fatal
injury.”

“Then, there is a saving clause as to other remedies :

“Except as expressly provided by this Act nothing in this Act
contained shall be deemed to affect the rights of action or other
remedies which any person would have had if this Act had not been
passed.”

“That would preserve, for instance, rights under Lord Campbell's Act.
where in certain cases the dependants of a person killed have a right of
action against the person through whose misconduct the death arose.”

Viscount Sankey's 3.37. The Lord Chancellor (Viscound Sankey) in the course of the Debates
speech. expressed these views’:

“My Lords, with your permission, I desire to say a few words upon
the legal issues which are involved in this Bill. It is difficult to offer any
strong opposition to the Second Reading of the Bill. On the contrary, some
of its proposals are attractive. I would go further and say that some of them
are not unreasonable, and must command a considerable measure of sym-
pathy. As the law at present stands a pedestrian who has been injured
by a motor vehicle on a road has to prove, in order to obtain damages,
that the person driving the car was guilty of negligence which caused the
accident and the injury.

“The purpose of the Bill, as expressed in the first clause, is to shift
the onus of proof and in some respects to alter the incidence of liability, by
limiting the defence to showing that the accident was caused by the negli-
gence of the Pedestrian. It is a usual Princip le of English law that the
plaintiff in such a case must prove that the defendant has been negligent,
and probably those of us who have had experience of trying these cases
would say that the plaintiff succeeds in the majority of cases. There is,
however, more than one principle in the Jaw, and in the application of
principles there is always a law of diminishing returns. The further some
principles “are extended the less useful or expedient they are apt to be
found. There is another principle in our law which says that a person who
keeps a savage animal, such as a tiger or a lion, does so at his peril, and
if he brings such an animal on the highway and if the animal escapes or
gets out of control the owner is liable for the consequences, apart from any
negligence on his part.

1Yol. 84, H.L. Debates, ool. 554.


Lord Buckmastor’s
speceh.

Wu

“This is no new principle, but a principle which has been in our law
for generations, and it does not seem to be a very alarming or revolutionary
change to apply it to a potentially dangerous machine like a motor vehicle.
At any rate, it does not seem unjust to say that where a motor car has
injured a pedestrian the onus should at least be on the driver to establish
some lawful defence, if he is to escape paying damages. What defences
should be open to him may be another question, with which I will deak
in a minute, but it canot well be disputed that a motor car which is being
driven at a high speed is a potentially dangerous machine. I need hardly
remind your Lordships that a railway train has fixed rails, a fenced track
and signals, while a motor car on the high road has none of these, and
motors are often driven at the speed of an express train.

“Those of us who have tried such cases know well the rule of thumb,
which is more or less accurate, that half the number of miles per hour is
the number of yards per second, so that fifty miles per hour is twenty-five
yards per second, That is to say, while I count one, two, a motor travelling
at fifty miles per hour will have gone fifty yards, and that does not ony
a pedestrian very much time to cross the road when a motor which is
yards off is coming along. The difficult question is not that of putting the
onus on the motorist, but on deciding what defences shall be open to him,
and it is there the Bill may be going rather too far. The only defence per I=
missible under it is for the defendant to satisfy the Court that the acci
was caused solely by the negligence of the pedestrian.

* * * * *

“This Bill, if it passes, will make a considerable difference in insurance
policies. That is a subject on which I am not able to give your Lordships
much assistance, but the information supplied to me is this. Informal in-
quities have been made as to the possible effect which the passing of this
Bill would have upon the rates of premium charged for policies complying
with “Part If of the Road Traffic Act, but it seems doubtful whether the
companies will be able to give any very definite figure. That a substantial
jnerease in these rates would be necessary can hardly be doubted. In the
first place an entirely new class of accident would rank for compensation—
namely, where there has been no negligence on the part of the motorist,
or no proved negligence. Secondly, the number of cases in which excessive
or even unfounded claims would be pressed by unscrupulous litigants would
undoubtedly be increased and the evil is one which already is a matter of
serious concern to insurance companies.”

3.38. Lord Buckmaster expressed himself thus in the Debates'\—

“It seems to me that this Bill deals with a very real existing mischief.
It happens that owing to action 1 took @ short time ago in this House I
have been the recipient of an enormous number of letters from those who
have suffered accidents at the hands of motor cars. Some are terrible to
relate, but the ones which moved me most have been tales of poor men
who say they can get no remedy because they find themselves immediately
up against a wealthy insurance company and they have no money to go
to lawyers to fight them. Anyone who knows anything of the history or
negligence actions in the Courts knows that is true and the man, unless
he obtains leave to sue in forma pauperis, cannot get anybody except what
are known as speculative lawyers, who ate by no means the most desirable
class in the community to encourage. Apart from that, this man has a
formidable wealthy opponent and cannot get what a man who is in a
position to fight can get. Even if he could he has, as has been said, to be
put to great expense in getting witnesses. Further, he may be in the most
difficult position that, owing to the blow that may have nearly cost him his
life, he is not able to give clear and definite evidence as to what has occurred.
व्‌ heard the noble Earl, 1 have no doubt inadvertantly, refer to the unfortu-
nate motorist, but he suffers no such shock when he is running down a

pedestrian.
* * * * *

उए० 84, H.L. Debates, col. 563,


Lord Danesfort*s
speech.

20

“We are dealing with the case of a motor car running a man down.
I say that in that case the man run down is practically incapacitated from
giving a clear account and that the motorist is not. If there is some rare
occasion where that “is not so it is a matter too small for the law to consider.
J believe the right course is to provide that there should be an insurance
against every accident caused to a pedestrian by a person driving a motor
vehicle and that insurance should cover everything. The present insurance
seems to me to be the most mischievous you could create because it insures
a man against the consequences of his wrong-doing. So far from discourag-
ing him from doing wrong it encourages him. Why should these reckless
people pause ? If they injure anyone they do not suffer in person or in pocket
and it is about time the law was changed.

“On a former occasion the noble Earl, Lord Howe, made some most
valuable suggestions as to what might be done, but I do not think they are
relevant on this Bill which merely affects the question of civil liability. Those
who drive motor cars have received a very great concession at the hands of
the public. They have obtained dominion of the road, and foot passengers,
who were formerly equally entitled to their use, are now nothing but people
permitted to use the roads on tolerance, and they have positively been
permitted by Statute to drive these cars at any place they please on the
country “roads subject to ineffectual restrictions about reckless and dange-
rous driving. When they have that right it is only fair that they should
have some further obligation cast on them. Of what the result of the exer-
cise of the right has been the figures are only too evident. It is no use
saying those figures refer to sentiment. They; refer to innocent people killed
and wounded or the King’s highway in numbers that stagger us to believe.
I say the Bill ought to pass, and that steps ought to be taken swiftly and
drastically to secure that once more there shall be security for the people
to use the roads of this country which are their rightful heritage.”

3.39. Lord Danesfort, later in the Debates, quoted’ clause 1 :—
Damages xecoverable in case of bodily injury.

1. (1) Where bodily injury to a person is caused by or arises out of
a use of a motor vehicle on a road or in a place to which the public have
a right of access damages shall be recoverable from the owner of the motor
vehicle in respect thereof without proof of negligence or intention “or other
cause of action as though the injury had been caused by his wilful act,
neglect or default, except where the injury was solely due to the negligence
of the injured person :
Provided that—

(a) where the injury was contributed to but not solely due to the
negligence of the injured person there shall be taken into account
in computing the damages the degree in which the negligence of
such person contributed to the accident; and

(b) where bodily injury is caused or arises as aforesaid in circumstances
in which—

(i) damages are recoverable from the owner in respect of the said
injury by virtue only of the foregoing provisions of this section;
and.

(ii) a legal liability is created in some person other than the owner
to pay damages im respect of the said injury; and

(c) this sub-section shall not apply to bodily injury suffered by a
person who at the time of the occurrence of the accident was
driving or being carried in or ypon a motor vehicle.

(2) Where bodily injury is caused as aforesaid, the fact that any finan-
cial payment is made or offered or any other assistance given or offered to

1५०, $8. H.L. Debates, col 1035.


21

the person injured by the owner of the motor vehicle or any other person
shall not of itself be regarded as implying any admission of negligence in
the driving or management of the motor vehicle.”

Objection antici- 3.40. Lord Danesfort, during one of the readings, anticipated one objection
pated. thus'— 7 i a

“It may be said—it has been said, and probably will be said again—
that it is hard on the motorist to have to pay, as he undoubtedly would have
to pay, a somewhat increased premium to ipspre him against liability under
this Bill. | doubt if the premium would be very considerable, but I would
ask your Lordships to consider this. The motorist has, under the existi
law, which has been altered in his favour, the right to go over the roa
at any speed he likes, and that causes this devastation and suffering. I ask
which would be the harder case—to ask the motorist under these conditions
to pay a somewhat increased premium to cover his liability in respect of
these immense concessions which have been made to him by the law, or
to deny, as the law at present denies, to something like 3,000 pedestrians
every year who are killed and something like 60,000 or 70,000 pedestrians
who are injured, the right to obtain adequate compensation for themselves
or their dependants, for death or injury.”

‘Third reading. 3.41. During the third Reading, Lord Danesfort explained the principle by
i. quoting the Select Committee’ :— le

“The Select Committee go on to say in paragraph 10—perhaps your
Lordships will pardon my reading this Paragraph because it really summa-
rises far better than I can do the principle of the Bill : -

“By reason of the precedents referred to above the Committee
have regarded themselves as free to consider, entirely on its merits, the
question as to whether, in the cases with which the Bill deals, good
reason was shown for making a further departure from the general
principles of the law of negligence. The Committee have come to the
conclusion that some such departure is justified. They think, on the
one hand, that a motor car upon the road, especially in view of the
vast and constantly increasing volume of motor traffic, may be regarded
to some extent as coming within the principle of liability defined in
Rylands versus Fletcher. From the point of view of the pedestrians on
the other hand, it seems to the Committee that the roads of this country
have—at all events in certain places and at certain seasons—been
rendered, by the use of motor vehicles, paces to which it is dangerous
for pedestrians to resort; that, nevertheless, it is necessary for pedeg-
trians to resort to the roads ; and that where a pedestrian, without negli-
gence on his part, is injured by a motorist whether negligent or not,
he should be entitled to recover damages.”

The last paragraph to which I need refer is paragraph 11 :

“Tt may be said against this that it is hardship on the motorist to
be made to pay damages for on accident which was not attributable to
his fault. The Committee take the view that this is, perhaps, a a
leading way of regarding the question and would put it rather that
the payment or compensation to .inngcent pedestrians who suffer injury
is a duty, not so much of the individual motorist who does the damage,
as of the motoring community as a whole, and that the increased liabi-
lity of the motorist ought to be covered, as provided for in the Bill, by
insurance against the increased third-party tisk.”

3.42. It would be pertinent in this connection to refer to the Report of the

Observations in

Sist Report of Law Commission of India on “compensation for injuries caused by automobiles
the Lavy Commission in hit-and-run cases”, where the position was stated as under’ :-—
of India.

1Vol. 86, H.L. Debates, cols. 1046-1047.
2V 01. 93, H.L. Debates, col. 148 (Third Reading). .
aLaw Commission of India, 51st Report (Compensation for injuries caused by automobiles in
‘hit-and-run cases), page 2, para 6 (September, 1972).
™


Arguments

in

Support of no

fault liabilit

ments

no fault

ty.

lisbility.

22

“6. A brief survey of the systems of compensation for accidents caused
by automobiles shows that these fall under one or other of the following
categories :—

(a) (i) Compensation by the person who, by his fault, causes the accident
“(such person may be briefly called the ‘person responsible for the
accident’).

(ii) Such compensation by the person responsible for the accident, irres-

pective of fault.

(b) Compensation by the insurer of the person responsible for the accident.

(०) Compensation by the State or by an agency set up or recognised by the
State, compensution beng 4१६०० irrespective of fault.

(d) Compensation by tie insurer of the victim.”

“10. Category (b) is illustrated by the provisions of the Motor Vehicles
Act which enable the injured person 10 recover compensation from the insurer
of the person responsible for the accident. There are certain conditions and
restrictions imposed in this behalf, which are, of course, matters of detail.”

The Commission, however, noted the difficulty of establishing negligence
pointed out in the case of Kesavan Nair Vs. State Insurance Officer.’

3.43. The case for the imposition of a rule of strict liability finds strong
support in the rules applicable to certain analogous situations. Pointing out that
strict liability was imposed at common law prior to Fletcher v. Rylands, one
study® shows the application of a rule of strict liability in a number of instances,
e.g., for harm done by trespassing animals; on a bona fide purchaser of stolen goods
to their true owner; on a bailee for the misdelivery of bailed property regardless
of his good faith or negligence ; and on innkeepers and hotels at common law.

There are a few other examples of strict liability : The Supreme Court of
Minnesota, for example,’ imposed liability without fault for damage to a dock
inflicted by a ship moored there during a storm.

The rule of strict liability rests not only upon the ultimate idea of rectifying
a wrong and putting the burden where it should belong as a matter of abstract
justice, that is, upoa the one of the two innocent parties whose acts instigated
or made the harm possible, but it also rests on problems of proof*.

One of these common features is that the person harmed would encounter
a difficult problem of proof if some other standard of liability were applied*,

Problems of proof which might otherwise have been faced by shippers,
bailors, or guests at hotels and inns certainly played a significant role in shaping
the strict liabilities of carriers, bailees and innkeepers. Problems of proof in suits
against manufacturers for harm done by defective products became more severe
as the composition and design of products and the techniques of manufacture
became less and less matters of common experience; this was certainly a factor
bringing about adoption of a strict Liability standard.

: 3.44, The major points advanced by those who would like the system of
liability based on “fault” to continue may be stated in outline as follows :—
(i) First, it is stated that the system of negligence is not designed to
compensate for all iosses and should not be regarded as deficient. merely
because it fails to provide compensation for certain accidental losses. In other
words, a distinction should be made between more deserving and less
deserving victims. A standard of negligence (it is stated) most nearly
approaches the popular concept of justice.

1Kesavan Nair V. State Insurance Officer, (1971) A.C.J. 219 (Ker.).

Pook, “Negligence & Liability, without fault ia Tort Law” (1971) 46 ‘Wash. L. Rev. 225,
roferred to in Keeton & Keeton, Torts (1977), page 592.

*Vincent V. Lake Erie Pransport Col., (1910) 109 Minn. 456, 124 N.W. 221; Keoton & Keeton , Torts
(1977), page 592.

‘“Keoton & Keston, Torts (1977), page, 692.

ब866 also para 3-9, supra.


Introduction of
liability without
fault recommen
ded.

Position in other
countries.

Variety of schemes.

Limitations re-
commended in cases
of no fault liabi-
life.

Pas

The essential soundness of this approach, as a general rule, cannot bé
doubted. But in the field under consideration, there are certain special
factors which seem to justify modification of the general approach.

(ii) Secondly, it is stated that moral accountability, which is a funda-
mental tenct of the common law system should not be undermined 100
meet the exigency of the situation. In reply to this, it could be stated that
the approach to be adopted is not merely of moral accountability, but one
of social justice, including the reason that he who creates a risk ought to
attract liability to compensaie though upto a certain pecuniary limit—for
the attendant harm’.

(ili) Thirdly, it is often stated that the principle of negligence deters
careless conduct and its removal would cause an increase in careless driving
and accidents. This, however, does not appear to be borne out by
experience in other fields—such as workmen’s compensation or railways—
where liability is either understood to be absolute or specifically laid down
to be so.

(iv) Fourthly, it is staied that if sociai justice is the basic approach,
then there ought to be rather a sysiem of social welfare applicable prefer-
ably to all deserving persons and noi mercly to victims of automobile
accidents, Somewhat based on the same approzch is the contention often
advanced that the problem of delay in courts and tribunals ought to 0७8
tackled comprehensively and not merely by concentrating on motor vehicles
claims. .

This is an attractive argument, and, upto a point, it is even sound. But
it is to be pointed out that the disproportionately high cost and undue
delay which is met with in the field unde: consideration justifies a selective
approach.

3.45. Having regard to the considerations set out in this Chapter, it appears
to be appropriate to provide for liability without fault in relation to death or

bodily injury caused by accidents from motor vehicles. Such a liability would
rest on the risk created by the use of a motor vehicle, and not on fault.

3.46. Before we make concrete recommendations as to the various points
arising on the subject, we may note that considerable developments in this field
have taken place. It would be tedious to give details thereof in this Report. How-
ever, we are appending to this Report’ a brief summary of the position in selec-
ted other countries.

3.47. These schemes present considerable variety. In particular, some of
these schemes envisage the creation of a state administered fund from which
damages are paid, thus bringing into existence a species of social insurance.

In India, it may not, at present be possible to go to that length. But it is
still practicable to consider a reform of the law in certain specific directions.
The broad objectives of reform should be to impose (i) liability without fault
on the motorist, (ii) coupled with liability insurance.

Insurance against liability to third parties is already compulsory under the
Motor Vehicles Act. The main impact of the reforms recommended in this
Report would be to expand the ambit of liability and, consequentially, of course,
to increase the ambit of payments that would have to be made by the insurer.

VIII. Limitations on liability without fault.

3.48. While, for the reasons given above, we contemplate “no fault” liabi-
lity, it is, in our opinion, also necessary fo provide for tim ing the quantum of
the liability if fault is dispensed with (ic. if the liability rests purely on the

10 further para 3-62 (a), infra.
*Appendix 4.
भूत the English law, see para 5-5, infra.


Limitations in
other countries.
supe

Position in Nordic
countries.

Position in U.S.A.

Maximum amount
Table. to be
annexed.

Provision in Rail-
ways. Act.

2a

basis of risk). This is desixable in order to prevent a steep rise in premium,
and also to leave some scope for watching the working of the proposed reform.
It may be noted that such a limitation forms part of the points suggested for
reform by the Supreme Court’ in one of its Judgments* on the subject.

3.49. In some other countries also, while the victim of the injury who is
entitled to compensation under the various liability rules may enforce his claim
directly against the insurance company, he can do so subject only to certain
monetary limits.

3.50. For example, in many Nordic countries,’ the liability of the company
to pay under a motor vehicle accident policy is limited to maximum amount,
either as regards personal injury or as regards property or as regards both. The
limits have been gradually increased in step with the inflation and with the general
tise in the standard of living. By way of illustration, we may set out the limits in
some of the Nordic countries which are understood to be as follows:

For each person For all damage to
injured property in the
same accident
o lool
National U.S. Dollars National U.S. Dollars
curreney (Approx.) curreney —_(Approx.)

Finland. +e (No limit) ~—((No limit) 250,000 50,500
Norway toe 200,000 28,000 100,000 14,000
Sweden 1000,000 193,500 100,000 193,500

(Before Ist January, 1970)
In Sweden, there is no limit as to compensation for personal

injury after 1970.
Denmark 2 0. 0. es 160,000 20,000 120,000 16,000

3.51. Several States in U.S.A. that have enacted “no fault” statutes have
also imposed a pecuniary limit on the benefits to be claimed under the scheme.
There are separate limits in regard to (i) damages under the head of medical
benefit, and (ii) damages on account of loss of earnings. The figures vary from
State to State, depending on the economic conditions in the State and other
factors. It appears that Connecticut, Floroda, Georgia, Hawaii, Kansas, Kentucky,
Massachussets, Navada, North Dakota and Utah are amongst the ‘low benefit’
states. Most of them provide Personal Injury Protection (No fault), medical
and wage loss coverage, totalling less than 15,000 dollars.

The limitations (maximum) that we have in mind will be apparent from
our detailed recommendations,‘ to be indicated later.

3.52. As to the maximum amount that should be allowed to be recovered
on the basis of “on fault” liability, we have considered the question if the Fourth
Schedule to the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 could, with some modi-
fications and amplifications, be adoped as a model. But we do not consider it
appropriate to adopt it for the present purpose. The scheme as provided in
that Schedule requires elaborate determinations with expert assistance, and, in
any case, is based on the postulate that the victim is a wage-earner. These
features would not always be present in regard to the claims with which we are
concerned in this Report.

3.53. We consider a simple limit to be preferable. While the analogous
provision in the Railways Act® (as to monetary limit) lays down Rs. 50,000,
our intention is to provide Rs. 1,00,000 per claimant for claims under the Motor
Vehicles Act.®

1Bishan Devi V. Sirbaksh Singh, A.1-R. 1979 8.0. 1862, 1866, 1867, para 21.
*Para 3-29, supra.

2Gomand, “Compensation for Automobile Accidents” (1970) 18A.J. C.L. 80, 98-99.
‘See para 3-62 and para 3-63, infra.

SSection 824 (2), Indian Railways, Act, 1980 (Appendix 1).

“For details, see para 3°63 infra,



tamits Narrow views.

Cowributory nogli-
gouce.

View of — most
Hick Courts.

Position in England.

Modification of
contributory negli-
geneo rulein some
countries on con-
tinent.

25

The theory here is that the money should be distributed among those who
suffer, in the way most advantageous to them and that is better that each injured
person should get a reasonable compensation than that some victims should get
full indemnity and others nothing. Limited amounts of compensation for injuries
due to motor traffic would be supportable on this basis.’

3.54. The precise limit that the legislature should fix in this behalf must
always remain a matter of controversy; opinions are bound to differ. The..loss
of income of these suffering persofial injuries or (in case of death) the conse-
quential loss caused to those who can claim compensation on death, ranges with-
in very wide limits. The law can only strike a middle. Of course, even then,
whatever limit is laid down at a particular time might, in view of inflation, need
periodical revision.

IX. Contributory and comparative negligence

3.55. So far, we have dealt with the scheme of the proposed amendment
and its impact in the generality of cases. It is now necessary to advert to the posi-
tion that we contemplate as regards one possible defence of a special character
contributory negligence and comparative negligence. The question whether, in
India, contributory negligence is a total defence in the field of general liability
in tort need not be discussed in detail.

3.56. Most High Coutts seem* to take the view that though India has no
legisla.ion corresponding to the English Act on the subject,’ yet our Courts are
free to apply a rule of comparative negligence. On this approach, contributory
negligence does not bar recovery, though it may reduce the amount to be re-
covered by a person who has contributed to an accident.

3.57. In England, the defence of contributory negligence was abolished in
1945 for the entire field of the law of torts. Contributory negligence can no
longer defeat a claim in toto, but can reduge the amount of damages recoverable
by the plaintiff, in England. This reform of the law (subject to specific statutory
exceptions) is applicable to the entire field of tortious liability.

It is enough to quote the material statutory provision in England, which
is as follows':—

“Where any person suffers damage as the result partly of his own
fault and partly of any other person or persotis, a claim in respect of that
damage shall not be defeated by reason of the fault of the person suffering
the damage bat tlie: damages recoverable in respect thereof shall be reduced
to such extent as the Court thinks just and equitable having regard to the
claimant’s share in the responsibility for the damage.” ‘

3.58. In some other countries also—e.g. in Sweden-traffic accident inusrance
still relies on the “computative negligence” rule of the general law of tort. The
court has a discretionary power to reduce the award if the victim has _negli-
gently contributed to the accident, due regard being had to the degree of fault
on either side. The rule is applied even to the dettiment of the dependants of a
person who is killed in a traffic accident to which the decedent's negligence has
contributed.’ The general rules of tort law are modified only in one respect:
slight negligence on the part of the victim is disregarded (“when there is only
little to blame the victim”). In the rest of the cases, in such countries, where
the person suffering damage has contributed to his loss by his own negligence,
the damages due to him under the law of torts are, as a rule, apportioned.
He will receive only a fraction of what he would otherwise receive.

1Compare Strahl, “Tort Liability and Insurance” (1959), Vol. 3, Scandinavian Studies in Law,
199. 222.

2Rural Transport Service V. Betwni Bibi, A.I.R. 1980 Cal, 165, 169 (reviews cases).
386७ para 3- 57, infra.

‘Section 1 (1), Law Reform (Contributory Negligence) Act, 1945 (8 & 9 Geo. 6 ०. 28).

Selmer, “Interaction between insurance and tort theories” (1970) 18 A.J.C.L. 146, 162.

‘“Hfeliner, “Tort liability and liability insurance” (1962) 6 Scandinavisn Studies in Law, 131, 160


Difficulties of
proof even in a
system of com-

parative negligence.

Recommendation
Contributory negli.
gence to be
disregarded.

* Cases of suicide:

excluded.

Main fentures of
Proposed scheme
and their rationale.

26

3.59, In our view, however, in the particular types of accidents with which
we are concerned, the mere substitution of a rule of comparative negligence may
not mitigate the difficulties experienced at present. It would be preferable to
suggest a simpler rule which can be easily worked.

Even in a system based on comparative negligence, the assigning of a speci-
fic percentage factor to the amount of negligence attributable to a particular
party could be a matter of perplexity in motor vehicle cases.

3.60. We would, therefore, exclude the operation of the defence of contri-
butory negligence or comparative negligence.’ Our recommendation, of course,
is confined to the subject of harm caused by accidents resulting from the use of
motor vehicles.

3.61. While on the subject of fault of the victim, it may be mentioned
that one argument that is generally advanced by Insurance Companies,—and even
by some Judges,—against “no fault liability” is that if a person actually throws
himself in front of a vehicle with the intention of committing suicide, and is
consequent: killed or injured. then there can be no justification whatsoever, for
the payment of any compensation to the person or his heirs. The short answer
to this is that compensation is payable only if there is an accident of the nature
specified in section 110(1) of the Motor Vehicles Act. An occurrence can be
said to be “accidental” only when it is not due to design; for, if an act be
intentional, it would clearly be no accident.

semary and rationale of points made as to liability without fault

3.62. Before we make concrete recommendations for legislative amend-
ment on the points discussed in this Chapter, we would like to summarise the
rationale underlying the important features of “no fault” liability as envisaged
in our scheme and also the rationale underlying the imposition of pecuniary
Umitations on liability in “no fault” cases—since these limitations form an integral
part of our scheme.

(a) Subject to a pecuniary limit, the level of protection against
megsurable economic loss is to be treated as risk of motoring? The
assumption is that a motorist who creates a risk of injury or death must
pay for that injury or death without regard to fault. This would, however,
be confined to claims before Tribunals created under the Act.

“No fault” liability as envisaged by us would be confined to claims be-
fore the Tribunal. Claims before ordinary courts should be decided on
fault basis only. This, however, would be the position only where a Claims
Tribunal has not been constituted at all for the area concerned.

(b) Through the medium of insurance and by making the insurer
liable, the cost of providing the compensation would, in substance, be dis-
tributed among all motorists, without regard to fault in particular accidents.
This will be applicable only to. claims before the Tribunal.

(c) In such cases, contributory negligence should neither be a defence,
nor be a ground for apportionment according to “fault”.

(d) The above scheme of liability on “no fault” basis will apply only
to the Claims Tribunal.

(0) The “fauit” principle (and related rules of tort law) will continue
us the bas’s cf aliccating the burden in other cases, i.e. in claims filed before
ordinary courts where no Tribunal has been created. Such cases, however,
will be rare. Ordinary courts can award compensation irrespective of limits,
if fault is proved.

3866 para 3 63, infra.
20f. para 3 44 (ii), supra,


New Chapter to
be inserted.

Other — alternatives
considered for higher
recovery on the basis
of fault,

27

(f) But even in cases where the fault principle continues, compulsory
insurance which the motorist (under the present law) must carry to protect
against tort liability will (as at present) continue to afford some protection,
provided fault is proved.

XI. Recommendations as to liability without fault and related matters

3.63. In the light of the preceding discussion, we recommend that the
following new Chapter and section should be inserted in the Motor Vehicles
Act, 1939 :—

CHAPTER 7A

Liability without fault

“92A. (1) In a claim for compensation in respect of death or bodily
injury caused by an accident of the nature specified in sub-section (1) of
section 110, preferred before a Claims Tribunal, the claimant shall not be
required to plead and establish that the injury or damage suffered was

due to the wrongful act, neglect or default of the person who caused the
accident.”

[Section 110(1), main paragraph reads: —

“(1) A State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute one or more Motor Accidents Claims Tribunals (hereinafter
referred to as Claims Tribunals) for such area as may be specified in the
notification for the purpose of adjudicating upon claims for compensation
in respect of accidents involving the death of, or bodily injury to, persons
arising out of the use of motor vehicles, or damages to any property of a
third party so arising, or both.”]

“(2) A claim for compensation in respect of such death or bodily
injury preferred before a Claims Tribunal shall not be defeated by reason
merely of the wrongful act, neglect or default of the person suffering injury
or damages nor shall the quantum of compensation recoverable in respect
of such death or bodily injury be reduced merely on the basis of the share of
such person in the responsibility for such death or bodily injury.

(3) The quantum of compensation payable on such a claim shall not
exceed the following limit, that is to say,—

“(a) in the case of bodily injury, rupees one lakh for each person
who claims compensation;

(b) in the case of death, rupees one lakh for each person for whose
benefit the claim is made.”

3.64. We may mention in this context that in the course of our considera-
tion of the question of “no fault” liability, we had occasion to consider a number
of alternatives for dealing with the situation where the claimant is in a position
to prove fault. A claimant may like to seek an amount in excess of the maximum
limit of compensation which we have provided on “no fault” basis. One alter-
native that we considered was to provide (while retaining the exclusive jurisdic-
tion of the Claims Tribunal) that the claimant at his option may, on the basis
of fault, claim a higher amount of compensation before the Claims Tribunal.
Another alternative that we considered was to allow the claimant an option in
regard to the forum, that is to say, while proceedings before the Tribunal would
be exclusively on no fault basis and would be subject to the prescribed maxi-
mum, proceedings before the ordinary civil court would be on the basis of
fault and would not be subject to any maximum.

*Para 3-63, supra,


Cases before the
Tribunal to
decided on no
fault basis.

Claims , before
ordinary courts
to be governed
by fault,

28

Of course, it was implicit in this alternative that the exclusive character
of the jurisdiction of the Claims Tribunal would be modified, inasmuch as, even
if a Tribunal is already created for an area, a claimant claiming a higher award
on fault basis would have to be allowed to go before an ordinary civil court.

3.65. On a careful consideration, we have come to the conclusion that it
is not necessary to adopt either of the two alternatives mentioned above and
that the best course would be to make a clean sweep of the distinction between
liability based on fault and liability based on no fault basis. All cases before the
Tribunal should be tried only on one basis, namely, “no fault” subject to a
specified maximum. There would be no option given to the claimant, nor would
he have any temptation to claim, by alleging fault, a higher compensation
(either on his own or on the advice of others).

To give an option to a claimant to go to a civil court for claiming damages
higher than what he would get under the “no fault system” would be to jeopar-
dize altogether the very existence and: functioning of the Claims Tribunals. The
danger of the claimanis being advised by lawyers to institute proceedings in a
court for that purpose is real.

3.66. There still remains one question to be considered, namely, where the
claimant must go before an ordinary civil court,—a situation that can arise if no
Claims Tribunal is created for a particular area,—should the principle of fault
continue ? Such situations should, of course, be rare, Prima facie, the intention of
the legislature is that Fribuinals should be created in adequate number all over
the country. We think that in these rare cabés, the present law may well
continue to operate. Accordingly, we are not making any specific provision for
ititroducing the ptinciple of “no fault” in clair that are tried by ordinary civil
courts in thé absence of Claims Tribunals.


Seope of the Chapter,

Section 95 (1), proviso.

Persons exelu-
ded by virtue
of section 95(1),
proviso.

CHAPTER 4
BENEFICIARIES OF COMPULSORY INSURANCE
SECTION 95(1)

“4.1, The question of substantive principles of liability having been disposed
of, the next question to be considered concerns the persons who can claim the
benefit of the provisions of the Act relating to claims enforceable against the
insurer. Under section 95(1), proviso, the benefit of the remedy’ conferred by
the Act against the insurer is limited to certain categories of persons?.

There are, however, certain minute limitations created by the relevant pro-
visions. An examination thereof reveals that both the contents of the relevant
provisions and the manner in which the limitations have been expressed have led
to certain practical problems. The fundamental question to be considered is,
whether it is in conformity with current notions of social justice to allow the
section to be hedged in with many minute limitations, restricting the categories
of persons who can avail themselves of the direct remedy conferred on third
parties against the insurer.

Section 94 imposes an obligation to insure against third party risk. Section
95(1) provides that the policy must be issued by an authorised insurer or by a
co-operative society allowed to transact such business, and must insure the person
or classes of persons specified in the policy (subject to the prescribed monetary
limits), against the specified liability.

4,2. Section $5(1), proviso, reads as under: —

“provided that a policy shall not be required:—

10) to cover liability in respect of the death, arising out of and in the
course of his employment, of the employee of a person insured by
the policy or in respect of bodily injury sustained by such an
employee arising out of and in the course of his employment other
than a liability arising under the Workmen’s Compensation ‘Act,
1923 in respect of the death of, or bodily injury to, any such
employee: —

(a) engaged in driving the vehicle, or
“(b) if it is a public service vehicle, engaged, as a conductor of the
vehicle or in examining tickets on the vehicle, or
(c) if it is a goods vehicle, being carried in the vehicle; or हु

(ii) except where the vehicle is a vehicle in which passengers are carried
for hire or reward or by reason of or in pursuance of contract of
employment, to cover liability in respect of the death of or bodily
injury to persons being carried in or upon or entering or mountig
or alighting from the: vehicle at the time of the occurrence of the
event out of which a claim arises, or

(iii) to cover any contractual liability”.

xt ded from
4.3. It would be helpful to consider who are the persons excluded fr
the scope of the benefits. The following seem to be some of the principal
examples of persons so excluded: — el
i i i i be required to
By virtue of clause (i) of the proviso, the policy shall not ti
cover tiability arising to an employee in the course of employment, except in
certain specified cases.

1Para4-2, infra.
*Contrast the Enalish Law, para 5-5, infra.
29

80-M/B(D)457MofLJ&CA—is


Anomally caused
by present. position
aS owner of goods,

30

By virtue of clause (ii) of the proviso, the following are excluded from the
requirement to cover liability in relation to them:

(i) Passenger of a private car carried gratuitously’

A gratuitous [| nger sustaining injuries in an accident is not covered
because (unless he is travelling in pursuance of a contract of employment),
section 95(1), proviso (ii), would exclude him’.

However, according to certain decisions,'-", where the policy is so drawn
as to cover gratuitous passengers, then the insurer would be liable even for
bodily injury or death caused to a gratuitous passenger.’

(ii) Ticketless traveller

The question whether a ticketless traveller is entitled to the benefit of the
provisions of the Act was raised in one case before the Supreme Court,’ but
having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, it was not necessary to
investigate it.

(iii) Hirer of a truck

The hirer of a truck is not covered, because section 95(1), proviso (i),
excludes him.’ While reaching this conclusion, the Calcutta High Court did
describe the position as ‘unfortunate’.

(iv) Owner of goods, travelling with the goods

Two high Courts have taken the view that an owner travelling along with
his goods in the goods vehicle cannot recover the insurer compensation for death
or personal injury.’ This view has been taken on a construction of section 95(1),
proviso (ii).

In contrast, according to a Karnataka case," the owner travelling with his
goods really pays for his own carriage also, and is covered.

4.4, We think that the present provision needs improvement. As to the
owner of goods.’ it may be noted that the employee of the owner of the goods
is not excluded, and would be entitled to sue the insurance company.” If so, it
is iNogical that the owner of the goods himself cannot suc.”

10f. K. Gopalakrishnan Vs. Sankaraman, A.1.R.1968 Mad. 436.
2a) Pushpabai Vs. Ranjit C & P Co., ALR. 1977 8.C. 1735, 1746, para 20.
(b) Hira Devi Vs. Bhaba Kant, A.1.R. 1977 Gawhati 31. 38, paragraphs 19, 20 (F. B.).
(0) Jam Shree Satii Diguijay Singh Ji Vs. Daud Tyabii, A.J.R. 1978 Guj, 158, 154, paragraphs
26, 27.

(d) Subhash Chander Vs. State of Haryana, A.1.R. Punjab & Haryana 54. 56, para 9 (reviews
cases).

8New Indian Insurance Co. Ltd., Vs. Mohinder Lal, (1978) Accident Claims Journat 10.

‘Assam Corporation Vs. Bivu Rani, A.LLR. 1975 Gauhati 3, referred to also in Hira Deri Vs.
Bhaba Kant, A.1.R. 1977 Gauhati 31, 38, paragraphs 19, 20 (F.B.

5Premier Assurance Co., Vs. Parameshwarbai, A.IR. 1976 Patna 187.

"Madhya Pradesh State Road Transport Corp. Vs. Zenibhai, A-1.R. 1977 8. 0. 2206.

Undian Mutual General Insurance Co., Vs. Manzoor Ashan, A.LLR. 1977 Cal. 34,37, para 17.

*South Indian Insurance Company Vs. Subramaniam, A.1.R., 1972 Mad. 49, 52, paragraphs
5 and 6.

Oriental Pire and General Insurance Co., Vs. Gurdev Kaur, A.I.R. 1967 Punjab, 486
490 (F. BL).

WChannappa Vs, Lacman, ALR. 1979 Karnataka 93, 103 (May). See also 7. M. Renukappa
Vs, Fahmida, A.I.R. 1980 Karn, 25 (Feb.).

Upara 4-3 (०), supra.

"Vanguard Insurance Co., Vs. Chinntmmal, A.LLR. 1970 Mad, 236.

Para 4-2, supra.



Need for change,

Social justice and
judicial "observa.
tions suggesting
reform.

Present position
not justified.

Recommendation
as to section 95(1)
proviso,

31

हे Whatever be the true construction of the present languages of the section
it seems to be anomalous that a person who legitimately travels with the goods
to look after his own goods cannot avail himself of the beneficial provision of
the Act. The fact that he has not made payment for carrying him as a passenger—
even if that be the factual situation in a particular case—should not, in our
opinion, be regarded as material in legislation primarily enacted to implement a
principle of social justice. From the aspect of social justice, the position should
be the same whether the claimant is the owner of the goods or is an employee of
the owner of the goods.

4.5. It is now time to consider whether the present position needs change.
In general, the policy of the law as embodied in Chapter 8 of the Motor
Vehicles Act is to provide for compensation not on the basis of quid pro quo or
contract, but as a measure of social justice.’ The very fact that liability to a
third party is required to be insured and the third party (within the limits laid
down in the Act) is afforded a remedy against the insurer, shows that the true
principle is sovial justice.

4.6. It may be pointed out that in one of the Punjab cases,’ the following
observations have been made while rejecting the claim for compensation made
by the owner of the goods, who was travelling with the goods:—

“No doubt, this is a hard case, but it is a case of a statutory omis-
sion’ for in this part of country small businessmen in protection of their
goods, and to do their business personally, very often themselves travel on
a goods carrier and that is probably the reason why R. 4.60(1) says that
‘no person shall be carried in a goods carrier other than a bona fide
employee of the owner or the hirer of the vehicle, and except in accordance
with this rule.

“This sub-rule recognises that the hirer of the vehicle may travel asa
passenger on a good carrier, but the proviso to sub-rule (2) of this rule
limits the number of such persons to a maximum of six. The learned
counsel for the respondents has pointed out that in this “case number
of persons travelling on the goods carrier in question was more than that
number, but that does not bring in the liability of the insurer, and it may
be a factor which may operate against the owner or the driver of the vehicle for
disobedience of this sub-rule. The omission in the statute, however, can-
not be supplied by a strained or incorrect interpretation of the statutory
provision by a court. It can only be supplied by a legislative amendment.”

4.7. It appears to us that the same reasoning applies to the other restrictions
contained in the section 95(1), proviso (ii). Even as regards gratuitous passen-
gers,’ the present provision excl fading them from the benefit of direct remedy
does not appear to be justified. In this context, we may note that in England
such an exclusion was previously contained in section 203, Road Traffic Act,
1960, but was promptly removed in response to a suggestion for law reform

made by the Court of Appeal.’

4.8. Our recommendation, then, is to delete clause (ii) of the proviso to
section 95(1). Clause (i), which excludes employees, may be retained. Employees
would be governed by the Workmen’s Compensation Act, and the present
restriction should, therefore, cause no hardship. Clause (iii) may also continue.

3866 para 4:7, infra.

Oriental Fire d& General Ingurance Co., Ltd., Vs. Gurdev Kaur, A.I.R. 1967 Punjab 486, 490
para 8 (F. B,).

*Emphasis added.

4866 also para 473. supra.

5Para 4-3(i), supra.

‘Connell Vs. Motor Ineurer’s Bureau, (1969) 3 W.L.R. 231, 237,


Scope.

Need to delete the
limits,

Bemoval of limit
under section 95(2)
suggesisd by

Supreme — Court,

CHAPTER 5

LIMITS ON LIABILITY OF THE INSURER
SECTION 95(2)

5.1 A major question to which attention may now be directed relates to the
various monetary limits on the liability of the insurer, as laid down in section
95(2), quoted below:—

*(2) Subject to the proviso to sub-section (1), a policy of insurance shall
cover any liability incurred in respect of any one accident up to the follow-
ing limits, namely :—

(a) Where the vehicle is a goods vehicle, a limit of fifty thousand rupecs
in all, including the liabilities, if any, arising under the Workmen’s
Compensation Act, 1923, in respect of the death of, or bodily in-
jury to, employees (other than the driver), not exceeding six in
number, being carried in the vehicle;

(b) Where the vehicle is a vehicle in which passengers are carried for
hire or reward or by reason of or in pursuance of a contract of
employment :—

“(i) in respect of persons other than passengers carried for hire or
reward, 2 limit of fifty thousand rupees in all;

(ii) in respect of passengers :—

(1) a limit of fifty thousand rupees, in all where the vehicle is
registered to carry not more than thirty passengers;

(2) a limit of seventy-five thousand rupees in all where the vehicle
is registered to carry more than thirty but not more than sixty
passengers;

(3) a limit of one lakh rupees in all where the vehicle is registered
to carry more than sixty passengers; and

(4) subject to the limits aforesaid, ten thousand rupees for each
individual passenger where the vehicle is a motor cab and five
thousand rupees for each individual passengers in any other
case;

“(c) save as provided in clause (d), where the vehicle is a vehicle of
any other class, the amount of liability incurred;

(0) irrespective of the class of the vehicle, a limit of rupees two thou-
sand in all in respect of damage to any property of a third party.”

5.2. These limits were inserted at a time when the concept of social justice
had not developed fully. They apply only as against the insurer. It is a matter
for serious consideration whether today there should be any such monetary limits
on the liability of the insurer only. These monetary limits, fixed somewhat arbi-
trarily on the basis of the nature of the vehicle and its size, and applicable only
against the insurer, appear somewhat anachronistic. There appears to be no
justification for imposing a pecuniary limit on the liability of the insurer, when
there is no such limit on the liability of the person insured.

5.3. It may be mentioned that some three years back, the Supreme Court
of India also made a suggestion for removal of the present limit of _liability.*
After referring to the element of discrimination found in section 95, the Sup-
reme Court observed:—



33

“Such an invidious distinction is absolutely shocking to any judicial
or social conscience and yet section 95(2)(d) of the Motor Vehicles Act
seems to suggest such a distinction. We hope and trust that our law-makers
will give serious attention to this aspect of the matter and remove this
serious lacuna in section 95(2) (d) of the Motor Vehicles Act. We would
also like to suggest that instead of limiting the liability of the Insurance
Companies to a specified sum of money as representing the value of human
life, the amount should be left to be determined by a Court in the special
circumstances of each case. We further hope our suggestions will be duly
implemented and the observations of the highest court of the country do not
become a mere pious wish.

Removal of Limit 5.4 Removai of the limit on the liability had earlier been suggested in the

दि by. | High judgments of certain High Courts, for example, Bombay."

5.5. In this context, it may be noted that the English Act has a very wide
provision,’ which reads:—

“145, Requirements in respect of policies of Insurance.

(1) In order to comply with the requirements of this Part of this Act,
a policy of insurance must satisfy the following conditions.

(2) The policy must be issued by an authorised insurer, that is to say,
a person or body of persons carrying on motor vehicle insurance business
in Great Britain.

(3) Subject to sub-section (4) below, the policy:—

(a) must insure such person, persons or classes of persons as may be
specified in the policy in respect of any liability which may be
incurred by him or them in respect of the death of or bodily in-
jury to any person caused by, or arising out of the use of .the
vehicle on a road; and

(0) must also insure him or them in respect of any liability which may
be incurred by him or them under the provisions of “this patt
of this Act relating to payment for emergency treatment.

(4) The policy shall not, by virtue of sub-section (3)(a) above, be

required to cover.

(a) liability in respect of the death, arising out of and in the course
of his employment, of a person in the employment of a person
insured by the policy or of bodily injury sustained by such a per-
son insured by the policy or of bodily injury sustained by such
a person arising out of and in the course of his employment; or

(b) any contractual liability.”

Section 95 (2) 5.6. (a) For reasons already stated,’ we think that there is ample justifica-
Recommendation to tion for removing the limit at present laid down in section 95(2), and, accord-
delete limit. ingly, we recommend its deletion.

(b) This is, of course, a matter different from the one to which we have
adverted while recommending’ the introduction of “no fault” liability.

In the context of no fault liability, we have recommended the imposi-
tion of a monetary limit. The limit so recommended will not be confined to the
insurer. Jt will apply to the owner, driver or other person liable also. The
justification for such a limit has been discussed at length‘ in the relevant Chapter
and we need not repeat the reasoning.

Marine and General Insurance Co. Vs. Balkrishna Ramchandra Navan, A.I.R. 1977 Bom. 53, 59
60, para 33, also referring to the Kerala judgment in Kesavan Nair Vs. State, (1971) Accident Claims
Journal 219;1971) Kerala Law Times 380.

*Paragraphs 5-2 and 5-3, supra.
*Paragraphs 3-52 and 3-53, supra.
“Paragraphs 3-52 and 3-53, supra.



Section —_98(2)—
Alternative re.
commendation to
insert uniform
limit of Rs. two
lakhs,

Revised _acction
95(2).

34

5.7. However, if our recommendation’ to delete the limit in section 95(2)
is not accepted, and the principle of having some pecuniary limit in section 95
(2) is retained, we would recommend the substitution in that sub-section of a
uniform limit of Rs. two lakhs per claimant, instead of the present smaller limits.
The present limits, besides being inadequate, are not uniform.

Having regard to considerations of social justice, we think that if the limits
cannot be abolished, then they should be revised as above. This recommendation
will apply to “fault” liability cases, where the claims are filed before the ordinary
courts. For “no fault cases”, i.e. for claims filed before the Tribunal on the basis
of no fault, the limits would be fixed according to our recommendation, made
separately’ in that regard.

5.8. If this alternative scheme (increase of the limit without abolition) 1s
adopted, section 95(2) should be revised as under:—

“(2) Subject to the proviso to sub-section (1), a policy of insurance
shall cover any liability incurred in respect of any one accident up to the
following limits, namely:—

(a) in the case of bodily injury, rupees two lakhs for each person who
claims compensation;

(b) in the case of death, rupees two lakhs for each person for whose
benefit tie claim is made:

Provided that nothing in thiy sub-section shall affect any provision of
this Act laying down limits as to the quantum of compensation payable in
claims before the Claims Tribunal.”

'Para 5-6(a), supra.
*Para 9°52, supra.


Supply of — parti.
culars by register-
ing authority for
police to Tribunal
for injured person,

Scetion 109
Supply of copies
information.

Duty to give infor-
mation.

CHAPTER 6

DUTY TO FURNISH PARTICULARS OF INSURANCE AND ACCIDENT:
SECTION 109 AND SECTIONS 109A AND 109B (NEW)

6.1. Much delay in the disposal of claim cases is caused also on account
of the fact that the person injured——and even the Claims Tribunal—face consi-
derable difliculty in tracing the particulars of the insurance company with which
the vehicle involved in the accident has been insured. It should be remembered
that the proceedings before the Tribunal cannot affect the insurance company
unless the insurance company is made a party to the proceedings, and this can
be done only when the particulars of the policy are made available. A suitable
provision making it obligatory on the Registering or the Police Authorities to
supply these particulars to the Tribunal or to the person injured should there-
fore be made.

6.2. For filing a claim under the Act, certain particulars are required, and
section 109, to some extent, addresses itself to that aspect. It is, however, found
in practice that the required particulars are not easily available to a claimant. To
remedy this hardship, certain obligations should be imposed on the police to
transmit the information required for filing the claim.

6.3. The Committee appointed some time ago by the Government of India
(in the Ministry of Law) to examine the question of legal aid and advice avail-
able to the weaker sections of the community’ had occasion to discuss why
remedies are not availed of in the case of a large number of victims of accidents
arising from the use of motor vehicles. The Committee suggested that people
should be made aware of the right to claim compensation and to approach the
Claims Tribunal for the purpose.

The Committee has observed that “one other radical and yet simple
stratagem. ..Can be adopted for the purpose of removing the handicap arising
from legal unawareness”. After referring to the procedure being followed in the
State of Jammu and Kashmir, the Committee recommended that a duty should
be cast on the Police Officer and the Doctor to submit details of the accident
to the Claims Tribunal. We quote below the relevant passage from the Report
of the Committee: eae

“7.04. Whenever there is an accident arising out of the use of a motor
vehicle, it would ordinarily almost invariably be reported to the police and
where any person is injured, he would ordinarily be taken to a hospital
except where the injury is of a minor character. It may, therefore, be
provided that whenever an accident is reported at a police station, the
police should be required, legislatively or by administrative instructions,
to note down in a printed proforma supplied to the police station by the
State Government or the State Board, various particulars in regard to the
accident, such as the name and address of the injured person and where
the injury has resulted in death, the name and address of the deceased as
aiso the names and addresses of his dependents, the number of the motor
vehicle involved in the accident, the name of the driver, if available, the
place and time of the accident and the details of the manner in which the
accident took place. The police should immediately take steps to find out
from the records of the registering authority the name and address of the
owner of the motor vehicle and the name of the insurance company with
which the motor vehicle is insured and incorporate these particulars in the

printed proforma.

1Report on National Judicature, Equal Justice—Savial Justice (August 1977), Chapter 7, pages
44, 45, paragraph 7-04.
35


Recommenda tion
to insett new
sections — imposii
obligation ou the
tice and the
spital authorities
to communicate
certain information
as to accidents.

Position in Tamil
Nadu.

Rule in Tamil
Nada.

Recommendation
to insert seotions
109A and 109B.

36

_ The police should then forward the printed proforma to the Claims
Tribunal having jurisdiction over the area where the accident took place.
Where an injured person or a deceased is brought to a Primary Health
Centre or a Hospital, Private, ‘mut municipal or Government owned, the officer
incharge must also ll in a similar printed proforma after gathering parti-
culars from the injured person or the relatives of the deceased accompany-
ing the body and forward it to the Claims Tribunal. The Registrar of the
Claims Tribunal should then get in touch with the police station having
Jurisdiction over the place of the accident and require the police to obtain
and furnish the name and address of the motor vehicle owner and the name
of the insurance company. We should suggest that the police and the hospital
authorities. should be laid under an obligation not only to gather the
requisite particulars and fill in the printed proforma and forward it 10 the
Claims Tribunai but also inform the injured person or the relatives of the
deceased that they are entitled to file a compensation claim before a
Particular Claims Tribunal and also hand over to them written intimation
to that effect.

“The Claims Tribunal, on receipt of the printed proforma, should
forward it to the legal services committee attached to the Claims Tribunal
and where an injured person or the dependants of the deceased come to
the Claims Tribunal directly for claiming compensation, they must also be
referred to the legal services committee.”

6.4. We find the suggestion made on the subject by the Committee! on
Legal Aid and Advice substantially sound, and recommend that it should be
immplemented by inserting suitable provisions’ at an appropriate place in the
Chapter.

6.5. We may mention that in Tamil Nadu, the Legal Aid Board has launched
a programme of assistance to victims of motor vehicle accidents who
are not able to afford a lawyer.* The Tamil Nadu Government have issued from
time to time administrative orders as well as rules under the rule-making power.
There had been frequent complaints of exploitation of these unfortunate people.
From the beginning, it was felt that this was an area where the Board could help.

6.6 In August, 1976 the State of Tamil Nadu introduced a rule‘ which
requires the investigating police officer to obtain an application for compensation
signed by the victim (or by the legal representatives of the deceased victim) and
to send it to the Claims Tribunal, without waiting for the result of the investiga-
tion into the accident.

We do not, however, consider it necessary to go to that length. In our
opinion, it is enough if a duty to transmit information is imposed, as above.

6.7. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that two new
sections—sections 109A and 109B—should be inserted on the following lines:—

“109B.(1) Where an accident arising out of the use of a motor
vehicle and involving the death of, or bodily, injury to, any person has
occurred and has been reported to the officer incharge of a police station
under section 109, such officer shall forthwith forward the material particu-
lars of the accident, in such form as nay. be prescribed, to the Claims
“Tribunal constituted under section 110 and having jurisdiction over the

area,

*Para 6:3, supra,

*Para 6-7, infra.

जए, B. Patwari, “Saga of Unique ete. Justice (3 April, 1980) M.L.J. 39-40, 41.

Tamil Nadu Motor Vehicle Accident Claims Tribunal Rules, Rule 3A (August, 1976). P.B.
Patwaci : “Saga of Unique etc. Justice (3 April, 1980) M.L.J. 39, 41.


Obligation of the
hospital autho-

rities to communicate
eet informa-
tion as tho accidents.

37

(2) The Claims Tribunal to whom the material particulars of an
accident have been forwarded under sub-section (1) may order the officer
incharge of the police station to furnish such further particulars relating to
the accident as the Tribunal may consider necessary and such officer shall
carry out the order forthwith.

(3) The officer incharge of the police station shall also forward a
copy of the particulars of the accident, forwarded under sub-sections (1)
and (2), to the injured person, and if a death has been caused by the
accident, to the legal representatives of the deceased person, and shall
inform them of their right to file before the Claims Tribunal an application
for compensation in respect of the death of bodily injury, and shall obtain
a written acknowledgement of such information having been communicated.

“109B. (1) Where an accident of the nature specified in section 109A
has occurred and any person injured or dead as a result of the accident has
heen broughé to a hospital, the person “incharge of the hospital’ shall forward
the material particulars of the accident, in such form as mgy be prescribed,
to the Claims Tribunal having jurisdiction over the area.

(2) The Claims Tribunal may order the person incharge of the hospital
to furnish such further particulars relating to the accident as the Tribunal
may consider necessary and such person shall carry out the order
forthwith”.

"Lhe expression “person incharge of the hospital could be suitably defined, if necessary.


Scope.

Appointment of
members of the
Tribunals.

Section 11061),
proviso—- Claims for
damage to pro-
porty.

Dificultios created
by. scetion 110(1),
proviso.

CHAPTER 7

THE CLAIMS TRIBUNAL : SECTION 110

7.1. We propose to deal in this Chapter with certain procedural matters,
confining ourselves to those provisions that appear to need either a change,
or at least some discussion of matters that require consideration.

7.2. Section 110(1) empowers the State Government to constitute Claims
Tribunals for adjudicating the specified questions. The Tribunals are to be
constituted by a notification, for such area as may be specified in the notifica-
tion. There is a proviso to the sub-section, to which we shall advert later.!
Sub-sections (2) and (3) deal with the composition and qualification of the
प्र jand sub-section (4) with the distribution of business amongst the

ribunals.

The Law Commission of India, in its Report on Delay and Arrears in
Trial Courts, made certain recommendations as to the authorities by which the
appointment of members of the Tribunals should be made, including arrange-
ments for the distribution of business. We shall revert to the topic later’.

7.3 We now come to the Proviso to section 110(1), (as amended in 1909).
Section 110(1), main paragraph, empowers the Tribunal to adjudicate not
only claims for compensation for death or bodily injury, but also claims for
damage to any property of a third party so arising or both. The Proviso to this
sub-section, however, enacts that “where such claim includes a claim for
compensation in respect of damage to property exceeding Rs. 2,000, the
claimant may, at his option, refer the claim to a civil court for adjudication and
where a reference is so made, the Claims Tribunal shall have no jurisdiction
fo entertain any question relating to such claims”.

7.4. The proviso to section 110(1), quoted above, creates difiiculties®
where the claim exceeds Rs. 2,000. The ciaimant can, in such cases, “refer the
claim to the civil court for adjudication”, under the proviso as it now stands.
The choice of the forum thus lies with the claimant. Such a procedure
creates practical difficulties and complications, in this particular case.
The practical difficulties and complications arise from the fact that if
the claimant decides to “refer the claim io a civil court for adjudica-
tion”, then two parallel proceedings in respect of the same accident would be
going on at two different places, Several common questions of fact or law may
arise in such proceedings and these questions may be decided differently in
the parallel proceedings. This is not a satisfactory situation. It should not be
left to a claimant to decide the nature of the Tribunal in which he will proceed
if such a course is likely to create scope for conflicting decisions. It is true that
certain laws,—e.g. the Act providing for workmen’s compensation—leave it
open to the workman to pursue his claim either in the ordinary court or before
the commissioner. But that Act does not contemplate the filing of parallel
proceedings in different Tribunals that may possibly lead to conflicting decisions.
Only onc proceeding can be filed. In contract, under the Moior Vehicles Act,
if the claimant chooses to approach the civil court, the claim for personal
injury would be under adjudication in a Claims Tribunal, while the claim for
damage to property (exceeding Rs. 2,000) would go on in the civil court. The
possibility of conflicting adjudications is obvious; such a conflict (between the
ordinary court and the Claims Tribunal) is bound to create confusion.

1Para 7:3, iufra.

*Cf. Law Comunission of India, 77th Report (Delay and Arrears in Trial Courts), paragraphs
10-3 and 10-4,

3868 also para 1-8, supra.

“Para 7-10, infra.

‘Para 7-3, supra.


Prectical impact
of proviso.

Need for section
110, Proviso debata-
ble—Deletion
recommended.

Recommendation.

Section 110(2),
Section 110(3).

Section 110(4).

‘Power 10. transfer
suit appeals and
other proceed.
ings.

39

7.5. This demonstrates the need for considering at greater length the
question whether the present provision restrictive of the competence of Claims
Tribunals is satisfactory. We must point out that in this particular case, the
restriction on the competence of Tribunals is not of mere academic interest.
In regard to pleadings, court fees and limitation, there is an important difference
between an ordinary civil court and the Claims Tribunal constituted under the
Motor Vehicles Act. Proceedings under the Motor Vehicles Act do not, for
example, require elaborate pleadings. There is no ad valorem court fees under
the Act, unlike in civil suits. The period of limitation for a claim under the
Motor Vehicles Act is six months. In contrast, in the civil court, the period
of limitation is much longer’.

7.6. Prima facie, therefore, there is a case for deleting the proviso to
section 110 in the light of the above considerations. We have not been able to
think of any counter-balancing considerations that would justify its retention.
If the intention is that claims for a high amount, i.e. exceeding a particular
figure, should be tried only by ordinary courts, then the same reasoning should
apply to claims for personal injuries which exceed that particular figure. But
there is no such pecuniary limit on the competence of the Tribunal in regard
to claims for compensation for personal injuries.

Nor is the proviso needed to protect the interests of the Insurance
Company. There is, as the law now stands, no difference in the statutory
liability of the insurance company, whether the proceedings are held under the
Motor Vehicles Act or under the ordinary law.

7.7 In view of what is stated above. we recommend that the proviso to
section 110(1) should be deleted.

7.8. Section 110(2) needs no comment.

7.9. Section 110(3) prescribes the qualifications of a member who is
appointed to preside over the Accident Claims Tribunal, and requires that he
should be a person who:—

“(a) is, or has been, a judge of a High Court, or
(b) is, or has been, a district judge, or
(c) is qualified for appointment as a judge of the High Court”.

The sub-section needs no change.
7.10. Section 110(4) provides that where two or more Claims Tribunals

are constituted for any area, the State Government may, by general or special
order, regulate the distribution of business among them.

Distribution of business should be appropriately vested in the High
Court’.

Accordingly, in this sub-section, the High Court should be substituted in
place of the “State Government”.

7.11. In regard to section 110, it is also appropriate to mention the con-
troversy that has arisen on the question whether the provisions of section 24
of the Code of Civil Procedure (transfer of suits and proceedings) apply so
as to empower the High Court to transfer cases from one Claims Tribunal
to another.

One view is that section 24 does not apply in regard to proceedings before
the Tribunal’. This is based on the reasoning that the “Claims Tribunal” consti-
tuted under section 110 is a mere “Tribunal”, and not a court.

1Articles 81, 82 and 113, Limitation Act, 1963.

4Para 7:2, supra.
*Laxminarain Misra Vs. Kailash Narain Gupta, A.IL.R. 1974 Raj. 155.


Recommendation
to insert section
110).

10.7.5. 28, 0.9.6.]

40

A contrary view as to the status of the Tribunal’? has been taken in 50116

other cases, though this specific point was not in issue.

7.12. In our opinion, it would be proper to vest a power in the High

Court to transfer cases. We recommend that new  sub-sections should be
inserted in section 110 to achieve the above object, as follows:—

“410(5) On the application of a party, and after notice to the parties,
and after hearing such of them as desire to be heard, or of its own motion,
the High Court may, at any stage, if satisfied that an order under this
section is expedient for the ends of justice, direct that any procecding be
transferred from a Claims Tribunal in the State to another Claims Tribunal
in the State.

“110(6). Every application under this section shall be made by a
motion which shall be supported by an affidavit.

“110(7). The Tribunal to which such proceeding is transferred shall,
subject to any special directions in the order of transfer, either re-try it or
proceed from the stage at which it was transferred to it.

“i10(8). In dismissing any application under this section, the High
Court ,may, if it is of opinion that the application was frivolous or vexa-
tious, order the applicant to pay, by way of compensation to any person
who has opposed the application, such sum, not exceeding one thousand
rupees, as it considers appropriate in the circumstances of the case.”

‘Krishan Gopal Vs. Dallotray, A.I.R. 1972 M. P. 125.
*Shardaben Vs. M. 1. Pandya, A.IL.R. 1971 Guj. 151.


Section 110A(1).

Section 110A(2).

Section 1 10A(3)—
Limitation.

No change.

Another — question
to be considered
later.

CHAPTER 8
APPLICATION FOR COMPENSATION : SECTION 110A.

8.1. An application for compensation under the Act is governed by section
110A. Sub-section (1) of the section deals with the persons by whom the appli-
cation can be filed.

8.2. The forum for filing the application (claim) is thus dealt with in
section 110A(2):—

“(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be made to the
Claims Tribunal having jurisdiction over the area in which the accident
occurred, and shall be in such form and shall contain such particulars as
may be prescribed.” .

न

In this sub-section, the words “in such form” should be replaced by the
words “according to such form”, in order to eliminate objections based on mere
technicalities.

8.3. Limitation for the application (claim) is thus provided in sub-section,
(3) of section 110A:—

“(3) No application for compensation under this section shall be
entertained unless it is “made within six months' of the occurrence of the
accident: ‘

Provided that the Claims Tribunal may entertain the application after |
the expiry of the said period of six months if it is satisfied that the appli-
cant was prevented by sufficient cause from making the application in time.”

8.4, This sub-section needs no change. It originally prescribed a period
of sixty days in that behalf. This created some hardship, and the period was
later increased.

8.5. We propose to consider separately another question which (though
also relatable to section 110A), has a wider importance’ namely, the question
of limitation in regard to cases where the claim arises before the constitution
of the Claims Tribunal for a particular area.

3866 amendment by Act 56 of 1969,
१86९ Chapter 16, infra.

41


Effect, of — death-—
Death of the wrong-
doer.

Survival of the
cause of — action—
Death of tort
feasor,

Death of the
claimant during
pendency of the
claim.

Section _ 110A(1)
(8)—“Legalrepre-
sentative”.

Meaning of “Legal
representative”,

CHAPTER 9

£FFECT OF DEATH, AND THE MEANING OF “LEGAL REPRESENTA-
. TIVE: SECTION 110A(1)(b)

9.1. We propose to consider in this Chapter the position regarding the
effect of death of the party to the proceedings in claims before the Tribunal.
Broadly speaking, in a suit in a civil court, two questions—one substantive and
the other procedural —come up for consideration when a party dies—(1) Does
the cause of action survive after the death? (2) Assuming that the cause of
action so survives, is any particular formal step to be adopted to bring the
legal representative of the deceased party on the record?

9.2. The substantive question is dealt with in section 306 of the Indian
Succession Act;’ a cause of action for personal injury not causing death does
not survive in favour of, or against, the wrong-docr’s legal representatives under
that section. In regard to certain cases, the Legal Representatives Suits Act,
1855 is also relevant.

Therefore, when a tort-feasor dies, proceedings for damages for bodily
injury caused by him do not survive under the Succession Act and the question
of substituting his legal representative? does not, in civil suits, arise.

But, in regard to proceeding under the Motor Vehicles Act, the Motor
Vehicles Act expressly over-rides section 306 of the Succession Act,’ and provides
that the death of a person in whose favour a certificate of insurance had been
issued shall not be a bar to survival of any cause of action (arising out of the
event which has given rise to a claim) against his estate or against the insurer.
The cause of action thus survives under the Motor Vehicles Act where the
wrong-doer is the holder of a certificate of insurance.

Moreover, in practice, most claims under the Motor Vehicles Act would
be against the insurer and the wrong-doer’s death does not therefore have much
practical importance.

9.3. As to cases where the claimant dies during the pendency of the pro-
ceedings, there is no special provision in the Motor Vehicles Act, so that the
substantive question as to the effect of death on the cause of section is left to
be dealt with by section 30* of the Indian Succession Act.‘ If the death was
the result of the bodily injury in question, the cause of action survives under
that section.

9.4. As to cases where the (prospective) claimant dies before the filing of
the claim, the position needs to be examined. Here again, if death resulted from
the bodily injury,’ the cause of action would survive under section 306.

9.5. But there is some conflict as to the persons who can take proceedings
a3 “legal representatives” under section 110A(1) (b) of the Motor Vehicles
Act. Under section 110A(1) (b), an application for compensation arising out
of an accident involving the death of a person caused by the use of a motor
vehicle may be made by the “legal representatives” of the deceased.

4Section 306, Indian Succession Act, 1925.

20rder 22, Rule 1, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

Section 102, Motor Vehicles Act, 1939.

“Para 9-2, supra.

+For injury to property, see para 9-5, infra, and the Legal Representatives suits Act, 1855.
42


Position under
Fatal Accidents
Act.

Nature of right
conferred by Fatal
Accidents Act.

meaning
repres!
Motor
Act.

Question for
consideration.

43

The expression “legal representative” is not, however, defined in the Act.
The Code of Civil Procedure defines this term as meaning a person who, in
law represents the estate of a deceased person and as including any person who
intermeddles with the estate of the deceased and where a party sues or is used
in a representative character, the person on whom the estate devolves on the
death of the party so suing or sued.

9.6. In the Fatal Accidents Act,’ the working is slightly different. That
Act provides that an action or a suit for damages in respect of the death of a
person caused by the wrongful act, neglect or default of another person shall
be for the benefit of the wife, husband, parent and child, if any, of the person
whose death shall have been so caused, and shall be brought by and in the
name of the executor, administrator or “representative” of the person deceased.
The Act further’ provides that no more than one suit or action shall be broughi
for, and in respect of, the same subject matter of complaint.

9.7. The precise nature of the right conferred by the Fatal Accidents Act
has been considered more than once‘. The word “representative” in this Act
is not equivalent to “heirs”, since, by the Legal Representatives Suits Act passed
on the same day, the right is given to bring a suit against heirs or representatives
of the deceased wrong-doer. The word “representative” means and includes in
this context all or any one of the persons’ for whose benefit a suit under the
Fatal Accidents Act can be maintained. They are the persons taking the place
of the deceased in obtaining reparation for the wrong done. Where there is no
executor or administrator, or where there is one and he fails or is unwilling to
sue, then the suit may be instituted by, and in the name of. the representative
of the person deceased, but only one suit is allowed to enforce the claims of
all the persons beneficially entitled. The right of each beneficiary is only to re-
ceive compensation in proportion to the loss occasioned to him by the death
of his deceased relative.

Thus, in the Fatal Accidents Act, the expression “representative” means
not the legal representative in the strict sense, but the wife, husband, parent
and children of the deceased, and any one of them can also bring the suit for
the benefit of others*.

9.8. So much as regards the legislative precedents. As to the Motor Vehicles
Act itself, the Act contains no definition of “legal representative”, and there
is a want of uniformity in the rules and in the judicial decisions as to the precise
scope of the expression. Fos example—to take rules first—in some States’
the expression “legal representative” is defined as having the meaning assigned
to it? in clause (11) of section 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

However, the Mysore High Court’ struck down such a rule on the ground
that the power to make rules under section 111A is only to carry into effect the
provisions of section 110A and rules cannot restrict the right given by section
110A to only some of the persons contemplated by that section.

9.9. Amongst the High Courts, there is a conflict of views.

tSection 2(11), Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

28ection 1A, Fatal Accidents Act, 1865 (13 of 1855).

agection 2, Fatal Accidents Act, 1855 and proviso.

‘Cf, Johnson Vs. The Madras Railway Company, (1905) T.L.R. 28 Cal. 479,

SSpouse, parent or child.

‘Jeet Kumari Vs. Chittagong Engineering & Electric Supply Co., A.I.R. 1947 Cal. 195, 198,
199, paragraphs 16-17.

2Bihar, Assam, West Bongal, Tamil Nadu, U. P. and Union Territory of Delhi.

8800 para 9-4, supra.

जज, Vasaalingaih Va. व, P. Papanna, A.J.R. 1972, Mysore 63.


Various shades
of view—First
view.

Second view.

Third view.

Recommendation
to. define “legal
Teppesentative”.

Recommendation
to insert section

20).

44

9.10. According to. one view,!—* the claim under the Motor Vehicles Act
would be governed by the substantive provisions of the Fatal Accidents Act.

9.11. According to a second view, the Fatal Accidents Act docs not control
the matter; on this basis the sister of the deceased was held to be entitled to file
a claim, even though she does not find a mention in the Fatal Accidents Act.‘

9.12. According to a third view,’ while the right to compensation is con-
fined to those who are mentioned in section 1A of the Fatal Accidents Act, the
claim can be brought by the representatives. That expression is not limited to
those entitled to the benefits of the Fatal Accidents Act. Thus, in a Madras case,
the married sister of the deceased (who had died a bachelor) was allowed to
file a claim. It was held that an application can be put by a “legal represcnta-
tive”, and that the Motor Vehicles Act is free of any reference to the Fatal
Accidents Act. Apparently, on this reasoning, the grandfather and the father
were held to be legal representatives for the purposes of the Motor Vehicles
Act, though they also do not find a mention in the Fatal Accidents Act’.

9.13. On a careful consideration of the matter, we are of the view that
the law on this important point should be settled, and to achieve that object, a
precise definition of the expression “legal representative” should be inserted in
the Act.

9.14. Further, in our opinion, it would be appropriate to assign to the ex-
pression “legal representative” the same meaning as has been given to the
expression “representative” for the purposes of the Fatal Accidents Act". This
would effectively carry out the purpose of social justice underlying Chapter 3
of the Act, to which the Fatal Accidents Act is the nearest approximation.

We would also prefer to make the provision to be inserted on the subject
self-contained.

9.15. Accordingly, we recommend that in section 2 of the Act, which
contains the definitions, clause (11) should be inserted as under :—

“(11) ‘legal representatives’, in relation to claims under Chapter via
of this Act, means the spouse, parent and children of the decea-
sed.”

°\Dewan Hari Chand Vs. Municipal Corporation of Delhi, A.T.R. 1973 Dethi 67, 69, 70, para-
graphs 9-10 (Ansari व.)

2p, B. Kader V3. Thuthamma, A.LR. 1970 Kerala 241.
*Kamala Devi Vs. Kishan Chand, ALR. 1970 M. P. 168.

१७) M. Bhsavalingaiah Vs. T. P. Papanna, ALR. 1972 Mys. 63, 68, paragraphs 23-24.
(a) BM. Avappan Vs. Moktar Singh, ALR. 1970 Mys. 66, 70, para 10 (Parent).

Northern India Transport Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Amravati, ALR. 1966 Punj. 288, 293, para
14 (D.B.).

‘Veena Kumari Kohli Va. Punjab Roadways, (1987) Accidents Claims Journal 297 (Punjab)
(Sister).

7 Vanguard Insurance Co. Vs. Chailu Hanumantha Rao, (1975) Accidents Claims Journal 182
(A. BP).

*Mokammed Habibulle Vs. K. Sethammal, A.1.R. 967 Mad. 123, 124, paragraphs 34.
*State"of Orissa Vs. Kapil Biswas, (1976) Accidents Claims Journal 395 (Orissa).
wPara 9-12, supra.


CHAPTER 10

OPTION REGARDING CLAIMS FOR COMPENSATION : SECTION 110AA

Section 110AA. 10.1. This takes us to section 110AA, which is a negative provision and

reads—

“1IOAA. Option regarding claims for compensation in certain cases.
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Workmen's Compensation Act,
1923 (8 of 1923), where the death of or bodily injury to any person
gives rise to a claim for compensation under this Act and also under the
Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, the person entitled to’ compensation

may claim such compensation under either of those Acts, but not under
both.”

No change. 10.2. The section deals with a very special case, and needs no chanbe.

80-L/B(D)457Mof LJI&CA—4 oy


Scope

Section —-L10B—
Persons entitled
to chain com:
pensation —contro-
versy as to case
of death.

Controversy as to
persons entitled
to claim cempen-
sation,

Delhi view.

Kerala View.

No change in sec-
tion 1108.

CHAPTER 11
PARTIES: SECTION 110B

11.1. This Chapter is concerned with the parties to proceedings by way
of claims for compensation.

11.2. The persons who can claim compensation are dealt with in the first
pert of section 110B. It reads—

“110B. Award of the Claims Tribunal. On receipt of an application
for compensation made under section 110A, the Claims Tribunal shall,
after giving the parties an opportunity of being heard, hold an inquiry into
the claim and may make an award determining the amount of compensa-
tion which appears to it to be just and specifying the person or persons to
whom compensation shall be paid by t he insurer or owner or driver of
the vehicle involved in the accident or by all or any of them, as the case
may be,”

The controversy that has arisen rests mainly on the question whether, in
case of death, the persons entitled to compensation, are the same as those
entitled under the Fatal Accidents Act, or whether the matter has to be decided
independently of that Act.

11.3. The Karnataka High Court, for example, holds that the brother and
sister of the deceased are entitled' to compensation as “legal representatives”,?
provided they can prove their dependency on the deceased. It construes the ex-
pression “persons” in section 110B as meaning the persons who are “legal re-
presentatives”, and takes the latter expression, in its turn, as including brothers
and sisters.

A contrary view has, however, been taken by the Delhi’ and Kerala High
Courts,* which deny any such right to brothers and sisters.

11.4. The Delhi High Court has expressly held’ that brothers are not enti-
tled to compensation under the Motor Vehicles Act, and that only the persons
mentioned in section 1A of the Fatal Accidents Act are so entitled.

11.5. The Kerala High Court has also held,’ in a case involving death
caused by a motor accident, that brothers and sisters are not entitled to rauk
as dependants under the Fatal Accidents Act. The judgment, though not direc-
tly discussing the question of construction of the Motor Vehicles Act, seems to
imply that the Fatal Accidents Act would govern right to compensation.

11.6. As the controversy relates to the persons in whose favour section
110B can operate, we have considered the question whether any clarification
defining the scope of that section in this regard is needed. However, we have
come to the conclusion that it is not required. We have separately made a re-
commendation for an amendment defining “legal representatives’’. This amend-
ment will not only apply to section 110A, but would also indirectly serve to
limit the scope of section 110B. We do not therefore consider a separate amend-
ment of section 110B necessary on the point just now discussed.

3General Manager, Karnataka State Road T'ransport Corporation, Bangalore Vs. Peera;
Parasappa Sangolli, AJ.R. 1979 Karnataka 154, 157—169, paragraphs 12-14 (August-Septem! ter
issues).

20f. Meghjibhai Vs. Chaturbhai, ALR. 1977 Guj. 195.

Dewan Hari Chand Vs. Delhi Municipality, A.I.R. 1973 Delhi 67, 70, para 10 (Ansari J.).

१, B. Kader Vs. Thalchamma, A.LR. 1970 Ker, 241.

*Dewan Hari Chand Vs, Dethi Municipality, A.I.R. 1973 Delhi 67, 70, para 10 (Ansari J.).

‘Pp, B. Kader Vs. Thalehamma, AIR. 1970 Ker. 241.

7See recommendation as to section 2(11) Para 9-15, supra,

46


Section 110B to be
amended to cover
all persons liable.

Position examined.

47

11.7. The above discussion was concerned with the persons to whom com-
pensation can be awarded. There is some deficiency in the law as to the persons
against whom liability arising from an accident can be enforced. It is to be
noted that the liability of the owner of vehicle—or, for that matter, the liability
of any other person ‘for death or bodily injury caused by the use of a motor
vehicle,—arises not under the Motor Vehicles Act, but under the general rule
of the law of Torts, modified (where applicable) by the Fatal Accidents Act! or
other statutory provisions. The owner and driver are not the only persons who
may become liable.’ There may be other persons who are liable, particularly
if, at the time of the accident, they were in possession or control of the car,
either personally or though servants acting in the course of their employment.

11.8. It appears to us that section 110B needs to be amplified on this
point. It should be noted that the Act is not confined to a claim against parti-
cular categories of persons, such as the insurer, the owner and the driver. Even
the jurisdiction of the Claims Tribunal is unrestricted in this respect, under
section 110. If all the situations in which a cause of action may arise are not
taken care of by section 110B, then a certain amount of incompleteness would
survive in section 110B. All claims under section 110 are not fully taken care
of by section 110B, And yet the jurisdiction of civil courts would be barred
by reason of section 1107, This would not be a satisfactory situation. This difti-
culty arising from section 110B particularly needs to be remedied.

There may be several situations in which a person who is neither the owner
nor the driver might, under common law principles, become liable for an acci-
dent caused by the use of a motor vehicle. A claim for compensation in such
a case would fall within section 110(1), being a claim for compensation ‘
respect of accidents involving the death of or bodily injury to persons arising
out of the use of motor vehicles... ... . . . ”. But section 110B—the provision
which requires the Tribunal to make an order as to quantum. of compensation
against owner, driver or insured,—leaves out the case. The following are a few
illustrative situations: —

(i) A car is given to a prospective purchaser, whose driver drives the car
and causes an accident. In such a case, apart from the driver, the
prospective purchaser would also be liable.

(ii) The car is sent to a garage.? The repairer and his driver who caused
the accident.

(ili) The registered owner may loan the car to X, who allows his driver
to drive the car and the victim is injured.

(iv) The registered owner asks a passenger to close the door. The passen-
ger closes the door, but, in doing so, negligently slams the door on
the fingers of the victim.

It is also worthy of notice that section 110 [unlike section 95(1) (b) and
also unlike section 94(1)] is not confined to the use of a motor vehicle in a
public place. The provisions of section 110 are wide enough to cover accidents
which occur in a private place.

To cover all these cases, in which section 110 would come into play,
section 110B should be expanded.

1Ariyamma, Vs. Narasimhiah, ALR. 1972 Mys. 73, 75.
Branch Manager, Hindustan General Insurance Co. Vs. Saramma, A.1.R. 1969 A.D. 390.
20f. Govindarajulu Vs. Govindaraja, ALR. 1966 Mad. 332.

AL.L.C. Vs. Karthyani, ALR. 1976 Orissa 21, 24, Para 13 (5. Acharya J.).

80-L/B(DM4S7MofLI&CA—4


Becommendation
to amend section
110B.

Amendment of
section 110B to
save limits as to
quantum of  com-
pensation recom
mended.

48

11.9. To achieve this object, we recommend that in section 110B, after the
words “by the insurer” or “owner or driver of the vehicle involved in the accident”,
the words “or any other person who was in possession or control of the vehicie
at the time of the accident” should be inserted. The amendment will eliminate
the controversy arising from the obscurity of the expression “owner”, as revealed
by the case law'-', and will make the section comprehensive’.

11.10. While this amendment would widen the scope of the power of the
Tribunal, there is also need for an amendment of the section on another matter,
by drawing attention to the limits on compensation that can be awarded. When
making this comment, we do not have in mind the existing limits on compensation
laid down in section 95(2). These limits, according to our recommendation,®
should be abolished. Even if they are retained, our recommendation is to in-
crease them, and they will apply only to ordinary courts.

We are primarily concerned with the limits which, according to our recom-
mendation in this Report’, will become applicable as regards the quantum of
compensation that can be awarded on a “no fault” basis (i.e. in claims tried
by the Claims Tribunals on that basis). .

In our opinion, it is desirable to ensure that the wide language of section
110B should not become a source of oversight, thereby leading to litigants and
others to overlook the limits. We therefore recommend that in section 110B,
a new sub-section should be inserted on the subject discussed above, after re-
numbering the present section as sub-section (1).

The following is a very rough draft of what we have in mind:—

“(2) Nothing in this section shall affect any provision of this Act
imposing a maximum limit on the amount of the compensation that can,
in respect of any accident, be claimed by any person before the Tribunal.”

1oolbui Vs. Pestonji, AAR. 1935 Bom. 333.
अर Bhagwant Gopal, A.1.R. 1943 Nag. 22.

2K ing V8. Ba Ba Sein, A.1.R. 1938 Rang. 400.
sgtate Vs. Prema Bai, ALR. 1979 M. P. 85, 87.
sAlso see para 11-7, supra.

*Paragraphs 5-6 to 58, supra.

*Para 3:63, supra.


Appearance through
legal practitioner.

Madhya Pradesh
rule,

Section 11088
to be inserted.

CHAPTER 12
APPEARANCE OF PARTIES: SECTION 11088 (PROPOSED)

12.1. The next question concerns appearance by parties through legal
practitioners, before the Claims Tribunal. The Act does not make any express
provision on the subject. Like many other matters of procedure it is left to
rules. However, some difficulty is created in this regard by the manner in which
the rules are framed in some States, which in substance, provide that the Tribunal
may in its discretion allow any party to appear through legal practitioner.

In our opinion, having regard to the nature of the proceedings before the
Tribunal, which though summary in character, may, often involve intricate ques-
tions of fact and law, it is proper that the Act should provide a right to appear
through legal practitioners.’ The State rules on the subject will, of course,
then become inoperative.‘

12.2. We may in this connection, refer to the Madhya Pradesh rule’, which
provides that any appearance, application or act required to be made or done
by any person before a Claims Tribunal (other than an appearance of a party
which is required for the purpose of his examination as a witness) may be
made or done on behalf of such person by a legal practitioner, or by an officer
of an insurance company, or with the permission of the Claims Tribunal, by
other person so authorised. It is desirable to insert a similar provision permitting
a party to appear by a legal practitioner or by other authorised person in pro-
ceedings relating to claims for compensation under the Act.

12.3. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend the insertion of the
following new section :—.

110B. Any appearance, application or act required to be made
or done by any person before a Claims Tribunal (other than an appearance
of a party which is required for the purpose of his examination as a
witness) may be made or done by such person or, on behalf of such
person,--—

“(a) by a legal practitioner,

(b) in the case of any insurance company, by an officer of the
company, or
(c) with the permission of the Claims Tribunal, by any other person,
duly authorised by the first-mentioned person.”

1Compare section 30(ii), Advocates Act, 1961.

2Andhra Pradesh, Rule 520; Assam, Rule 9; Delhi, Rule 8-11; Maharashtra, Rule 308; Tamil
Nadu, Rule 9 and so on.

Rule 18, Madhya Pradesh Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal Rules, 1959.

49


Modo of recording

evidence.

Procedure in
Act.

made in rules.

the

CHAPTER 13

VIDENCE AND PROCEDURE: SECTION 10९

13.1. We now come to the question of evidence and procedure in proceed-
ings before the Claims Tribunal.

The Tribunal has power to take evidence on oath.’ The Act does not lay
down, in detail, the mode of recording evidence ; the matter is left to be dealt
with by rules to be made by the State Governments.? Generally, these rules
require that the Tribunal should make a brief memorandum of the substance
of the evidence of cach witness. Though the award of the Tribunal is subject
to certain monetary limits,’ a verbatim record of the evidence is not, as a rule,
required, though sometimes medical evidence is required to be recorded
verbatim.

The position does not seem to need modification.

13.2. As to procedure, the Act provides* that in holding inquiries the
Tribunal may, subject to rules, follow such summary procedure as it thinks
fit, State Governments have, under their rule-making _power,* adopted
or copied various rules contained in the Code of Civil Procedure on specific
matters, But it is often found that these rules are not comprehensive and leave
out important matters that arise frequently in practice.

Because of want of specific rules, the awards of the Tribunals are, in
many cases, sought to be challengtd in appeal १-२ on minute points of procedure
causing avoidable delay and injustice. To give one example, there has arisen
a question whether a claimant before the Tribunal can sue as an indigent
person. Fortunately, the question has been answered in the affirmative’.

There are many other points of a procedural nature which, if dealt with
by rules, would avoid controversies and expedite disposal.

13.3. All this shows the need for well-drafted and comprehensive rules as
to matters for procedure. We do not consider it necessary to recommend an
amendment of the Act for the purpose mentioned above, but we would draw
the attention of the State Governments to the need for making comprehensive
rules on the subject of procedure, so as to expedite disposal and avoid contro-
versies on matters of detail.

*Section 110C(2).

*8ection 1118, main paragraph.
"Section 110D.

‘Section 1100(1).

8Section 11400):

Calcutta State Transport Corporation Vs. Laxmi Rani Pal, A.1.R. 1977 Cal. 249, 250, para 5
(Re-examination of witnesses).

1M. Krishnan Vs. Pankaj Jethalal Shah, A.I.R. 1970 Mad. 259, approved in P. Sanmugham V8.
Madras Motor General Ins, Co. Ltd., AT. 974 Mad. 363, 366 paragraphs 10, 11 (Commissions).

8Darshana Devi Vs. Sher Singh, ALR. 1978 P & H_ 265, 267, paragraphs 2-3,



Section 110९0.

Two periods to
be dealt with.

Interest prior to
making of claim.

Position under
Interest. Act, 1978.

Later Acts.

CHAPTER 14
INTEREST : SECTION 110CC

14.1. The subject of interest on awards is dealt with in section 110CC,
which reads :—

“Where any Court or Claims Tribunal allows a claim for compensation
made under this Chapter, such Court or Tribunal may direct that in addition
to the amount of compensation simple interest shall also be paid at such
rate and from such date not earlier than the date of making the claim ag
it may specify in this behalf.” . .

In this connection, it may be noted that extensive amendments have been
made by the legislature—many of them on the recommendation of the Law
Commission,’ in the general law relating to interest. It is proper to take note
of them? and to examine how far section 110CC needs reform in the light of
those amendments’.

14.2, It will be convenient to deal first with the interest awardable for tl
period before the making of the claim, and then with the interest penn
for the period subsequent to the making of the claim.

14.3 As to interest prior to the making of the claim under the present 4
law as contained in the Act, interest is not granted from the date of the accident,
but only from the date of the claim. Such has been the judicial construction.
Section 110CC, by its express terms, also does not provide for such interest.

14.4. Similar position prevailed in civil courts in regard to interest on
damages before 1978. Until very recently, in a civil court, interest could not
be awarded on unliquidated damages.’ It could only be awarded on a liquidated
sum—‘debt or sum certain”, as is often put.

14.5. Notice should, however, be taken of the wider power’ to award
interest conferred by the revised statutory law of interest—the Interest Act,
1978—on all courts, including Tribunals. That Act specifically empowers the
court to award interest on damages, and “court” (as defined in the Act)’
includes a Tribunal and an arbitrator.

It is enough to quote section 3(1) and 3(2) of that Act which read’—

“4(1). In any proceedings for the recovery of any debt or damages
or in any proceedings in which a claim for interest in respect of any debt
or damages already paid is made, the court may, if it thinks fit, allow
interest to the person entitled to the debt or damages or to the person
making such claim, as the case may be, at a rate not exceeding the current
rate of interest, for the whole or part of the following period, that is to
say,—

—_———

SLaw Commission of India,—
(a) 54th Report (Code of Civil Procedure, 1908).
(७) 63rd Report (Interest Act, 1839).
*Para 14-3, infra.
Vor the suggested amendment, see para 14-6, infra.
4(a) Oriesa Mining Corporation Vs. Kopula, I.L.R. (1975) Cutt. 1072.
(b) New India Assurance Co. Vs. Surjyamoni, A.L.R. 1980 Orissa 17, 19, para 12.
See Law Commission of India, 63rd Report (Interest Act, 1839), page 21, para 5:1.
*gection 3, Interest Act, 1978.
tection 2(1), Interest Act, 1978.
@§eotion 3(1) and 3(2), Interest Act, 1978.

aL


Neod for parity as
regai period
before claim.

Period after the
making of the
claim—need for
parity,

Section  110CC
Recommendation
as to rate of in-
terest. and mak-
ing interest man-
datory.

Recommendation
to revis» section
11000.

52

(a) If the proceedings relate to a debt payable by virtue of a
written instrument at a certain time, then, from the date when the
debt is payable to the date of institution of the proceedings ;

(b) if the proceedings do not relate to any such debt, then,
from the date mentioned in this regard in a written notice given by
the person entitled or the person making the claim to the person
liable that interest will be claimed ;

Provided that where the amount of the debt or damages has been repaid
before the institution of the proceedings, interest shall not be allowed under
this section for the period after such repayment.

(2) Where, in any such proceedings as are mentioned in sub-section

(a) judgment, order or award is given for a sum which, apart
from interest on damages, exceeds four thousand rupees, and

(b) the sum represents or includes damages in respect of per-
sonal injuries to the plaintiff or any other person or in respect of a
person’s death, then, the power conferred by that sub-section shall
be exercised so as to include in that sum interest on those damages
or on such part of them as the Court considers appropriate for the
whole or part of the period from “the date mentioned in the notice
to the date of institution of the poceedings, unless the Court is satis-
fied that there are special reasons why no interest should be given
in respect of those damages”.

14.6. In our opinion, justice requires that the Court or Tribunal adjudi-
cating a claim under Chapter 8 of the Motor Vehicles Act should, in this
particular sphere, have the same powers as a Court which tries a civil suit.
It would therefore be appropriate to revise section 110CC to confer such a
power.

14.7, As to the period after the making of the claim, the subject (in
regard to civil courts) is governed by section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
This position should also be reflected in the section dealing with the power of
the Court or Tribunal under Chapter 8, and at this stage aJso, the Court or
Tribunal should, in our opinion, have the same power as a civil court.

14.8 Coming to the rate of interest, generally, in the past, 6 per cent interest
has been allowed on amounts awarded under the Act.’ In some cases only
4 per cent was allowed.’ In our view, the rate of interest should be specifically
mentioned in the section and it should ordinarily be 12 per cent per annum.
The award of interest at this rate would expedite realisation of the amount
awarded. It may be noted that section 34° of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
(as amended), allows interest upto 12 per cent for “commercial transactions”.
The case for a suitably high rate of interest on compensation awarded under
the Motor Vehicles Act is still stronger.

Further, it is, in our opinion, desirable to override contrary laws and to
make the grant of interest mandatory unless reasons exist to the contrary.

14.9. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section
110CC should be revised as under :—

eS कन्नततत-

(a) Hanuman Das V. Usha Rani, A.L.R. 1978 Punj. & Har. 177—180, para 14.
(b) Sushil Kumar V. Binodini Rath, A.I.R. 1977 Orissa 112.

Kailash Wati Vs. State, ALR. 1975 H. P. 35.
Section 34, Code of Civil Procedure, as amended in 1976.


53

“110CC. Where any Court or Claims Tribunal allows a claim for
compensation made under this Chapter, such Court or Tribunal shall have
the same power to direct the payment of interest on the sum awarded as
a civil court trying a civil suit has under the law for the time being in
force, including the Interest Act, 1978 and “section 34 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908, and shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in any law for the time being in force, make a direction accordingly
unless the Court or Tribunal, for reasons to be recorded, considers such a
direction unjust :

Provided that unless the Court or Tribunal, for reasons to be recorded,
directs otherwise, the rate of interest shall not less than twelve per cent
per annum for the period beginning with the date of making of the claim.


Seotion 110D(1)—
Appeals

Reéommendation
to amend — section
110D(1).

Section 110D(2)—
Appeal in petty
cases,

Section 110E—
Recommendation
for deposit of

amount of award.

CHAPTER 15

APPEAL AND EXECUTION : SECTION 100 AND 110E AND NEW
SECTION 110KE

15.1. An appeal is provided by section 110D against the decision of the
Claims Tribunal. Sub-section (1) provides that the appeal shail lie to the High
Court at the instance of any person aggrieved by an award of a Claims Tribunal.
The period of limitation is ninety days relaxable by the High Court for sufficient
cause,

15.2. It is often noticed that appeals are filed by the insurer on insubstantial,
if not flimsy grounds, thereby causing avoidable hardship to the claimant who
has succeeded in his claim after considerable labour and expense. In our view,
it १5 necessary to require deposit of the amount awarded by the Tribunal before
an appeal can be filed. It may be noted that under the Workmen’s Compen-
sation Act, the entire amount of money has to be deposited in the Court before
preferring an appeal from the decision of the Commissioner under that Act.

Section 30(1), 3rd proviso, Workmen’s Compensation Act reads :—~

“Provided further that no appeal by an employer under clause (a)
shall lie unless the memorandum of appeal is accompanied by a certificate
by the Commissioner to the effect that the appellant has deposited with
him the amount payable under the order appealed against.”

A similar, provision should be introduced in the Motor Vehicles Act,
requiring deposit of the entire amount awarded, before filing an appeal?

15.3. The next point concerns sub-section (2). At present, under section
110D(2), no appeal lies against an award of the Tribunal when the amount in
dispute does not exceed Rs. 2,006. This figure was inserted in 1956. Since
then, there has been a steep fall in the purchasing power of the rupec. In view
of this development, we recommend that subsection (2) of section 110D should
be revised by substituting, for the words “two thousand rupees”, the words
“five thousand rupees”.

15.4. Section 110E provides that where any money is due from any person
under an award, the Claims Tribunal may, on an application made to it by the
person entitled to the money, issue a certificate for the amount to the Collector
and the Collector shall recover the same in the same manner as arrears of land
Tevenue. Every one knows the long delay that is involved in the complex and
time-consuming process of the recovery of any amount as an arrears of land
revenue. Considerable delay is therefore caused in the payment of the compen-
sation amount to the person entitled to it. It is, therefore, desirable that a
specified provision should be included in the Act, laying down that when an
award is made under section 110B, the person directed to pay and involved
in the accident shall deposit the amount in the Claims Tribunal within thirty
days of the date of the making of the award. The amount may be deposited
either in cash or by a cheque on a Scheduled Bank.

In the event of an appeal being filed by the assured or the person against
whom the award is made, the amount deposited in the Claims Tribunal should
be made payable to the person entitled to it, only on his furnishing a bank
guarantee for the return of the amount if the High Court sets aside the award
or in appeal reduces the amount of compensation.

*Seotion 30(1), 3rd proviso, Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923,
38७9 para 15-6, infra—proposed section OER.

ot


Deposit in High
Court.

New section
NOEE recom-
mended.

Deposit of amount
awarded.

65

15.5. The procedure just now indicated in regard to the deposit of the
amount of compensation should also be made applicable for the deposit of
amount in the High Court when, the High Court on a disposal of the appeal,
awards compensation for the first time or enhances the amount awarded by
the Claims Tribunal.

15.6. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend the insertion of
the following new section in the Act :—

“LIOEE. (1) When an award is made under section 110B the person
against whom it is made shall within thirty days of the date of the making
oj the award deposit the entire amount awarded in the Claims Tribunal,
ciher in cash or by a cheque on a scheduled bank.!

(2) Where an appeal against such award is filed in the High Court
by the person aggrieved by the award, the amount deposited in the Claims
Tribunal shall not be paid to the person entitled thereto except on his
furnishing a bond, with a scheduled bank as surety, to the effect that if
the High Court in appeal sets aside the award or reduces the amount of
compensation, he shall “return the amount of such part thereof as may
be necessary for compliance with the decision of the High Court.

(3) Where no such appeal is filed within the period allowed for filing
an appeal or where the appeal, if filed, is dismissed by the High Court, the
amount deposited in the Claims Tribunal shall, if not already paid under
sub-section (2), be paid to the person entitled thereto,

(4) Where an appeal against an award is filed, and the High Court
awards compensation for the first time or enhances the amount awarded
by the Claims Tribunal, the provisions of sub-section (1), (2) and (3)
shall, with such modifications as may be necessary, apply in relation to
deposit in the High Court of the amount awarded by the High Court of
the amount representing the increase ordered by the High Court, as the
case may be, as they apply in relation to deposit of an amount awarded
by the Tribunal.” ree
eee
‘The expression “Scheduled bank” may be suitably defined.


Soope of th
Chapter. °

Limit of jurisdic-
tion—Territorial.

Pecuniary limits.

Section 110F—
Discrepancy with
section —_110(1),
proviso (Damage
to property).

Section. _110F—
Causes of action
arising —_ before
constitution of
‘Tribunal.

CHAPTER 16
JURISDICTION AND LIMITATION
Section 1107 and 110A(3)

I. Limits of Jurisdiction

16.1. We propose to deal in this Chapter with a few points concerning the
jurisdiction of Claims Tribunals constituted under the Act, We shall be primarily
concerned with sections 110A and 110F, The matter could be conveniently
considered under a few possible heads of limits of jurisdiction—territorial limits,
pecuniary limits, pre-existing causes of action and the like.

16.2. As to territorial jurisdiction, section 110A(2) provides for the filing
of an application in a tribunal within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the
accident occurred. This sub-section has raised no problems so far.

16.3. As regards the general pecuniary jurisdiction of Claims Tribunals,
there is no provision faying down limits thereon.

वा, Damage to property

16.4, Some difficulty exists in regard to claims for proprietary damage made
by third parties. Under the proviso to section 110(1), (as it now stands), claims
above rupees two thousand in relation to damage to a third party can, at the
option of the claimant, be referred to the civil court ; but, under section 110F,
where any Claims Tribunal has been constituted for any area, no civil court
shall have jurisdiction to entertain any question, relating to any claim for com-
pensation which may be adjudicated upon by the Claims Tribunal for the area
(the rest of the section is not material. as it relates to the grant of injunction).

If, as already recommended by us,’ section 110(1), proviso is deleted, this
point would not survive.

IIL. Causes of action arising before constitution of the Tribunal

16.5. The jurisdiction of a Claims Tribunal would obviously be exercisable
as to future causes of action. As regards a cause of action arising before the
constitution of a Claims Tribunal, obscurity seems to have prevailed for some
time. The majority of the High Courts took the view that once a Tribunal is
constituted, the jurisdiction of civil court is barred in respect of all claims pre-
ferred after the constitution of Tribunal even though the accident occurred
before such constitution2-, The High Court of Madhya Pradesh,’ however, held
that a suit for damages in an ordinary civil court is not barred where the cause
of action arose before the Claims Tribunal was constituted. :

1866 discussion as to section 110(1). proviso, para 7-11, supra.

4a) Devendra Kumar Vs. Pilokhri Brick Kiln, ALR. 1972 All. 61.

(०) V.C.K. Bus Service Vs. H.G. Sethna, ALR. 1965 Mad. 149: virtually dissenting from
Chandrasekharan, Vs. Narayanasundaram, (1963) 76 M-L.W. (S.N.) 44.

sUnited Motor & General Insurance Vs. Kariar Singh, A.B. 1965 Punjab 102, 105, 108, Para-
graphs 7, 10 (discusses the question of pending proceedings also).

4M. Ayappan Vs. Mukhtar Singh, A.1.R. 1970 Mys. 67.
sgushma Mehta Vs. 0. P. Transport Ltd., A.LR. 1964 M. 9. 133.

56


57

Supreme Court 16.6. The Supreme Court has now held" that as soon as the Claims Tribunal

judgment. is constituted, the jurisdiction of the ordinary civil court is ousted. The person
injured would have a vested right of action, Cut not a vested right of forum and
the change of forum under sections 110A and 110F must be given effect to.
The legislature did not think it necessary to affect pending suits, but wanted the
cheap remedy to be available as soon as the Tribunal was constituted by the
State Government in all cases, irrespective of the date of the accident, provided
the remedy of going to the court was not barred on the date of the constitution
of the Tribunal.

Difficulty as to 16.7. Recognising that on this construction, certain difficulties might arise
limitation. in relation to limitation, the Supreme Court also held that the time for, the
purpose of filing the application under section 110A did not start running before
the constitution of the Tribunal. In the case before the Supreme Court, time
had started running for barring of the suit, but before its expiry, the forum was
changed and for the purpose of the changed forum, time could not be deemed
to have started running before a remedy of going to the new forum had been
made available. The following passage from the judgment of the Supreme Court
represents the principle enunciated by the Supreme Court on the question of
itation® :—

“Apropos the dar of limitation provided in section 110A(3), one can
say, on the basis of the authorities aforesaid, that strictly speaking the bar
does not operate in relation to an application for compensation arising out
of an accident which occurred prior to the constitution of the claims
Tribunal. But since in such a case there is a change of forum unlike the
fact of the said cases the reasonable view to take woud be that such an
application can be filed within a reasonable time of the constitution of the
Tribunal, which ordinarily and generally, would be the time of limitation
mentioned in sub-section (3). If the application could not be made within
that time from the date of the constitution of the Tribunal, in a given case,
the further time taken in the making of the application may be held to be
the reasonable time on the facts of that case for the making of the appli-
cation or the delay made after the हि हा of the period of limitation pro-
vided in sub-section (3) from the date of the constitution of the Tribunal can
be condoned under the proviso to that sub-section. In any view of the
matter, in our opinion, the jurisdiction of the civil court is ousted as soon
as the Claims Tribunal is constituted and the filing of the application before
the Tribunal is the only remedy available to the claimant. On the facts of
this casc, we hold that the remedy available to the respondents was to go
before the Claims Tribunal and since the law was not very clear gn the
point, the time of about four months taken in approaching the Tribunal
after its constitution can be held to be either a reasonable time or the’delay
of less than two months could well be condoned under the proviso to sub-
section (3) of section 110A.”

Need to amend 16.8. Subject to what we are going to say about limitation, we would

seetion 1108: like to incorporate the proposition laid down by the Supreme Court" by a suit-
able amendment dealing with jurisdiction in regard to an accident occurring
before the creation of a Claims Tribunal. We, therefore, recommend that an
Explanation should be added to section 110F as follows :—

1New Indian Insurance Oo. Lid., Vs. Shanti Mishra, A.J.R. 1976 8. C. 237.
2Page 241, para 7 in the AIR. 196 8. 0, 237.

2Para 242, para 10 in the ALR. 1976 8. 0. 237.

‘Para 16°9, infra.

*Para 16-7, supra.


Sectis 110A(3)—
mmendation
for “"'dshendment.

Recommondation
to amend Section
110& (3).

58

“Explanation—The Claims Tribunal shall have jurisdiction whether or
not the accident occurred before the Tribunal was constituted, but nothing
herein contained shall affect any proceedings pending before a Civil Court
involving any question relating to any claim for compensation arising out
of any accident which occurred before the constitution of the Claims
Tribunal.”

IV. Limitation for claims

16.9. At the same time, the starting point for limitation for a claim on a
cause of action which arose before the constitution of the Tribunal’ should be
altered by suitably amending section 1108 (3).

A time limit of six months is prescribed by section 110A(3) for making
an application for compensation. This time limit is to be computed from the
date on which the accident occurred, subject to a proviso which is not material
for the present purpose. In our opinion where the Tribunal is constituted after
the occurrence of the accident, the period of limitation (six months) should be
counted from the date of the constitution of the Tribunal. If the time limit is
computed from the date of occurrence of the accident, certain practical problems
may arise in regard to a cause of action which arose Prior to the constitution of
the Tribunal. These practical difficulties would be avoided if the amendment
suggested above is carried out.

The reason is that “to require a claimant to apply to the Tribunal within
sixty days’ of the accident when the Tribunal itself did not exist within that
Period is to ask him to do the impossible?

16.10 We therefore recommend that the following further proviso should
be inserted below section 110A(3) :—

“Provided that where the accident occurred before the date of constitution of
the claims Tribunal, the period of six months specified in this sub-section shall be
computed from the date of constitution of the Claims Tribunal if on that date a
suit for damages, or compensation in respect of the accident is not barred under
the law of limitation for the time being in force.”

1Cf. pare 16-7, supra.
*Sixty days was the earlier limitation period. It is now six months.

AIgbal Prakash Vs. State of M. P., (1962) M-P.L.J. 465, quoted in Sushma Mella vs. O.P.T.,
ALR. 1964 MP. 133, 135, para 12.


Prosent position.

CHAPTER 17
RULES : SECTIONS 111 AND 111A

17.1. It remains now to notice briefly the provisions as to rules in Chapter
8 of the Act. Section 111 confers a power to make rules on the Central Govern-
meat; section 111A (inserted in 1956) confers a power to make rules on the
State Government also. The power of the Central Government is to make rules
for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Chapter, while
the power of the State Government is to make rules for the purpose of carrying
into effect the provisions of sections 110 to 110E—broadly speaking, the sections
concerned with the Claims Tribunal. In both the cases, there is the usual pro-
vision under which the Government concerned may, without prejudice to the
generality of the power conferred on it, make rules dealing with certain matters
specifically enumerated in the relevant section.

We have already drawn attention’ to the need for comprehensive rules on
the subject. We have no further comments in the matter.

“1Para 13-3, supra.
59


CHAPTER 18
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
We summarise below the recommendations made in this Report :—

CHAPTER 2—The present law and general recommendation as to Chapter 8.

(1) The present heading of Chapter 8 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939
should be revised so as to read “Insurance of Motor Vehicles and Adjudication

of Claims for compensation in respect of accidents caused by Motor Vehicles”.
CHaprer 3—Liability without fault

(2) By inserting new section 92A (to be placed under a new Chapter
7A), the doctrine of liability without fault should be introduced in the Act and
strict liability imposed in regard to death or bodily injury caused by an acci-
dent of the nature specified in section 110(1). This will apply to ail claims for
compensation in respect of such accidents tried before the Claims Tribunal.’

(3) On the introduction of such liability, there should be a monetary limit,
prescribing the maximum compensation that can be awarded by the Claims
Tribunal for death or personal injury. The maximum amount awardable (after
inserting “no fault liability”) should be Rs. one lakh?

Cuapter 4—Beneficiaries of compulsory insurance : section 95(1)

(4) Section 95(1) proviso (ii), which excludes certain persons from the
benefit of a direct remedy against the insurer, otherwise available to a claimant
for compensation, should be deleted.'

CHAPTER 5—Monetary limits on the liability of the insurer : section 95(2)

(5) In section 95(2), which imposes a pecuniary limit on the liability of
the insurer on the basis of the class of vehicle and other criteria specified in the
section, the limit should be either delected, or raised to Rs. two lakhs per
claimant (in regard to claims before ordinary courts).°

[This is in regard to claims before ordinary courts which would have
jurisdiction only when no Tribunal has been constituted. In regard to claims
before Claims Tribunal, there is a separate recommendation as to the pecuniary
limits of compensation for death or bodily injury.]°

CHAPTER 6-—Duty to furnish particulars of insurance and accident : sections
1094 and 1098 (proposed)

(6) Two new sections—sections 109A and 109B—should be inserted,
imposing obligations on the police and the hospital authorities to communicate
certain information relating to the accident and other specified matters to the
Claims Tribunal and also to the injured person or his legal representatives.”

*Para 2-7.

*Para 3:63.

*Para 3°63.

“Pare 4:8,

sParagraphs 5-6, 5°7 and 5-8.
“Seo item (3), eupra.

Pare 6-7.


61

Crapier 7—The Claims Tribunal: section 110

(7) Section 110(1), proviso, which gives a third party an option to make
a claim in the civil court in cases of proprietary damage excedeing Rs. 2,000,
should be deleted

(8) Section 110(4) should be amended so as to vest the power to distribute
business amongst the Claims Tribunals in the High Court and not (as at present)
in the State Government.

(9) In section 110, a provision shoud be inserted empowering the High
Court to transfer proceedings from one Claims Tribunal to another (in the State)
in the ends of justice.*

CHAPTER 8—4 pplication for compensation : section 110A

(10) Section 110A(2) should be amended as recommended in the Report.
(This is a minor verbal change).‘

CHAPTER 9-—Effect of death and the meaning of “legal representative” : section
110A(1)(b) and section 2(11) (proposed)

(11) In section 2, clause (11) shculd be inserted providing a definition
of the expression “legal representatives”, as meaning the spouse, parent and
children (of the deceased).*

Cuarter il-—-Parties : section 1108

(12) In section 1108, a provision should be inserted empowering the
Tribunal to make an order for compensation °o be paid by a person who (though
not the owner or driver) was in possession or control of the vehicle at the time
of the accident.

At the same time, a saving should be inserted regarding provisions fixing
a maximum limit’ for the compensation that could be awarded.

CuHarTER 12-~.4ppearance : section 110BB (proposed)

(13) A new section 110BB should be inserted to provide for appearance
before the Claims Tribunai through a legal practitioner or other authorised
person.®

Cuaprer 13---Evidence and procedure: section 110C

(14) Attention of State Governments should be drawn to the need to make
comprehensive rules of procedure?

CuarTer 14.--Interest : section 110CC (proposed)

(15) A new section 110CC should be inserted to provide that in proceed-
ings on a claim for compensation, the Court or Tribunal shall have the same
power to direct the payment of interest on the sum awarded as a civil court
has under the law (including the Interest Act, 1978 and section 34 of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908). This provision will have effect notwithstanding any-
thing to the contrary to any other law. Further, unless there are reasons to the
contrary, it should be mandatory to give a direction for the payment of interest.

$Para 7
*Para 7:10.

3Para 7-12.
*Para 8-2.

*Para 9-15,
‘Para 11-9.
*Para 11:10,
*Para 12-3.
*Para 13-3.

80-L/B(D)457MofLJ &0A—5



62

_ The rate of interest should ordinarily be twelve per cent, and interest should
begin with the date of making the claim.

Cuarter 15—-Appeal and execution : sections 110D and 110E, and proposed
section 110EE

(16) Provisions should be introduced, requiring a person against whom
an award is made by the Claims Tribunal to deposit the entire amount awarded.
Detailed provisions are also recommended as to deposit of the amount where
the award is made for the first time on appeal (or amount awarded in appeal}
and as to the effect of appeal on an amount already deposited.’

Cuarrer 16—Jurisdiction and limiiaiion : sections 110F and 110A (3)

(17) In section 110F, an Explanation should be added to provide that
the Claims Tribunal, once constituted, shali have jurisdiction even if the accident
occurred before its constitution. But pending proceedings shall not be affected.’

(18) In section 110A(3), a further proviso should be inserted to provide
that where the accident occurred before the date of constitution of the Claims
Tribunal, the period of limitation (six months) specified in this sub-section, shall
be computed from the date of constitution of the Claims Tribunal, unless a
suit for damages or compensation for the accident has already become barred
under the law of limitation‘ for the time being in force.

Sd/-
P. ५. Dixit Chairman

Sd/-
S. N. Shankar Member

Sd/-
Gangeshwar Prasad Member

Sd/-

P. M. Bakshi Member Secretary

27th May, 1980.

ER - eee onan a
*Para 15-6.
*Para 16-8.
‘Para 16-10.



APPENDIX 1

EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN RAILWAYS ACT, 1890

828. Liability of railway administration in respect of accident to trains
carrying passeigers :--

(1) When in the course of working a railway an accident occurs, being
either a collision between trains of which one is a train catrying passengers
or the derailment of or other accident to a train or any part of a train
carrying passengers, then, whether or not there has been any wrongful act,
neglect or default on ihe part of the railway administration such as would
entitle a person who has been injured or has suffered loss to maintain an
action and recover damages in respect thereof, the Railway administration
shall, notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, be liable
10 pay compensation to the extent set out in sub-section (2) and to that
extent only for loss occasioned by the death of a passenger dying as a result
of such accident and for personal injury and loss, destruction or deterio-
ration of animals or goods owned by the Passenger and accompanying the
passenger in his compartment or on the train, sustained as a result of such
accident.

(2) The ability of a railway administration under this section shall
in no case exceed fifty thousand rupees in respect of any one person.’

Wee amending Act 45 of 1973.


APPENDIX 2

EXTRACT FROM THE WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923

3. Employer's liability for compensation —(1) If personal injury is caused
to a workman by accident arising out of and in the course of his employment,
his employer shall be liable to pay compensation in accordance with the pro-
visions of this Chapter :

Provided that the employer shall not be so liable :—

(a) in respect of any injury which does not result in the total or partial
disablement of the workman for a period exceeding three days ;

(b) in respect of any injury not resulting in death, caused by an accident
which is directly attributable to—

(i) the workman having been at the time thereof under the influence
of drink or drugs, or

(ii) the wilful disobedience of the workman to aa order expressly
framed, for the purpose of securing the safety of workmen, or

(iii) the wilful removal or disregard by the workman of any safety
guard or other device which he knew to have been provided for
the purposes of securing the safety of workmen.


APPENDIX .3

Extract from the carriage by Air Act, 1972 First Schedule, Chapter गा,
Rules 17—21

CHAPTER IIT

LIABILITY OF THE CARRIER

17. The carrier is liable for damage sustained in the event of the death or
wounding of a passenger or any other bodily injury suffered by a passenger if
the accident which caused the damage so sutained took place on board the
aircraft or in the course of any of the operations of embarking or disembarking.

18. (1) The carrier is liable for damage sustained in the event of the
destruction or loss of, or of damage to, any registered luggage or any goods, if
the occurrence which caused the damage so sustained took place during the
carriage by air.

(2) The carriage by air within the meaning of sub-rule (1) comprises the
period during which the luggage or goods are in charge of the carrier, whether
in an aerodrome or on board an aircraft, or, in the case of a landing outside
an aerodrome, in any place whatsoever.

(३) The period of the carriage by air does not extend to any carriage by
Jand, by sea or by river performed outside an aerodrome. If, however, such
a carriage takes place in the peformance of a contract for carriage by air, for
the purpose of loading, delivery or transhipment, any damage is presumed,
subject to proof to the contrary, to have been the result of an event which took
place during the carriage by air.

19. The carrier is liable for damage occasioned by delay in the carriage
by air of passengers, luggage or goods.

20. (1) The carrier is not liable if he proves that he and his agents have
taken all necessary measures to avoid the damage or that it was impossible for
him or them to take such measures.

(2) In the carrage of goods and luggage the carrier is not liable if he
proves that the damage was occasioned by negligent pilotage or negligence in
the handling of the aircraft cr in navigation and that, in alt other respects, he
and his agents have taken all necessary measures to avoid the damage.

21. If the carrier proves that the damage was caused by or contribujed
to by the negligence of the injured person the court may exonerate the carrier
wholly or partly from his liability.


Introductory.

Austria.

‘Cansda—Saskat:
chewan.

APPENDIX 4

POSITION IN SELECTED COUNTRIES AS TO COMPENSATION FOR
AUTOMOBILE ACCIDENTS

Several schemes providing for ‘no fault compensation for auomobile
dent’s have come to be en in some of the Comnoawealth countrics and
also in some jurisdictions ou'side (he Commonwe:lth. 1) vould be tedious fo give
details of the les'slation in { in the various countries. The material on the
subject is overwhelmingly vast. The follcwing is a bricf statement of the positien
in sclested countries."

It may be mentioned that, these schemes mostly contemplate the payment
of compensation without proof of fault. Poyment in such cases is mostly made by
a corporation created by law or from a fund maintained by the State and is
generally subject to certain monetary } s. Compen
limit can, however, be claimed under the ordinary process. The fund from which
payment is made is firanced by contributions levicd from the insurers.

In some countries’ payment is made by the insured person or by the insuzer,
but the State undertakes liability if there is no insurance or if the owner is no"
identifica.

fault is not abolished, but the burden of proof

2 few other coun
reversed,

Brief discussion of the position in selected countries follows.

Legislation in Austria’ represents a pruning down of the available defences
and a consequential expansion of liab’ Tn regard to a road traffic accident
the law of that country‘ allows only the defence that the accident was due to
an unavoidable event that is caused neither by a defect in the condition of the
le 1१07 bs use of its mechanism.

In one of the Provinces in Canada,, the legi goes the whole way. The
Province of Saskatchewan was the first to legislate on the subject of no fault
compensation. 10 1946 was passed an Act which (as amended) is the Automobile

Accident Insurance Act, 1963-1964° of Saskatchewan.

Under this statute, drivers are required to purchase insurance from a Govern-
ment insurance office, which, in turn. provides a fixed scale of compensation,
withou: the need io establish fault, for accident victims, including drivers. This
is not an exclusive method of recovery, and the victim may sue to obtain addi-
tional compensation upon the ordinary common law _princinles. The amount
paid under the schem2 is deducted! fram any verdict obtained at common law.
The drunken, the un-insured or the suicidal driver is excluded from the benefits.
The Saskatchewan plan was not directed to relieving court congestion or to
meeting ¢ sms 02879 the trial of automobile cases by judge or jury.

Countries covered—Austria, Canada, Denmark, England, Finland, France, (West) Germany
Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and U.S.A. (Illinois, Massachussets, Michigan
and New York.)

बह, Japan.

*Floming, comment in (1975) AJ.C.L. 513, 518, fn. 30.

+Austrian Railway & Motor Vehicle Liability Act, (E.K.H-G.) 1959, section 9-1.

2M. Justice Herron and Me. Justice Aspriy, Paper on ‘Motor Car and the Taw’ page 12
(Commonwerth Law Soaferenes, 1935}.

66


Sas':atchewan
Le, *ilation.

Fund created to
cover the scheme,

67

The frequency of motor accidents accounts for legislation in Saskatchewan
providing for payment of a fixed and limited amount of compensation to the
injured party regardless of negligence. Its self-advertised primary object was to
prevent destitution resulting to persons injured by automobile accidents by
gucranteeing the recovery of some sum by the injured. Periodical payments are
featured during disability, Its scale of benefits is law, e.g., $ 5,000 for the primary
defendant in the case of death.

Under the Saskatchewan scheme, an application for a vehicle Tegistration
or for a di licence must be accompanied by a certificate of accident insur-
ance, the insurer being the provincial government insurance officer. Persons
injured by the operation of motor vehicles may, under the terms of this insurance,
recover specificd benefits without proof of fault. The scheme, as a general rule
(with exceptions as to drunken driving, driving without licence and certain other
snecial circumstances). reduces liability based on fault as regards the owner and
the operator as already stated. Claims based on negligence are not eliminated?

The Saskatchwan Automobile Insurance Act, Provides’ that “every person
is hereby insured” against loss resulting from bodily injury sustained in an
accident while driving or riding in a moving motor vehicle in Saskatchewan, or
as # result of a collision with or being run over by a motor vehicle, resardless
of fault.‘ The certificate of insurance Projects not only the person named in
the certificate, but also any other person in Saskatchewan riding in the vehicle
while it is being operated by a properly licenced driver. Any person injured,
who is not named as an insured, is also ‘deemed to be a party to the contract
and to have given consideration therefor, and is protected. The certificate itself
protects all persons domiciled in Saskatchewan injured while driving or riding
in a vehicle outside Saskatchewan anywhere on the North American continent.§

Protection under the Saskatchewan Act is coincidental with the licencing
of the vehicle and the issue of a driver's licence, the premium being paid at the
time when such licences are issued. A resident of the province will lose the
protection of the Act only,

(1) where he is under the influcnce of intoxicating liquor or drugs to such
extent as to be incapable of property controlling the vehicle ;

(2) where he dri.2s without a licence or in a vehicle not properly regis-
tered ; and

(3) where he ticcs on a part of the vehicle not designed to seal passengers
or carry a load.*

This coverage (in Saskatchewan) is secured under an exclusive provincial
insurance fund. All drivers and car owners must pay for government insurance
annually, ccncurrently with their applications for renewal of licences and
registrations. The terms of the insurance contract are contained in the statute,
and the registration certificate of the driver’s licence, coupled with the
Statute, constitute the only “policy of insurance”. This lapses with the expiration
of the licence and registration.’

1866 (1952) 66 Harv. L. R. 191.

शा, Mustice Herron and Mr, Justice Aspray, Paper on ‘Motor Car and the Law’ page 12
(Commonwealth Law Conference, 1965),

*Note in (1961) 39 Can. Bar Rev. 107, 110,
48. 8., 1946, 0. 11, 3. 121), now B.8.S., 1953, C. 371, s. 19(1).
5छ.8.8., 1953, 0, 371, 8. 192 19(2).

*R.SS., 1953, 0. 371, 3. 29-30,

RSS., 1953, 6. 371, s. 19(2).


Canada— Other
Provinces.

Denmark.

68

The law is administered by the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office,
a Crown corporation, which was first incorporated by an Act of the legislature
for the purpose of effecting insurance in competition with private companies.’
In respect of its functions under the Automobile Accident Insurance Act, however,
it is a statutory body and the procedure resembles that of an administrative board
under workmen’s compensation legislation.

The scheme in Saska‘chewan has been amended several times and is now
found as the Automobile A lent Insurance Act of 1963, 5 Rev. Stat.
Saskatchewan, Ch. 409 (1965). The full statutory text requires some 60 pages.’
A brief sketch of its provisions follows.*:—

(i) All drivers are requi
ficate of insurance
3(5).

(ii) All insurance is provided ty tho Saskatchewan Government Insurance
Gifice, Paragrapn 2(p).

a condition ef driving, to secure a certi-
ying a hasic premium; paragraphs 3(1),

(iii) For his premium the driver buys, in effect, three kinds of coverage
nccident protection (Part TL), property loss (collision, theft, casualty)
protection (Part HI), and fiability insurance (Part IV)

(iv) It is the sccident snsurance that is the key to the compensation plan
If provides accid coverage tor “every person” suffering bodily
injury from the use or operation of a motor vehicle.

(v) There is an elabroate schedule of benefits. For total disability, the
maximum benefit is 25 per week for a maximum period of 104 weeks,
paragraph 22(2) : for partial disability, the amount is $ 12.50 per
week, paragraph 22(3). In case of death the benefits are $ 5,000
for the pi ry dependant and $ 1,000 to each secondary dependant
if the decedent (deceased) was a hov-owife, the award is $ 2,000
and if a child, it varies from $ 100 to $ 1.000 depending on the age
of the child. Paragraph 24.

3

(vi) Common law acticns for negligence are left intact by the Act, subject
to deduction of any accident insurance benefits paid under the Act.
Paragraph 77.

(vii) Since the province has an independent scheme of health insurance, it
not necessary for this Act to cover medical expenses resulting from
nts.

In many other provinces of Canada, while liability continues to be based
on negligence, the victim’s prospects for collection of damages have been im-
proved by the cnactment of “safety-responsibility” legislation. There were also
enacted “impounding Acts”. These Acts provide that after an accident, a vehicle
involved in the accident shail be impounded at the instance of a public official
unless proof of financial responsibility has been furnished. The vehicle impounded
is not released until all claims are settled or security given for the payment and
until proof of financial responsibility for the future is given.

In Denm: he existing (Denish) Road Trffic Act' imposes 2 duty to
obtain third-party motor insurance. It defines the scope of the insurance as
covering claims made under the special compensation rule of the Act. This
tule imposes liability upon the owner or user of the motor vehicle under a
fault rule providing for a reversed burden of proof (that is, a presumption of
liability).

IR.SS., 1958, C. 871, s. 3, 4 and 5.

2Gregory & Kalven, Cases and Materials on Torts (1969), page 898.

*For details, see Keeton and O'Connell, Basie Protection for tho Traffie Victim (1965), pages
140—1 48.

4Gomard, “Comnensation for auto accidents” (1970) 18 A.J.C.L. 80, 82.

STovbekendtgorelse (Consolidation Agt) No. 231, 27th June, 1961, as amended, s. 66(1) and s. 65.



69

Denmark has, for time being, retained fault liability with a rever:
of proof. A certain hesitance to abandon the present synems has यान ला
noting that these systems grant compensation to the great majority of injured
persons, and that they have been built into the practices of courts and of insu-
rance compadics'.
England—statu ‘ory [७ England, the Road Traffic Act, 1972? which re-enacts earlier Iegislation
provision. requires every person who uses a vehicle on a road to take out a policy of insu-
rance indemnifying him in respect of any liability which may be incurred by
him in respect of the death, or bodily injury to, any person (including a passen-
ger) caused by, or arising out of, the use of the vehicle on a road. Further, a
third person who suffers bodily injury as a result of a tortious act of the insured
is given a direct right of action against the insurers, provided that the liability

cf the insured is first established®.

These provisions first passed in 1930 left one gap-a motorist might have
ive, insurance. This gap was filled by an extra-statutory piece of

England—extra-

statutory machi- nO, OF Ro cite
nery. machinery described below.
awe? statutory provision—section 145 of the Road Traffic Act 1972—
reads:

_ 8145. (1) Ta osder to comply with the requirements of this Part of
this Act, a policy of insurance must satisfy the following conditions.

(2) The policy must be isstied by an authorised insurer. that is to
say, a person or body of persons carrying on motor vehicle insurance
business in Great Britain.

(3) Subject to sub-section (4) below, the policy: —

(a) must insure such person, persons or classes of persons as may
be specified in the policy in repect of any liability which may be
incurred by him or them in respect of the death of or badily
injury to any person caused by, or arising out of, the use of the
vehicle on a road; and

(b) must also insure him or them in respect of any liability which
may be incurred by him or them under the provisions of this
part of this Act relating to payment for emergency treatment.

(4) The policy shall not, by virtue of sub-section (3) (8) above, be

required to cover—

(a) liability in respect of the death, arising out of and in the course
of his employment, of a person in the employment of a person
insured by the policy or of bodily injury sustained by such a
person arising out of and in the course of his employment; or

(b) any contractual liability.”
The extra-staiutory, machinery is in the form of an agreement.

Motor Insurer In 1946, the Motor Insurers’ Bureau in England entered into an agree-
Bureau in England. ment on the subject with the government (later replaced in November, 1972 by
another agreement). Under the agreement, the Bureau undertook to satisfy un-

satisfied iudements in respect of any: liability’, required to be covered by a policy

specified cases. The Bureau even makes Pe

of motor vehicles insurance in 2 e
ments in the case of an unidentified hit-and-run driver—a matter governed by

separate agreement, >> >:::इृइ।उ ।हइि _ि्यिे्एएए agreement.

1Gomard, “Compensation for auto accidents” (1970) 18 AJ.C.L, 80, 84.

23,etions #3 and 145, Road ‘Traffic Act, 1972.

3 Post Office V. Norwiok Union Insurance Society Ltd., (1967)? Q.B. 363.

‘or the text of the 1946 agreement see Hardy V. M.1.B., (1964) 2 A BE. R. 742,

(a) F
ort pages 7—10, paragraphs 2226 aad

{by Also see Law ommission of India, 51 St Rep
(October 24, 1968) New Law Journal.


Finland.

France.

French Civil Code

and the

legislative

frame work as to

tortious

liability.

70

There is no legal liability on the part of the Bureau to the third

हु $ party, as
he is not privy to the Agreement, although the Minister might obtain specific
performance’.

. fhe statulory crovisions for compulsery third parly insurance, together
with the agreement referred to above, do not, of course, cover every accident.
The system was not intended to provide universal compensation, but only
compulsory cover for negligence. The Bureau will repudiate liability when the
accident has been caused in circumstances not legally required to be covered
by insurance—-e.g. wholly on private land as distinct from a road. Hence it is
a condition precedent to recovery under such a system of fiability insurance that
a judgment should be obtained against the defendant if liability “is contested by
his insurance company. The Bureau may require the party bringing the pro-
cecdings fo take alt nable steps fo obiain judgement against all tortfeasors
responsible, and in er ways the 1972 ngrcement gives it wide powers to
control the steps to be takea by the injured party’,

Hence it may still be necessary to embark on the lengthy and expensive
process of a trial in cerder to prove fault, and if this cannot be proved, the
plant ‘oday is in no Eetter pecition than he was forty years ago’.

In the Nordic countries, the expediency of maintaining presumptive lia-
ir, ancl surance coverage fo thie “reversed fault” rule, was actively
Pebated, The Finnish Act’ of 1959 has now practically abolished® the personal
liability of the owner and of the user, in so far as the insurance covers the loss
or damage. Their liability has been replaced by a compulsory insurance system
for the direct benefit of the injured pezson'.

Jn certain other countries on the Continent, while, traditionally, liability
has been based on fault, a broader liability was developed, inter alia, in motor
vehicles cases by judicial interpretation. An example of such an approach is furni-
shed by the position in France, where the result was reached on an interpreta-
tion of a provision of the French Civil Code’.

The legislative framework of delictual liability in France is comparatively
straight forward and is detailed in just five articles of the Civil (0002, The tradi-
tional basis of liability is fault, understood as an intentional, reckless or negli-
gent act’. In addition, there are some special cases where the plaintiff need
not prove fault in order to establish liability” ; where the defendant is answerable
for ‘he acts of cortain classes of persons (e.g. parents for the acts of their
children ; masters for the acts of their servants); where the defendant has the
use, direction and control of an animal: and where the defendant is the owner
of a building which, through structural defects or lack of repair has caused
damage by its collapse.

In these cases, the burden of proof is shifted: responsibility is presumed with-
out proof of fault and can be rebuited only by defendant’s proof of an absence of
casual connection between the act in question and the damage to pla'ntiif or,
in some cases, other particular facts.

Alurtner V. Circuit, (1963) 2 0. 8. 587; (1968) 1 All E. R. 323, 883,
2White V. London Transport Executive, (1971) 2 Q.B. 721.
2As in Hunter V. Wright, (1938) 2 All E.R. 621.

tyinnish Traffic Insurance Act, 6th Jane, 1959.
# (1970) 18 AJ.C.L. 80, 85.

8Gomard, “Compensation for Auto Accidents’
‘Finnish Motor Vehicle Insurance Act (26th June, 1959).
French Civil Code, Article 1384. para 1.

*Harding, “Fault in French Law of Delict” (July 1979) Vol. 28, Part 3, L.C.L.Q. 525, 528,

See Arts. 1382 and 1383 of the Civil Code.
aogjvjl Code, Arts. 1384 to 1386,


Judicial construc-
tion of Article
1384.

Contriltory neg
tigence in’ Ey

Poram in Fraace.

West.
the
framework.

a

sortant is Article 1384, aline a 1 of the Code.

According io one translation’ of the provision in question—

हे “A person is responsible not only for the damage caused by his own act,
but ato wh'ch has been caused by the acts of 9.9... ०००० things
which ure under his care.” ~

[Cn est responsible non seculement du dommage que Yon caus per son
propre fait, mais ic celui qui est cause par 128 fais ....-.....0. des
choses que Pon a Sous as garde].

been thus? translated in another book on French

The same provision
jaw: —

“A person is liable not only for the damage he causes by his own
act but also for that which is caused by the acts ..... beet eee ae ..0f
things which he has under his control.”

This provision has had interesting history. For most of the nineteenth cen-
tury, French courts read this clause as being simply introductory to be the snecial
cases dealt with by Articles 1385 and 1386 (damage by animals and. collaps-
ing structures). However, with the increasing industrialisation and mechanisa-
tion of society and the resultant enlirged risk of acciden's which were often
anonymous in character (i.e. where it was difficult to establish fault on the part
of a particular person) and moreover a growing feeling that the law of delict
should serve the ends of compensation as much as those of penalising wrong-
doers Article 1384(1) came to be given 2 much wider interpretation.

was internreted as even something as diffuse as electricity or gas‘,
was imposed, without proof of fault, for damage caused by such
hich were usually dangerous. such as motor Vehicles and machines),
provided that they were under defendant’s “garde” or, more exactly, under
“use, direction and control -*.

Cortributory negligence is. however, recognised in France as a defence in
certain cases by judicial decisions. The matter is too intricate to permit dis-
cussion in this brief study. But it mav be noted that one writer’ has critised
this approach as “an introduction or fault into article 1384(1), liability and
therefore .....-...-4- contrary both to the logic of the provisions interpreta-
tion and to the policy behind that interpretation”.

1 would he of interest to note that in France! liability for motor aoci-
dents heen entirely taken out of the hands of administrative courts and
subjected ‘o the principles of private law and the jurisdiction of ordinary courts.

In ths © न Repuhl's of Germany, somewhat similar developments have
resulted, |: = have heer achieved more by direct legislative provision than
by judicial decisions For tortious liability in general, the relevant articles of the
Cade of Civil Gn West Germany) is Article 823, paragraph 1, of the Burger-
liches Gesatzbuch (B.G.B.).

YArticle 1884, para 1, Fronch Civil Code.
taping, “Fronch Law of Delicts” (1979 July) Vol. 28, Part 3, L.C-L.Q. 525.
us & Walton, Introduction to French Law (2nd Edn, 1963), pages 226, 237 (Article
4See Encyclopedic Dalloz, 4, No. 139, 141.
5Ch, reum. 2 Dee, 1941, D.C. 1942, J. 25.
cHanding, “Fault in French Law of Delict” (Jaly 1079) Vol. 28, Part 3, T.C.L.Q. 625, 526.
?Harding, “Fault in the French Law of Deliet” (July 1979) 1.C.1.Q. 525, 529.
SKahn-Prount, Levy and Rudden, “Soures Book of French Law” (1973) page 205 (Lawof t
December, 1957).


Apportionment,

on the basis of
contributory nez+
lizence.

Position as to
oollisior.s.

Road Tralfic Act
The Civil Aspect

Contributory negli
gence.

Germany—Road
Trafic accitents
in Germany—Some
matters of detail,

72

Ti reads: —

“Anyone whose intentional or negligent act causes unlawful harm to the
ife, body, health, liberty, property or any other right of another is liable
10 make preparation for the resulting damage”.

11 2 imposes on any person who infringes a statutory

protection of others, the same obligation 10 pay

Act—makes certain special provisions
y.
ts the work accidents insurance scheme.

Hence, in gcreral, in West Germany, compensation for injuries must be
sought by cither p-oof of fault under Article 823 of the Code Civil or by reliance
on the Road ‘Frac Act of 1952, or by claiming under the work accidents
incurance scheme.

is the position as to creation of liability. The question of its apportion-
ment under section 254(1) of the Civil Code (West Germany) is also of
interest. If ४ a ntiffs fault has contributed to the damage, then the defen-
and the extent of his obligation—depend upon the circum-
siances and, pertcular, on how far the injury has been caused predominantly
by one or the other party.

However, in the situation where both the plaintiff and the defendant are in

conte OF ४ yeticle, both are strictly liable for any damage caused by
the'r vet 3 basis of the operational risk (Betriebsgefahr) inveived in

using the vehicles.”

1952 (Germany), imposes strict liability’ on the
keeper ए ५ though, if he can show that the accident was due to an
Sunavoidatle cvst that is caused neither by a defect in the condition of the
vghicle, nev by a fouse of ts mechanism” and that he or his driver had shown
the care of a skilled driver, he can avoid liability. The driver, as such, may also
be found Hable under a separate provision of the Act which reverses the

The Road Traffic Act

hueston of proof.

There is a maximum sum awardable (at present DM 250,000" by way of
Junzp sum or DM 15.000 by way of annuity, in respect of one accident}. These
damages do not include compensation for pain and suffering or aesthetic loss,
and hence questions of fault will offen have to be adjudged on, for an action
under the Road Traffic Act does not preclude a suit under Article 823 of

the B.G.B
Weet German law concerning road traffic accidents is detailed and

complicated. The following quotation from an article® on West German legisla-
tion on this subject would be of interest, as showing the attention paid to

JHardine. “Panit ia the Fronch Taw of Dotict”* (July 1979), Vol. 28, Part 3, L.C.L.Q.. 525,

a

2Gn0 the Strassenverkehraqesetz of Dec. 19, 1952.
88ection 7, West Germany Road Traffic Law.

4The exchange rate of the German Mark on May 1, 1978 was £1=-DM 3-93.

3H. 0, Horton, ‘Motor Traffie Accidents and West German Law” (1976) 126 New 1. an

1201-1202.


73

certain matters of detail in order to facilitate proof :—

“A German driver who is involved in a 30०40 traftic accident and
knows that an accident has occurred is obliged not only to disclose his
same, address, car registration number and insurance details but also
to do all that he can to give a clear picture of the facts connected with
the accident and to keep to a minimum any damage which could result
therefrom [paragraph 71(2)3, The General Conditions of Motorised
Vehicle Insurance].

“This requirement can lead to practical diificultics since, io iulfii it
totally, it is often necessary tha. the vehicles involved remain exactly
where the accident occured. Sometimes this is possible, until the police
arrive. Yet, traliic conditions can necessitate that the vehicles be removed
from the highway because they constitute “an obstacle, dangerous to other
road users. If such be the case it will suffice if the collision-position of the
vehicles is clearly marked out on the road, together with any skid marks,
before they are removed. Chalk markings, measurements taken with a
tape-measure, a sketch or photograph will suffice. The Federal Court of
Justice (BGH) has decided that full compliance with paragraph 7 can be
excused only if it is absoluiely necessary ‘o remove the vehicles in the
interests of maintaining a safe flow of trallic (BGH If ZR 35/59). At
night, for exemple, it would be unreasonable to leave collision-vehicles
and injured persons on a busy road (BGH IV ZR 527/58). A German
driver who, without good reason, does not comply fully with paragraph 7
runs the risk of losing his insurance indemnity, for, although his insurance
company must meet third party claims, it will be entitled to recoup any
sums paid out from the criver himself.

“A driver involved in a road traffic accident has a duty also to prevent
further accidents arising from his mishap. He must stay by his vehicle to
warn other road users, and, when the police arrive, may only leave it when
ordered to do so by the police (BGH VI ZR 195/59). Warning triangles
should also be placed on the road at “least 50m to 80m from the accident
spot ; at night they. should be illuminated (BHH Vers R 69,668). Other
road users must exercise due care if they see that an accident has occurred
or signs which might so indicate, e.g. a stationary police vehicle with
flashing blue warning light.

“On being involved in an accident and knowing that an accident
has occurred there is a duty to stop. Paragraph 142 of the Penal Code
(St GB), formerly headed Verkehrsunfellilucht (“hit and run” traffic
accident), was revised in 1976 and is now entitled Underlaubtes Entfernen
Vom Unfallort (illegal leaving of the scene of the accident). The para-
graph, which imposes criminal sanctions in certain circumstances, in
primarily concerned with the procedure to be followed when an accident
takes place so that civil law remedies can be the more easily pursucd and
the settlement of insurai claims facilitated. It states, inter alia, that any
person whose conduct, in the given circumstances, may have contributed
to the accident must remain at the scene of the accident. ‘Any person’
includes other road users, passengers and also pedestrians, if there is a
possibility that they caused, or partially caused, the accident. All such
persons “must declare that they were involved in the accident, but none
needs to say how he was involved. In fact, the elimination, concealment
or removal of evidence, even taking a drink to alter the alcohol level in
one’s blood to defeat a blood test, is not punishable under paragraph 142.
(But such conduct makes one liable to a fine under paragraph 34 of the
Strassenverkehrsordnung (Road Traffic Act). Also, the Federal Court of
Justice has decided (BGH II ZR 53/65) that such action can result in
the loss of one’s insurance indemnity, since paragraph 1, supra, would not
be observed). Even an incorrect statement as to one’s own involvement in
the accident is not punishable under paragraph 142. So, if, after an
accident, an involved party just stands there without saying a word he is



पर

fiable to prosecution under paragraph 15२. Bui, au imvoived pexsoii, wao
falsely describes his involveneni, is noi. 41 bola mmsvances, However, Re
would contravene the requiremenis ol paiagraph 7, supra.

“Paragraph 142 recognises tuat the
which one has to leave the scene of ih
an injured person to hospital 0: ic m medical attention for oneseii
(even if it should turn out that tue inju: were only minor); “perhaps to
evade threatened violence from the other part. In such cases the formali-
ties required by paragraph 142 musi cc completed as soon as possible
Jater (unverzuglichnachtraglich), on returning to the police.

inighi weil Ge circumstances in
dent at ouce, e.g. to transport

हे “If an accident takes place and ao one else is present, a problem
arises. For example, one bumps into an empty parked car or damages a
ience on a lonely country road. An a hay taken place and th,
a duty to stop. Bui for how long? In tac fist exampic one might wait
half an hour, leave one’s name and address under the windscresn wiper
und then inform the nearest police station of onc’s involvement ii an
accident giving the registration of the damaged car. In the second
example, one would not be expected to camp ail night at the sceze of
the accident before trying to find the owner of the fence—one would inicim
the nearest police station. The test is: did the driver act reasonably and
responsibly in the circumstances? It should be added that if a driver acts
as described in such circumstances as just instanced he would not fail to
comply with paragraph 7, supra, (nor paragraph 142) and so would not
lose his insurance protection (BGH वा ZR 24/65).

“If, however, an accident occurs and no-one is injured except the
driver himself or there is no damage io property other than that ut the
driver himself, there is no duty under paragraph 142 to stop nor to report
the accident to the police (BGH St R 148/55) even if the driver was in
any way unfit to drive at the time of the accident.

“Paragraph 142 makes it clear that repentance is irrelevant. Thus, if
a driver has an accident decides not to stop, then repents and returns
to the scene of the accident ‘to do the deces ng’, the driver is guilty of
illegally leaving the place of the accident and can be imprisoned for up
to three years or fined. The fact of repentance may, however, lead the
police not to prosecute or, if they do, result in a reduced sentence or fine.

In 1974 there were 32,372 successful prosecutions under paragraph 152.

“when a road traffic accident occurs it is always advisable io cull the
police to the scene of the accident. The police are obliged to investigate
any accident, being considered ‘to be in the position to ascertain the
necessary facts with the requisite expertise and reliability’, Even if the
accident damage is only to property (Sachschaden) and is of a minor
nature the police cannot refuse to investigate (Bayr OLG Ib st 288/65).
When the “police arrive the parties to the accident are not obliged to make
any statement (except to fulfil the requirements of paragraph 142) and
are advised to check the accident sketch and report made by the police
since, in subsequent proceedings, whether civil or criminal, there will be
a rebuttable presumption by the court that both documents are accurate
and complete. In cases where only very minor damage is caused, e.g. 8
dented mudguard, the participants may decide to settle repair costs
between themselves. This could be unwise on the party of the defaulting
driver, since the other driver might still decide to report the accident to
the police, and to the other party’s insurance company, especially if be
discovers the damage to be more extensive than originally diagnosed. In
such a case he would put himself in a much stronger position than the
other party since he has asked the police (the proper authority) to investi-
gate the collision. The driver who was willing to settle would also be acting



Japan—Liability
under the Civil

Code—Con

Legislation in
Japan.

78

contrary to bis insurance contract in that he, by paying or promising to
pay for the damage he cuused, comsevencd paragraph 7 11(i} of the
General Conditions of Motorised Vehicle insurance which staies: On
causing damage which involves liability to third Parties the insured person
is not permitted, without the previous “consent of the insurer, to admit or
to satisty a ciaim totally or partially. In all but exceptional circumstances
89: well lose the projection of his insurance company (paragraph
7 11(2) of the Generai Conditions and BGH 11 ZR 173/653)",

In Japan, ihe basic provision of the Japanese Civil Code reguiating tortious
liability is article 709, which provides:

“A persoa who, wilfully or n:
is bound to compensate him for ६

sligently, has injured the right of another
९ damage which has arisen therefrom.”

Ariicle 72

gence, provides :
“Hf thes

) of the Civil Code of Japan, dealing with the piaintil’s neghi-

ए has been fault on the injured party, the court may
७ it into account in deteriaining the amount of compensation for, damages.”
is the civil-law rule cf comparative negligence; tault on ihe part of the
injured party does not necessarily “extinguish the wrongdoer’s liability, but
only reduces the damages he mist pay. aus if a pedestrian or a
who w injured by an automobile was himself at fault, the c [०५ ere
reduced according to the degree of fault of the parties ard at the diserction
of the court. When two automobiles collide, reciprocal liabilities generally
arise.”

The court then reduces the amount of damages owed to each party under
the principle of comparative negligence, and the difference is paid by the party
owing the larger amount. These computations are often difficult to make and
may, in some cases, hinder or prevent settlement out of court.

When a driver is employed by a taxi company, a trucking company, or an
individual, the employer is ordinarily liable for injury caused by the employee,
assuming that the latter would be held liable under article 709. Article 715(1)
of the Japanese Civil Code prescribes the employer’s liability in these terms:*

“A person who employs another for the purpose of any undertaking
is bound to compensate for damages which his employee has inflicted on a
third party in the execution of this undertaking. Provided, however, that
this does not apply if the employer has exercised adequate care in the selec-
tion of the employee and the superintendence of the undertaking, or if the
damage would have arisen even though adequate care had been exercised.”

Literally, this provision exempts an employer from liability if he can prove
that his selection and supervision of the driver were faultless; but the courts have
long refused to allow such proof. The employer who has paid such compensation
may demand reimbursement from the employee, however, under article 715(3),
although often he does not do so.

The Japanese Automobile Damage Compensation Security Act primarily
compels' liability insurance covering fixed amounts, but the government inakes
a contribution to the cost and there is an entirely new system of “provisional
payments”. “The mere fact of . death or injury (having been caused) by
the operation of an automobile entitles the victim to demand payment from the
insurer in an amount of about one-third of the compulsory policy limits. Reimburse-
ment of amounts, thus ‘provisionally’ paid in the absence of liability, is limited
to a claim by insurer against the government which in turn may, but hardly ever
will, recoup itself from the victim’.

1Von Mehren (Ed.), Law in Japan (1963), page 401.
2Von Mehren (Hd.), Law in Japan (1963), pages 401, 402.

3Von Mehren (Ed.), Law in Japan (1963), page 402.

4Bbrenzweing in (1956) 5 American Journal of Comparative Law 273,


Liability in Jepan.

Use of concepts.

76

हे This last provision goes some way towards the approuch of compensation
irrespective of fault.’

_ The Damage Law can be best discussed by being broken down into three
topics: liability, compulsory liability insurance, und governmental compensation
of injured persons not otherwise compensated through insurance."

As to liability, article 3 of the Damage Law’ provides as follows:

“A person who, for his own benefit, piaces an automobile in operational
usc, if he has injured the life or body of another, is bound to compensate him
for the damage which has arisen therefrom. Provided, however, that this
does not apply if he can prove that he and the driver did not neglect care
in the operation of the automobile, that there was wilfulness or negligence
on the part of the injured party or a third party o‘her than the driver, and
that there was no structural defect nor functional disorder in the auto-
mobile.”

Some concepts in article 3 of thc Automobile Damage Law are used in a
special sense’. The term “automobile”, as defined in articte 2(2) of ihe Road
Transport Vehicle Law, includes almost every kind of motor vehicle except
motor-bikes, that is, passenger cars, trucks, buses, motorcycles, and motor
scooters.

The “owner of an automobile or a person otherwise having the sight to use
an automobile, who, for his own benefit, places an automobile, in operational use”
is defined as a “holder” of a motor vehicle. This term does not include an un-
authorised operator, such as a thief. However, the broader language of article
3 is less restrictive and embraces the unauthorised operator as well. But a mere
“driver” engaged by an owner, since he is not operating the vehicle “for his own
benefit”, is not liable under article 3 but only under Civil Code.

“Operation” is defined in article 2(2) of the Damage Law as the ordinary
use ot motor vehicle without regard to whether it is used in the transportation
of persons or goods. This definition is applied somewhat arbitrarily, however. If
an unoccupied motor vehicle starts moving because it was improperly parked, or
if a pedestrian is injured when a door of a parked vehicle is opened, an injury
inflicted results from the “operation” of the vehicle. But when one driver,
working on*his vehicle at a service station, ignited a fire by dropping a spark
that fell on a gasoline can, the injured service-station attendant was held to have
no rights under the law because the accident did not result from the operation

of a motor vehicle.
Article 3 covers injuries to a taxi passenger, for there are no specified

injured persons who can claim recovery. As is pointed out below, however, it is
disputed whether article 3 applies to injuries suffered by passengers who are either

guests or members of the holder’s family.

Coverage under article 3 is limited to the damages arising from death or
personal injury ; accordingly, the provisions of the Civil Code govern claims for
property damage. The exclusion of property-damage coverage in the law is due
to the heavy economic burden on holders of motor vehicles that would result
from nearly strict liability and compulsory insurance for property damage.

der bears the liability under article 3. Thus, if an employer is the
holden he saust prove not only the absence of fault in his employce, but also
other matters such as the fault of the injured person. ce liability of the driver
to his employer remains under article 715(3) of the Civil Code, if the employer

can prove fault of the employee.

“Compensation without Litigation” (1964) 37 Aust. L.J. 339, 349.

page 406.
Law (Japan) (No. 97 of 1955).

786० Sit John Barry,
2Von Mehron (Ed.), Law in Japan (1963),
*The Automobile Damage Compensation Security
‘Von Mehren (Ed.), Law in Japan (1963), pages 406—AlL.


Compulsory liability
insurance in Japan.

Government com-
pensation in Japan

Vi

‘This right of indemnification, however, comes into existence only when the
total damage exceeds the amount covered by the compulsory insurance, because
the insurance covers both the holder and the driver. Other matters not specifi-
cally mentioned in article 3, such as the measure oi damages: and comparative
negligence, are still governed by the provisions of the Civil Code (Japan). *

No one is to operate a motor vehicle unless it is covered by insurance
as required by article 5 of the law. When a contract of libility insurance has been
concluded, the insurance company issues a certificate to the isured; the docu-
ment must be kept in the vehucle during operation and-must be presented to the
proper administrative oflicers upon request and when any interest in the vehicle
is to be transferred. An insurance company may not refuse to write a contract
of liability insurance. In order to make these provisions effective, violation of any
of them is punishable by fine or imprisonment; for example, operating an un-
insured vehicle may be punished by a fine of not more than 30,000 yen or im-
prisonment for not more than three months.

_ The law does not provide who shall procure the policy of liability insurance;
in practice, the holder generally takes it out.

Under the liability-inusrance system, the insurer must indemnify the holder
for any liability he has under article 3, up to certain limits. The amounts of in-
surance payments are prescribed by article 2 of the Enforcement order, imple-
menting article 13 of the law, as follows: for death, 5,00,000 yen; for serious
injury, 1,00,000 yen ; for slight injury, 30,000 yen. These are the maximum bene-
fits payable under compulsory insurance; when actual damages are less than
those amounts, payments equal to the actual damages are to be made.

The provisions oa compulsory insurance do not apply to.motor. vehicles ope-
rated by the state, public corporations, prefectural governments, and the five major
Japanese cities. These holders presumably have the means to pay damages and are
willing to do so. For holders of large fleets of vehicles, the law provides a system
of self-insurance instead of liability insurance. Such possessors must obtain the
approval of the Minister of Transportation; the standards for the grant of approval
are ownership of more than two hundred vehicles (a bus being treated as two
vehicles), the ability to pay damages, and the absence of danger of frequent
accidents. Regulations provide that the self-insurer must maintain a reserve fund
and must manage the assets thereof in order to meet whatever motor-vehicle lia-
bility it might incur.

In the usual case in Japan, the injured person has no difficulty in obtaining
compensation for his injuries to the extent of the coverage of the liability insu-
rance, but in some exceptional cases there is no such coverage. In these, the govern-
ment pays compensation to the injured person, just as insurance companies often
make direct payment to injured persons. ‘Then the government is subrogated to
the injured person’s rights and may seek reimbursement from the injurer, who
remains primarily liable. Thus an injured man always has the benefit of some
kind of liability insurance, Governments do not ordinarily pay compensation
for injuries incurred through an accident between private persons—in Japan, the
only other example is the case of damage from atomic encrgy—and this exceptional
शर्त progressive provision shows that the relief of persons injured in motor-vehicle
accidents is considered a problem of vital importance.

The government compensates injured persons for loss of life or personal
injuries resulting from the operation of a motor vehicle in two types of cases. The
first is that in which the injured person cannot demand damages under article 3
because the holder of the vehicle is unknown, that is, the case of hit-and-run
driver, Even if the driver or the holder of the automobile was covered by liability
insurance, the injured person cannot take the benefit of the insurance. The secondé
case is that in which the required coverage has not been taken out, cither becausgt

¥
ri
sd

the holder has not obtained liability insurance, whether forgetfully, neglectfully,*

or intentionally, or because the accident was caused by a thief or other unauthp-
rised driver whom the compulsory insurance does not cover. fs

S0-L/B(D)ASTMofLISCA— 6


7 New.Zealand.

Abolition of tort
Section.

New Zealand.

Compensation—

Scope of — in Now

Zealand.

Injuries —_ covered
in New Zealand.

Statutory Com.
mission.

Procedurc—Formal
application.

New Zealand has adopted a comprehensive plan for dealing with all acci-
dental injuries, no matter how ceused.

‘The New Zealand legislation has abolished all rights‘ of action in tort for per-
sonal injury or death and has. provided instead, for state-funded compensation
in respect of aii those wao suilered injury or death due to an accident, whether
छा not caused by the act or default of another.
© iNew acaund Act has been described as “the most ambitious reform of
tort law in the common law word™. It makes provision for the compensation of—

(i) earners who sufier personal injury by accident regardless of place, time

or cause;

(ii) all persors who, in New Zealand, suffer personal injury by a motor
vehicle accident;
ceriuin dependents of those cujners and motor vehicie accident victims
where death results from the injury.

The only (very limited) survival of the fault principle is that a person
who wilfully inflicis ries on himself has no claim, but even then dependants
may be compensated if in special need.

The Act’ esteblishes an Earner’s Scheme and a Motor Vehicle Accident
Scheme, the former dealing with personal injuries to earners (but not limited
to injuries arising out of employment). and the latter covering the entire
population with respect to injuries inflicted by motor vehicles. Where the
schemes operate, tort action is abolished.

Compensation under the New Zcaland scheme includes medical and
related benefits, compensation for lost carning capacity at a rate of 80% of
earning up to $ 200 a week, lumpsum payments for non-pecuniary losses in
cases of permanent loss or impairment of bodily function to a maximum of
$5,000 ard c onsaiion for pain and suffering and loss of amenities to a
moximum of $ 7.500. Gther injury-related expenses are covered as well. Death
benefits mclude funeral expenses, and an allowance for a dependant widow or
widower of 50% of the amount that would have been payable to the deceased
for loss of earning capacity. The dependants’ allowance is higher where other
dependants are involved.

overed, the New Zealand scheme provides for com-
pensation for personal ir for death. it should be noted
that the scheme purperi: t ficd and comprehensive scheme of accident
compensation, inasmuch as it is not confined to injuries caused by motor
vehicle accidents. The compensation awarded us scheme is irrespective
of fault. As a result, personal injury by accident is taken out of the field of
the law of torts.

As to the injuries

The award of compensation is by a Commission constituted for the pur-
pore under the Act. It is a body corporate wih three members appointed for
a three yeur term, on the recommendation of ihe Minister of Labour.

The applicant for compensation submits a

decision is made
1 for review to the
an appeal to an independent appeal authority
upreme Court. An appeal, with leave,
of Supreme Court.
nings.

The procedure is briefly this.’
formal application io the Comm
by the staff of the Commissi
Commission (with hearing). There
and a further appeol (with leave) io the
can be filed in the court of eppeal against the de
There are detailed provisions jor the ass

4The Accidents Compensaion Act. 1972 (New
2Geoffrey W. Palmer, © Comp-nsation For Personal Tnjury : A Requiem for the Common Law
in New Zealand” (1973) 21 Amer. Jour, Com. Law I.

Accident Compensation Act, 1972. New Zeland Statutes, 1972, Vol. 1, No. 4
38०९ Hepple, Tort (1979) Appendix 5, pages 715—722 and Supplement page 732.


Earners’ scheme
in New Zealand.

Funds ereated in
New Zealand.

79

Past वा of the New Zealand Act provides for the establishment of an
earners’ scheme under which cover may be either (a) continuous cover, or
(b) work accident cover’.

(a) Continuous cover:

This entitles an earner to rehabilitation assistance and compensation in
respect of personal injury, “if the accident occurs at any time while the cover
continues whether or not the accident arises out of and in the course of his
employment.”

Part IV of the Act provides that all persons “shall have cover under the
motor vehicle accident scheme in respect of personal injury by a motor vehicle
accident in New Zealand and death resulting therefrom”, if the vehicle was regis-
tered and licenced or required to be registered and licensed’. Cover also extends
to accidents involving motor vehicles of visitors to New Zealand,‘ towed regis-
tered and unregistered vehicles,’ agricultural trailers’ and invalid carriages’.

The New Zealand Act creates two main funds from which compensation is
to be paid: an Earners’ Compensation Fund and a Motor Vehicle Accident Com-
pensation Fund‘. There is also an Active Service Compensation Fund in respect
of accidents in the armed forces, and a General Fund to which most adminis-
trative expenses are charged and the income of which is largely derived rate-
ably from the other Funds’. .

The Motor Vehicle Fund receives money from two sources:

(a) levies charged on every licensed and registered motor vehicle (the
amount payable being an adaption of premiums payable under the
former third party liability system, e.g., $ 11.35 on private motor cars,
$ 7.90 on motor cycles)”,

(b) an annual flat rate levy of $ 2 on every driver’s licence". There is power
to prescribe different levies for different classes of drivers” and to impose
penalty rates on drivers with bad records.”

The Earners’ Fund in New Zealand pays compensation due to earners, in-
cluding that payable in respect of motor vehicle accidents arising out of and in
the course of employment. This fund receives money from levies on employers
in respect of earnings of employees and levies on the self-employed". The levies
are payable at rates prescribed by order-in-council® and by notice in writing the
A.C.C. may impose a penalty rate of levy on any employer or self-employed
person whose accident record ‘is significantly worse than that normally set by
‘others of the same class™, The A.C.C. may also set a rebate of levy where
an accident rate is ‘significantly better than that normally set by others of the
same class”, The levies must be within limits specified in Part I of the First
Schedule (Between 0.25 per $ 100 and $5 per $ 100)४, subject to a maximum
amount (at present $ 10, 400) of the earnings on which levies are payable”.

1g, 6 Alternatively, one member must be so qualified.
98.7.

4g. 92.

38. 93.

58, 94.

७8. 95.

१38. 96,

88. 31,

28. 32 (3).

1°First Schedule, Pt. II.

4First Schedule, Pt. TE.

338, 100,

388, 100(d).

3९8. 71.

3०8, 72.

185. 1301) (a). This may not exceed the normal rate for that class by more than 100 per cent,
47g. 73. (1) (a).

iFirst Sobedule Pt. 1,

9g. 74.


Norway.

Accident insurance
in Norway.

Sweden—general
position,

Swedish law of
torts.

80

In Norway, as early as 1912, strict liability was introduced for road traffic
accidents. The Norwegian Motor Traffic Act (1912) imposed strict liability for
loss or damage caused by motor vehicle (with an exception for contributory
negligence). As a result of fairly recent amendments, .the general liability of
owners of motor-cars has in the main been abolished. The traditional personal
liability (whether based on a reversed fault rule or on a strict rule) has receded
into the background and has been replaced in the main by a system of compul-
sory first party motor insurance!-2.

Personal liability (of the owner and user) is thus abolished, in so far as
insurance covers the loss or damage’. Their liability is replaced by the insurance
system for the direct benefit of the injured person‘. Yf the loss or damage exceeds
the limits of the poficy personal liability survives.

The development of the Norwegian compulsory traffic accident insurance for
motor vehicles is of great interest. But we may confine ourselves to some of the
salient features of the present system’,

Every registered motor vehicle in Norway must carry traffic accident in-
surance for the benefit of all potential accident victims, including the passengers,
except the driver himself. The victim has a direct claim against the insurer. As
long as the claim does not exceed the compulsory insurance limit—Norwegian
kr, 200,00 (about 28,000 Dollars) for each person wounded or killed-—negligence
on the part of the owner or the driver of the vehicle is irrelevant. The only
requisites are that the damage in question was caused by the vehicle, that the
vehicle was not being utilised for तीर purposes than_as a means of transporta-
tion, and that it was not parked in a place to which the public had no access.
Claims in excess of Norwegian kr. 200,000 follow traditional rules of tort law,
and negligence or mechanical defects must be proved. Such claims may be
reduced to an equitable amount, if full liability is considered too heavy a burden
on the tortfeasor’.

It may be noted that under the Norwegian Motor Vehicle Liability Act
{section 10), insurance companies are liable also to pay compensation to victims
of uninsured automobiles’. Under section 13 of the same Act, the company which
pays has recourse against the person who should have taken out insurance and
also against the driver.

Sweden has recently introduced “no fault” liability for road traffic accidents.
But the process has been gradual, and its evolution is of interest.

Until recently, Sweden retained fault liability (for road accidents), though
with a reversed burden of proof.

General liability ii Sweeden for personal injury is governed by the Tort
Liability Act of 1972, which requires a person causing personal injury inten-
tionally or through negligence to compensate the person injured*. An intentional
or grossly negligent act on the part of the injured person may operate to reduce
the damages payable, and there may also be a reduction if the liability would
be excessively onerous for the defendant, having regard to his finances, though
this must not operate unfairly towards the person injured.

4Gomard, “Compensation for Auto Accidents” (1970) 13 A.J.C.L. 80, 82, 83.

286७ also Hellner in (1972) 16 Scandinavian Studies in Law, page 187.

*Motor Vehicle Liability Act, 3rd Feb. 1961 Norway.

‘Gomara, “Compensation for Auto Accidents” (1970) 18 A.J.C.L. 80, 85, 88.

5§olmer, “Interaction between Insuranos & Tort Theories” (1970) 18 A.J.C.L, 145, 149.
Selmer, “Tntoraction between Insurance & Tort Theories” (1970) 18 A.J.C.L. 145, 149.

1Gomard, “Compensation for Automobile Accidents” (1970) 18 American Journal of Compara-
tive Law, 80, 97.
७३७७ Heilmer, “New Swedish Tort Liabitity Act” (1074) 22 Am. J. Com. L. page 1,


Swedish Act of
1916 as to motor
vehicles.

Swedish Act of
1976 as to. traffic
damage.

Personal injury
Boards in Sweden.

81

But the Swedish law of general tort liability does not govern injuries suffered
in a road accident.

Statutory liability! for road accidents was based on two main principles :—
(i) rebuttable presumption of fault, and

(ii) liability of the owner of a car for the presumed fault of the driver.

As to the first principle, reference may be made to an important Swedish
piece of legislation. This legislation imposed a liability? upon any person using
or allowing a motor vehicle to be used for traffic on public roads unless he proved
that the injured person himself had contributed towards the injury, or it appeared
from the circumstances that the injury could not been averted by using all
the attention and care required on the part of the driver’.

The burden of proof was thus imposed upon the owner or user to show that
a negligent act has not been commited. This statutory rule which imposes
Kability on the holder of the automobile unless he can prove absence of negli-
gence in operating the vehicle and keeping it in good order, differs from the
Anglo-American use of the maxim res ipsa loguitur, in so far as the reversal of
the burden of proof applies 10 all cases covered by the statute, not only to those
where the conditions necessary for the application of the maxim are present.

The second principle (vicarious liability) is nothing peculiar and need not
be discussed.

Subject to these special rules, the general doctrine of fault continued to
govern liability in Sweden for road accidents upto 1975.

A certain hesitance to abandon the tort system was expressed, noting that
these systems granted compensation te the great majority of injured persons, and
that they had been built into the practices of courts and of insurance companies*.

This position continued upto 1975.

After 1975, in Sweeden, personal injury claims relating to road accidents
came to be governed by the (Swedish) Traffic Damage Act of 1975. This Act’
creates a “no fault” scheme of compensation based on compulsory insurance,
with claims being made directly against the insurer. Contributory negligence may
reduce or bar damages if it constitutes gross negligence or wilful misconduct
(e.g. self-induced injuries), or if the driver is drunk and negligent. Though
action in tort is not barred, the fact that compensation (even under the no fault
scheme) is assessed on the same principles as tort damages makes future tort
actions unlikely. An insurer has a right of recourse against the insurer of another
vehicle which was responsible for the accident, and also against any person who
caused the accident deliberately or by gross negligence.

A special feature of the Swedish law governing tort compensation for death
and personal injury is that the a ing of the awards is very much centralized.
The insurance companies are obliged to consult central “personal injury boards”
(there are separate boards for traffic insurance cases and other liability insurance

cases), before settling with the injured party’.

3The Motorists Liability Act, 1916 (Sweden).

मु Denmark the stricter liability rule was introduced in 1903. Liability ६० insure was introdu-
ced in Denmark in 1918; in Sweden in 1929 (The Traffic Insurance Act, 1929).

3Gomard, “Compensation for Automobile Accidents” (1970) 18 A.J.C.L. 80, 83.
4Gomard, ‘Compensation for Auto Accidents” (1970) 18 A.J.C.L. 80, 84.

®Traffic Damage Act, 1975 (Sweden).
elmer, “ Personal Injury Law in Nordic countries” (1970) 18 A.J.C.L. 54, 56.


Procedure of Boards. ©

Switzerland.

82

The statutory Traffic Board in Sweden settles all disputed claims involving
disability of 10 per cent or more, and fatal accident claims. The Board makes
recommendations, which are not of binding effect, but they are normally followed
by the insurers. In most cases, courts accept the figure suggested by the Board.

The Swedish Traflic Board is composed of four lawyers who are judges
or former judges by profession (herein called the “judicial members”), and 16
insurance ‘company officials, mostly lawyers (herein called the “insurance
members”). The chairman, who must be one of the judicial members, is appointed
by the Government, and the other members by the Swedish Association of Traffic
Insurance Companies, subject to approval by the Insurance Inspectorate. When
the Board deals with particular claims, it sits in panels of only four persons (two
judicial members and two insurance members) ; if the voting is even, the vote of
the chairman is decisive. The Liability Board is composed of two judicial
members and eight insurance members, all of whom are appointed by the Asso-
ciation of Swedish Insurance Companies; a quorum requires one judicial member
and three insurance members'.

Each of the boards has a full-time working secretary (in the Taffic Board,
a lawyer). The annual costs for the whole activity of the Traffic Board (includ-
ing salaries to three other employees) amount to less than 300,000 Sw. kroner
(about $ 60,000); the yearly expenses of the Liability Board can be calculated
at about half this amount. In view of these rather modest resources, the yearly
results of the board’s activities are impressive. The Traffic Board deals nowadays
with more than 1800 claims a year (1871 in 1967, 1885 in 1968); the Liability
Board with 300—400 (372 opinions 1967, 300 in 1968)’.

Some general traits of the procedure of the Traffic and Liability Boards
may be of interest; on the whole, cases are dealt with in the same way in both.
The insurer which refers the question of damages to the board delivers the docu-
ments in the case, stating the settlement that it proposes and the reasons for its
position; this proposal is only preliminary, and the insurers feel at liberty to raise
or reduce the amount at a later stage. At the same time, the insurer presents a
short memorandum containing all the essential facts of the case, including medical
testimony and reports made by some insurance company employee about the
economic and 5 circumstances of the claimant. The memorandum and the
proposal are distributed to the members of the board in good time before the
meeting. If the victim is represented by counsel, the insurer will generally have
provided counsel with all relevant information. Counsel are permitted to see the
memorandum too, although it is not regularly communicated to them, but the
proposal of the insurer is considered confidential. As for the claimant who has
no lawyer, it is not always thought adviseable that he should read all the medical
testimony and reports on his living conditions; in other respects, he is treated in
the same way as his legal adviser would be.

In Switzerland,’ under the Swiss Road Traffic Law, the only defence allowed
is that the accident was due to an unavoidable event caused neither by a defect
in the condition of the vehicles nor by failure of mechanism‘.

It appear’ that the Swiss Act® extends to damage to property as well as to
death and bodily injury. The injured person is entitled to compensation unless
the defendant proves that the accident occurred fortuitously or through ‘serious
fault’ on the part of the injured person or some third party and that neither he
nor any person for whom he was responsible was guilty of fault and that the
vehicle concerned was not in a defective condition. If both parties are partly to

1Bengtsson, “Personal Injury Boards in Sweden” (1970) 18 A.J.C.L. 108, 110.

‘Bengtsson, “Personal Injury Boards in Sweden” (1970) 18 A.J.C.L. 108, 111.

Article 591, Swiss Road Traffic Law (1958).

“Fleming, Comment in (1975) 23 A.J.C.L. 513, 518 and footnote 30. ,

"Society of Conservative Lawyers, Your Rights, Your Courts, Your Injuries (1970).. page, 81,

*Haftpflicht and Versicherung Inkrafttroten 1-1-1980 (Vol. 20-11-1959). Articles 58, 59, 60.
61, 65, 76 and 76,


U.S.A.

Schemes in U.S.A.

6) Mlinois.

Limitations
Illinois plan.

83

blame, liability is apportioned taking account not merely the degree of fault on
each side but also ‘the operational risks of a vehicle’. As in many ‘risk’ system
countries, the result of this provision is that in many cases, even if the fault is
equal, a greater proportion of the blame will be put upon the vehicle user upon
the basis that he is using something which is inherently dangerous.

In U.S.A., the subject of “no fault” liability has received the maximum
attention. Literature on the subject is prolific. Although statutory developments
are of a comparatively recent origin, academic studies of “no fault” began much
earlier, and the debate has since then continued unabated.

In fact, as early as 1925, one Judge’ proposed certain reforms including
compulsory insurance on the subject.

Some other Judges in U.S.A. also have strongly favoured the introduction of
“no fault” liability. For example, Judge Friendly, writing a few years ago, ex-
pressed? himself in favour of the removal of all automobile accident cases from
all judicial systems, federal and state. He suggested that this may be done even
by a national “no fault” insurance law, if the states did not promptly proceed to
adopt their own. Many persons were of the view that some system of “no fault”
insurance must come, for the present system is extraordinarily inefficient in
providing compensation for the ordinary claims resulting from automobile colli-
sions’. These moves have borne fruit.

In many States in the U.S.A., statutory schemes have now been introduced
for the compensation of victims of motor vehicles accidents. These schemes may
be broadly classified into (i) those where benefits are paid through a fund con-
tained and administered by a Government agency, and (ii) those in which bene-
fits are paid through private enterprise insurers.

In some of the schemes, what has come to be known as “partial tort
exemption” is incorporated’, Such an exemption bars claims in respect of pain
and suffering for less serious injuries. In some of the other schemes more cover-
age is added without, however, changing the basic system of negligence law and
liability insurance‘.

By way of illustration, the position in a few States is briefly stated below.

In Illinois, the compulsory no-fault scheme, in effect since January 1, 1972,
pays for medical, hospital and funeral expenses incurred within a year of the
accident that caused the injury, to a maximum of only $ 2,000. The maximum
income continuation benefit is $ 150 a week, with a 52 week limit. Provision is
also made for the payment of an amount upto $ 12 a day for one year on account
of loss of services where an injured person is not a wage earner.

An interesting feature of the Illinois plan is its provision for an optional
additional coverage paying all medical, hospital and funeral expenses with no
time limit, but with a maximum of $ 2,000 for funeral expenses, a limit of
$ 50,000 per person and $ 100,000 per accident. This optional coverage would
also extend wage loss benefit for five years and would pay survivors’ benefits for
five years as well. Also noteworthy in this plan, which preserves the negligence
action, is the limitation imposed on recovery for pn and suffering. Such recovery
can be had only in cases of dismemberment and disfigurement, and is limited to
50% of the first $500 and 100% of the excess.

x 8, Marx, Judge of the Superior Court in Cincinnati, “Compulsory automobile insurance”
(1925) ar Bar Assn, पद page पर, referred to in Bombaugh, “Uniform Motor Vehicles Accidents
Reparation Act” (1973) 59 Ama. Bar Assn. Jour. 45.

tHenty J. Friendly, Federal Jurisdiction (1973), pages 133-138; see Clement Haynsworth in
Book Review (1973-1974), 87 Yale L.J. 1082, 1085, 1086.

*Gloment Haynsworth, Book Review in (1973-1974) 87 Yale L.J. 1082, 1085, 1088.

‘Keston & Keeton, Cases and Materials in Torts (197), pages 796, 800, 801.

Sp,A, 771430, amending 11008 Insurance Code of 1937.


(ii) Massachusetts.

(iii) Michigan.

Unique aspect of
Michiganlaw—
Proprietary loss.

(iv) Now York.

Tribunals in New
York.

84

One of the earliest plans in the United States for compensation for accidents
caused by motor vehicles was the “Personal Injury Protection Plan” enacted in
Massachusetts.’ Its “no fault” limits are low: $ 2.000 per person.’ The tort action
continues to exist, with amounts paid by the Personal Injury Protection Plan
deducted, and with damages for pain and suffering available only in cases of
serious injuries.

It should be observed, of course, that the vast majority of automobile acci-
dent injuries come within the limit of the Massachusetts plan.

Perhaps the most complete and generous plan in the U.S.A. is the one
enacted in the state of Michigan late in 1972, to come into effect in the autumn
of 1973 4. Under the Michigan scheme, compulsory personal protection in-
surance is intended to pay for all medical and hospital expenses and for all
recovery and rehabilitation costs, Lost income is to be made up with a 15%
deduction (the deduction takes account of the fact that the benefits are tax free)
and with a maximum oi 1,000 dollars per month and a limit of 3 years. In this
sense, the limit for wages comes to 36,000 dollars. There is no limit for medical
expenses’,

Provision is made in the Michigan law for periodic adjustments to reflect
changes in the cost of living. In addition, upto $ 20 a day for other expenses may
be claimed for a three year period. Death benefits include upto $1,000 for
funeral expenses and payment of economic support to dependants at up to $20
a day per person to a maximum of $ 1,000 a month over a three year period.
Benefits received from collateral sources are deductible from amounts payable
under the personal protection insurance.

An injured party, in Michigan, is still entitled to bring a negligence action,
but the personal protection insurer may recover (from the damages awarded)
any amount paid out under the policy, or deduct the recovery from any benefits
owing. Recovery for non-pecuniary losses is limited to cases of death, serious
disability or disfigurement.

The unique aspect of the Michigan legislation is its compulsory “property
protection insurance”, which pays property losses, irrespective of fault, upto a
maximum of one million dollars.

In New York, the Comprehensive Automobile Insurance Reparations Act®
passed by the State legislature in January, 1973 is similar to the Michigan plan,
but provides no death benefits and no property damage coverage. It pays medical,
hospital and associated expenses, and psychiatric costs, as well as the cost of
physical and occupational therapy and rehabilitation. Lost earnings have a 20%
deduction, The maximum is 50,000 Dollars per claimant’. The New York plan
pays upto $25 a day for other necessary expenses for a maximum of a year.
Damages for non-pecuniary losses are limited to cases of serious injury. The right
to bring an action in negligence is saved, but there can be no recovery for any
loss covered by the personal injury insurance.

The law in New York has been recently amended in 1977, One important
feature introduced by the amendment of 1977 is the scheme of having two
tribunals for the determination of two types of questions and also the introduc-
tion of guidelines for assessing medical fees.

3Personsl Injury Protection Act. Mass. Gen, Lars Ann. 6. 90, 5९०. 348, D, M, N, 0 (Supp. 1972);
6. 175, sees. 22K-H, 113B-C (1972); ०. 231, sec. 6D (Supp. 1972).

Hepple, Tort (1979), Appendix 6, pages 725-726.

2Hepple, Tort (1979), Appendix 6, pages 725-726.

‘Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated, S. 500-3103 ef seg-

SKeoton & Keoton, Tort (1977), page 802 (Chart).

*McKinney’s Insurance Law, Art. XVIII, section 620 et sec. (offective Jan. 1, 1974).

‘Hepple, Tort (1979), 726, footnote 1.

*Richard Naimark, “No Fault In surance in Now York State” (September, 1978), Vol. 33, Now
8, Arbitration Journal, pages 37—40.



Other States in
U.S.A.

Uniform Motor
Vehicle Accident
Roparation Act.

Benefits under the
uniform Act in U.S.A.

85

Under the amended New York law, there are two basic tribunals, one for
determining questions of a medical nature and the other for determining questions
of a non-medical natuze. “Non-medical” questions would include questions relating
to loss of wages, miscellancous expenses and the ambit of coverage of policy.

The medical tribunal in New York is to consist of medical experts, but it
has also the power to require the claimant for compensation to submit to medical
examination by a doctor appointed by the medical tribunal.

Non-medical questions are decided in New York by another tribunal,
generally consitituted by the American Arbitration Association which has been
given a recognised legal status in the New York law.

As regards the actual assessment of medical expenses the use of the sche-
dule of fees prevalent in workmen's conipensation law is prescribed as a guide-
line by the amendment of 1977. This amendment was in response to the earlier
practical experience of the arbitrators who had to deal with the matter. They
were of the view that such questions should not be left to the discretion of the
arbitrator.

It seems that there was a feeling that insurance companies tried to hold the
recovery for medical benefits to a low ceiling.’

The notion of “no-fault” liability has proved successful in some other States
in the U.S.A. having “no-fault” statues?—* ,

There has also been prepared a uniform law, in the U.S.A. by the title of
the Uniform Motor Vehicle Accident Reparation Act which, however, has not
yet been enacted in any State’,

In the Uniform Act, there is a reparation system in which each person
insures himself against the loss incurred in operating a motor vehicle. This
principle is regarded as essential to the full and efficient compensation of motor
vehicle losses and the rational allocation of the resulting ९००5४,

All persons insured in an automobile accident are assured of benefits for
their injuries without regard to fault.

The Uniform Act establishes certain compulsory minimum benefits called
“basic reparation benefits” which are to be paid without regard to fault to persons
suffering loss from injury arising out of the maintenance or use of a motor vehicle.
Only the following persons are wholly excluded from the benefits: —

(1) Persons who intentionally injure themselves or others (and their
survivors) ;

(2) person who “convert” motor vehicle—but they can claim under their
own insurance or if they are under the age of 15 year’.

ARichard Naimark, “No Fault Insurance in New York State” (September 1978) Vol. 33, No.
3. Arbitration Journal, pages 37—40.

Arkansas, Colorado, Connesticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Kansas Kentucky,
Maryland Massachusetts: Michigan, Minnesota, Nevada, Now Jersey, North Dakota, Oregon,
Pennsylvania, South Carolina, South Dakota and Utah.

%Commerce Clearing House, Automobile Law Reporter (Insurance), page 1935 et sec.
‘Uniform Motor Vehicle Accident Reparation Act.

SBombaugh, “Uniform Motor Vehicles Accidents Reparation Act” (1973) 59 Am. Bar Assn.
Tour. 45.

*Bombaugh, “Uniform Motor Vehicles Acciaents Reparation Act” (1973) 59 Am. Bar Assn.
jour. 45,



Payment of benefits
under the Uniform
Act.

86

There seems to be no over-all limit in point of dollars or for time with
respect to benefits for loss of work, economic loss to survivors and replacement
service 1055. 7

With two exceptions, the basic reparation benefits of a basic reparation
insured are always paid by his own insurance company.’ A basic reparation
insured is a person identified by name as an insured in a contract of basic repara-
tion insurance, his spouse, or other relative residing in the same household, and
a minor in his custody or the custody of a relative residing with the named
insured. An exception to the general rule is made for injuries to the driver or
other occupant of a vehicle that occur while the vehicle is being used in the
business of transporting persons or property. The other exception is an injury to
an employee, his spouse, or other relative residing with him, if the accident
causing the injury occurs while the injured person is driving or occupying a
vehicle furnished by an employer. In both of these cases the insurance covering
the vehicle is responsible for the benefits.

An injured person who is not a basic reparation insured recovers basic
reparation benefits from the insurer of the vehicle he occupied or if, a pedestrian,
from the insurer of any involved vehicle. The insurer paying basic reparation
benefits to an uninsured pedestrian is entitled to contribution from the insurers
of all involved vehicles, An unoccupied parked vehicle is not an involved vehicle
unless it was parked so as to cause unreasonable risk of injury.

1Bombaugh, “Uniform Motor Vehicles Accidents Reparation Act” (1973) 59 American Bar
Association Journal 45, 47.

1 {B(D)457Mof11&CA—2000--8-9-81— GIPS