LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

EIGHTY SIXTH REPORT

The Partition Act, 1893

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA MINISTRY OF LAW



. DO. No. F. 2(5)/80—LC.

Justice P. V. DIXIT,
New Delhi-110001.
27th August, 1980.

My dear Minister,

I am herewith sending the Eighty-sixth Report of the Law Com-
mission on the Partition Act, 1893.

The Partition Act was enacted in 1893 for the purpose of providing
that where division of property cannot reasonably or conveniently be made
and that sale of the property and distribution of proceeds would be more
beneficial for all the share-holders, then the court may direct the sale of
the property and distribution of the proceeds. The Act is technical in
character. It has been in force for about 87 years and it is time that the
defects and deficiencies in its working should be removed.

In the light of the experience of the working of the Act and numerous
conflicting decisions of sdveral High Courts on almost all the provisions
of the Act, the Commission has suggested amendments in the Act,

(a) for overcoming practical difficulties experienced in course of the
working of the Act;

(b) for removing drafting defects and obscurities which have caused
difficulty in the interpretation of the statute;

(c) for ensuring the better Fulfilment of the purposes of the Act;
and

(d) for removing lacunae in the existing provisions,

The amendments proposed by the Commission can best be appreciated if
the entire background of the Act and its provisions are kept in mind. A
summary of the background or of provisions of the Act in thig letter can be
of little help in the appreciation of the proposal made by the Commission.

The Commission wishes to express its. appreciation to Mr. P. M.
Bakshi, Member Secretary for the preparation of the Report. We also
acknowledge with thanks the help given by Mr. V. V. Vaze, Additional
Secretary.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,

Sd/-
(P. V. DIXIT)

Shri P. Shiv Shanker,
Minister of Law, Justice & C. A.,
New Delhi-1.

(i)


Chapter

Chapter 6.
Chapter 7.
Chapter 8.
Chapter 9.

Appendix 1.
Appnedix 2.
Appendix 3.

CONTENTS

Introductory. . .
History. : . .

Scheme of the Act and analogous provisions. .

English law. . . .
Power of sale: sections 1-2.

Sale to shareholders : section 3.
Share of dwelling house : section 4
Miscellaneous : Sections 5 to 10
Summary of recommendations.

APPENDICES
Text of English Act of 1858. .
Text of English Act of 1876. पु ना
Present English law. . . . .

(ii)

PAGE

10
11
17
21
32
36

39
al
43


CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTORY

1.1. This Report relates to the Partition Act, 1893. Though the Act may Scope of the
appear to be very technical in character, it really! deals with important matters Report.
pertaining to the division of property and is vitally conmected with the basic
function of law.

1.2. Law exists primarily for the resolution in a peaceful manner of Function of
conflicts in society (or in groups constituting the society), being conflicts law as peaceful
relating to justiciable matters. This object it seeks to achieve in a two-fold resolution of
manner—by laying down rules as to the norms to be observed by members “Mists.
of the society in their relations with one another, and by setting out the
machinery for enforcing the norms so laid down. The latter function is con-
ventionally regarded as belonging to the sphere of “adjective” law. The
Partition Act, being primarily concerned with working out certain remedies
telating to proprietary rights, pertains mainly to adjective law.

1.3. But the fact that the Act belongs to the field of adjective law does Act not con-
not mean that it is concerned only with technicalities. In the course of the cerned with
determination of issues arising under various provisions of the Act, difficult tehnicalities.
questions of distributive justice very often fall to be considered. An apparently
simple provision—such as is contained in section 4 which, inter alia, empowers
the Court to determine the valuation of a share in certain situations—might
involve a balancing of various factors which are not necessarily of a legal
character but which pertain to certain economic facts, conduct of parties and
many other matters, The Act is a part of the adjective law only in the sense
that it primarily operates at the stage of litigation and its provisions are mainly
concerned with the process of litigation. But its importance far transcends the
mere niceties of litigation.

1.4. Even when one concentrates on the adjectival aspect, certain expecta- Defective
tions of society musi be satisfied. The machinery incorporated in adjective machinery.
jaw should be smooth in its operation and the law relating thereto, as far as
possible, free from ambiguities that might hinder its smooth operation. Un-
fortunately, the machinery as contained in the Partition Act has not worked
satisfactorily. Experience has shown that the manner in which many of its
provisions were originally framed and the conflicting interpretations which those
provisions have received in the courts, have resulted in confusion and caused
hardship,

1.5. There is hardly any other Act on the Indian statute book in regard Conflict of
to which such a conflict of decisions has arisen as in regard to the Partition decisions.
Act. Almost every important provision of the Act has been the subject matter
of conflicting judicial decisions. On some points (€.g. as to section 4), the
conflict is so wide that one is unable to find any common ground at all? If,
therefore, uniformity in law is one objective of the revision and reform of the
law, then certainly the Partition Act appears to be an enactment eminently
suitable for being taken up for revision.

1.6. Besides this, the Law Commission. has already forwarded Reports on Law of pro-
several matters concerned with the substantive law of property,? and it is appro- Perty and aw
priate to take up now its adjective counterpart. of Partition.

1.7. The need for revision of the Act having been felt, a study of its Need for
provisions was commenced in the Commission some time ago. In the meantime, ‘v!sion.

1, Para 1.3, infra.
2. Chapter 7, infra.

3. E.g. Law Commission of India, 70th Report (The Transfer of Property Act, 1882)
and 64th Report (Married Women’s Property Act, 1874) and 815 Report (Hindu Widows
Remarriage Act, 1856). tee

1


Scheme of
the Report.

Partition Act, 1893

the Commission also received from the Gujarat High Court! a copy of its recent
judgment highlighting the confusion that has arisen by reason of conflicting
interpretations of section 4 of the Act. The need for revising the Act is re-
inforced by several other recent judgments of various Courts.

It may also be added that a suggestion pointing out some of the difficulties
experienced in the working of the Act (particularly, sections 2 and 3) and
urging reform of the law had also been received some time ago by the Ministry
of Law (Legislative Department) from a member of the Bar: ‘he Legislative
Department had, thereupon, suggested that the Law Commission might consider
the question of revision of this Act—a suggestion made in view of the fact that
the Commission had, at that time, a proposal to take up for revision the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882, Since then, the Commission has already
forwarded its Report on the Transfer of Property 55, as already stated.

1.8. It is therefore proposed to consider the Act section by section after a
brief historical discussion. To some extent, the Act is based on English statutory
law as it was in force at the time when the Indian Act was enacted.

The salient features of the English law, as it then existed and as it is in
force now, have been given in an Appendix.

1, Para 7.16, infra.

2. F. 1(1)/64-L. C. (Law Commission) and F, 14(4)/62 Leg. I (Legislative Depart-
ment).

3 Law Commission of India, 70th Report (Transfer of Property Act, 1862).

4. Para 1.6, supra, पु

5. Appendix 3,


CHAPTER 2
HISTORY

2.1. The circumstances in which the Partition Act, 1893 came to be enactcd History of the
are interesting. Indian statute law, as it stood in 1892, did not contain any Act.
provision empowering the Court to direct a sale and division of the Proceeds
of sale in partition suits. The Code of Civil Procedure! (as then in force) dealt
with the procedure for the partition of lands Paying revenue and lands not
paying revenue respectively? But the relevant sections of the Code authorised
the Court only to divide the property (and, in some exceptional cases, to award
money compensation for equalizing the value of the shares). The Court could
not direct a sale of the property followed by a division of the Property that
remained. I{ was bound to give a share to each of the parties.

2.2. This lacuna caused a difficulty which was thus explained in the Statement of

Statement? of Objects and Reasons to the Bill which led to the Act of 1893— Qrieets, and
“Instances, however, occasionally occur where there are insuperable

practical difficulties in the way of making an equal division; and in such

cases the Court is either powerless to give effect (0 its decree, or is driven

to all kinds of shifts and expedients in order to do so. Such difficulties

are by no means of very rare occurrence, although in many cases where

the parties are properly advised they generally agree to some mutual arrange-

ment, and thus relieve the Court from embarrassment,

“It is proposed in the present Bill to supply this defect in the law by
giving the Court, under proper safeguards, a discretionary authority {0
direct a sale where a partition cannot reasonably be made and a sale would,
in the opinion of the Court, be more beneficial for the parties. But having
regard to the strong attachment of the people of this country to their landed
possessions, it is proposed to make the consent of the parties interested at
least to the extent of a moiety in the property a condition precedent to the
exercise by the Court of this new power. In order at the same time to
Prevent any oppressive exercise of this privilege, it is proposed to
give such of the “shareholders as do not desire a sale the right to buy the
others out at a valuation to be determined by the Court.

“The power, moreover, which it is proposed to give to the Court, wil!
be a discretionary one, to be exercised on a consideration of all the circum-
stances of the case. It should be added, that where the Court is obliged to
direct a sak, a right of pre-emption is given by the Bill to the parties
similar to that conferred on shareholders by section 310 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1882.”

2.3. Regarding the clause of the Bill corresponding to section 4, the State- History of

ment of Objects and Reasons further observed+— provision con-
terring power
“It is also proposed in the Bill to give the Court the power of com- OF sale.

pelling a stranger who has acquired by purchase a share in a family dwel-
ling house when he seeks for a partition to sell his share to the members
of the family who are the owners of the rest of the house at a valuation
to be determined by the Court. This provision is only an extension of
the privilege given to such “shareholders by section 44, paragraph 2 of
the Transfer of Property Act, and is an application of the well known rule

1. Sections 265 and 396, Code of Civil Procedure, 1882.

2. See para 2.11, infra.

3, Statement of Objects and Reasons to Bill No. 8 of 1892, Gazette of India, 1892
Part V, page 46 (portion relating to sections 2 and 3).

4, Gazette of India, 1892, Part V, page 46.


Draft Bill.

Opinion on
the Bill.

Comment of
Government of
Bombay.

View of the
High Court of
Calcutta.

Views of
Mr, Knox
and British
India Asso-
ciation,

Partition Act, 1893

which obtains among Mohamedats everywhere and by custom also among
Hindus in some parts of the country.

“The other sections of the Bill only deal with matters of procedure
and do not call for any detailed notice.”

__ 2.4. Tt would appear that the draft Bill, as originally proposed, sought to
incorporate almost all the Provisions of the English Act! on the subject. For
example, under clause 3 of the Bill, as proposed, a sale could be ordered even
on the request of any shareholder irrespective of the quantum of his interest in
the property, as in section 3 of the English Act of 1868. Clause 4 of that Bill
required the Court to direct a sale of the property and distribute the proceeds
on the application of a share-holder interested in a moiety, and mainly followed
section 4 of the English Act of 1868.

_2.5. The Bill was circulated to local Governments, High Courts etc. for
opnion, with a circular dated the 31st October, 1889. Many of the opinions
so received objected to the provisions? under which a sale could ‘be ordered
irrespective of the quantum of interest of the shareholder applying for sale. For
example, Mr. Justice Muttusami Aiyar of the Madras High Court suggested
that, in the case of ancestral land forming the sole or principal means of subsis-
tence of a Joint Hindu family, no sale should be directed except by the consent
of all or the majority, of the co-shares. The experience of Sir R. West (quoted
by the Bombay Government) was that the (English) Partition Act was unsuitable
for India, The Government of Bombay thought that the Bill would break up
half the old estates, at least in the course of a generation.

2.6. Among the changes desired by the Government of Bombay was a
provision that where members resisting partition represented one-third of the
aggregate estate, partition should not be decreed if the: share of the members
demanding partition could be made a charge on the estate. On the other hand, the
Advocate-Gefteral of Bombay and Mr. Justice Parsons and Mr. Justice Telang
of the Bombay High Court approved of the Bill in substance. Mr. Batly,
Acting Legal Remembrancer, Bombay, strongly opposed the Bill, and thought
that before so drastic an enactment as the English Partition Act was imported
that before so drastic an enactment as the English Partition Act was imported
in a more modern form. His suggestion was that before a sale could be
ordered, a request must have been made by one moiety of the persons interested,
and the dissent of the other interested parties must be unreasonable or
frivolous.3

2.7. The High Court of Calcutta also did not approve of the drastic provi-
sions in the Bill, In its opinion those provisions might lead to great abuse and
multiply a class of cases already too numerous. It made a further suggestion
that where a partition could not be practically made, the Court should have
a power to compel the plaintiff to allow himself to be bought out, and that
when a share in an estate has been, or is about to be, sold by private sale to
a stranger, the other co-sharers should have a right of pre-emption in the whole
or such portion of the estate as the Court may think reasonable. This sugges-
tion of the Calcutta High Court seems to have been the genesis of the provision
in present section 4.

2.8. Mr. Knox, Legal Remembrancer, North-Western Provinces and Oudh,
thought that the Bill might become an instrument whereby rich shareholders
owning a smal] interest in immovable property may bring about (to their own
advantage) sale of an ancestral property and break up joint property holdings.

There was also strong opposition to the Bill from the British India Asso-
ciation, which stated —

“The Bill, following the English Partition Act of 1868, and favouring,
without paying any regard to the difference of social conditions, the sale of

1. Partition Act, 1868 (See Appendix 1).

2. See para 2.4, supra,

3. Discussion rding history of the Bill is based on papers relating to the Parti-
tion Act, 1893 (4 of 1893); National Archives, Printed file, Home iudicialy Department,
1891, particularly pages 1-12, Minute dated the 19th September, 1890,


History
the properly... ceeseeeee is entirely unsuited to the circumstances of
this country.”

2.9. The most interesting comment, however, from our point of view, was
that of Mr. Brojendra Coomar Seal,! District Judge, Bankoora, who suggested
the following rules, namely,—

“I. When {the property can conveniently be divided into as rts
as there are shares, it should be so divided.” many Pa

“TI. When it cannot be so divided, but when a portion of the property
can be allotted to each sharer, to equalize the shares the Court should
have jhe power to direct one sharer to pay compensation to another for
the difference between the portion actually allotted to him and the portion

is enti to.

“TTI. When.all the sharers wish, or when the Court finds it impossible
to divide the property according to Rule I or II, the whole or a portion
of the partible property may be valued by the Court at what it is actually
worth, and, taking that to be the upset price, cause it to be sold to that
sharer who will pay the highest price above the upset value. If none of
the sharers wish to purchase, or to purchase at the upset price, then the
surrounding neighbours may be allowed to compete for the property, and
it may be sold to that neighbour who will pay the highest price above the
upset value. If the neighbours do not come forward, then it may be put
up to public sale irrespective of the upset price, subject to the rules in
Chapter XIX of the Civil Procedure Code so far as they are applicable.”

His views found support? in the comment of Sir A.R. Scoble, 0.0.

Mr. Seai’s

2.10. As a few of the comments revealed opposition to some of the propo- Decision aa
sals in the Bill, it was considered that the power to equalise the shares? was °° equalisation,

sufficient to meet all ordinary cases except family houses. The suggestion of
the Calcutta High Court‘ (regarding purchase of a share by a stranger) was also
accepted. This was the tentative decision of the Government of India.

2.11. However, before taking its final decision, Government sought the
advice of two legal experts, namely, Dr. W.H. Rattigan and Mr. G.H.P. Evans.
Dr, Rattigan was in favour of the Bill, notwithstanding the objections received
thereon. He traced the history of the Law of Partition and observed that there
was authority for saying that even in Hindu Law, in the case of property
indivisible by nature, partition was to be effected according to vukti or equity,
and one of the modes expressly recognised in such a case was by selling the
property and dividing the proceeds.5 He noted that according to Muslim
Law, money compensation could be ordered while dividing, for instance, a
house with a piece of ground attached. He referred to the Indian statute law
as it then existed (ie., sections 265 and 396 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1882) and expressed the view that while those sections authorised money com-
pensation for equalisation, they did not contain a provision to meet cases of
partition of a single property (like a dwelling house) which could not be divided.

Dr. Rattigan also referred to the observations made in a Punjab case’
where the want of a law enabling the Court to deal properly with cases where
a house could not be divided was noted, and it was pointed out that the parties
were left either to buy one another out or to devise the most extraordinary
shifts and contrivances of screening off their respective shares from one another.
He pointed out that the apprehension that richer persons would harass the
poorer co-sharers under clause 4 as proposed was not justified, as the Court
had a discretion, However, to inspite greater confidence in the public, he

1, See also para 2.13, infra,

2. Para 2.13, infra.

3. This power was discussed in Ashanullah v, Kali Kinkur, (1884) LL.R, 10 Cal.
675, 676.

4, Para 2.7, supra.

5. Dr. W. H. Rattigan, Comment on the Partition Bill, citing Jolly's Tagore Law
Lectures (1888), page 93.

6. Hidayah, Book 39, Chapter Ill, cited.

7. Punjab Record case No, 15 of 1878; observations of Sir Dennis Fitzpatrick J.

2-317 LAD/ND/81

Views of
Dr, Rattigan
and Mr. Evans.


Views of
Mr. Evans—
Weakening of
joint family -
not favoured.

View of Sir
AR. Scoble,
ac.

Speech of
Dr, Rash

Behari Ghose.

Proceedings

Partition Act, 1893

supported the proposal that the previous sanction of the District Court should
be required before a sale was ordered.

2.12. Mr, G.H.P, Evans, however, thought that while, no doubt, part ‘ition
cases presented considerable difficulty and a power to direct sale wor geatly
simplify matters, yet any measure tending to break up the joint Hindu family
system would meet with great opposition, and that the time was not opportune
for introducing any such measure.

2.13. It may also be noted that the Government had shown the papers to
Sir A.R. Scoble, Q.C., who was inclined to think that where a partition by
agreement could not be effected, a public sale of an undivided share, or of a
right, title and interest should be permissible only where the other members of
the family declined to purchase the share of the member claiming partition at

- @ reasonable price. In his opinion, the suggestions of Mr. B.C. Seal! were

commendable. It was in these circumstances that the Bill was modified, befo:
its introduction. :

2.14. Dr. Rash Behari Ghose, while moving for leave to introduce the Bill,?
observed that an amendment of the law was called for, “as a state of things in
which a judicial deadlock is possible can never be viewed with indifference by
the Legislature”. He pointed out that the Bill imposed stringeny conditions
before sale could be ordered, one of which was that at least one-half of the
sharers must concur in the sale. He also referred to the text of Brihaspati? that
in the case of clothes and ornaments an equitable partition was made by distzi-
bution of the price after their sale.

2.15. From the proceedings of the Council of the Governor-General,’ it
would appear that Dr. Rash Behari Ghose was aware of the criticism that some
of the restrictions imposed by the Bill were unnecessary, but he replied that
“for obvious reasons, sweeping innovations in matters of so much delicacy are
always to be deprecated and that we cannot proceed too cautiously”.

1. Para 2.9, supra.

18927 Proceedings of the Council of the Governor-General of India, dated 25th March,

3. Digest V, 366.
4 Proceedings of the Governof-Genergl-in-Council. dated 9th March, 1893,


CHAPTER 3
SCHEME OF THE ACT AND ANALOGOUS PROVISIONS

3.1 In order to understand the scheme of the Act, we should bear in mind Concurrent
what are concurrent interests. Land (or, for that matter, any other property) interests,
may be the subject of separate ownership or of co-ownership, Where two or more
persons have simultaneous interests in Jand (or in other property) they are said
to hold it concurrently and to have “concurren‘” interests.!

3.2, So long as those having concurrent interests continue to enjoy it in Partition.
common, the jaw would not interfere. When, however, a desire arises for
separate. enjoyment, the law must regula te the rights and liabilities in the light of
the conflicts that might ensue. legal term “| “मनन is applied to the
division of lands, tenements, and hereditaments belongi to co-owners and
the allotment among them of the parts,? so as to put an end to the community
of ownership between some or all of them. The co-owners may be joint
tenants, tenants in common, or co-parceners,

Thus, if three persons ate co-owners (tenants in fee simple) of Blackacre.
Whiteacre, and Greenacre, the transaction by which one of them becomes sole’
owner in fee simple of Blackacre, another of Whiteacre, and the third of
Greenacre, is a “partition”.

Partition is thus a legal process by which joins title and possession of
co-owners of joint property is converted into the separate title and possession
. Of each of the co-owners m respect of specific item or items. The joint property
is divided into species and each one of the erstwhile co-owners is put in posses-
sion of a specific extent of property allotted to his share. In some cases,
however, partition will not be convetient and the Act concentrates on that
situation seeking to provide suitable alternatives.

3.3. The Act does not purport to deal with the whole law of partition. Scope of the
This is made clear by the long title, which describes it as an Act to amend Act of 1893.
the law of partition. The substantive law relevant to partition, ic. division
of undivided property into separate shares, is not dealt with in the Act. That
falls within the purview of the law of propertly, or in certain respects, with those
Tules of personal law which deal with the proprietary relations of co-parceners
or other co-owners, infer se. The Act mainly deals with the field of the
remedy by way of a suit for partition, ic. when partition is sought through the

machinery of the courts. This belongs to the field of adjective law.3 Even in
this field, the Act covers only a small area, namely, (a) cases where a division
of the property is not convenient, and the whole property has to be sold, or
(b) cases where the sale of the share of one of the parties entitled to partitions
(or of his transferee)’ is considered desirable.

3.4. The two important topics dealy with in the Act are— Scheme of
(a) power of the Court to order sale instead af division in pattition suits te Act
(section 2), and

right of am member of a family to purchase a share in a dwelling
(७ ah of any member of 5 family to purchase a share in a dwelling
transferred to a stranger (section 4).

The scheme of the Act may now be briefly summiarised.

1. Cf. Black, Law Dictionary (1979), page 264,

2. Halsbury, 3rd Ed., Vol, 29, page 343, para 539. Also see Vol. 14 (Equity),
Pages 501, 502.

3. Chapter 1, supra.

4. Section 2,

5. Section 3(1).

6. Section 4(1),



8

Provisions
briefly summa-
tised.

Kinds of
sales
the Act.

Analogous
laws.

Partition Act, 1893

3.5. Section 161) and 1(2) deal with preliminary matters. Section 1(4)
provides that the Act does not affect any local law providing for the partition
of immovable property paying revenue to Government.

Under section 2, in any suit for partition, in which a decree for partition
might have been made if the Act had not been passed, if it appears to the
Court that (a) by reason of the mature of the property to which the suit
relates or of the number of shareholders therein or of any other special circum-
stances, a division of the property cannot reasonably or conveniently be made,
and (b) Sale of the property and distribution of the proceeds would be mote
beneficial for all the shareholders, the Court may, on the request of the
shareholders interested in a moiety or upwards, direct a sale of the. property
and distribution of the proceeds. Where a request for such a sale is made
by the shareholders interested in a moiety, section 3 provides that any other
shareholder may apply for leave to buy the share or shares of the party or
(parties asking for such sale, and thereupon the Coury shall order a valuation
of the share or shares and offer to sell the same to the applicant. The section
also contains a Provision as to what happens where there is a competition
between the shareholders seeking to purchase. Detailed provisions as to bidding,
and as 7° the mode of conducting sales under sction 2, are contained in sections

ani

Section 4 deals with the right of a member of a family to purchase the
share of a stranger “suing” for partition, where the share is in respect of a
dwelling house belonging to an “undivided family”.

Section 5, which is common to both the groups of sections, deals with
the representation of parties under disability. Sections 6 and 7 have already
been referred to. Under section 8, orders for sale made by the Court under
the Act are deemed to be “decrees” within the meaning of section 2 of the
Code of Civit Procedure. Section 9 saves the power of the Court to make a
decree for pastition of a part of the property im suit and sale of the remainder
under the Act. Section 10 relates to the application of the Act to pending
suits,

3.6. It is necessary to bring out a recurrent theme of the Act—sale of the
property or of a share. There are severat kinds of sales contemplated by the Act.
Firstly, there is the sale under section 2. The sale can be ordered on the
application of sharehoMlers interested in a moiety or upwards, but the Court is
not bound to grant the application.

Next, there is the sale under section 3. If any other shareholder applies
to purchase the share or shares of the shareholders who desire a sale by
public auction under section 2, they have a right to do so. Here the sale 19
mandatory, Dutt is a sale only of the ras ule amongar: the applied
under section 2. This is not a public sale,! but only a sale amongst? the ००:

The third category of sales is that contemplated in section 4, whereurider
8 stranger purchaser (transferee) of a share can be compelled to sell his share
to a member of the family applyimg for such purchase. Here the Court is
ound to grant the application, and the sale is, thus, mandatory. The sale is
not of the entire property, but only of the share of the transferee. It is not
held by public auction, being merely a sale from the transferee to the applicant.

3.7. Besides the Partition Act, a few other enactments contain provisions
which are analogous to, or connected with the Act. Of these, the most important
is the provision in section 44 of the Transfer of Property Act* concerned with
dwelling houses, which reads—

“Where the transferee of a share of a dwelling-house belonging to an
undivided family is not a member’ of the family, nothing in this section shall
be deemed to entitle him to joint possession or other common or part
enjoyment of the house.

1. See section 3(2).
2. Hari Charan v. Fakir Chandra, (1936) 40 C.W.N. 955.
3. Section 44, Second paragraph, Traasfer of Property Act, 1882.


Scheme of the Act and Analogous Provisions

it is because of this section! of the Transfer of Property Act that section 4
of the Partition Act was enacted. We shall have occasion to consider it in
detail, later on?

3.8. Another analogous provision, based on the same principle of excluding Section 22,
strangers, is contained in section 22 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956, which Bindu Suece-
gives a right of pre-emption to co-sharers,

3.9. The same principle of giving preference to a co-sharer underlies the 0. 21, R. 88,
provision in Order 21, Rule 88 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. It C.P.C.
provides that where property sold in execution of a decree is a share of an
undivided immovable property, and two or more persons, of whom one is
a co-sharer, respectively bid the same sum for such property or for any lot,
the bid shall be deemed to be the bid of the co-sharers.3 The object of this
rule is to enable the co-sharers in an undivided immovable property to keep out
strangers, if the co-sharers so desire.* In substance, the rule has the effect of
giving the bidding co-sharer a right to pre-empt the share, if the other condi-
tions given in the rule ard satisfied. The rule thus safeguards the rights of
co-sharers in undivided immovable property.5

3.10. Finally, a Court, when allotting shares at a partition, has a general General power
power to award monetary compensation. Where a partition of land or other 0 award
property is made and the shares allotted to the parties are of unequal value, eee ion
the award of a sum of money or other compensation to the owner of the less (09०७).
valuable portion has always been regarded as within the powers of the Court.

The compensation so awarded is known as “owelty”.6

The matter has been exhaustively discussed in a judgment of the Supreme
Court.7/_ When, on petition, an owelty is awarded to a member for equalisation
of the shares on an excessive allotment of immovable property to another
wmember, such a provision of owelty ordinarily creates a lien or a charge on
the land taken under the partition’ | “Owelty” may thus be defined as the
difference which may be paid or secured between one co-parcener or co-tenant
and another for the purpose of equalising a partition.

1. See also para 2.3, supra.

2. See discussion relating to section 4, paragraphs 7.1 to 7.9, infra,

3. 0. 21, Rule 88, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

4. Dambar Singh v. Murari Lal, A.B. 1914 All. 426, 427.

5. Cf. Munna Lal v. Gopi Lal, A.LR. 1940 Nag. 337, 339.

6. Jowitt, Dictionary of English Law (1959), Vol. 2, page 1283.

7. T.S. Swaminatha v. Official Receiver of West Tanjare, A.LR. 1957 S.C. 577, 582,
Paragraphs 14 and 18.

8. T. S. Swaminatha v. Official Receiver of West Tanjore, A.1.R. 1957 S.C. 577.

9. Compare Bouvier, Law Dictionary, Vol. 2, page 2437, citing various authorities
including Coke and Viner, substantially to this effect.


Evolution of
English law.

Position in
India.

CHAPTER 4
ENGLISH LAW

4.1. Evolution of the English law relating to partition is interesting, It
was partly in the background of the position as to remedies in partition suits
as understood in common law that Indian legislative posals were formulated.
The English law seems to have evolved through the Einowing broad stages—

(@® partition (physical) the only remedy available ;
(ii) compensation made available, in addition to the above remedy ;
(iii) sale made permissible, in addition to the above remedies ;

(iv) sale not only made available, but also made compulsory, in case of dis-
agreement between the co-owners.

4.2. In India, the legal position as to the power of sale appears to have
been the same as prevailed in England before amendment of the law by the
statutes passed on the subject. The Court had no power whatsoever to direct
a sale of.a property in a partition suit! The Partition Act of 1893 for the first
time made it possible for the Court to direct @ sale in certain circumstances,
but the power conferred on the Court is a limited power, as will be evident
from a detailed examination of its provisions.

It is not necessary to encumber the body of the Report with details of
English law. These have been given in an Appendix? to this Report.

1. Gadadhar v. Janaki Nath, A.LR. 1969 Cal. 59, 63, 64.
2. See Appendix 3.

10


CHAPTER 5
POWER OF SALE : SECTIONS 1-2

5.1. We proceed now to an examination in detail of each section of the
Act.

5.2. Section 1 deals with formal or preliminary matters (short title and
extent), and needs no change.

5.3. Section 2 of the Act empowers the Court to order the sale of the
property in suit in certain cases. The section reads as under :—

“2. Power to Court to order sale instead of division in partition
suits-—Whenever in any suit for partition in which, if instituted prior to
the commencement of this Act, a decree for partition might have been
made, it appears to the Court that, by reason of the nature of the property
to which the suit relates, or of the number of the shareholders therein or
of any other special circumstance, a division off the property cannot
reasonably or conveniently be made and that a sale of the property, and
distribution of the proceeds would be more beneficial for all the share-
holders, the Court may, if it thinks fit, on the request of any such share-
holders interested individually or collectively to the extent of one moiety
or upwards, direct a sale of the property and a distribution of the
proceeds.”

The section thus requires that the application must be made by persons
holding at least a moiety in the Prope tty and the other conditions specified in
the section must also be satisfied, before sale can be ordered.

5.4. Since the requirement that there must be an application by persons
holding a moiety has, in practice, been found to be rather harsh, attempts
have from time to time been made to take the stand that the Court can order
fale even apart from the provisions of section 2, Rulings on the subject are
conflicting, and, an analysis would show that the following views have been
taken on the question:

(i) The Court can order sale of the property independently of the Act and
such a sale can be ordered not only ‘among the co-sharers but also
(to the public) by public auction,
(ii) Such a power exists to a limited extent-sale must be limited only
amongst the co-sharers.
(iii) The sale can be ordered by the Court only with the consent of all the
co-sharers. हु
(iv) No such power exists, and a sale cannot be ordered apart from
section 2, either by public auction or among the co-sharers.
This particular question hag not yet been decided by the Supreme Court,!
‘though it has recognised the power of the Court to effect partition by. such
equitable means as may be appropriate.

Case law which supports one or other of the four possible views stated
above may now be examited,

5.5. The first view, namely, that independently of the Act, the Court can
order sale by public auction, ‘is illustrated by a decision of the High Court of
Andhra Pradesh? which so held, giving the fo! flowing reasons :—

(1) The power existed under Hindu law. Certain texts of Hindu law

show that clothes and ornaments are divided by distributing the

1. Badri Narain v. Nil Ratan, AR. 1978 S.C. 845.

vp yn tig Ramaprasada Rao v. Subbaramaiah, LR. (1957) Andhra 566; A.LR. 1958 AP.
647 (Subba Rao CJ. and Ansari J), (approved on another point in Badri Narain v. Nil
Ratan, ALR. 1978 S.C, 845.

i

Sections con-
sidered.
Section 1.

Section 2
and inherent
Power of sale,

Jurisdiction to
order sale
apa rt, from

1९ Act.

First view.


12

Second view.

Subsequent
case law.

Third view-
sale with
consent,

Partition Act, 1893

proceeds after selling them,’ and that, in some cases, where joint
enjoyment or enjoyment by turns is not possible, the sale of some of
items and distribution of the proceeds between the members of the
family’ is authorised. Besides this, many texts emphasise the propo-
n species of property, such as, water, ri hi
cooked food’ female slaves ete arc indivisible, OMe % WAY» vehicles.

(2) There are several judicial decisions to the effect that independent!
the Partition Act, the Court has inherent power to refuse to divide है
property by metes and bounds and to direct its sale.

(3) Serious hardship would be caused if such a power was not recognised.
The Court would be powerless to make an equitable distribution of
the property when one or other of the properties could not be equitabl:
partitioned, or when all the parties, colluding together. create a dead.
lock. The very process of partition would be retarded.

(4) The Partition Act was designed only to meet a particular conting ency,
and did not, in any way, affect the power of the Court to make an
equitable distribution of the properties.

5.6. The second view, namely, that the Court can, even from the
Act, order sale amongst the co-sharers, scems to have been in earlier
beara’ of the ce st Court.3 The case most often cited is one decided

y Sir Asutosh Mookherjee J.,‘ where the plaintiffs suing for partition

that they might be allowed to retain exclusive powsessice: of the rice prayed
payment to the defendant of compensation (at a valuation to be made by the
Court). proportionate to the share of defendant’s property. The Jower courts
concurrently found that the property could not be conveniently partitioned, and
ordered the plaintiffs to pay to the defendant one-third of value as deter-
mined by the Commissioner,—plaintiff thereafter retaining possession. On
appeal by the defendant, the High Court held that the defendant was not bound
to transfer his share to a plaintiff at a valuation, and in the absence of a
statutory provision, the Court could not compel bim to do so, Since it was
admitted that the property could not be conveniently partitioned, the proper
course was to direct a sale of the property amongst the co-sharers and to give
the property to the highest bidder among the co-sharers.

5.7. Subsequently, however, this decision was explained’ by the same High
Court as limited to the facts ‘of the case, and not intended to lay down a
general principle of law that in a suit for partition the Court possesses a power
of sale apart from the Partition Act. In a later case,® the conclusion reached
was, that the effect of the Partition Act could not be whittled down by drawing
upon some undefined and uncertain inherent powers in the Court to direct
a sale where the invitation of the parties is merely to make a partition between
the co-sharers. It was held that a sale of the disputed property could not be
‘ordered wn among the co-sharers (there being no prayer to that effect in
the case).

A still later Calcutta decision’ re-affirms the view that the power to direct
a sale must be limited to the cases provided for in the Act.

5.8. The third view, namely, that sale can be ordered outside the Act with
the consent of the co-sharers, seems to have been taken in one Calcutta decision’
But the Calcutfa decision was overruled later.?

1 Brihaspathi, as stated by Smritichandrika VII, 41.

2. Katyayana, cited in Smritichandrika शा, 47,

3. The earlier cases are collected in Panna Lal v. Hrishikesh, UL.R. (1949) 1 Cal. 192
(5. B. Sinha, 3.).

4. Debendra Nath v. Hari Das, (1910) 15 Calcutta Weekly Notes 552,

5, Atul Chandra v. Bhusan Chandra, AIR. 1926 Cal. 1190 (Cuming and Page 7).

6. Nritva Gopal v. Pran Krishna, ALR. 1952 Cal, 893. 57 C.WN. 439 (0. N. Das

and Guha Ray JJ.). ie
7. Probhat Kumar v. Ram Mohan, AIR. 1958 Cal. 177, 178, para 9 (Mullick 19.

8. Narendra v. Inanendra, (1952) 90 Cal. LJ. 147, referred to in Gadadhar v. Janaki
Nath, (1968) 72 C.W.N. 299. पर
9, Gadadhar v. Janaki Nath, A.LR. 1969 Cal. 59, 63, 65, para 32,



Power of Sale : Sections 1-2

According to dicta in a Madras case,’ sale by consent of the parties is
outside section 2.

5.9. The fourth view, namely, that the power to order sale must be sought Fourth view.
within the four comers of the Act, has been stressed in a decision of the
Calcutta High Court.» This case holds that the intention of the Act was to prevent
4 request for sale being made on insufficient ‘grounds or from improper
motives, and to safeguard the rights of thé co-sharers in joint properties by
conferring on such co-sharers a right of pre-emption and sale limited to the
co-sharers themselves,

Re any Geen, was made in the judgment to the speech of Dr Rash Views of
ose who, while introducing the Bill? made the following Dr.
observations :— 8 Behary Ghose,

oe . but the strong attachment of any countrymen to landed
property, lly when it is ancestral, should make us extremely cautious
वा replacing in any particular case the usual remedy of an equal partition
by a sale of the property and a division of the proceeds. We cannot
therefore proceed too warily, and accordingly the power with which it is
Proposed to invest the Court is only given subject to very stringent condi-
tions and only to the extent necessary to meet the acknowledged evil.”

It was also observed in the judgment that if the Court had power to dircct
a sale, there would have been no necessity for enacting the Act of 1893.
Primarily. a co-sharer, in a suit for partition, has a right to have his undivided
share in the property divided into specific gotment, and not to the money
value of his share. A partition suit is merely an invitation to the Court to
convert the joint possession into possession in severalty of the different portions
in accordance with the shares. At common law, there was no power to direct
a sale in lieu of partition, Even in the Hindu law, the power of sale was
extremely limited,* and same was the position in Muslim law.’ it was stated,

5.11. This wide disparity in judicial opinion leads to uncertainty. It has Need for
arisen primarily because there has been felt a desire to do substantial justice, reforms for
but the language of section 2 comes in the way, so that Courts not inclined to sous नी
stretch the language take a narrow view, while others take a wide view.

The present narrow scope of section 2 causes hardship in several cases.
Where persons holding a moiety do not make the required application under the
section, the Court becomes helpless in the matter. This helplessness has driven
some of the High Courts to seeking a power to order sale outside the four
corners of the Act, while other High Courts regard themselves as bound by the

provisions of the Act.

5.12, Let us take a few concrete situations, A situation outside section Concrete
2 would arise— ‘situations,
(i) where the parties sue for partition, but do not apply for sale, through
lethargy;

Gi) where the parties sue for partition, but request that the sale should
be held only among the co-sharers,7

(ii) where the court is convinced that the Property catnot be conveniently
or equitably partitioned, but the parties create a deadlock by not
applying for sale, thus retarding the very process of partition:8

1. Subbamma v. Veerayya, A.I.R. 1932 Mad. 15, 17.
2. Nritya Gopal v. Pran Krishna, ALR. 1952 Cal. 893; 57 C.W.N. 439 (0. N. Das
and Guha Ray JJ.)

3. Dr. Rash Behary Ghose: Speech on Introduction of the Partition Bill, Fort St,
George Gazette, dated 12th April, 1892.

4. Brihaspati’s text, Digest’ V, 366, cited.

5. Hedaya, Book 39, Chapter 3, cited.

6. Paragraphs 5.5 to 5.10, supra.

7. Cf, Ram Prasad v. Mukandi, A.I.R. 1929 All. 443.

8. Cf. Ramaprasada Rao v. Subbaramaiah, AIR. 1958 AP. 647, 651, para, 22:
3-317 LAD/ND/81


English Act.

History(—)
Reasons for
existing
natrow scope
of section 2.

Hardships
revealed in
practical
working.

Partition Act, 1893

(iv) where some of the parties desire a sale, but their number does not
make up the requisite moiety.

In all these situations, hardship results if a narrow view is taken.

_ 5.13 It may be noted that the corresponding provisions of the 1868 Act
in England were wider, because, apart from section 4 of that Act (which
corresponds to section 2 of the Indian Act), there were two other cases dealt
with in sections 3 and 5 of the English Act, whereunder partition could be
ordered.'. A request of any party interested was enough to bring those
sections into play, ‘and it was not necessary that parties holding a moiety should
apply-

5.14. We have had a look at the history of the Act in order to find out
the reason for the existing narrow scope of section 2. It appears that this
narrow scope was proposed by the framers of the Act for the following .

reasons? :—

“But having regard to the strong attachment of the people of this
country to their landed possession, it is proposed to make the consent of
the parties interested at least to the extent of a moiety in the property,
a condition precedent to the exercise by the court of this new power.”

5.15. There is, no doubt, some force in this reasoning. But the practi-
cal working of the Act has brought out scrious hardships resulting from a
strict application of its provisions, Lethargy or indifference on the part of
parties interested in a moiety (or want -of agreement amongst them) is, as the
law now stands, enough to take the case outside the scope of the Act and to
render the Court helpless as stated above. There jis, therefore, sufficient
justification for widening the scope of section 2 in this respect.

5.16. The hardship’ under section 2 discussed above obviously calls for
amendment of the law. In our opinion, having regard to the situations® that
‘have arisen in the various decided cases in India.’ it is: desirable to keep
the provision wide so as to empower the Court to act suo motu. On the
existing section, such a situation would not be covered,’ unless its language
is unduly stretched. Parties sometimes avoid taking the position that the parti-
tion is impossible or extremely inconvent, and pray only for partition by metes
and bounds; but the Court itself finds it difficult to divide the joint property
info separate specific allotments? The Court then feels helpless. This is cer-
tainly a situation that must be avoided. ‘The proper course would, therefore
be 10 give to the Court a power as above.

5.17. Our recommendation in this context is twofold :—

@ In the first place any shareholder should have a right to demand sale
if the other conditions are satisfied. The law should not (as at pre-
sent) insist on the application of shareholders of at least 2 moiety. Of
course, the other conditions given in the section must be satisfied.
Once that is established, any shareholder should have the right to
demand sale.

(ii) Secondly, a discretion should be given to the Court to order a sale of
the property in a partition suit, even of its own motion, where, because
of the nature of the property or other considerations already men-
tioned in the section, a partition would not be convenient and a sale
would be more beneficial.

1. See Appendix 1. .
2 Statement of Objects and Reasons, Bill No. VII of 1892, Gazette of India, 1892,

Part V, page 46.
3, Statement of Objects and Reasons, Bill No. VINE of 1892, Gazette of India, 1892,

Part V, page 46.
4, Para 5.14, supra.
5. See para 5.15, supra.
6. See paragraphs 5.6 to 5.10, supra.
7. Cf, the facts in Ramaprasada Rao v. Subbaramiah, A.A. 1958 A.P. 647.
8. Probhat Kumar v. Ram Mohan, ALR. 1958 Cal. 177, para. 6.
9. For suggested re-draft, see para 520, infra.

i |


Power of Sale : Sections 1-2

Reasons, however, must be recorded for such an order! passed by the Court
of its own motion.

5.18. This takes care of the major problem created by section 2, We may Section 2 and
note that a partition of the entire property in suit, and then the allotment of mode of sale,
a portion thereof to some of the parties and sale of that portion, is not autho-
tised? by section 2 or by section 9. The reason for the narrow scope of the
Act on this point is obvious. If the whole property is not sold and only a
part of a house or a part of land is sold, then the part to be sold would not fetch
a reasonable price and this would cause hardship to the sharers to whom it has
been notionally allotted. The section is attracted in every case where a division
of the property between all the sharers cannot reasonably or conveniently be
made, Otherwise, the section would lose its application in most cases, as it
‘would always be possible to allot a property or portion thereof to one of the
co-sharers.3

5.19. We may now refer to one matter on which the section is silent. Sale amongst
Where a plaintiff applies to the Court that a sale may be held, and that who- °°
ever among the co-sharers offers the highest bid might be given the house (the
house being incapable of partition), and the parties are agreed that no division
can be made, the Court can, according to case law,‘ direct the sale to be
held among the plaintiff and the defendants, and the property to be given 10
the highest bidder above the valuation fixed by the Court. In terms, however,
the section does not expressly authorise a sale among co-sharers.’? We propose
to consider the problem arising from this position at the appropriate place’
under section 7.

5.20. We have also certain comments to offer as to the opening words of Opening works
section 2 which read— to be revised.

“In any suit for partition in which, if instituted prior to the commence-
ment of this Act, a decree for partition might have been made.” The wording
is not very happy. Presumably, the object underlying these words seems to
be this. The legislature was legislating only for cases where a right to parti-
tion is available under the general law. This pre-supposes that certain condi-
tions should be satisfied. For example, there must be concurrent interests in
the property in dispute, and the property must not, by reason of any statutory
or other legal prohibition, be impartible.

In other words, if by the general law, there is no right to claim partition,
then a party cannot invoke the provisions of the Act as to sale. This seems to
be the dominant idea. But this intention is expressed in words which appear
to be somewhat confusing. The reader is mentally taken back to the period
before the passing of the Act and gets the impression—inaccurate though it
may be—that he is expected to conduct research into the law of partition as
it existed in 1893, Such, however, could not be the intention. The dominant
idea {as explained above) is that there must be a right to claim partition. This
idea could, and should, be expressed in better language. Accordingly, we would
recommend that the portion of section 2 in question should be suitably revised.

The re-draft of section 2 which follows? later will indicate concretely what
we have in mind.

5.21. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section
should be revised as under :—

2 Section 2 to
be revised.

Revised section 2

“2, Power to Court to order sale instead of division in partition suits- -
Whenever in any suit for partition in| which the Court is entitled to pass
a decree for partition, it appears to the Court that—

(a) by reason of the nature of the property to which the suit relates,

or of the number of the shareholders therein or of any other

1. For suggested re-draft, see para 5.20, infra.

2. Jadunath v. Haran Chandra, 1.L.R. 49 Cal. 1043; ALR. 1923 Cal. 221.

3. Abdulla Haji v. Kunamina, A..R. 1961 Kerala 201, 202, para 3.

4. Debendra Nath v. Hari Das, (1911) 7 LC. 844, discussed in Mohit Krishna v-
Pranab Chandra, A.1.R. 1930 Cal. 616.

5. Ram Prasad v. Mukandi, A.I.R. 1929 All. 443.

6. Mohit Krishna v. Pranab Chandra, A..R. 1930 Cal. 616, 619 (S. K. Ghosh J.).

7. Ram Gopal v. Bhikani, A..R. 1964 Raj. 229.

8. See para 8.7, infra.

9. See para 5.21, infra.



16 Partition Act, 1893

special circumstance, a division of the property cannot reasonably
or conveniently be made, and

(b) a sale of the property and distribution of the proceeds would be
more beneficial for all the shareholders,

the Court—

“@ Shall, on the request of any such shareholder, direct a sale of the
property and a distribution of the proceeds;

Gi) may, even if no such request has been made, if it thinks fit in the
interests of justice, for reasons to be recorded, direct such sale and
distribution.”


CHAPTER 6

SALE TO SHAREHOLDER : SECTION 3
व, Shareholders entitled to apply for sate.

“ 6.1. We now Proceed to section 3, which has been judicially described as Section 3—
a कम of trouble’ 1 The serious anomaly brought about by section 3(1), A source of
which we shall discuss presently,? seems to justify this description, trouble.

_ 6.2, The first question to be considered concerns section 3(1), which, so far The anomah
as is relevant to the point to be considered, provides that where a request is of favouring
made to the Court to direct a sale under section 2, and “...... any other share. small share-
holder applies for leave to buy at a valuation the share or shares of the party holders.
or parties asking for a sale, the Court shall order a valuation... > and offer
to sell the same to such shareholder”.

6.3. There is a controversy related to the rights of shareholders who have Controversy
applied under section 2. This controversy arises because of the words “any 28 [© rights
other shareholder”. Two views exist on the scope of section 3(1) in this regard. Pe des

According to the Madras? and Calcutta‘ view, section 3 is confined to cases
where leave to buy is applied for by any other shareholder, Its provisions can-
not therefore be availed of by the very shareholders who applied under section
2 Ge. aig shareholders owning one half share in the property, as the section
now stands),

According, however, to the Punjab High 00005 the shareholders who
applied under section 2 can also apply under section 3.

_ _ 64. It seems to us that the narrower view creates an anomaly, as its effect Anomaly

is practically to favour the smaller shareholder at the expenses of the larger. caused by |
‘The fact that a person owns a large share is, under this view, made a dis- "ower view
jability, precluding him from offering to buy the interest of the party owning

the smaller share. As has been observed by the Madras High Courté (even

though it felt constrained to adopt the narrower view on a construction of the

section), if A owns 9/10th and 8 1/10th of an item, A is under a disability

although, if there are two persons, and one is to be favoured, then A would

have a much better claim than B.

The Calcutta High Court (though taking the narrower view) has also
observed’ that it was significant that section 3 favoured the smaller shareholder
fat the expense of the larger, However, it was not for the Court to enter into
a discussion as to the reasonableness or otherwise of a “clear and ditect”
provision made by the legislature by which one particular party is given an
advantage over the other.

6.5. The hardship caused by a narrow construction of section 3(1) may be Lllustrative
illustrated by taking the facts of an actual case from Calcutta® A holds a fase a8 {0
14 anna share in a tank, and B holds a 2 anna share. If A applies for sale sulting from
under section 2, then B can purchase A’s share under section 3. But A cannot, narrower view

1. Subbamma v. Veerayya, A.1.R. 1932 Mad. 15, 16.
2. Paragraphs 6.2 to 6.7, infra,
3. Angamuthu Muddliar v. Ratna Mudaliar, हरे, 1925 Mad. 1234,
4, (a) Atul Chandra v. Bhushan Chandra, A.1.R. 1926 Cal. 1190.
(b) Manik Lal v. Pulin Behari, AJR, 1950 Cal. 431, 432, 433.
5. Seth Chiranji Lal v, Hardwari Lal, (1964) LL.R, 2 Punjab 321, 328 (P. C. Pandit 1).
6. Subbamma vy. Veerayya, A.1.R. 1932 Mad. 15, 16, bottom (Venkatasubba Rao J.).
7. Manik Lal v, Pulin Behari, A.L.R. 1950 Cal. 431, para 8 and 433, para 13 (R. P.
Mookerji J.).
8 Atul Chandra v. Bhushan Chandra, ALR. 1926 Cal. 1190.

17


1$

Anomaly
created by
section 3.

Recommends:
10 regare
xin

Sale of
property.

Section 3

and tion
of ine for
a

Partition Act, 1893

in such proceedings, offer to purchase B’s share, The Court cattnot even direct
a sale of the property amon; ng the co-sharers.! TI i ०
he is holding a very large & must either— he result is that A, even though
(3) tolerate the joint posseSsion of B (how it nient it
Until B appliss Tor sale, ar (however inconver it may be),
(b) apply under r ceotion 2 and allow the property to go out off his hands,
since, accor to the narrower view, he cannot apply under section 3.

This, in effect, means that the largest co-share: peaceful
efiective enjoyment of his share. me Sharer cannot have and

6.6. As already pointed out above,? this is a serious anomaly in section 3.
The anomaly should be removed by amending section 3(1) so as to ebable any
co-sheren to apply under that sub-section. The hardship caused by section 3
has been ref to in many judicial decisions. Because of the atiomalies to
which we have referred above, the very scheme of section 3 has been crithcised
in 8 Calcutta case.5 We ca taken due note of this criticism. The chatiges,
which we are recommen in seqtion 3 will, we hope, conduce to furthering
the interests of co-sharers, by removing those provisions which constitute serious

ies,

6.7. Our recommendation, then, is to revise section 3(1) as under: —

“(i) If, in any ease in which the Court directs a sale under section 2,
ANY... shareholder applies for leave to buy at a valuation the share or
stiares of any other patty or parties, the court may order a valuation of the
share or shares inl such nianner as it may think fit, and offer to sell the same to
such shareholder at the price so. ascertained, and may give all necessary
ahd proper ions in this behalf, amd where such applications are made
in respect of the shares of different or opposing parties, the Coutt may make
a order finder thiy subsection in respect of such of those shares as it may

em just.”

IL Sale of the property.

6.8. It should also be provided that if, in any case in which the Court
directs a sale under section 2, any shareholder applies for leave to buy at a
valuation the property to which the suit relates, the Court may order a valuation
of the property in such manner as it may think fit and offer to sell the property
to such shareholder at the price so ascertained and may give all necessary and
proper directions, in that bebalf, A new sub-section (1A) should be inserted
in section 3 on the subject as umder:—

“3(1A). If, in any case in which the Court directs a sale under section
2, any shareholder applies for leave to buy at a valuation the property to
which the suit relates, the Court may order a valuation of the property in
such manner as it may ghink fit and offer to sell the same to such shareholder
at the price so ascertained and may give all necessary and proper directions
in that behalf.”

Ill. Time limit for application for sate

6.9. We now come to ०16 point which also arises out of section 3(1). The
right of a party to purchase the shares of the co-sharers who had made an
application under section 2 is to be exercised within a particular time. Section.
xD provides that if, in any case in which the Count is requested to direct a sale,
any other share-holder applies for leave to buy, the Court shall order a valuation
of the shares and offer to sell the same. Controversy exists as to the exact
point of time at which the application under section 36) should be made.
\Should the application be made before the sale is ordered, or can it be made
before the sale is actually held? ‘There is a conflict of decisions on the subject.

. Atul Chandra v. Bhushan Chandra, AIR, 1926 Cal 1190,
Para 6.4, supra. .
Original suit No. 750 of 1919 (Madras) referred to in Subbamma v. Veerayya.
. 1932 Mad. 15, 16.
Ram Prasad v. Mukandi, ALR. 1929 All, 443,
. Nitish Chandra v. Promod Kumar, A.LR.. 1953 Cal. 18, 20, para 22 (DB) (per
R. P. Mookerjes J.). - wooed as ba tt
6. Soe ta}ra,

Al

we Beye


Sale to Shareholder : Section 3

6.10. According to the narrower view (represented by an eatly Madras Conflict of
case), the application. must be made before the sale was ordered under scotion Views

2; once a final order is made as between the parties for sale under section 2, no
order can be made under section 3.

According to a contrary view, such an application can be made at any time
before the sale is actually held under section 2.

The wider view has been taken in—
@ Bombay,?

Gi) Calcutta?

iii) Madras (later case)’ and

(iv) Punjab.

6.11. According to Bombay view,® for example, the terminus a@ quo Bombay view.

for making an application under section 3 arises after an application requesting
the Court to direct a sale is made under section 2. The confirmation of the
sale would be the last point of time before which an application could be made
under section 3, However, the Court must be circumspect in granting the
request under section 3, because once a sale is ordered, equities arise in favour
of third parties.

It has also been pointed out in Calcutta? that section 3 does nor contain
any restrictive words such as “before the Court makes an order under section 2”.

6.12. Having regard to this conflict of decisions, the question to be consi- Practical
dered is—what is the direction in which the law should be amended? It appears aspects

to us that from the practical point of view, there is much to be said for incor-
porating the wider construction,7-8 In the earlier Madras case,? which takes
the narrower view,' it has been stated that unless the sections are construed in
the narrower mater, there would be much difficulty in applying them, because
the sale would be by public auction when anybody might bid for the property
“unless the Court expressly confines it to the parties only”. But, with great
respect, it is not easy to understand how this should cause any serious difficulty.
If an application is made under section 3 before the property is sold, naturally
the sale would be stopped. Small inconvenience might be caused to the pros-
‘pective bidders, but no serious difficulty seems to be likely to arise from 8
wider construction of section 3(1).

6.13. In fact, it is the narrower view that might cause a difficulty, The Difficulty,
Th was pointed out in that ०0४०:

case that if a plaintiff contests the title of the defendants or of some of them, view,

difficulty is illustrated in an earlier Calcutta case.

then, until the question of title is decided in the preliminary decree, the defen-
dant cannot avail himself of the right given by section 3, even though the plain-
tiff himself might have suggested a sale of the property.

1. Angmuthu v. Ratna, LR. 48 Mad, 920; ALR. 1925 Mad. 1234 (Kumaraswami
Sastri & ©, Krishnan JJ.).

2. Teherbhai Abdulalli v. Nagindas, A..R. 1979 Bom. 41 (Feb.).
3. (a) Nitish Chandra v. Promod Kumar, A..R, 1953 Cal. 18, 19, 20, paragraphs 12
and 19—22,

(b) Maniklal v. Pulin Behari, ALR, 1950 Cal. 431.
4. Jayarama Chettiar v. Annamalai Chettiar, (1966) 1.L.R. 2 Mad. $30.
5. Seth Chiranji Lal v. Hardwari Lal, (1964) LL.R. 2 Punjab 321 (P. C. Pandit J.).

6. Teheribhai Abdulalli v. Nagindas Gokuldas Saraf, A.LR. .
(February). al lulalli v. Nagindas Gokuldas Saraf, A.LR. 1979 Bom. 41, 43, para 12

7. Nitish Chandra v. Promod Kumar, A.LR. 1953 Cal. 18.

8, Para 6.10, supra,

9. Angamuthu v. Ratna, L.L.R. 48 Mad. 920; A.LR. 1925 Mad. 1234, 1235.

10. Para 6.9, supra.

वा, Manik Lal v. Pulin Behari, ALR. 1950 Cal. 431, 433, para 16 (R, P. Mookerjec 73.

as


20

Section 3—
Recommenda-
tion as to
time.

Section 3(2)
— Amendment

secommended.

Partition Act, 1893

6.14. In the light of what we have stated above,’ we would recommend an
amendment of section ३ to iscorporate the wider view by edding an Explanation
as under:—

“Explandtion.—An application wider sub-section (1) or under sub-
section (1A) may be made at any time before the sale is actually held.”

IV. Consequential amendment of section 3(2)
6.15. An amendment of section 3(2) is needed cotsequentia} on the
amendment proposed in section 3(1) and the proposed insertion of section 3(1A).
We therefore recommend that section 3(2) should be revised as under: —

“(2) If two or more shareholders severally apply under sub-section (1)
or subasection (1A) for leave to buy the same share or shares or for leave
to buy the property, as the case may be, the Court shall order a sale of
the share or shares, or of the property, as the case may be, to the shareholder
who offers 70 pay the highest price above the valuation made by the Court.”

1. Para 6.13, supa.


CHAPTER 7
SHARE OF DWELLING HOUS:

I. Introductory

_ 7.1. We propose to consider in this Chapter section 4 of the Act, The Section 4—
section, so far as is material, provides that where a share of a dwelling house Principle of.
belonging to an undivided family has been transferred to a person who is not a
member of such family and such transferee “sues” for partition, the Court shall,
if any member, being a shareholder, undertakes to buy the share of such trans-
feree, make a valuation of the share of the transferee and direct its sale to such
shareholders,

: SECTION 4

7.2. This section supplements the provisions of section 44, second paragraph Sectiou 44,
of the Transfer of Property Act, which reads as follows :—!-? Transfer of

“Where the transferee of a share of a dwelling-house belonging to an Property Act
undivided family is not a member of the family, nothing in this section shall
be deemed to entitle him to joint possession or other common or part
enjoyment of the house.”

Section 44 of that Act having thus provided that the stranger purchaser is
Not entitled to joint possession or other common or part enjoyment, section 4
of the Partition Act takes the next step, and enables the members of the family
to buy out the outsider, It can, therefore, be said, that section 4 takes up the
law from the point at which section 44 of the Transfer of Property Act has
left it.

7.3. The principle of section 44, second paragraph, Transfer of Property Act Principle

can be deduced from the judgment of Westropp C.J. in a Bombay case?-— underlying
“We deem it a far safe practice and less likely to lead to serious .

breaches of peace, to leave a purchaser to a suit for partition, than to place
him by force in joint possession with the members of a Hindu family, who
may be not only of a different caste from his‘own, but also different in race
and religion.”

7.4. Section 4 of the Partition Act is also based जा the same principle that Section 4
forms the justification for section 44, Transfer of Property Act. As the two analogous to
provisions are supplementary io each other, most Courts have tried to ensure Taneler Of
that they are construed in harmony with each other.4 However, the extent to property Act.
which, in order to achieve this harmony, section 4 can be given a wide interpre-
tation, has become the subject matter of controversy, to which we shall revert

later.5 धर wee
7.5. Before we discuss the points that arise on section 4, we may -mention Section 4—
that its constitutional validity was challenged in the Madras High Court on the Constitutional
ground that it was “illegal discrimination” to enable the member of the family validity ©
10 buy out the transferee, while denying that right to the transferee.6

The argument did not succeed,

II. Meaning of various expressions see 4
. : * तु « i Section 4—

7.6. Various expressions used in section 4, such as ‘dwelling house”, See Aa
“undivided family” and “member of such family”, have come up for interpreta- of लए
tion in several decisions of the various High Courts, and Courts have, in general, house”.

1. Section 4, Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (4 of 1882).

2. See also Chapter 2, supra. हु

3. Balaji v. Ganesh, (1881) ILL.R. 5 Bom. 499, 504 (Westropp C. J.).

4. Cf. Buto Krishna v, Akhoy Kumar, AJR, 1950 Cal. 111. 113, para 11. (RP.
Mookerjee and P. N. Mitra JJ.).

5, See paragraphs 7.12 to 7.33, infra.

6. Krishna Pillai v. Perukutty Ammal, A.LR. 1952 Mad. 33, 34, para 6 (Panchapakesa

Ayyar 1)-
al
A—317 LAD/ND/81


22

Case law

‘on various
expressions—
“undivided”—

Meaning of
“family”.

Partition Act, 1893

placed a wide and liberal construction on these expressions, keeping in vie
object underlying section 4, namely, to provide for peaceable cajoyment of ine
property and to secure privacy.! For example, it has been held that a “dwelling
house” does not cease to be so merely because of a temporary suspension
occupation or absence of the co-sharers, provided the members are likely to
return to its occupation.? Continuous residence of the member is not necessary.3

Then, the term “house” has also been liberally interpreted, so as to include
the appurtenant lands or premises which are necessary for its proper occupation
or enjoyment.4-5

7.7. As regards the requirement connoted by the word “undivided”, as
occurring in section 4, it has been held,°-® that it is not confined to a joint Hindu
family, or even to any joint family but simply connotes that there is a family
the members whereof have not divided their property? The emphasis is on the
undivided character of the house." Accordingly, a Muslim widow who, though
re-married long ago, continued to live with the second husband in the family
house, has been held entitled to the benefit of the section."!

The fact that all other property has been partitioned, would also not take
away the operation of the section, if the family is still undivided in relation to
the dwelling House,

7.8. The term “family” as occurring in section 4 has been widely construed,!2
so as to cover cases of Hindu sisters'3 or Muslim sisters!4 living together and even
a son-in-law whotS frequently comes and stays with the father-in-law,

As observed by Kindersley V. C.,!6 the word “family” is, in itself, a word
of most loose and flexible description. It has also been observed'? that “family
is a popular and not a technical expression and its meaning is often controlled
by the context”.

Indeed, in a still later case,!8 the mafter was put perhaps in a more general
form:

“The term family embraces a collective body of petsons living together
in one house or within the curtilage. In legal phrase this is the geteric des-
cription of a ‘family’, It embraces a household comprised of parents “or
children or other relatives or domestic servants, in short, every collective
body of persons living together within the same curtilage, subsisting in
common, and directing their attention to a common object, the promotion

1. Dulal Chandra v. Costhabehari, AX.R. 1953 Cal. 259 (Chakravarti 0. J. and
G. N. Das 1).
2. Kalipada v. Tulsidas, A..R. 1960 Cal. 467.
1 » Sushila v. J. B, Baral, A.LR. 1956 Orissa 56 (case of Christians) (reviews case
jaw).
4. Nilkamal v. Makakshy Charan, AIR, 1928 Cal. 539, 542.
5. Khirode Chandra v. Sarodd Prasad, (1910) 12 Cal. LJ. 525; 7 1.6. 436
(Mukherji, 1).
* 6, Babulal v. Hulla Mollah, A.R, 1938 Pat. 13.
7. Bai Fatima v. Gulamnabi, A.R. 1936 Bom. 197,
8. Mt. Gangi v. Atma Ram, ALR. 1936 Lah, 291,
9. Sultan Begum y. Debi Prasad, (1908) 1.L.R. 30 All. 324 (F.B).
10. Buto Krishna v. Akhoy Kumar, A.LR. 1950 Cal, 111.
11. Shafina Begum v. Mt. Kifita, AIR. 1939 All, 640 (Collister 7).
12. Khirode Chandra v. Saroda Prasad, (1910) 7 LC. 436 (Autosh Mukerjee J.).
13. Krishna Pillai v. Perukutty, AIR. 1952 Mad. 33.
P, 14. 0 Hussain v. Toorab Hussain, AJR. 1958 Pat. 232 (Ramaswami C.J. and
rasad J.).
15. Ahmad Khan v. S. Maijar, AR, 1971 Orissa 284 (8. K, Patra & R. N. Misra JJ.).
16. Green v. Marsden, (1853) 1 Drew 646, 651; 61 ER. 598.
17. Burt ५. Hellar, (1872) 14 Eq. 160.

icon v. Cochran, (1869) 31 Texas 677, cited in Salim Ullah y, Bacir Ullah, ALR,

18. Wil
1948 All. 142, 143.


Share of Dwelling House : Section 4

of their mutual interests and social happiness, This is the most popular
acceptation of the word.”

7.9. The matter came up for detailed consideration in a Calcutta case.' Calcutta case,
Asutosh Mookerjee J. summed up his own view in these terms: as to “family”.

“The word ‘family’ as used in the Partition Act, ought to be given a
liberal and comprehensive meaning and it itcludes a group of persons related
in blood, who live in one house or under one head or management.”

The principle underlying the section and the authorities, both English and
Indian, appear to be to maintain the integrity of a body of people knit together
by the tie of common residence, The advent of a stranger is bound to lead to
disruption.?

- In an Allahabad case, 3Sir John Staley, CJ., delivering the judgment of
the High Court, observed: . .
“(a) The words ‘undivided family’ as used in this section appears to
be borrowed from section 44, T. P. Act.
{b) The words ‘undivided family must be taken to mean ‘undivided
qua the dwelling house in question, and to be a family which own the house
but has not divided it’.”

7.10. A good summary of the effect of the various decisions regarding summary of

section 4 is contained in a Calcutta ruling as follows+:— decisions,
“These decisions lay down that the word ‘family’ as used in the sec-
tion ought to be given a liberal and comprehemsive meaning and it m-

cludes a group of persons related in blood, who live in ‘one ho use under
one head or management; that it is not restricted to a body of persons
who can trace their descent from a common ancestor; but it is not neces-
sary for the members to constitute an undivided family that they should
constantly reside in the “dwelling house, nor is it necessary that they
should be joint in mess; that it is sufficient if the members of the family
are undivided qua the dwelling house which they own; that it is the owner-.
ship of the dwelling house and not its actual occupation which brings the
operation of the section into play: and that the object of the section is
to prevent a transferee of a member of a family who is an outsider from
forcing his way into a dwelling house in which other members of his family
have a right to live.”

7.11, It may be noted that section 4 stands apart from the group com- Section 4
prising sections 2, 3 and 6. In the case of section 4, one of the parties must available only
be a stranger transferee. In the case of the other sections, one of the parties against stran-
may, or may not, be a stranger.) a

_ With these preliminary observations, we proceed to a consideration of the
points arising on the section.

IIL Sult against stranger purchaser

ti 7.12, The most important question to be considered with reference to sec- Section (4)1
ion 4(1) is whether the section is attracted when the suit for partition is brought 80d the | ex-
not by the stranger purchaser, but by a member of the family against the pression ‘sues
stranger purchaser. The Section. uses the expression “and such transferee sues tion
for partition”, which, if taken literally, would be confined to cases where the
stranger purchaser is a plaintiff in the partition action, Controversy has arisen
as to the proper construction of the section. While many High Courts have
construed the section widely, so as to extend it even to cases where the stranger
purchaser figures as a defedang in a suit for partition,’ other decisions take
& contrary view. The controversy was already acute enough in 1955, when

1. Kshirode Chandra v. Saroda Prasad, 12 CLJ. 523.

2. Salim Ullah v. Fagir Ullah, AIR. 1948 All, 142, 143,

3. Sultan Begum vy. Debi Prasad, (1908) LL.R. 30 All. 324, 327, 328 (FB).

4. Nilkamal y. Kamakshya Charan, ALR. 1928 Cal. 539, 541 (M. N. Mukerji, 7).

5. Subbamma v. Veerayya, ALR. 1932 Mad, 15, 16.

6. See para 7.16, infra. -


Views of
three High
Courts refered
to by way of
illustration.

Three inter-
pretations of
section 461).

First view—
the narrower
one.

Second view—

~ every party

a plaintiff.

Partition Act, 1893

the Calcutta High Court had occasion to review the cases on the subject.! Sub-
sequent decisions have even intensified the controversy. The conflict of deci-
sions on the question now requires serious consideration.

7.13. We shall, in due course, give an analysis? of all the important rulings.
However, by way of illustrating nature of the controversy, we would, at
this stage, refer to the views of three High Courts.—.

(i) Two decisions of the Bombay High Court}-4 take a narrow view,
holding that section 4 applies only where the transferee is a plaintiff claim-
ing partition or separate possession.

(ii) A Full Bench decision of the Allahabad High Court,5 while fol-
lowing the Bombay view, indicates that the Court would be prepared to
extend the benefit of section 4 to a case where the transferee, though
not the plaintiff, makes a claim for partition. हे

(iii) The Calcutta High Court® takes a wide view, holding that the
transferee defendant need not even have made a claim for partition.

7.14, Thus, three interpretations of section 41) seem to be prevailing’7—

(i) The section applies only where the transferee is the plaintiff and
sues for partition. This is the narrower view.

(ii) The section applies cither where the transferee sues for partition, or
where a member sues for partition and the transferee makes a claim
for allotment of his share. This is the intermediate view.

(ii) The section applies even where the transferee is a defendant, irres-
pective of whether he applies for allotment of his share or not, This
is the wider view. -

1.15. The first view® is based on the language of the section as interpreted
strictly. The Bombay decisions? on the subject represent this view.

7.16. The second view!? is based on the principle that in a partition suit .
every party is a plaintiff as well as a defendant, and this dual capacily arises
from the very nature of the partition proceedings, wherein each party is
entitled to partition or a separate allotment. It is also urged in support of
this interpretation that it promotes the object of the statute, namely, to pre-
vent the instrusion of strangers into the dwelling house 7-14

In an Allahabad case,!5 it was held that ifa defendant transferee in a
suit for partition claimed a shate in the dwelling house, he can be treated as
a “plaintiff” under section 4. In a later Full Bench ०88०० also, it’ appears
to have been prepared to go to this extent. However, in that case there was
no such prayer by the stranger purchaser.

1. Haradhone Haldar v. Usha Charan Karmakar, ALR. 1955 Cal. 292, 294, para-
graphs 11 and 12 (reviews case law).
. Para 7.18, infra.
. Balshet v. Miran Saheb, (1899) LL.R. 23 Bom. 77.
Khangerao v. Balkrishna, ALR. 1922 Bom. 121.
Sakhawat Ali v. Ali Hussain, AJR, 1957 All. 356, 358, para 12 (F.B.).
Haradhone v. Usha Charan, AAR. 1955 Cal, 292 (review cases).
|. For an analysis of case law, see para 7.18, infra.
. Para 7.14(i), infra.
9, Para 7.13, supra.
10. Pard 7-14(ii), supra, asad, ALR. 1941 Pat. 4
. Sheodhar १. Kishun Pi , ALR. at. 4.
2 Je te Thakur v. Dina Bandhu, (1948) LL.R. Cal. 248, ALR. 1947 Cal. 426
(Das J).
hhama De v. Jatindra, A..R. 1929 Cal. 269.
i aan Me Lahana Bai, (1937) LL.R. No 0 Ae 1937 Nag. 4.
= Baksh v. Nizamuddin, AJR. 1956 , . €
6 vsakhawat Ali v. Ali Hussain, AIR. 1957 All. 356, 358, para 12 ',8)--5८6
para 7.11, supra,

SA AAR


Share of Dwelling House : Section 4

‘The Madras High Court, in an earlier case,! took the view that section
4 does not apply where the transferee is a defendant, at least where he has
not made aay prayer for specific allotment. Later, however, that High Court
has taken a different view, applying the section where the transferee (though
a defendant) claims partition? This is the second and intermediate view.

7.17. The third and widest view is represented by a Calcutta case. Third view---
The High Court not only held the section to be applicable even where the the widest
transferce figures as a defendant, but also observed that the presence or
~ absence of the additional factor, namely, that the defendant transferee had
applied for allotment (of a specific share), did not make any real difference
In the opinion of the Court, the basic reason behind some ‘of the decisions
which took the wider view was, that the words “to sue” signified not only
“to prosecute”, but also “to defend”—of course, in the light of the peculiar
nature of a partition suit. :

7.18. The following analysis of cases on the subjects High Court-wise, Analvsis of

may be helpful for giving an idea of the position at a glance :— es Hist

1. Sakhawat Ali v. Ali Hussain, ALR. 1957 All, 356, Para 13,
(narrower view) (with dicta favouring the intermediate view) (5९९
qiggussion of this case in Ramaswami v. Subamma, A.I.R. 1967 Mad.

, 162).

2. Khanderao v. Balkrishna, A.LR. 1922 Bom. 121 (narrower view).

3. Satyabhama v. Jatindra Mohan, A..R. 1929 Cal: 269, 271 (Sahrawardy
& Jack JJ.) (intermediate or wider view) (See discussion of this
case in Alekha v. Sagabandhu, A.LR. 1971 Orissa 127, 131, para 8).

4. Haradhone v. Usha Charan Karmakar, AIR. 1955 Cal, 292, 294,
para 13 (P. N. Mookerjee J.) (wider view).

3. Gulam Rasool v. Deceased Dulhanbai, widow of Sardarkhan by his
heir Rasulkhan_and others, Appeal from Order No. 3 of 1978 decided
by the High Court on 30-8-1979/ 7-10-1979 (Gujarat High Court)
(wider view).

6. B. Ramayya v, Venkatasubbarao, A.1.R. 1950 Mad, 214 (narrower view).

7. Ramaswami v. Subramania, ALR. 1967 Mad. 156, 158, 160, 162,
paragraphs 6 and 16 (Natesan J.) (intermediate view).

8. Laxman v. Mt, Lahana Bai, A.L.R. 1937 Nag. 46 (Stone C. J.) (inter-
mediate view).

9. Aleka v, Jagatbandhu, A.I.R. 1971 Orissa 127, 130 (A. Misra &
B. K. Palra JJ.) (wider view), followed in Tejpal v. Purni:na Bai, A.LR.
1976. Orissa 62.

10. H. N, Mukharjee v. Shyam Sunder, A.LR. 1973 Pat. 142, 144 (wider

view)-

7.19. So much as regards the case law on section 4. Having regard Wider Scope
to the object underlying the section, we see no reason why it should not exiend of section
to every proceeding wherein partition of a family dwelling-house is in issue. 4 favoured.
irrespective of the manner in which the parties are arrayed and irrespective
of the question whether there is a prayer for specific allotment. To adopt
the first view (which is the narrowest one) on the subject would mean that
the members of the family will have to wait until the transferee sues for
partition. Similarly, to confine the section to cases where the transferee
(though a defendant) asks for specific allotment of a share (the second view),
would also cause some hardship, because it would deprive the plaintiff of a
beneficial provision of the law if the transferee keeps quiet and asks for no
relief. In fact, some of the judicial decisions which have taken this view
have themselves recognised the hardship that would sometimes be caused by
such an interpretation.4-6

1. Butchi Ramayya v. Venkatasubba Rao, A.I.R. 1950 Mad. 214.

2. Ramaswami Vv. Subramania, A.1.R. 1967 Mad. 156, 158, 160, Paragraph 6, 16.
3. Haradhone Haldar v, Usha Charan Karmakar, A.U.R. 1955 Cal. 292, 294,

4. Butchi Ramayya v. Venkatasubba Rao, A.I.R. Mad. 214,

5. See also para 5.17, supra.

6. Sakhawat Ali v. Ali Hussain, ALR. 1957 Alb 356, 359, pera 13 ¢F.B).


. 26

Justification
for legisla-
tion adopting
wider approach.

Semantics not
considered.

Need for
clarification.

Recommenda-
tion regarding
section 4(1).

Recommenda-
tion to revise
section 4(1).

Partition Act, 1893
The third and widest view has, therefore, much to commend itself.

7.20. If due regard be had to the object of section 4, there is justifica-
tion for a legislative reform adopting the widest approach, rather than the
narrowest one. Whatever difficulties may have been felt by some of the High
Courts in view of the constraints imposed by the present wording of section
4—a wording which may be ambiguous—when there is an opportunity fer
review of the law, there is ample justification for amending the section so as to
widen it. Such an amendment would not only facilitate peaceful enjoyment
amongst co-sharers, but also carry out fully the policy underlying section ‘44
of the Transfer of Property Act and introduce harmony between that provision
and section 4 of the Partition Act. It would also be in conformity with the
essential nature of a partition suit. -

7.21. On this approach, it becomes unnecessary to deal in detail with
the semantics of the matter or to discuss the precise meaning of the expres-
sion “sue”, since what we afe now concerned with is snot the interpretation
of the present provision, but the shape which, as a matter of justice, it ought
to assume,

7.22. The amendment that we confemplate would not amount to intro-
ducing a totally new approach, as many High Courts have already taken a
similarly wide view, even of the present section. Many decisions, however,
point out that the language of the section is not happy,' and lends itself
easily to a strict construction.» For these reasons, clarification of the scope of
section 4 is needed,

7.23. In view of what has been stated above, we recommend that
section 4(1) should be widened so as to ensure that it applies whether the
‘wansferee is a plaintiff or a defendant{ and whether the transferee makes a
prayer for specific allotment or not, provided that the suit is one for partition
(the usual situation) or a suit for possession against the transferee (a situa-
tion which may arise, for example, where the plaintiff member is not in posses-
sion). Such an amendment will set right the hardship of an extreme character
that is often caused by the present law, an illustration of which would be
found in the facts of the Allahabad case? to which we have referred, There
the plaintiff had brought a suit against the transferee for possession or,
alternatively, for partition. It was admitted, that he was the owner of 47/48th
share in a house, and defendants No. 1 to 9 (transferees) owned only 1/48th
share (being the share of certain former co-sharers). Still, the section could
not be applied.

7.24. In the light of what we have stated above, we recommend that
section 4(1) should be revised as under :—

“4, (1) Where—

(a) a share of a dwelling house belonging to an undivided family
has been transferred to a person who is not a member of such
family, and

(b) a@ suit for partition of the dwelling house or for separate possession
of a share of the dwelling house is instituted, and

(©) the transferee is a party to such suit whether as a plaintiff or as a
defendant,

the Court shall, if any member of the family being a shareholder
shall undertake to buy the share of such transferee, make a valua-
tion of such share in such manner as it thinks fit and direct the
sale of such share to such shareholder, and may give all necessary
and proper directions in that behalf.”

1. Haradhone Haldar v. Usha Charan Karmakar, ALR. 1955 Cal, 292, 293, para 10
(2. N. Mukerjee 1). :

2. Banchhanidi v. Balram, AR. 1951 Orissa 180, para 3.

3. Sakhawat Ali v. Ali Hiissain, ALR, 1957 All. 356, 357, para 5 (78):


Share of Dwelling House : Section 4

IV. Female members marrying into another family.

7.25. One more question arising out of section 4(1) may now be considered, Section 4(1)
There is a conflict of decisions on the question whether a female member pnd gases of |
marrying into another family ceases to be a “member” (within the Ineaning marrying into
of section 4). The view of the Bombay High Court! is that when a Muslim another
woman leaves the family house to live in her husband’s house, she prima facie family.
gives up her intention to reside in the house, and is not therefore entitled to apply
under section 4. This was on the ground that a person who was not in
occupation and who had no intention of occupying could not be entitled to
apply under section 4. A woman who marries and goes to live in her
husband’s house (it was stated), prima facie gives up her intention of continuing
१० reside in her old house.

But the Madras view? is that she does not cease to be a “member” of
the family. The Judgment rests on two considerations—(i) marriage under
the Muslim law is a contract and no question of change of status arises,

(ti) under section 4, it is not necessary that the co-sharer applying for leave
should continue to be a member of the family. It is enough if she is entitled
to a share on partition.

7.26. In view of the conflicts of decisions.on the above point, we are of Need for
the opinion that a clarification of the position is required. As regards the course ‘!@tification,
to be adopted, we would favour a more liberal approach in the matter than that
adopted by the Bombay High Court. There are, in practice, many situations
in which a married daughter’s attachment to the family: house may be revived.
Divorce, separation and widowhood are some important instances. The claim
of a female with regard to section 4 should not be disregarded merely because
she had married and taken up residence with wher husband’s family or witb
her husband, at another place.

Social justice demands that she should have the same rights under section
4 as any other co-sharer who has not married. Such an approach is all the
more necessary in the changed social conditions, with increasing emphasis on
the rights of women, Even as the section now stands, it could be so construed.
However, without entering into the niceties of the correct interpretation of the
section, we would, for the reasons that we have already mentioned, recommend
an amendment of section 4 by adding a suitable Explanation, .

Having regard to the fact that the situations to which we have made a
reference above might recur frequently in Indian Society, we are of the view
that the law on the subject should be clarified.

Incidentally, we may also mention that though the case law to which we
have made a reference was concerned with Muslims, the position would not
be different as regards Hindus, or, for that matter, as regards persons of any
other community.

In the light of the above, we recommend that the following Explanation
should be inserted below section 4 :—

Explanation to be added to section 4
“Explanation.—For the purposes of this section a person who is a
member of the family does not, on marriage, cease to be such member.”

7.27. It may be noted that in order to attract section 4, it is not neces- Actual resi-
sary that the members who claim its benefit must be actually residing in the dence not
house.3-4 necessary,

V. Stage for applying under section 4

7.28. Some questions seem to have ari8en in the past as to the stage at which
an application can be made under section 4(1). Jt has been held that it can
be made at any stage of the partition suit, even after the passing of the final
decree. Thus, in a Calcutta case,5 a final decree was passed on 28-11-1913.

1, Bai Fatima v. Gulam Nabi, ALR. 1936 Bom, 197, 199 (Macklin 33.

2. Rukia v. Rajia Bibi, A.I.R, 1963 Mad. 298. ‘

3. Nil Kamal vy. Kamakshya, A.1.R. 1928 Cal. 539, 542.

4. Md. Sulaiman v. Mt. Amir Jan, A.1.R, 1941 All. 281, 282.

5. Prankrishna v. Surath Chandra Roy, LL.R. 45 Cal. 873; ALR. 1919 Ca} 1055,


2 Partition Act, 1893

Defendants 2 and 3, who were members of the family, thereafter claimed to
purchase the share sold. An argument was advanced that the Subordinate
Judge had no jurisdiction to pass an order under section 4 after the passing of the
final decree. The contention was negatived by the High Court. In a Iater
Calcutia case,' it has been held that “the right conferted by section 4 may
be exercised at any time before the final allotment takes place”, ~

A_ similar view has been expressed by a Bench of the Allahabad High
Court,? which held that “the section itself fixes no stage up to which alone
the application can be made. On the contrary, the Janguage of the section
shows «hat it can be made at any stage”. न

Later case 7.29. The Calcutta High Court has in a fairly recent case expressly

law. laid down that an application under section 4 is maintainable after the passing
of the final decree and before the possession of the allotted property is deli-
vered to the stranger transferee in execution of the decree. This view is
consistent with the scheme of the section, which aims at the preservation of
homogencity amongst the members of a family with respect to the dwelling
house.

In this position, no clarification is required on the above point.

VI. Form of decree

Section 4(1) . 7.30. There remain to be considered some procedural points concerned
and form of with section 4(1). The exact form of the decree to be passed under section
लए case. 4(1) seems to have been a matter of some doubt in the past. Thus, in an

Allahabad case,4 the Court, while not pronouncing a final opinion on this
point, expressed a doubt as to the decree passed in that case by the lower
court. The decree passed by the lower court was a simple money decree in
favour cf the plaintiff (transferee) for the sum awarded on account of com-
pensation for the house (together with costs of the suit), against the defendant
who had claimed the benefit of section 4. The High Court pointed out that
this decree had not the effect of transferring to the defendants the plaintiff's
share, and observed—“We feel some doubt as to the precise form of decree
which the Legislature intended to be passed in such a case”. The High Court
considered one possibility, namely, that the intention of the Legislature might
be that the transferee should execute व deed of sale in favour of the member
applying under section 4 (as in the case of a suit for specific performance of
a contract of sale), and that, after the execution of such a document, the
defeadant would become liable to the plaintiff for the unpaid purchase-money
and the plaintiff would obviously be entitled to maintain his suit “for the
recovery of the same if not already paid”. The High Court observed that
perhaps the Legislature did not intend a cumbersome procedure, But it had
no doubt that the decree passed should be one which has the effect, in Jaw.
of transferring the ownership of the plaintiff's share to the defendants, and
for that reason it modified the decree so as to direct that the plaintiff was entitled
to recover the sum from the defendants and that the Court shall put the defen-
dants in possession of the plaintiff's share and declare them to be the owners
of the same.

Subsequent 7.31. Subsequent decisions. however, have expressed more definite views
cases—Alla~ in the matter. Thus, in a later Allahabad case,’ the following observations
habad view. were made :--

“Tn such cases ordinarily the purchaser should be asked to deposit in
Court the purchase money by a time fixed by the Court, the time to be
fixed and extended at the discretion of the Court. If the purchaser
deposits the said purchase money within the time allowed by the Court,
a decree should be passed in the suit in favour of the purchaser declaring
1. Niranka Sashi Roy v. Swarganath Banerjee, 4.2, 1926 Cal. 95. -
2. Dwarka Das v. Godhana, A.I.R, 1939 All. 313, followed in Kashi Nath v. Atma
Ram, A.LR. 1973 All. 548,
3. Satya Narayan Chakravarty v. Vishwanath Pail, (1970) 74 C.W.N, 871.
4. lias Ahmad v. Bulagi Chand, 1. L. R. 39 All. 672, 674; ALR, 1917 All. 2, 3
एड i pened. Selim i ALR. 1941 ‘All. 28), 263, (8.
5 laine FI wy fe ir Jan. |. » 283, oe
Dar 13, 10228, Sunt PShanta, ‘ALR, 1952 Nag. 193. ! पं



Share of Dwelling House : Section 4

that all rights of the plaintiff or persons claiming partition in the pro-
perty in suit have been transferred by a Court sale 4 favour of the defen.
dant on payment of the said sale price and the plaintiffs claim for parti-
tion is dismissed, If necessary, a sale certificate may also be issued to
the purchaser. In case the defendant or the purchaser makes default in
payment of purchase money, a decree for partition be made in favour of
the plaintiff and the partition should be proceeded with.”

7.32. The question came up for interprefation before the High Court of N; 4
उप... In that case, the lower Appellate Court had हटने the claim separ view
under section 4. The High Court, allowing the appeal, passed an elaborate
decree to the effect that the claimants under section 4 shall deposit in the
trial court a specified sum on or about a certain date for payment to the
transferee for purchase of his share, and, on such deposit being made within
the time fixed the amount shall be paid to the transferee, and the claimants
“shall become owners of two-thirds share of the plaintiff in the site in suit...... ”,
and the plaintiff's claim for partition and separate possession stands dis-
missed. In case defendants 2 and 3 fail to deposit the same, their claim
under section 4 shall stand dismissed and the plaintiff shall be entitled to
apply to the trial court for partition of his share.

It may be noted, that in this case the decree itself vested the share in the
claimant under section 4.

7.33. In a later Nagpur case,2 the decree directed by the High Court Later
was, that the defendant (claimant under section 4) depositing the amount in Naspur
the lower court by a specified date, the plaintiff shall execute a sale deed of 110
his half share of his property at the cost of the defendant. If such payment
is made, the parties will bear the costs of the lower court. If the payment is
not made on or before that date, the lower court will pass a preliminary
decree for partition of the house and appoint a Commissioner to effect that
partition. In that event, the defendant will pay the costs of the plaintiff in
the lower court. Thus, here the transferee was directed to execute a sale-
deed in favour of the claimant under section 4, instead of the decree ipself
providing that the claimant shall become the owner.

7.34. In a Madras case,3 a decree passed in favour of one of the parties Madras case,
in an earlier suit in respect of a claim under section 4 came up for considera-
tion. The High Court noted the observations made in the earlier Allahabad
ease’ to the effect that perhaps the Legislature did not intend a cumbersome
procedure etc. and observed that it would be very hard to force the trans-
feree to give up the property which he had purchased, and, in return, to give
thim nothing but a right to bring a fresh suit against the claimant under section 4.

7.35. We think that the form of the decree has been laid down in subs- Stages 2 fo, be
tantially correct manner in the later Allahabad case,> to which we have already the ‘decree.
referred. The essential stages to be followed should be reflected in the decree. *

These stages would appear to be as follows :—+
(i) The claimant under section 4 should be directed to deposit in Court
the sum fixed within a specified time,—which may, however, be extend-
ed at the discretion of the courts

[A Court has, in an application under section 4(1), first to ascer-
tain whether the property is a dwelling house. If yes, then it is to
proceed to value the share of the stranger, Then it is to require the
co-sharer who was a member to deposit the amount within a date to
be fixed by the Court.]

1. Sumitra v. Dhannu, A.L.R. 1952 Nag. 193, 195, paragraphs 15 and 16.
2. Kalyan Mal v. Jagdish Prasad, A.I.R. 1953 Nag. 130, 132, para 14 (Mangal Murti
JS).

& Deo
3. Subramanya v, Sheik Ghannu, A..R. 1935 Mad. 628, 630 (Walah J.).

4, Nias Ahmad v. Bulaqi Chand, 1.L.R. 30 All. 672; ALR. 1917 All, 2.
5. Mohammad Sulaiman v. Mt. Amir Jan, AIR. 1941 All, 281, 283; para 7.31,

supra.
6. Cf, Subal Chandra v. Gostha, (1956) 60 C.W.N. 829, 833.

5-317 LAD/ND/81



30

Decree analo-

gous to speci-
ic performance
of contract

for sale,

New provision
not recom-
mended.

Valuation of
share how
done.

Date _of
valuation —
Calcutta view.

Partition Act, 1893

(tt) me the sore is is not made in time, then the transfer fails, and the Court
necessary steps for partisioning the enti includin
dwelling house, ing UNE OTS काना), mg the
The application under section 4 should be dismissed, and an order

for Partition by metes and bounds should be passed (or, if @ prelimi.
nary dectee is already passed, it will be proceeded with),

(ii) If the money is deposited in time, the transferee should be required to
transfer his share to the applicant by executing a conveyance. ined

(iv) If the transferee fails or neglects to execute the cofveyance, a decree
Should be passed ordering him to execute the deed, and, in execution
of such a decree, the Court itself may execute the document.!

_ 7.36. The decree would, thus, be substantially analogous to the decree
which the Court passes in a suit for specific performance of a contract for the
sale of immovable property.2-3

_ _ 7.37. The enactment in the Act of a provision as to the form off decree
is not necessary. However, we recommend 40 the High Courts that the si

tion made by us may be incorporated in the rules under the Code of Civil
Procedure.

VIL. Date of valuation .

7.38, When the applicant under section 4 gives an “undertaking”—which
means an unconditiona] offer from which he cannot resile,,—then the Court has
to make a valuation of the transferee’s share and direct its sale® The valua-
tion is ordinarily done through the Commissioner, 7° but if the matter is simple
it can be done by the Court, The important thing is that the decree should
have the effect, in law,°! of wansferring the ownership of the stranger’s share
to the applicant under section 4.

7.39, There seems to be some controversy as to the date with refexence
to which valuation is to be made, According to the Calcutta view,'' the rele-
vant date which requires to be considered is the date when the undertaking
‘is given and it is only at that point of time that valuation can be made as
envisaged by the section. Disagreeing with the reasoding of the Orissa Judg-
ment!? on the subject, the Court made these observations—-

“To my mind, section 4 does not contemplate that the market value
is to be taken on the date of institution of the suit. It is true that the sale
by the stranger to the co-sharer being in the nature of a forced sale or
under compulsion, valuation of the premises has to be determined with
great care and caution so as not to cause any hardship to either of the
parties,

“T find however considerable force in the submission made by the
learned Advocate for the plaintiff that the valuation thereof should be made
on the date when an undertaking to purchase is given, and the wording
of section 4, io my mind, also indicates that such valuation is to be made
only when an undertaking is given by any member of the family to buy
the share in question.”

1. Order 21, Rule 34, Code of Civil Procedure,’ 1968.

2. Cf. section 28, Specific Relief Act, 1963 (47 off 1963).

७ 1 Com (Code of Civil Procedure}, 38
ission of India, 27th Report vil Procedure), page

० Brier BO Rule 19k proposed) and’ page 172 {aot modified in the saih शिकारी,

(0) Order 20, Rule 12A, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

. Paragraphs 7.35 and 7.36, supra,

. Hias Akmad v, Bulagi Chand, LR. 39 All. 672; ALR. 1917 All. 2.

. Athappa v. Somasundaram, ALR. 1944 Mad. 428.

. As to Commissioners, see Order 26, Rules 9 and 10, Civil Procedure Code.

. As to partition see Order 26, Rules 13 and 14, Civil Procedure Code.

. Niranka Sashi v. Swarganath, A.LR. 1926 Cal. 95.

10. As to form of the decree, see supra.

11, Monomohan v, Uskarani, ALR. 1979 Cal, 79, 83, para 15.

12. Bhikari Behera ९; Bharmananda Nai ALR. 1963 Orissa 40, Para 7.40, infos

ery aus


Share of Dwelling House : Section 4 Ee

7.40. According to the Orissa view, it is the market value as ruling on Orissa view.
the-date. of suit that governs the matter,. This also seems to be the view taken,?
though impliedly, in Nagpur. The point was not specifically in issue, the
competition being between purchase price and market price on the date of suit.

7.41. The need for a clarification on the above point is obvious, It is evi- Need for
dent that the valuation must be fair to the stranger purchaser as well as to the clarification
co-sharer of the erstwhile undivided family, It is not easy to decide which of as to date of
the two views on the subject should be codified—the Calcutta view or the V#Ua#0-
Orissa view. There is much to be said in support of either view. However,
on balance, it seems to us that it would be reasonable to fix the valuation with
reference to the date of the undertaking given by the co-sharers, This would
avoid the impact on the co-sharer of fiuctuations in market price after the
undertaking,

7.42. Accordingly, we recommend that a new sub-section should be added Recommendation
in section 4, as under: — fo add pew
“(3) The valuation under sub-section (1) shall be with reference 17 in section 4.
the market value on the date on whidh the co-sharer undertakes to purchase
the share.”

1. Bhikari Behera v. Dharmananda Natia, A.LR. 1963 Orissa 40, 41, para 6,
2. Sumitra v. Dhannu, A.LR, 1952 Nag. 193, 195, 196, paragraphs 13-14,


Scope of the
Chapter.

Section 5.

Section 6.

Section 6(1)
and upset
Price.

Section 6(3).

Section 7.

CHAPTER 8

MISCELLANEOUS : SECTIONS 5 TO 10

8.1. We have disposed of the important provisions of the Act, The rest
of the Act contains provisions of a miscellaneous character which do not require
much discussion. .

8.3. Section 5 deals with certain acts to be done on behalf of a person
under disability in a suit for partition and provides as follows :—

“3. ie any, suit for partition a request for sale may be made or an
undertaking, or application for leave, to buy may be given or made on
behalf of any party under disability by any person authorised to act on
behalf of such party in such suit, but the Court shall not be bound to
comply with any such request, undertaking or application unless it is of
opinion that the sale or purchase will be for the betefit of the party under
such disability.”

The section is analogous to the provision in the Code of Civil Procedure,!
whereunder an agreement or compromise by a next friend or guardian for the
suit requires leave of the Court.

t The section needs no change.

8.3. Section 6, which is concerned with certain matters concerning bidding
at sales under the Act, reads as under: —

“6. Reserved bidding and bidding by share-holders—{1) Every sale
under section 2 shall be subject to a reserved bidding, and the amount of
such bidding shall be fixed by the Court in such manner as it may think
fit and may be varied from time to time.

(2) On any such sale any of the shareholders shall be at liberty to
bid at the sale on such terms as to non-payment of deposit or as to setting
off or accounting for the purchase-money or any part thereof, instead of
paying the same, as to the Court may seem reasonable.

(3) If two or more persons, of whom one is a shareholder in the pro-
perty, respectively advance the same sum at any bidding at such sale, such
bidding shall be deemed to be bidding of the shareholder.”

8.4. The provision in section 6(1) that the Court shall fix an upset price
is a beneficial provision,—or even necessary—because otherwise one of the co-
sharers may (at the auction) knock off the property at a low price, thus causing
prejudice to the other co-sharers,

8.5. Sub-section (3) of section 6 is also of particular interest, as showing
that under the law as it now stands, shareholders and strangers may alike bid
at the sale.3 The question whether there is need to ive 8 Power to the Court
in certain special cases to confine the sale to co-sharers will be considered later.4

8.6. This takes us to section 7, which is in the following terms:—

“7, Save as hereinbefore provided, when any property is directed to
be sold under this Act, the fol towing procedure shall, as far as pfacticable,
be adopted, namely—

(a) if the property be sold under a decree or order of the High

Court of Calcutta, Madras or Bombay in the exercise of its origival

jurisdiction, the procedure of such Court in its “original civil jurisdic-

tion” for the sale of property by the Registrar;

1. 0. 32, R. 7, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

2. Para 8.3, supra.

3. Subbamma v. Veerayya, A.I.R. 1932 Mad, 15, 17.

4. See discussion relating to section 7, para 8.7, infra,


Miscellaneous : Sections 5 to 10

(b) if the property be sold under a decree or order of any other
Court, such procedure as the High Court may from time to time by rules
Prescribe in this behalf, and until such rules are made, the procedure
Prescribed in the Code of Civil Procedure in respect of sales in execution
of decrees.’

8.7. Section 7(a) mentions only the three High Courts in the Presidency Section 7(a)—
towns, Since the passing of the Act, a few other High Courts have been creat- High Courts
ed with ordinary original civil jurisdiction and clause (a) should be amended with original
to cover them. ‘Accordingly, we recommend that section 7(a) should be suitably Gloticn Re-
revised. commendation.

__ 8.8. When a sale is ordered under section 2, the procedure to be adopted Section 7 and
is (subject to rules) the same as the procedure for execution sales. A sale con- sale among
fined to co-sharers is not) permissible—a matter to which? we have already Recommenda-

referred. tion,

Some Courts have assumed that such a power exists, 377 but we think that
the Act does not, at present, give such a power.®

At the same time, such a power is required in the interests of justice. In
certain special cases—for example, in the case of a family dwelling-house to
which the co-sharers have an emotional attachment—the Court should have a
power to confine the sale to co-sharers. No doubt, in general, a sale by public
auction would fetch a higher price than a sale confined to certain parties. But
there may be special cases where the monetary aspect may uot be the only
relevant one, and other over-riding considerations require that only co-sharers
should be allowed to offer bids. We therefore recommend that present section 7
should be re-numbered as sub-section (1), aNd a new sub-section should be in-
serted in the section to provide for a power of the nature mentioned above.’

8.9. Under section 7(b), the procedure for a sale under the Act is (subject section 7
to rules made by the High Court) the same as is prescribed in the Code of and appeals
Civil Procedure in respect of sales in the execution of decrees. From this, certain aear orders
important consequences follow. For example, objections to the sale would have pause ot tale.
to be dealt with under Order 21, rule 89 et seg., Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
Now, the question may arise whether an order dismissing an objection to a sale
held under the Act is appealable under Order 43, rule 1(j) of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 which allows an appeal against “an order under rule 72 or
rule 92 of Order XXI, setting aside or refusing to set aside a sale”.

8.10. An earlier decision® of a single Judge of the Punjab High Court held Case law
that such an order was appealable. However, in a later ruling of a Division
Bench of that High Court,’ this view was disapproved. It was held that section 7
has not the effect of converting the sale proceedings into “execution proceedings”
and since the Act does not make any provision for appeal expressly or by neces-
sary implication, and does not provide that a person who is dissatisfied with
an order declining to set aside a sale under the Act, shall have the same rights
of appeal as a person dissatisfied with an order declining to set aside a sale in
execution of a decree, no such right of appeal could be spelt out from the section.

8.11. We do not think it necessary to disturb the proposition laid down No change in
in the latter case. above point.

1, See para 8.12, infra for re-draft.
See supra, .
Ram Prasad v. Mt. Mukandi, A.LR. 1929 All. 443. (Banerji & King JJ).
Mohit Krishna v. Pranab Chander, A..R. 1930 Cal. 616, 619 (S. K. Ghose J.).
Babendra Nath v. Haridas, (1911) 15 C.W.N. 552 (Mookerji J.).
Gadadhar v. Janakinath, ALR. 1969 Cal. 66, 67, paragraphs 36—40,
For re-draft of section 7, see para 8.12, infra.
. Hans Raj v. Nirenjan Lal, A.L.R. 1952 Punj. 159.
). Hukum Chand v. Harish Chander, A.LR. 1959 Punj. 129, 130, paragraphs 6 to 8
(Bhandari C.J. and Dulat 1). हु रत

१००७० :३ ७ छ के ५ 8२

$3


Revised
ion 7.

Section 8—
Appeals.

Section 8 and
order for sale
passed outside
the Act.

Section 9.

Partition Act, 1893

8.12. In the light of the above discussion, section 7 should be revised as’
tt
“Section 7. Procedure to be followed in case of sales—{1) Save as
hereinbefore provided, when any Property is directed to be sold under this
Act, the following procedure shall, as far as practicable, be adopted, namely,
(a) if the property be sold under a decree or order of a High
Court... ++. in the exercise of its original jurisdiction, the procedure
of such Court in its original civil jurisdiction for the sale of Property
by the Registrar;
(0) if the property be sold under a decree or order of any other
Court, such procedure as the High Court may from time to time by
rules prescribe in this behalf, and until such rules are made, the proce-
dure prescribed in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in Tespect of sales
in execution of decrees.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Court
may, in a particular case, for reasons to be recorded, direct that only share-
holders, or only shareholders and such other persons as the Court may
specify, shall be entitled to bid at the sale of the property.”

8.13. This takes us to section 8, which provides that any order for sale
made by the Court under section 2, 3 or 4 shall be deemed to be a decree within
the meaning of section 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. As is well known,
such provisions have important consequences as to appealability of the orders
in question. For example, where the trial court allows the sale, but the appel-
late court refuses to pass an order for sale, and thus reverses the order of the
Arial court, the order of the trial court is a “decree” and is subject to second
appeal if the requirements of a second appeal under section 100 of the Code
of Civil Procedure are fulfilled.’ :

An order rejecting an application under section 4 is not, however, a “decree”
as it does not fall within the section; but its correctness can be questioned in
appeal from the final partition decree.23 This is also the position Tegarding an
order rejecting an application under section 3.4 We think t fat an ofder rejecting
an application for sale should also be treated as a decree in view of its impor-
tance. Section 8 should be revised as under :—

“8. Orders for sale to be deemed decrees.—Any order for sale or reject-
ing an application for sale made by the Court under section 2, 3 or 4 shall
be deemed to be a decree within the meaning of section 2 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908.”

8.14. It has been held’ that even where the order for sale is passed in a
case which falls outside the Partition Act (i.e. without an application by the
Parties), after the passing of a preliminary decree for Partition, the order can be
viewed as a further preliminary decree and is therefore appealable. The order
has a general effect on the entire proceedings in the suit, and precludes the
Possibility of the plaintiff getting an allotment in specie of his share, and the
order thus negatives the right to which he is entitled as a co-sharer, and ig final
and conclusive so far as the trial court is concerned.

The point discussed above does not, however, necessitate any change in the
section.

8.15. Section 9 provides that in any suit for partition the Court may, if it
shall think fit, make a decree for a partition of part of the Property to which
the suit relates and a sale of the remainder under this Act. The section needs
no change.

1. Satyabhama y. Jatindra Mohan, AIR. 1929 Cal. 270.

2, Bhuban Mohan v. Brojendra Chandra, AJR. 1941 Cal. 311,

3. Wali Mohammad v. Shamsul Hug, (1967) All. Law Journal 379, dissenting from
A.LR. 1937 Nag. 4.

4, Nitish Chandra पर, Promode Kumar, A.LR. 1953 Cal. 18, Para 9 (R. P. Mookerjee
and Lahiri JJ.).

5. Vissanna v. Visabrahmam, A.LR. 1957 A.P. 25 (Vishwanathn Sastri J) followed in
Mayimu v. Maliyaminal, A.LR. 1968 Ker. 282.


Miscellaneous : Sections 5 to 10 35

8.16. Section 10 provides that this Act shall apply to suits instituted before Section 10--
the commencement thereof, in which no scheme for the partition of the property
has been finally approved by the Court. The utility of the section at the present Commended.
day is nil, and we recommend that the section should be repealed.

8.17. Appendix 1 and Appendix 2 to this Report contain the text of the Appendices,
English Acts of 1868 and 1876 (now repealed). As copi ies 01 these Acts are not
readily available, we have included them for ready rence. Appendix 3 deals
- with the present English Law and its evolution,


CHAPTER 9
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS

We summarise below the recommendations made in this Report.

Chapter 5.—Power of sale: seations 1-2

(1) Section 2 (Power to order sale instead of division in partition suits) should
be revised so as to provide that where division cannot reasonably or conveniently
be made and sale of the property and distribution of the proceeds could be
more beneficial, the Court shall, on the request of any shareholder, direct such
sale and distribution. Further, even if no request has been made by any share-
holder, the Court may, if it thinks fit in the interests of justice, for reasons to be
recorded, direct such sale and distribution.’

The opening words of the section should also be revised as recommended.?

Chapter 6—Sale to shareholders : section 3

(2) In section 3(1) (Procedure where a sharer undertakes to buy). under
which, at present, only certain co-sharers—i.c. co-sharers who have not sued
under section 2—can apply for purchase, an amendment should be made to enable
any co-sharer to apply under that sub-section.

(3) In section 3, a new sub-section (1A) should be inserted to provide that
if, in any case in which the Court directs a sale under section 2, any shareholder
applies for leave to buy at a valuation the suit property, the Court may order
valuation and offer to sell the property to that shareholder at the price so ascer-
tained and may give all necessary and proper directions in that behalf.4

(4) An Explanation should be inserted in section 3 to the effect that an
application under sub-section (1) or under (newly inserted) sub-section (1A) may
be made at any time before the sale is actually held.’

(5) Consequential changes may be made in section 3(2).
Chapter 71—Share of dwelling house: section 4

(6) Section 4 (partition suit by transferee of share in dwelling house) should
be widened so as to ensure that the right to seek purchase of the share of the
transferee should be available to a co-sharer who is a2 member of the family—-

(a) whether the transferee is a plaintiff or defendant, and

(b) whether the transferee has made a prayer for specified allotment or not,
provided that the suit is one for partition (the usual situation) or a suit for
possession against the transferee (@ situation which may arise, for example, when
the plaintiff member is not in possession).7

(7) While the enactment of a provision as to the form of a decree to be
passed under section 4 is not necessary, the suggestion made in the Report as
to the lines on which a proper decree could be drawn is commended to the High
Courts’ for being incorporated in the rules to be made under the Code of
Civil Procedure.

1, Para 5.21.

2. Para 5.20.

3. Para 6.7.

4. Para 6.8.

5. Para 6.14,

6. Para 6.15.

7. Para 7.23.

8. Paragraphs 7.35 to 7.37.

36


Summary of recommendations

(8) An Explanation should ‘be added to section 4 to provide that for the
purposes of this section, a person does not, on marriage, cease to be member
of the family.! .

(9) In section 4, there should be imserted a new sub-section to the effect
+that the valuation under section 4(1) shall be with reference to the market
value on the date on which the co-sharer undértakes to purchase the share.?

(10) As regards the procedure to be followed in case of sales under the -
Act, all High Courts having original jurisdiction should be governed by sec-
tion 7(a). © specific mention of High Courts of the three Presidency towns
should. accordingly be deleted from that clause.3 -

(11) In section 7, a new sub-section should be inserted to provide that
the Court can (in an appropriate case) direct that the property should be sold,
only among the co-sharers.* हु

(12) Section 8 should be amended to provide that an order rejecting an
application for sale should also be deemed to be a decree.5

(13) Section 10 (Application of the Act to pending suits) should be repealed.©

P. V. DIXIT . — Chairman
S. N. SHANKAR — Member
.GANGESHWAR PRASAD हा — Member

. P. M. BAKSHI . — Member-Secretary

19th August, 1980. 7

1, Para. 7.26.
2. Para 7.42.
3. Paragraphs 8.7 and 8.12..
4. Paragraphs 8.8 and 8.12. °
iS. Para 8.13.
6. Para 8.16.
6-317 LAD/ND/81


APPENDIX 1
PARTITION ACT, 1868:
(31 & 32 Vic. 0. 40) (Repealed)
An Act to amend the law belting १ Biititioh.
हि (25th June, 1868).

Br it enacted by the Queen’s most Exgellent Majesty, by ad with the Adviee
. and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, itt this
present Parliament assembled and by the Authority of the santé, as follows : —

1. This Act may be cited as the Partition Act, 1868. Short Title,

2. In this Act the term “the Court” means the Court of Chancery in Eng-

land, the Court of Chancery in Ireland , the. Landed. Estates Court in Jrélavid,
and the Coutt of Chancery of the County Palatine’of Lancaster, - withiti their
respective Jurisdictions. u पु
* 3. In a Suit for Partition, where if this Act had not been passed, a Decree Power to
for Partition might have been made, then if it agpears to the Coutt that, by Court to onde
reason of the Nature of the Property to which the Shit relates, or of the Number %/¢ jnst

‘of Parties interested or presumptively interested therein, or of the Absence of हा
. ‘Disability of some of those Parties, or-of asty other Citcumistaiice, a Sdle, of

the Property and a Distribution of thé Proceeds would be mote beneficial fbr

the Parties interested than a Division of the property between or dthoht :

the Court may, if it thinks fit, on the Request of any of thd Parties interested,

and notwithstanding the Dissent or है कि lity of any others of them, direct a

Sale of the Property accordingly, and may give al wecessaty of proper conse-

quential Directions. है

4. In a Suit for Partition, where, if this Act had not beeti passed, a Pectee ste on
for Partition might have been mate, ther if the Pdrty or Partles interested, indi- Application
vidually or collectively, to the Extent of One Méiety or upwards in the Property $ ain ot
to which the Suit relates, request the Court to direct a Sale of the Property and proportion of
a Distribution of the Proceeds instead of a Division of the Property between ested.
or among the Parties interested, the Court shail, is it sees good Reason to
‘the contrary, direct a Sale of the Property acco. dint ly, and give ail ‘necessary
or proper consequential Directions. o. .

5; In a Suit for Partition, where, if this Act had not been passed, a Decree As to Purchase

for Partition might have been made, then; if any party interested in. the Property Fee ag
to which the Suit relates requests the Court to direct a Sale of the Property site,
and a Distribution of the Proceeds instead of a Division of ‘the Property between °
or among the Parties interested, the Court may, हैँ it thinks fit, uoless. the other
Parties interested in the Property, or some-of them, undertake to purchase the .
Share of the Party requesting a Sale, direct a Sale of the Property; and give
all necessary or proper consequential Directions, and in case of such Under-
taking being given the Court may order a Valuation of the Share of the Party
yequesting a Sale in such manner as the Court thinks fit, and may give ail
‘Mecessary or proper consequential directions. -

6. On any Sale under this Act the Court may, if it thinks fit, allow any Authority for
of the Parties interested in the Property ta bid at the sale, on such Terms as Parties inter’
to Non-payment of Deposit, or as to setting off or accounting for the Purchase “#4 to bid. _
Money or any Part thereof instead of paying the same, or as to any other.

Matters, as to the Court seem reasonable.

7. Section Thirty of the Trustee Act, 1850, shall extend and apply to Cases Application of

where, in Suits for Partition, the Court directs a Sale instead of a Division of Trustee Act.
the Property. 3 8 14 View

39


Parties to Parti-
tion Suits.

Costs in Parti-
tion Suits.

As to General
Orders under

this Act. (21 &
22 Vict. ०. 27).

Authority conferred by Section 1 of the ‘County Courts Act, 1865.

Partition Act, 1893

8. Sections Twenty-three to Twenty-five (both inclusive) of the Act of the
Session of the Nineteenth and Twentieth Years of Her Majesty’s Reign (Chap-
ter One hundred and twenty), to facilitate “Leases and Sales of Settled Estates”,
shall extend and apply to money to be recéived on any Sale effected: under the
Authority of this Act.. + .

9. Any person who,.if this Act had not been Passed, might have main-
tained a Suit for Partition may maintain such Suit against any One or more
of the Parties interested, without serving the other or others (if any), of those
Parties; and it shall not be competent. to any Defendant in the Suit to object .
for Want of Parties; and at the Hearing of the Cause the Court may direct
such Inquiries as to the Nature. of the Property, and the Persons interested
therein, and other matters, as it thinks mecessary or proper with a view to an
Order for Partition or Sale ‘being made on further Consideration; but all Persons.
who, if this Act had not been assed, would have been necessary Parties to
the Suit, shall be served with e of the Decree or Order on the Hearing,
and after such Notice shall be bound by the Proceedings as if they had been
originally Parties to the Suit, and shall be deemed Parties to the Suit; and all
such persons may have Liberty to attend the Proceedings, and any such Person
may, within a Time limited by General Orders apply to the Court to add to
the Decree or Order. पु

10. In a Suit for Partition the Court may make such Order as it thinks.
just respecting Costs up tothe Time of the Hearing.

11. Sections 9, 10 and 11 of the Chancery Amendment Act, 1858, relative
fo the making of General Orders, shall have effect as if they were repeated
in this Act, and in Terms made applicable to the Purposes thereof.

12. Ia England the County Courts shall have and exercise the like Power
and Authority as the Court of Chancery in Suits for Partition (including. the
Power and Authority conferred by this Act) in any Case where the .
to which the Suit relates does not exceed in Value the same shall 86 22 156 and and
exercised in like Manner and Subject to the like Provisions as the Power and.


APPENDIX 2

THE PARTITION ACT, 1876

(39 & 40 Vic. c. 17) (Repealed)
CHAPTER 17
An Act to amend the Partition Act, 1868,
A.D. 1876.
(27th June, 1876).

Bs it enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty, by and with: the advice and
consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in the present
Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows :—

1. This Act may be cited as the Partition Act, 1876, and shall be read as
one with the Partition Act, 1868,

_ 2. This Act shall apply to actions pending at the time of the passing of
‘this Act as well as to actions commenced after the passing thereof and the term
“action” includes a suit, and the term “judgment” includes decree or order.’

3. Where in an action for partition it appears to the court that notice of
the judgment on the hearing of the cause cannot bg served on all the persons
on whom that notice is by the Partition Act, 1868, required to be served, or
cannot be so served without expense disproportionate to the value of the property
to which the action relates, the court may, if it thinks fit, on the request of any
‘of the parties interested in the property, and notwithstanding the dissent or
‘disability of any others of them, by order, dispence with that service on any
person or class of persons specified in the order, and, instead thereof, may direct
advertisements to be published at such times and in such manner as the court
shall think fit, calling upon all persons claiming to be interested in such property
who have not been so served to come in and establish their respective claims
in respect thereof before the Judge in Chambers within a time to be thereby
limited. After the expiration of the time so limited all persons who shall not have
so come in and established such claims, whether they are within or without
the jurisdiction of the court (including persons under any disability), shall be
bound by the proceedings in the action as if on the day of the date of the order
dispensing with service whereof is dispensed with; and thereupon the powers
of the court under the Trustee Act, 1850, shall extend to their interests in the
property to which the action relates as if they had been parties to the action ;
and the court may thereupon, if it shall think fit, direct a sale of the property
and give all necessary or proper consequential directions.

4. Where an order is made, under this Act dispensing with service of notice
on any person or class of persons, and property is sold by order of the court,
the following provisions shall have effect :—

(1) The proceeds of sale shall be paid into court to abide the further order

of the court:

(2) The court shall, by order, fix a time, at the expiration of which the
proceeds will be distributed, and may from time to time, by further
order, extend that time ;

(3) The court shall direct such notices to be given by advertisements or
otherwise as it thinks best adapted for notifying to any persons on
whom service is dispensed with, who may not have previously come in
and established their claims, the fact of the sale, the time of the intended
distribution, and the time within which a claim to participate in the
proceeds must be made ;

(4) If at expiration of the time so fixed or extended the interests of all the
persons interested have been ascertained, the court shall distribute the
proceeds in accordance with the rights of those persons;

41

Short title,

Application of
Act.

Power to dis-
pense with service
of notice of
decree or order
in special cases.

Proceedings
where service

is dispensed with,


42

Provision for
case of succes-
sive sales in
same action.

Request by

married woman,
infant, or person
under disal By.

Action for parti-
tion to include
action for sale
and distribution
of the proceeds.

Partition Act, 1893

(5) If at the expiration of the time so fixed or extended the interests of all
the persons interested have not been ascertained, and it appears to the
court that they cannot be ascertained, or cannot be ascertained without
expense disproportionate to the value of the property or of the unascer-
tained interests, the court shall distribute the Proceeds in such manner
as appears to the court to be most in accordance with the tights of
the persons whose claims to participate in the proceeds have been
established, whether all those persons are or not before the court, and
with such reservations (if any) as to the court may deem fit in favour
of any other persons (whether ascertained or not) who May appear from
the evidence before the court to have any prima facie rights which
ought to be so provided for, although such rights may not have been
fully established, but to the exclusion of all other persons, and there-
upon all such other persons shall by virtue of this Act be excluded
from participation in those proceeds on the distribution thereof, but
notwithstanding the distribution any excluded person may recover from
any participating person any portion received by him of the share of
the excluded person. .

5. Where in an action for partition two or more sales are made, if any
person who has by virtue of this Act been excluded from participation in the
proceeds of any of those sales establishes his claim to participate in the proceeds
jot a subsequent sale, the shares of other persons interested in the proceeds of
the subsequent sale shall abate to the extent (if any) to which they were increased
by the non-participation of the excluded person in fhe proceeds of the previous
sale, and shall to that extent be applied in or towards payment 10 that person
of the share to which he would have been entitled in the proceeds of the
previous sale if his claim thereto had been established in due time.

6. In an action for partition a request for sale may be made or an under-’
taking to purchase given on the part of a married woman, infant, person of’
unsound mind, or person under any other disability, by the next friend,
guardian, committee in lunacy (if so authorised by order in lunacy), or other
person authorised to act on behalf of the person under such request or undertaking
on the part of an infant unless it appears that the sale or purchase will be for
his benefit.

7. For the purposes of the Partition Act, 1868, and of this Act, an action
for partition shall include an action for sale and distribution of the proceeds,
and in an action for partition it shall be sufficient to claim a sale and distribution
of the proceeds, and it shall not be necessary to claim a partition.


APPENDIX 3
PRESENT ENGLISH LAW AND ITS EVOLUTION

I. General

In England, partition took place where land belonging to joint tefants, Partition in
tenants in common, coparceners, or (in Kent) heirs in gavelkind was divided English law.
amongst them, each taking a distinct part.’

Compulsory partition amongst co-parceners was effected at common law by Position at

the “writ of partition”. common law as
to co-parcener.

In the case of joint tenants or tenants in common, at common law,? there Position at
was no right to compel a partition. Co-parceners, who took their land by common law as
descent from the former owner,’ were allowed to insist upon partition,> for, as to joint tenan-
their co-ownership was “cast on them by the act of the law, and not by ‘their “*
own agreement, it was thought right that the perverseness of one should not
prevent the others from obtaining a more beneficial method of enjoying the

property”.
This argument, however, was not applied to joint tenancy or tenancy in
common, which necessarily arose by act of parties.”

However, by the Partition Acts, 1539 and 1540,8 as amended? in 1697, a Partition Acts
statutory tight to compel partition was conferred upon joint tenants and tenants 1539 and 1540.
in common,!° one tenant being entitled to insist upon a partition,!! however
inconvenient it might be.'?

The procedure in England for actually effecting the partition (where permis- Procedure for
sible) was this. A Commission was issued to Commissioners to divide the effecting partition.
property and, on their “return” coming in, the patries were ordered to execute
mutual conveyances to carry out the division.’

Failing agreement,'4 the only method by which partition could be compelled writ at common
‘was by the writ de partitione facienda.'s The writ of partition was, however, a law.
cumbersome and difficult process. After some attempt to simplify the process
in 1697,!6 the writ was abolished in 1833.!7

Thereafter, partition was effected by an action for partition in Chancery—
a jurisdiction confirmed by statute in regard to the Chancery Division.'®

. Jowitt, Dictionary of English Law (1959), Vol. 2.
|. Megarry and Wade, Real Property (1966), pages 438, 439.
. Litt, 290, 318.
Megarry and Wade, Real Property (1966), page 441.
Litt, 241.
11805 R.P., 243, 244,
Williams 149; B1, Comm. ii, 180.
partition Act, 1539, 31 Hen. 8, ०. 1 (estates of inheritance); Partition Act, 1540.
32 Hen. है, ०. 32 (estates for life or years).
9. Partition Act, 1697 (7 & 9 Will, 3, c. 31) (itaproving the procedure).
10. See note (2) to Co, Litt, 169a.
11. Parker v. Gerard, (1754) Amb. 236.

12. Warner v. Boynes, (1750) Amb. 589.
Baring v. Nash, (1813) 1 V. & 8. 551 at 554

13, Jowitt, Dictionary of English Law (1959), Vol. 1, page 416.

14, Halsbury, 3rd Ed., Vol. 32, page 344, para 541.

15. As to the development of partition actions, see generally Patel v. Premabhai,
(1954) A.C. 35; (1953) 3 W.LR. 836 (P.C).

16, Le. by 8 & 9 Will. 3, ०. 31 (1696-7) (repealed).

17, Section 36, Real Property Limitation Act, 1833 (3 & 4 Will. 4, ०. 27) (repealed).

18, Section 34, Judicature Act, 1873.

er ayaene

43° -


No power of
sale,

Power of sale
in English law.

Effect of Parti-
tion Act, 1868.

Power to direct
sale,

Present law.

Partition Act, 1893

I. Compensation

Before the Partition Act 1868, Courts of Common Law could not award
compensation, but could direct only a mere partition or allotment of lands and
other real properties between the Parties, according to their respective shares,
having regard to the value of the properties! The Courts of Equity could,
however, with a view to a more convenient and just partition, order payment
of compensation to one of the parties for “owelty” or equality of partition,
So as to prevent any injustice or avoidable inequality.

IL... Sale

‘There still remained another difficulty, even in Chancery. Though the
Court of Chancery assumed jurisdiction to decree ‘partition, the Court had no
discretion to refuse partition or to order sale in lieu thereof? ‘This position
produced numerous inconveniences and absurdities. Before the Partition Act
of 1868, the Court had no power at common law to direct a sale in lieu of
Partition, even in case where partition in specie was highly inconvenient and
largely affected the value of the property. Statutes °-- were, therefore, passed
in 1868 and 1876 to give jurisdiction to the Court to Srder. in certain cases,
sale of the property and distribution of the proceeds in lieu of partition.

A classic example of the inconvenience experienced at common law is
provided by the case of Turner vy. Morgans A decree had been passed for the
partition of a housed among three persons. The Commissioner allotted to th
plaintiff the entire stock of chimneys, all the fire places, the only staircase in
the house and all the conveniences in the yard. On appeal, Lord Eldon, the
Lord Chancellor, in overruling the objection, said that “he did not know how
to make a better partition for the parties; that he granted the commission with
great reluctance ; but was bound by authority; and it must be a strong case
to induce the Court to interpose; as the parties ought to agree to buy and selt”.

It was in 18686 that the Court was empowered to decree a sale instead of
partition, Such an order might be highly desirable where, for example, the cost
‘of partition proceedings would exceed the value of the property,’ or where a
single house had to be partitioned into thirds, and the owner of two-thirds was
given all the chimneys and fireplaces and the only stairs;? but if there were
three houses, each share would have consisted of one house, and not a third
of cach house.? .

The Act of 1868 provided for sale at the discretion of the Court, and also
for mandatory sale if a moiety of the co-owners requested for sale. By an
amendment made in 1876, it was provided that an action for partition was to
include action for sale and distribution of proceeds.

The Partition Acts have now been repealed.!° Instead, subject to certain
qualifications, a power is given to the trustees for sale (in whom the legal estate
is vested) to effect a partition with the consent of the beneficiaries, and convey
the land to them.!) If the trustees or any of the beneficiaries refuse to agree to
a partition, any person interested'* may apply to the court, which may make
such order as it thinks fit,!’—such as, an order for sale.

1. Gadadhar Ghose v, Janaki Nath Ghosh, ALR. 1969 Cal, 59, referring to Story,
Equity Jurisdiction, 3rd Edn., Art. 654.

2, Halsbury, 3td Ed., Vol. 32, page 35, paragraphs 541, 542.

3. The Partitioa Act, 1868 (31 & 32 Vic. ०. 40) (Appendix 1).

4, The Partition Act, 1876 (39 & 40 Vic. ०. 17) (Appendix 2).

5. Turner v. Morgan, (1803) 8 Ves. 143, 11 Ves. 10 Pembe 2

‘ition Act, 1868 amended by the Partition Act, 1879. See Pemberton v. james,

sth rac ere 685; Powell v. Powell, (1874) 10 Ch. App. 130; Drinkwater v. Ratcliffe
(1875) L.R, 20 Eq. 528,

J. See Griffies v. Griffies, (1863) 11 W.R. 943.

8. See Turner v. Morgan, (1803) 8 Ves. 143, 11 Ves, 157 n.

9. Earl of Clarendon v. Hornby, (1718) 1 P. Wms, 446.

10. LP. (Am) A., 1924, ss. 10, 123), 10th Sched; L.A, 1925, 7th Sched.

31. LP.A., 1925, s. 2803).

12. For the meaning of “persons interested”, sce Stevens v. Hutchinson, (1953) Ch.
299.
13. LP.A., 1925, &. 30.


Appendices 45
IV. Partition Acts of 1868 and 1876 in England

It may be mentioned that in the (English) Partition Act of 1868, the power Secti f the
of sale could be exercised under three sections applicable to three different earlier Act ana-
situations. Though the Act has been repealed, an analysis of these sections might !
be useful from various points of view.

Under section 3 of the English Act of 1868, if it appears to the Court,
that by reason of the nature of the property or the number of the parties
interested or presumptively interested, or the absence or disability of some of
the parties, or of any other circumstance, a sala of the property would be more
beneficial for the parties interested than a division, the Court may, if it thinks
fit, on the request of any of the parties interested and notwithstanding the
absence or disability of any of the other parties, direct a sale of the property
and make all necessary or proper consequential directions.

Under section 4 of the Act of 1868, if a party or parties interested, indi-
vidually or collectively, to the extent of one moiety or upwards in the property
to which the suit relates, request the Court to direct a sale of the property etc.
instead of a division, the Court shall, unless it sees good reason to the contrary,
direct a sale of the property.

Under section 5 of the English Act of 1868 if any party interested in the Power to order
property requested the court to direct a sale of the property etc., the court sale under sec-
might, if it thinks fit, unless the other parties interested in the property or some tion 5.
of them undertake to purchase the share of the party requesting a sale, direct
a sale of the property and give all necessary or proper consequential directions,
and in case of such undertaking being given, the court may order a valuation
of the share of the party requesting a sale in such manner as the court thinks
fit and may give all necessary or proper consequential directions,

Generally! in determining whether? a sale was more beneficial than a Position in Eng-

partition, thé court considered only the pecuniary results, distegarding matters land as to sale.
of sentiment, and had regard to the interest of all parties interested as a whole.
But the court could, and would, order a sale where in its discretion it thought
fit, unless the parties opposing a sale undertook to purchase the shares of those
desiring sale. It may be added that a party asking for sale was not compellable
to part with his share at a valuation.?

All these sections applied only where there was a suit for partition in which
a decree for partition could have been made “if the Act had not been passed”.

The following analysis will show the points of difference between the three
sections :—

Section 3 (1868 Act) Section 4 (1868 Act) Section 5 (1868 Act)

(Sale ordered because of the Sale ordered because of Sale ordered on the request of
nature -of the Property etc. request of parties infe- a party, irrespective of any
rested in a moiety. consideration of nature of the
property etc. or desire of per-
sons interested in moiety of

the interest etc.

(ii) Sale discretionary. Sale obligatory, unless Sale discretionary.
good reasons to the con-
trary.

(lif) Request of any inte- Request of parties inte- Request of any interested
rested party is enough. rested in a molety is ne- party is enough.
cessary.

(iv) Noright to other co- No right to other co- | Other co-sharers can purchase
sharers to purchase the share sharers to purchase and __ the share of the party request-
of the party requesting a sale thus to avert a sale. ing sale.

and thus to avert a sale.

1. Halsbury, 3rd Ed. Vol. 32, page 346, para 543,
2. Section 5, Partition Act, 1868 (31 & 32 Vic. ० 40), ”
3. Pitt, v. Jones, (1880) 5 App. Cas. 651.


46

Reasons for re-
peal of Partition
Acts.

Effect of 1925
Act.

Advantage to the
purchaser.

Partition Act, 1893
V. Legislation of 1925

The Partition Acts of 1868 and 1876 hi
of शा Ast ave now been repealed by the Law

The reasons for repeal of the Partition Acts (in England) may be briefly
stated. In a tenancy-in-common, the existence of a number of persons interested
in the land, each of them entitled to a separate share, raised a serious difficulty
in transfer. There was no one person in whom the legal estate could properly
be vested, because all tenants had the equal right to present enjoyment and
Possession. Not only was it necessary to obtain the consent of each party, but
alse the title of each of them had to be deduced for transfer. This created
contusion. हे

To end such a confusion, the Law of Property Act, 1925 radically altered
the law relating to tenancies-in-common.} The object of this legislation was to
enable land which is subject to tenancies-in-common fo be sold without casting
upon the purchaser any obligation to consider the titles or the beneficial] rights
of the tenants. Section 1(6) of the Act of 1925 therefore provided, as a first
step,4 that a legal estate is not capable of subsisting or of being created’in “an
undivided share in land”.

It is then enacted that an undivided share in land shall. not be created
except behind a trust for sale. This involves two consequences, 76

First, the legal estate must be held by trustees holding as joint tenants upon
trust for sale.

Secondly, the subject-matter of the tenancy in common is converted’ from
land to money, for land directed to be sold is regarded by equity as
having already been sold.

The third step is the group of provisions in sections 34-38 of the Law of
Property Act, 1925 whereunder, the legal estate must be held upon a
“statutory trust for sale”.

As a result of this statutory trust for sale, the purchaser is released from
the old duty of checking the title of each person. Further, the receipt in writing
of the trustee is sufficient discharge to the purchaser, and he is not bound to
see to application of the money. *°9

The advantage to the purchaser by this scheme is that he is no longer
compelled to investigate the title to each tenant in common. He is concerned
only with the legal estate held by the joint tenants upon trust for sale, since
the rights of the persons beneficially entitled exist merely as equitable interests
behind the trust for sale, and they are overreached upon a conveyance of the
land by the trustees for sale, provided that the purchase money is paid to at
least two trustees or to a trust corporation. It is a matter of indifference,
therefore, that some of the tenants in common are minors, or that some of them
are unwilling to acquiesce in the sale.

Although, in the case of a statutory (as distinct from an express), trust for
sale the trustees are required, so far as practicable, to consult, and give effect to

1. See section 207, Law of Property Act, 1925 (15 & 16 Geo. 5 ५. 20).

2 For a summary, see Halsbury, 3rd Ed., Vol. 32, pages 345 and 346, paragraph
543, and footnote (h) at page 346.

3. As to conversion, see Snell, Equity (1966), pages 517--519.

4. Cf. Cheshire, Modern Law of Real Property (1976), page 222.

5. Section 36(4), L.P.A. 1925.

6. Cheshire, Modern Law of Real Property (1976), page 225.

7. As to conversion, see Snell, Equity (1966), pages 517, 519.

8. See section 1461), Trustee Act, 1925 (15 & 16 Geo. 56 J |

9, Snell, Equity (1966), page 273. . a “


Appendices

the wishes of the beneficiaries entitled in posséssion, or in the case of a dispute,
of the majority in terms of value, yet it is expressly enacted that it shall be no
concern of a purchaser to see that this requirement has been complied with.!

In view of these detailed provisions, retention of the Partition Acts became why English
unnecessary in England. Sale is now the rule in the case of all lands held by Acts repealed,
co-owners (subject to certain exceptions which are not relevant for the present
purpose), and partition an exception, unless by consent.

VI. Statutory trust for sale—The machinery

47

The statutory trust for sale in England operates as follows :-— Operation of sta-
tutory trust for

Under the Law of Property Act, when there is a statutory trust, the gale,

Jand is held upon trust to sell the land, with power to postpone the sale
and to hold the rents and profits until sale and the ultimate proceeds of the
sale upon trust to give effect fo the beneficial and equitable rights of the
persons to whom the land was limited.”

So long as all the trustees desire to continue their enjoyment. of the
property, they need not sell the land, in view of the power to postpone
the sale.3 But if all of them cannot agree to postpone the sale, the impera-
tive direction to sell must be given effect to. If the persons concerned are
all of full age in undivided shares, they all become joint tenants upon this
statutory trust. Thus, if land is conveyed to A, B, C and D in equal shares,
then all four become joint tenants of the legal estate, and are entitled,
equitably to the proceeds of the sale when the sale is held, and to the rents
and profits until the sale is held.* They need not sell at once, or indeed
at any time, in view of their power to postpone the sale. Instead of sale,
a partition of the land is also allowed.5 The trustees or personal representa-
tives of the persons beneficially interested have also this right. ५7

There is no deadlock in the scheme of the English Act. Either the other No possibility

tenants-in-common agree to purchase the share—in which case the trust for sale ©

is terminated by a conveyance to those beneficiaries, or (if the trustees refuse
to exercise their power) the beneficiary can apply to the court for a vesting or
other order, 8-9 It may also be mentioned that any “person interested” can apply

for an order to compel the trustees to sell.!°

Tt remains to note that by section 90 of the Inclosure Act!! 1845 power to Other statutory

make partition orders was conferred upon the Inclosure Commissioners.

power ultimately devolved upon the Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries, but
this power was seldom used, and is believed to have been impliedly repealed

by the provisions of the Law of Property Act, 1925.12

jg Provisions in
This Pogland.

To revert to the Law of Property Act,!3 a legal estate is not now capable No legal estate

of subsisting or being created in an undivided share in land and in most cases in undivid

it can now be created only so as to take effect behind a trust for sale. 15

Thus, neither a joint tenancy nor a tenancy in common as known to the
common law can now be held in England, except in the capacity of trustees. As
a result of the passing of the Act of 1925, partition actions in England have been

rendered unnecessary, and have become obsolete.'®

1. L-P.A. 1925, 5, 20(3); as amended by L.P(A.) A., 1926, Sched.

2. Section 35, Law of Property Act, 1925.

3. Goodeve & Potter, Modern Law of Real Property (1929), page 395,
4. Section 34(2), Law of Property Act, 1925.

5. Section 28(3), Law of Property Act, 1925.

6. Re ‘Brooker Public Trustee v. Young, (1934) Ch. 610.

7. As to chattels, see section 188, Law of Property Act, 1925.

8. Goodeve & Potter, Modern Law of Real Property, (1929), pages 402, 403.
9. See Snell, Equity (1966), page 247.

10. Section 3, Law of Property Act, 1925,

11. The Inclosure Act, 1845 (8 & 9 Vic. ०. 118).

12. Halsbury, 3rd Ed., Vol. 32, page 346, para 544.

13. Section 106, Law of Property Act, 1925 (15 & 16 Geo, 5 ०. 20).

Halsbury, 3rd Ed., Vol. 32, page 329, para 514, page 338, para 529 and section 36

14.

(4) of the Settled Land Act, 1925.
15, Sections 30, 34, 35 & 36, Law of Property Act, 1925.
16. Halsbury, 3rd Ed., Vol. 32, page 344, para 540.


48

Effect of section +

34(2) LP. Act
1925.

Settled Land
Act, 1925,

Legislation in
England of 1964,

Partition Act, 1893

It is unnecessary to go into further details about the provisions of the 1925
Act. It is enough to add that section 34(2) of the Law of Property Act 1925
provides, in effect, that conveyance of land to any person in undivided share
shall (where the persons are of full age) operate as if the land had vested in
the grantees as joint tenants upon the “statutory trusts hereinafter mentioned”.
Under section 35 of that Act, such a trust is upon trust to sell the same 806 to
possess the net proceeds of sale after payment of costs etc., upon such trusts
and subject to such powers and provisions as may be requisite Tor giving effect
to the rights of the persons interested in the land.

i Sections 23 to 26 and 28 make detailed provisions as to how the trust for
sale is exercised, and how the property is to be managed until it is sold.! Unsold
lands can be partitioned, or provision made for equality money under section
28(3) of the 1925 Act. Chattels can be partitioned under section 188.

if one of the tenants in common unreasonably refuses consent, then an order
for sale can be obtained from the court, but the court would make such. order
only if it is satisfied that it is just and proper to do so, and may impose terms
as to alternative accommodation. 2.3

Where the land is settled land, the matter is governed by detailed provisions
in the Settled Land Act, 1925. Again, it is unnecessary to enter into any elaborate
discussion thereof for the purposes of this Report.* In practice, the legal fec
simple is conveyed to trustees (who may or may not be the beneficiaries) upon
an express trust for sale, the details of which are set out in full on the face of
the document of settlement which would give all necessary or proper conse-
quential directions.

In 1964, legislation was enacted ih England tc: remove certain doubts as to
how far a surviving joint tenant could sell off his share.6 The details‘ of this
legislation are also not material for the present purpose. ‘

See M. Lewis, “Statutory trusts for sale” (1940) 56 L.Q.R. 255.
2. Bull v. Bull, (1955) 1 A.E.R. 253, 256 (C.A.).
3. See also Cook v. Cook, (1962) Probate 235, (1962) 2 A.E.R. 811.

4. For a neat summing up of the points, see Stephen's Commentary on the Law of
England (1950), Vol. 1, page 220.

5. The Law of Property (Joint Tenants) Act, 1964.

6. See Law Times (March 20, 1964), page 159.

GIPN—-S6—317 L.A.D./ND/81—30-1-82—1500