LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

EIGHTY - SEVENTH REPORT

ON
IDENTIFICATION OF PRISONERS ACT,1920

1980


Justice P.V. DIXIT, CHAIRMAN

LAW COMMISSION
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

New Delhi, August 29, 1980.

Call
My dear Minister,

Tam herewith sending the Eighty-seventh Report of the Law Commission on ‘Identification
of Prisoners Act, 1920’.

2. The object of the Act is to provide legal authority for the taking of measurements of
finger impression, foot-prints and photographs of persons convicted of or arrested in connec-
tion with certain offences. Since the enactment of the Act some sixty years back, there has been
much advancement in the scientific use of finger impressions, measurements of foot-prints and
other limbs of the body, photographs in detection of crimes. It is, therefore necessary to revise
the Act so as to make it correspond with modern trend in criminal investigation. In its Report,
the Law Commission has suggested several amendments of the Act in that direction.

3. Our chief debt is owed to Shri P.M. Bakshi, Member-Secretary, who prepared the Report.
The assistance given by Shri V.V. Vaze must also be acknowledged with thanks.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,
Sd/—
(P.V. DIXIT)

Shri P. Shiv Shanker,
Minister of Law, Justice &
Company Affairs,
Government of India,
New Delhi,


CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 2

CHAPTER 3

CHAPTER 4

CHAPTER 5

CHAPTER 6

CHAPTER 7

APPENDICES
Appendix 1
Appendix 2
Appendix 3
Appendix 4

CONTENTS

Introductory
Historical ..

Significance of the Act : Its general scheme and analogous
laws o + न

Preliminary matters : Sections 1 and 2

Taking of measurements, fingerprints and photographs :
Sections 3 to 5 .

Incidental provisions : Sections 6 to 9

Summary of recommendations

English law as to fingerprints and photographs
American law as to fingerprints and measurements
Select cases on article 21

Analysis of operative provisions

PAGE

12
21
23

25
29
33
35


CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTORY

1.1. In view of the importance in the field of criminal investigation of the Identification of Genesis of the
Prisoners Act, 1920, it has become necessary to have a fresh look at the Act, enacted some 60 Report and scope.
years back, and to revise it so as to make it correspond with modern trends in criminal investi-
gation. That apart, a suggestion has been made by the Supreme Court in a recent judgement!
for amending the law relating to identification in regard to the particular point which was
before the Court’.

On an examination of the Act, it was found that the entire Act needed to be reviewed.
Accordingly, this Report deals with the whole of the Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920.

1.2. The Act of 1920 was drafted to meet certain difficulties that had been felt in the imme- Comprehensive
diate past before its enactment. As often happens with legislation drafted to meet an immediate examination not
76805, a comprehensive examination of the area to which the Act of 1920 related was not undertaken
undertaken at the time of its enactment. This is amply borne out by the many local amend- Previously.
ments made in the Act by several States. Revision of the Act on an All India basis has not been
undertaken so far. Such a review appears to be called for on account of many reasons, one
of them being the practical difficulty pointed out in the judgement of the Supreme Couit4.

1.3. Legal discussions in India during the past 20 years or so concerning various measures Scope of legal
of identification adopted by the police have centred mainly on the constitutional prohibition ‘Sussions so far.
against self-incrimination laid down in Article 20(3) of .the Constitution,—or some-times
on the value of a particular species of identificatory evidence. The effect of the constitutional
prohibition is now, as a result of a series of judgements of the Supreme Court, fairly clear.

So far as is relevant to the present discussion, it can be stated that compulsion to procure
“‘non-communicative” evidence is not prohibited by the Constitution.

As regards the value of particular species of identificatory evidence, again, the position
is now fairly clear as a result of decisions of various courts.

1,4. But the very fact that constitutional issues have, in the past, loomed large in the case Need to focus 1
law on the subject has obscured one important aspect of the general law, namely, that the sli- attention on legal
ghtest interference with the body or use of force to compel the furnishing of even non-commu- हे
nicative material requires a statutory authority, in the absence of which such action would
Prima facie attract tortious liability. Once this aspect is borne in mind, the need for clear
and specific statutory provisions on every step that the police or any other investigating agency
proposes to take in this area cannot be disputed. It is on this aspect, therefore, that a pretty
large part of the discussion to be found in some of the succeeding chapters of this Report
will necessarily concentrate.

1.5. The process of investigation of offences is essentially one of the collection of factual कक ल्थ)४| गि bar eaieiel
material needed for the ascertainment of past events. In modern times the process by its very दस in Investi-
nature must enlist the services of several scientific disciplines. Information relevant to the °°"
process comes to the police in different ways and, in gathering scientific evidence, different
types of coercion may have to be applied. But there is one general legal principle which,
though elementary, requires to be pointed out. That is the principle that in a country govern-
ed by the rule of law such coertion must have specific legal sanction.

Hence the need for provisions clearly demarcating what coercive measures can be
adopted in investigation.

1.6. The police do have powers of arrest in specified cases. But mere arrest does not give Powers of the
a right to search® the person or to take other coercive measures of interference with the Police.
person. This rule of the common law is the implicit assumption underlying the Act, and forms
the basis for specific and precise provisions on the matters concerned®. This Report seeks to
examine how far those provisions are in need of improvement.

State of U.P. v. Ram Babu Misra, (1980) 2 8.C.C. Part 3, pages 343, 346, para 8 (issue dated May 1980),
*Para 5:25, Infra.

*Chapter 2, infra.

“Para 1-1, supra.

*The King v. Queen, (1968) 3 W.L.B. 391,'394-11, 398 (P.C.).

“Seo, further Chapter 2, infra,


Need for balance.

Article 21 of the
Constitution—

procedure establish-

ed by law.

Guidelines in
judicial pronounee-
ments.

Scheme of discus-
sion.

Constitutional
competence.

2

1.7, The Report is therefore concerned with coercive measures employed in the investi~
gative process. In the formulation of such coercive measures, a balance has to be struck
between the rights of an individual and the imperative need in the interests of the society
for the protection and punishment of crime. This is not an easy task. It is beset with diffi-
culties.

There are in conflict two competing interests—the interest of the citizen to be protected
from invasion of his physical privacy and the interest of the State to secure evidence which has
a bearing upon the commission of crime are in conflict.

Reconciliation of the two is the basic preblem. Of course, we are here using the
expression “privacy”: s indicating those values which a civilised socicty would like to cherish
for protecting the human desire for secrecy and anonymity as also for freedom from physical
interference. The discussion is not intended to imply that such a right in all its amplitude is
recognised in Indian law.

1.8. Besides the above general consideration which emphasises the need to reconcile two
conflicting interests, it is proper to mention that we have, in formulating our recommendations,
borne in mind the developing law relating to the concept of “procedure established by Law”
under Article 21 of the Constitution}.

Recent years have witnessed a judicial construction of this concept that adds a new dimen-
sion to the Article®. The effect of decisions of the Supreme Court—to state it very broadly—
is that it is not enough that the action of the State conforms to the fundzmental rights guaranteed
by other provisions in Part वी of the Constitution. State action must also satisfy the
test of Article 21, and can be challenged if it restricts personal liberty in a manner that violates
the requirement of “‘procedure“ established by law, as construed judicially.

1.9. This 's a comparztively recent development znd not all the aspects of legislation restric-
ting personal liberty have yet come before the courts for being tested in the light of the cri-
teria® Jaid down by the Supreme Court‘. One cannot, therefore, with very great confidence,
assert that this or that restriction on personel liberty would, or would not, meet the criteria
so laid down. However, such guidelines ६५ cre available from judicial pronouncements on the
subject rendered so far® have been kept in mind by us in formulating our recommendations.
We heve considered this to be purticularly necessary, since the subject touches a sensitive area
of human rights—bodily integrity and interferenc with it at the instance of the State, although
such interference may be in the cause of the prevention and detection of crime.

1.10. In order to obtain a proper perspective of the subject matter of the Act, we pro-
pose to deal first with its significance, its general scheme and its history, and then to proceed
with an examination of its provisions. These provisions fall into three main categories—
(i) preliminary, (ii) operative, and (if) incidental’. The territorial extent of the Act and
the definitions given in the Act, which constitute the preliminary provisions, will be taken up
first, followed by a review of the operative provisions. We shall conclude our Report by a con-
sideration of the incidental provisions of the Act.

1.11. Some of the matters that fall to be considered in this Report involve an examination
of one important constitutional question—how far does the subject matter of the Act fall within
the competence cf Parliament ? We shall deal with this question in due course*, when we
commence our detailed consideration of the Act. However, by way of anticipating our con-
clusion, we may State that, in our view, Parliament is competent to legislate on the matters
which are, at present, dealt with in the Act of 1920 as also on the matters in regard to which we
are, in this Report, proposing an addition to the law.

मन Appendix 3.
2Neo Appendix 3.
Para 1:8, spre
sAppendix 3.
SAppendix 2
Para 3°13, स्व,

sPara 3°13, वीर,
*Paragraphs 4:3 to 4:8, infra.



CHAPTER 2

HIsTORICAL

2.1. As enacted, the Act gives importance to three species of evidence—finger -prints!, Fingerprints.
measurements and photographs. Of these three, historically speaking, finger-prints are the most
important. It is well known that the science of finger-prints originated in India, Sir William
Herschel of the Indian Civil Service and Sir Francis Galton being the scientists who systema-
tised it. The use of finger-prints for the investigation of crime is now a common method all over
the world. It has been stated :

“Although the use of finger-prints for identificetion is said to have been known
to the ancient Egyptians, its place in Anglo-Saxon jurisprudence was not established
until after the middle of the ninteeth century. The Bertillon system of identification which
includes photographs, finger prints and measurements of the body, is of a still more recent
date. This system es used in Criminal Law has twe main purposes. The first is the iden-
tification of the accused person as the person who committed the crime with which
he is charged, and the second is the identification “‘of शा accused as the seme person who
has been charged with or is convicted of other crimes. For this second purpose the
police of most of the cities of this country (U.S.A.) and Europe attempt to keep the des-
cription cf every person arrested by them, in permanent records. These records are

oo

popularly known as ‘rogues’ galleries’.

2.2. One of the leading cases in Australia illustrates the importance of fingerprints. Case in Australia.
The appellant had been convicted of house-breaking. The only evidence against the appellant
depended upon a comparison of one of several finger-prints on a bottle (which was in a shop
when broken into), with a print of the middle finger of the appellants’ left hand taken in
goal. The High Court refused leave to appeal against the conviction observing as follows :—

“Signatures have been accepted as evidence of the identity as long as they have been
used. The fact of the individuality of the corrugations of the skin on the fingers of the
human hand is now so generally recognised as to require very little, if cny, evidence of
it, although it still seems to be the practice to offer some “expert evidence on the point.
A finger-print is therefore in reality an unforgeable signature. This is now recognised in a
large part of the world and in some parts has been for centuries.”

2.3. At this stage, we would like to quote the statement of Objects and Reasons annexed Statement of
to the Bill which became the Act of 1920. The reasons for the enactment of the Act are thus objects and Ressons,
given inthe Statement of Objects‘ :

“STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS”

“The object of this bill is to provide legal authority for the taking of measurements,
finger impressions, foot-prints and photographs of persons convicted of, or arrested in
connection with, certain offences. The value of the scientific use of finger impressions
and photographs as agents in the detection of crime and the identification of criminals
is well known, and modern developments in England and other European countries ren-
der it unnecessary to enlarge upon the need for the proposed legislation.”

1, See definition of “measurements”.

2, Annotation, Right to Take Finger Prints and Photographs of the Accused (1933) 83 I.L.R. 127.
3. #. v. Parker, (1912) 14 C.L.R. 680 (Australia).

4. Gazette of Indie (1920), Part V, page 162,


History of section 5

4

“The existing system by which the police in India take finger impression, photographs
etc., “of criminals and suspected criminals is void of legal sanction, except as regards
registered members of criminal tribes, in whose case provision exists for the taking of
finger impressions in section 9 of the Criminal Tribes Act, 11911 (III of 1911). The need
for legalising the practice has long been recognised, but it was not thought expedient to
take the matter up so long as no practical difficulties arose. Instances have recently been
reported to the Government of India where prisoners have refused to allow their finger
Prints or photographs to be taken. With a view to prevent such refusals in future it is
considered necessary without further delay to place the taking of measurements, etc.,
which is a normal incident of police work in India as elsewhere, on a regular footing.
No measurement, etc., of any person will be taken compulsorily unless that person has
been arrested.?

2.4. We shall have occasion to deal in detail with the history of certain points of parti-

cular relevance to section 5, in this Report.

1, Criminal Tribes Act, 1911.
3, Paragraphs 5:21 and 5-22, infra.


CHAPTER 3

SIGNIFICANCE OF THE ACT : Its GENERAL SCHEME AND ANALOGOUS Laws
1. Significance

3.1. At this stage, a few words about the significance of the provisions of the Act of 1920 significance.
i the gencral context of the Indian Legal system would be eppropriate.

3.2. The principal object of the Act of 1920 is to permit the taking of certzin coercive Object of coercive

measures in order to facilitate the “identification” of— measures and rela-
tionship to criminal

(1) convicts, procedure,

(2) persons arrested in connections with certain offences, and

(3) persons ordered to give security in certain cases.

_, THESE MEASURES constitute the means sanctioned by the Act. The object, of course, is to
facilitate the identification of criminals or suspected criminals. The mersures themselves are
connected with the subject of ‘criminal produdure’— an aspect to which we shall advert
later.!

3.3. Modern writers on criminology now use the word “criminelistics” to denote the use Criminalistics and
of scientific techniques in the investigation of crime.?-3 It is an applied science devoted to physical evidence.
the application of the natural sciences for the purposes of law enforcement. In U.S.A.,
criminalistics has been defined as that part of that aspect of police work which involves the
collection and processing of physical evidence.4-5

३.4. Much of such evidence can be obtained without requiring the arrested person to Relationship of the
exhibit the body or otherwise to participate physically. But cert:in types of evidence can be Act to the law of
rey only by his active physical perticipation and the Act provides the statutory suthority Tet.
fr reap iring the accused to do so. In this sense, the Act is of considerable importence in
the realm of the law of torts, since the rules re cognised by that law confer protection cgainst
physical interference without lawful authority.

3.5. The object of the Act being to procure evidence, its vital bearing on the law of evi- Relationship of tLe
dence is obvious. But the evidence procured is of a specie] nature, being somewhat diff- Act to the Low cf
erent from oral or documentary evidence which constitutes the usual species. The material Evidence.
sought to be procured with the help of the coercive measure sanctioned by the Act is reclly
in the nature of demonstrative evidence®.

3.6. The object of all evidence is to re-create the events that led to the controversy now Object of evidence.
under trial. Its goal is to appeal to the five senses of the presiding officer, so that he may (on
the disputed fects) arrive at a conclusion from what he perceives by those senses. This is
sought to be achieved, in practice, by a variety of means constituting several species of evi-
dence.
3Para 3-3. infra,
ACf. Grassberger. University Teaching of Social Sciences (UNESCO) (1957), page 62.

38ee also Sutherland and Cressey, Criminology (1968), pages 348. 349, reserring also to Ohara and O'storling,
Introduction to Criminalisties.

‘Bennett Sandler, Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice (1979), page 127.
5As to the torm “physical evidence”, see note in (1964) 80 L.Q.R. 18.
"Soe para 3-9, infra.

BI-M/T(N)HOMofLI&CA—2 3


Vital question in a

criminal case,

Physical evidonce
and personal chars
acteristies,

Real or @emonstra-
tive evidence.

6

3.7. The ultimate and most vital question in a criminal trial is—

Are the accused person und the person chara. terised 2s having committed the crime one
and the sime person? The quesiioa is most commonly enswored in one ofthe two ways!

(a) It may he possible to establish | connection between some physic:] evidence essocia-
ted with the crime und some personal characieristic of the iccuscd (such as, blood
group, fing:r-prints, etc.).

(4) It may be possible to show a connection between the scene of crime and some other
definite f:.ctor linked with ihe accused such 65, the fibres of ६ textile which had been
put on by the sccused, or the peculiar nature of the physical marks on the garment
found at the scene of crime and its connection with the vocation of the accused.
Work done in the course of a vocation may be of a particuler nature which leads to
the coming into existence of some peculiar marks on the garments.

3,8, Of course, physical evidence? is of infinite variety; it may include blood, hait, ammuni-
tion and fire: rms, soil, the humen voice and dinger-prints.

Personal cheracteristics used for the identification of criminals are—roughly in order of
precision—the following? :

(t) blood group :

(2) colour of the hair :
(3) voice :

(4) general appearances:

(5) shope ond size nd arrangement of the teeth and bones : and
(6) fingerprints.

II. Demonstrative Evidence

3-9. Such evidence falls in the category of real or demonstrative evidence. Real or
demonstrative! evides:ce is the “things” thet are introduced zs exhibits and explained by
testimony. In such circumstances oral testimony is secondary to the exhibit or object. Demons-
trative evidence is often the most important cvidence in a crimine] trial. The humen body,
pictures, maps, charts, drawings, models, znd samples of handwriting, are all examples of
demonstrative evidence, which must ७150 mect the tests of edmissibility end relevancy. Im-
portant examples of demonstrative evidence might be—finger-prints of an accused on the

stolen propery or on doorwzys, or on furniture at the scene of the crime. Measurements have
also a part to play.

One knowledge: ble writers has mentioned the following measures of identification in
deteil :

(a) Fingee-
(6) Ear:
(c) Bones and teeth;

(व) Skull;

(e) Fluids and hair (External);
(f) Fluids (Internal);

(g) Fibres;

(h) Handwriting;

(0) Voiceprint (spectrograph).

vints, foot-prints and footwear prints:

AHL. J. Watts, Forensic Medicine (1968), page 9.

*Para 2-3, supra,

SH. J. Watts 4 Porensie Medicine (1

4¥or the ph
(1969) pages:

oH. L. Bar
pages 16-22,

8). pace 106. .
D. J. George, Constitutional limitations on evidenee in criminal eases

jonstrative’™, 8:

, “Personal identification—Recent trends and techniques” (Tuly 1970), Ledian Police Journg)


7

वा, Objects of identification

3.10. We shall now deal briefly with the objects of identification. The taking of mea- The objects of iden-
surements and photographs for the purposes of identification and the procuring of other tification.
evidence for that purpose might have a number of objects to be achieved.

(a) In the first place, if finger-prints or other identifying materials in regard to a parti-
cular person have been taken or collected, identification becomes easy when there is a suspec-
ted repetition of the offence or of a similar offence by the same person, since it is then possible
to check whether the person as to whom the record of identification material has been kept is
the person who has now repeated the offence.

Section ३3 of the Act would be particularly useful for these purposes, dealing as it does
with the taking of measurements etc. of convicted persons or persons who have been ordered
to give security for good behaviour. Here, the section looks to the future.

Measurements so taken may also be useful in cases where there is a suspicion (at the time of
taking measurements or other evidence for identification) that the person mde to undergo
this procedure has had a previous conviction.’ Here, the section looks to the past.

(8) Secondly, identification may be necessary for the purpose of an investigation into au
alleged offence in order to establish the identity of the person arrested with the actual culprit,
on the basis of the demonstrative evidence. “Ultimately, the material so collected would be
tendered as evidence, mainly under section 9 of the Evidence Act. Sections 4 and 5 of the Act
of 1920 are primarily concerned with this aspect. Section 7 is also, to some extent, concer-
ned with such identification.

(c) Thirdly, identification may be useful to establish a previous conviction—i.e. iden-
tity of the arrested person with a person previously convicted. Section 3 would be useful in
this context®. Such previous conviction may itself be admissible in evidence either for impos-
ing higher punishment or (in some cases) asa relevant fact or fact in issues.

(४) Finally, identification may be useful for statistical purposes,—for example, measure-
ments of convicted persons may be collected and analysed in order to confirm or reject any
theories of anthropoligical interest that may be put forth in regard to criminals. The Act of
1920 does not directly concern itself with this aspect. But measurements and other material
taken under the Act can be used for such purpose also, if necessary.

IV. Scheme of the Act Scheme of the Act.

3.11. Let us now see how the Act seeks to achieve these objectives. The scheme of the
Act briefly is this. The first two sections deal with preliminary matters (short little, extent of the
Act and definitions). Various species of demonstrative evidence that can be procured form
the subject matter of three operative provisions—sections 3, 4, and 5—which confer on the
specified authorities power to take such evidence.

3.12. Here the Act employs a dichotomy. It makes a distinction between (i) situations Dichowmy.
where the power to take such evidence is given to a police officer (of the prescribed rank), and
(ii) situations where an order of the Magistrate is considered a pre-requisite before taking such
evidence. The distinction so made is obviously based on the solicitude of the law for the free-
dom of the individual even while he is under arrest.

3.13 The operative provisions of the Act are :
Section 3—Taking of measurements etc. of convicted persons.

Section 4—Taking of measurements etc. of non-convicted persons arrested for an
offence punishable with rigorous imprisonment for one year or upwards.

Section 5—Power of Magistrate to order a person to be measured or photographed.

Provisions analyse.

1 See para 3:10 (०), infra.
9 See para 3-10 (a), supra,


Principle underlying
the Act,

Act not exhaustive
other techniques of
identification,

Voice prints furnish
‘one example of phy-
sical evidence not
dealt with by the
Act.

Categories of identi-
fication material not
closed.

8

The following sections deal with incidental or consequential matters :—

Section 6, Resistance to the taking of measurements, etc.

Section 7. Destruction of photographs and records of measurements etc. on
acquittal.

Section 8. Power to make rules.

Section 9. Bar of suits.

3.14. It may be observed that the Act proceeds upon the principle that the less serious the
offence, the morc resiricted should be the power to make coercive measures. Correspondingly,
the more serious the offence, the wider the power to take coercive measures conferred by the
Act. Thus, section 3 (which is mainly confined to offences of a serious nature) confers the
specified powers on police officer. But, in contrast, section 5 (which has a much wider scope)
requires magisterial orders before coercive measures can be taken thereunder. Section 5 is
applicable to action to be taken for the purposes of “any investigation or proceeding under the
Code of Criminal Procedure : : + ”

V. Scope

3.15. The Act of 1920 does not, of course, exhaust all the conceivable species of evidence
that might be collected to fucilitate ideatification. In addition to the matters included in
the Act, 8 great variety of techniques for the study of the traces of crime has been developed.
The techniques of physics and chemistry have, in recent times, been extensively applied to the
detection of crime. It would be difficult to enumerate all of them exhaustively. It is also un-
necessiry to do so, since we do not propose to insert in the Act any omnious provision or an
all-embracing section on the subject. As we have already stated!, in formulating such pro-
posals the law must try to strike a proper balance between social needs and individual privacy
An all-embracing and pervasive provision might unintentionally have the effect of authorising
many practices, which may not be desirable.

3.16. Often, it becomes desirable to have an accused person speak for the purposes of
giving to the police an opportunity to hear his voice and try to identify it as that of the criminal
offender. A comparison may even be desired between the voice of an accused person and the
recorded yoice of a criminal which has been obtained by, say, telephone tapping. To faci-
litate proof of the crime the police may like that the accused should be compelled to speak,—
and even that his voice as recorded may be converted into a ‘voice print,’2-3

Words so compelled to be spoken for the purposes of comparison may not amount to
testimonial compulsicn with the scope of the constitutional privilege against self-incrimination
as now understood, so long as the matter which the accused is compelled to speak does
not relate to the crime.‘ They represent really evidence of a physical nature. The accused, -by
speaking such words, is giving merely “‘identification data”, and is not subjected to any
“testimonial compulsion.” .

However, if the accused refuses to furnish such voice, there is no ‘egal sanction for
compelling him to do so, and the use of force for that purpose would be Sie legal.

3.17. Obviously, the categories of data to be collected for purposes of indentification
cannot be closed. Ata given point of time they may be enumerated with reference to the species
of evidence generally found to be useful at that particular time. But advancing scientific know-
ledge must go on adding to the list. In fact, there could be no end to the species of demonstra-
tive evidence that can come into existence and prove to be useful in the investigation of
crime, Even shoe-prints have been regarded as useful in identification.®

1, Sco para 1-7, supra.
2. Of. R. v. Keating, (1909) 200. Appeal Reports 61.
3 See Thomas McDade, “The Voiee-Print” (July 1970) Indian Police Journal, 9३३०३ 26—34.

4 Compare Inbau, Self-inovimination (1950), page 51, referred to by Moreland, Criminal Propedure
(1959), pages 78-79,

5 HS. Longia, “Shoe-print Identification” Vol. 18, Indian Police Journal, pages 14 to 19,


9

3.18, This somewhat elaborate discussion of the significance of the Act and of the Manifold aspects of
various aspects of identification would show how important a place the Act ‘occupies, not the Act.
only in the realm of evidence but also inthe realm of criminal procedure and—what is often
not adequaetly appreciated—in the realm of criminal statistics and penology.

IV. Analogous provisions.

3.19. The Act of 1920 is not the only statutory authority for the toking of signature in Analogous provi:
legal proceedings. There is an analogous provision in section 73 of the Indian Evidence Act, छह अत iwadens
1872. That section empowers the Court to take specimen signature or finger-prints from a हे
person present in Court.

3.20. Section 73 wes considered at length by the Law Commission in its Report on the Earlier recommen-
Evidence Act. 7-2 The Commission discussed in detail the conflict of decisions on the question dation“as to section
wheather section 73 could be invoked at the stzge of Investigation. The Commission noted 73, Evidence Act.
that the Evidence Act applies only to ‘judicial proceedings’ and observed that it would be
inconsistent with the general scheme of the Act to provide in a section of the Act for a power
exercisable at an earlier stage, and recommended that it should be made clear that the power
under section 73 operates only after the Court has taken cognisance ofa matter.

The Commission recommended the following re-draft of section 73 :—

“73, (1) In order to ascertain whether a signature, writing, or seal is that of the
person by whom it is alleged to have been written or made, any signature, writing or seal
admitted or proved “‘to the satisfaction of the Court to have been written or made by
that person may be compared by or under the orders of the Court with the one which is
to be proved, although that signature, writing or seal has not been produced or proved for
any other purpose.

(2) The Court may direct any person present in Court to write any words or figures
for the purpose of enabling comparison of the words or figures so written with any
words of figures alleged to have been written by such person.

(3) This section applies also, with any necessary modifications, to finger impressions,
palm impressions, foot- prints and typewriting.

Explanation.—Nothing in this section applies to a criminal court before it has taken
cognizance of an offence.”

3.21. Besides the Evidence Act, the Foreigners Act? gives power to the Central Govern- Foreigners Act.
ment to make rules, inter alia, requiting a foreigner to allow his photograph and finger im-
pressions to be taken and to furnish specimens of handwriting and signature to the prescribed
authority at the prescribed time and place.
3,22. After this brief survey of the scheme of the Act and of analogous provisions and Section by section
recommendations made in the past, we proceed to examine the Act of 1920 section by examination.
‘ion.

1, Law Commission of India, 69th Report (Indian Evidence Act, 1872) (May 1977), pages 445 10453, chapter 33
2, Law Commission of India, 69th Report (Indian Evidence Act, 1872) (May 1977), pages 452.53, para 33.40
२, Section 3(2) (iv) and 11(2) , Foreigners Act, 1946,


CHAPTER 4

PRELIMINARY MATTERS : SECTIONS 1 AND 2

Seotion 1 (1)-Com- 4.1. With reference to section 1(1) which relates to the short title of the Act, we would

mont regarding fhe like to point out that the present short title is not quite appropriate, for two reasons.

Act. First, the use of the word ‘‘prisoners” is somewhat misleading. That word, to the ordinary
layman, carries the sense of a convicted person. The Act, however, is applicable not only to
persons convicted, but also to a person who has been arrested for the specified offence or for
the specified cause.

Secondly, the word “identification” used in the title is also not very expressive. It seems to
lay emphasis on the process of identification and creates an impression that the Act is concerned
with what have come to be known as “identification parades.” However, the scope of the Act
is quite different from that of“ identification parades.” It is concerned more with certain measure-
es to be taken and evidence to be collected that would facilitate identification at a later stage
than with the process of identification.

In view of this, we are of the oninion that there is room for improvement in the short
title. It is difficult to think of a title which would be short and at the same time expressive;
but we suggest that the Act can be more appropriately titled as “Criminal Procedure (Physio-
logical Evidence) Act” or as‘‘Criminal Investigation (Physiological Evidence) Act.”

Section 1(2) of the 4.2. Section 1(2) provides that the Act extends to the whole of India except the terri-

Act of 1920. tories which immediately before the Ist November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States.
Thus, some areas of India are still left out of the scope of the Act. In 1951, a number of Central
Acts were by a specific Central legislation? extended to areas then comprised in Part B States,
but the Act under consideration was not so extended. We have devoted some thought to the
matter and have come to the conclusion that the Act should be so extended to those areas.

‘True position as to 4.3. Legislative competence of Parliament as to the subject matter of the
competence, Act cannot in our opinion, be doubted as it falls within “criminal procedure.”
Section 3 of the Act (which deals with obtaining the measurement of convicted
persons) is, no doubt, concerned with persons in prison and could arguably be related
to the legislative entry—‘prison and prisoners.’ But 3pretty large portions of the
Act—particularly, sections 4 and 5 (and so much of sections 6 to 9 as provides for matters
connected with sections 4 and 5), are really relatable to ‘criminal law’ and ‘criminal pro-
cedure,’—matters which fall in the Concurrent List. ‘If the investigation of an offence can be
regarded as a part of ‘criminal procedure,’ then certainly these sections of the Act should

also be regarded as forming part there of.

Section 3 as falling 4.4. Even as to section 3, which we have already mentioned above®, its subject-matter
within “Criminal seems to fall within the topic of “criminal procedure.” Fingerprints of various persons men-
Procedure”, tioned in the section are principally taken to ensure their identification in case of suspected

repetition of crime or, in some cases, to check if they have already committed a crime. Essen-
tially speaking, then, the section deals with a matter incidental to the enforcement of the
criminal law by appropriate process and belongs to the field of criminal procedure.

Scope of “criminal 4.5. It is true that these matters (i.e. the taking of fingerprints etc.) were not “included
procedure”. in the Code of Criminal Procedure” at the commencement of the Constitution, so that the
inclusive portion of the relevant constitutional entry relating to ‘criminal procedure”? may
not literally apply to them. But that does not necessarily imply that they do not belong to
the domain of*criminal procedure’’. The ambit of that concept is fairly wide, if properly
understood. Though the taking of measutements etc. is not specifically mentioned in the
Code of Criminal Procedure, it cannot be denied that it is part of the investigative process,
its object being to arrive at a certain tentative conclusion on the basis of material so collected.

(b) Acts extending the Procedural Codes.
. Concurrent List.
. State List, Entry 4.
. Concurrent List, Entries 1-2.
«para 4, 3, supra.


11

4.6. We may, as regards the scope of the expression “criminal procedure’’, mention that Academic practice—
many books on criminal procedure deal with the subject of investigation also. One notable की के Procedure

example is that of the leading American book on the subject!. cept.

As has been observed by another writer? on the American Legal System, while describing
police investigation,—

“Criminal procedure is an extensive concept. It describes the entire field of criminal
prosecution, beginning with the police investigation and, thus, is not limited to the actual
prosecution which begins with the indictment’.

4.7. The mutter could be approached from another angle. From the analysis of the Objects _ connected
various aspecis of identifice tion my de cerlisr in this Report, it? would be evident that the princi- With criminal justice,
pal urpose of identificztion is the uchievement of certain objects essentially connected with
criminal justice. So viewed, the entirety of the subject matter of the Act of 1920 can be legi-
timately regarded as falling within the subject of ‘criminal pracedure’’.

4.8. If the view taken by us tebout legislecive competence is correct in kw, then there Section 1(2) to be

should be no difficulty in extending the Act of 1920 to the whole of India except the State of @mended.
Jammu and Kashmir. Once this is done, the wey is clear for considering improvements in

various sections of the Act. The changes to be proposed need not therefore be confined to the
Provisions of section 5.

In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that the Act should be extended to the
whole of India except the St:.te of Jammu and Kashmi The mending Act will, of course,
take care to repeal corresponding laws in force in arezs formerly comprised in Part B States
and make such transitional provisions 2s me y be necessary.

Section 2—Defini-

4.9. This tckes us to section 2 which contains three definitions. tions,

Clause (a) provides that ‘measurements’ includes finger impressions and foot-print
impressions.

Clause (b) provides that ‘police officer? means en officer in charge of a poli
a police officer making an investigation under Chepicr XIV of the Code of Crin
dure, 1898, or any other police officer not below the rank of sub-inspector.

According to clause (c), ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

_ 4.10. We have comments to offer only on clauses (a) and (b) of section 2. In clause (a), Changos recommen.
which defines ‘measurements’, palm impressions should be added. Their utility is well esta- ded in ‘oction 2 (a)
blished, in regard: to the investigation of offences. and Section 2 (0),

In clause (b), & reference to the Code of 1973 (and its relevant chapter) should be substi-
tuted, in place of the reference to the Code of 1898.

We recommend that section 2(a) and 2(b) should be amended accordingly.

3, Orfield, Criminal Procedure from arrest to appeal.
3. Peter Hay, Introduction to United States Law (1976), page 193.

3, Pata 3-10, supra.

4, Pata 4:7, supra.
5, Cf. English law (Appondix 1).


Statutory authority,

Use of foree iltegat
without authority.

Section 49, Cr. P.C
1973.

Importance of sec-

CHAPTER 5

TAKING OF MEASUREMENTS, FINGER-PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS : SECTIONS 3 to S$
1. Statutory authority for use of force

5.1. We propose ६० consider in this Chapter sections 3 to 5, which constitute the statu-
tory authority for taking certain measures for collecting evidentiary material from arrested
or convicted persons and others. The use of force as a sanction for such measures, dealt
with in section 6, will be considered in a later chapter.

_ 3.2. It is well established that in the absence of a specific statutory provision empower-
ing a specified authority to take finger-prints or measurements or to compel a person to fur-
nish specimen signature, the use of force for any of these purposes would prima fo facie amount
to civil wrong.' If there is actual or threatened physical interference with the body by compul-
sion,” the common Jaw action in tort; (for assault or battcry) would be available. Where
such compulsion is “non-testimonia!”, questions of a constitutional nature with reference
to Article 20(3) may not arise, but the general law of tort would still have to be complied
with,

5.3. Moreover, it is against the spirit of the Code of Criminal Procedure to read any
mplicd power to direct a person to give a specimen of his signature under pain of penalty
or to furnish other physical evidence.

In this context, section 49 of the Code of Criminal Procedure quoted below is relevant—

“49. The person arrested shall not be subjected to more restraint than is necessary
to prevent his escape”.

Thus, even if the testimony sought to be procured thereby is not of a “communicative”
nature, the use of coercive measures would be 1088) unless specific statutory authority exists.
This shows the significance of sections 3-5, which confer such authority in regard to measure-
ments as well as photographs.

3.4. As to photographs, the taking of photographs without the consent of the person to
be photographed is no doubt not illegal, according to the position as generally understood in
India. But the use of force to compel a person to stand up for being photographed would
need statutory authority, and this is precisely what saction 6 provides.

Il. The proper approach-balance between law enforcement and liberty.

5.5. Such coercive measures—i.e., the use of force for procuring identificatory evidence-
derive their authority fiom sections 3, 4 and 5 read with section 6. 7 Sections 3, 4 and 5 confer
power on the police, or in certain cases, on the magistrates, to direct the persons concerned
to furnish demonstrative evidence of the specified types. Section 6 authorises the use of force
for the purpose. These provisions constitute the most important part of the Act.

Improvements appear to be needed in these operative provisions, in certain respects.
For example, the species of evidence thet may be directed to be furnished by an arrested: per-
son or by a convict may have to be added to, in view of various scientific developments,, The
range of offences in connection with which (after arrest) such evidence can be required to
be furnished may also need to be expanded, in the interest of detection and prevention of
crime. Further, even where, though no ‘offence’ in the strict sense is cl |, yet, proceed-
ings for good behaviour (or analogous proceedings) have been instituted srt es the law, some
expansion of the scope of the relevant provisions may be called for.

1, Law Commission of India, 87th Report (Code of Criminal Procedure)(sections 1 to 176), Appendix 6, pages
203 to 208.

2, Law Commission of India, 69th Roport (Evidence Act), Chapter 33.

3, Section 49, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

12


13

5.6, At the same time, while expanding the scope of these provisions, the need to pro- Aspect of human
tect freedom of the individual ought not to be lost sight of. The subject is a sensitive area thts.

of human rights-bodily integrity and interference therewith under the aegis of the 18७7, This
is an aspect of fundamental importance. We hope thit while formulating our recommenda-
tions, we have not lost sight of this important aspect.

HI. Taking of specimen signature and possible legislative devices for making an amendment

5.7. Before dealing with the content of the operative provision, we would like to address Legislative device
ourselves to a consideration of the legislative device best fitted to implement the suggestion considered.

made by the Supreme Court in the judgement? to which we have already made a reference?,
Holding that section 73 of the Evidence Act cannot be invoked for requiring a person to
furnish a specimen of his handwriting at the stage of investigation, the Supreme Court added
that “‘suitable legislation” (on the unalogy of section 5 of the Identification of Prisoners Act,
1920) should be enacted, investing Magistrates with powers to require a person to furnish spe-
cimen writing or signature during investigation.

There can hardly be ery doubi about the need to amend the law on the point suggested
by the Supreme Court. The question thit requires to be considered is about the legislative
device to be adopted for achieving the objects in question. The object of investing Magistrates
with the power in question could be achieved by adopting one of several alternatives :

(6) amending? the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;
(ii) amending® the Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920;
(ii) framing® a separate law for the purpose.

Amendment of section 73 of the Evidence Act would, of course, be out of question, as
the Act is not concerned with the stage of investigation.

The Supreme Court did not, of course, make any observations implying that the amend-
ment or addition to be made for this purpose should be made to the Act of 1920, or, for that
matter, to any particular enactment. The words “suitable legislation” (in the judgement)?
leave the matter elastic. In this connection, we have, as stated above,-considered several possible
alternatives. Our examination of the present statutory framework has satisfied us that most
convenient course would be to make the necessary amendment in the Act of 1920. The posi-
tion with reference to the merits of each alternative, briefly discussed below, would seem to
support our conclusion.

5.8. The first alternative’ would be to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 by Amendment of the

inserting suitable provisions either in the Chapter of that Code relating to investigation (say,
as section 165A, 165B and so on) or in the Chapter dealing with search. In that case, however,
a number of further provisions—provisions by way of penalties, definitions and roles—would
have to be inserted to deal with several incidental matters, and these might spoil the compact-
ness of Chapter 14 of the Code, if not the symmetry of the entire Code.

Moreover, for the detailed implementation of the power proposed to be added, some
matters would have necessarily to be left to rules—a course which docs not fit in with the gene-
ral pattern and style of the Code. An amendment of the Code woud therefore suffer from certain
serious drawbacks.

. See also para 1-7, supra.
» State of U. P. v. Ram Babu Misra, (1980) Vol. 2, Part 3, 8.0.0. 348, 346 (May 1, 1980),
Para 1-1, supra.

. Para 5:8, infra.

. Para 5-9, infra.

Para 5-10, infra.
१. Paragraphs 1-1 and 6-6, supra.

*, Pare 5:7, supra,
81-M/J(N)56MofLI&CA—3

Code not preferred.


14

Second alternative

preferable 5.9. In comparison, the second alternative! mentioned by us—amending the Act of 1920—

appears to be a smoother one. The Act is a more appropriate place for inserting the requisite
provisions (both substantive and consequential). The substantive additions—power to require
2 person to sign—can be made without much violence to its present structure. Moreover,
amendment of that Act would involve adding the least amount of statutory matter. The Act
already contains detailed provisions dealing with matters incidental to, or consequential on,
a direction to furnish the specified types of demonstrative evidence.

Any new power to be conferred could be dealt with suitably by an amendment of the rele-
vant operative provision; and provisions incidental to the exercise of the new power could
also be conveniently accommodated in the existing incidental provisions of the Act.

In fact, by making minor amendments to sections 6 to 8 of the Act, incidental matters
could be adequately provided for and this process would involve addition of the minimum
amount of statutory matter. It is therefore preferable to amend the Act of 1920.

Question of separate 5.10. We also considered the third? alternative, namely, enactment of separate legislation

legislation. to deal with the matter. However, if this device is adopted, the advantages to be gained by
amending the Act of 1920, to which we have already madea reference above®, would be lost.
The separate law to be newly enacted would have to provide for several incidental matters,
thus leading to duplication. We would, therefore, adhere to our preference for amending the
Act of 1920 as the most convenient device for dealing with the point raised‘ in the judgement
of the Supreme Court.

A separate Act would have to provide for a number of matters of detail. The provisons
to be inserted would, having regard to the methods of legislative drafting in India and its
traditions, have to follow closely the wording of the Act of 1920. Such a course should,
if possible, be avoided, since it would needlessly encumber the statute book and duplicate
certain propositions.

Thus, even for the limited purpose of effecting a reform on that point, amendment of the
Act of 1920 is the most convenient course. In fact, the point is analogous to section 5.

Act of 1920 to be 5.11. Prima facie, then, we are inclined to adopt the alternative of incorporating the
amended. necessary amendments tin the Act of 1920. We do not think that such a course is likely to
raise any serious legal or practical problems.

IV. Powers of the police : sections 3 and 4

Section 3 Changes 5.12. With these general observations as to the operative provisions, we proceed to con-
Tecommended. sider their specific content and text.

Section 3 State 5.13. Section 3 requires every person who has been convicted of certain specified offences

Amendment, or who has been ordered to furnish security for good behaviour under the Code of Criminal
Procedure to allow his measurements and photographs to be taken by the police officer in the
prescribed manner, if so required. Offences mentioned in this behalf are—offences punishable
with rigorous imprisonment for a term of one year or upwards and also offences which would
render the person convicted liable to enhanced punishment on a subsequent conviction.

As a result of practical difficulties experienced in the working of the section—presumably
because of its limited scope—extensive amendments have been made by several States in the,
section. We have taken ourselves through those amendments and, as a result of our study
have come to the conclusion that the scope of the section needs to be expanded in certain di-
rections. For example, while the test of punishment of rigorous imprisonment of one year or
upwards laid down in section 3 is satisfactory so far as it goes, certain other offences should
also be included, having regard to their nature and to the consideration that, in practice, they
are likely to be persistently repeated, because of the prospect of gain. For this reason, we re-
commend that the offence under section 19 the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 should be included
in section 3 of the Act of 1920. Section 19 punishes a person who, without licence, engages in,
or controls, any trade whereby a dangerous drug is obtained outside India and supplied outside
India. The offence is likely to be repeated in view of substantial profits likely to accrue from
its commission.

3, Para 5-7, supra.
2, Para 5:7, supra.
3, Para 5-9, supra.
4, Para 5:7, supra.



15

5.14, Apart from the case of conviction under section 19 of the Dangerous Drugs Act!, Section 18, Dang-
a person in respect of whom orders under section 18 of that Act have been passed should also, ११०७४ Drugs Act.
in our opinion, be included in section 3. Section 18(1) of that Act reads as under :—

“18, Security for abstaining from commission of certain offences—(1) Whenever any
person is convicted of an offence punishable under section 10, section 12, section 13 or
section 14 and the Court convicting him is of opinion that it is necessary to require such
person to execute a bond for abstaining from the commission of offences punishable
under those sections, the Court may, at the time of passing sentence on such person, order
him to execute a bond for a sum proportionate to his means, with or without “sureties,
for abstaining from the commission of such offences during such period, not exceeding
three years, as it thinks fit to fix.”

In our opinion, such persons may, for purposes of the matter under discussion, be regarded
as standing on the same footing as persons to whom section 3 already applies, The
epithet “dangerous” in the short title of the Act is significant.

5.15. While the amendments recommended above would expand the scope of section, Other minor changes
a few other minor changes are also required in the section. In clause (0), in place of the present in section 3.
teference to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, reference to the Provision n in the Code
of 1973 should be substituted. Further, in the last line, after the words “if so required”,
the words “‘by a police officer” should be added, for the sake of precision®.

5.16. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section 3 should be re- Suggested redraft of
vised as under :— Section 3,

Revised section 3

“3. Every person who has been—

(a) convicted of any offence punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term of one
“Year or upwards, or

(0) convicted of any offence punishable under section 19 of the Dangerous Drugs Act,
1930, or

(©) convicted of any offence which would render him liable to enhanced punishment on a
subsequent conviction or

@ ordered to give security for his good behaviour under section 117 of the Code of Crimi-
nal, Procedure, 1973 or under any other law for the time being in force, or

(©) ordered to give security for abstaining from the commission of certain offences®
under section 18 of the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930.

shall, if so required by a police officer allow his measurements and photographs to be
taken by a police officer in the prescribed manner.”

5.17, Section 4 provides for the taking of measurements of any person who has besn gection 4—State
arrested in connection with an offence punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term of one Amendments.
year or upwards, if so required by a police officer. State amendments to this section have
expanded its scope in several directions.

4 In the first place, power has been given to take also a photograph of the persons concern-
ed.

In the second place, persons who have been arrested under section 19 of the Dangerous
Drugs Act or section 7 of the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements),
Act, 1954 or section 8 of the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 1956
have been covered5,

4, Pare 5-13, eupra.
3, Compare section 4.

3. Under section 18, Dangerous Drugs Act, socurity for abstaining from the commission of certain offences can be
required,

3, Para 5-13, supra,
8, Compare Maharashtra Act 35 of 1970.


Need to
the section,

improve

16

In the third place, persons arrested under sections 54, 55 or 151 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898 (now the Code of 1973—sections 41 and 151), have been covered.!

In the fourth place, persons in respect of whom a direction or order under section 5 of the
Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 has been made, have been covered. That section autho-
rises the Central Government to order the removal from India of a person who has entered
without passport.

In the fifth place, persons to whom pardon has been tendered under certain provisions of
the Code of Criminal Procedure have been covered. Finally, persons arrested in connection
with offences under certain local laws relating to police, beggers and habitual effenders have been
cove! od

5.18. We are of the opinion that many of these amendments, in view of their importance
to the detection and prevention of crime and the maintenance of records of suspected criminals
and otherwise with reference to achieve satisfactorily the various objects of identification, deserve
to be adopted for the whole of India. While some of them are of local interest, a few others.
have an all-India importance. At the same time, we are not inclined to make the scope of the
section very wide.

As regards persons arrested by the police under section 41, it is enough to include section
41(2) of the Code of quoted below :—

“41(2). Any officer in charge of a police station may, in like manner, arrest or cause
to be arrested any person, belonging to one or more of the categories of persons specified
in section 109 or section 110.”

Section 151(1) of the Code may be expressly covered. It reads—

“151, (1) A police officer knowing of a design to commit any cognizable offence
may arrest, without orders from a Magistrate and without a warrant, the person so de-
signing, if it appears to such officer that the commission of the offence cannot be otherwise
prevented.”

Section 19 of the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 has already been referred to. It punishes
a person who ‘“‘engages in or controls any trade whereby a dangerous drug is obtained outside
India and supplied to any person outside India, otherwise than in accordance with conditions
of the licence granted under the Act.”

Section 7 of the Drugs & Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954 pu-
nishes a person who “contravenes any of the provisions of the Act or the rules made thereunder”.

Section 8 of the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women & Girls Act, 1956 punishes
the act of abducting or soliciting for the purposes of prostitution.

Section 4 of the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 provides for the arrest of “any
person who has contravened or against whom a reasonable suspicion exists that he has con-
travened any rule or order made under section 3.”

Section 5 of the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 provides for the issue of a direc-
tion or order for the “remova! of any person from India who, in contravention of any rule
made under section 3 prohibiting entry into India without passport, has entered therein... .”.

Section 306 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 provides for the tender of pardon
to any person supposed to have been directly or indirectly conerned in, or privy to, an offence
to which the section applies. Pardon is tendered to such person on condition of his making
a full and true disclosure.

Section 307 of the same Code provides for the tender of pardon to any person supposed

to have been directly or indirectly concerned in, or privy to, certain offences.

These are all offences which represent serious anti-social conduct likely to be indulged
in frequently because of profits. Identification material—such as fingerprints and photo-
graphs—would be particularly usefulin such cases.

1 Compare Maharashtra and Gujarat Amendment,

3, Maharashtra Act 35 of 1970, amendment of section 4 and new seotion 4A insortod by Bombay Act 58 of 1953.
3, Para 6°13, supra,


17

5.19, Bearing the above considerations in mind, we recommend thet section 4 should
be revised as under :—

Revised section 4
“4, Any person—

(a) who has been arrested in connection with an offence punishable with rigorous im-
prisonment for a term of one year or upwards, or

(b) who has been arrested under sub-section (2) of section 41 of the Code of Criminal, Pro-
cedure, 1973, or

(c) who has been arrested under section 151 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or

(६) who has been arrested in connection with ar offence punishable under—
(i) section 19 of the Dargerous Drugs Act, 1930, or

(ii) section 7 of the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act,
1954, or

(iii) section 8 of the Suppression of Immoral, Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 1956, or
(e) who has been arrested under section 4 of the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920, or

(7) in respect of whom a direction or order under section 5 of the Passport (Entry into India)
Act, 1920 has been made, or

(g) to whom a pardon has been tendered under section 306 or 307 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973.

shall, if so required by a police officer, allow his measurements or photograph to be taken by
a police officer in the prescribed manner.’’

V. Magisterial orders—section 5—the present position as to signature.

5,20. This takes us to section 5. That section empowers a magist! to order a person
to allow his meusurements or photograph to be taken, where the magistrate is satisfied that
for the purpose of any ‘investigation or proceeding under the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1898? (this was the Code then in force), tt is expedient to make such a direction, It is then
obligatory for the person directed to attend at the time and place specified ir. the order and
to al fiow his measurements or photograph to be taken by the police officer. There are cer-
tain safeguards in this behalf, provided by the two provisos to the section.

5.21, It is to be noticed that section 5, as it stands at present, does not permit an order
to be passed direciing a person to furnish a specimen signature or handwriting. The rea-
sons for this narycw scope of the ssction are partly historical. The Act of 1920 was drafted
to mect an immediate need. The difficulty that had been actuzlly experienced roundabout
1915 related only to photographs and fingerprints. There had been no difficulty reported
as to taking a specimen signature.

5.22. Even as regards photogrephs and fingerprints, no difficulty seems to have been

Recommendation
to revise section 4.

Section 6.

Position as to taking
of specimen.
signature,

Position before and
1918,

felt before 1915. But, in 1915, the Government of Bengal drew attention to the case of two after

dangerous conspirators convicted in the Raja Bazar bomb case who were most persistent
in their refusal to be photographed. That Government further reported that instances were
becoming frequent in which prisoners 1efused to allow their fingerprints or photographs to
be taken. It was in this background that the Government of Bengal suggested certain amend-
ments in the Police Act and the Prisoners Act with a view to enabling the police officers and
jail superintendents to take fingerprints, measurements, etc. of persons under arrest, under-
trial prisoners and convicts!,

1. National Archi papers relating to Act 53 of 1920, despatch to the Secretary of State for India from the
‘Home Department No. 8 of 1918 dated 18th September, 1918.



Legal questions not
raised 80 far.

Position in England
88 to signature.

Suggestion of
Supreme Court.

Identification
of voico—present
position.

18

_The Government of India, after an examination of the whole question, came to the con-
clusion that—

“No further time should be lost in placing on a regular footing a practice which is the
normal incident of police practice in India.”

Since no difficulty had been felt as regards the taking of signature as such, no provision
on that point was contemplated in 1920.

5.23. In fact, even after 1920, the legality of coercive mezsures to secure identificatory
evidence in general does not seem to have been directly in issue before the courts. After
the commencement of the Constitution, some constitutional questions with reference to the
compulsory taking of evidence have, no doubt, been debated in courts. But the position
under the general law of torts has not been discussed at length in India. Even in the leading
case relating to self-incrimination under article 20(3) of the Constitution, where one of the
set of documents in issue related to certain specimen signatures taken from the accused in
the erstwhile State of Bombay, the legality of the practice as such was not challenged.

The position in this respect, however, has now changed. The observations made by the
Supreme Court, already referred” to, render a detailed examination of this aspect desirable.

5.24. It would be of interest to note that in England no power has been taken to use
force to compel the taking of signature, though the taking of fingerprints has been provided
for a statutory regulations. We are setting out in an Appendix the English law in some
detail.

5.25. In India, the deficiency in section 5, resulting from the absence of a provision as
to the taking of signature became crucial in the case before the Supreme Court.4 The Sup-
teme Court, after holding that section 73 of the Indian Evidence Act did not apply at the stage
of investigation, made the following pertinent observations :—

“We accordingly dismiss the appeal and while doing so, we would suggest that suit-
able legislation® may be made on the analogy of section 5 of the Identification of Priso-
ners Act, to provide for the investiture of magistrates with the power to issue directions
to any person, including an accused person to give specimen signatures and writings.”’

Since a difficulty has already arisen as to specimen signature, a suitable amendment of
the law is necessary on the point. We shall, towards the close of this Chapter,® suggest a
suitable re-draft of section 5.

VI. Recording of voice

5.26. The scope of section 5 needs to be expanded in another respect. The general power
of investigation given to the police under the Criminal Procedure Code may not imply the
power to require the accused to furnish 2 specimen of his voice. Cases in which the voice
of the accused was obtained for comparison with the voice of the criminal offender are known
but the question whether the accused can be compelled to do so does not seem to have been
debated so far in India.

There is no specific statutory provision in India which expressly gives power to a police
officer or a court to require an accused person to furnish a specimen of his voice.

1, Kathi Kalu, A.1.H. 1961 8.0. 1808, 1816, para 21.
2, Chapter 1, supra.

3, See Appendix 1.
4, State of U. P. v. Ram Bubu Misra. (1980) 2 $.C.C. 341, para 8 (Ist May, 1980).
3, Emphasis added.
8, Para 5-32, infra,


19

5.27. It would appear that there is scope for the use of recording of voice in investigation.
A sound recording would, for example, be very useful where accent or lisp is important.)

A voice print? is a visual recording of voice. It mainly depends on the position of “for-
manis”. These are concentrates of sound energy at a given frequency. It is stated? that
their position in the ‘frequency domain”’ is unique to each speaker. Voice prints resemble
finger prints, in that each person has a distinctive voice with charzcteristic features dictated
by vocal cavities and articulcics*.

Voice-print identification seems to have a number of practical uses. In England, in
November 1967 at the Winchester Magistrate’s Court, a man was accused of making malici-
ous telephone calls. Voice-print identification (spectrograph) was used and the accused was
found guilty®.

Identification by voice has been often resorted to elsewhere".

5.28. In view of this scientific advance, it may be useful to expand the scope of ‘the
coercive measures sanctioned by the Act, so as to cover identification by voice. Though the
need for such identification may arise only occasionally, such a provision could be of great
value. Of course, a provision requiring a person arrested to speak certain words or to make
certain sounds cannot be enforced directly, in as much as, if the person concerned refuses to
do so, it is not physically possible to compel him to speak. At the same time, indirect sanctions
in the shape of a penalty (compare section 6) for refusal to do the specified act could be
applied.

If the above approach is accepted, the object could be carried out by adding, in section
5, suitable words at the appropriate place’.

VII. Recording Iof reasons for order of the Magistrate

5.29. We have so far discussed, in regard to section 5, questions of a substantive nature
mainly concerned with scope of the section. It is now necessary to consider matters of a pro-
cedural character. As the section stands at present, the magistrate is not required to give
reasons for the direction made by him under the section’. It appears to us that there are
several important considerations justifying the insertion of such a requirement.

In the first place, the section applies to “any person””—though, under the proviso, it is
necessary that such person should at some stage have been under arrest. Its scope is thus fairly
wide. In the second place, the section authorises the giving of a direction for the purpose of
“any investigation or proceeding” under the Code. This also shows the width of its coverage.
In the third place, the kind of action that may be directed under the section interferes with
bodily integrity and refusal is attended by criminal penalties. Propriety, therefore, requires
that reasons should be given for such a direction,

Apart from this one cannot overlook the emerging interpretation!® of “procedure estab-
lished by law” (article 21) that is now being developed by the Supreme Court. In view of
this developm2nt, it is desirable that the section shouid incorporate such a safeguard as is sug-
gested above. For allthese reasons, we are including this amendment in the redraft of section
5 which we are recommending later in this Chapter!!.

VIII. Overlapping between section 5 and section 73

5,30, While the above amendments would expand the scope of section 5, there is one
point in regard to which its scope may need to be restricted. This is necessary in order to
remove a certain amount of overlapping that exists at present between section 5 of the Act

1, Alec Samuels, “Idenitifieation Evidence” (1975)125 New L. J. 1146, 1147.

Ronnott Sandler, Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice (1979), page 303.

3, Bonnett Sandler, Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice (1979) note below figure 9—7.
५. Bennett Sandler, Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice (1979), pages 303-304.
‘Thomas Me Dade, “The voice-print” (1970 July), Indian Police Journal, pages 2634 .

. Soe Appendix.
. Soe para 5: 32, infra.

. J.B. Gubbary v. Emperor, A-L.R. 1936 Cal. 65, 67.
Section 6.

20, Seo Appendix 3.

मे, Para 6-32, infra,

Chapter 5—Utility
voice recorder.

Need to extend the
scope of section 6.

Reasons for a direc-
tion under Section 5,

Overlapping between
section 5, Act of
1920 and section 73,
Evidence Act.


Need for _amend-
ment- excluding from
section 5 enses
covered by Section
73, Evidence Act.

Recommendation
to revise section 6.

20

of 1920 and section 73, Evidence Act. If one takes the case of a magistrate acting in the course
of trying an offence, the overlapping becomes manifest. The magistrate may, at the trial
stage, require the person concerned—usually, the uccused person—to furnish a specimen of
his finger impression not only under section 73, but also under section 5. Section 5 is wide
enough to cover the stage of trial, as it covers every “proceeding” under the Code. There
exists, thus, an overlapping between the two.

So far as section 73 is concerned, its scope will, to a certain extent, come to be better
defined, after the recommendation? of the Law Commission on the Evidence Act is im-
plemented. According to the clarification as recommended by the Law Commission, section
73 will apply 10 4 court only after it has taken cognizance of an offence. To this extent the
overlapping will be reduced.

But section 5 (unless suitably amended) will continue to apply, inter alia, to the stage
after cognizance of an offence by a magistrate and, to that extent, overlapping will continue.
It does not need much argument to point out that such overlapping jurisdiction in this matter
is not only unnecessary, but also likely to create confusion. For example, section 5 is hedged
in with certain safeguards, while section 73 is not. Thus, the question whether safeguards
should or should not be complied with in a partiular case will depend on the statutory pro-
vision resorted to. This should be avoided.

5.31. It is to be noted that section 5 covers finger impressions and (after the proposed
amendment) will cover also signeture!. Both are covered by section 73 also, in regard to the
trial stage. That is how overlzpping arises.

In order to romove the overlapping, it is necessary that 2 provision should be inserted in
section 5 to ensure that it does not apply in relation to any action that the court is competent
to take under section 73 of the Evidence शैली,

IX. Recommendation as to section 5

5.32, In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section 5 should be re-
vised as under :—
Revised section 5
“(1) If a Magistrate is satisfied that, for the purpose of ony investigation or p1o-
ceeding under the Code of Criminzl Procedure, 1973, itis expedient to direct any person—
(a) to allow his measurements or photograph to be taken, or
(b) to furnish a specimen of his signture or writing, or
(©) to furnish a specimen of his voice by uttering the specified words or making the
specified sounds.
the Magistrate may make an order to that effect, recording his reasons for such an order.
(2) The person to whom the order relates—
(a) shall be produced or shall attend at the time and place specified in the order, and
(4) shalt allow his measurements or photcgraph to be taken by a police officer,

or furnish the specimen signature or writting or furnish a specimen of his voice,
as the case may be in conformity with the orders of the Magistrate before a police
officer.
“(3) No order directing any person to be photographed shall be made except by a
metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class.
(4) No order shall be made under this section unless the person has at some time
been arrested in connection with such investigation or proceeding.
(5) Where a court has taken cognisance of an offence a Magistrate shall not under
this section, give to the person accused of the offence any direction which could, under
‘section 73 of the Indian Evidence Act 1872, be given by such Magistrate.”

1 (a) Superintendent and Remembrancer of Legal Affairs v. Kiranbalt,A. 1. R, 1933 1928 Patna 103,
(b) *zahri.. Emporor, ALR. 1928 Patna 103.

2, Law Commission of India, 69th Report, para 33-40,

3, See para 3-20, supra.

4, Para 5-32, infra. and para 5:23, supra.

8, Para 5-32, infra.


CHAPTER 6

INCIDENTAL PROVISIONS : SECTIONS 6 TO 9

6.1. By now, we have disposed of the operative provisions of the Act, and we now
proceed to consider its incidental provisions. Of these provisions, section 6 is the most im-
portent. It provides ceriz.in senctions in regerd to resistence to the taking of mez surements or
photographs. Under sub-s 1), it shall be lawful to use all means neccss.ry to secure the
taking of moasurcmunis or piciogr.phs. Under sub-section (2), resistznce to, or refusal to
allow the taking of, messurements or photographs is deemed to be an offence under scction
186 of the Indian Penal Code (voluntarily obstructing a public scrvant acting in the discharge
of his official duties).

6.2. The provision in section 6(1) to the effect that on the resistance to the teking of mea-
surements or photographs or on the refusal to allow the taking of the sme, “it shall be lewful
to use idl means necessary io secure the t.king thereof” raises un inicresting question, ni mely,
how far is the person using such “necessary means’ allowed to go and what is the extent of
force that he can employ for the purpose ?

This sub-section is modelled on the provision relating to arrest in the Code of Criminal
Procedure!. Under that Code, if a person to be arrested resists forcibly che endeavour to arrest
him or «ttempts to evede the arrest, the police officer or other person «rresiing him “mzy use
all means necessary to effect the arrest”. The Code, however, further provides that nothing in
the section gives a right io cause death of a person whe is not accused of an offence punishable
with death or with imprisonment for life.

In the context of measures for identification, no such qualification was apparently con-
sidered necessary, because it would be unthinkable that the person taking “measurements”
would go to the length of causing death or even serious bodily injury.

We would leave section 6(1) undisturbed, no difficulty having crisen so far.

6.3, In view of tho amendment recommended by us in section 5 of the Aci?, section 6(2)
will need certain consequential changes so as to penalise refusal to furnish specimen signature
or voice.

6.4. Accordingly, we recommend that section 6 should be revised as under :—

Revised section 6

“6, Resistance to the taking of measurements, etc.—(1) If any person who, under this
Aci, is required to allow his measurements or photograph to be taken resists or
refuses io cllow the tking of the some’, it shall be lawful to use all means necessary to
secure the taking thereof.

(2) Resistance to, or refusal to allow, the taking of measurements or photographs
or refusal to furnish a specimen signature or writing or a specimen of voice under this
Act shall be deemed to be in offence under section 186 of the Indian Penzl Code.”

6.5. Section 7 provides for the destruction of photographs and records of measurements
on acquittal, except where the person concerned has been previously convicted of an offence
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term or one year of upwards.

1, Section 46(2) and 46(3), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
2, Para 5:32, supra.
3, It isunnecessary toadd the taking: ofsignature in sub-section.

a

Section 6.

Questions raised by
section 6(1) “means
necessary”.

Changes needed in
section 6(2),

Suggested re-draft
of section 6.

Section 7.


22

Seotion 7 to be reg 6.6, In view of the changes recommended by us in section 5, section 7 will also need
7 amplification S0_as to provide for the destruction of specimen signature or wirting or specimen
of voice. Accordingly, we recommend the following re-draft of section 7 :—

Revised section 7

“7, Destruction of photographs and records of measurentents etc. on acquittal.—
Where any person, . -Not having been previously convicted of an offence pun-
ishable with rigorous imp: ment for a term of one year or upwards, —

(@) has had his measurements taken or has been photogr::-phed or has Surnished any
Specimen signature or writing or a specimen of his voice in accordance with
the provisions of this Act,

(6) and is released without trial or discharged or acquitted by any Court,

all measurements and all photographs (both negatives and copies) so taken, and all
Specimen signature and writings or specimens of voice so furnished, shall, unless the Court
or (ina case where such person is released without trial) the District Magistrate or Sub-
Divisional Officer for reasons to be recorded in writing, otherwise directs, be destroyed or
made over to him.”

Section 8, 6.7. Section 8 empowers the State Government to make rules for the purpose of carrying
into effect the provisions of the Act, including, in particular, certain specified matters, which
are mostly connected with action to be taken under sections 3 to 7.

Revised section 8, 6.8. This section will need consequential changes in view of the amendments recommended
by us in section 5. Apart from that, opportunity may also be taken of providing that rules
under the section should be made by means of notification to be published in the official gazette.
Accordingly, we recommend that section 8 should be revised as under :—

Revised section 8

“8. Power to make rules—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this
Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision,
such rules may provide for—

(a) restrictions on the taking of photographs of persons under section 5;

(0) the places at which measurements and photographs may be taken or at which
any person may be required to furnish “‘any specimen signature or writing or
specimen of his voice under this Act ;

(c) the nature of the measurements that may be taken under this Act;

(d) the method in which any class or classes of measurements shall be taken under
this Act;

(९) the dress to be worn by a person when being photographed under section 3;
and

(f) the preservation, safe custody, destruction and disposal of records of measure-
ments and photographs and of specimen signatures and writings or specimens of
voices taken under this Act.

i 6.9. Section 9 contains a general provision barring suits or proceedings for anything
Setion A-No done or intended to be done in good faith under the Act or under rules made thereunder. Follow-
ing as it does, the usual pattern, it needs no special comments.

1, Para 5.32, supra.


CHAPTER 7

SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
We summarise below the recommendations made in this Report.

Chapter 4—Preliminary matters
(1) Short title of the identification of Prisoners Act, 1920 should be amended as re-
commended in the Report!.
(2) Section 1(2) of the Act should be amended so as to extend the Act to the whole of India
except the State of Jammu and Kashmir?.

aa (3) In section 2(a), which defines “measurements,” palm impression should also be
added.*

(4) In section 2(b), in place of the present reference to the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1898, a reference to the Code of 1973 should be substituted.

Chapter 5—Taking of measurements, fingerprints and, [photographs : sections 3 to 5.

(5) In section 3, the offence under section 19 of the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 should
be added. Further, in the same section, person in respect of whom orders under section 18
of the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 have been passed should also be included?.

(6) In section 3(5), in place of present 1eference to the Code of 1898. a reference to the
Code of 1973 should be substituted. Further, after the words “if so required,” the words “by
a police officer” should be added, for the sake of precision®,

(7) Section 4 should be amended so as to empower a police officer (as defined in the Act
to take photographs of the persons to whom the section” applies.

(8) Section 4 should be further amended to cover the taking of identification data
from certain other persons mentioned in the Report®, being persons arrested under various
statutory provisions as specified.

(9) Section 5 should be amended to provide specifically for a power (to be exercisable
by the authorities and subject to the safeguards given in the existing section) to require the
persons mentioned in the section to furnish—

(a) specimen signature or writing®
(9) specimen of voicel?.
(10) For a direction given by the Magistrate under section 5, reasons should be given'!.

(11) Overlap between section 5 of the Act of 1920 and section 73 of the Evidence Act
should be removed by excluding from the scope of section 5 a case in which « court can act
under section 73.12

3, Paragraph 4:1,

2, Paragraph: 8.

3, Paragraph: 10,

4, Paragraph 4-10.

8, Paragraphs 5: 13, 5-14 छत 5-16.

3, Paragraphs6: 16 and5: 16.

2, Paragraphs 5-17 to5: 19.

3, Paragraphs5-17to 9 19.

9, Paragraphs 6-21 to 5-25 and 5-32,
10, Paragraphs 5-26 to 5-28 and 5:32.
2, Paragraphs 5-29 and 5-32.

48, Paragraphs 5-30, 5-31 and 5-32.

23


24
Chapter 6—Incidential provisions : sections 6 to 9.

(12) In view of the amendments recommended in the other provisions of the Act, section
should also be amended to make consequential changes'.

(13) In view of the amendments recommended in section 5, section 7 should also be
consequentially revised?.

(14) In view of the amenmdnets recommended in section 5, section 8 should also be
amended for carrying out consequential changes. Further, it should be provided in the section
that rules under the section shall be made by means of ० notification to be published in the
Official Gazette’.

P.V. Dixit.
(89) ........
Chairman
S.N. Shankar
Sd/—
Member
G Prasad Pais
angeshwar Prasa Member
.M. Bakshi ae
P.M. Bakshi Member-Secretary

27th August, 1980.

3, Paragraphs 6-3 and 6-4.
3, Paragraph 6-6.
3, Paragraph 6-8.


APPENDIX 1

ENGLISH LaW AS TO FINGERPRINTS AND MEASUREMENTS

I. Common law

There is no general common law right to search the body of a person arrested,! except
for weapons which he carries or for evidence on his possession which is material to the offence
alleged to ha ve been committed.?-3

Although there is little English authority, it con be said with some confidence that the use
of force ngainst the body of a detained person for the purpose of obtaining evidence would
(unless there is « specified 7010 of statutory authority sanctioning it) be actionable as a tort.

There isa common law power to search arrested persons (the police have not tried to
assert that this power extends to a search of the body, as distinct from a search of the clothes
or exterior)*, But other cases of use of force would require statutory authority.

There is no common law right in the police in England to take finger prints without the
consent of the accused®. The consent must be free’,

Scott L.J. regarded the taking of fingerprints without statutory authority as inconsistent
with the presumption of innocence until proof of guilt and (if it followed anarrest) as an element
in the false imprisonment’,

The Scottish Justiciary Appeal Court in 19338. by a majority judgment, held that forcible
taking of finges-prints did not constitute a violation of the common law right of the subject in
Scotland. But it would appear that the English law was different this was pointed out by Lord
Hunter in his disszatiag judgm2nt in ths above mentioned case.

01% contemporury ariicle? offered these comments on the Scottish case. “Forcible taking
of fing2rprints 0055 not nupecr to have been the subject of rted English judiciai decisions.
It would b> wis>, how2ver, for thoss on whom the taking of such (fingerprints) devolves to
acquaint thomselves with the regulations on the subject and see that Such (regulations) are
strictly carried out.”

II. Present statutory provisions as to finger prints

The position in England as to finger prints is now governed by statutory provisions. The
Magistrates may order fingerprints! and palm prints! i of the accused to be taken, where he
has becn chai ged with a summary or indicatable offences, if an application is made by a Police
Officer not below th? rank of Inspsctor. This power cannot, however, be invoked where the
accused is under 14 yzars of age.!2-13

For th> purpos: of taking fingerprints, such reasonable force may be used as is necessasy.
Fing>r priats गा १५४ b> taken at the plic> where the court is sitting or where the person concerned.
is committed to custody or remand,

1, See also Chapter 1 of the Report.

2, Bessell v. Wilson, (1853) Law Times old series 233.

3, Halsbury, 4th Edition, Vol. 11, page 85, para 121.

4. Glanville L. Williams, The Privilege Agvinst Solf-Incrimination: An International aymposium (England)
(1961), 51 J. of Cri. Law, Criminology and Police Scienco 166, 169.

. Isschinsky v. Chritie, (1946) K.B. 124, 142 (Scott L.J.).
. Dumbell v. Roberts. (1944) 1 All E.R. 326, 330 (C.A.) (Por 8००४ L.J.).
|. Dumbell v. Roberts, (1944) 1 All E.R. 326, 330,
. See Law Commission of India, 69th Report.
Note in the Justice of Peaco, reproduced in (1933) 34 Criminal Law Jounral 71, 78.
. Section 40(1), Magistrates Courts Act, 1952.
Section 33, Criminal Justice Act, 1967.
Section 40.1), Magistrates Courts Act read with section 8, Children and Young Persons Act, 1967.
33, Moriarty, Police Law (1976), page 16.

n

25

Search of body.

Position in England
as to battery.

Position in Enland
as to fingerprints,

Use of force.


Regulations under
the Prisons Act.

Photographs.

Compulsion to
attend identificay
tion parade,

26

_, Fingerprints can be taken only of a person “who has been taken into custody and charged
with an offence before a magistrate.”!

But such prints may also be taken from any person who appears before a Magistrate’s

Court in answer to 2 summon for any offence punishable by imprisonment by virtue of one of the
the statutory provisions,? पु

If the information is dismissed, or if the examining justices’ do not commit the accused for

valor if he is ecquitted, the finger-prints and all copies and records thereof must be destroy-

Apart from the provisions mentioned above, there are statutory Regulations in force in
England relevant to the subject.* Under the Prisons Act, the Secretary of State may makeregu-
lations for measuring and photographing of psisoners.5 This provision applies also to remand
centres, detention centres and Borstal institutions and persons det::ined therein. Such Regu-
lations were made in 1896 under the corresponding evrlier legislation, and are continued in
force by the Prisons Act.*-7

A crimin»! prisoner may be photographed and measured at any time during imprison-
ment, either in prison dress or in any other dress suitable to his position in life. “Measurements”
includes, the taking of impressions of external filaments of the fingers and thumb of each hand
with ink.

An untried prisoner may be photographed or measured and his finger impressions taken
while in prison by order of the Secretary of State or upon a written application by a police
officer of not lower rank then a Superintendent. The application must be confirmed by a
magistrate or (in the metropolitan area) by the Commissioner or an Assistant Commissioner
of Police. The application must set forth that, from the character of the offence with which the
prisoner is charged or for other reasons, there are grounds for suspecting that the prisoner
has been previously convicted or has been engaged in crime or that from any other cause® his
photograph and measurements are required for the purposes of justice®.

There are provisions in England for the destruction or return of the photograph and
measurements on acquittal ctc. where the person concerned is an untried prisoner who has not
been previously convicted of crime. The provisions also enable the prisoners’ fignerprints to be
compated with other prints in the possession of the prosecution.

The U. K. Committee on identification evidence said!° :—

“The first 2nd most obvious case is when the accused refuses to attend the parade.
We have noted that in parts of the United States there has been a move in recent
years to employ a court order to compel.a suspect who is not already in custody to
attend an identification parade. But such has never been the practice in this country (U.K.)
and none of our witnesses had advocated its introducion; apart from the objectio.
in principle to the exercises of compulsion, everyone is agreed that a fair parade requires
the accused’s co-operation.”

. Section 40(2), Magistrates Courts Act, 1952.

Section 33, Crimianl Justice Act, 1967.

. Section 40(4), Magistrates Courts Act, 1952.

|. Stone's Justices’ Manual (1970), Vol. 2, pages 2636-2637. Also Vol. 1, page 455,

. Sections 16 and 43(3), Prisons Act, 1952°
6, Stone's Justices’ Manual (1970), Vol. 2, pages 2636-2637.
. See Halsbury, 3rd Ed., Vol. 30, page 591, para 1131.

, Stone's Justices’ Manual (1970), Vol. 2, pages 2636-2637.
. 800 also Halsbury, 3rd Ed., Vol. 30, page 596, para 1143.

10, Departmental Committee on Evidence of Identification in Criminal Cases (1976), pages 97,98.


27

Ill. History of English law

The present law on the subject of fingerprints has developed gradually and through stages.
In the case of convicted criminals, section 6(6) of the Prevention of Crimes Act, 1871 (34 and
35 vie. Chapter 112) authorised the making of regulations for the photographing of criminals.
The Penal Servitude Act added measurements to photography, and extended the Regulations
made under the Act of 1871 so as to cause them to apply to “‘all prisoners who may for the time
being be confined in any prison.”

Provision was made for fingerprinting! in the Regulation of 1896 applying to criminal
prisoners®. A person on remand in custody or a convicted prisoner could be measured, photo-
graphed and fingerprinted.

The only difference between persons on remand and convicted persons was that the former
could only be fingerprinted pursuent to a warrant issued by a magistrate on the application of a
police officer not below the rank of Superintendent or, in the metropolitan area, the Commis-
sioner or Assistunt Commissioner of Police, while the latter cold be fingerprinted at any time
without warrant.* If a prisoner on remand with no previous convictions was acquitted or dis-
charged by the magistrate, his fingerprints were to be destroyed. Until 1948 these Regulations
provided the only authority for the compulsory finger-printing of suspected persons.*

The Regulations did not cover persons charged with offence triable summarily.

The law was altered by section 40 of the Criminal Justice Act, 1948, replaced by the Magis-
trates’ Courts Act, 1952, section 40 which (as subsequently amended)® is the principal legis-
lative provision governing fingerprinting.

Section 40 (as amended) provides that where any person not less than 14 years of age who
has been taken into custody or summoned is charged with an offence before a ‘“‘magistrates”
court, the court may, on the application of a police officer not below the rank of Inspector,
order that his fingerprints or palm prints shall be taken by a constable®.

IV. Evidence illegally obtained in England

However, evidence extracted without the consent of the person concerned is not necessarily
inadmissible. A note in the Law Quarterly Review? has put the position thus :

“It is clearly reasonable and just that a strict rule should apply to confessions and to
other statements made in answei to questions asked by the police. Such an answer or
statement is not admissible unless it is shown to have been in the sense that it has not been
obtained by any threats or inducements.”

“This distinction between statements and confessions on the one hand and what may
be termed physical evidence’ on the other is an entirely rational one, becuase the danger in
the case of confessions and statements is that they may be false. On the other hand physical
evidence cannot be affected by any threats or inducements. The Judges’ Rules concerning
the admission of confessions do not therefore apply to finger-prints.”

V. Position in Australia

In Australia?, the High Court had occasion to deal with the position relating to photo-
graphs at length. While noticing that section 81(4) of the Police Offences Act, 1953
to 1967 (State of South Australia) permitted the taking of photographs of a person in lawful
custody on a charge of committing an offece for the purpose of establishing the identity of such

1, Leigh, Police Powers in England and Wales (1975), pages 199-200.

3, Regulations for the Measuring and Photography of Criminal Prisonors, S.R. & 0. 1986, No. 762, conti-

nued in foree by Prisons Act, 1952, ss. 16 and 54(3).
2, 8.12. & 0. 1896, No. 762, paragrapus 3,4,5.
4, Sir J. Moylan, Scotland Yard (1929), pages 192—194,
3, By Criminal Justice Act, 1967, section 33.
h, Police Powers in England and Wales (1975), page 200.
¢ on Callis v. Gunn! (1963) 3 W.L.R. 935 (1964) 80 L.Q.R. 17, 18.
‘ote the expression ‘physical evidence’.
3, Queen v. Ireland, (1970) 44 Australian Law Journal Reports 263, 268,

History.

Evidence not
inadmissible because
of force,

Photographs in
Australie®


Evidence illegally
obtained.

Sweden.

28

Person with a person known to have committed the crime then under investigation, the High
Court pointed out that the police officer had no power to require a person to submit to photo-
graphy for any purpose other than the identification—that is, identification to the extent men-
tioned in the statute.

In this particular case photographs of the hand of the accused were taker, and used to
assist the medical expert in the formation of the opinion that the scratches on the right hand
of the accused could have been caused by handling the knife of which the handle had been
broken. The accused had been charged with committing murder of a woman in kitchen, and
amongst che knives found in a drawer in the kiichen, three had traces of human blood
protein end the hendle of one of them wss broken. There wes evidence that two days before
this incident the handle hid been intact.

The evidence in question wes excluded in exercise of the discretion of the Court.

According to English ६५ well 2s Austrulian pri.tics, while the fi ct that evidence wes illegally
obiained, docs not make it incdmissible, it cn be @ ground for exercising the discretion of the
court in favour of excluding the evidence. The matter 105 been dealt with xt some length in
an article published in the Austr. lian Law 30008]! some iime zgo. In generz), if the evidence
has been obtained by ‘oppressive conduct’ or unfairly, the judge would exclude it in exercise of
such a discretion. This proposition has been re-iterated ina fsirly recent judgment? of the Privy
Council where, however, on the facts, the evidence was allowed.

Tn Scoiland, the position is more interesting, in as much as the evidence is not admitted
unless the Judge in his discretion approves its zdmission®.

VI. Canada

In Cannds, in one reporied case* in the Onturio Court of Appe..] in 1973, consideration
was given to the quesiion whether it wes proper for the prosecution to give evidence thet an
accuse! ॥-0 refused ६० take pert in an identificution parade. In his summing up the trial judge
seid that there was no sivtuiory authority to force an accused person, or a suspect, or a
person at a police siation, into a line up, and that it wes for the jury to decide, on the totali
of the evidence, whit signific:nce should be attached to Mr. Marcoux’s refus:} to. part
ina suggested line up.

On appeal, two judges of appeal held that this direction did not conflict with the principle
that no man should be compelled to incriminate himself. They said :

“That privilege relstes to the obtcining of oral confessions or stetements from a
prisoner. Hore the evidence adduced refates to the conduct of the necused, not to something
that he stated or did not state as to the charse ageinst him. Thus it is not en invasion
of his rights under the maxim (namely, the privilege against self-incrimination). It is
but a circumstance which together with ell the other circumstences the jury/are entitled to
take into consideration.”

Tn a dissenting judgment, Brooke J/A said thet the privilege ageinst self-incrimination
vested in the appellant the right to refuse to participate in the line-up, and that to allow a
negutive inference to be drawn from the exorcise of that right would amount! to a p-rtial denial of
the right itself.

VIN. Civil law countries

The position docs not appear to be substantiz lly different, even in the civil law countries.
Tt is perhaps for this reason that, where necessary, some continental Codes of Cirmins! Procedure
contain specific provisions® in regard to the employment of coercive mesures by the police
for identification.

In Sweden, for identification by voice, on sever] occasions the suspect and other person
have recd a suitable text on tape which is later played back to the witness®.

3, D.C. Pearce, “Judicial Review of Search Warrant” (1970) A.L.J. 467, 481.
3, King y. Reginam, (1969) A.C, 304 (P.C.).
3, King v. Reginam, (1969) A.C. 304 ; (1968) 2 All E.R. 610, 612, 617 (P.C.).

4. Riv. Marcoux and Solomon, (1973) 23 CRNS 61 (Ontario) referred to by Departmental Committee on
Evidence of Identification in Criminal Cases (1976), page 193.

5, E.g. section 81. a, German Code of Criminal Procedure.

*, Departmental Committee on Evidence of Identification in Criminal cases (1976), Appendix L, page 196,
para 36,


APPENDIX 2

AmgrRICAN LAW AS TO FINGER PRINTS AND MEASUREMENTS
1, U.S.A.—The basis for federal jurisdiction

In the U.S.A., the basis for federal constitutional jurisdiction in the area of criminal
procedure is most prominently the 14th Amendment of the Constitution. Its mandate—‘‘due
process”’ as a condition for restricting a person in respect of his life, liberty or property—has
furnished the Federal Courts with a jurisdicton whereunder, to a large extent, they require
the law enforcement agencies and the courts to conform to certain norms. These norms are
mainly derived from the first ten amendments to the Constitution which contain various
guarantees, includng certain guarantees relevant to criminal procedure.

By their terms, these amendments do not apply to the States, but many of them have
become applicable to the States by virtue of a series of Supreme Court decisions construing
the words “(०९ process’’ in the Fourteenth amendment as embracing all the essentials of a
fair trial and therefore as incorporating many of the fundamental rights guaranteed by the
first ten amendments relevant to criminal proceedings. In other words, if particular guarantee
contained in the first ten amendments is so fundamental as to justify the view that it should
be regarded as part of “due process’’, then the States also must conform to them. It is on
this basis that the privilege against self-incrimination (the Fifth Amendment) and the protec-
tion against unreasonable search and seizure (the Fourth Amendment) have become applica-
able to the States.'-?

Il. Self-incrimination in U.S.A.

The Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides that no person “shall be
compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himselt”. Similar guarantees are embo-
died in the Constitutions of every State, except Iowa and New Jersey. Iowa has read the pri-
vilege into its “due process clause” and New Jersey has adopted it by statute.3-t

The privilege against self-incrimination in the United States is universally interpreted as
protecting the accused from compulsion to testify against himself by a threat of the contempt
power.5

The privilege is thus generally assumed to prohibit all forms of pressure on the accused to
testify and also any adverse comment on him if he fails to testify. Asking the accused to take
the stand and thus forcing him to claim the privilege affirmatively is also unconstitutional.

This concept of the privilege is the product of a complex history. In England,® — sus-
picion of all interrogation of the accused emerged initially as a reaction to practices of the High
Commission and the King’s Star Chamber in enforcing unpopular religious and political
laws in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries. Accused persons were sometimes
forced to testify against themselves by use of the contempt power and torture. In addition,
since they were frequently not informed of any specific charge against them, they were compel-
led not merely to incriminate themselves, but also to provide the material for a charge.?- In
reaction the rule developed that the concempt power could not be used to compel an accused
to testify, even after he had been specifically charged. The development of the accused’s
rights to counsel and to call witnesess, together with the tradition that the accused should
not be put under oath, culminated in the nineteenth century in a general rule of compulsory
silence. During this period the privilege acquired its greatest significance, since the enforced.
silence could not logically give rise to an inference of guilt.

|, Mapp. v. Ohio, (1961) 367 U.S. 643.

Malloy v. Hogan, (1964) 378 U.S. 1.

Amana Socty v. Salzer, (1959) 250 Towa 380, 383; 94 N.W. 2d 337, 339,

N.J. Rev. Stat. 2A : 84A-17 (Supp. 1963), See generally Model Code of Evidence rule 203, comment (1942).
McCormick, Evidence (1954), 126, 263 and 264. हे

G. Williams, The Proof of Guilt 26 (1961), pages 38--45 (3d ed. 1963).

1, Bee also Ferguson v. Georgia, 365 U.S. 570, 573—78 (History of incompetency doctrino).

29

Origin of the pri-
‘lege against self-
crimination.

No compulsion and
no adverse comment
permitted.

Evolution.


Accused as witness.

30

When concern for the innocent led later in the 19th century to legislation enabling the
accused to testify if he chose, the Acts in U.S.A. generally provided that no adverse inference
should be drawn from failure to testify on part of the accused.

Ill. U.S.A.—Non-testimonial compulsion permitted

Ina number of comparatively recent decisions, the Supreme Court of U.S.A. has indicated
that not all evidence which an accused is compelled to supply is protected bythe fifth amend-
ment.!-2_ Thus, in Schmerber v. California,’ the Supreme Court stated :

“The distinction which has emerged..........-- is that the privilege is a bar against
compelling ‘communications’ or ‘testimony’, but that compulsion which makes a suspect
or accused the source of ‘real or physical’ evidence does not violate the privilege.”

Employing this distinction, courts have upheld the following acts—(i) compelling an
accused to participate in a line-up (ii) to provide handwriting samples® voice exemplars®,
(ii) to provide blood samples,? and finger-prints® (iv) to dress in clothing related to the
crime® and (v) to identify himself as being present at the scene of an accident!0-l2,

The Supreme Court has explained that such procedures do not violate the privilege,
because they compel the accused only to “exhibit his physical characteristics, not....... +. .to
disclose any knowledge he might have”!8,

In the latest case!4 relating to voice-prints, the view was reaffirmed that a handwriting
exemplar (in contrast to the content of the work written) is, like the voice or body itself, an
identifying physical characteristic outside the protection of the fifth amendment. It was em-
phasised that the voice recordings were to be used solely to measure the physical properties
of the voice of the persons concerned, and not for the testimonial or communicative content
of what has been said.

IV. Due process

Violation of due process, however, is not allowed where the police practice “shocks the
conscience”,—as where a stomach-pump is used to extract a substance from within the accused
body. Such evidence is not admissible.!5

a रत र्र्च्च्च् ७ख छ ख औउ$फ उरी
1, Aronson, “Payschistric Examination” (1973-74), 26 Stanford Law Review 55, 67, 68.
2, See 16 L, Ed. 2(d) 1332.

3, Schmerber v. California, (1966) 384 U.S. 757, 764. See also Gilbert V. California, (1967) 388 U.S. 263; United
States v. Wade, (1967) 388 U.S. 218,

4, See United States v. Wade, (1967) 377 U.S. 218 (also permitting requiremont that defendant speak for purpose
of voice identification) : United States v. Butto, 393 p. 2d 783 (4h Cir. 1968).

8, Gilbert v. California, (1967) 388 U.S. 263, 265—67; United States v, Doe, 405 F. 324 436 (2d Cir. 1968).
५, See United 8 ates v. Dionisio, (1973) 410 U.S. 1.
7, See Schmerber v. California, (1966) 374 U.S. 757.

®, See United States ex. rel.O Halloran, ०. Rundle, 266 F. Supp. 173 (E.D. Pa.) af'd , 384 F. 24.997 (3rd Cir.
1967), cert, denied, (1968) 393 U.S. 860.

9, 860 United States v. Evans, 359 F. 2d (3d Cir.) cert. denied, (1966) 385 U.S. 863 Morrie v. State, 184,
50.24 199 (Fla. App. 1966).

10, See California v. Byars, (1971) 402 U.S. 424.

31, Case Law of Fedral Courts taken mainly from Aaronson, Psychiatrio Examination (1973-74) 26 Stanford
Law Review 55, 67, 68.

1, See further 21 Americal Jurispurdence, 2d. articles 314—316 (Criminal Law).
33, United States v. Wade. (1967) 388 U.S. 218, 222.
४, U.S. v. Dionisio, (1973) 410 U.S. 1, 6.

15, Rochin v. California. (1952) 342 U.S. 165.

A subsequent illinois decision seems hardly reconcilable with the Supreme Court decision State v. Odom. 353
S.W. 2d 708 (Me. 1962).


31

The same test was applied to the extraction of a blood sample taken from an unconscious
perpetrator though the test resulted in admissibility.

An American writer, after mentioning the effect of a violation of constitutional guaran-
tees (the exclusionary rule), adds?—

“Included in this rule (due process) are—identification during a line-up without the
presence of the legal counsel, confessions...............5 (taken) during the time of
detention by the police if the prisoner had no opportunity to have legal counsel present.”

Within the due process limitation, scientific evidence may unquestionably be produced
from a defendant as long as the methods are relatively gentle and scientifically proper.? The
demands of an urgent traffic law enforcement have contributed much 10 the admissibility of
alcohol test results+ and, for that matter, of radar speed evidence’.

A suspect might be forced to wear particular clothing, where this was a material evidence
in the identification®.

V. Finger-prints and photographs

It appears that in the United States the compulsory taking of finger-prints and photo-
graphs from persons under arrest is a common practice’.

As already stated, what the constitution prohibits is physical or moral compulsion to ex- Non-testimonial
tort communications from him, and not an exhibition of his body as evidence (when such compulsion in
evidence may be material)*. Therefore, no constitutional protection exists against compulsion U-5-4+
to submit to giving fingerprints, photographing, or measurements, to write or to speak for
identificaticn, to appear in court, to stand, to assume a stance, to walk, or to make a particular
gesture,

Also, there is in the United States (from the constitutional point of view) no protection

against requiring the accused persons to adopt a particular stance® or to give a specimen of
his voice!9,

The question, thus, is only one of providing statutory authority for measurements or the ९००४४० of legality ,
procurement of other demonstrative evidence so that no liability in tort arises. It would be
tedious to deal with the position in varicus States of the U.S.A.

According to one view!!, to take a finger print, photograph or measurement of an arrested
person is not violation of the privilege against self-incrimination}?, nor a breach of privacy.

According to some courts, therefore, it is valid without statutory authority!3-14,

1, Breithaupt v. Abraham, (1957) 352 U.S. 432. Delaware reached an opposite conclusion in State v. Wolf
164 A. 2d 865 (Del., 1960).

3, Peter Hay, Introuction to U.S. Law (1976),Page 193.

3, See People v. Diicher, 189 Cal. App.2d 720, Cal-Eptr.407 (1961), Cf. Qolte v. State,172 Neb, 110, 108
N.W. 2d 737 (1961)

4, E.g. State v. Baker, 56 Wash, 2d 846, 355 P. 2d 806 (1960); and see State v. Ball, 179 A. 2d 466 (Vt.,
1962); Bean v. State, 12 Utab 2d 76, 362 P. 2d 750 (1962).

5, Fiser, Vehicle Traffic Law(1961), pages 240-243.
*, Holt v. U.S., (1910) 218 U.S. 245, 252 (Holmes J.)

7. Moreland, Criminal Procedure (1969), page 76, citing the leading case of U.S. v. Kelly, (1932) 55 Federal 2d
67 83 A.L.R. 122.

3, Schmerber v. California, (1967) 384 U.S. 757.,
®, Gilbert, v. California, (1967) 338 U.S. 263,

2०, See “Voice prints , infra and U.S. v. Wade, (1967) 388 U.S. 218.
मे, American Jurisprudence, 2nd Ed., Vol. 21, “Criminal Law” , pages 393-394, articles 369-370.
42, See American Jurispurdence, Ist Ed.—‘“Privacy” article 27.

33, United States v. Kelly, (CA 2) 55 F. 2d 67, cited in the American Jurisprudence, 24 Ed., Vol. 21
“Criminal Law”. ’

34, Shannon v. The State, 207 Ark 658, cited in the American Jurispurdence, 2d Ed., Vol 21, “Crimi ”
pages 393394, articles 369-370, P 01 21, “Criminal Law",


Model Code of pre-
arraingment proce-
dure.

Voice prints.

No privilacge as re-
gards voice prints.

Use of voivo prints,

32

But in some jurisdictions a different view is taken, and the taking of fignger prints or pho-
tograph without consent und without statutory authority is regarded as an actionable
assault!-®.

It would appear on the whole that specific legal authority would be required for compul-
sory measures of identification. This position, if not expressly or elaborately discussed, seems
to have been impliedly zccepted in U.S.A. in recent times. For example, the Model Code of
Pre-arriagnment procedure adopted by the American Law Institute permits the taking of
finger prints of arrested persons for the purpose of investigation at the stage before commence-
ment of trial’.

The American Law Institute has proposed* that the courts generally should be empowered
to issue, on grounds of reasonzble suspicion, an order to appear for identification procedures,
such procedures to include fingerprints, blood or urine samples, identification material that
may be on the surface of the body or under finger-nails, and procedures to obtain witness
identification through line-ups, photographs, voice samples or handwriting exemplars.

VI. Voice prints.

Several courts on the federal and State levels in U.S.A. (including the Military Courts
of Appeals), have accepted voice prints identification®. In an interesting case before the
Military Court of Appecls®. the use of voice printing in a case involving obscene telephone
calls was upheld.

The privilege against self-incrimination in the U.S. does not extend to protect an accused
person who is required to speak so that he may be identified’.

However, it would appear that a court order is taken to compel the accused to submit to
having a tape record made of his voice, Thus it is stated® that in the State of New Jersey the
Superior Court granted a prosecutor’s request for an order compelling an accused to submit

to having a tape made of his voice so that the resulting voice-print might be compared with
another voice-print®.

Voice prints are used to identify criminals who use the telephone to thereaten_ bombing of
airlines and public buildings as well as those who make obscene telephone calls and put on the
telephone threats of extortion and kidnappers who by telephone make demands for ransom!°,

TE

३, Fildes v. Murphy, 113. N-T.S. 2nd 288, cited in the American Jurispeudonce, 2d Ed-, Vol. 21, “Cri
Taw”, pages 393-394.
2 Sce also cases cited in Black, Law Dictionary (1914), Vol. 2, pag 86, under “Physical Examination”.
5 Section 5,01, Model Code of Pre-arvaigment Procedure (American Law Tnstitute)-
3 Departmental Committee on Evidence of Tdentification in Criminal cases (1976), page 194, 1.0.
5 Bennett Sandler, Law fn forcement and Criminal Tustice pages 304-305,
6 ight, (1967) 17 US.MLA. 183.
7 US. ४. Wade (1967) 388 US, 218.
+ Phomas Me Dade ,“The Voice-print (1970 Ju, Indian Police Journal, pages 26-34,
© State v. Mckenna, (226A) IL 757 Superior Court of New Jersey.
1० LG. Kersta, “Voice-print identifieation and application” (1971) Tndia Police Journal, pages 10—16,



APPENDIX 3

SELECTED CASES ON ARTICLE 21 OF THE CONSTITUTION—PROCEDURE ESTABLISHED
By Law

1. Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, A.1.R. 1978 S.C. 597; 1978(1) S.C.C. 248.

This was the first case spelling out the requirement of “procedure estalished by law” in
Article 21 and its positive content.

2. In the Special Courts Bill 1978, A.1.R. 1979 S.C. 478, 516; 1979(1) S.C.C. 430, 433.

In this case, the Supreme Court, while upholding the constitutional validity of Special
Courts Bill, 1978 with reference to Article 14, observed that the Bill had also got to meet the
challenge of Article 21.

It was held by the majority in the Mancka Gandhi case that the procedure contemplated
by Article 21 must be “right and just and fair and not arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive; other-
wise, it would be no procedure ait all and the requirement of Article 21 would not be satisfied’’.

It was, therefore, imperative to cxamine whether the procedure prescribed by the Special
Courts Bill was just and fair or was, in any respect, arbitrary or oppressive.

3. Sita Ram v. State of Uttar Pradesh, A.1.R. 1979 S.C. 745, 753, 1979(2) S.C.C. 656, 669.

In this case the Supreme Court, while considering the validity of the Supreme Court
Rules (1966), Order 21, Rule 15(1)(c) and section 384 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, said that life and liberty had been the cynosure of special constitution attention in Article
21. The Court referred to Maneka Gandhi v. Unior of India where the essence of the concept
of natural justice as part of reasonable procedure had been brought out. That judgment sho-
wed how the Supreme Court had unravelled the fuller implications of Article 21 and how
(since then) the Court had followed that prescription and even developed it in humane direc-
tions,

4. Hussainara Khatoon (1) v. Home Secretary, A.1.R. 1979 S.C. 1360, 1361; 1980(1) S.C.C.
» 84.

In this case, the Supreme Court, while considering a petition for writ of habeas corpus
said that there could be little doubt, after the dynamic interpretation placed by the Court on
Article 21_ in Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, that a procedure which keeps such a large
number of people behind the bars without trial so long cannot possibly be regarded as
reasonable, just and fair as to be in conformity with the requirement of that Article.

5. Hussainara Khatoon (IV) v. Home Secretary A.1.R. 1979 S.C. 1369; (1979) 3 S.C.R.
532, 537.

In this case, while considering the rights of the accused and the constitutional obligation of
the State, the Supreme Court referred to Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India and said that it
was now well settled (as a result of the decision in Maneka Gandhi's case), that it was not
enough that there should be some semblance of procedure provided by law, but the procedure
under which a person may be deprived of his life or liberty should be ‘reasonable, fair and just’.
A procedure which did not make available legal services to an accused person who is too poor
to afford a lawyer and who would, therefore, have to go through the trial without legal assis-
tance, could not possibly be regarded as ‘reasonable, fair and just’. It is an essential ingredient
of reasonable, fair and just procedure that a prisoner, who 15 to seek his liberation through
the court’s process, should have legal services available to him.

6. Shri Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia v. State of Punjab, (1980) 2 S.C.C. 565, 586.

In this case, the Supreme Court, while determining the scope of section 438 of Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (anticipatory bail) and while discussing the question how best to
balance the interests of personal liberty and the investigative powers of the police, said that
section 438 was a procedural provision concerned with the personal liberty of the individual,
who is entitled to the benefit of the presumption of innocence. Since he is not (on the date

33


34

of his application for anticipatory bail), convicted of the offence in respect of which he seeks
I, an Over-generous infusion of constraints and conditions which are not to be found in
section 438 can make its provisions constitutionally vulnerable. The right to personal free-
dom cannot be made to depend on compliance with unreasonable restrictions’.

The beneficient provision contained in section 438 must be saved, not jettisoned. After
the decision in Maneka Gandhi's case, no doubt can survive that in order to meet the challenge
of Article 21, the procedure “established by law” for depriving a person of his liberty must
be fair, just and reasonanle.

7, P.S.R. Sadhanantham v. Arunachaiam, A.1.R. 1980 S.C. 856, 858-859.

In this writ petition the petitioner challenged the leave to appeal under Article 136 of
the Constitution and subsequent proceedings as violative of Article 21, and hence unconstitu-
tional. The Supreme Court was called upon to lay down the scope of Articles 136 and 21
of the Constitution. The court, while discussing the matter, said that Article 21 in its sub-
lime brevity, guards human liberty by insisting cn the prescription of ‘procedure established
by law”, and not a “fiat” as a “sine qua non for deprivation of personal freedom”. And
the procedure so established must be fair, not fanciful nor formal nor flimsy- Maneka Gandhi's
case was referred to in this ontext. In express terms, Article 136 does not confer ona party
a right to appeal as such, but it confers a wide discretionary power on the Supreme Court
to interfere in suitable cases.

(On the facts, leave to appeal already granted was upheld).

8. Anand Vardhan Chandel v. University of Delhi, A.I.R. 1978 Delhi 308, 314.

In this writ petition, the High Court answered in the affirmative the question whether
there is a fundamental right to education to be spelt out of clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Aiticle
19(1) and Article 21 of the Constitution. It said that the law is now settled by the Maneka
Gandhi's case that the expression ‘life and personal liberty’ in Article 21 of the Constitution
includes a variety of rights, though they are not enumerated in Part III of the Constitution, pro-
vided that they are necessary for the full development of the personality of the individual and can
be included in the various aspects of the liberty of the individual.

9. Inder Parkash v. Dy. Commissioner, Delhil A.1.R. 1980 Delhi 87, 92.

In this case the High Court quashed the order cancelling the admission of the Petitioner
as a medical student, on account of inordinate delay of about four years, faring which the peti-
tioner continued his studies. It referred to the Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India_in order
to show that the right to higher education or professional education partakes of the nature
of fundamental right, though not specifically mentioned in the Constitution. Any improper
interference in such a pursuit would attract the fundamental right to carry on the profes-
sion.

1, Emphasis added.


YDENTIFICATION OF PRISONERS ACT, 1980—ANALYSIS OF SUBSTANTIVE

APPENDIX 4

PROVISIONS

SSF

Section Persons affected Nature of power Competent Authority
conferred
3 Convicted persons. Measurements (As de- Police officer.
fined in the Act-this This means-—
includes fingerprints). (i) Police officer in charge
of Police Station;
(ii) Police officer making
an investigation under
Chapter XIV of Code
of Criminal Procedure,
1898; or
(iii) Any other Police offi-
cer not below the rank
of sub-inspector.
3 Convicted persons. Photographs. Police officer.
This means—
(i) Officer in charge of a
Police Station;
(ii) Police officer making
an investigation under
Chapter XIV of Code
of Criminal Procedure,
1898; or
(iii) Any other police offi-
cer not below the rank
of sub-inspector.
4 Arrested persons. Measurements (As defi- Police officer (as defined in
ned—this includes fin- section 2(b).
gerprints).
5 Any person. (But he Measurements (As de- Magistrate.
must have been arrested _ fined, it includes finger-
at some stage-see se- prints.)
cond proviso).
5 Any person, (But he Photograph. Magistrate of ist Class

must have been arrested
at some stage).

81-M/J(N)S6MofLI&CA—1500—24-8-81—GIPS

(See first proviso).