LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

EIGHTY - EIGHTH REPORT

ON

GOVERNMENTAL PRIVILEGE IN
EVIDENCE: SECTIONS 123-124 AND 162,
INDIAN EVIDENCE ACT, 1872 AND
ARTICLES 74 AND 163 OF THE
CONSTITUTION

7" January 1983


D, 0. No. F. 2(4)/82-L. ८. January 10, 1983.

My dear Minister,

I sead herewith the Highty-eighth Report of the Law Commission on
Goverament Privilege from production of certain documents and disclosure
of certain communications before the courts.

The subject was taken up for consideration at the request of the Government
of India arising out of a communication from the learned Attorney General of
India to consider the implications of a recent judgment of the Supreme Court
in what is popularly known as Judges’ Transfer Case.

The Commission wished to express its appreciation to Mr. P. M. Bakshi,
Part-time Member of the Commission for the preparation of the“Report. We
also acknowledge with thanks the help given by Mr. V. V. Vaze, ex-Member-
Secretary.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(K. K. MATHEW)

Shri Jagannath Kaushal,
Minister of Law, Justice &
Company Affairs,

Shastri Bhavan,

New Delhi-1.

(1)

1-450 LAD/ND/83


CHAPTER 2.

CHarTeR 4.

CHAPTER 6.
CHAPTER 7.
CHAPTER 8 .
CHAPTER 9.
Cuarter 10,

Cwaprer 11 .

CONTENTS
Introductory.
Present Law.
The general ambit of the privilege : “Affairs of State”,
The authority who can claim the privilege. |
The authority which decides the question of privilege.

The materials for claiming and deciding the privilege.

The machinery for determination of the privilege as claimed.

The procedural codes,
Constitutional provisions.
Brief comparative survey.

Recommendations.

10
u
13

18

22
29


CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTORY

1.1. This Report deals with an important topic that lies at the frontiers The subject:

of public law and adjective law—the question of State privilege. The subject
was earlier known by the title of “Crown Privilege”, but is currently discussed
under the title “public interest privilege” or “Executive privilege”. Claims of
privilege under this head generally have constitutional dimensions and, for
that reason, may be said to belong to the domain of public law. At the same
time, the claim to such privilege is made in-courts and, if successful, excludes
certain species of material from being effectively admitted in evidence—thus opera-
ting in the adjective field. Because of this dual character of the privilege, a dis-
cussion of the subject borders on the realm of constitutional law as also on the
realm of adjective law.

1.2. The subject has been taken up by the Law Commission at the request
of the Government of India, who, in turn, had been requested by the Attorney-
General of India? to consider the implications ofa recent judgment? of the Supreme
Court and the need for defining certain matters connected with the privilege, arising
out of the aforesaid judgment.

1.3. Public law in its procedural aspect is of as much interest as its substantive
law. Although the citizen may sue public bodies and the Government, it does
not necessarily follow that the law and procedure applied by the courts to such
suits will be the same as is applied in litigation between private citizens. Special
procedural advantages and protections are enjoyed by the State. One of such
protections operates in the field of evidence, and is in the nature of a privilege regar-
ding the production of certain documents and disclosure of certain communications.

1.4. The term “privilege” as used in Evidence law means a freedom from com-

ulsion to give evidence or to discover-up material, or a right to prevent or bar

information from other sources during or in connection with litigation, but on
grounds extrinsic to the goals of litigations

In the law of evidence, there are many situations where a party to litigation (or
some other person) may claim a privilege and thereby resist the production of a
document or the giving of oral evidence on a particular subject in court.

1.5. Most of these privileges are enjoyed by private persons. For exampl
the law confers upon the individual the constitutional -privilege of not incriminatiag

The reference,

Public law in its
procedural aspect.

Privilege.

The State,

himself, it also accoids a privileged status to confidential communications between

- attorney and client; husband and wife and between certain other communicants
in special private relationships.t But we are concerned here with a situation where
the claim is by the State to withhold a document, or evidence, on the ground that the
disclosure will be prejudicial to the public interest. This is the privilege dealt with
in section 123, Evidence Act, which prohibits the giving of evidence derived from
unpublished official records relating to affairs of State except with the permission
of the head of the Department.

1.6. It may be stated as a matter of interest that section 22 of t! i
Act (2 of 1855) was as follows :— on 22 of the Evidence

“XXII. A witness shall not be forced to produce any document relati
to affairs of State the production of which would be contrary to good policy

1. Attorney General’s letter dated 1st February, 1982 to the Minister of Law, Justice and Company
15.

3 5.0. Gupta V. Union of India, A.I.R. 1982 S.C, 149.
3. Paul F. Rothstein, Evidence ; State and Federal Rules (1981), page 407.
4, Graham 0. Lilly, An Introduction to the Law of Evidence (1978), page 317.

Section 123
and its
predecessor.


Liability of
the State.

History and
rationale,

Executive

om

English law—_
injury to public
interest.

2

1.7. From the point of view of public law, it is possible to view the matter
aS one concerning the liability of the State in the adjective sphere. Though the pro-
vision is contained in the Evidence Act, it is obvious that it hasimportant rey
Sionsin administrativelaw. We are referring to this aspect in order to put the matter
in its proper perspective. .

1.8. In England, Crown privilege is usually dealt with as an aspect of the : -

general law of State liability. In this connection, it may be noted that the Crowa.
Proceedings Act, 1947, while making the Crown liable as a private citizen in many
respects, took care to provide that its provisions should not affect this general law.

In one article, published a few years ago, the history of Crown privilege
was thus dealt with\— *

“The source of the Crown’s privilege in relation to production of documents
in a suit between subject and subject (whether production is sought from a
party or from some other) can, no doubt, be traced to the prerogative right to-
prevent the disclosure of State secrets, or even of preventing the escape of
inconventent intelligence regarding Court intrigue. Asis pointed out in Pollock
and Maitland’s History of English Law (2nd ed., Vol. I, page 517), ‘the king has
power to shield those who do unlawful acts in his name, and can. withdsaw
from the ordinary course of justice cases in which he has any concern. If
the king disseises A and transfers the land to X, then X when he is sued will
say that he cannot answer without the king, and the action will be stayed until
the king orders that it shall proceed’. We find similar principles applied to
the non-disclosure of documents in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.”

“But with the growth of democratic Government, the interest of the Crown
in these matters developed into and became identified with public interest,

er In the early days of the nineteenth century, when principles of
‘public policy’ received broad and generous interpretation......we find the
privilege of documents recognised on “the ground of public interest”. At this
date, public policy and the interest of the public were to थी intents synony-
mous.” .

In the report of Layor’s case, the Attorney-General claimed that minutes
of the Lords of the Council should not be produced; and Sir John Prate L-0.J,
supported the claim, adding that “tit would.be for the disservice of the King to have
these things disclosed”.

1.9, Inthe United States, the corresponding privilege, known as “executive
privilege”, is definitely considered as an aspect of “sovereign immunity”. Of course
this American version of Crown privilege has never been at par with the British
doctrine as known in some of the earlier cases, but we need not discuss that aspect
of the matter at present.

*

1.10. The general principle now formulated in England is that relevant evidence
must be excluded if its reception would be contrary to the public interest. ft is
this general principle that seems to regulate the disclosure or non disclosure of
communications in the conduct of official affairs. There is no separate rule for
official communications in addition to that applicable for official papers. In parti-
cular, the Crown is not allowed to object to the giving of any oral evidence by a
witness, even if he be a civil servant. The witness must attend, and objection must
be limited to question relating to matters claimed to be covered by the doctrine
of public policy®—whatever be the proper scope of that doctrine.

1. “Doquments Privileged in Public Interest 39 Law Quarterly Rev. 476-477.

2, Layer’s case, (1722) 16 How. St. Tr. page 224.

3. Broome V. Broome, (1955) 1 All E.R. 201,204. For comment, see (1957) Cambridge Law Journai
i. on

‘


3

The case of Broome? is an illustration: The wife in that case had sued the
husband for dissolution of the marriage, on the ground of cruelty, alleging, inter
alta, that when she joined the husband in Hong Kong (where the husband was posted
as a sergeant in the army), the husband took her to a filthy apartment of a standard
far below his means and failed to provide her with any assistance and kept her
skort of money. For proving this allegation, the wife caused a subpoena (for oral
evidence and for producing certain documents) to be served on one Mrs, Allsop,
who was, at the material time, the sole representative of the Soldiers’ Families
Association in Hong Kong. The Secretary of State for War, by a certificate,

~ recorded the opinion that it was not in the public interest that “the document should
be produced or the evidence of Mrs. Allsop given orally”. Weare, atthe moment,
concerned with the latter part of the certificate relating to oral evidence. Sachs,
J. held that it was wrong on the part of the Minister to adopt a procedure which
would prevent the witness from giving any evidence, whatsoever, of any sort.
The form of the certificate was not such as to enable the court to ascertain what
really was the nature of the evidence for which privilege was being claimed. On
the merits also, he was not persuaded that, in the circumstances of the case, there
was a legitimate justification for claiming the privilege. Evidence of Mrs. Allsop
as to the way in which the wife was reczived atthe Quay at Hong Kong and the sort
of accommodation available and connected matters was relevant and of assistance
to the court and in none of those matters was there any apparent cause for any
intervention in the name of Crown privilege.

५. 1.11, So far as could be gathered from the case law on the subject, there is,
in England, no separate privilege of confidential communications made to public
servants—at least according to the modern theory. The principle of injury to the
public interest applies, and it would appear that whatever rule applies to written
records, applies to oral comthunications. However, it is said? that the procedure
which may be appropriately followed in respect of oral evidence may have to be
worked out.

Lord Simon, in Rogers V. Secretary of State,t observed as under :

“I am not, for myself, convinced that there is any general privilege protec-
ting communications given in confidence (see Smithy. East India 29.3. but
Cf. Alfred Cromption Amusement Machines Ltd. v.C. Comrs. of Customs
and Excise)®”. :

After adverting to the circumstances from which the law might itself i fe
confidentiality, Lord Simon observed : 8 infer

“But if this 1s a correct classification, it would suggest that the privile ;

(a true privilege being waivable) is that of the imparter of the information aad

not that of the recipient”.

‘While Lord Simon was cautious enough not to make a categorical sta
the treatment of the subject in some of the recent works on evidences? sent,
suggest that cases of confidential communications made for official purposes or
not separately dealt with, but are subsumed under the general category of public
interest.

In India, the privilege incorporated in section 123 of the Evidence Act was.
perhaps, intended to incorporate a policy decision. It is not, however, very clear
whether the farmers of the Evidence Act examined the English law in detail. The
available records 1elating to that Act do not throw light on the subject.

2. Broome V. Broome, (1955) Probate 190, 198; (1955) 1 AN E.R. 201 (Sachs 3.).
3. Rogers V. Secretary of State, (1972) 2 All ER. 1057, 1067 (HLL).
4. Smith V. East India Co., (1841) 1 Ph, at 54. -

‘5, Alfred Cromption Amusement Machines Ltd. V. Comrs. of Cust
fe 353, 380; (1972) 2 W.LR. 835, 859. of Customs and Excise, (1972) 2 All

6. Cross on Evidence. (1979), Chapter 12, Section 1, Pages 305-317,
7, Phips on, Manual of Evidence (1972), Page 94, *

No stparate

है 2
fn England


The significance
of privilege.

The cost of
privilege.

Balancing of
nflicting ~!
considerations.

Scheme of
discussion.

report

4

1.12. In fact, such privileges raise several important issues of policy transcen-
ding meretechnical issues. Privileged communications enjoy protection for 4 unique
reason. The law of evidence generally seeks accuracy in fact finding by receiving
relevant evidence thought to be reliable, while rejecting that which is thought to
be insufficiently probative or trustworthy. But privileged communicatiogs,
which (by usual evidentiary standards) may be highly probative as well as
trustworthy are excluded because their disclosure is inimical to a principle
or relationship (predominately non-evidentiary in nature) that society deems
worthy of preserving and fostering. Quite often, the evidence that could be
derived from these protected sources would be admissible if judged by the
usual standards of probative value and trustworthiness, Nevertheless, it is
excluded for reasons of policy.

1.13. The cost of evidentiary privilege is apparent, and it should not be borne
with indifference. In the first place, the conferral of a privilege results in the sup-
pression of probative evidence and makes the trier decide factual issues without
benefit of the evidence. In this sense, an evidentiary privilege increases the proba-
bility that judicial disputes will be decided erroneously. Hence, in short, the
question arises if the privilege is worth its price. The conferral of a_privilege is
grounded upon the assumption that its recognition significantly advances an interest
relationship, or principle that society considers a prevailing value. Thus, a balan-
cing is necessary.

1.14. It is to be noted that the breadth of the cloak of secrecy accorded by
a privilege is often the amalgam of statutory language and judicial gloss, and
of a tension between certain branches of public policy, on the one hand, and the
need of the public and the court to be informed, on the other hand.

1.15. After making these general observations, we would like to indicate
the scheme of discussion adopted in this Report. The rationale and general ambit
of the privilege under discussion will be first dealt with. The authorities that can
claim the privilege and the authorities that will decide the claim will next receive
attention—the latter being of comparatively much greater importance. We shall
then address ourselves to the material on which the claim to privilege may be as-
serted and the machinery and procedure for adjudication of the claim Besides
the provisions of the law of evidence, a discussion of certain constitutional provi-.
sions relating to secrecy will also be required. .A brief discussion of the position
in certain other countries will be offered. The Report will conclude with recommen-
dations for reform of the law.

1.16. At this stage, it would be proper to mention that there is a Cor न
hensive Report? of the Law Commission on the Indian Evidence Act, RTD .
The Report was forwarded to Government® in May, 1977. The Report has,
in an exhaustive and comprehensive manner, dealt with the entire Evidence Act,
including, of course, the sections relevant to the present Report. Not only have
we derived considerable assistance from the material presented in the Report, but
also we are happy to say that we agree in substance with the approach tho wn in
that Report.

1. Graham C. Lilly, An Introduction to the Law of Evidence (1978), page 317.
2. Law Commission of India, 69th-Report (Indian Evidence Act, 1872) (May, 1977),
* 3. Qne of us’ was a party to that Report also.
पु हा


CHAPTER 2
PRESENT LAW IN INDIA

2.1. The present law on the subject of State privilege—in so far as it relates
to the production of evidence as such—is principally contained in sections 123,
124 and 162 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. The first cwo sections are, on an
analysis, found to overlap each other. The last-mentioned section (section 162)
is not confined to State privilege as such, but concerns itself with the procedure for
determination of all questions of privilege, whether the privilege is claimed under
the head of State privilege or under any other head.

In the main, these three sections of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 are mate-
rial to the topic under consideration. In fact, as already stated, that Act has itself
been reported by the Law Commission in an exhaustive and comprehensive Report.t
Certain provisions of the Constitution dealing as they do with the secrecy of certain
material, will also receive attention.

2.2 It should be' mentioned that this Report is not concerned with the general

+ question of secrecy in Government and it is not therefore proposed in the Report

to go into a detailed discussion of freedom of information, citizen’s right to know
and allied matters. Those matters—important as they are in any democratic society
—focus on the relations between the Government and the (शा in general. It
may also be mentioned that the Official Secrets Act is also outside this Report.
That Act deals with a different aspect of Government secrecy—the communication
of official secrets and the commission of certain other acts prejudicial to security
which are regarded as constituting conduct fit for punishment by use of the weapon
of criminal law. (Incidentally, this Act also has been reported on by the Law
Commission).* The present Report deals rather with evidentiary privilege claimed
on behalf of the State on the basis of certain considerations of high Policy considera-
tions—more appropriately called public interest.

2.3. Governmental privilege in litigation in regard to evidence has attracted
considerable attention in recent times in so many countries, within as well as out-
side the Commonwealth. The developments have been somewhat rapid. Indeed,
at some stage, they have been so rapid as to make it difficult to keep abreast of them.
On some issues relevant to the privilege in question, the law elsewhere can still be
said to be in a state of evolution. While the general direction in which the law
is moving may be said to be fairly well established, new situations- not unexpectedly
—go on arising, and furnish illustrations of an infinite variety of circumstances in
Telation to which the privilege comes to be claimed—successfully or otherwise.

It is not our intention to embark on an exhaustive survey as such of the position
in numerous countries. But material that elucidates points that might otherwise
remain obscure will be referred to wherever appropriate.

2.4, The Indian law on the subject is mainly concerned in three sections of
the Evidence Act, Section 123 of that Act reads as under :-—

“123. No one shall be permitted to give any evidence derived from un-
published official records relating to any affairs of State, except with the per-
mission of the officer at the head of the department concerned, who shall give
or withhold such permission as he thinks fit”.?

Besides section 123, there is yet another section relevant to official matters,
the disclosure whereof would be injurious tothe public interest. Under section
124 of the Act, no public officer shall be compelled to disclose communications
made to him in official confidence when he considers that the public interests would
suffer by the: disclosure. .

1. Lag Commission of India, 69th Report (Indian Evidence Act, 1872), Chapters 65, 66, 93 (May,

2. Law Commission of India, 43rd Report (Officences against the National Security),
3- Por‘ rules,as to discavery, see, Onder 11, Code of ‘Civil Procedure, 1908.

5
2450 BAD/ND/83

Scope of

the present

Report and

Rea Her f
eport 01

the Law

Commission.

Scope of the
openness in
Government.

Gorparative
devel iS.

Indian law—
sections 123
and 124,
Evidence Act.


Sections
123—124
compared,

Overlapping
between the
two and its
possibie
‘sequences,

Section 162.

6

2.5. Tosome extent, sections 123 and 124 of the Evidence Act seem to overlap 5
at the same time, in certain respects, they differ from each other. They overlap,
in So far as evidence which is derived from unpublished official records, and which
consists of communications made to a pitblic officer in official confidence, falls under
both the sections. They differ, in so far as evidence derived from unpublished . ©
official records, but not consisting of communications made to a public officer in
official confidence, falls only under section 124 and is outside section 123.

Section 123 is not confined to a public officer, while section 124 is so confined.
On the other hand, section 123 is confined to a written record, while section 124
is not so confined. Qverlapping can therefore arise on their present wording, as
already mentioned above. Weshallrevertto this aspect when making our concrete
recommendations.

2.6. In certain cases—say, inregard to oral official comminications—it is
enough to comply with section 124, Such cases do not present problems of magni-
tude. But the overlapping between the two sections ‘to which we have teferred
above) may create difficulties, whete both the sections apply. In particular, while,
under section 123 (as it now stands), it is fot the head of the Department to give
permission; under section 124, it is for the public servant to decide whether the
public interest would suffer by the disclosure. It will be necessary to revert to this
aspect later, since it is a matter of cractal importance and does not constitute a prd>
blem of interest merely from the point of view of legislative drafting or of textual
analysis of the sectjon.

2.7. पिया with the subject is the provision in section 162 of the saii¢ Act,
under which a witness summoned to produce a document shall, if it is in his posses-
sion or power, bring it to court, no! ithstanding any objection which there mas
be to its production of to its oa ity. The validity of any such Object jon shia
be decided by the Court, under the section. That section का provides that the
Court, if it seems fit, may inspect the document, ‘unless it (the document) refers to
matters of State, or take other evidence, to enable the Court to determine on its
admissibility. (The last paragraph of the section is not material for the present
purpose). .

Section 162 is not, of course, confined to décuntents for watch a vitege is
claimed under section 123. The Section is the machinety section for the detérmi+
nation of all claims to privilege in tespect of docaments.

2.8, Allthese provisions of the Evidence Act received detailed discussion by
the Law Commission in its Report on the Evidence Act. The reconmmreixtations
made in that Report in 80 far a8 they concern sections 123, 124 and 162, misty be
summarised at this stage for convenience of referénce.*

The recommendation relating to section 123 was to revise the section on the
following lines :—

1) No one shall be permitted to give any evidence derived from unpublished
५ official records telating to any affairs of State, unless the officer at the head
ofthe department concerned has given permission for giving such evidence.
(This proposition was intended to state the position, to start with. It
would operate primarily es ‘between the witness and his supetior, There

was no change of substance).

(2) Such officer should not withhold such petmission unless he is satisfied that
‘the giving of such evidence would be injurious to the public interest. die
should make an affidavit also in this regard. The Court may ma ro if it thi
fit, call for a further affidavit from the head of the depai ia . (This pre.
position was intended to amplify the section, by highligh the test of
Ninjury to the public intetest”—a test discenrnible from the stise law onthe
subject—and by codifying the procedure that had already indicated
judicially).

a

1, See Chapter 11 dAfhas 7

7. Law Commission of Tadls, 0th Réport राज Rvidshes AG, 1972); Cappers 6,66 ent 93,



7

(3) Where such officer has withheld permission for the giving of such evidence,
and the Court, after inspecting the unpublished official records concerned
and after considering the affidavit, is of the opinion that the giving of such
evidence would not be injurious to the public interest, the court should

-tecord its decision to that effect and thereupon the section will not apply
to such evidence. [This proposition was intended to modify the existing
section, in so far as the textual law was concemed, The change wag an
important one, as the decision as to injury to the public interest would
be with the Court and not with the officer at the head of the Department].

ad 2.9, Then, as regards section 124, the recommendation was to revise it as
under :— हा

“124. (1) No public officer shall be compelled to disclose communications
ade to him in official confidence, other than communications contained in
uapublished Official records relating to-any affairs of State, when the court con-
siders that the public iaterests would suffer by the disclosure.

(2) Where a public officer who is a witness ina asked a question which might
require the disclosuze of any such co: ३३० and, be objects to answering
the question on the ground thatthe pi lic interests would suffer by its disclosure,
the court shall, before rejecting his. an) jection, ascertain from him, in chambers,
the nature of his objection and reasons therefor”.

2.10. As to section 162, second paragraph, Evidence Act, the recommendation
of the Commission was to delete the words “unless it refers to matters of State’.
The object was to remove any restriction on the Power of the court to inspect a
document claimed to be relating to “affairs of State” and therefore privileged on

account,

_. 2-11. The survey of the Indian law has. so. far concentrated on the provisions
in the Evidence Act. Besides these, there are important provisions in articles 74.
and 163 of the Constitution, to which it will be necessary to make a reference!
for the purpose of considering certain needed amendment. These provisions pro-
tect the secrecy of advice given by the Cabinet.

ari (242, दि The 5 succeeding Chapters of this Report, will deal with several points
sing Out of the above provisions—-statutory as. well as constitutional—ia the light.
of the materials referred to above. fad natin the light

1, Chapter 9, infra.

Constitutfonad:
Provisions.

Succeeding

the Report


Sections 123—
Affairs of
State.

Routine
documents.

Security of
the State.

Ministerial
advice.

Obscurity as
toincome-tax
papers.

CHAPTER 3
THE GENERAL AMBIT OF THE PRIVILEGE : “AFFAIRS OF STATE”

3.1. At this stage, it may be convenient to deal in brief with the ambit of the
privilege conferred by section 123 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872— an exercise
which will show concretely how the abstractions that appear in the law have becn
applied in practice. The expression “affairs of the State” which occurs in the section
18 not used in other legislation in force in India. But it is used frequently in text
books and academic literature. The principal object of the use of the expression
is to indicate the distinction between matters of concern to the State, and matters of
private interest.1. This of course, is not the only ingredient of the privilege, since
it is further required that the matters in respect of which privilege is claimed must
be of such a nature that their disclosure would be prejudicial to the public interest.
The principle on which the protection is given is that where a conflict arises between
public and private interest, private interest must yield to the public interest.

3.2. Every communication from an officer of the State to another officer is
not necessarily one relating to “affairs pf State”. The privilege could not arise,
for example, in respect of a posting register kept by the Customs Preventive Service,
theentryin question being merely a note of the time when particular preventive
officers were ordered to be at their stations.” 1 पर पु

3.3. The expression ‘affairs of State” may cover the case of documents in
respect of which the practice of keeping them secret is necessary for the proper secu-
rity of the State. Reportsrelating to an individual with a view to taking action under
the Preventive Detention Act is a matter relating to affairs of State. |

३.4, The expression “affairs of State” would also cover advice given by a’Mini-
ster. Thus, in a Rajasthan case‘, the plaintiff brought an action for the recovery of
Rs. 1,19,000 against the State of Rajasthan, on account of a refund of a part of the
excise duty paid on the stocks of matches produced by the plaintiff for consumption
in the State territory. This was in pursuance of an agreement with the State Govern-
ment. There was a document which embodied the minutes of the discussion and
indicated the advice given by the Minister. The State claimed privilege in respect of
this document under section 123, he claim of privilege was upheld by the trial
court, as well as by the High Court. The High Court held that the document which
embodied the minutes of discussion and which indicated the advice given by the
Minister was certainly protected under section 123, and the Court could not com-
pel the State to produce it. हु

On the other hand, documents and lettersrelating to a contract with the Govern-
ment for the supply of goodsdo not relateto affairs of State.®

3.5. These simple situations may not present much difficulty. But the obscurity
of the expression “affairs of State” is illustrated by the decisions that were rendered
with reference to other matters. Income-tax returns made to income-tax officers and
assessment orders may be cited as an example. Before the enactment of specific
statutory provision on the subject, it was held that returns submitted to the income-
tax officer, and statments before him or orders made by him, did not refer to “affairs
of State” (section 123), nor were they made in official confidence (section 124), and .
the officer concerned was bound to produce them, if summoned to 00 80.5-7 It was
after these judicial decisions that section 54 of the Income-tax Act, 1922, was enacted.
Section 54 of jthe Income-tax Act, 1922 (now section 137 of the Income-tax
Act, 1961)to state only the gist thereof enacted that statements made or
returns, accounts or documents produced for evidence before Income-tax

of India, AR. 1951 Bom. 72.

2. Rukumali ४... R., 22 C.W.N. 1951.

3. Choudhury V. Changkakati, A.LR. 1960 Assam 210.

4. Kotah Match Factory, Kotak V. State of Rajasthan, A.LR. 1970 Raj. 118.
5. 6. 6. in Council V. Peer Md. ALR. 1950 Punj. 228.

6. Venkatachella V. Sampatu Chettiar, (1909) .L.R. 32, 62; 19 Mad. LJ. 263.
4. Jadabaram पे Builoram, (1899) LL.R. 26 Cal. 281.

ee
1. State of Punjab V. Sodhi Sukhdev Sindh, A.I.R. 1961 S.C. 493, and also Lady Dinbai V. Dominion

8


9

authorities shall be treated as confidential and disclosure thereof by any public
servant was prohibited, and no official shall be required to produce any such docu-
ment of to give evidence in respect thereof.

3.6 The difficulty of deciding whether a matter is or is not an“affair of State”
is also illustrated by the case-law relating to statements made by witnesses in the cases
of a departmental enquiry into the conduct of a public officer. The question arises
when, after the departmental enquiry, the guilty public servants are prosecuted—
usually for the offence of accepting illegal gratification. It was held by the Calcutta
High Court? that such statements were not privileged under sections 123 to 125,
and the accused was entitled to cross-examine the witnesses under section 153
with reference to the statements made by the witness at the departmental! enquiry.
‘The same view was taken by the Nagpur High Court.? On the other hand, statments
by witnesses in a secret and confidential investigation by the 0.1. D. for ascertaining
whether there is a prima facie case fora departmental enquiry against the public
‘servant were held to be privileged by the Lahore and Orissa High Courts.2-4

In a Punjab case,* the respondent Surjit Singh had filed a suit against the
State of Punjab for a declaration that his retirement from service before he reached
the age of superannuation was illegal and was violative of various provisions of the
Constitution of India. He requested the trial court to direct the department to pro-
duce in Court the character Rolls and confidential reports maintained in the depart-
ment, in respect of himself and some other inspectors who were junior to him but
were retained in service. The State claimed privilege unger section 123, on the ground
that the documents were unpublished official records relating to “affairs of State”.
The trial court disallowed the privilege, holding that these documents did not relate
to “affairs of State.” The matter came up before the High Court in revision. The
High Court allowed the petition filed by the State, and held that the character roll
and confidential reports maintained for the purpose of providing an appraisal of the
merit of State Servants by their superiors from time to time were in the nature of con-
fidential communications from one officer to another, and were meant to serve as
part of the material designed to maintain the efficiency of the public servants. The
High Court further held that those documents would relate to “affairs of State”.
It dissented from two eatlier cases to the contrary. Thus, conflicting views exist
within the same High Court.

3.7. In a Punjab case, Khosla J. attempted to evolve a definition of the expres-
sion “affairs of State”,’ and this definition was relied on in the same High Court
ina later case.? However, in appeal before the Supreme Court in the later case,® the
definition was not treated as exhaustive. Thus, the expression “affairs of State” is
in practice, found to be somewhat imprecise.

3.8. In fact, it is the concept of injury to the public interest that is jn furture
- likely to be paramount in India, as in other countries,

ea
1. Harbans V. R., 16 C.W.N. 431.

2. Ibrahim V. Secretary of State, A.I.R. 1936 Nag. 25.
3. Nazir V. R. ALR. 1944 Lah. 424. हर
4. James Bashi V. Collector of Ganjam, A.I.R. 1959 Orissa 152.
5. State of Punjab V. Surjit Singh, A.LR. 1975 P & H 11.
- (a) Union of India V. Raj Kumar, A.LR. 1967 Punj. 387.
(०) Niranjan Dass V. State of Punjab, ALR. 1968 Punj. 255.
7. G.Gin-Council V. Peer Mokd., A.LR. 1960 Punj. 228, 233 (Khosla, J.).
. Sadni Sukhdev Singh V. The State, A.ILR. 1961 Punj. 407. नि
9. State of Panjab V. 3०48 Sukhdev Singh, ALR. 1961 S.C. 43, (1961) 2 S.C.R. 37 हि

a

ry

Departmental
inquiries.

Imprecision.

Injury to
ic
pul


The head of
the Department

CHAPTER 4
THE AUTHORITY WHO CAN CLAIM THE PRIVILEGE

Indi 4.1 The authority that can claim the privilege is specified in section 123 of the
ian Evidence Act as the Head. of the Department. It is not forenoe to the किट प्र
the niceties of the precise meaning of this expression with reference to the. eae f
trative set up of Government. What we would like to emphasise is that, in.
with our recommendation,’ the claim made by the Head of 12752
be final or binding on the Court. The Head of the Department can place all mag
before the Court that are relevant for acquainting the court with the nature =
do ument and. for persuading it about the validity of the claim. The final
to whether, having regard to the circumstances of the case, the claim is j
will be with the court. The court will (as at present) have power to take oral evig
for the purpose. However, primarily it will be on an examination in chaml
the document) that the court will arrive at the decision. ” .

4.2. Another important question relates to the authority which will decide
the claim of privilege. This will be discussed in the next Chapter?

1. Chapters, 5,6 and 7. infra.
2. Chapter 5, infra,

10)


CHAPTER 5
THE AUTHORITY WHICH DECIDES THE QUESTION OF
PRIVILEGE

5.1. The question which authority will determine the existence or otherwise of Indian and
Government privilege in relation toa particular document is one on which we find, Enslish law.
considerable disparity tetween the Indian statutory law on the one hand and the

दर 61 h law on the other-If we are to take literally what is stated in section 123 of the

wn Evidence Act, it is for the head of the department concerned to determine
Whether or not the document should be disclosed. In England, on the other hand,

‘Wheté an objection on the score of “Crown privilege” is made as to the production
ofa: document, it is for the court to decide whether the objection should be upheld?
Toa large extent, this disparity between Indian law and English law has been reduced
By judicial decisions in India?

5.2. In our view, the statute itself should make it clear that power to decide the Need to vest
question of privilege vests in the court.The foundation for the privilege is injury to Bows in the

. the public interest.? There are two aspects of the puplic interest—the puplic interest .
in the maintenance of secrecy of certain material, and the public interest in the pro-
duction of all factual material that is relavent to a matter in issue in litigation. The
two may often bein conflict. The balancing of the considerations thatso come into
conflict is a delicate task which should, both in the interests of justice and in the
‘efficient performance of the task of such balancing, be left to the judiciary, rather

. than to any other agency. Courts are, by training as well as by their orientation
properly equipped to deal with such questions. As Salmon, L. J. (as he then was)
said, writing extra-judicially*—

“This is constitutional question of the first importance and it can be set-
tled only in the courts....There is no, indeed, no country in which the com-
mon law holds sway whose courts have failed to recognise they have such a
power——to be exercised, no doubt, rarely and in the last resort, but nevertheless

“to be exercised when necessary.”

Lord Justice Salmon described the power as “vital to the true administration
of justice”. .

5.3. When the matter is viewed in this perspective, it will be perceived that it Defect
is a major defect in section 123 of the Evidence Act, that it does not give prominence in the .
to the essence of the privilege, namely, the injury to the public interest. According to Present section.
the modern understanding of the basic objective and rationale of the privilege, it is
not enough that the documents relate to “matters of State”. The matters must be
such that their disclosure would be injurious to the public interest. As early as 1931,
the Privy Council stated the position thus in a case very often cited—

“The principle of the rule is the concern for public interest and the rule
will accordingly be applied no further than the attainment of that object requires.”5-¢

5.4, The case law on the subject has been reviewed by Ray, C. J.” who observed:
“In the ultimate analysis the contents of the documents are so described that it poset

1. Conway V._ Rimmer, (1968) 1 All E.R. 874 (H.L.). See particularly the speech of Lord Morris
of Borth-Y-guest.

2. See the case law on section 162, Evidence Act.
[Also paragraph 7.8, infra]. .
3. Cf. State of U. P. ५. Raj Narain, 2.17. 1975 S.C. 865.

4. Lord Justice Salmon, “Bench : The Last Bulwark of Individual Liberty” (1967) reptinted in
(1967) 69 Bom. L. R. (Journal) 123.

4. Robinson V. State of South Australia, A.LR. 1931 P.C. 704, 719.
6. Cf. Sankey V. Waitlam, (1978) 21 A.L.R. 505 (High Court of Australia),
4 State of U.P... Raj Narain, A.LR. 1975 S.C. 865; 875, 816 | pata 41,

nN


12

could be seen at once that in public interest the documents are to be withheld.”
Most of the commonwealth decisions! onthe subject emphasise the aspectof balanc-
ing—an aspect recently re-emphasised in America also.? The touchstone by which
the doctrine of Crown privilege operates, was felicitously expressed by Lord Rad-
cliffe in the Scottish appeal.* His Lordship said: “The power reserved to the Court
is therefore a power to order production even though the public interest is to some
extent affected prejudicially. This amounts to a recognition that more than one aspect
of the public interest may have to be surveyed in reviewing the question whether a
document which would be available to a party in a civil suit between parties is not
10 be available to the party engaged in a suit with the Crown. The interests of Govern-
ment, for which the Minister should speak with full authority, do not exhaust the
public interest. Another aspect of that interest is seen in the need that impartial
Justice should be done in the courts of law, not least between citizen and Crown, and
that a litigant who has a_case to maintain should not be deprived of the means of
its proper presentation by anything less than a weighty public Teason. It does
not seem to me unreasonable to expect that the court would be better qualified than
the minister to measure the importance of such principles in application to the
particular case that is before it.”

———_— SSS
1. (a) Rogers V. Home Secy., (1973) A.C. 388, 406, 412.
(0) Konia V. Morley, (1976) 1 N.ZLR. 455.
(©) Glasgow Corp. V. Central Land Board, (1956) S.C. 1, 18, 19 (HLL.).
(d) Re Grosvenor Hotel London No. 2, (1965) Ch. 1218, 1246.
2. U.S. V. Nixon, (1974) 418 U.S. 683. .
3. Glasgow Corp. V. Central Land Board, (1956) S.C. 1, 18, 19 GLL.).



CHAPTER 6

THE MATERIALS FOR CLAIMING AND DECIDING THE
PRIVILEGE

6.1. The materials on which a claim to the privilege under discussion may be
based generally comprise—

(a) affidavits filed in the first instance,
(b) further affidavits, when required by the court,
(c) the document in original (where produced),

(d) oral evidence (to the extent permissible).

The first two raise no problems, as (a) the parties may be expected to file such
affidavits as they may be advised,! and (0) the Court should continue to have the
necessary power to direct them to file affidavits? As to the third aspect (the original
document), we are recommending that it should be produced for inspection in every
case.®

As regards the last aspect —oral evidence—the Court certainly has the power
to call for it, even now. If—as is our recommendation —-the law should insist that the
document (in respect of which privilege is claimed) should be produced for inspection
by the Court in camera,‘ occasions for oral evidence will be reduced to a very large
extent.

6.2 Inregard to production, section 123 speaks of the permission of the head of
the department. It was 16107 by a majority judgment of the Supreme Court in 1961
that the Court is competent, and indeed bound, to hold a preliminary inquiry and
determine the validity of an objection to the production of the document, when
privilege is claimed under section 123. This necessarily involves an inquiry into the
question whether the evidence relates to “affairs of State” or not.

The head of the Department claiming privilege under section 123 must apply
his mind. In Amarchand v. Union of India (a)* judgement of the Supreme Court
of India referred to by the Court of Appealin the English case of Conway v.
Rimmer’ this aspect became important. In that case, the Supreme Court rejected the
claim for privilege on the ground that the statement of the Home Minister did not
show that he had seriously applied his mind to the contents of the document, or that
he had examined the question whether their disclosure would injure the public inter-
est. The Supreme Court observed as follows :—

“In view of the fact that section 123 confers wide powers onthe head of the
department, the heads of departments should act with scrupulous care in exer-
cising their right under section 123 and should never claim privilege only or
even mainly on the ground that the disclosure of the document in question may
defeat the defence raised by the State. Consideration which are relevant in clai-
ming privilege on the ground that the affairs of the State may be prejudiced by
disclosure must always be distinguished from considerations of expendiency”.

« State of U.P. V. Raj Nurain, AUR. 1975 S.C. 865.

. State of U.P. V. Raj Narain, A.I.R. 1975 S.C. 865.

. Chapter 7, infra.

. Chapter 7, infra.
State of Patiab V. Sodhi Sukhdev Singh, ALR. 1961 S.C. 493; (1961) 2 S.C.R. 372.
Amurchand V. Union of India, A.L.R. 1964 S.C. 1958, 1961 (not reported in the S.C.R.).
Conwsy V. Rimnpr (in th: Court of Appzal).

Seu pene

13
3—450 LAD/ND/83

Materials.

Position
regarding
production.


Practice in
India as to
affidavits.

Andhra Case.

14

6.3. It is well-known that the practice in India is for the head of the department

to make an affidavit, setting out the objection on behalf of the State and relevant
factors. The present practice was thus described by the Supreme Court in another -
case!—

“It is now the well-settled practice in our country that an objection is raised
by an affidavit affirmed by the head of the department. The Court may also
require a Minister to affirm an affidavit. That will arise in the course of the
enquiry by the Court as to whether the documents should be withheld from
disclosure. If the Court is satisfied with the affidavit evidence that the document
should be protected in public interest from production, the matter ends there.
If the Court would yet like to satisfy itself, the Court may see the document.
This will be the inspection of the document by the Court. Objection as to pro-
duction as well as admissibility contemplated in section 162 of the Evidence
Act is decided by the Court in the enquiry as explained by this Court in Sukhdev
Singh's case.

This Court has said that where no affidavit was filed, an affidavit could
be directed to be filed later on. The Grosvenor Hotel, London Group of cases;
(1963) 2 AILE. R. 426; (1964) 1 1 8. R. 92; (1964) 2 Ail E.R. 674and (1964)
3 AILE. R.354 (supra) in England shows that if an affidavit is defective, an oppor-
tunity can be given to file a better affidavit. It is forthe Court to decide whether
the affidavit is clear in regard to objection about the nature of documents. The
Court can direct further affidavit in that behalf. If the Court is satisfied with the
affidavits, the Court will refuse disclosure. If the Court in spite of the affidavit
wishes to inspect the document, the Court may do so.”

6A. It was agrued in an Andhra case? that the notes and minutes made on the

files were within the privileged class and were exempt from production. The privilege
claimed by the Additional Chief Secretary could not be questioned in view of
section 123. It was held that there was nothing in the affidavit to “suggest that the
notes made, relate to expression of an opinion in the determination and execution
of public policies”, a test suggested in Sukhdev Singh’s case.®

‘State of U.P. ५. Raj Narain, A.1.R. 1975 S.C. 865, 876, para 42,

2. R. Ramanna V. Govt. of A.P., ALR. 1971 AP. 196.
3. Sukhdev Singh's case AIR. 1961 S.C. 493, 502,


CHAPTER 7
MACHINERY FOR DETERMINATION OF THE PRIVILEGE

7.1. It is now possible to examine section 162 in the light of the above points. Section 162
Section 162 comprises four matters:— analysed.

(a) the duty of a person who is summoned to produce a document, to bring it
into court;

(b) the power of the court to decide objections to its production (in evidence)
or admissibility;

(c) the procedure to be followed for the purpose of exercising the power re-
ferred to at (b) above; and

(d) the translation of the document.

7.2. As regards the first topic (duty to produce), it should be noted that there (a) Production,
is a distinction between bringing the document in court and its production in evi-
dence. When a person is summoned to “produce” a document—the expression
“production” is also used in the two procedural Codes—that person must bring
it into court. This simple and elementary provision really gives rise to the important
implication that even if a person has an objection to handing over the document for
use in evidence, he must bring it into court. The physical production of the document
is obligatory. Whether the objection to its legal production is on the ground that the
document has no relevance to the suit or proceeding or whether it is on the ground
that the document, though relevant, is inadmissible by virtue of astatutory bar,
it is not for the person summoned to determine that objection for himself. Only the
Court will decide the objection to “production” in this sense. Production in the
physical sense is mandatory on the person called upon to do so by the Court.

7.3 The question really should not have presented any serious difficulty. Once Inspection by
it is established that the claim to privilege must be decided by the court, the logical the court znd
course should have been to allow the court to examine all the materials. The docu- Production of
ment itself would, of course, be the best evidence and (if in existence) the best evi- for inspection.
dence ought to be before the court. The matter has been unnecessarily complicated
by section 162 of the Evidence Act, which seems to exclude from inspection by the ~
court a document relating to “‘matters of State”. The anomalous position was dis-
cussed at length by the Law Commission in its Report on the Evidence Act, and we
would like to record here that we whole-heartedly agree with the approach adopted
in that Report and the recommendation made by the Commission for amendment
of the law. Since that Report was written, developmenis in other countries have
re-inforced the desirability of inspection by the Court of the document claimed to
be privileged. Of course, the inspection must be in chambers—as was emphasised
by the Law Commission in specific terms. Subject to this safeguard—which, in this
case, is of paramount importance—the court must have power to inspect the docu-
ment. To this, there should be no exception and on this reasoning section 162, Evi-
dence Act, will certainly require amendment.

7.4. Even as regards physical production (in the sense explained above), diffi- Documents not

cult questions could sometimes arise, where a witness who is summoned to produce in possession
a document raises the objection that the document is not in his power. In this context, OF Power.
the crucial words are—“Possession or power”. Where the witness is exclusively in
control of the document and some one else claims control over it, no difficulty could
arise by reason of the first part of section 162. But difficulty may arise when the wit-
ness is in joint possession with somebody else, who is not before the court. Insuch a
case, in deciding whether the witness ought to be compelled to “produce” the docu-
ment, normally the court will act on what is considered to be just in the circumstances.
This aspect came up for consideration in a Bombay case.? On a review of English
cases, it was observed that this matter would depend on whether the defendant,
physically speaking, could produce this document and, legally speaking, ought
to Produce it, there being no other person having an interest distinct from the de-
fendant.

1, Haji Jaharia Kassim V. Haji Casim, (1876) 1.L.R. 1 Bom. 496, 499.

15


(०) Decision of
objection,

(०) Machinery,

Anomaly,

Supreme
Court case,

16

But one having the actual custody of documents-may be compelled to produce
them even though the document is owned by others.

Under the first part of section 161, then,
court. The production of the document in e
be excused where the document is privileged

the document must be brought into

vidence will, under the second part
from disclosure.

7.5 It is expressly laid down in the second Part of the
can decide the validity of the object. Thereis, however, a disharmony between section

1 2! 3, in the last part, gives Power to the head of the
Department to give or withhold permission “as he thinks fit”. But section 162 gives
the power to the Court, It is necessary to remove this disharmony—which can be
achieved by deleting the offending part of section 123:

Section that only the court

____ 7.6. For implementing the second part of section 162 {ac
issue of privilege), some machinery is obvioulsy needed. This i
section 162. It compresses, in effect, two different topics. +

(i) inspection of the document—the court is given this power, unless the docu-
ment relates to “matters of State”,

ijudication upon the
5 the third part of

{ii) taking of other evidence by the court to enable it to decide the objection.
7.7. In so far as section 123 excludes the court’s power to inspect documents
Telating to “matters of State”, it presents a provision that is anomalous as well as
Productive of serious disharmony,—not to speak of injustice. It is anomalous,
because the inspection of a document would ordinari ly be the best method of judging

its nature and essential character. To deprive the court of this indispensable machi-
nery is to render its role futile. Other evidence cannot be a substitute for the original.
The provision is also out of harmony with that part of section 162 which assumes
that the court shall decide the question of privilege. Finally, the provision could be
Productive of injustice, because, on rather insufficient evidence, a useful document
may come to be excluded. It is this aspect that requires urgent attention. The only
satisfactory way is to remove the exception. As Lord Morris said.

“Whenever objection is made to the production of a relevant document,
it is for the court to decide whether to uphold the objection... .the power of
the court must also include a power to examine the documents privately.”

7.8. In this connection, reference may be made to the observations in State
of U. P. ५. Raj Narain? which were as follows:—

“As it was held in that case,* that the Court has no power to inspect the
document, it is difficult to see how the Court can find, without conducting an
enquiry as regards the possible effect of the disclosure of the documents upon
public interest, that a document is one relating to affairs of State as, ex-hypothesis,
a document can relate to affairs of State only if its disclosure will injure
public interest. It might be that there are certain classes of documents which
are per se noxious in the sense that, without, conducting an enquiry,
it might be possible to saythat by virtue of their character their disclosure
would be injurious to public interest. But there are other documents which
do not belong to the noxious class and yet their disclosure would be injurious
to public interest. The enquiry to be conducted under section 162—is an
enquiry into the validity of the objection that the document is an unpublished
official record relating to affairs of State and therefore permission to give
evidence derived from it is declined. The objection would be that the document
telates to secret affairs of State and its disclosure cannot be permitted, for,
why should the officer ai tne head of the department raise an objection to the
production of a document if he is prepared to permit its disclosure even though
it relates to secret affairs of State? Section 162 visualizes an enquiry into that
objection and empowers the court to takeevidence for deciding whether the

1, Conway ¥. Rimmer, (1964) 1 AUL E.R. 874, 880 (FLL).
2. State of U.P. V. Raj Narain, AAR. 1975 S.C. 882, 883, para 69 (per Mathew, J.).
3. State of Punjab V. Sodhi Sukhdev Singh, A.1.R. 1961 Punj. 493, 567, para 94.


17

objection is valid. The coutt therefore has to consider two things; whether the
documents relate to secret affairs of State; and whether the refusal to p2rmit
evidence derived from it being given was in the public interest. No doubt, the
words used in section 123 ‘as he thinks fit’ confer an ‘absolute discretion’,
on the head of the depaitment to give or withold such permission.
As I said, it is only if the officer refuses to permit the disclosure of a document
that any question car arise in a court and then section 162 of the Evidence Act
will govern the situation. An overriding power in express terms is conferred
on the court undet section 162 to decide finally on the validity of the objectior.
The court will disallow the objection if it comes to the conclusion that the do-
cument does not relate to affairs of State or that the public interest does not com-
pel its non-disclosure or that the public interest served by the administration of
justice in a particular case overrides all other aspects of public interest. This
conclusion flows from the fact that in the first part of section 162 of the Evidence
Act, there is no limitation on the scope of the court’s decision though in the
second part the mode of inquiry is hedged in by conditions. It is therefore clear
that even though the head of the department has refused to grant permission,
it is open to the court to go into the question after examining the document and
find out whether the disclosure of the document would be injurious to public
interest and the expression “as he thinks fit” in the latter part of section 123
need not deter the Court from deciding the question afresh, as section 162
authorises the court to determine the validity of the objection finally (see
the concurring judgment of Subba Rao, J. in Sukhdev Singh’s case”).

It may be noted that, at present, inspection of a document which relates to
“matters of State” is prohibited by section 162. In Amar Chand’s case,’ the
appellant called upon the respondents, the Union and the State to produce certain
documents. The respondents claimed privilege. The Supreme Court saw the
documents and was satisfied that the claim for privilege was not justified. The
case illustrates how inspection may become necessary to determine whether
the claim to privilege is justified.

We may also refer to an Andhra case? on the same point.

7.9. The last part of section 162 (translation) creates no problem. (d) Translation.

1. Amar Chand V. Union of India, A.1.R. 1964 S.C. 1958.
2. R. Ramanna V. Govt. of A.P., A.LLR. 1971 A.P. 196.


Right of
appeal—
need for.

Forum of
appeal.

Lord Reid’s
views as to
appeal.

Wigmore’s
view.

CHAPTER 8
THE PROCEDURAL CODES

_, 8.1. An important question relating to procedure that deserves to be con-
sidered may now be mentioned. Where a document is claimed to be privileged
under section 123 and the Court deter mines the qvesticn one way cr the other,
the question naturally arises whether there should be a right cf appeal against a
ruling so determining the question, and if so, in what cases, and to which forum.
In considering that issue, a distinction can be made between a ruling upholding
the privilege so claimed and a ruling denying it, in the particular case. A ruling
upholding the privilege can be challenged in appeal on final determination in the
case, whether it be a decree or other final order in a civil case and a judgment of
conviction or acquittal or other final order in a criminal case. A separate right
of appeal is not required, and the absence cf sucha right would not sericusly pre-
judice the interests of the private litigant, whose request for admission in evidence
of the particular document is rejected by upholding the privilege. But the case
of a denial of the privilege stands on a different footing. The document would
then straightaway go into evidence. If, ultimatcly, on appeal, the document is
held to be privileged, an anomalous situation might arise. The harm that the
privilege is intended to rrevent (injury to the public interest) wot.ld then have been
already done. Any ruling of the Appellate Court (even if it ypholds the privilege)
would then have only an academic value, so far as that particular litigation is con-
cerned. In view of this, an immediate and separate right cf apfeal to the ap-
propriate forum would appear to be necessary in the interests cf justice. Such
a course, we think, should be adopted whether the proceedings are civil or criminal
im nature,

8.2. Next, as regards the forum, we are of the opinion that irrespective of the
status of the trial court or of the nature of the proceedings, the appeal against the
order denying the claim of privilage should be to the High Court.

Two reasons have weighed with us in coming to this conclusion. First, the
question is of such a nature that the procedural law should enable the matter to
be decided by the highest court in the State withcut delay. Secondly, a straight
appeal to the High Court would cut short the intermediate stages and enable the
cendering of a prompt decision. Usually, controversies involving such claim
are of a sensitive character and it is desirable that the resolution of such controverses
within the legal framework is not unduly prolonged. We would, therefore, re-
commend that both the Codes of procedure—Civil and Criminal—should be
amended by inserting a suitable provision on the subject, incorporating the points’
tiscussed above.

8.3. It may be mentioned that the suggestion for giving a right of appeal
to the Government was made by Lord Reid in Conway’s case}.

“It is important, however, that the Minister should have a right to appeal
before the document is produced. The matter was not fully investigated in
the argument before Your Lordships, but it dces appear that in one way or
another there can be an appeal if the document is in the custody of a servant
ofthe Crown or of a person who is willing to co-operate with the Minister.
There may be difficulty if it is in the hands of a person who wishes to preduce
it. That difficulty, however, could occur today, if a witness wishes to give
some evidence which thc Minister unsuccessfully urges the Court to prevent
from being given. It may be that this is a matter which ‘deserves further
investigation by the Crown authorities”.

8.4, Afterexamining the scope of the privilege inthe light of logicand policy,
Wigmore concludes as follows? —

“(1) Any executive or administrative regulation purporting in general
terms to authorise refusal to disclose official records in a particular depart-
ment when duly requested as evidence in a court of justice should be deemed
void.

- Conway V. Rimmer, (1968.) 1 All E.R. 874. For later stages, see (1968) 2 All E.R. 304,
2. Wig. S. 379. cited in Sarkar, Evidence (1971), page 1165.

18


19

(2) Any statute declaring in general terms that official records are con-
fidential should be liberally construed to have an implied exception for
disclosure when needed in a court of justice.

(3) The procedure in such cases should be : A letter of request from
the head of the Court to the head of the Department (accompanying the
subpoena to the actual custodian), stating the circumstances of the litigation
creating the need for the document ; followed (in case of refusal) by a reply
from the Depart mental head stating the circumstances deemmed to justify
the refusal ; and then a ruling by the Court, this ruling to be appealable and
determinate of the privilege’.

8.5. In the light of the above, it will be necessary to insert a suitable pro-
vision in both the Codes at the appropriate place, somewhat on the following
lines :—

‘‘Any person aggrieved by the decision of any court subordinate to the High
Court rejecting a claim for privilege made untler section 123 or section 124 of
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 shall have a right of appeal to the High Court
against such decision and such appeal may be filed notwithstanding the fact that
the proceeding in which the decision was pronounced by the Court is still pending.”

Suggested
provision.


Article 74—
Advice given
by Ministers
to the
President.

Need for
protection
regarding
materials
constituting
the reasons.

Supreme court
case,

Another view
possible.

CHAPTER 9
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS

9.1. We have so far considered the position under the Evidence Act.
There is an important constitutional provision to which reference shculd
now be made. Article 74 of the Constitution reads as under :—

“74, (1) There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister
at the head to aid and advise the President who shall, in the exercise of his
functions, act in accordance with such advice :

Provided that the President may require the Council of Ministers to
reconsider such advice, either generally or otherwise, and the President shall
act in accordance with the advice tendered after such re-consideration.

_ (2) The question whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered by
Ministers to the President shall not be inquired into in any Court.”

5 Similar provision is contained in article 163 of the Constitution in regard to
tates.

9.2. article 74, while preserving the confidentiality of the advice tendered
by Ministers, makes no specific provision in relation to the connected matters,
that is to say, papers preceding the advice and forming the materials that constitute
the reasons for the advice. On this point a clarification becomes necessary in view
of the discussion contained in a recent decision of the Supreme Court.2

9.3. In the Sepreme Court decision referred to above, the questicn at issue
(so far as is relevant for the present report) was the ambit of the protection against
disclosure under article 74(2) of the Constitution. It was held that while the
reasons which had weighed with the Council of Ministers would certainly form
part of the advice, the material on which the reasoning is based and the advice is
given cannot be said to form part of the advice. On this basis, the correspondence
exchanged between the Law Minister, the Chief Justice of Delhi and the Chief
Justice of India which constituted the material forming the basis of the decision
of the Central Government in that particular case was held to be outside the
exclusionary rule enacted in article 74(2) of the Constitution. In arriving at
this conclusion, one of the judgments adopts the analogy of a judgment given by
acourt of law. The relevant passage reads as under :—

“The point we are making may be illustrated by taking the analogy of
a judgment given by a Court of law. The judgment would undcubtedly be
based on the evidence led before the Court and it would refer to such evidence
and discuss it but on that account can it be said that the evidence forms part
of the judgment ? The judgment would consist only of the decision and
the reasons in support of it and the evidence on which the reasoning and the
decision are based would not be part of the judgement. Similarly, the material
‘on which the advice tendered by the Council of Ministers is based cannot be
said to be part of the advice and the correspondence exchanged between the
Law Minister, the Chief Justice of Delhi and the Chief Justice of India which
constituted the material forming the basis of the decision of the Central Govern-
ment must accodingly be held to be outside the exclusionary tule enacted in
clause (2) of article 74.”

9.4 We have given anxious consideration to the reasoning and the conclusion
in the judge ment of the Supreme Court referred to above. However, with respect,
itappears to us thatitis possible to take a different view1n the matter. It isevidence
that supplies the reasons 07 grounds for the conclusions on varicus questions of
fact at issue. It is because of the ‘evidence that factval conclusions on matters
at issue are reached. To put it differently, in litigation, evidence constitutes the

3. S.P. Gupta V. Union of India, ALR. 1982 S.C. 149 (February issue) ; (1981) Suppl. S.C.C,
87, 246 to 266, paras 59-74. -

20


21

factnal grounds or reasons for the decision. Similarly, in regard to the advice
tendered by Ministers to the President, the materials that support the Ministerial
advice represent the factual grounds or reasons for the edvice. We therefore
consider it proper to regard the materials forming the basis of the advice as part
of the grounds or reasons for the advice.

9.5. The matter could be viewed from a pragmatic angle also. Under
article 74(1), proviso of the Constitution,! the President has the right to require
the Ministers to reconsider the advice tendered by them. Now, the President
can disciarge this constitutional responsibility only if he has before him the materials
that had weighcd with the Ministers in tendering their advice. It is only on the
basis of these materials that he can satisfy himself about the propriety of the ‘advice

- tendered and of the extent to which the advice is warranted bythe materials. What
“‘reasons’ seeks to express is the mental process of those who give the advice. This
mental process does not operate in a vacuum ; it operates ina particular setting,
from which it ought not to be separated. It is common practice that the back.
gfound information and documents which are operative in the minds of those
whose business it is to advise on high matters of Stateare referred to (though
not set out indetail inso many words)intheir advice. Itis impossible to view
the advice in isolation from such materials, relevant to and referred to in the
advice, thereby constituting the very foundation of the advice.

9.6. When the matter is viewed in this light, it becomes desirable to remove
the doubts created in this respect by the Supreme Court judgment.?. The impli-
cations of article 74(2) of the Constitution should, in our opinion, be articulated
more expressly and clearly than has been done at present. Such an amendment
becomes necessary in order to re-state the position more clear ly in the interest of
harmonious working of the Constitution and in the interest of a faithful imple-
mentation of the constitutional policy as we understand it.

9.7 At the same time, we ’ are not unaware that in regard to any head of
evidentiary privilege, there are dangers in framing the relevant Provision too widely.
The interest of the litigants, on the one hand, and the interest ofsocietyin the main-
tenance of a certain constitutional policy, on the other hand, are both important.
The operative rules on the subject should seek to strike a happy balance between
the two. We think that such a balance could be maintained and considerable va-
gueness and unintended width of the privilege could be guarded against, by provi-
ding that materials to be privileged under article 74(2) of the Constitution as
constituting the reasons must have been referred to in the advice mentioned in that
article.

9.8. This postulates an amend ment of the relevant constitutional provisions.
It may be difficult to give a precise draft, but the following is a very rough suggestion
for an Explanation to be added to-article 74 of the Constitution to carry out the
above object :— .

“Explanation.— Materials that constitute the grounds or reasons jor the
advice tendered by the Ministers to the President shall, for the purposes of this

article, be deemed to be part of such advice, where such materials are referred
to in such advice.”

A similar Explanation (with necessary adaptation) should be added to article
163 of the Constitution, which is an analogous provision relating to the advice ten-
dered by Ministers to the Governor.

We recommend that the Constitution be amended on the lines indicated above,

——
1. Para 9.1, supra.

2. Para 9.3, supra.
4—450 L.A. 0. /N.D./83

Material id

for reconsidera~
tion of the
advice,

Need for
amendment.

Materials
referred to
in the advice
tendered by
Members,

Recommendations
as to articles

74 and 163 of

the Constitu-
tion.


General trends
witnessed in
England and
other _
countries. f

England.

The process
of evolution.

CHAPTER 10
BRIEF COMPARATIVE SURVEY
I. General observations.

10.1. A study of the comparable position in many other countries, particularly
England, Australia, Canada and the United States, shows that by and large the law
on the subject of State privilege is moving from rigidity to elasticity, from a formal
approach to a liberal one and from the earlier position of control by the executive
to the later position of the discretion being left increasingly to the judiciary. No
doubt, extreme cases and unprecedented situations might provoke an extreme
re-action in this or that direction. In general, as stated above, two broad develop-
ments are witnessed; in the first place, the paramount test now recognised ig that
of injury to the public interest; in the second place, it is also now recognised that
the ultimate authority to determine the availability of privilege in a particular case
is the judiciary, and not the executive. This trend is illustrated in England by the
leading decision in Conway V. Rimmer ; in Australia by the leading decision in
Sankey V. Whitlam ;in Canada by the relevant case law : and in New Zeland also
by the relevant case law. Some areas in Australia ana (in regard to the Fedetal
Court) Canada have adopted a different approach—but these might be regarded
as aberrations.

10.2. The position in England definitely bears out the genetal trend mentioned
ve,

II. English Lew.

10,3. The English cases on the subject of Crown privilege (now known as.
‘State interest’ or ‘public interest’) have undergone a long process of evolution!
The case law upto Conway V. Rimmer® was reviewed, in detail, in the Report

of the Law Commission on the Evidence Act.*
Some subsequent cases were also noted in the Report on the Evidence Act!

Thereafter, several cases have arisen on the subject. They do not lay down
any new principle, but seem to show that the general trend is towards less of a rigid
approach and more of an eleastic one.

In some of the cases, the claim of privilege was upheld. ‘-* In one of the cases,
the claim was over-ruled and discovery of documents ordered. The House of Lords
stressed the need to balance the public interest in non-disclosure against the ‘public
interest, in seeing that justice is done to the parties,?

10.4. The decision of the House of Lords in Norwich Pharmacal Ltd. Via,
Customs and Excise Commissioners® is of a particular interest. The appellants
were owners and licensees of a patent; information concerning imports published by
the Commissioners showed that some importations must have been made by persons
infringing the patent. The appellants sought an order that the Commissioner
should disclose the name of the importers of the goods which were the subject of
the patent. Though of the opinion that the Commissioners had rightly refused to
make a disclosure without an order of the court, the House of Lords made the

4. Gf. Cross, Evidence (1979), pages 306, 307.

2. Conway V. Rimmer, (1968) 1 All E.R. 874 (HLL.).

3, Law Commission of India, 69th Report (Evidence Act).

4 Fora briefsurv2y, 3०३ D.C.M. Yardley, “Exzcutive Privilege” (1974) New Law Journal 794,796
Je RV. Lewes J. J. ex-Parte Home Secretary, (1972) W.L.R. 279 (HLL). .
6. Alfred Crompton Amusement Machines Ltd., (1973) AU E.R. 169 (HLL.).

1. हैं। /6 Pharmacal Co. Ltd. V. Commissioners of Customs & Excise, (1973) 2 AN E.R, 943,

8. Marwick Pharmacal Co. Lid. V. Customs & Excise Commissioner, (1973)2 All E.R, 943 (B.L

22


23

order. The most relevant consideration was that the p2rsons whose names were
to be disclose4 were almost c2rtainly wrongdo2rs.1_ Other relevant considerations
were said to be the relations betw2en the wrongdoers and the Commissioner, whe-

ther the information could bs obtained from another source, and whether giving it *

would involve the Commissioners in trouble which could not be compensated by
an order for costs.?

10.5. Lord Edmund Davies’s observations in another case are also pertinent.
“The disclosure of all evidence relevant to the trial of an issue being at all times a
matter of considerable public interest, the question to 98 determined is whether it
is clearly demonstrated that in the particular case the public interest would never-
theless be better served by excluding evidence despite its relevance. If, on balance,
the matter is left in doubt, disclosure should be ordered”,

10.6. The principle as emerging from various judicial decisions in England
has been stated thus in the leading English book on Evidence :—

“Relevant evidence must be excluled on the ground of public policy when
it concerns certain matters of public interest considered to be more important
than the full disclosure of facts to the court and when it relates to miscellaneous
matters connected with litigation’. हु

10.7. The rule specifically relating to public interest has been simply stated
as follows® :—

“Relevant evidenc> must be excluded if its recention would be contrary
to State interest, but ‘State interest’ is an ominously vague expression and it is
necessary to turn to the deci ‘ed cases in order to ascertain the extent to which
this objection to the reception of relevant evidence has been taken”.

Some illustrative cases may be mentioned.

10.8. Discussion of English law in the text books generally appears uadet
various categotiies, national security, public service and the like, In one of the
cases® involving national security, the defeadants, 35018 under the direction of
the Board of Admiralty, refused to produc> a letter to their agent on the ground that
it contained information concerning the Governaent’s vlans with regard to 01%
of the Middle Eastern campaigns of the First World War. The information had,
of course, been given to the defendants by the Board of Admiralty under the seal
of strictest secrecy, but as Swinfen-Eldy, L. J. observed :—

“The foundation of the rule is that the information cannot be disclosed
without injury to the public interests, and not that the documents are confidential
or official, which alone is no reason for their non-oroduction : the general public
interest is paramount to the interests of the suitor”.

Where the security of the State is involved, the claim of privilege (if substantiated
by adequate material) may be more readily upheld’.

10.9. Many national interests other than that of national security have been
protected by the rule under consideration.’ On2 ofthe cases may becited.? Internal
communications between the Customs and Excise Commissioners and their staff
and communications of the Commissioners with third parties, all of which were
brought into existence to enable the Commission2rs to fulfill their statutory obli-
gation of forming an opinion concerning the basis on which purchase tax should
be payable by the company, were held to be propzr subjects of a claim to withhold
them from production in the public interest.

The only iniocent importers would have bzen re-importers.

On the last two cases, see a note by C.F. Tapper, 37 M.L.R. 92.

D.V.N. S. P. 2. 2. (1978) A.C. 171, 174, 246; (1977) 1 &॥ 8.7. 589.

Cross, Evidence (1979), page 304.

Cross, Evidence (1979), pag? 306.

Asiatic Petroleum Co. Ltd. V. Anglo-Persian Oil Co. Ltd., (1916) 1 K.B. 822, 830.
Cf. Dancan V. Cammel Laird & Co. Ltd., (1942) 1 All E.R. 857.

. Cross, Evidence (1979), page 297.

. Alfred Crompton Amisem2nt M chines V. Customs Commr., (1973) 2 All E.R. 1169.

wow nr ar ener

The priniciple

National
security.

Other
national
interest,


Communications
in public
service,

Residual
categories.

Cabinet
minutes.

Police in-
formation.

Criminal
cases.

Public
interest —
suggestion
for catego-
risation.

24

... 10.10. The claim of privilege has b2en occasionally sought to bs justified
in circumstances where a report has been made from one public servant to another
in course of his duty. The argument here is, that the report should be treated as
confidentia} if it was prepared in conditions under which the officials making it
expected it to be so treated. If confidentiality is destroyed, then the civil servant
would not (it is stated) bz prepared to write full and frank reports. The category
can be conveniently labelled as a claim arising unde1 the head of “public service’’,
It would, however, appar that at the present day the privileg: under this head is
not recognised in England separately, The agrument that a confidential report
will not be made frankly (if there is a probability of public scrutiny) has been criti-
cised more than once by English academic writers.1 Garner suggested* long ago
that it-really does not stand up to close examination, because “a civil servant should
not be prepared to write a report that may be open to criticism or one that he does
not wish to be examined in court (58४३ on state security grounds)”,

The House of Lords, dealing with the argument that the candour of commu-
nication between civil servants might be prejudiced if a privilege is not recognised
observed in Conway’s case® as under :— ,

“It is strange that civil servants alone are supposed to be unable to be
candid in their statements made in the course of duty without the protection of
an absolute privilege denied to their other fellow subjects”.

10.11. There are other residual circumstances in which privileg: is claimed
Thisis the residual category under “public interest”. It seems, that in England
this category is defined by reference to specifis hzads, such as, the prevention of
specific crimes and the maintaining of the motale of the armed forces of the Crown,
However, even these specific heads have not escap2d criticism, judicially* and
otherwise’ According to Cross*—

“It is difficult to believe that all the cases mentioned (by him) unde
head of other national interests would be followed today”. 7 the

Cross cites the following observations of Lord Hailsham of St. Marylebone? :—

“The categories of public interest are not closed, and must alter from time
totime, whether by restriction or extention, as social conditions and social legis-
lation develop”.

10.12, As to Cabinet minutes, communications with ambassadors and some
cases of communications between heads of departments, it was conceded in the
speeches in Conway V. Rimmer® that no court would order the production of such
documents.

10.13. Sources of police information are a judicially recognised class of evi-
dence, excluded on the ground of public policy unless their production is required
to establish innocence in a criminal trial®.

10.14. As to criminal cases, in England, it is stated not to be the practice to
claim privilege on the ground of State interest}.

10.15. Suggestions have appeated in England that legislative action should
be taken to particularise the species of public interest which should be taken into
account", But no such restrictive legislation seems to have been ‘enacted so far
in Eng'and.

For example, Ingris Bell in (1957) Public Law.
Garner, Administrative Law (1967), page 252—a view repeated in later edition,
Conaway V. Rinner, (1958) 1 AU E.R. 874, 919, 967 (HLL.).
Regrossnor Hobe (No. 1) (1963) 3 All E.R, 426, on appeal (1964) 1 AILE.R. 92.
Articles in (a) 79 L.Q.R. 37, 153, 487.

(b) 80 L.Q.R. 24, 158.

(०) (1963) Public Law 405.
6. Cross, Evidenc: (1979), page 309.
7. 20. ५. N.S. P.C. 2. , (1978) A.C. 71, 230.
8. Conway ५. Rimmer, (1968) All E.R. 910, 971.
9. Rogers V. Secretary of State for the Home Department, (1972) 2 All E.R. 1057,
10. Cross, Evidence (1979),-page 310,
11. Clark, “The Last Word on the Last Word” (1969) , 32 Modern Law Rey. 142, 148,

wena


25

10.16. According to some of the earlier English cases, the production of a
document may be withheld in public interest either on account of its contents or
else because it belongs to a class which, on grounds of public policy must, as a class,
be withheld from production. The latter ground of production is usually raised
when some ground other than the national security-is at stake.

However, the trend in modern times, so far as the privilege claimed on the
ground of affairs of State or public interest is concerned, is to apply one uniform
test, the governing consideration being the simple (though abstract) one of injury
to publicinterest. Relevant evidence must be excluded if the reception would be
contrary to State interest:.

10.17. There is probably no category of documents such that courts will never
order a document failing within it to be disclosed.3-4

It may be that, in practice, the fact that the document relates to a particular
subject may induce the court to accord to that document a higher sanctity than to
otherdocuments ofamoreroutinecharacter. Inthis way, thenature of the document
may be one of the relevant considerations in coming to a conclusion as to how far
it deserves protection on the ground of injury to the publicinterest. But the formu-
lation of the rule in abstract terms is not affected by this aspect, though it may be
useful in spelling out, in more concrete and visible form, that which is indicated in
abstract terms by a generalrule. If one were to prepare a digest of reported cases,
such a classification would rerhags be convenient as furnishing a label unde: which
to arrange the discussion. Beyond that, classes may not necessarily furnish a basis
for devising legal categories. , है

10.18. As to procedural aspects, in Conway V. Rimmer®, it was specifically
and positively laid down that whenever an objection is made to the production of
a relevant document, it is for the court to decide whether to uphold the objection.
It was also held that the inherent power of the court must include a power to ask
for a clarification or amplification of an objection to production, though the court
will be careful not to impose (at that stage) a requirement which could only be met
by divulging the very matters to which the objection related. Further, the power
of the court must also include a power to examine documents Privately though
that power should in practice be sparingly exercised. Finally, as Lord Morris of
Borth-y-gest observed : “I see no difference in Principle between the consideration
which should govern what have been called the contents cases and the class cases.”6

10.19. No distinction is made in England between cases in which Crown is a
party and those in which the proceedings are between Private citizens or corporations’.

IIL Austraila and Canada

10.20. In Australia, two important developments have taken place re
The well known decision of the High Court of ‘Australia in Santer Vv. Whitan
specifically holds that it is the responsibility of the court to decide whether a docu-
ment should be Protected from disclosure in the public interest. The court must
balance the public interest in non-disclosure against the public interest in Proper
justice. The nature of the public interest involved will vary from case to case, so
that the protection afforded to documents of a class concerned with high levels of
Government cannot be absolute, nor enjoyed for ever. According to the above

+ Cross on Evidence (1979), page 307.

. Cross on Evidence (1979), page 306.

Lord Fraser in Science Research Council ५, Nasse, (1979) 3 W.LR. 784.
See also para 10.18, infra.

Conway V. Rimmer, (1968) A.C. 919, 971 (Lord Mortis of Borth-y.gest),
Cf. para 10.16, supra,

. Cross, Evidence (1979), page 389,

|. Sankey V. Whitlam, (1978) A.L.R. 305, 535-546 (High Court of Australia),

Ft agaeys

Class-
content,
distinction.

Categori-
pen. not
favouret

in England.

Procedural
aspects.

Arranging
of parties
not material,

Australia
and Canada.


Legislative
reaction in
Australia.

New South
Wales
Amendment.

“26
tuling, the fact that a document belongs to a class of documents that would ordi-
narily be regarded as Protected from disclosure in the public interest is not neces-

sarily determinative of the issue. Factors other than the document’s membership
of the class might be relevant to the balancing of the public interest.

10.21. The case mentioned above was a private prosecution brought against
the former Prime Minister and two members of the Labour Ministry in Australia,
alleging a conspiracy arising out of the so-called “Loans Affair’. The documents
summoned included documents 1 comprising cabinet papers and communications
between Ministers and senior officials of the Government in relation to matters of
Government policy. Some of the documents had already been published in The
Bulletin magazine and also in a book; some had even been tabled in Parliament
in the course of a debate on the “Loans affair’, The magistrate before whom pri-
vilege was claimed upheld the claim of privilege by the Commissioners for all
the documents summoned in respect of which the privilege had been claimed.
The matter came up-before the High Court on the informant seeking a writ of
mandarhus and declaration for production of the documents originally summoned.
The High Court declared that (with one exception) all the documents ought to be
produced. As regards the excepted document, a part of the said document was
also to be made available. Tt was clearly laid down by the High Court that there
was no particular class of documents exempt,—not even cabinet papers. The nub
of the decision is to be found in the statement of Stephen, J.2A—

“The judge-made law relating to Crown privilege is no code, it erects no
immutable classes of documents to which a so-called absolute privilege is to
be accorded. On the contrary its essence is a recognition of the existence of
the competing aspects of the public interest, their resp2ctive weights and hence
the resultant balance varying from case to case”.

10.22. This is the first development in Australia on the judicial side. But
this is countered by the second noteworthy development in Australia, beifig a legis-
lative reaction to the above decision in Sankey V. Whitlam. An example of this
is the Evidence Amendment Act, 1982 passed for the Australian Noithern Territory.
This Act allows the Attorney-General to make a claim of privilege, if he considers
that in the public interest certain documents or communications should not be
released. Ifsucha claim is made the court cannot admit those documents or
communications in evidence. The Act covers relates to documents involving
Ministers, Cabinet or the Executive Council, and communications between Federal
and State Ministers.

The above legislation was vehemently criticised by the opposition, in the
course of discussion of the Bill in the legislature®.

10.23. Incidentally, it may bz of interest to mention that the Australian judg-
ment in Sankey V. Whitlam has ben cited in a decision of the House of Lords,*
apparently expressing agreement with its bioad approach.

10.24. It appears that as a reaction to the decision in Sankey V. Whitlam,
the New South Wales State Government also amnded the Evidence Act to provide
in section 61(1) as under :—

“61. (1) When the Attorney General certifies in writing}that in his
opinion—

(a) any communication described in the certificate or any communi-
cation relating to a matter 50 described, is a governm2nt communication
and is confidential; and

(b) the disclosure of the communication in any legal Proceedings
described in the certificate is not in the public interest, the communication
shall not be disclosed in or in relation to those legal proceedings or be
admissible in evidence in those legal proceedings”.

1, Dennis Pearc2, “Of Ministers, Referies and Infermers—Evidence Inadmissible in the Public
* ‘Ynterest” (1980), 54 Aust. LJ. 127, 128.

2. Sankey V. Whitlam, (1978) 54 A.L.J.R. 11, 31 (High Court of Australia).

3. Evidence Amendment Act, 1982 forthe Australian Northern Territory. See (July 1982) 8 Com~

“ “monwealth Legal Bulletin 890.

4. Burmah Oil V. Bank of England, (1979) 3 W.LR, 722, 760 (Lord Scormen).


27

, 10.25. In Canada, the rule (apait from a specific statute, to be presently men- Canada.
tioned)! as laid down by the case law? seems to be a liberal one. Most Canadian
courts have followed the English decision in Conway V. Rimmer in regard to the
subject of State interest, although occasionally a different approach is visible. From
a survey of the judicial decisions in Canada, it would appear that at least in cases
where there is no question of national security or international relations or cabinet
confidence, the claim of privilege on the basis of State interest will be reviewable
by the courts in Canada?-1,

10.26. However, there is one specific statutory provision—section 41 of the Legislative
Federal Court Act, 1970 (an Act dealing primarily with the structure, jurisdiction Caen:
and procedure of the new Federal Court of Canada)—which adopts a somewhat, Federal’ a
different line of approach. The section reads as under> :— Court Act.

“41. (1) Subject to the provisions of any other Act and to sub-section (2)
when a Mintster of the Crown certifies to any court by affidavit that a document
belongs to a class or contains information which on grounds of a. public interest
specified in the affidavit should be withheld from production and discovery,
the court may examine the document and order its production and discovery
to the parties, subject to such restrictions or conditions as it deems appropriate
if it concludes in the circumstances of the case that the public interest in the
proper administration of justice outweighs in importance the public interest
specified in the affidavit.

(2) When a Minister of the Crown certifies to any court by affidavit that
the production of discovery of a document or its contents would be injurious
to international relations, national defence or security, or to federal-provincial
relations, or that it would disclose a confidence of the Queen’s Privy Council
for Canada, discovery and production shall be refused without any examina-
tion of the document by the court.”

IV. U.S. A.

10.27. The case law on Governmental privilege in the U.S.A. has not been Position in
so rich and profuse as in Commonwealth jurisdictions. But at least two judicial us. —
decisions are noteworthy. The first is U.S. V. Reynolds,’ which established The decision of
the proposition that it is the judiciary that decides whether the privilege claimed . .
on a particular occasion is justified or not.

10.28. The trend is confirmed by the famous case of United States V. Nixon,’ The decision
which suggests that the privilege in the areas of “State” secrets and “official infor- of 1974.
mation’ is qualified and gives way upon a judicial assessment that there are more
important interests to be served by disclosure in a particular ,case. To some extent,
the decision in United States V. Nixon may be regarded as going further in the
direction of liberality than the earlier decision in U.S. V. Reynolds’, inasmuch as
judicial weighing of the conflicting considerations is now given a place of pride,

10.29, Literature on the above decision is abundant. The entire bunch of Draft
papers involved in the litigation has been brought out conveniently in one publi- Federal
cation®, Soon after the judgment, there appeared several articles, of which it is Rules.
enough to mention two which (taken together) cover almost all aspects of the deci-
sion 10.11,

je Paragraph 10.26 infra.
2. See cases cited in Stanley Schiff, Evidence in the Litigation Process 1978, Vol. 2,
page 1069.
Barshnzll, “Crowa Privilege’ (1973) 51 Canadian Bar Rev. 551.

Note, “Exzcutive Privilege’” (1975) 33 Univ. of Toronte Faculty Law Rev. 181.

. Szction 41, Federal Court Act, 1970 (Canada).

U.S. ५. Reynolds, (1954) 345 ७.5. 1.

U.S. ५. Nixon, (1974) 418 U.S. 683,

U.S. V. Reynolds, (1954) 345 US. 1.

Leon Freedman (Ed.), U.S. V. Nixon : President before the Supreme Court (1974).
10. Symposium, U.S. V. Nixon, (1974) 22 UCLA Law Rey. 1-140.

yi. Paul A. Freunds, “Oa Presidential Privilege” (1974) 88 Harvard Law Rev. 13.

Ponawre


Obscurity
of position.

Draft
Federal
Rules of
Evidence.

“Secrets of
State” and
“Official:
information’.

Practice
in USA.

Secrecy in
Government
200 U.S.
velopments.

28

10.30. No doubt, some of the obiter dicta in the judgment in U.S. V. Nixon
(observations relating to national security etc.) create the impression that the Court
would go back upon its liberal approach earlier shown in U.S. V. Reynolds. How-
ever, that itself is a matter of some controversy.

Perhaps because of the obscurity of the position arising from the paucity of case
law, one eminent writer on American constitutional law! has stressed the need
for laying down some definite rules.

10.31. Before the decision in U.S. V. Nixon was pronounced, there had been
formulated in 1972, the draft federal rules of evidence*, and it is desirable to quote
the relevant provision as proposed thetein, so as to show the thinking even at that
time. This is how the rule as to governmental privilege was formulated in those
rules—

“The Government has a privilege to refuse to give evidence and to prevent
any person from giving evidence upon a showing of reasonable likelihood of
danger that the evidence will disclose a secret of State or official information
as defined in this rule.” .

10.32. In the same formulation, the documents were divided into two cate-
gories, namely secrets of State and official information, respectively. A “Secret
of State” is a governmental secret relating to the national defence or the international
relations of the United States. ‘‘Official information” is information within the
custody or control of a department or agency of the Government, the disclosure
of which is shown to be contrary to the public interest. Although the category of
secrets of State (danger to national defence or international relations) separately
mentioned in this formulation was probably derived from the decision in U.S. V.
Reynolds, it should be mentioned that undet that decision the judge must in every
case determine whether the circumstances are appropriate for the claim of the pri-
vilege. Further (as already mentioned above), the later decisionin U.S. ५, Nixon
shows a more liberal approach. That decision held that the interest of accused
Watergate conspirators in marshalling evidence in their defence outwieghed the
President’s claim of privilege. Although the decision in U. 5. V. Nixon related
to protection claimed in high level communications in the executive department
and did not relate, as such, to national defence, it would appear that the courts
in United States would not now leave the question of privilege entirely to the dis-
cretion of the executive.

10.33. As regards the actual procedure to be followed, the formulation pro-
posed in the U.S. craft Federal Rules is of interest as showing the general approach.
Rule 509 (c) of those rules* proposed as under :—

“(c) Procedure.—The privilege for secrets of State may be claimed only
by the chief officer of the Government agency or department administering the
subject matter which the secret information sought concerns, but the privilege
for official information may be asserted by any attorney representing the
Government. The required showing may be made in whole or in part in the
form of a written statement. The judge may hear the-matter in chambers
but all counsel are entitled to inspect the claim and showing and to be heard
thereon; except that, in the case of secrets of State, the judge, upon motion
of the Government, may permit the Government to make the required showing
inthe above formincamera. Ifthe judge sustains the privilege upon a showi:
in camera, the entire text of the Government’s statements shall be sealed and
preserved in the court’s records in the event of appeal. In the case of privilege
claimed for official information the court may require examination in camera
of the information itself. The judge may take any protective measure which
the interests of the Government and the furtherance of justice may require”,

10.34. It may also be mentioned that the general approach to “secrecy in
Government” has been affected: by the passage of the Freedom of information Act,
although that Act 1055 not directly deal with evidentiary privilege.

The subject of cabinet papers as such does not seem to have received much
specific discussion in the United States.

1. Philip Kurland, in Los Angeles Times (22 June, 1975) referred to by Pritchett, American Consti-
tution (1977), page 250, fn. 19.

2. Rule 509, Federal Rules of Evidence (1972) (proposed).
3. Rules 509%(c), Fedetal Rules of Evidence (proposed).


CHAPTER 11
RECOMMENDATIONS

Asa result of the discussion contained in the preceding Chapters, certain changes
in the present law will be required. These changes concern (a) the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872, (b) the two procedural Codes, and (c) the Constitution.

(a) So far as concerns the Indian Evidence Act, 1772, the recommendations
telate to sections 123, 124 and 162.

(i) Section 123 should be revised as under :—

“123. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, no one shall be
permitted to give any evidence derived from unpublished official records
relating to any affairs of State, unless the officer at the head of the depart-
ment concerned has given permission for giving such evidence.

(2) Such officer shall not withhold such permission, unless he is satis-
fied that the giving of such evidence would be injurious to the public interest ;
and where he withholds such permission, he shall make an affidavit contain-
ing a statement to that effect and setting forth his reasons therefor:

“Provided that where the Court is of opinion that the affidavit so made
does not state the facts or the reasons fully, the Court may require such
officer or, in appropriate cases, the Minister concerned with the subject,
to make a further affidavit on the subject.

(3) Where such officer has withheld permission for the giving of such
evidence, the court, after considering the affidavit or further affidavit, and
if it so thinks fit, after examining such officer or, in appropriate cases, the
Minister, orally,—

(a) shall issue a summons for the production of the unpublished
oficial records concerned, if such summons has not already been
issued ; .

(b) shall inspect the records in chambers; and

(c) shall determine the question whether the giving of such evidence
would or would not be injurious to the public interest, recording
its reasons therefor.

(4) Where, under sub-section (3), the court decides that the giving of
such evidence would not be injurious to the public interest, the provisions
of sub-section (1) shall not apply to such evidence”.

Gi) Section 124 of the Evidence Act should be revised as under :—

_ “124. (1) No public officer shall be compelled to disclose commu-
nications made to him in official confidence, when the court considers
that the public interests would suffer by the disclosure.

५ (2) Where a public officer who is a witness is asked a question which
might require the disclosure of any such communication, and he objects
to answering the question on the ground that the public interests would
suffer by its disclosure, the court shall, before rejecting his objection,
aroertain from him,in chambers, the nature of his objection and reasons
therefor.

(3) Nothing in this section applies to communications contained in un-
published official records relating to any affairs of State, which shall be
dealt with under section 123.1”

1, As to newly proposed section 124 (3), see para 2.5 supra,

29


30

(0) In section 162, second paragraph, evidence Act, the words “unless
it refers to matters of State” shall be deleted.

(b) As regards the two procedural Codes, the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973—it will be necessary to insert
in both the Codes at the appropriate place a provision somewhat on the
following lines?:—

“‘Any person aggrieved by the decision of any court subordinate to the Righ
Court rejecting a claim for privilege made under section 123 or section 124
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 shall have a right of appeal to the High
Court against such decision, and such appeal may be filed notwithstanding
the fact that the proceeding in which the decision was pronounced by the
court is still pending.”

(c) As regards the Consititution, articles 74 and 163 will need amendment, on
the lines recommended in the relevant Chapter of this Report?.

K.K. MATHEW . . . . « Chairman
NASIRULLAH BEG . . « Member

IP. CHATURVEDI. + 6 « « Member

P.M. BAKSHI. . . . . + Member (Part-time)
M.B.RAQ e« 6 * «6 «© © ७ Member-Secretary.

Dated : 7th January, 1983,

4. Cf. Chapter 8, supra.
2. Paragraph 9.8, supra.

GIPN—S3— 450, LAD/ND/83—28-9-64—-625,


1. 3
2. 3
3.

4, 9
5. 10
6. i
पु ll
है MW
9. 18
10. 18
11, ar
12. 22
13. 29

1.11
Footnote 1
Footnote 7
Footnote 8
4.1

5.2

5.2

5.2

8.2

8.2

9.4
Footnote 8
Sub-Para (a) of Ist Para

ERRATA

Line For Read
W v. C, Comrs. vy. Comrs.
1 Al F. के, 201 AILE. R. 201
1 Phips on Phipson
1 Sodni Sodhi
8 do ument document
3 puplic public
3 puplic public
5 relayent relevant
3 Pprivilage Privilege
9 controverses controversies
Top line factnal factual
1 Commissioner Commissioners
1 1772 1872

GIPN—Sec, 3--450 L.A. 0. (५. 0.)183--2-5-86--.625.