LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
EIGHTY-NINTH REPORT
ON
THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs


Cuaprer |

३

CHAPTER

CHAPTER 3

CHAPTER 4

ow

CHAPTER
CHAPTER 6
CHAPTER 7

CHAPTER 8

CHAPTER 9
CHAPTER 10
CHAPTER II
Cuaeter 12

CHAPTER 13

CHAPTER [4

Cuapter 15

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
EIGHTY-NINTH REPORT
ON
THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTORY.

SECTIONS | AND 2:
PRELIMINARY.

SECTION 3:
THE BAR OF LIMITATION.

SECTION 4:
EXPIRY OF PRESCRIBED PERIOD WHEN COURT IS
CLOSED.

SECTION 5:
EXTENSION OF THE PRESCRIBED PERIOD FOR SUFFI-
CIENT CAUSE.

SECTION 6:
LEGAL DISABILITY.

SECTION 7:
DISABILITY OF ONE OF SEVERAL PERSONS.

SECTION 8:
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS TO THE PROVISLONS CONCERNING

DISABILITY.

SECTION 9:
CONTINUOUS RUNNING OF TIME.

SECTION 10: .
SUITS AGAINST TRUSTEES,

SECTION 11:
SUITS ON FOREIGN CAUSES OF ACTION.

SECTION 12:
EXCLUSION OF TIME IN LEGAL PROCEcDINGS.

SECTION 13:
EXCLUSION OF TIME WHERE LEAVE TO SUE OR APPEAL

_ AS PAUPER IS APPLIED FOR.

SECTION 14:
TIME TAKEN IN INFRUCTUOUS LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

SECTION 15 :
EXCLUSION OF TIME IN CERTAIN OTHER CASES.


CHAPTER 16

CHAPTER 17

CHAPTER 18

CHAPTER [9

CHAPTER 20

CHAPTER 21

CHAP LeR 22

CHAPTER 23

CHAPTER 24

CHAPTER 25

CHAPTER 26

1 CHAPTER 27

CHAPTER 28

CHAPTER 29

CHAPTER 30

CuapTer 31

CHAPTER 32

CHAPTER 33

CHAPTER 34

CHAPTER 35

SLCTION 16:
EFFECT OF DEATH ON LIMITATION,

SECTION 17 :
FRAUD AND MISTAKE.

SECTION 18 :
ACKNOWLEDGEMERT.
SECTION 19 ;

PART PAYMENT.

SECTION 29 ;

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OR PAYMENT BY ANOTHER
PERSON.

SECTION 21;

ADDITION OR SUBSTITUTION OF PARTIES.
SECTION 22 :

CONTINUING WRONGS.

SECTION 23:
ACTS NOT ACTIONABLE WIT HOUT SPECIAL DAMAGE,

SECTION 24 ;
COMPUTATION OF TIME,

SECTION 25 :
ACQUISITION OF EASEMENTS BY PRESCRIPTION.

SECTION 26 :
EXCLUSION IN FAVOUR OF REVERSIONER OF SERVIENT
TENEMENT.

SECTION 27 :

EXTINGUISHMENT OF RIGHT TO PROPERTY.
SECTION 28 :

AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN ACTS.

SECTIONS 29 TO 32 ;

SAVING. TRANSITIONAL PROVISLONS AND REPEAL.
LIMITATION AND THE AMENDMENT OF PLEADINGS.

ARTICLES 1 TO 5 :
SUITS RELATING TO ACCOUNTS.

ARTICLES 6 TO 55 ;
SUITS RELATENG TO CONTRACTS,

ARTICLES 56 TO 58 :
SUITS RELATING TO DECLARATIONS.

ARTICLES 59 TO 60 :
SUITS RELATING TO DECREES AND INSTRUMENTS.

ARTICLES 61 TO 67 :

SUITS RELATING TO IMMOVABLE PROPERTY.


CHAPTER 36

CHaPILR 37

CHAPTER 38

CHAPTER 39

CHAPTER 40

CHAPTER 41

CHAPTLR 42

Cuavrer 43

CHAPTER 44

ARTICLES 68 TO 71 :
SUITS RELATING TO MOVABLE PROPERTY.

ARTICLES 7210 91 :
SUITS RELATING TO TORT.

ARTICLES 92 TO 96 :
SUITS RELATING TO TRUSTS AND TRUST PROPERTY.

ARTICLES 97 TO 112 :
SUITS RELATING TO MISCELLANEOUS MATTERS.

ARTICLE 113:
SUITS FOR WHICH THERE JS NO SPECIFIED PERIOD.

ARTICLES 114 TO 117 :
APPEALS .

ARTICLES 118 140 136:
APPLICATIONS IN SPECIFIED CASES.

OTHER APPLICATIONS.

SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS.


D.O. No. F.2(6)/82-LC

K. K. MaTHEw Shastri Bhavan,
\ New Delhi-110001.

February 28, 1983.

My dear Minister,

I send herewith the Eighty-ninth Report of the Law Com-
mission recommending certain amendments to the Limitation Act.
1963.

2. Revision of the Limitation Act has been taken up, by the Law
Commission svo moto in view of the importance of the subject as
branch of adjective law. The present Act was enacted about 20
years ago. The Act is an enactment of general application and
importance. It is, therefore, proper that such an important enact-
ment is reviewed from time to time. ‘

3. During the last 20 years extensive developments have taken
place both in law and in society. It is proper that those develop-
ments should be taken note of in a comprehensive manner.

* 4. The Commission wishes to express its appreciation to
Shri P. M. Bakshi, Part-time Member of the Commission, for the
finalisation of the Report. We also acknowledge the assistance
rendered by Shri V. V. Vaze, ex-Member-Secretary in preparing the
initial draft of the Report.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(K. K, MATHEW)

Shri Jagannath Kaushal, .
Minister of Law. Justice & Company Affairs,
Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi.

: @)


LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA EIGHTY-NINTH
REPORT ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTORY

1.1. Revision of the Limitation Act, 1963 has been taken up by the Law Revision of

Commission of India so motu, in view of the importance of the subject as a the Limita-
branch of adjective law. The Act is an enactment of general application and
importance; its provisions come up before the course daily for interpretation.
An unjust or unsatisfactory rule of limitation that bars the institution of legal
proceedings means that the remedy contemplated by the law for the enforce-
ment of a legal right becomes futile, or—if the injustice or unsatisfactery charac-
ter of the rule consists in its allowing an unduly long time for the pursuit of a
legal remedy—then the interests of justice are defeated, because stale demands
would thereby be encouraged. It is therefore proper that such an important
enactment is reviewed from time to time. The present Act was enacted about
twenty years ago. During this period, extensive developments have taken place,
both in law and in socicty. It is proper that those developments should be
taken note of in a comprehensive manner.

The present Act was passed after the Law Commission reported on the
earlier Act of 1908 and largely implements the recommendations made by the
Commission.' It is therefore particularly appropriate that 8 review of the law
may be undertaken by the Commission again.

1.2. The statutory 189 of limitation has a long and interesting history in History.
India, which takes us at least to 1859. Before that year, there was no uniform
law of limitation. Various Regulations, applicable to the Company’s Courts
deating with certain topics falling within the law of limitation, were in force
in the Mofussil of the three Presidencies. For the Courts established by the
Royal Charter in the Presidency towns, the English law was taken as applicable.
To introduce uniformity in law, the limitation Act (14 of 1859) was passed.
The Act came into force in 1862, but covered only suits, and, moreover, did not
contain any provision relating to prescription. The Limitation Act. 1871 (9 of
1871), which replaced the Act of 1859, added certain provisions in the nature
of law of prescription also, and introduced, for the first time. the arrangement
which one finds in the present Act—namely, the general principles relating to
computation and exclusion of time find a place in the body of the Act, while
the actual time—limits for various kinds of proceedings are placed in a tabular
statement. forming a Schedule to the Act. It may also be mentioned that the
Act of 1871 introduced a period of sixty years applicable to a suit of any kind
brought by the Government. This Act was replaced by the Limitation Act.
1877 (15 of 1877). Besides making certain minor changes in regard to the
classes of suits expressly covered and the time limit or the starting point of
limitation for various suits, the Act of 1877 extended the operation of the law
of prescription. by making two additions to it. In the first place. while the
Act of 1871 had provided that the right to land or to a hereditary office could
be extinguished by lapse of time, the Act of 1877 extended this’ principle to

‘Law Commission of India. 3rd Report (Limitation Act. 1908) (uly, 1956).
2—14 M of LI & CA/ND/33


Principles for

Need for
having ano-
ther look,

SOTH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 1 Introductory)
any property, whether movable or immovable. Secondly, while the Act of 187]
provided for the acquisition of casemenis absolutely by open and uninterrupted
enjoyment for twenty years. the Act of 1877 extended this provision to what
are known as profits a prendre.

The Limitation Act 1908 (9 of 1908) made certain changes in matters of
detail, without radically altering the substance or the arrangement of the pro-
visions. In the meantime, the Indian Easements Act dealing with easements,
had been passed. which too provided for the acquisition and extinction of ease-
ments by prescription. The Limitation Act of 1908 therefore expressly pro-
vided that its provisions concerning easements shall not apply to cases arising
jn the territories to which the Indian Easements Act. 1882 may. for the time
being. extend. The Limitation Act of 1963 (the present Act) has made a few
changes of substance in the Act—particularly, in certain time limits and also in
yegard to the scheme relating to apnlications for execution. At the same time,
jt has not disturbed the basic structure of the Act of 1908. As already men-
tioned,’ the present Act largely implemented the recommendations made by the
Law Commission in iis Repert on that Act.

1.3. It would be convenient to mention at this stage some of the general
principles adopted by us in revising the Act. In the first place, we have
examined the case law on the Act in some detail, addressing ourselves especially
to conflict of decisions on important points. In a law of day-to-day use. this
aspect is of practical importance. Secondly, some of the provisions of the Act
appeared to require review in the light of a few juristic trends that have emerged
in recent times. By way of example, we may mention the more liberal attitude
of the law in regard to mistake of law as a basis for granting relief against strict
application of rules of imitation. Thirdly, certain commercial and other trans-
actions have gained popularity in recent times and it is proper that the law
should take note of them. We may cite, by wav of example, the practice of
placing money in fixed deposits. For the recovery of moncy so placed, the Act
has no specific article at present-- a matter certainty requiring attention.
Fourthly, apart from confict of views. judicial decisions hav: brought out a few
Jacunae in the Act--for examole. the difficulty caused by the draftsmanship of
section 29 in regard to suils for dower. — Fifthly. some of the provisions of the
Act are unduly restricted in their scope. and it has been considered worth
examination whether the ॥ ple on which they are based should not

“be given its full scope hy making the provision more ample — than

at present. Section 11 furnishes one example, That section (dealing with cer-
tain aspects of conflict of laws) is unnecessarily restricted to certain kinds
of causes of action. These have been some of the important aspeets that have
been kept in view in reviewing the Act.

1.4. A query may perhans he raised as to the necd fer having another look
at the Act within twenty years or so. Tt is enough to answer if by quoting
what the Chairman of the Taw Commission for England and Wales said about
the process of law reform:?

“In every society. law reform in changing times is a process which is
as endlessly necessary as cleaning the streets. maintaining buildings.
pruning trees and disposing of refuse. Tt has to be done: cither systemati-
cally and continuously, or drastically from time to time.”

‘Para 1.1, supra.
*Mr. Jutice Kerr, “Law Reform in Canging Times”, 96 Taw Quarterly Review 515.


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN, OF INDIA ON TfL LIMITAT'ON ACT, 1963

Chapter 1-—fatwoductory)

15, The policies wikleuying the law of limitation are ultimately based on Policies
justice and convenience. An jadivilual shouid not tive under the threat of a underlying.
possible action for an imdeterminate period, since it would be unjust. Again, limitation,
the defendant should be saved the task of defending stale causes of action, as
it is often inconvenient. Further, vigilance in the pursuit of rightful claims
should be encouraged so that these are the ethical or rational justifications for
the law of limitation. All that has been said on ihe subject can be sam-
marised by stating that the law of imitation rests upon theee main foundations—
justice, convenience and the need to encourage diligence.

1.6. However, it is obvious that while these considerations are laudable in pargship
themselves, their translation into practical legislation is not a matter of case. An occasionally
oveemphasis on these propositions wi the risk of disregarding some — other“?
weighty couniet-balaacing consideration might cause serious injustice. The law
of limitation altracts adverse compients whea a person is thrown out of court
on the plea of liniiaiion 0. possible fault of his. A recent English caset
on the point is of onc Mr. Lif. Fle had suflereel serious personal injuries in a
car accident, bin, on account ef wreng advice given by fis svtictors, the two
insurance companies with whont the concerned ear owners bad insured them-
selves got away on the iecénical plea of dieitation. An academic writer’ com-
pares that luckless passenger to the plight of Winnie the Pooh.’ “Pathetic”, he
said, “that’s what it is, Pathetic”. Reference is made by the same writer in
this coniext.

Thus, the faw of Jinvituien has to strike a balance between the policy
considciations mentivned abeve fon ihe जाए hand) and the cisk of injustice (on
Ue vther hand).

4.7. So much as regaids the mipertanee of having a law of limitation that creme of

is reasonably fair in iis substanee and reasonably certain in its term. — The the Act:
scheme of the present Aci may be brisily deseribeul in this stage. The Act (like The sections.
its predecessurs) is clivided into sections and articls. The operative provisions
and the principles as to compuaiion of the period of limilaiion, as also provi-
sions in the nature of preseripiion, are to be found in the sections of the Act.
The periods of limitation applicable to various classes af suits, appeals and
applications, and the time fram wiich the period begiis to run in cach case,
are matters dealt with in a tabular form in the articles placed in the Schedule to
the Act.

4.8. One of the principal objects of the law of jimtitation is the discourage-
ment of slale demands', particularly fur the reason that where the raising of
controversy is unduly delayed, evidence tends to disappear and opportunily may
arise for the filling of cluims which are cither dishonest or mistaken in point
of facts. Since this difficulty would not survive where the party against whom
the claim is made has himself furnished reliable evidence of the debt or liability,
the Act in sections [8 to 20, provides for counting a fresh starting point of
limitation where the person sought to be charged in respect of any property or
tight has made a written acknowledgement of Hiability, as also where payment
on account of a debt or an inteiest on a legacy has been made by such person
(coupled with a written record). Of course, such acknowledgement or payment
mast have been made before ihe claim has already become time-barred.

Laff ४, Peastey, 41980) | AML E.R. 6:
*Bereli Morgan, “Fault in the System” (30 Oct. 1980) 130) New 1... 1007.
34 Milner, Winnie The Pooh. Chapter 6,

‘ef. para 1.5 supra.



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF (NDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 1—Introductory)
1.9. The case of substitution or addition of parties during the course of
litigation is dealt with in section 21.

’

Continuing breaches of contracts and torts are taken care of by section 22,
while, in respect of suits for compensation for acts which are not actionable
without special damage, section 23 makes a suitable provision. Section 24
provides that for the purposes of the Act all insiruments shall be deemed to be
made with reference to the Gregorian calendar.

1.10, Next follow provisions in the nature of prescription concerned with
the acquisition of easements by prescription (sections 25 and 26) and the
extinguishment of right to properly at the determination of the period of limi-
tation for instituting a suii for possession of any property (section 27), The
body of the Act ends with miscellancous provisions concerned with the amend-
ment of certain other Acts, savings, transitional provisions and repeal (sections

28 to 32). है

Coming to the body of the Act, sections 1 and 2 deal with — preliminary
matters, including definitions. The most important provisions of the Act
telating to the bar of limitation occurs immediately thereafter, in section 3.
Dismissal of a suit, appeal or application filed after the prescribed period is
mandatory. Section 4 deals with the situation of expiry of the prescribed
period at a time when the court is closed. Under section 5, in the case of
appeals and certain applications, the court has power, for sufficient cause, to
extend the prescribed period. Here one has an example of legislative anxiety
to maintain a balance: between ensuring vigilance and avoiding hardship. As
regards persons under Icgal disabitily, appropriate provisions are made की see-
tions 6 to 8. Subject to these special provisions, the general principle laid
down in section 9 is that once time has begun to run, no subsequent disability
or inability to institute a suit or make an application stops it. By way of an
exceptional provision, section 10 provides that certain suits against trustees and
their representatives are not barred by “any length of time”. The section takes
within its fold Hindu, Muslim and Buddhist religions and charitable endow-
ments as well—a provision which constitutes a first rate example of the legis-
lature stepping in to correct an anomaly brought to light by judicial decisions.
Section 11 deals with a iopic belonging to conflict of laws, namely, suits on
contracts entered into outside the territories to which the Act extends. Such
suits are governed by the Indian law of limitation, whatever be the locus of

the cause of action.

Elaborate provisions as to the computation. of the period of limitation next
follow. Thus, time taken in certain preliminarics that are requisite for pur-
suing legal proceedings of special categories (appeals and certain applications)
is the subject matter of section 12—-provision based on necessity. That scc-
tion also enacts the general rule that the day from which the period of limita-
tion for any suit, appeal or appliation is to be । ckoned must be excluded in
computing the period of limitation. Sections 13 and 14 provide for the ex-
clusion of time actually taken in certain infructuous legal proceedings --in regard
to the special case of an application for permission to suc as a pauper (if
ultimately the application is not granted}, and in regard 10 the more general
case of legal procecdings which become infructuous because the court, from
defect of jurisdiction or other cause of like nature. is unable to entertain them.
Certain cases where the institution of legal proceedings has to be postponed by
reasons of necessity, judicial orders (such as. injunctions or stay orders) or
statutory provisions as to the giving of a notice as a condition precedent to



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATJON ACT, 1963

(Chapter i—Iintreductory}

the institution of a Jegal proceeding, and the like, are deait with in section 15.
The absence of the defendant from India is, in computing the period of limi-
tation for a suit, excluded under section 155).

A cause of action arising on death or a cause of action whose accrual does
not take place until after the death of the person concerned needs special treat-
ment, and section 16 attends 10 such causes of aclion in the context of limita-
tion.

While these provisions of the Act are mostly concerned with difficultics
arising from certain circumstances which are not dependent on the conduct of
an individual, justice requires that prevision should also be maue to relax the
Jaw of limitation in case of fraud or mistake— these twe being situations in
which a person is prevented from instituting Segal proceedings within tume,
either because of the misconduct of the opposite party or because of his own
having laboured under a misconception. These two situations are taken care
of by section 17.

4.11. The Schedule to the Act contains 137 articles, laying down periods scheme of
of limitation for various kinds of proceedings. Of these, articles 1 to 113 relate the Act:
to suits; articles 114 to 117 relate (० appeals and articles 118 to 137 relate to the Articles
applications. The genera! scheme adopted in the Schedule is that, in cach Schedule.
category, specilic types of proceedings are covered by specitic articles dealing
with a particular cause of aclion or head of relief. This is followed in cach
category by a residuary article, which is intended to take care of a suit. an
appeal of an application (as the case may be}, not covered by a speciiic article.

The periods of limitation prescribed for vativus categories of suits, appeals and
applications vary.

1.12, Coming more particularly to suits, it may be stated that the periods
prescribed by the relevant articles vary from one year to thirty years; for all
suils instituted by the Guverament, the uniform period (under article 112) is
thirty years, except a suit before the Supreme Court in the exercise of its origi-
nal jurisdiction. In general, it can be stated that most suits for money or
monetary claims (excepting claims in tort) enjoy a period of three years, and
most suits relating to tort are governed by periods of one year, 1wo years or
three years. Suits for the recovery of immovable properiy (and on allied
causes of action} enjoy a pericd of twelve years, with certain exceptions; the
most important exception in this context is the period of thirty years, allowed
for a suit for redemption or foreclosure of a mortgage under articles 61(a) and
63(a), respectively. The residuary article for suits {article 113) allows a period
of three years for suits not otherwise specifically provided for.

4.13. The starting point of limitation (subject to certain exceptions) as
regards suits, is in general, the date of accrual of the cause of action. How-
ever, this concept has not been capressed in any general terms---such as “accrual
of the cause of action: rather, it has been translated into a date linked up
with some specific and concrete act or event which is appropriate for the
Particular type of cause of action to which the suit relates. [np some exceptio-
nai cases, the daic sclected as the starting point is not one corresponding to the
accrual of the cause of action, but some other date which is more appropriate
for the particular type of claim. For example, in a suit relating to accounts,
being a claim for the balance duc on what is described as a “mutual, open and
current account”. where there have been reciprocal demands between the parties.
the starling point under article | is the close of the year when the last item ad-



Section !—
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

Section 2-—
Definitions.

89TH REPORT UF LAW COMMN, OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter {--Introductory, Chapter 2~-Sections i and 2; Preliminary)

mitted or proved is entered in the account. Similarly, for a suit for ihe wages
of a seaman, the starling point under article © is the end of the voyage during
which the wages are earned. Again, under articles 73 and 74, which are con-
cerned wilh compensation for alse imprisonment and compensation for mali-
cious prosecution respectively. the starting point is termination of the false im-
prisonment or of the malicious prosecution, as the case may be. Then, under
article 81, a suit by executors etc. under the Lega! Representatives Suils Act,
1855 can be filed within one year of the date of the death of the person wronged.
Finally, in several cases. the knowledge of the plamtill as to the accrual of the
cause of action is material for Gcicrmining the starting point. Examples of
such an approach are furnished by articles 4, 56, $7, 59, 61(b), 68, 71. 84, 92 (०
95 and 102.

1.14. In rd to appeals. the pertod of Jimitation various from 30 days.
to 90 days, depending principally on the nature of the order appealed from and
the forum to which the appeal is to be takea. There is no residuary article
for appeals.

1S. As regards applications, the prescribed periods vary fram 10. days
{article 118) to 12 years tartigle 136, which is the 8: | article for an applica-
tion for the execution of any decree ता order of any civil cour), The residuary
article for applications ‘article 137) allows a period of 3 years.

CHAPIER 2
(11015 1 AND 2: PRELIM

INARY

2A. Beginning a Gansideration of the Age scetienwise, Section | deals swith
the short title, extent and commencement of the Act, By a notification of the
Central Government issued under Scetion 13), the Act came into force’ on the
Ist January, 1964... Under Seetion 112) the Act extends to the whole of India
except the State of Jammu and Kashmir, Some uncertainty seems to exist as
to how far the Act has repealed corresponding laws of the previous French and
Portuguese possessions which now form part of the territories of India, The
point will be adverted to’ while discussing section 20, which seeks 10 preserve
“special and local” Jaws.

2.2. Section 2 contains a number of definitions, being definitions of the
following words and expressions : —

(a) “applicant”:

(0) “application”:

(cy “bill of exchange”:
(d) “bond”:

(०) “defendant”:

(1 “easement”:

(g) “foreign country”:
(h) “good Taith”:

i) “plaintil:

dated 29th October, 1963,
to section 29, infra.

‘Notification. No 5.0. 3118,
See discussion on refatil



ROTH REPORT EY (२४ COMIN, GF INDE ON THE LIMITATION act. 1963

Pretiminury, Chapter 3 Section 3; The Bar of
1 Expire of presceibed period when Court is
closed

>

Section f and 2
n Cheper 4 Sects

(Chapter
4 intitesti

4) “period of limiation”
and “prescribed”:

(k) “promissory note”:

0) “suit”;

(प्र) “tort” and

{n) “trustee”.

We have ne changes lo recommend in the definitions. since they have not
created any serious controversies that may necessitate a change in the law.
Provisions by way of interpretation or explanation also occur in a few substan-
tive provisions of the Act, Their relevance is primarily confined 10 those parti-
cular provisions. and can he pest dealt with while considering those provisions.

CHAPTER 3

SECTION 3: THE BAR OF LIMITATION

BAL. The operative provisions of the Limitation Act may be said (o begin Section 3
with Section 3... Sub-Section (1) of this section which constitutes the most timiraton.
important operative provision.-- enacts that, subject to the provisions comainced

in sections 4 to 24, every sui instituted. appeal preferred. and application made

after the prescribed period shall be dismissed. although limitation has not been

set up as a defence. Thus. in the first place: the dismissal ef a time-barred
proceeding is made mandatory by this provisions: secondly, this is so even if

the defendant does nat sol ap limitation as a defence

Sub-section (2) of section 3 explains. in some detail, in three clauses {a},
की and (टी, -how the proposition laid down in sub-section (1) is to be applied.
clause (a) of the sub-section explains when a su “instituted” generally, as
well as in the case of a claim by a pauper or a claim against a company which
is being wound up by the Court. Clause (b) deals with set off and counter-
claims. while clause (c} deals with an application by notice of motion ina High
Court.

3.2. While no changes of substance are recommended: की section 3. we have Recommendation
1० amend

one recommendation to make for a verbal change in section 302) (a) Gi. i0 section 3९2)
which the expression “a pauper” foccurting at two places) needs 10 be replaced fa) Gi.

by the expression San indigent person”. in view of the changed phraseolog
adopted in the Code of Civit Procedure. 1908 as amended in 1976. 9 We re-

commend accordingly

CHAPTER 4

SECTION 4; EXPIRY OF PRESCRIBED PERIOD
WHEN COURT IS CLOSED

1, Bar of

4.t. Section 4 provides that where the prescribed peried for any suit, .
- imitation,

appeal or application expires on a day when the Court is closed, the suit etc
may be instituted on the day when the Court re-opens. The Explanation to
the section provides that a Court is deemed to be closed on any day if. during
any part of its normal working hours. i¢ remains closed on that day.


Principle

Changes
needed in
section 4
in view of
section 4.

Section 5

Extension of
section 5 to
suits not
Tecommended.

SYTHE REPORT OF FAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON TIE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chaptcr 4 Section 4: Expiry of prescribed period when Court is closed,
Chapter 35—Section 3: Extension of the prescribed period for sufficient caused

4.2. Obviously. section 4 is based on the principle that the Jaw does not
compel a man to do the impossible—lex non cogit ad impossibilia—and that
the act of court should harm no one.'

4.3. While the section, standing by itself, has created no problems, some
difficulties have arisen in connection with the combined operation of sections 4
and 14. We shail advert to this point at the appropriate place*

CHAPTER 5

SECTION 5: EXTENSION OF THE PRESCRIBED PERIOD FOR
SUFFICIENT CAUSE

5.1. Section 5 empowers the court, for “sufficient cause”, to entertain an
appeal or application (except an application for execution) filed after expiry of
the prescribed period. A number of points require to be considered with
reference to this section. The section does not apply to suits,

1. Suits

5.2, Section 5, as stated above, docs not apply to suits. We have consi-
dered the question whether the section should be amended so as to include
within its ambit suits filed after the prescribed period. Delving into the old
records relating to the drafting of the Indian Limitation Bil!, 1908, we dis-
covered that this question was considered at that distance of time also. When
the draft of the Indian Limitation Bill 1908 was circulated for comments, Dr.
Hari Singh Gaur commented as under:

“Iam not sure if 8 suit may not be also included in the clause: if
the intending plainti’ is wrongfully contined by the defendant. why he
should lose his suit? Section 18 ‘fraud’ does not cover such a case.”

However, the Divisional Judge. Nagpur.' was apprehensive that if the ambit
of the clause was enlarged. it would lead to unsavoury practices: false grounds
were often invented when the litigant found that he was out of time. In most
cases they were. accordingly to him, based on purely personal incidents or
conditions which his adversary was not expected to refute.

5.3. Though there is some merit in Dr. Hari Singh Gour's suggestion, we
think that enlarging the scope of section 5 to cover suits would do more harm
than good to the administration of justice. The rapport between the lawyer
and his rural client is gencrally so well established that a visit to the family
lawyer on the weekly market day is always on the agenda of a villager. Such
being the style of functioning of village folks. it is improbable that the munshi
to the lawyer would allow his client’s case to go by default by asking him
to wait till the last day of limitation, Tf, as contemplated by Dr. Hari Singh
Gour, a plaintiff may be prevented from reaching his lawyers on the last day
of limitation by scheming defendants. he could as well as prevented by other

XCF. Anadi v. Hirannayya, AAR. 1972 5.0. 239.

*See discussion relating to section 14, infra.

3Dr. Hari Singh Gour: Annexure to the letter from F.S.A. Stoica, Esq. LCS. Chief
Secretary to the Chicf Commissioner. Central Provinces, to the Secretary to the Govt, of
India. Legistative Department. dated 190 December, 1907, National Archives File, page 3.

‘Rai Bahadur Sharat Chandra Sanyal, National Archieves File



S9TH REPORT OF 1. 5७ COMMN. ON LIMITATION ACF. 1963

(Chapter 5-—Section S Extention of the Pres

tibed Period for Sufficient cause)

causes like breakdown of the bus service. floods, illness. ete the authorship of
which cannot be imputed to the defendants.

का view of the above. we do net recommend evteniion of the Principle of
section 5 to suits

Il. Applications

5.4. Regarding the applicability of section 5 to applications, the law as Applications,
revised in 1963 is wide enough. The Law Commission had. in its report’ on
the Act of 1908. recommended that a uniform rule should be adopted. applying
section 5 to all applications. except those under Order 21 of the Code of Civil
Procedure. 1908. This change has been carried out. and no further change
Appeared to be needed in this regard. There appea's 10 be jus afieation for
exeluding applications under Order 21 (applications for execution) from the
scope of the Section. sinee the period z long enough (12 yearsy.

HH. Erroncous legal advice

5.5. In Seetion 5. the expression “sufficient cause for not preferring an Erraneous
appeal or making an application within the prescribed period has been inter. कक
preted by the Supreme Court.’ to inchide lawyers” ignorance about the law
regarding calculation of the period of Jimitation. In that case. the High Court
had refused to condone the delay and to admit the Company's appeal, but the
Supreme Court. reversing the judgment of the High Court. observed as under:

“A Company relies on its Legal Adviser and the Manager’s expertise
is in company management. and not in law. There is no particular reason
why, when a company or other person retains a lawyer to advise it or
him on legal affairs. reliance should not be placed on such counsel.”

5.6. The principle. is in fact. well established. At the same time, courts Reasonable
have been circumspect in serutinising the claim of a party that he was misled expected
by a wrong legal advice. For example. a plea was made before the Madhya of counsel.
Pradesh High Court’ by a counsel that he had relied on a Full Bench ruling of
that High Court under the old Act. The Court refused to countenance such an
argument. when. in point of time. the new Act had come into force a year
before the event. Similarly, the Delhi High Court fejected the plea for con
donation of delay, when it ४ el that the appellant acted upon the advice
of an eminent counsel who had. in computing limitation. relied on an overruted
judgment of that Court.

5.7. The fact that the appellant was misguided by the wrong advice given
by his legal adviser. has not. alone and by itself, been held to be tantamount to
“suflicient™ cause within the meaning of section §. The Courts have inquired that
the lawyer who gave the opinion exercised reasonable care. In other words.
the advice should have been the result of a bona fide fake not attributable to
negligence or want of skill and the view taken by the lawyer was such as would
have been entertained by a competent Person exercising reasonable skill’. As

"Law Commission of India. 3rd Report (Limitation Act. 1908), page 13, para 26.

*Article 136.

8Concord of India hustrance Co. ४. N

‘Chunital v. State of M-P. AJR. 1957 AP. 127. 12;

‘Banwarilal v. Union of India, AAR. 1973 Delhi 24.

"Bhatti Bh, Monaal ५ . Khavendra. A.LR.. 1968 Cal. 69: R. Trading Co. v. M. Trading
Agency, ALR, 1971 Cal, 313.

3—14 M of LI&CA/ND/83

A.LR. 1979 S.C. 1666.



10

Questions
connected
with the
Tequirement
of care.

Ignorance of
Counsel.

ROTH REPORT OF LW COVEN. ON LENTATION act. 1963
(Chapter 3-- Section 5- Extention of the Prescribed Period for Sufficient carse)

the Privy Council observed’. “there is certainly no general doctrine which saves
parties from the results of wrong advice”. The Supreme Court”. while inter-
preting the words “sufficient cause” in section 5. has observed that the wards
“should receive a Jiberal construction so as to advance substantial justice when
no negligence or inaction or want of bona fide is imputable to a party.” Tn an
English case*, Brett, LJ. observed:

“In cases where a suitor has suffercd from the negligence or ignorance
or gross want of legal skit! of his Legal Adviser. he has his remedy against
that Legal Adviser. and meantime the sujlor must suffer, But where there
has been a bona fide mistake, not through misconduct not through negli-
gence nor through want of a reasonable skill but such as a skilled person
might make. T very much dislike the idea that the hts of the client should
be thereby forfeited”.

58. If that requirement has to be read into section 5 some questions arise.
Though the expression “good faith” has been defined in section 2(h). that cx-
pression does not find a place in Section 5. Taking note of this. Abdur Rahman
J. in a Lahore case' observed:

“Tt must be. however, conceded that in finding a ‘sufficient cause” under
section 5 of the Act. a ‘good faith’ is more in general sense of that word
as grammatically understood rather than in the sense in which it bas been
defined in section 347}, Limitation Act.”.

“Tt may not be irrelevant to recall the dcfinition of ‘good faith’ in section
3(2). General Clauses Act in that cosmection. An act according to that
definition. may be done honestly and in perfect good faith although it may
have been done negligently, Let me. however. not be understood to say
that an act. however negligent- whether grossly or otherwise - should
always be regarded as falling within the term ‘sufficient cause’ employed in
section 5. Limitation Act if it is found to have been done honestly. Tt would
depend upon the circumstances of h case although T am free to confess
that it would go a long way to help a person who asks for indulgence under
section 5 if he can satisfy the Court that he had been acting honestly.”

$9. Though the Supscme Court case” concerned itself with the counsel's
ignorance about the law regarding computation of period of limitation, some
observations in था curlier case of the Supreme Court’ seem to suggest that the
Court might be prepared to condone negligence or the part of the Connsel in
special circumstances.

“37, Even otherwise. in the entire circumstances of the case disclosing
sheer indifference. perhaps ignorance. on the part of the advocate. Shri
Bharaitinder Singh and no laches. whatever on the part of the appellant.
we would have been inclined to condone the “delay of 12 days under section
5 of the Limitation Act”.

IKunwar Rajendra Bahadur Singh ४. Rajeshwar Bali, ALR. 1937 P.C, 276.
State of West Bengal v. Howrah Municipality. ALR. 1972 5.6. 749. 755.
°Highten v. Treherne. (1878) 39 Law Times 411.

‘Arura v. Karam Din, हि, 1947 Lah. 77.

SConcord of India Insurance Co. v. Nirmala Devi, ALR. 1979 S.C. 1666.
SChinubahai ¥. R.C. Bali, A1.R. 1977 SC 2319.


89TH REPORI OF LAW COMMN, ON LIMITATION ACT. 1963
(Chapter 5—Section 5--Extention of the Prescribed Period for Sujficient cause)

5.10. The scope of the eapression “sufficient cause™ in relation to lapse
on the part of a counsel came up for consideration before the Supreme Court'
again receatly, A Senior Sub-Judge of Narnaui had been authorised by the
High Court to hear appeals, but as the counsel was ignorant of this fact,
he had filed the appeal in the court of the Additional District Judge in 1960.
In 1961, when the appeal came up for hearing, the objection regarding want of
jurisdiction was sustained and the memorandum of appeal was returned to the
appellants. The appellants filed the memorandum before the Senior Sub-Judge,
the proper appellate Court and prayed for condonation of the delay of 185
days, being the period of pendency of the appeal in the court of the Additional
District Judge. Though the Senior Sub-Judge condoned the delay, the High
Court disagreed. The Supreme Court found that the High Court was in error
in refusing to condone the delay, and remanded the appeal to the High Court.

there is another aspect Limits of

must have arisen before expiry of the the concept of
“sufficient

cause”,

5.11, Apart from the aspe
to be considered. The ‘suflicient: caus
perivd of Limitation.

ov ina cuss Vent Gajaaty ॥ which an appeal was
preferred under the Supreme Court (Enlargement of minal Jurisdiction) Act,
1970 against the judgment and order of the High Court of Gujarat, setting aside
the acquittal of the appellant and convicting and sentencing bim tor serious
offences under section 302, read with section 34, Indian Penal Code and under
section 326, read with section 34 of that Code. The only fact of relevance
to the present inquiry is that the appeal to the High Court was filed three months
after the period of limitation bad expired and this delay was condoned by the
High Court. The Supreme Court, however, did not countenance this action
of the High Court of condoning the delay of thece months under section 5 of the

Limitation Act and observed :

A peculiar situation i

“Ht appears that inidally the State Government took a decision not to file
appeal and it allowed the period of limitation te lapse. Subsequenily, on
certain observations made by the High Court while considering a revision
petition by Bhulabhai that it was a fit case where the State Government
should file an appeal and on notice being issued by the High Court to the
State Government in the matter. the appeal was filed. df was filed three
months after limitation had expired. A faint attempt was made to show
that when the initial decision was taken not to fie an appeal all the papers
had not been considered by the department concerned, but we are not im-
pressed by that allegation. The truth appears (0 be that the appeal was not
filed at first because the State Government saw no case on the merits for
an appeal, and it was filed only because the High Court had observed-—~
and that was long after limitation had expired that the case was fit for
appeal by the State Government. Now, it is true that a party is entitled to
wait until the last day of limitation for filing an appeal. But when it allows
limitation to expire and pleads sufficient cause for not filing the appeal ear-
lier, the sufficient cause must establish that because of some event or cir-
cumstances arising before limitation expired it was not possible to file the
rcumstance arising after the expiry of
limitation can constitute such sufficient cause. There may be events or cir
cumstances subsequent to the expiry of limitation which may further delay
the filing of the appeal. But. that the limitation has been allowed to expire

appeal within time, No cvent or

‘Hadlu y. Shiv. Charan, (1980) 4 SCC. 401.
2A “singh Thakur Singh vo State of Gujarat, ALR. 1081 S.C. 733, 11981] 1. SCC,

495, 497,



12

Need for
codification
of the law
on the
subject of
legal
advice.

Married
women.

14० change
necded as
to macried
women,

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. ON LIMITATION ACT. 1963
(Chapter 5—Section 5 Extention of the Prescribed Period for Sufficient cause)
without the appeal being filed must be traced to a cause arising within

the period of limitation. In the present ए there was no such cause, and
the High Court ered in condoning the delay.”

The Supreme Court, has in the observations queted abeve. underscored an
important aspect of section 5. by stating that the “sufficient cause” must be
traced to a cause arising within the period of limitation.

5.12, We bave, on an examination of all aspects of Ue matter, come to the
conclusion that the position on the subject of legal advice given erroneously
needs to be codified. However. it would make for a better appreciation of evidence
and merits of a claim under this section if the court has before it, in black
and white, the advice given by counsel.

While stressing the importance of a written legal advice, we are Bot oblivious
of the fact that the regulation of the legal profession has been entrusted by the
Advocates Act, 1961, to the Bar Council of India. Hence, we recommend’ that
the Central Government should request the Bar Council of India to frame rules
making it obligatory upon an advocate to tender ४ written legal advice in
matters concerning limitation, We hope that the Bar Council of India would
appreciate the necessity of such a rule when the fate of an otherwise good
claim hangs on the technical plea of limitation.

We are recommending a suitable Explanation to be inserted below section 5
on the subject of erroneous legal advice?, The draft that we propose will show,
in a concrete form, the salient features.

LY, Peculiar disabi

0५ of married women

5.13. We now turn 10 a slightly different topic namely. the position of
married women. Section XIL of Limitation Act No. (4 of 1859 (legal disability)
provided as under: —

“XIE The following persons shall be deemed to be under bgal ise
ability within the meaning of the last preceding section marricd women in
cases to be decided by English law, minors. idiots and lunatics.”

"However. in the subsequent statutes of 1871 and 1877, the class of “married
removed from the fist of persons under legal disabilily. In England.
the Married Women’s Property Act abolished the common law rule aud made
marricd women’s wages and carnings her separate properly and gave her a
power to recover them in her own name,

As far as Hindu or Muslim women in India were concerned. they never
suffeced from the disability of prohibition from acquiring property. For others
appropriate provision has been enacted.

5.14, No doubt. there ave certain procedural difficultics of a married woman
in seeking legal redress today. The prevalence of the dowry system and certain
other anomalies have brought to surface some of the handicaps of the married
women. While we fully appreciate the difficulties faced by mz
(especially from the rural pa ]

ried women
is of India). in obtaining legal advice. we have

[छा implementation by the Central Government.
ee para S.14, infra.

%See Law Commission of India, 66th Report (Married Women’s Property Act, 1874).



8911 REPORT OF LAW COMMS. ON LIMITATION ABI. 1963

(Chapter 5—Section 5 Extention of the Prescribed Period for Sufficient cause)
(Chapter 6, Section 6: Legal Disability)

come to the conelusions that amending cither section 5 or section 6 and creating
a separate category of persons under disability would be carrying the statute
100 far, for the simple reason that (unlike minority or lunacy). the disability of
a married woman would not come to an end until the demise of her husband
ora divorce. The result would be an excessive prolongation of the period of
limitation otherwise, applicable. This might result in defeating some of the
basic features underlying the law of fimilation. Rather than classifying them as
persons under disability, education about rights would be a better solution.
Consequently, no amendment vf section 5 or section 6 is suggested to cover
this particular problem.

¥. Recommendation

. Recommendation
5.15. In the Jight of the above discussion, we recommend that section § 4s 1 section 3.

should be revised as under :—

Revised section 5

“S. Any appeal or any application. other than an application under any
of the provisions of Order XXL of the First Schedule w the Code of Civil Pro-
cedure, 1908, may be admitted after the prescribed period. if dhe appellant
ov the applicant satistics the court that he had sullicient cause for not preferring
the appeal or making the application within such period.

Explanation 1—The fact that the appeilant or the applicant was misled by
any order, practice or judgment of the High Court in ascertaining or computing
the prescribed period may be suflicient cause within the meaning of this section.

Explanation H.-- Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of
this section, the fact that the appellant or the applicant was misted by any ero
neous legal advice given by a legal practitioner is stifficicnt cause within the mean-
ing of this section, provided :

{a) the advice was sought and given before the capiry of the prescribed
period, whether for the purpose of the particular appeal or application
or otherwise, and

(b) the advice was given in good faith and in writing.”
CHAPTER 6

ECTION 6 : LEGAL DISABILITY

6.1, Where a person colitied to institute proceedings is under a legal dis- Section o—
ability, some concession is obviously required in respect of the law of limitation, 52 ty,
since it is probable that the person looking after the affairs of one wuder dis-
ability may not take that much interest in his affairs as is required for the insti-
tution of legal proceedings for the enforcement of a right vested in the person
under disability. To provide for such a situation, section 6. in five sub-sections,
enacts claborate provisions concerning minors. insane persons and idiots. The
proceedings to which the section applies are suits and applications for the exe-
cution of a decree. Broadly speaking. under sub-section (1) (which is the ope-
rative provision), if the person entitled to institute a suit or make an application
for adjudication of a decree is, at the time from which the prescribed period is
to be reckoned. under disability. he can institute the or make an application
within the same period after the disability ceases. would otherwise have



14

No change
needed.

Section 7—
Disability of
one of several
Persons jointly
entitled.

Meaning of
the expne-sion
“time will
not rua”,

SOPH REPORT OL LAW (७५७४, ON LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 6—Section 6~ Legal Disability; Chapier 7- Section 7—Disabitity of
one of several persons)

been allowed from the time specified therefor in the third column of the Sche-
dule”. The other sub-sections of the scetion deal with certain matters of detail,
such as disabilities of morc than one kind or successive disabilities, disability
followed by death, the position regarding legal representatives, and so on. The
Explanation to the section makes it clear that “minor” includes a child in the
womb.

6.2. The extensive case-law un the section, on a perusal, does not bring to
light any problems that need sotution by an amendment of the section. We do
not, therefore, recommend any change in the section.

CHAPTER 7
SECTION 7 : 9

ABILETY OF ONE OF SEVERAL PERSONS

7A, Continuing the subject of disability, and dealing with a special situa-
tion in that regard, section 7 provides that where one of se ral persons juintly
cotitled to institute a suit or make an Ipplication Lov the execution of a deeres
is under a disabilily and a discharge can be giver without the concurrence of
such person, then time with run against all; but where no such discharge can
be given, time will noi run as against any of them uniil one of them becomes
capable of giving such discharge without the concurrence of others or until the
disability has ceased. The first Explanation 10 the section makes it clear that
the section applies to a discharge trom every kind of lability, includiag a lia-
bility in respect of any immovable property. The second Explanation provides
that the manager of a Hindu undivided family governed by the Mitakshara law
shall be deemed to be capable of giving such a discharge without the con-
cucrenee uf the other members of the Lumily, only if he is in Management of
the joint family property.

7.2. The use of the expicsstou ‘ume will nut rua in section 7 regarding the
disabilily of one of several persons has given tise (७ dilficulties uf interpretation
which have come to surface ina Full Bench decision of the Kerala High Court’.
The appeal in that case pertained to movable Propertics belonging to one Poa-
famma, who dicd some time in 1941, leaving 7४० sons us the sole surviving
Members of the joint family. In 1943, when these two sons were minors, their
father and the materpal grand-parcats sold the Properlivs, for the recovery of
which the two sons filed a suit in 1954. to the meantime, the original purchaser
had gifted away the properties to his minor children, who were impleaded
as defendants to the suit in 1955. The first plaintiff! had attained majority in
1951, though the sceund plaintill continued to be a minor even in 1955 and
uttained majority only in 1958.

The majority of the Bench held that the suit was barred by limitation. As
one of the plaintifis acquired the capacity to give a discharge without the con-
currence of the others when he became the manager in 1951, the plaintiff could
not get more शिक्षा three years from 1951 for filing the suit, under section 8
of the Act.

7.3. The dissenting Midge. however, held that time began to run as against
both the plaintiffs (under tion 7) in 1951, when the first plaintif€ became the
manager uf the joint family, but this acquisition of majority or managership was

‘AS to married wamen. se discussion in Chapter 5, supra,
*Ponnama y. Padmanabhan, ALR. 1969 Ker, 163 UB).


8917 REPORT OF GOW COMIN, 05 LITT MO: 1. 1963
(Chapter 7~ Section 7 Disability of one of several persons)

not the “cessation of disability’ within the meaning of section 8 The entire
period of 12 years provided by article 142 {of the Act of 1908) was available to
the plaintiffs from the date ‘time began to run’, unallected by the three year
limit of section 8. The dissenting Judge conecded that the three-year limit of
section 8 would, at best. be reckoned from 1958 onwards when the second
plaintiff became a major. because. by then. both the plaintiils to be under
disability,

7.4. The majority was unhappy about the drafting of section 7 and made the
following observations : —

“The wording of section 7 crea
part of that section says that ‘time 51 any of them
until one of them becomes capable of arge. without the
concurrence of others or until the disability has ceased*. which would seem
to imply that the starting point of Jimitation itself is postponed until after
the capacity so diseh: has been acquired bY ong of them, or until the
disability has ceased.”

However, they got over the difficulty by putting a harmonious construction
on sections 6 and 7, observing that the latter yan appendix to the
former and that the avowed purpose of both the sections was to extend the
p-riod of limitation.

7.5. The expression “time will not run” alse occurred earlier in section है History

of the Act of 1871, which ran as under:

‘Disability of one joint creditor. . $ When one of several joint credi-
° icrs or claimants is under any such
disability and when a discharge can
be given without the concurrence
af such person, time will not run
against them all: but where no such
discharge con he given, time will not
run as against any of them until
they all are free from disability.”

Section 8 of the Act 1877 reads as under:

“Disability of one joint creditor . §&. When one of several joint credi-
tors or claimants is under any such
disability and when a discharge can
be given without the concurrence
of such person time will run against
them all but where no such  dis-
cha can be given, time will not
run against any of them until one
of them becomes copable of giving
such discharge without the concur.
rence of the others.

Hlustrations

(a) A incurs a debt to a firm of which B,C and 0 are partners. B is
insane and C is a minor. D can oa discharge of the debt without the
concurrence of Band C. Time runs inst BL C and 9.

(0) A incurs a debt to a firm of which FE. F and G are partners. E and F
are insane. and G is a minor. we will net rim against any of them until
either E or F becomes sane. or G attains majority.

The expression “time has begun to n” occurs also in section 9 of the
Present Act which provides that where once time hus begun to run, no subsequent
disability or inability to institute a suit or make an application stops it.


English Act,

Law io
USA.

Need for
amendment

Recommendation.

8911 REPORT OF LAW COMM, ON LAUEATION ACT. 1963

(Chapter 7) Scetion 7 Disability of one of several persons)

7.6. 1 may be of interest to mention that the difficulties arising out of the
expression ‘time will not run’ as respects persons under disability. are not
present in section 22 of the U.K. Limitation Act, 1939 (so far as is material)
reads as under: —

“ff on the date when any
of limitation is prescribed by thi:

ight of action accrued for which a period

Act. the person to whom it accrued was
under a disability. the action may be brought at any time before the एन
piration of six years. or in the case of actions to which the last foregoing
section applies, one year from the date when the person ceased to be under
a disability or died. whichever event first occurred. notwithstanding that the
period of limitation has expired.”

While commenting on the special provision regarding fimitation for infants.
Halsbury has observed? that the provision is a saving ९ which does not. of
itself impose a disability and the plaintiff, while under disability, may bring
his action in the same way as if the Act had not been passed. and may also do
so within the stetutory 00 after determination of the disability.

7.7 In regard to the Americ
position thus:

n Law Corpus duriy Secondum states the

“The saving of the position of limitation by reason of disabilities depends
‘on the statute as it existed at the time the cause of action accrued. In the
absence of such a saving clause the statute ruos asainst all persons whether
or not they are under disability

and this statement of the law has been quoted in various cases.

However. it is observed :

“The statute begins to run against persons under disability as soon as the
disability is removed. but. unless a statute prescribed the maximum period
that limitations may be tolled by disabilities, limitations do not begin to
run until the disability is removed”

A reading of the above shows that even in American jurisdictions the २४५
pression “limitations do not begin to ren” has been understood toa mean suspen-
sion of the running of the time. even though that running of time started earlier.
even against the person ander disability and the expression has not been under-
stood to mean that (he starting point of limitation itself is postponed.

78, As the expression “time will not run” (in section 7) is: givir rise to
difficulties of interpretation’, we are of the view that the language of existing see-
tion 6(1) can be usefully incorporated in section 7. and scetion 7 should be
suintbly amended on those lines.*

7.9. Tn the light of the above we recomm
ed as under:

dl that section 7 should be revis-

d section 7

entitled to institute a suit or
cis under any such disability

“7. Where one of several persons joint)
make an application for the execution of a de
as is referred to in section 6. then -

THalsbery (4th Ed.). Vol. 28. page 388, para 868, See also Vol. 24. para 898.1 cf seq,
*Paragraph 7.2 to 74 supra.
8For the draft see paragraph 7,9 infra.



SOTH REPORT OF LAW COMMIN, OF INDIA ON ‘THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 7—Section 7--Disability of one of several persons. Chapter 8—Section
8—Special Exceptions to the Provisions Concerning Disability. Chapter 9—
Section: 9~Continuous Running ofsTime.)

(a) if a discharge can be given without the concurrence of such person,
the provisions of section 6 shall not apply in favour of any of those
persons:

{b) if no such discharge can be given, the provisions of section 6 shatl
apply in favour of all of them, until one of them becomes capable of
giving such discharge without the concurrence of the others or until
the disability has ceased. (Rest of the section as at present). +

CHAPTER 8

SECTION 8 : SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS TO THE PROVISIONS CONCERN-
ह ING DISABILITY

8.1, Section & provides that the provisions concerning disability (sections 6 Special

and 7} do not apply to suits to enforce rights of pre-emption. nor shall be Exceptions. to
" .. the provisions

deemed to extend, for more than three years from the cessation of the dis- concerning

ability of the death of the person affected thereby, the period of fimitation of “isability.

any suit or application. The section thus (i) totally excludes from the beneficial

provisions suits to enforce right of pre-emption. and (ii) puts an arithmetical

limit on the extent to which the beneficial provisions relating to disability can

operate. The first exclusion is limited to one category of suits, while the

second applies to all suits and applications.

The exclusion of suits for pre-emption appears to be based on a legislative
policy of not giving any relaxation to such suits, presumably in order that tran-
sactions concerning immovable property may not be kept in suspense for a
long time’. This is fact is the rationale underlying the requirement generally
met with in rules of the substantive law concerning pre-emption. to the effect
that the “demand” for pre-emption should be made immediately after the sale.

‘The second restriction imposed by section 8 obviously shows legislative
anxiety to maintain a balance between the consideration that stale demands should
be discouraged and the counter-balancing consideration that the law of limitation
ought not to operate in such a way as to cause Serious hardship in individual
cases.

8.2. The section has not caused any serious: difficulties or controversies. and No change
does not seem to require change. nee

CHAPTER 9
SECTION 9 : CONTINUOUS RUNNING OF TIME

91. The general principle that where time has begun once to run, no sub- Section 9-०
sequent disability or inability to institute a suit or make an application stops it, Gantinuous
is incorporated in section 9, There is a proviso to the section. very limited in itstime.
operation, to. the effect that where letters of administration to the estate of a
creditor have been granted to his debtor, the running of the period of limitation
for a suit to recoyer the debt is suspended while the administration continues.

The proviso becomes necessary since the same person cannot be both the plain-
tiff and the defendant in the same suit.

9.2. The section does not seem to need any change. Ro change

‘ef. section 16(3).

4—14 Mof LI&CA/ND/33


18

Section 10—
Suits against
trustees und

their remesenia-

tives.

History of
the main
paragraph,

History
of the
Explanation.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT. 1963
(Chapter 10 Section 10--Suits Against Trustees)

CHAPTER 10
SECTION 10: SUITS AGAINST TRUSTEES

10.1. Section 10 is one of those very rare statutory provisions which grant
a total exemption from limitation for particular suits. In brief. it provides that
certain suits against a person in whom property has become vested in trust
for any specific purpose are not barred by “any length of time”. The same prin-
ciple applies to suits against the legal representatives of the trustee or against
assigns from the trustee, not being assigns for valuable consideration. The
suits to which the section applies are suits for the purpose of following, in the
hands of the trustee. or his legal representatives or assigns. such property or’ the
nrocceds thereof. or for an account of such property or proceeds. There is a
very important Explanation to the section. which has a long historical back-
ground.) Tt reads as under:

“Explanation.~For the purposes of this section. any property compri-
sed in a Hindu. Mustim or Buddhist religious or charitable endowment shalf
be deemed to he property vested in trust for a specific purpose and the
manager of the property shall be deemed to be the trustee thereof.”

10.2. The main paragraph of the section is based on early decision and
certain statutory provisions: छाए it is more elaborately worded than the earlier
English provision on the subject. The current English statutory provision on the
subject is. of course, fairly elaborate **

10.3, The Explanation. of course. does not occur in the English statutory
provisions. It was, in fact. not contained even in Indian Law before 1929. It
was inserted as the second paragraph of section 10 of the Act of 1908 by the
Indian Limitation (Amendment) Act. 1929 (1 of 1929) to override certain judi-
cial pronouncements. These were decisions of the Privy Council relating to
Hindu relizious endowments as well as Muslim religious endowments. “7 The
Privy Councit held that property dedicated to God (in the Case of Hindu en-
dowments) did not vest in the shebait, who was merely a Manager though. by
custom. he might have certain beneficial interest.

In law, the property vested in the idol or institution, as the case may be.
Similarly. under Muslim law. the moment of waqf was created. the property
vested in God Almighty and the mutawalli or Sajiadenashin had no right in the
property. He was not a ‘trustee’ in the technical sense." Accordingly. the benefit
of the provision in section 10 of the Act of 1908 was not available against such
persons, It was to override these pronouncements that the relevant paragraph
was added in section 10 of the Act of 1908---a provision which has been carried
over in the present Act.

tof, B. K. Mukherice. “Hindu Law of Religion and Charitable Trusts” (4th Edition 1979)
page 298313. para 6.69 to 6.98,

°CF Girinder Chunder v. Mackintosh. 1879) LLR. 4 Cal. 897.

SSection 19, Limitation Act. 1939 (Eng) (See paragraph 10.6 infra).

‘CT. Chintaman v, Khanderao. A.1.R. 1928 Bom. $8.

SVidva Varuthi v, Balusami Aivor ALR. 1922 P.C. 123. 41 M.LJ. 346.

*Abdur Rehim v. Narait: Dasa AAR. 1923 P.G. 44: (1..8.) 50 Cal. 329

ICivil Justice Committee Report. (LR) 50, Cal. 329, followed by Council of State Bill
No & of 1927.

"See. for other rulings before 1929. B. K. Mukheriea, Hindu Law of Religious and
Charitable Trust & (4th Ed, 1979), pages 301-304, para 6.74 to 6.78.



SOT REPORT UF LAW COMDS. OF INDIA CN THE 1811/11% - (५1. 1863
(Chapter i—Sectiun 10--Suits Against Trastecs.)

10.4. We have considzicd the question whether the Explanation to secon Need to
10 should be extended 10 Sikh aad jain cndowments, and ttave come tu ihe cover, Sikh
conclusion that the scope of the Expianation should be so widened. The mode endowments.
of ercation of these cndowments in not, substantially different from nat in. vogue
amongst Hindus and Buddhists. The practice of having a “manager” without
formally constituting fim a ‘trustee’ is prevaleat in regard to Sikh apd Jain था
dowments also. The section of the public interested im these endowments would,
therefore, need the protection conferred by Explanation, (0 the sume extent as
those already entitled to its benefit. 11 may be repeated ihat the Explanation
became necessary in view of tie fact that certain judicial Jecisions took the
view that in the case of Hindu endowments, taeie is no express trust as such,
and the concept of trust which impiivs the vesting of piuperiy in che trustee,
could not be appropriately applied io these endowments, because there is no
vesting of property in these managers.’ Similar was the view regarding wakfs.
To override this judicia! pronouncements, 1६ became necessary to provide, first
that int such cases the endowment shali be deemed to be a trust: secondly, that
it shall be deemed to be for a specific purpuse and thirdly that the manager shalt
be deemed to be the trustee. The backgroud against which the Explanation
came to be inserted js to be borne in mind iv suggesting its extension’.

105. The express mention of Hindus, Muslim and Buddhist endowments Nesd मे for
and the omission of mention of endowmenis of Sikhs aad Jains may create an frovision,
impression that Sikh and Jain endowments are excluded from the benelit of the
section, The practice of creating trusts for ‘charitable purposes’ is as much pre-
valent amongst persons following these two religions us it is amongst Hindus,

" Muslims and Buddhists.’ There is, in our view, hardly any reason why these two
coramunitics should be excluded from the beneficial provisions of the Explana-

tion.

Accordingly, we recommend that the eaisting Explanation to sectivn 10
should be amended suitably, on the Jincs mentioned above.

10.6. To proceed now w # dillgrent aspect of section 10 it may be stated qrustee who
that the British Parliament fel that the corresponding section 19 of their Limi- ७ also a
tation Act, 1939 was working unjustly on an ‘honest trustee’ who was also a Reagan
beneficiary under the teust. Thus if के is a trustee of, and beneficiary under a Act, 1980.
trust along with three more beneficiaries A, B and C, a filth person D can sue
without any barrier of limitation to recover the full amount of the shure of the
trust property ३० which he would bave been entiticd and obtain satisfaction out
of the share of X, the trustec -beneficiary even though limitation has expired

* ugainst the other three bencficiaries A. B and C. That is to say, if the fifth bene-
ficiary D has a 20%, share. his entire share will be carved out of the allotment
ef X which is only 25% of the entire assets leaving him with only 5५. The
amendment effected by U.K. Limitation (Amendment) Act. 1980 has come into
force on Ist May, 1980. Now, after the amendment, X will not be divested of

the 20% share, but only of the excess Ss.

Section 19 of the U.K. Act of 5939 as amended in 1980 now reads as
under :-- .

IParageaphs 10,1 and 10.2, sfipra
2Prragraph 10.3. supra.
SUE Rakhi ०. Muhammad Abdul Ralim: (1933) LLR. 56 All, 11). 116 17.00. and cases
in paragraph 10.3 7
in paae eM Mukherice Hindu Law of Religions and Charitable Trusis (4th Ed. 1979). page
328, paca 7.12. है

‘See, for the suggested amendmen’s. para (0.3 infra.



sirability
a a lopting
the English
provision.

Recommendation

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. UF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACr, 1963
(Chapter 10—Section 10—Suits Against Trustees.)

“10. (1) No period of limitation prescribed by this Act shall apply to
an action by a beneficiary under a trust, being an action—

{a) in respect of any fraud or fraudulent breach of trust to which the trustee
was a party or privy; or

(0) to recover from the tsustee trust property or the Proceeds thereof in the
Possession of the trustee, or previously received by the trustee and
converted to his use.

(1A) Where a trustee who is also a beneficiary under the trust receives or
retains trust property or its procecds as his share on a distribution of trust pro-
Perty under the trust. his liability in any action brought by virtue of paragraph
(b) of the foregoing sub-section to recover that property or its Proceeds after the
expiration of the period of limitation, prescribed by this Act for bringing an
action to recover trust property shall be limited to the excess over his proper
share.

This sub-section only applies if the trustee acted honestly and reasonably
in making the distribution.”

10.7. Though the problem sought to be remedied by the recent amendment
to the English Act’ has not arisen in any case decided, the amendment incor-

Porated a salutary rule of equity and hence we recommend its adoption in our
Act?

108. Accordingly, we recommend that section 10, should be re-numbered
as sub-section (1) and after the words “notwithstanding anything contained in

- the foregoing provisions of this Act”, the words and figures “but subject to the

provisions of sub-section (2) should be added in it. New sub-scctions (2) and
(3) should be added in section 10 as under: —~

“(2) Where a trustee who is also a beneficiary under the trust receives
or retains trust property or its proceeds as his share on a distribution of
trust property under the trust, his liability in any suit by virtue of sub-section
(1) to recover that property or its proceeds or for an account of such pro-
perty or proceeds after the expiry of the period of limitation shall be limit-
ed to the excess received or retained by him over his share.

(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) apply only if the trustee, in make
ing the distribution, acted in good faith.”

The Explanation to the Section should be revised as under :---

“Explanation.—For the purposes of this section any property compri-
sed in a Hindu. Muslim, Buddhist, Sikh or Jain religions or charitable en-
dowment shall be deemed to be property vested in trust for a specific pur-

pose and the manager of the property shall be deemed to be the trustee
thereof.”

‘Paragraph 10.6 supra.
*For the draft, see para 10.8 infra.


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. ज INDIA ON THE LIMHATION ACT, 1963 2
(Chapter Li-- Section 14- Suits on Foreign causes of Action.)

CHAPTER 11
SUITS ON FOREIGN CAUSES GF ACTION

41.1 While section [0 was a negative provision excluding from the scope Section {1-~
of the Act certain kinds of sui section HQ) is a positive provision to the Contracts
effect that suits instituted in the territories to which this Act extends on contracts elsewhere.
entered into in the State of Jammu & Kashmir or in a foreign country shall be sub-
ject to the rules of limitation contained in the Act. Not content with this positive
provision, the section, in sub-section (2), rules out the application of foreign rules
of limitation by providing that no rule of limitation in force in the State of Jammu &

Kashmir or in a foreign country shaif be a defence to a suit instituted in the
territories to which the Act estends on a contract entered into in that for
country or in Jammu & Kashmir unless two conditions are satisficd, namely:

{a) the rule has extinguished the contract. and

(0) the parties were domiciled in that State or in the forcign country dur-
ing the period prescribed by such rule.

11.2. The section is based on the principle well recognised in private inter-
national law in the Anglo-American Legal Systems—that rules of limitation are Principle.
part of the lex fori. Whether an obligation is to be enforced or not depends ex-
clusively upon the law of limitation of the forum in which the suit is brought.

As observed by Story very long ago.’

“It has accordingly become a formularly in international jurisprudence
that all suits must be brought within the period prescribed by the local
law of the country where the suit is brought (/ex fori). otherwise the suit
will be dismissed.”

In contrast. the fore: iption would be applicd in a country.
because when a Jaw extinguishes the right by reason of lapse of time, the right
itself does not survive, and there is nothing to enforce.

11.3. It may be mentioned that in proceedings brought in national courts position
to enforce rights created by the Treaty of Rome (which established the Euro. ay Jo Ts
pean Economic Community), the relevant limitation period is that fixed by theof Rome.

State in which the action is brought.’

11.4, The traditional English rule is well settled. in Preston and Newson on pe English
Limitation of Actions. the authors wrote as follows under the heading “Private Law.
International Law

“The English courts have adopted a very simple method of dealing with
the rules of limitation in private international law. It is common ground bet-
ween all systems of private international law that matters of procedure arc
to be determined by the lex fori. In so far as the Statutes of Limitation pres-
cribe periods within which actions may be brought, they are, in English courts,
classified as methods of proceeding.”

Story, Conflict of Laws. (8th Ed.) Article 577, page 794: Cf, Ruckmaboye v. Lujlovbhoy,

(4852) 5 Moo. LA. 233, 265. 267. (P.C

*Halsbury 4th Ed. Vol 28 page 266 para 606.

3Presten and Newson, Limitation of Actions (140) page 16. quoted in Redtiguas v.
R. J. Parker, (1966) 3 W.L.R. 546, Cf. ibid. (1953 ed}, page 15 (no material change)



«Restatement

S97 REPORT OF LAW CUMMN. OF INDIA ON THE वा 14110 ACT 1963
(Chapter 11--Section 11--Suits on Foreign causes of Action.)
Referring to Don v. Lipmann,' the authors observed”

“But a foreign rule of limitation is not classificd as a matter of procedure in
an English court if it extinguishes the right as well as the remedy. The fact
that on expiration of the foreign period the plaintiff's right is to be extingui-
shed docs not help a plaintit! who fails to sue in England within the English
period, but a defendant may rely on the extinguishment by the foreign period
irrespective of whgther the English period had eclapsed.. we

11.5. The rule has also been incorporated as Rule 604 of the Restatement of

Law of the American Law Institute thus.*

Rule 604—Foreign Statute of Limitatious

Criticism by

“If action is not barred by the statute of lievitalivas of ibe lorum, an
action can be maintained though action is barred in the State where the
cause of action arose.” .

11.6. Cheshire and Nosth have observed’, criticising the English upproach

Cheshire and as under: —

North.

Status quo
recommended this
by U.K. Law

Reform

Committee,

“English law in unfortunately committed to the view that statutes of limita-
tion, if they merely specify a certain time after which rights cannot be en-
forced by action, affect procedure, not substance’, In the resutt,
therefore, any relevant statute of limitation that obtains in the lexfori may be
pleaded while a statute of same foreiga law. even though it belongs to the
proper law of the transaction, must be disregauded’ The prevailing view on
the continent is to be opposite effect,

“This is another cxampte where English law. through ils failure to in
terpret a foreign rule in its context has gone astray”.

{L.7. The U.K. Law Reform Committee in its 21st Report’ teok totice of
criticism, but did not make any recommendation in this regard:

“As we have explained. English law treats limitation as part of the law
of procedure. An English court will, therefore, always apply English law
lex fori) to an issue of limitation, notwithstanding that the substantive rights
in question are governed by foreign law.’ In determining the existence of
those substantive rights a distinction has to be drawn between a foreign rule
of limitation and a foreign rule of prescription: if the ‘proper law’ of the
transaction (lex causae) extinguishes the right through lapse of time, the
English court will give effect to that extinction if, on the other hand, under
the relevant lex causae lapse of time merely bars the remedy (as it does in
most cases in English law), the English courts will ignore the foreign limita-

tion period and apply English law alone.

18970 ४. Lipmann (1837) 5 Cl है हु
"See Preston & Newson. Limitation of Aciions (194), page 16, quieted in Redvignez v-

RS.
34 1... Restatement of Cont हि
‘Cheshire and North, Private International Law. (40th Edition. 1979), page 695.
sRodrigue: v. R. J. Parker (Male), (1967) 1 0.8. 116, 131-136 and see Pedresen v.

Fin. 1. °

Parker, (1966) 3 W.L.R. 546, 560.

ict of Laws, Rute 604.

Young. (1964) 110 C.L.R. 162.

“€This has been followed even in Australian jurisdi

m. Panozza & Co. Pir. Ltd. ve

Allied Interstate 1014.) Pty, Ltd. (1976) 2 NS.W.D.R. 192.

TLaw Reform Com

Ist Report (Cond. 6923) (September. 1977), page 30-

SHarris v. Quine, (18! .R. 4 0.8. 653.


SOTH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF TRDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter H-- Section df Suits on Forvien causes of Action.)

Classification of limitation is not itself part of the law of imitation but
of private international law and therefore not “within our terms of reference.
For that reason, we make no positive recommendation about it. Nevertheless
we received from Dr. F. A. Mann 8 memorandum arguing persuasively in
favour of making a change in the English rule (which has been heavily criti-
cised by academic writers)’ and we think it right to mention the matter so
that it may be considered as a possible, subject for reform.”

EL8. Besides Cheshire another team of distinguished authors’ have also Gviticism—

attacked this principle of English law thus:

“Statutes of limitation in the familiar sense usually prescribe that no court
proceeding shall be brought to enforce a right after the lapse of a certain
period of time. Sometimes however they provide that the right or tifle is ex-
tinguished.* Tt is only statutes of the latter type that the English classifica-
tory technique regards as pertaining to substance. The other type of. statute
of limitations which merely extinguishes the remedy is regarded as proce-
dural!

“This means that a plaintiff can suc in an Australian court on a cause
of action which, though barred by the proper law of the transaction, is not
barred by Australian law.’ it also means that an action cannot be brought
in Australia if barred by an Australian statute of limitations, though action
would still be competent by the proper Jaw’,

“Jt is suggested that such applications rest on no intelligible principle,
nor is the distinction between extinction of right and extinction of remedy
meaningful in this context. A statute can hardly be regarded as prescribing
a mode of regulating the course of litigation if it simply says that no litiga-
tion can take place.”

However, they add—

“Nevertheless. the tide of English decisions has probably set so firmly
in the direction of the dichotomy between extinction of right and extinction
of remedy hat no movement is now possible.”

11.9. We have devoted considerable thought to this aspect. With great res-
pect. the criticism made by Cheshire of the traditional English Rule (which has
been Substantially followed in section 11), appears to be based on one faulty con-
cept of reasoning. The law of limitation may not be a part of the law of “proce.
dure” in the narrower sense. but it is certainty a part of adjective law in the widest
sense. The criticism does not do justice to the juristic aspect mentioned above.
Procedure may be a narraw field. but adjective law is a wider one, covering the
entire process of litigation. including the time and manner of pursuing a remedy
in the Courts of a country. It is but fair that the courts operating within a coun-
try should have regard only to the law of that country, so far as the pursuit of

15.9. LD. Falconbridge. Essavs on the Conflict of Laws, 2nd ed. Ch. 12, Cheshire,
Private International Law. %h Ed. fed. North). pages 687-690

*Svkes and Pryles, “Austrafian Private International law” (1979) page 130.

As fin the English context) in the case of so-called adverse nossession of land’ and
in some cases of failure to take action in resnect of chattels. है

tHuhen v. Stainer. (1835) 2 Bing (N.C.) 202: 132 ER. 80, See Subbotovsky ५." Wauny,
(1968) 3, N.S.W.R. 261 (Nagle 3.)

SHartis v, Quine, (1869) LR. 4 0.8. 653 (Court of Queen's Bench),

SBritish Linen Co, v. Drummond, (1830) 10 B & C 903; 109 E.R. 683.

Sykes and
Pryles.

Correct.

“ approach®

3B


4

Some theore-
tical aspe cts,
answering the
criticism.

Some
Practical
aspects of
importance,

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMIN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION AC1. 1963
(Chapter 11- Section He -Suits on Forcign causes of Action.)

remedies in those courts is concerned. Limitation is certainly concerned with the
actual process of litigation; the need ‘for invoking a rule of limitation arises only
if and when the plaintiff invokes the aid of the judicial process. In this sense,
limitation is very much concerned with the enforcement of the remedy within

the portale of the court and is therefore rightly regarded as belonging to adjec-
tive law.

We may quote the views of an American author’ who has beautifully des-
cribed the distinction between remedy and right: ---

“A broken promise is not repaired by the passage of a period. False
words that stain a name are not made true because twelve months go by.
Pain may recede in memory, but that does not mean it was not sufferred
when the victim was assaulted. If these things are recognised as deserving
reparation, they deserve it no less the day after the term is reached than
they did the day before. Time does not heal all wounds: homily is fatuous

“Thus, limitation appears to be not a matter of substantive right, but a
practical device. It is difficule to deal with an event long after it has hap-
pened. Memories fade. witnesses die. documents vanish. proof one way or
the other is hard to find. Moreover, even with all the evidence at hand, the
outcome of a law suit will not necessarily coincide with truth. Much de-
pends on the. hazards of litigation. on the wisdom and honesty of judges
and jurors, the luck of testimony. Hence it is only reasonable that the alle-
ged wrong doer (in most instances. we will not be certain he did wrong)
should one day be entitled to repose. Finally -most important and scarcely
ever mentioned—if al! disputes were kept alive forever. then there would
be an infinity of litigation. In the management of a polity there needs to be
an end of things.”

11.10. Tt has been stated by the critics of the traditional rule that “a statute
can hardly be regarded as describing a mode of regulating the course of litiga-
tion, if it simply says that no litigation can take place.” However. this criticism
is itself open to criticism. The procedural law contains so many rules which bar
the very entertaining of a suit on procedural grounds and nobody has ever said
that such rules are not regarded as falling appropriately within the domain of
procedure. Our own Code of Civil Procedure contains examples of such rules in
section 11, section 47. section 66, section 80, section 86. Order 2, Rule 2, Order
7, Rule 11, Order 9, Rule 8. Order 23, Rule | and so on.

11.11. Apart from these theoretical aspects. it should also be mentioned that
there is an important practical aspect which cannot be overlooked. When a court
embarks upon an inquiry into the period of limitation, such an inquiry covers
not merely the time limits proper (the arithmetical periods). but also various
detailed rules for the computation of those periods. If we were to expect courts
to have regard to foreign law of limitation. that would mean calling upon the
court to study, understand and apply the foreign [aw in all its complexity and
profusion. This would be an extremely difficult task. हु

11.12, For all these reasons, we have been unable to persuade ourselves to
accept the criticism made by Cheshire and others of the traditional Engtish
Rule—a rule which has been adopted in the American Restatement also.*

‘Charles Rembar. The Law of the Land (1980) page 81.
*Para 11.6 and 11.8. supra,
*Para 11,5, supra.


SOTH REPORT OF LAW CUOMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT. 1963
(Chapter 11---Section Hf --Suits on Foreign causes of Action.)

11.13. We may add that on grounds of policy also, a court ought not to be Policy con-
bound by the mules of limitation applicable under a foreign lex causae. The time siderations.
limit may be either unreasonably short or unreasonably long:

W114. It is not always an casy task to ascertain foreign law. This could Difficulty
Prove an onerous burden on the courts. The burden would be all the more one- oe ecergain-
rous for the Indian courts to ascertain the foreign law of limitation of 150 coun-tule.
tries by paying for the fees and costs of foreign experts which would unneces-
sarily delay the disposal of cases. It should be remembered that, as mentioned
above, if the foreign law is to be applied, the Indian court will have to study
not only the time limits, but also the principles for the computation of periods
of limitation. This would be a stupendous undertaking.

11.15. Therefore, we see no reason to disturb the principle underlying sec- Suits on
tion 11, Some matters of detail concerning the section may now be dealt with. causes of कब
Though sub-section (2) of section ft is confined to contracts, the position would than contracts,
not, in substance, be different for other causes of action that arise outside the
. territories to which the Act extends.

The section has been held not to be exhaustive.’ Thus, for example, the

same principle applies to execution Again, if a suit is for conversion, the same
principle would apply?

11.16, In this context, the history of the section is interesting. Section 12 of History of

the Act of 1871 provided as under: section है
वि the point of
“12. No foreign rule of limitation shall be a defence to a suit in British view of

India on a contract entered into a foreign country, unless the rule has ex-*°P®
tinguished the contract, and the parties were domiciled in such country
during the period prescribed by such rule.”

In 1877, a positive assertion about the applicability of the Indian Act to
Suits instituted in British India was made. Section 11 of that Act read as under: —

_ 711, Suits instituted in British India on contracts entered into a foreign
country are subject to the rules prescribed by this Act.

No foreign rule of limitation shall be_a defence to a suit instituted in .
British India ‘on a contract entered into a foreign country, unless the rule has
extinguished ~the contract. and the parties were domiciled in such country
. during the period prescribed by such rule.”

11.17. In the draft Bill of the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 no change from Comment-
the Act of 1877 was proposed as regards this section. However, one comment’ गाज
मु was received which was as under:— है

“The words ‘or obligation incurred in’ should be added after ‘contracts
entered into’, in order to show that suits, of whatever class the cause of
“

‘Dickie & Co. v. Mun. Board, AAR. 1956 Cal. 216, 219 (Bachawat J).

*Nabibhai Vasirbhai v. Dayabhai Amulak, ALR, 1916 Bom. 200, 201, 202: LLR. 40
Bom. 504.

*Ruckmaboyee v. Luloobhoy Mothchand, (1851-1855) 5 MLA, 234 (B.C).

‘HLS, Phadnis, Acting District Judge. Khandesh No. 2, 751 dated 30th November, 1907,
National. Archives’ Papers. ._

5—14 Mof LI&CA/ND/83


26

Need for
widening
the section.

‘Section to
be extended

ings other
than suits,

Recommendation.

89TA REPORT OF 1.4७ COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 11--Section ¢1---Suits on Forcign causes of Action.)

action in respect of which arises in foreign country, ate subject to these
provisions.”

This is an interesting comment raising as it does a point which we our:
selves have apart from the comment pursued.

11.18. To revert to the present section and current needs, we wish to point
out that the principle of private international law upon which the section is
based, makes no distinction between suits based on contracts and other suits,
Practical considerations also justify a widening of the section so as to make it
applicable to all causes of action. There is no reason for adopting a different
approach as to non-contractual causes of action, We think that the section should
be widened.’

11.19. There is another point in regard to which also the ambit of the sec:
tion can be conveniently widened. The section, as it stands at present, is con-
fined to suits; we are of the view that it should be extended to all proceedings.
Although proceedings other than suits wherein the question of competition bet-
ween’ Indian and foreign laws of limitation may be in issue are not many, there
is no reason why the legislature should not recognise the principle underlying
section 11 and give it the widest amplitudé. Irrespective of the character of the
Proceeding, if the remedy sought is not barred by the law of limitation of the
forum, then in that forum the law should allow the proceeding to be maintained,
even though it may be barred by the law of limitation of the country where the
cause of action for the particular proceeding arose, The principle on which
section 11 is based— a matter which has been already elaborated in the preceding
paragraphs’—should be regarded as equally applicable, whether the litigation is
in the shape of a suit or in the shape of any other proceeding. Accordingly, we
Propose a widening of the section on this point also.’

11.20, In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section 11
should be revised as under:- -

Revised. section 11

“11. (1) Suits and other proceedings instituted in the territories to
which this Act extends on causes of action arising in the State of Jammu
and Kashmir or in a foreign country shall be subject to the rules of lims-
tation contained in this Act.

(2) No rule of ‘limitation in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir
or in a foreign country shall be a defence to a suit or proceeding instituted
in the said territories on a cause of action arising in that State or in a foreign
country unless—

(a) the rule has extinguished the right which the cause of action is
founded: and

(>) the parties were domiciled in that State or in the foreign country
during the period prescribed by such rule.”

‘For a draft of revised section 11, see ‘para 11.20, infra.
+Paragraphs 11.2 to 11.4, supra,
‘Bor the draft see para 11.20, infra.


BOTH REPORT OF LAW COMMN, OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 12—Section 12. Exclusion of Time in Legal Proceedings)
CHAPTER 12
SECTION 12: EXCTUSION OF TIME IN LEGAL
PROCELDIN

12.1, With section 12 begins a set of provisions dealing with the computa: Section 12.

tion of periods of Timiiation. Assuming that the fadian law of limitation applies
to the case, attention also to be paid to the arithmetic of the matter. In
section 12. one finds iwo sets of visions---one general, the other of a more
limited application. The first set provisions provides for excluding the first
day~—the day. from which the penod is to be reckoned. The second set of
provisions provides for excluding. in compysing thé period of limitation, the
time requisite for obtaining certain copies, Fhe second set of provisions is
confined to appeals and certain applications, while che first set applies to all
suits. appeals and applicuiions, The two sets have’ noihing common to them
and it is only the accidents of tegislation that have brought them together.

12.2, The first set of provisions 1६ 19 be found in section 12¢f) and in the ‘Lhe principle
earlier part of section 12(2). Section सिर) provides that in computing the period underlying

of limitation for any suit. appeal or application, the day from which such period
is to be reckoned shall be excluded. Cn ine same analogy, the earlier part of
section 12(2) provides that in computing the period of limitation for an appeal
or an application for leave to appeal or tor revision or for review of a judgment,
the day on which the judgment complained of was pronounced, shall be ex-
cluded. Broadly stated, the princip!: Sere is that the date of accrual of the
cause of action is 10 be excluded’

Provisions for excluding the first day are contained in the General Clauses
Act’ and the Transfer of Property Act also. This is more a cule of convenience
“thaa a rule based on any fundamenial princinie of justice.

12.3, The second set of provisions deals with the ime requisite for obtain:

ing copies of judgments, decrees, sentences. orders and awards, where an appeal underlying
| sections 12(2),
$2(3) and 12(4)--

or an application of the specified category is to be filed. These are contained
in section 12(2), latter half and sections 12¢2)(3) and 12f4).

The Explavation to the section (which bas provoked sone controversy, to copies.

be mentioned later’) reads as under: -

“Explanation.--In. computing under this section the time requisite for
obtaining a copy of a decree or order, any time taken by the court to pre-
pare the decree or order before an application for a copy thereof is made
shall not be excluded.”

"The principle underlying the set of provisions for the exclusion of “time
requisite” in obtaining copies of judicial determinations is two-fold. In the first
place, before a litigant aggrieved by the decision of a court or arbitrator pursues
a remedy by way of appeal or application in order to contest the legality, pro-
ptiety or correctness of such degision, it is proper that he should have

ICf. Ganapati v. Sitharatma (1886) 1.1..1९, 10 Mad, 292,
“Section 9, General Clases Aci, 1
Section 1i0—Franster of Property Av. 1882,
*See discussion relating lo section 12 Explanation infra.

27


Law Com-
Report.

ety ater
player:

vo

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 12—Section 12: Exclusion of Time in Legal Proceedings)

knowledge of its full contents.’ Secondly, in some cases, ‘the law requires that the.
appeal or application must be accompanied by 2 copy of such decision’.

12.4, The Law Commission, in its Report on the Act of 1908, while com-
menting’ on section 12 of the Act, observed as under:—

“Some courts have taken the view that the delay in drafting the decree
before an application for a copy is made should be deducted as ‘time re-
quisite’. But we think that a delay of the office before the application for
4 copy is made should not count in favour of the patty. A suitable provi-
sion should be added to make this clear.”

The Commission also recommended a draft of an Explanation to be added.
at the end of section 12 for achieving the above object:

“Explanation.—Any time taken by the Court to prepare the decree or
order before an application for copy thereof is filed shat! not be regarded
4s time requisite for obtaining the copy within the meaning of this section.”

12.5. Even though the recommendation of the Commission was accepted in
principle, the Explanation that was enacted has used the expression “shall not
be excluded” instead of the wording suggested by the Commission “shall not be
regarded as time requisite”. The Explanation emerged as follows in the Act
as passed in 1963:

“Explanation—In computing under this section the time requisite for
obtaining a copy of a decree or an order, any time taken by the court to
Prepare the decree or order before an application for a copy thereof is
made shall not be excluded.”

126, Difficulties of interpretation arose under the newly added Explanation

to Section 12. In a full Bench decision of the Bombay High Court’, it was
observed:—-

“On the plain and grammatical construction of the Explanation to section
12(2) of the Act the intention of the Legislature is clear namely, that while
computing the time requisite for obtaining a copy of decree any time taken
by the court for preparation of the decree before an application for a copy
chergof is made is not to be excluded, that is to say, such period will have
to be included in computing the time requisite for obtaining copy.”

Earlier, a full Bench of Patna High Court’ had taken notice of the ration-
ale underlying the recommendations of the Law .Commission, but concluded
that the text of the Explanation said just the opposite:—

“I am aware that the Law Commission, while recommending the recast of
the old Limitation Act, stated that in their view, the period taken by the
court for preparing the decree before an application for a copy is made,
“should not be counted in favour of the. applicant. One of the objects and ©
reasons given in the bill was that any delay in the office of the court in

1Cf. Surty v. Chettyar, (1928) 55 1.A. 161, 170 (PC).
al, td, CRC, is one example.

w Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1908), page 17-18, para 37,
Page 76 (section 12).
‘Subbash ९. Maroti, A.LLR. 1975 Bombay 244 (F-B).
‘State of Bikar v, Md. Ismail, ALR. 1966 Pataa 1 (F-B.).



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 12-—Section 12—- Exclusion of time in legal proceedings)

drawing up a decree or order before the application for a copy thereof is
made, shall not be exciuded. The recommendation of the Law Commis-
sion or the objects and reasons stated in the bill cannot aller the clear and
unambiguous meaning of the actual cnactment that the parliament passed.”

12.7, Fortunately. the Supreme Court,! has now settled the position and Quieius by
interpreted the Explanation to section 12 to mean that a person cannot get ex- Supreme
clusion of the period that elapsed between pronouncement of the judgment and
the signing of the decree, if he made the application for a copy only after pre-
paration of the decree. In view of the latest judgment of the Supreme Court, the
controversy hus subsided. However, in order to express the intention and true
Meaning more clearly, we recommend a suitable change in the Explanation under
discussion? “

4

128. A situation may arise when there is a legal impediment to preparing Legal
a decree. When there is a tegal impediment to prepare a decree on account for impediment
non-compliance with such direction or tor other legally permissible reasons the preparation
law should allow relaxation. The point was adverted to in one case before the °C 4 decree.
Supreme Court? We are recommending a suitable amendment’ inserting a
specific provision on the subject.

12.9. At this stage, we may also take notice of the newly addgd rule 6A Order 20,
to Order 20, Code of Civil Procedure. 1908. In implementation of the recom. 67
mendations of the Law Commission made in its Report, (on that Codey* it has Procedure
now been made obligatory upon the courts to prepare the decree as expediti- Effect of.
ously as possible and, if it cannot be so done within 15 days from the date of
the pronouncement ‘of the judgment, the aggrieved party is enabled to obtain
a certificate that the decree has not been drawn up. The aggrieved party can
in such case prefer an appeal treating the last paragraph of the judgment as a
decree. Similarly, the decree holder can initiate the Process of execution on
the basis of the last parageaph of the judgment, which itself shall be deemed
to be the “decree” for the purpose of execution. The amendment made in 1976
thus confers the status of a decree upon the copy of the last paragraph of the
judgment, but that status comes to an end the moment a regular decree is
drawn .up.

¢

12.10. So far as the inter-connection of Rule 6A of Order 20, Code of Civil Amendment of
Procedure, 1908 with Section 12. Limitation Act is concerned, it would be Section 12
uncontraverted that the aggrieved party would as much be entitled to obtain an copy of the
exclusion of time on account of delay in obtaining a copy of the Jast paragraph !ast paragraph
of the judgment (on the basis of which he can now take steps fdr filing an judgment.
appeal), as he would be in obtaining a copy of the actual decree, It is true
that the party would be able to obtain a copy of the last paragraph of the judg-
ment somewhat carlier than copy of the decree. Nonetheless, the copying sec-
tion of the court is bound to take some time in supplying a copy of even the
last paragraph of the judgment. To put the matter beyond the pale of doubt,
we recomend that a suitable Explanation should be added to section 12 on the
above point.’ .

'Udayan Chinubhai ५, R.C. Bali, AR. 1977 S.C, 2319.

2808 para 12.13 infra for the draft disetsssion.

3Udayan Chinubhai v. के, C. Bali, AR, 1977 S.C. 2319, 2337. Para 35.

15९८ para 12.13 infra. ry

‘Law Commission of India. 540 Report (Code of Civil Procedure, 1908) Chapter 20
"See paragraph 12.13 infra.

29


tribunals,

Marginal
nole to
section 12
to be
amended.

Recommendation.

(S. 12,
Expl. 9

(New)

(New)

(New)

&

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT. 1963
(Chapter 12—Section 12—Exclusion of time in legal proceedings)

12.11. One more change needed in Section 12 concerns tribunals. We are
of the opinion that the section should, by an express provision, be extended
to quasi-judicial bodies, since there is no reason why the time taken in the
various steps contemplated by .the section should not be available in regard tp
appeals before such tribunals, It is desirable that the matter should be governed
by a specific provision applicable to थी such tribunals rather than be left to be
dealt with on a case-to-case basis.

12.12. There is yet another point (though a minor onc) on which Section
42 will need amendment. The marginal note to section 12 speaks of “Exclu-
sion of time in legal proceedings”, and the expression “legal proceedings”
should be given a wide meaning so as to include proceedings before tribunals.
This would mean amending the section. If section 12 is to be amended so as
to put it beyond doubt that the section is applicable to proceedings before tri-,
bunals,' it would be better to amend the marginal note also. This is so because
where the marginal note has not been amended despite the addition of matter
in the section, sometimes controversies arise Such controversies are worth
avoiding wherever possible.

12.43. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend the following
amendments to section 12: --

(i) The marginal note to the section should be revised as under :—

“Exclusion of time in legal proceedings, including proceedings before
quasi-judicial tribunal!

(ii) The present Explanation should be revised, and certain further Expla-
nations should be added. The Explanations to appear before section 12 will
now read as under: —

“Explanation 1. Any time taken by the court to prepare the decree
or order before an application for a cOpy thereof is made shall uot be re-
garded as time requisite for obtuining the copy within the meaning of this
section.”*

Explanation H.---Where there is a legal impediment to the prepara-
tion of a decree or order on account of a direction in the judgment or non=
compliance with the direction or for any other legally permissible reason,
any time during which the decree or order cunnot be prepared on account
of such legal impediment shall be regarded us time requisite for obtaining
the copy within the meaning of this sections

“Explanation 11,—-For the purposes of this section, ‘decree’ includes the
last paragraph of the judgment, where it is proposed to use a copy thereof for
the purpose permitted by rule 6A of Order XX in the First Schedule to
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

“Explanation 1V.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared
that the provisions of this section apply to proceedings before quasi-judicial
tribunals, as they apply to proceedings before courts."

}Paragraph 12.11. supra
*Tara Prasad Singh etc. v. Union of India & others (1981) 1 S.CJ. 53, 67.
SParagraph 12.12 supra.
‘Paragraph 12.9 supra

‘Paragraph 12.8 supra.

SParagraph (2.10 supra.
"Paragraph 12.11 supra.


t
89TH REPORT OF LAW COMM. OF ENDTA. ON TRE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter \3-—-Section 13- Exclusion of time where leave to ste or appeal
as pauper ix applied for

CHAPTER 13

SECTION 13: EXCLUSION OF TIME WHERE
LEAVE TO SUE OR APPEAL AS PAUPER IS
APPLIED FOR

43.1 Section [3 deals with a very special case; provision is madz जि €X- Section 13.
cluding time taken in prosecuting an application for leave to sue of appeal as
a “pauper”, where ultimately such leave is refused, and the “pauper”, has then
to file a suit or appeal as an ordinary person. The section was introduced in
1963. It was not contained in the original Bill and was inserted’ by the Joint
Committee on the Bill for tie following reasons :—

“The Committee fecl that in a case where an application for leave to
sue or appeal as a pauper has been made and rejected, the time taken in
prosecuting in good faith such application should be excluded in compat
ing the period of limitation prescribed.

13.2. The Section réally consists of two parts. and its content may be एन analysis.
stated in a simplified form thus:

(1) Where an application for leave to sue or appeal as a pauper has been
made and rejected, then. in computing the period of limitation pres-
cribed for any suit or appeal in such case, the time during which the
applicant has been prosecuting in good faith his application for such
leave shall be excluded.

- (2) The Court may. on payment of the court fee prescribed for such suit

or appeal, treat the suit or appeal as having the same force and effect
as if the court fee had been paid in the first instance.

_ 13.3, The purport and significance of section 13 will be better understood procedural
if one bears in d ie scheme of the provisions’ in the Code of Civil Pro- provisions

cedure, 1908 as to suils and appeals by as (0 indigent

“indigent persons” (whe were, before persons.
the amendment of the Code in 1976. described as “paupers”). A person who

does not have sufficient means to pay the court fee prescribed for the plaint can

seek Jeave of the court to suc as an indigent person: To determine whether

such leave should be granted, the court is required to hold a preliminary in-
quiry, at the end of which either the leave prayed for is granted or refused.

If the leave is granted. then the application is converted into a plaint—the
Code of Civil Procedure. 1908 so provides in express terms. In harmony With
this procedural provision, the Limitatiow Act’ enacts that for the purposes of
the Limitation Act,

“(a) a suit is instituted......

Ui) in the case of a pauper when his application for leave to sue as
a pauper is made.”

What happens, however, where the application is refused and the applicant
has to file a suit in the ordinary manner after payment of court fees? The Indian
Limitation Act, 1908 contained no provision on the subject. As regards the

Joint Committee Report on the ion Bill. 20 November, 1962.
*Oxders 33 and 44, Code Civil Procedure, 1908.
Section, 3(2KdXii), Limitation Act, 1963.



32

Verilgt change

recommended.

Section 14--
Exclusion of
time taken by
infructuous
legal procee-
dings. .

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 13—Section 13-—Exclusion of time where leave to sue or appeal
as pauper is applied for
(Chapter 14—Section t4--Time taken in infructuous legal proceedings.)

Code of Civil Procedure, section 149 of the Code empowers the Court to give हु

time to a person for the payment of court fees generally, However, this section
does not provide for the starting point of Limitation. Moreover, there is 2
conflict of decisions on the precise effect of an order under the section.’ So
there was no “relation” back of the suit filed within the extended time?

The provision in section 13 of the present Limitation Act now gives a defi-
Nite answer; the time taken in the (infructuous) application is excluded when
computing the period of limitation prescribed for the suit filed (on payment of
court fees). As regards appeals, the Courts, under the earlier Limitation Act,
generally used to allow the benefit of the relaxing power under section 5 of the
Limitation Act, treating the fact that the infructuous proceedings had been
prosecuted in good faith as a “sufficient cause” within the meaning of section
5 for condoning the delay. Under the present section 13, resort to section 5 is
no longer: required, since section 13 makes an appropriate for appeals also.

13.4. While no changes of substance are needed in the section, it is neces-
sary to point out that the words “as a pauper” occurring in the section are out
of tune with the phraseology of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 as amended
in 1976 on the recommendation’ of the Law Commission. The current phraseo-
logy is “indigent person” in the amended Code.

Accordingly, we recommend that in section 13, for the words “as a pauper”,
the words “as का indigent person” should be substituted.

CHAPTER 14

SECTION 14: TIME TAKEN IN INFRUCTUOUS
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

14.1 It often happens that a litigant pursues civil proceedings bona fide and

+ with due diligence. but the proceedings fail because the Court is unable to enter-

tain them by reason of defect of jurisdiction or other cause of a like nature.
The litigant is therefore, compelled to institute fresh proceedings in a competent
court in the proper manner. It is but fair that the time taken in the earlier civil
proceedings should be given credit, when computing the period of limitation for
the later proceedings. Though the English law recognises no such rule, the Indian
legislature has, for a long time, given recognition to this principle, in regard to
certain situations. Section 14 codifies the principle. Sub-section (1) covers suits
telating to the same matter in issue. Sub-section (2) covers applications for the
same relief. Sub-section . (3), which was inserted for the first time in 1963, is
meant for a case where the first suit was withdrawn under 0.23, R. 2 of the Code
of Civil Procedure, with permission to file a fresh suit. In all the three sub-
sections, it is necessary that the earlier proceeding must have failed by reason
of a “defect in jurisdiction or other cause of a like nature”.

An Explanation to the section—

(a) provides that the day of institution and the day of termination of the
earlicr civil proceeding are both to be counted;

\Mulla, Code of Civil Procedure. Abridged edition (1982), page 323.

§Naraini v. Makhan, (1885), LL.R. 17 All 526.

3Law Commission of India, 54th Report (Code of Civil Procedure, 1908), Chapters
33 and 44, ’
163 ‘For various conditions of the section, see Peerappa v. Basamma, A.J.R. 1981 Kara.

«


SOT REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
. हे

(Chapter 14—Section 14---Time taken in infructuous legal proceedings.)

(b) makes it clear that a plaintiff or an appticant resisting an appeal shalt
be deemed to be ‘prosecuting’ a proceeding; and,

(c) expressly provides that misjoinder of parties or of causes of action shall
be deemed to be “a cause of a like nature with defect of jurisdiction”.

In the Indian Limitation Bill, 1908, as circujated for comments, the Explana-
tion regarding inclusion of misjoinder of parties or causes of action was absent,
with the result that a number of comments received,’ urging the Legisla-
tive Department to resolve’ the conflict? on the question whether misjoinder of
parties or cause of action fell within this clause. These suggestions were accept-
ed, and that is how the Explanation made its appearance on the statute book.

14,2. An important question that has arisen in the context of section 14 Section 4 and
may be considered at the outset, since it concerns section 4 as well. Put in Section 14
simple terms, the question is this—Can a plaintiff avail himself of the combined
benefit of section 4 and section 14. A Supreme Court case? illustrates the pro-
blem. A suit for damages was filed in a Karnal Court on 2nd March, 1959.
Limitation had expired on Ist March, 1959, but that was a holiday. The pre-
sentation being to a wrong court, the Karnal court retumed the plaint on October
28, 1959, and it was presented the next day, ie.,.on 29th October, 1959 to the
- Ambala Court, which had jurisdiction to try the same. The plaintiff claimed (1)
exclusion of the delay of one day in presenting the plaint in the Karnal Court
under section 4 and (ii) exclusion of the succeeding period spent in the Karnal
Court under section 14. The Supreme Court, relying on an earlier decisidn of
the Privy Council’, held that section 4 is inapplicable where the plaint is pre-
sented to @ wrong court, and observed as under:

“Tf the plaintiff had filed the suit in the trial court on March 2, 1959,
then certainly the suit would have been within time under section 4, as that
was the prope: Court in which the suit should have been filed. As the
Karnal Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the int, it was not the
Proper Court. The fact that the plaintiff would be entitled to take advantage
of the provisions of section 14 of the Act would not, in any way, affect the
question whether the suit was filed within the time as provided in section
4 in the Karnal Court. Section 14 of the Act only provided for the exclusion
of the time during which the plaintiff has been prosecuting with due ili-
gence another civil proceeding against the defendant, where the proceeding
is founded upon the sime cause of action and is prosecuted in good faith
ia a court which, from defect of jurisdiction or other cause of a like nature
is unable to entertain it. Even if the plaintiff was entitled to get an exclusion
of the time during which he was prosecuting the suit in the Karnal and
Panipat Courts, the suit would not be within time, as the filing of the suit

, in the Karnal Court was beyond the period of limitation”.

, 143. A strict’ interpretation to the effect that nothing more than the exact Madras case.
period during which the suit was pending in a Court which discovered that it
had no jurisdiction to try the same was given earlier in a Madras case, The
last day of filing the suit was 9-9-1918, which was a holiday. The plaint was
presented to a wrong court on 10-9-1918. It was returned on 23-1-1920 for

‘Chief Justice of Calcutta High Court No. 602, dated 2ist February, 1908: Chief Justice
L. Jenkins of Bombay High Court No. 2469. dated {8th December, 1907: District Judge,
Dacca No. 1982 dated Sih December, 1907.

ALL.R. 29 Bom 225; 6 W.R.C.R. 184: LL.R. 10 Cal 86: LL.R 23 Cal 821; ILR 22 Mad
494; LL.R. 10 Bom. 608; LL.R. 22 All. 248.

8Amar Chand Irani v. Union of India, ALR. 1973 3.0. 2735, (७2 1 SCC. 115.

‘Maqbul Ahmed ५. Pratap Narain Singh, A.LR. 1935 P.C. 85: LA, 80.

"Govindasami Padayachi v. R. Sami Padayachi, ALR. 1983 Mad. 1142), 116, 119,

6--14 M of LI & CA/ND/83


34

Nagpur case. .

Lahore case.

Need for
amendment.

Explanation
‘inserted.

Appeals.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THELIMITATION ACT, 1963

{Chapter 14—Section 14 -Time taken im infructuous legal proceedings.)

Presentation to the proper Court and was re-presented on 26-1-1920. So far as
the period from 10-9-1918 to 26-1-1920 was concerned, section 14 was held to be
applicable and the period from 24-i-1920 to 26-1-1920 was treld to be covered
by section 4 of the Act. But the one day between 9-9-1918 and 10-9-1918 could
not be excluded. either under section 4 or under section 14 and hence the suit
was held to be time-barred. The inapplicability of section in such cases has been
reiterated by that High Court.'-* in subsequent ‘decisions.

144. A Nagpur case* has followed the majority trend in holding that section
4 of the Limitation Act cannot refer to other Courts in which an unsuccessful
attempt at institution of a suit was made during the summer vacation when the
Court was closed. However, in a later case‘, this ruling was distinguished and
it was held that section 4, which by itself excludes no time, can be tacked on to
section 14 of the Limitation Act.

14.5, The inapplicability of section 4 to such cases has been the view in
Lahore* also,

14.6. In a judgment of the Bombay High Court’ we have the following obser-
vations :

“Clearly the plaintiff is entitled to take advantage of those days during
which the first Court was closed for the vacation, and the computation should
be made in the same way as if the second Court had been closed for the
vacation.”

14.7, Having considered that matter at some length we are of the view that
the situation as in the Supreme Court- case’ requires to be remedied, We take the
view that where a plaintiff, ‘filing a sujt in a Court without jurisdiction on a day.
next following the day when the limitation period expired because the earlier
day was dies non, finds himself denied the benefit of section 4, hardship is bound
to result. If the principle of section 4 is that a plaintiff or applicant should not
“be penalised merely because the day on which he should have filed the plaint
or application in court was a court holiday, there is no reason why the principle
should not be extended to the situation when the plaintiff bona fide files the
plaint in a Court which later on discovers that it has no jurisdiction to try the
suit.

14.8, We therefore recommend that a suitable Explanation should be added
to section 4. on the point discussed above."

14.9, Another quéstion relating to jthe scope of section 14 pertains to the
nature of the proceedings covered by the section. Section 14 speaks of computa-
tion of the period of limitation for any “suit”, and in view of the definition of
the word ‘suit’ in section 2(1), the section does not apply to appeals.

Yayarama Aiyar v. 3. Rajecopalan, A.LR. 1965 Mad. 459.
?Ramachandra lyer v. Annamalai, है... 1968 Mad. 103, 105.%
‘Wamanrao v. Umrao, ALR. 1937 Nag. 215. 215. 216: LL.R. 1937 Nag. 217.
‘Chudamansao v. Ramkumar, A.1.R. 1948 Nag. 15.
*Dharaman Ram v. Ganga Ram, A.LR. 1929 Lah. 425.
‘Basayanappa ५. Krishnadas, A.1.R. 1921 Bom. 379, 380.
“ tAmar Chand Irani v. Union of India, AIR, 1973 S.C. 373; (1973) 1 S.C.C. 15 [Para
34.2, supra] हर
"See para 14.23, infra: proposed section 4, Explanation IT.



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN, OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 14—Section 14—Time taken in infructuous legal proceedings.)

14.10. However, several decisions hold that even though section 14 has no
application to appeals which are governed by section 5, the principles of section
14 will apply even to proceedings in appeal.’

In a Saurashtra case,’ the High Court relied on three Privy Council rulings
‘on the subject*.“.° and summarised the result of these cases thus.

“These three Privy Council rulings seem to lay down that although
section 14. of the Limitation Act is not directly applicable to appeals, the
principles underlying it on grounds of equity shoyld be applied to appeals in
considering an application under section 5 of the Limitation Act. The exis-
tence of circumstances contemplated by section 14 has consequently been
regarded as a ground for excusing the delay caused by the wrong proceed-
ings, and a sufficient cause for the delay within the meaning of section 5
of the Limitation Act, it being assumed that the party would be deemed
to have acted with reasonable diligence where such circumstances existed.”

14.11. A few other cases on the subject also take the same view.’

14,12. No doubt, even though section 14 does not apply to appeals, invoking Need to
the provisions of section 5 may in. practice solve the hardship that would other-¢xtend

हि Section 14--

wise result? We, are, however, of the view that a right should be given to anto appeals,
appellant to exclude the time taken in proceedings bona fide in a court without
jurisdiction, rather than leaving the matter to the discretion of the court under
section 5 to be exercised for “sufficient cause”. While pea the expression
sufficient cause,” the courts may take conflicting which appear to be
worth avoiding on such matters.

‘We, therefore, recommend the extension of section 14 to appeals by express
phraseology”. .

" 14.13, When the plaint is returned and the plaintiff is required to undertake Time taken
some journey to present the plaint to the proper court, the question may arise '" Journey.
whether the time taken in such a journey should also count for the purposes of
section 14, It has been held in an Allahabad case," that reasonable fime spent for
going to place of proper court can be excluded but if the plaintiff falls ill after the
plaint was returned, the period of his illness can, in no case, be excused to condone
the delay. We are of the view that in a country as diverse as ours, with means of
communications not always satisfactory, a plaintiff or applicant is bound to take
some time in performing the physical act of carrying the plaint from the court
which pronounces want of jurisdiction, to the proper court. The period spent in
performing this physical process would depend upon the distance between these
-, two courts, but it cannot be gainsaid that some time is bound to be spent in this
« journey.. Consequently, we recommend that thie Explanation to section 14 should

be amended suitably for the purpose.”

’

'Subédar Baman y. Mt. Masti, A.1.R. 1960 HLP. 14.

SBai Hirubai v. Girdhar Keshav, A.LR. 1962 Sav. 20.

SBrij Indar Singh v. Kanshi Ram, (191%) 1.L.R. 45 Cal. 94.

‘Sunderbai ४. Collector of Belgaum, A.LR. 1918 P.C. 135.

SRajendra Bahadur Singh v. Rajeshwar Bali, A..R. 1937 P.C. 276.
‘Munshi Ram v. Raghubir Chand, A.UR. 1953 HLP. 15.

"Balbir Chand |. Gopal Chand, A.1.R. 1954 PEPSU 126.

SAnamti Ram v. Mt. Chaduri, ALR. 1956 Assam 63;

*Ram Lal v. Rewa Coalfields, A.LR. 1962 S.C. 361, 365.

WSee para 14.23 Infra Section 14 (2A) as pro}

uRikbad Dass v. Smt. Chandro, ALR. 1971 01, 234

‘See para.14.23, infra Explanation to Section 14, clause (aXii) as proposed.



i

Conflict
of views,

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF ‘INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 14—Section 14—Tite taken in infructuous legal proceedings.)

14.14. At this stage, it is proper to'sefer to a point concerning the appli- ’
cability of section 14 to arbitration proceedings. The question is whether the
benefit of section 14 can be claimed where the earlier infructuous proceedings took
Place before arbitrators, and not before courts. In this context, one has to make
a distinction between (i) arbitrations governed by the Arbitration Act, 1940 and
(i) Arbitrations not governed by that Act. As regards the first category of arbi-
trations, section 37(5) of the Arbitration Act. 1940 has made a suitable provi~
sion for the exclusion of time taken in an arbitration. As regards the second
category of arbitrations, though the Arbitration Act, 1940 will naturally be in-
applicable, it seems from a fairly recent judgment of the Allahabad High Court!
that the benefit of section 14 can be availed of in such arbitrations. It also appears
that before the incorporation of the relevant provisions in the “Arbitration law,’
there were other relings which regarded section 14 as applicable to the arbitration
We do not, of course, consider it necessary to suggest any express amendment
‘on the above point.

14.15. In connection with section 14 it is of interest to refer to oné suggestion

‘ which was made by a District Judge’ in 1907. He suggested the addition of the

following further clause to section 14:— *

“(3) The time requisite for obtaining a copy of the decree or order in
the cases mentioned in clauses (1) and (2) and’ the time which the plaintiff
or the applicant prosecuting the suits or application with due diligence
requires in going to the proper ०00, shall be excluded.”

The suggestion falls in-two parts: (i) exclusion of the time spent in obtaining
copies of the final order of the court, where the plaintiff or the applicant was
wrongly prosecuting his claim; (ii) exclusion of the time required by the plaintiff
or the applicant in physically performing the journey from the wrong court to the
Proper court.

The second fart deals with a point that has been already attended to.. The
first point is dealt with below.

14.16. ‘An examination of the case law discloses that there i some confligt
on the subject. For example, an Andhra Pradesh case’ takes the view that the
time occupied in obtaining certified copies of the judgment, and in taking other
indispensable and necessary steps preparatory to an initiation of the proceedings .
in’ a court which ultimately proved to be fruitless, should also be regarded as
the time during which the plaintiff has been prosecuting the civil proceedings.

14.17. The Patna High Court has, however, taken a coptrary view on the
subject.’ पु .

“There is nothing in section 141) which can justify the view that the time
taken by a party in taking steps for invoking the aid of the Court should also be
excluded while computing the period of limitation. Explanation I to section 14

'Chaman Lal v. State of U.P.,.A.1R. 1980 All. 308.

See also State of U.P. ४. Satya Prakash, 1978 All. Lt

*Ramdutt Ramkissandass v.E. D, Sassoon, (1929) 56 Ind. App. 128 (P.-C),

‘Abdul Rahim v. Ojamshee, (1930) LL.R. 56 Cal. 13

“District Judge, Rajshahi (Eastern Bengal & Assam); National Archives Papers relat-
ing to the Limitation Act of 1907. Paper No. 2704G., dated 7-12-1907.

SPara 14.13, supra.

"irumareddi V. State of A.P.. ALR. 1965 A-P. 388 (F.B.)
"Narain Das v, Banarsi Lai, ALR. 1970



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 14—Section 14--Time taken in infructuous legal proceedings.)

clearly provides that ia excluding the time dating which a former suit or appli-
cation was pending, the day on which a former suit or application was pending,
the day on.which the suit or application was instituted or made, and the day on
whigh the proceedings therein ended, shall both be counted. Section 14 has to be
read as a whole along with the Espianation to-that section. It is true that in
section 14(1), the word ‘prosecution’ has been mentioned, but in Explanation I
the wosd ‘pending’ has becn meitioned. The position thus is that reading sec.
tion 14(t) along with Explanation I, it is the pendency of a Civil proceeding,
either in a Court of first instance or in a Court of appeal, which has to ascertain
the period during which the proceeding actually remained pending”.
In an earlier Patna case,' Fas! Ali J. had also propounded the view that
the only period that ihe plaintif€ is entitled to exclude while computing the
tiod of, limitation is the period during which the plaint was pending in the
Court returning the plaint.

14.18. A’ judgment of the Madhya Pradesh High Court’ allowed, huwever, the
time requisite for obtaining certified copies for filing appeal as the period which
“counted. in favour of the plaintiff.

14.19, Still earlier, a single judge of the Lahore Court’ said het that the
time spent in challenging the soundness of the order of the court of first instance
in returning the plaint was also excluded under section 14 of the Limitation Act.

14.20. Upon a review of the conflict of decisions, we are of the view that to No change
allow maximum latitude to the plaintiff or applicant by allowing him exclusion १००४
(from the prescribed period) of time spent in obtaining copies of orders, decrees

‘or arguments or challenging in highcr courts the order of want of jurisdiction
may encourage dilatory tactics and hence no change of law is needed on this
point.

14.21. Sometimes the Court returning the plaint passes an order permitting Direction by
the plaintiff to file the. returned plaint in the proper court in an extended: period! the caller
after expressing an opinion that a fraud had been perpetrated entitling the plaintiff
to the benefit of section 14 of the Act. This, however, is beyond the powers of the
court and it has been held in an-Allahabad case* that whether the plaintiff was
entitled to the benefit of section 14 of the Limitation Act is not to be decided by
the court directing the return of the pluint- The point, of course, does not neces-
sitate any change in the law. :

14.22. It sometimes happens that the plaintiff filed successive petitions to 9 Successive
wrong court and seeks to plead the benefit of section 14(2). The period forming petitioos.
the intervals between successive petitions (when the party merely stood by, allow-_
ing limitation to run) cannot, however, be considered as a period of “prosecuting”
proceedings, within the ambit of the rule.*

No change, of course, is needed on this point.

\Pirm Jiwanram Ramchandra ¥. Jagernath Sahu, ALR. 1937 Pat. 496.
(st. Duliyabai v. Vilayatalli A.LR. 1959 MP.

urdit Singh v. Mota Singh, A.J.R.. 1939 Lah. 47.

‘Parameswara Kurun v. Vasudeva Kurun, 1.L.R, (1964) Kerala 625.
’Ranject Singh v. Bind Bahadur, AJR. 1975 All. 547.

4S. V. Krishnicr ¥. AR. Ramchandra, A.LR. 1961 Mad. 197,



38

Recomendations

for amending
sections (14
and 4}

Section 15—
Exclusion of
time in

other cases.

’

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 14—Section 14—Time taken in infructuous legal proceedings.)
(Chapter 15—Section 15 : Exclusion Of Tima in certain other-cases.)

14.23. Jn the light of the above discussion, we recommend that amendments
on the following Yines should be effected in sections 14 and 4.

@ Section 14 should be amended as under: —
Sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 14 as they are.
New Subsection (2A) should be ‘inserted in section 14 as under: —

“(2A) In computing the period of limitation fur any appeal, the time
during which the appellant has been prosecuting with due dili-
gence another civil proceeding, whether in a court of first instance
or appeal or revision against the same party-for the same relief
shall be excluded, where such proceeding is prosecuted in good
faith in a court which, from defect of jurisdiction or other cause
of a like nature, is unable to entertain it,"

. (ii) The Explanation should be revised as under in section 14:—
“Explanation.—For the purposes of this section—
(a) in excluding the time during which a former civil proceeding was
pending— हि
() the day on which that proceeding was instituted and the day
on which it ended shall both be counted;

(ii) the time reasonably necessary for a plaintiff or an applicant or
an appellant to perform the journey from the place where the
former civil proceeding was pending to the place where the
proper court is situated shall be deemed to be time during which
the former civil proceeding was pending.”*

[Clauses (b) and (० of “the Explanation as they are at present].

ii) Section 4 should be amended by adding thereto another Expla-
nation (after re-numbefing the present Explanation as Explana-
tion I). The added Explanation will read as under: —

“Explanation —For the purposes of this section, the word
‘court’ includes a court which, from defect of jurisdiction or other
cause of व like nature, is unable to entertain the suit, appeal or
application, as the case may be, provided the suit, appeal or appli-
cation was prosecuted in good faith. in that court

CHAPTER 15
SECTION 15: EXCLUSION OF TIME IN CERTAIN OTHER CASES है

45.1. There are certain other cases, not covered by the provisions so far
discussed, where though the cause of action may be ripe, circumstances tender
the institution of legal proceedings legally impossible or difficult for a variety
of reasons. Taking due note of such impossibility. the Act in Section 15, makes
a suitable provision for the exclusion, of time in five sub-sections, each addres-
sed to a different situation but each ‘more or less deriving its justification from
impossibility or difficulty: of the nature mentoned above.

1806 para 14,12, supra.
See para 14.13, supra.
See para 14.2 to 14.8, supra.


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN, OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 15—Section 15-——Exclusion of Time in certain other cases.)

Sub-section (1) of section 15 concerns itself With the case where the
institution of a suit or execution of a decree has been stayed by an injunction
or order. The period during which the injunction or order continued is to be
excluded in computing the period of limitation for the svit or for an applica-
tion for execution of the decree in respect of which the injunction or order was
issued.

Tn sub-section (2), we have the case where, before the institution of a
suit, notice is required to be given or the previous consent or sanction of the
Government or other authority is required, by law. The period Sf such ‘notice
(if given) or the time required fot obtaining such consent or sanction is exclud-
ed in computing the period of limitation for such suit.

Under sub-section (3), where a receiver or liquidator is appointed in in-
solvency or liquidation proceedings, the period beginping with institution of such
proceeding and ending with expiry of three months from appointment of the re-
ceiver or liquidator is excluded, in computing the period of limitation for any suit’
ot application for execution of a decree by the receiver or liquidator.

Sub-section (4) provides that where a purchaser at an execution sale sues
for possession of the property sold, the time during a proceeding to set aside
the sale has been prosecuted shall be excluded in computing the period of limita-
‘tion for such suit.

Finally—and this is the most important provision—sub-section (5) of section
1s deals with the defendant’s absence from India, in the following ternis:—

“(5) In computing the period of limitation for any suit the time during
which the defendant has been absent from India and from the territories
outside India under the administration “of the Central Government, shall be
excluded.”

Such points of detail as require to be considered in connection with the
section are dealt with below, sub-section wise.

15.2 Section 15(1), inter alia, grants exclusion of time when the execution Section 15()—
of a decree has been stayed by an injunction or order; the words ‘injunction’ Atiachment of
and ‘order’, as occurring in the section, have been interpreted differently by
different courts in the context of attachment of a decree. In a Punjab case,’ an
objection to the attachment of a house was preferred under section 47 of the
Code of Civil Procedure 1908. An order was passed to the effect. that’ the
person entitled objecting was to stay in that house during her lifetime, and
that. the attached property could not be sold in execution, but that the decretal
amount remained a charge on that property. It was held that this order did not
operate to “stay” the execution proceedings during the lifetime of the objector,
and in no way affected the right of the decree-holder to obtain satisfaction by
attaching other property of the judgment-debtor. Consequently, section 15 was
held to have no applicability to the case.

However, in Calcutta. ‘an attachment of a decree under Order 21, Rule 53
of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 was held to operate as a stay of the execu-
tion®, though a contrary view has been taken by the Andhra Pradesh High Court

Yaswant Roi y. Dowarmal, ALR. 1968 Punjab 509. * .

*Kiran Shashi Debi v. Chandrika Prasad, ALR: 1916 Cal. 620, See cases cited
in pata 15.3, infra,

पट, Ramayya v. K. Nageswararao, A.LR. 1969 A.B. 250, 256.


Confict
settled by

Court—

* need for

codifying the
present
position.

Principle |

pted
1851 case.

Hardship-
¢o-contractors,

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

” (Chapter 15—Section 15—Exclusion of Time in certain other cases.)

153, By an unrepotted decision of the Supreme Court,’ it is now settled
that an attachment of a decree under Order 21, Rule 53 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, does not amount to “stay” within the meaning of section 15(1).

Having regard to the fact that the judgment of the Supreme Court referred
to above* does not appear in the series of law reports usually consulted, we
consider it desirable that section 15 should contain a specific provision in this’
regard, so as to avoid controversy in future.

Such a clarification would be faithfull to be legal position as it was under-

stood by the majority of the High Courts’* even before the Supreme Court
Judgment.’ .

15.4. Under section 1515), the time during which the defendant has been
absent from India and from the territories outside India under the administration
of the Central Government, is excluded in computing the period of limitation

for any suit against such a defendant. As long back as in 1851, an action was
‘brought in the Supreme Court of Judicature® at Bombay for conversion of cet-
tain chests of opium. Upon a defence beihg raised that the suit was barred
by limitation, as having been brought beyond six years of the accrual of cause
of action, the plaintiff alleged that the defendant was residing outside the juris-
diction of the Supreme Court of Judicature at Bombay and beyond the territory
subject to the Government of the East India Company and, therefore, the suit
was not barred. The Supreme Court upheld the plaintiff's contention on the
basis 01 the‘British statutes then in force in the country’.

15.5. The word “defendant” in section 15(5) has given rise to certain pro-
blems, in as much as the section does not indicate in so many words as to
what a plaintiff should do when he is to file a suit against several defendants some
of whom are absent from India. In a suit on the original side of the Calcutta
High Court”, the plainiiff sought to take advantage of this sub-section against
an absent defendant after exhausting his remedy of filing a suit against his coé
Promisor in a promisory note executed by the absent defendant as well as others.
This was tured down. but Garth CJ. observed ‘4s follows about the inequity
of the provisions :

“Tt is true that the rule upon which T am acting may possibly lead to some
hardship in cases when one ‘or more of several co-contractors is out of the
jurisdiction, and the plaintiff. if he waits for his return, would be barred by
the Statute of Limitation. But this is an injustice which the legistlaiure, if they
so -pleased, could easily remedy, and which has been, in fact, remedied in ~
England by the Statute of 19 and 20 Vict.. ०. 97.”

. . . . os.
His brother on the Bench Markby J.. pointed out how the rule had beeh
modified in England:

“The rule laid down by Parke. B., in King-v. Hoare” is very likely correct
in theory. Tt is at any vate identical, or nearly identical. with the strict rule of the

‘Shantaranjandas v. D. Misramal. (\976) Unreported Judgment S.C. 232,
*Shantaranjandas v. D. Misramal, (1976) Unreported Judgement S.C. 232.
SChanbasappa v. Holibasappa. AIR. 1924 Bom. 383, 384. :

‘Saroj Ranjan v. Joy Durga, A.LR. 1934 Cat 140. 141.

"Firm Deochand Panualal v. Shubhakaran, AAR. 1916 Cal. 620.

‘Kiran Shashi Debi ४, Chandrika Prasad, ALR. 1916 Cal. 620.

Por the draft, see para 15.19 infra section 15, Explanation I, as proposed.
®Ruckmabovee v. Lulloohhoy Motichand, (1851-1885) 5 M.LA. 234 (P.C).-
"Statute 21 James 1 Ch. 15 and 4 Anne. Ch. 16. _ वि

“Hemendro Coomar, Mullick v. Rajendra ia Moonshee, (1878) LL.R. 3 Cal. 353, ३६३...
‘King v. Hoare (1844) 14 LJ. Est.:29: RR. 694, 702, 703, 704.


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN, OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 15—Section 15-—Exclusion of Time in certain other cases.)

ancient Roman law. But it must be borne in mind that this rule was abolished
in the Roman law 1300 years ago, and has been since repudiated in America
and everywhere in Europe, except in England. Even in England, until the deci-
sion of King v. Hoare’ it was very doubtful whether the rule prevailed or not in
joint contract; whilst since that time one learned Judge (Sir James Knight Bruce)
has spoken of the rule in strong terms of disapprobation (27 L.J. Bank, 29). Lord

- Mansfield also expressed the opinion in Rice v. Shute that all contracts with
Partners were joint and several. and the rule in King y. Hoare has been since
modified by Statute in England. The 19 and 20 Vict., ०. 97, Section 11 direcis
that the period of limitation as to joint debtors shall run notwithstanding that
some are beyond seas but expressly provides that the creditor Shall not be
barred as Against those out of the jurisdiction by judgment recovered against
those who remain within it. If the rule laid down in King v. Hoare be combined
with the law of limitation here, which is very strict, it is by no means clear
that a creditor might not very often be left to the choice between a remedy
against an insolvent debtor and having his debt barred.”

15.6. When the draft Bilt of the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 was circulated Comment.
for comments, the injustice arising out of such an interpretation formed the sub-
ject matter of the comments of one Mr. M. Gupta: —

“Section 13 [present section 15(5)] of the Act might be with advantage amend-
ed so as to provide for the case where some of the defendants have been absent
from British India. If on the grammatical construction of the section it is held
to be applicable to a case where only some-of the defendants have been absent
from British India, then it has been observed that if some of the joint debtors
who are within British territories are insolvent and the plaintiff waits for the

. return for the absent defendants. he will often find himself altogether barred by
limitation’?

15.7. Dr. Whitley Stockes in his Anglo-Indian Codes* has also made similat Comment-
observations. : Dr. Whitley
Stokes.
18.8: In England, section 11 of the 19 and 20 Vict., ९. 97, had removed
the anomaly pointed out by the Calcutta High Court. The section reads:

“11. Where such cause of action or suit with respect to which the
period of limitation is fixed by the enactments aforesaid or any of them
lies against two or more joint debtors, the ~person or persons who shall be
entitled to the same shall not be entitled to any time within which to com-
mence and sue any such action or suit against any one or more of such joint
debtors who” shail not be beyond the seas, at the time such cause of action
or suit accrued, by reason only that some other one or more of such joint
debtors was or were at the time such cause of action accrued beyond the
seas, and such person or persons so entitled as aforesaid shall not be barred
from commencing and suing any action or suit against the joint debtor or
joint debtors who was or were beyond seas at the time the cause of action

1King v. Hoare (1844) 14 LJ, Et, 29 : 67 R.R. 694, 702, 703, 704,

. Gupta, Barrister-at-Law, Hoshangabad. Annexure II to the letter No. 2063, dated
19th December, 1907 from the’ Chief Secretary to. the Chief Commissioner, Central Pro-
finces to the Secretary 10 the Govt. of India, Legislative Department, National Atchievos

c.

Stokes Anglo-Indian Codes (1888) Vol..2 page 950.
7—14 Mof LI&CA/ND/83


42.

Law Com-
Ramon

eport on.
Contract, Act.

89H REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 15—Section 15—Exclusion of Time in certain other cases.)

or suit accrued after bis or their return from beyond seas, by reason only
that judgment was already recovered against any one or more of such joint
debtors who was not or were not beyond seas at the time aforesaid.”

15.9. The difficulties raised by the Calcutta judgement, as well as by cases of
other: High Courts, were considered by the Law Commission in its Report on
the Contract Act, 1872' and we reproduce. below their observations from that
Report :—

\

“70, The Contract Act treats ali contracts as joint and several. The
necessary consequence is that it is not open to one promisor who is sued to
compe! the promisee to sue others. There has, however, been considerable
divergence of opinion on the effect of a judgment obtained by the promisee
against one out of a number of promisors. In the words of the Federal
Court?, unlike English Law. the Indian Law makes a general liability joint
and several, in the absence of an agreement to the contrary. It’ is, therefore,
open to the promisee to sue any one or some of the joint promisors and it is
no defence to such a suit that all the promisors should have been made
parties, We think that Strachey, C.J., correctly stated the law in Muhammad
Askari v. Radhe Ram? when he said: The doctrine now rests not so much
on King ५. Hoare! as on the judgment of the Law Lords in Kendall v. Hamil-
ton’. As explained in these judgments, the doctrine that there is in the
case of a joint contract ३ single cause of action which can only be once
sued on, is essentially based on the right of joint debtors in England to have
all their contractors joined as defendants in any suit to enforce the joint
obligation.

The right was in England enforceable before the Judicature Act by means
of a plea in abatement, and since the Judicature Acts by an application for
joinder which is determined on the same principles as those on which the plea
in abatement would formerly have been dealt with. In India that right of joint
debtors has been expressly excluded by section 43 of the Contract Act, and,
therefore, tha basis of the doctrine being. absent, the doctrine itself is inapplicable.
Cessante ratione legis, cessat ipsa lex. The result is that a decree obtained
against some of several joint promisors remaining unsatisfied ought not to be held
as a bar to a subsequent action against the other promisors. We recommend that
this result may be incorporated in the Act by. inserting a new section’.”

After making these observations, the Law Commission recommended’ the
insertion of.a new section 44 A as follows in the Contract Act:—

“44 A. Effect of decree obtained against one promisor.—A. decree

against any one or more of a number of joint promisors does not, if it has

* remained unsatisfied. and in the absence of express agreement to the contrary,
bar a subsequent suit against any one or more of, the other promisors.”

We reiterate the recommendation for amending the Contract Act. quoted
above. Such an amendment would resolve the difficulty that at present arises
in the law of limitation, when only some of the defendants (joint promisors) have
been absent from India.

1Law Commission of India, 13th Report (Contract Act, 1872). pages 32-33.

2Jainarain Vv: Surajmull, 1949) 12 Fed, LJ. 216, 225.

322 All. 307.

‘King V. Hoare (1844) 153 E.R. 206, 67 RR. 694.

५1879 4 A.C, 504.

22 All, 307 811, 312).

Vide section 4A, Appendix 1 (of the 13th Report).

SLaw Commission of India, 130 Report (Contract Act, 1872), App. I. section 448.


89TH REPORT OF LAW CUMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 15—Section 15—Eaclusion of Time in certain other cases.)

35.10, Another point cclating to section 15 is concerned Kitn cases where Agent in
the defendant had an agent in India, A Full Bench of the Calcutta High Court! India of
decided that section 13 of the Limitation Act, 1877 which excluded the time हु
during which a defendant had been absent from British India in computing the
period of limitation for any suit applied even where, to the knowledge of the
plaintiff, the defendants, (partners in a firm), were during the period of their
absence, carrying on business in British India through an authorised agent who was
authorised 10 bring suits in India. The Fall Bench overruled an earlier case of

the same High Court,’ and oaserved:—-

“In support of this contention the case of Harringion v. Gonesh Roy
is strongly relied on by the defendants. I doubt, however, whether, having
regard to the clear and precise language of section 13, that decision is well
founded, for it seems to me that, whatever may be the common sense of the
decision, it can only be arrived at by interpolating into the section words
that are not there, words to the effect that the time of absence is not to be
excluded if the defendants are, during the period of personal absence, repre-
sented by a duly constituted agent in British India. Although we have been
teferred to the case of Hawkins v. Gathercole; as to the manner in which
statutes are to be construed, 1 do not see my way to put the construction
upon the section for which the defendants contend; if we did so; 1 think we
should be rather legislating than adjudicating upon the section as it stands.
It may well be that it would be expedient, not to allow the time of absence
from British India to be excluded, if the defendants be carrying on business
in British India, and be represented by a duly authorised agent ducing such
absence; but if this change is to be.made, it must be made by the Legisiature.
Reading the language of section 13—a section be it remembered in a Limita-
tion Act, the provisions of which must be construed strictly, and which, when
set up as a gefence, must not be extended to cases which are not strictly
within the enactment, whilst exceptions of an exemption from, its operation
are to be construed leberally (see per Lord Cranworth in Boddan v. Morely,)'—
reading, I say, that section according to the ordinary significance of the words
used, I think we are not warranted in holding that the section does not apply
to cases where the defendants are during the period of absence, carrying on
business in छात्र. India through an auithorised agent. In other words, I
do not see my way to getting over the clear and precise language of the
section, feeling as I do that the words of the section ate too strong against
the view contended: for by the defendants, and that we could only support
that view by the interpolation of words to the effect I have stated above.”

15.11. The Full Bench ruling based itself decision on the strict interpretation

‘of the provisions of section 13 of the Limitation Act of 1877 (corresponding to

section 15 of the present Act). In Harrington’s case,’ the division bench had

held that section 13 of the 1877 Act did not apply to a case when to the know-

fedge of the plaintiff, the defendant, though not residing in British India, is re-

presented by a duly constituted agent and mookhtar, Powerful arguments were

advanced to reverse the Ginding of the District Judge, who had held otherwise
and the court said:

“The Judge relies on section 13 of the Limitation Act, which provides

that ‘in computing the period of limitation prescribed for any suit, the time

1poorno Chunder Ghose v. Sassoon. (1897) LUR. 25 Cal. 476 (F.B.).
2Harrington v. Gonesh Roy. (1884) LL.R. 10 Cal. 440.

3Hawkins v. Gathercole, (1856) 6 De G.M.&G. 1.

*Boddan र. Morely, (1857) 1 De G & Jones 1(23).

‘Harrington V. Gonesh Roy, (1884) LL.R. 10 Cab 440, 442.


Aspect of
conflict of
jaws.

abroad.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

{Chapter 1S—Section 15—Exclusion of Ti ime in certain other cases.)

during whills the defendant has been absent from British India shall be ex-
cluded’. He goes on to say ‘admittedly Mr. Harrington, the defendant in
this case, *has been so absent from the date of dispossession till now’. It
seems, however, that Mr. Harrington is represented in this country by Mr.
Crowdy, who, in the first instance, was made a defendant in the case as
Manager and Mookhiar of the Bhugwanpur Factory.

Jf the Judge's interpretation of section 13 were correct, there would be
no limitation at all as against a propriétor residing in England, although
suits might be conducted for and against him through his agent in this coun-
try. It is impossible to believe that this was the intention of the law.”

15.12. A reading of the judgements referred to above shows that the judges
in both the benches were in unison that it would be expedient not to allow the
time of absence from British India to be excluded under section 15(5), if. the
defendant is represented by a duly authorised agent during such absence. The
difference between the approaches of the two benches was that while the Full
Bench in the later ruling felt hamstrung by the language of the section and left
it to the legislature to amend it, the Division Bench in the earlier Tuling sought
to put an interpretation on that section which in their opinion accords with the
true intention of the legislature”.

15.13. Whatever way one looks at il, seems to us most incogruent—-consi-
dering the fact that more and more of non-residents are cafrying on business
in India through their authorised agents—that the non-residence in India of such
a defendant himself should ensure to-the advantage of a plaintiff, who knows
that the defendant could be served through @ duly authorised agent in India.’

15.14, 11 could as well happen that a judgment against the defendant, ope-
rating through an agent, would be in conformity with the tenffts of private inter-
national Jaw'‘also. By appointing an agent to use or defend, the absentee defen-
dant has, in a sense, submitted to the jurisdiction of the court where the agent
is working for gain, However, we need not express any firm view on this point.
This. aspect in any case is not directly material to the present issue,

In view of the above discussion it is desirable that a suitable Explanatioft
should be added 10 section 15(5) on the above point?

15.15. We now deal with another situation to which section 15(5) applies.
Considering the number of fndians going abroad for trade, commerce or seek-.
ing livelihood, it coukl as well happen that the plaintiff and the defendant were
both residing outside India during the relevant period and the plaintiff could
have obtained redress without much difficulty, in the court of that country where
they were so residing. In such a case, it would be unjust to allow such a plain-
tiff the benefit of exclusion of the period during which the defendant was resid-
ing outside India, when the plaintiff himself was also during the same period,
outside India and could have sued the defendant in the foreign country.

15.16. A situation of the nature contemplated above is not merely hypothe-
tical; such a case’ did occur more than’a century ago in the then North West
Provinces and was decided under the Limitation Act of 1859,

ACK, Sayaji Rao v. Madhav Ruo ALR. 1929 Bom. 14, 20.
para 1, 19, infra: section 15, Explanation Ii, as proposed.
‘Mahomed Musech-ood-deen Khan 'v. Clara Jane Museeh-ood-deen, 2 NWPHCR.

173 {case under Limitation Act of 1859)}—quoted in Muthukonni v. Andappa, A.LR. 1955
Mad. 96 (F.B.).


80TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE Limitation Act, 1963
(Chapter 15—Section 15—Exclusion of Time in certain other cases.)

This was a suit brought in by a wife against her husband for the recovery
of the amount due to her on account of dower payable under a written agreement
and for maintenance and other reliefs. The parties were married in England in
1863, according to Mohammadan law. The defendant—husband left England
and eventually returned to India in December, 1865, only to be followed by
his wife in June, 1869, who, immediately, upon arrival, instituted the suit in
India.

It was argued by the wife-plaintiff, that she was entitled to rely on the pro-
visions of section 13 of the Limitation Act, 1859 [corresponding to present sec-
tion 15(5)] and to exclude, from the computation of the periods of limitation
applicable to her several claims, the time during which the defendant husband
was absent from British India. This contention was countered by the husband-
defendant, according to whom, when both the parties were living in England, to
put a construction on section 13 and to allow one of the parties to take advan-
tage of the absence of the other party from British India would lead to extremely
inconvenient results. Repelling the defendant's argument, the High Court said:

“It ig true that such a construction may lead to very inconvenient results.
A person may resides out of India for years, and according to the law of
Jimitation of the country in which he resides, the remedy against him in
respect of a cause of action of the nature of a personal action may be lost,
yet, on his coming to India, it will revive. We can hardly conceive that
this was the intention of the legislature, If, would seem that in the Act no
provision has been made for cases in which the cause of action arises in @
foreign country, or in which, at the time the cause of action accrues, both
partiés are residing in one and the same foreign country possessing tribu-
nals to which they might have recourses; at the same time, it is to be
_ remembered that the law of limitation is a law which bars the remedy and
does not destroy the right, and therefore, if by any of its sections we find
indulgence, shown to suitors, we are bound to give {ull effect to the lan-
guage in which that indulgences conceded.” .

15.17. The judgment referred to above raises two important issues: first,
whether the Indian courts should entertain a suit by a person based on a cause.
of action arising in a foreign country when his remedy to obtain redress in the
foreign court would have been barred on account of the law governing actions
in that foreign country? Secondly, whether the exclusion of time allowable under
section 15(5) should also be granted even if the plaintiff was residing in the same
foreign country where the defendant was residing during the relevant period?

As regards the first point, it falls within the ambit’ of section 11. However,
the second limb of the suggestion in the jadgment, namely, that the benefit of
section 15(5) should not be available to the plaintiff who, during the relevant
time, was also residing in the same foreign country where the defendant also
resided, deserves acceptance in our opinion. A plaintiff who could, but did
not choose to, resort to the court of competent jurisdiction in the foreign coun-
try where he was then residing should not in an Indian court be allowed the
advantage of an extension of limitation period. Accordingly, we recommend
that an exception should be engrafted on section 15(5) on the subject.*

15.18. The draftsman of section 15(5) may not have focussed his attention on
the possibility of a defendant flitting across the globe more than once during the
period of limitation. But scientific advances in jet propulsion have made such

1Emphasis added.
3586 discussion as to section 11, supra. (Chapter 11).
3See para 15, 19 infra Section 1565), Exception as proposed.

Questions
raised by
the judgment,

Frequent
trips to
foreign
countries.

45


Recommendation
felating to
section 15.

Section 16-
fect of

the right to
sue,

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN, OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

{Chapter 15—Section 15—-Exctusion of Time in certain other cases.)
(Chapter 16—Section 16—Effect of Death on Limitation.)

frequent trips possible. The courts have dealt with such a situation and given
to the plaintiff the right to take into account all such peciods during which the
defendant was absent. This view seems to be in conformity with the intend-
ment of sub-section (5), and we do not recommend any amendment of the 6ub-
section for this purpose. .

15.19. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend the following,
amendments to the Jaw on the topics dealt with in section 15:-- °

(i) An exception should be inserted below section 155) of the Limitation
Act as under:— ह

“Exception.—Nothing in sub-section (5) shall apply to a period subse-
quent to the date on which the cause of action arises, being a period during
which—

(3) both the partics were residing in one and the same foreign country
and the plaintiff was aware of the residence of the defendant; and

(b) there were, in the foreign country, properly constituted courts or
iribunals to which the parties had, or could have had, recourse for
enforcing the cause of action.?*

(ii) The following Explanations should be added to section 15 of the Limi-
tation Act:

“Explanation 1.—The attachment of a@ decree under rule 53 of Order
XXI in the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 does not
amount 10 @ stay of execution of the decree within the meaning of stubesec-
tion (1),

“Explanation H-—For the purposes of this section, a defendant shalt
not be deemed to have been absent from India during any period during
which he had, to the knowledge of the plaintiff, a duly constituted agent in
India, authorised to institute and defend legal proceedings on his behalf in
India!"

(iti) Amendment of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 by the insertion of new
section 44A in that Act, may also be carried out, for resolving the controversy
telating to decree against one of several joint promisors,*

CHAPTER 16
SECTION 16 : EFFECT OF DEATH ON LIMITATION .

16.1. The general principle is that when a right to sue accrues to a person
during his lifetime, his death thereafter does not suspend the running of limita-
tion. The reason is, that time commences to run at once (in general) and,’ as the
Act puts it, once time has commenced to run, no subsequent inability to sue stops
or suspends its running.

‘Mohammed Sulaiman Rowther v. N. K. A. Mohammed Ibrahim (1967) 2 M.L.J. 483.

*Ismailji Haji Halimbhai v. (लावा Abdul Kadar, A.LR. 1901 Bom. 460, 461: LLR 45...
Bom. 1228.

‘See para 15.17, supra.

‘See para 15.3, supra.

3586 para 15.14, supra.

"See para 15.9, supra.

‘Section 9, Limitation Act, 1963,



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 16—Section 16—Effect of Death on Limitation.)

However, where a right to sue accrues for the first time after the death of a
person- i.e. if a person dies before the right to sue accrues, there must be some
person capable of representing his estate when the right to sue accrues. Where
the right to sue accrues on the death of a person (i.e. where the death and accrual
of the cause of action are simultaneous), the same is the position. Dealing with
these two situations, section 16([1) of the Act provides that the period of limita-
tion shall be computed from the time when there is a legal representative of the
deceased capable of instituting the suit or application in question..

While section 16(1) deals with the death of the would-be plaintiff, section 16(2)
applies the same principle to the case of the death of a person liable to be sued—
the would-be defendant. Where his death takes place before, or simultaneously
with, the accrual of the cause of action, the period of limitation is to be comput-
ed from the time when there is a legal representative of the deceased against whom
the plaintiff may institute a suit or make an application for enforcing the cause
of action in question.

However, section 16(3) provides that nothing in sub-section (1) or sub-sec-
tion (2) applies— .

(a) to suit to enforce rights of pre-emption, or

(b) to suits for the possession of an immovable property or of a hereditary
office. वि

The exception takes out these suits, presumably because the application of
the section to such cases would tend to create insecurity of title.' Moreover,
the period of limitation for suits for immovable property is generally twelve
years, and no hardship would be caused by the non-existence of a legal repre-
sentative for some period. In the case of suits Tor pre-emption, though the
period is not so long, there is the general rule that the demand for pre-emption
must be made quickly and the legislature has not considered it proper to interfere
with the operation of this rule. It may be mentioned that the same approach
hag been shown while dealing with the case of legal disability. The special pro-
visions? enacted to give extra time to persons under legal disability do not apply
to a suit to enforce a right of pre-emption’.

16.2. The Law Commission,‘ relying on the Privy Council case of Mayyappa
y. Subramanya; recommended extension of the old section 17 (now section 16)
of the 1908 Act‘even to rights of action accruing on death and this recommenda-
tion has since been accepted. The gist of the Privy Council decision is that time
does not run or commence to run until there is a person in existence who is capable
of being sued. This proposition has been sought to be clarified in present sec-
tion 16, which takes the place of section 17 of the Act of 1908. The crux of
the amendment in the law achieved by section 15 of the present Act is the addi-
tion, in sub-section (1), of the words “where a right to institute a suit’or make
an application accrues only on the death of a person” and the addition of cor-
responding words in sub-section (2). The change was made in the light of cer-
tain decisions that had applied section 17 of the Act of 1908 even to cases where
the right to sue had accrued on death.®

16.3. No further change is needed in the Section.

1Cf. Kesho Prasad v, Madho Prasad, (1924) LL.R. 3 Pat 880.
Sections 6-7.

Section 8.

sLaw Conimission of India, 3rd Report, Page 21, Para 47.
5Mayyappa ४. Subramanya, 30 C.W.N. 833 (P.C).
‘Meyappa v. Subramanya, (1916) 20. C.W.N. 833 @.C).

No change
needed.

47


Section 17-
Effect of
fraud or
mistake on
Aimitation.

of the section.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 17—Section !7—Fraud and Mistake)
CHAPTER 17
FRAUD AND MISTAKE

17.1 In general, a peron’s ignorance of his right to sue does not suspend
the running of limitation. However, it has been recognised for a Jong time that
“the right of a party defrauded is not affected by laps¢ of time...... so long as
he remains, without any fault of his own, in ignorance of the fraud which has
been committed”.! Acting on this principle, secsion 17 provides that in the case
of certain types of fraud, the period of limitation shall not start running until the
fraud has been discovered. This, of course, is only a broad statement of the
Principle, several matters of detail which are dealt with in the section will be
mentioned in due course.

More or less the same principle is applied by the Act where relief from the
consequences of a mistake is the very basis of the cause of action, the period of
limitation shall not begin to run until the plaintiff or applicant has discovered
the mistake.

In both these cases, the relaxation is given by the Act itself. In addition,
there is a third case where the Act gives a power ta the court to extend the period
of limitation on the ground of fraud. Where a judgment debtor has, by fraud
or force, prevented the execution of a decree or order within the period of limi-
tation, on the ground of fraud. Where a judgment debtor has, by fraud or
force, prevented the execution of a decree or order within the Period of limita-
tion, the court may, on the judgment creditor’s application made after the expiry
of the period prescribed for execution, extend the period, if the application is
made within one year from the date of discovery of fraud or the cessation of
the force, as the case may be. Incidentally, this provision takes in not only
fraud—a circumstance that affects knowledge-but also force-~a circumstance
that affects the exercise of the right, and not its knowledge.

17.2. The section may appear to be rather long: this is due to several fac-
tors, mainly historical, The main subject of the section—fraud—was dealt in
the Act of 1908 in section 19.

+ However, that section did not specifically deal with a cause of action which
itself was founded on fraud: it dealt only with fraud that prevented knowledge
of a right already accrued. The Law Commission, in its Report? on the earlier
Act, considered it proper that that case should be included—as in the English .
Act’ Secondly, as recommended by the Law Commission, in the same Report.
the case of mistake has also been coyered in the present Act again, on the
lines of the English Act. In India, the earlier Limitation Act of 1908 did not
contain a provision for mistake in the body of the Act. Article 96 of that Act,
however, laid down a period Of three years for a suit “For relief on the ground
of mistake” and provided that the starting point shall be “When the mistake
becomes known to the plaintiff.” .

Thus, fraud and mistake are the matters dealt with in section 1700. Sub-
section (2) of the section, relating to fraud or force Preventing the execution of a
decree, is derived from section 48(2) proviso of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908. :

\Rolfe _v. Gregory, (1864) 4 De G.I. & 3. 576, 579 (Lord Westbury).
Law Commission of India. 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1908) page 21, para 48-49,
Section 26, Limitation Act, 1939 (Eng.).


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 17--Section \1T—Fraud and Mistake)

Section 48 was rcpealed (as recommended by the Law Commission in its
teport on the Limitation Act, 1908) but it was necessary to retain, on the statute
book, this part of section 48 and the Law Commission recommended that it
should find a place in the Limitation Act, in the section dealing with fraud?

17.3. At this stage, it would be useful to refer to certain developments in Comparative
this field in the United Kingdom. Section 26 of the U.K. Limitation Act 1939, gndy of
as it stands after its revision by the Limitation Amendment Act 1980° is repro- Engtish Jaw.
duced below as of interest: ह

“Postponement of limitation period in case ‘of fraud, conceqlment or mis-
take, *

हे 26. (1) Subject to sub-section (3) of this section, where in the case of any
action for which a period of limitation is prescribed by this Act, either—

(a) the action is based upon the fraud of the defendant; or

(b) any fact relevant to the plaintiff's right of action has been deliberately
concealed from him by the defendant; or { .

(० the action is for relief from the consequences of a mistakes;

the period of limitation shall not begin to run until the plaintiff has disco-
vered the fraud, concealment or mistake (as the case may be) or could with
reasonable diligence have discovered it. :

(2) For the purposes of the last foregoing sub-section, deliberate commission
of a breach of duty in circumstances in which it is unlikely to be discovered for
some time amounts to deliberate concealment of the facts involved in that breach
of duty,

7 (3) Nothing in this section shall enable any action—
(a) to recover, or recover the value of, any property; or

(b) to enforce any charge against, or set aside any transaction affecting, any -
Property;

>
to be brought against the purchaser of the property or any person claiming
through him in any case where the property has been purchased for valuable
consideration by an innocent third narty since the fraud or concealment or (as
the case may be) the transaction in which the mistake was made, took place.

(4) A purchaser is an innocent third party for the purposes of this section—

{ay in the case of fraud of concealment of any fact relevant to the plaintiff’s
Tight of action, if he was not a party to the fraud or (as the case may

+ be) to the concealment o! :hat fact and did not at the time of the pur-
chase know or have reason to believe that the frand or concealment
had taken place; and

(0) in the case of mistake if he did not at the time of the purchase know or
have reason to believe that the mistake had been made. _

हि Case law that has accumulated on the above provision in England though
> of interest need.not be mentioned here as it is not material for the purposes of
the present Report. ‘

‘Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1908) page 21. para 48-49,
Limitation Act, 1939 (2 & 3 Geo. 6c. 21). (Eng.).
SLimitation Amendment Act 1980 ०, 24 (Eng.).

8-14 Mof LI&CA/ND/33


Wide meaning
to the word

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

. (Chapter 17—Section \7--Fraud and Mistake)

17.4. The English authorities have been interpreting the word ‘fraud’ very
widely and have been regarding dishonesty as fraud for the purposes of the Limi-
tation Act, even, if the conduct in question, would not constitute fraud at com-
mon law.'*

\ “The contention on behalf of the appellants that the statute is a bar upless ~
the wrong doer is proved to have taken active measures in order to prevent deten-
tion is opposed to common sense as well as to the principles of equity. Two men,
acting independently, steal a neighbour's coal. One is so clumsily in his opera-
tions, or so incautious, that he has to do something more in order to conceal his
fraud. The other chooses his opportunity so wisely, and acts so warily, that he
can safely calculate on not being found out for many a long day. Why is the
one to get scot-free at the end of a limited period rather than the other? It would
be something of a mockery for courts of equity to denounce fraud as “a secret
thing”, and: to profess to punish it sooner or later, and then to hold out a reward
for the cunning that makes detection difficult or remote.”

We do not, of course, propose any change in the ‘article in our Act on this
point, '

17.5. In relation to section 17, we first deal with a few cases relating to fraud
subsequent to accrual of the cause of action. In a Calcutta case’, the father of a
minor obtained a decree, but died before its execution. The judgment debtor got
himself appointed as guardian of the minor’s property, but did not disclose to the
Court his indebtedness to the minor under the decree. It was held that the judg-
ment debtor, once he became a guardian, was under an obligation to make a
full disclosure to the court of his indebtedness. His non-disclosure amounted to
a fraud, both on the court and on the minor.

The Madras Law Joumal, commenting on this:case (while recognising that
substantial justice was done in the case), doubted whether an act of fraud com-
mitted after accrual of the cause of action is within the section.‘

The view of the Madras High Court*-is also to the effect that section 18 of
the Limitation Act, 1908 cannot apply to a case.where there was no fraud at the
date when the cause “of action arose, but a subsequent act of fraud was relied on
to save limitation. है

The Patna High 0006, while commenting upon section 18 (of the Act of
1908) in connection with an application under Order 21, rule 90 of the Civil Pro- .
cedure’ Code, 1908, observed :— पु

“It is clear from the language of this section that the petitioner, in order |
to get the benefit of it, must satisfy thé Court that he had been kept from
the knowledge of his right to file an application to set aside the sale by the
opposite. party. His right to set aside the sale clearly accrues after the sale.
Therefore, the fraud perpetrated by the opposite party must be a fraud com-
mitted after the sale and not fraud cammitted in bringing about the sate: and
the fraud must be one by which the petitioner has been kept from the know-
ledge of his right to file the application to set aside the sale.”

In the absence of later case law continuing the controversy, no change is
needed.

‘Beaman v, A.R.T.S. 7.16... (1949) 1 AlLE:R. 465
Bulli Coal Mining Co. ४. Osborne (1899) A.C. 351.
SGobinda Lal v. Nalini Kanta, ALR. 1925 Cal. S84; 1.1... 52 Cal. 63.
‘Comment in (1925) 48 M.L.J. (Journal) 31.
*Ramalagu Servai v, Solai Servai. ALR, 1921 Mad\283.
 Magdhar v. Dhorai, ALR. 1920 Pat. 728


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 $1

(Chapter 1?7—Section \17—Fraud and Mistake)

176. Unlike the English law (where there is no general statutory definition the Indian ~
of “fraud”), the Indian Contract Act, 1872 defines “fraud”. Case jaw that has law,

. developed in India around this statutory definition governs the concept of fraud,

so far as that Act is concerned. Limiting ourselves to the law as contained in sec-

tion 17 of the Limitation Act, we find that it we oul not be inconsistent with the
scheme of things if we give a wider meaning and content to the word “fraud” for .
the purpose of the Limitation Act, leaving the definition of “fraud” in the Contract
Act unaltered. That is to say, on proof, of the existence of certain circumstances,
a plaintiff, would be able to cross the first hurdle of limitation and to seek post-
ponement of the point from which time shall begin to run against him under the
Limitation Act. This would be regardless of the question whether the matter is
tried on merits, the same set of circumstances is to be regarded as sufficient to
enable him to obtain a judgment against the defendant on the ground of “fraud”
as a matter of substantive rights.

17,7. As adumbrated earlier’, in England section 26 of the Lirfitation Act Bnglish

has been amended to enlarge the concept of fraud law or equity. The debates Provision.
show that it was the intention of the legislature to allow the courts to develop
this field of law. A general proposition enunciated by Lord Evershed M. R.
“that fraud’ is conduct or inactivity which, having regard to some special relation-
ship between the parties concerned, was an unconscionable thing for the One to
do towards the other’ appears to us to be a tersely ‘comprehensive statement of
the position’.

17.8, We are of the view that a suitable Explanation should be added to principle
section 17 of the Limitation Act, taking the substance from the English. provi- of English
sion as to unconscionable conduct’. In principle, we find the English provision 8 to be
useful one. : incorporated.

+ ‘179, Besides dealing with fraud, section 17 also deals with relief based on Mistake and
mistake. The use of the expression ‘mistake’ raises the question of relief claimed the case of tas
by a person on the ground that a statute or statutory instrument on the strength tional statute,
of which his rights had been interfered with has been found to be unconstitu-
tional. There are a few decisions of the Supreme Court of India on the subject,
to be noticed presently.

17.10. The Supreme Court has held‘ that in the absence of’ any provision of Writ jurisdic-
law specifically: applicable, a period of limitation cannot be provided by judicial Hoa and
legislation. Nor can the court relax the law of limitation except as provided by limitation.

a specific statutory provision’. >

17.11. However, a different approach is visible in the case of writs.

Tn a recent case’, thie question that fell for consideration revolved round the
modalities of the refund of excess market fees realized by the several market
committees of Haryana. The original rate of market fee of 2 per cent was in-
greased to 3 per cent under Haryana Act 22 of 1977. This-increase was challenged
as being unconstitutional. )

7822 para 17.3, supra

Kitchen v. RAF. Assaciation. (1958) 3 All E.R. 241, 247

ऋ the draft, see end of this Chapter.

‘State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur ४. 6, 5. Verma, (1968) 1 Labour Law Journal 849,
844 (S.C).

5Cf. Raiender Singh v. Santa Singh, A.J.R. 1973 5.0. 2537, 2

SShiv ‘Shankar ‘Dal Mills v. State of Haryana, (1980) 2 S.C.C. 437, 438


$2

7

i
i

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 17—Section 17—Fraud and Mistake}

The challenge was upheld and the recovery of excess of 1 per cent was
held to be ulira vires. No directions were, however, given for refund at the time
when the Haryana Act 22 of 1977 was declared unconstitutional, because these
amounts could not then be quantified. There was some discussion before the
High Court regarding the article of limitation applicable to. such a claim for re-
fund of levies held unconstitutional by the court. But the Supreme Court observ-
ed as under on this point:— ~

“There cannot be any dispute about the obligatic: or the amounts since
the Market Committees have accounts of collections and cre willing to dis-
gorge the excess sums. Indeed, if they file suits within the limitation period,
decrees must surely follow, What the period of limitation is and whether
Article 226 will apply are moot as is evident from the High Court's judg-
ment, but we are not called upon to pronounce on either point in the view
we take. Where public bodies under:colour of public laws, recover people's
moneys, later discovered to be erroneous levies, the dharma of the situation
admits of no equivocation. There is no law of limitation, especially for
public bodies on the virtue of returning what was wrongly recovered to whom
it belongs. के / \

Nor is it palatable to our jurisprudence to turn down the nr2,er for high
Prerogative writs, on the negative plea of ‘alternative remedy’ since the root
principle of Jaw married to justice, is ubi-jus ibi remedium.”

The aumber of occasions on which the market committee realised the increas-
ed levy of rupees three must have been legion. But, as appears from another
judgment of the Supreme Court', the levy was effected under the provisions of.
Ordinance 12 of 1977 dated Sth September, 1977 (in Haryana) and Ordinance
2 of 1978 promulgated on 28th April, 1978 (in the State of Punjab). That is to
say, in both the cases, if the market committees were to file suits before the
judgment of the Supreme Court? was delivered, the civil suits would have been >
in time. But the observations of the Supreme Court extracted above indicate a
Teadiness to give ‘relief in writ jurisdiction unhampered by the technicalities of
limitation.

17.12. In an earlier case’ the Supreme Court that observed that where a
Person comes to the court for a relief under article 226 of the Constitution on
the allegation that he has been assessed to tax under a void legislation and, hav-
ing paid it under a mistake, is entitled to get it back, the court, if it finds that
the assessment -was void, being made under a void provision of law; and that
the payment was made by mistake, is still not bound to exercise its discretion
directing repayment. Whether repayment should be ordered in the exercise‘ of
this discretion will depend in each case on its own facts and circumstances. The
court, felt that it was not easy nor was it desirable to lay down any rule for
universal application.

s :

17.13. The observations of the Suprme Court to the effect’ that where the
delay is more than the period of limitation prescribed for a civil action (which
is three years), “it will almost always be proper for the court to hold that the
delay is unreasonable, “were pleaded in a regent case before the Calcutta High
Court’ on behalf of the State of West Bengal as a justification for denying the

1K. K. Puri ९. State of Punjab (1979) 3 S.C.R. 1217, 1228, 1262. ,
2Shiv Shankar Dal Mills v. State of Haryana, (1980) 2'S.C.C. 437, supra,
ae 3 Me. vy 117 | Bhai, ALR. 1962 $¢ 1008.
tate of M.P..v. Bhaila ४, paragraph 17.12, supra.
'State of West Bengal v. Suresh Chandra 5 1989) 84 Calcutta Weekly Notes 229,

337.


an
89717 REPORT OF LAW COMMN, OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

{Chapter \7--Section 17—Fraud and Mistake)

refund of certain taxes paid by a sanitary contractor under the Bengal Finance
(Sales Tax) Act, 1941. Rejecting the contention, however, the High Court obs-
erved :—~

“In our view, in Bhailal Bhai’s case, the Supreme Court has not laid down
any fixed period namely, three years when the mistake was detected as “in
Article 96 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1908. As we have understood the
decision of the Supreme Court in Bhailal’s case, it has been laid down by
the Supreme Court that the High Court should not normally exerdise its
discretion when the claim for refund is made beyond the period of three
years from the datc the mistake came to be known to the patty. The use
of the words ‘almost always’ is very significant. The facts and circumstances
of a particular case may be such as to persuade the High Court to exercise
its discretion in favour of the party claiming réfund even bepond the period
of three years from the date of his knowledge of the mistake. It a patty,-
after coming to know of the mistake committed by him in paying taxes not
payable him because the law under which the taxes were realised was void,
does not take any step in the niatter either by making an application for
tefund or bringing it to the notice of the authorities concerned about the
illegal realisation of the tax under a common. mistake of law, or in other.
words, if the party sits idle during the period of time within which a civil

" action is to be brought, in such'a case, the High Court should not exercise
its discretion in granting relief to that party for refund.”

47.14, Then there is a Madras case also on the subject. In a suit filed by
Parry and Company against the State of Tamil Nadu on the original Side of -
- the Madras High Court’, the question of applicability of section 17(1)(c) came up
for consideration. Parry and Company, a dealer in engineering equipments (for
goods imported under the Import Trade Control Permit) were taxed by the sales
tax authorities on certain transactions as local sales for the assessment year upto
1966-67. In view of the decision of the Supreme Court in Khosla’s caset the
Plaintiffs became entitled to refund of the sum of Rs. 43,659/- paid by way of
sales tax for the recovery of which the suit was filed. ‘The Supreme Court judg-
ment was delivered on 18th January 1966 and reported on Ist May 1966. The
court found, as a question of fact, that the plaintiff had knowledge about the
judgment on 14-3-68. As the suit wa8 filed on 20th March, 1972, the court dis-
missed it as being barted by time, but there are observations in the judgment to
indicate that if the plaintiff had approached the court within three years of his
knowledge of the decision of the Supreme Court in Khosia's case, the suit would
have been within limitation.

“17.45. Another case’ relating to the refund of sales tax recovered under mis-
take of law—this time from Madhya Pradesh brings out how the omission from
the Act of 1963 of article 96 (which occurred im the Act of 1968) makes no sub-
stantial difference to the position. The following observations are pertinent:

“Under the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, a claim for relief on the
ground of mistake was governed by art. 96 and :time commenced to run
from the date when the mistake becomes known to the plaintiff. See The
State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bhailat Bhai, 15 STC 450 81.7, 1964 SC 1006
and (1965) 16 SFC 689 (SC) (supra). In both thefe cases it was. held that

Parry & Co. v. State of Tamil Nadu, 1975 -Tax Law Report 1565 (Madras).
966 Sit 2182 & Co. Pvt. Lid. v. Deputy Commissioner af Commercial Taxes, AJR.
1 . 1216. i रु
1 Maltex (India Ltd. v. Asstt. Commissioner of Sples Tax, Indore Region, Indore, ALR. .
197t MP. 162.


34

Position
summed
up as to
mistake of
far

Recommendation

to insert an
‘Explanation to
Section 17.

Execution

. 89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter \7--Section 17—Fraud and Misiakey
Chapter 18-—Section 18--Acknowledgement

article 96 applied to a suit for recovery of moacy paid under a mistake of

law. Article 96 has been omitted in the new Limitation Act of 1963. How-

tver, section 17(1}(c) of this new Act provides that in the case of a suit

for relief from the consequences of a mistake, the period of limitation shall )
not begin to run until the plaintiff has discovered the mistake or could with

reasonable diligence have discovered it.”

17.16. The upshort of the above discussion is that even though Shiv Shankar
Dat Mills case expounds a theory that there is no law of limitation for returning
what was wrongly reeovered, this observation was intended to indicate only
the width of the writ jurisdiction. It should not be taken to mean that the courts
should ignore the provisions of section 17 read with article 113 of the Limitation
Act and decree a time-barred suit,

17.17. In the result, the only change needed in’ section 17 is the addition of
an Explanation to deal with conduct which is unconscionable, having regard
to the special relationship between the parties—a point already dealt with earlier
in this Chapter.’ For this purpose, we recommend the insertion of the following

+ Explanation below section 17:-—

“Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, ‘fraud’ includes con-
duct on the part of the defendant or the opposite party, as the case may be,
which, having regard to some special relationship between the parties, was
unconscionable,”

CHAPTER 118

SECTION 18: ACKNOWLEDGMENT '

18.1. Where a suit or application is in respect of any property or right, an
acknowledgement of liability in respect of suth property or right, made in writ-
ing signed by the party against whom the property or right is now claimed (or
by his predecessor-in-interest), gives a fresh period of limitation, to be computed
from the time when the acknowledgement Was so signed. This is the gist of
section 18(f). Section 18(2y deals with the cases in which oral evidence of the

-contents of the acknowledgment may be given.

The Explanation to the section, in clause (a), lays down that an acknowledg-
ment may be sufficient though it omits to specify the exact nature of the pro-
perty or right, or avers that the time for payment etc. has not yet arrived, or is
accompanied by a refusal to pay etc., or is coupled with a claim to set off, or is
addressed to a person entitled to the property or right.

Under Explanation (b) to the section the expression “signed” means signed
either personally or by an agent duly authorised in this behalf.. .

Explanation (c) provides that an application for ‘the execution of a decree
or order shall not be deemed to be an application in respect’ of property or right”.

18.2. It was as a result of the recommendations of the Law Commission’
that Clause (c) of the Explanation modifying the earlier rules provides that an
application for the execution of a decree or order does not make it equivalent to
an application in respect of any property or right (Section 18). It has similarly

18९९ paragraph 17.8. supra.
*Law Commission of India, 3rd Report,: (Limitation Act 1908) page 23, para 52 and
pages 80-81 Sections 1761) agd 18 Explanation. 5 °


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA. ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 .

(Chapter 18~-Section 18—Acknowledgement.)

been provided that “debt” does not include money payable under a decree or
order of a court (section 19)'. The Law Commission was of the view that in res-
pect for execution there should be no scope for extension of time by acknowledg-
ment or by part payments.

One writer, commenting on a judgment of the Madras High Court’, has ob-
served* that the Act of 1963 the earlier labyrinth of rulings on step in aid in
execution have no relevance.

18.3, Dr. Whitley Stokes in bis Anglo-Indian Codes has made the fotlowing Person
suggestion relevance to the Section: -- Une ey
“Section 19 {corresponding to section 18 of 1963 Act) should provide

fot the case of an acknowledgment or payment in favour of a person under

disability or by a person absent from British India”.

This suggestion has been repeated by U.N. Mitra in his book on the Law
of Limitation & Prescription’. पु .

18.4, No decided case has, however, been noticed by us in which the courts Change
have refused to grant the benefit of section 6 or section 15(5) (these are the rele needed.
vant provisions in the present Act) in addition to the period of limitation comput-
ed in accordance with sections 18 and 19 of the Act of 1963, that is, the benefit
of a fresh starting point for such computation upon an acknowledgment or pay-
ment. An attempt to clarify at this stage that sections 18 and 19 shall not preclude
the taking into account of the provisions of section 6 and section: 15(5) may lead
to an unintended result that the other provisions of the Act which also provide

_ for the exclusion of time in certain other specified cases are in derogation of the
effect of sections 18 and 19. Consequently, even though we agree in substance with

‘ the approach of Dr. Whitley Stokes. we do not consider any amendment to the
Act necessary on the point under discussion.

18.5. It would be of interest to compare the position in England. Unlike the The English
phraseology used in sections 18 and 19 of the Indian Act. which provides beyond Amendment .
doubt that the acknowledgment or payment has to be made “before the expiration
of the prescribed period”, under the English Act an acknowledgment or part-

Pent made outside the limitation period gave rise ‘to a fresh, cause of action
" exdept where the expiry of the limitation period has not simply barred the remedy,
‘but extinguished the right’--say, in case of claim for recovery of land or ad-
vowson. न

But it should be mentioned that by the Limitation (Amendment) Act. 1980,
which came into force on 1st May, 1980, the following sub-section has been, add-
ed at the end of section 28 of the principal) Act: tO.

’

“Subject to the proviso to the last foregoing sub-section, a current
period of limitation may be repeatedly extended under ‘this section by fur-
ther acknowledgments or payments. but a right of action, once barred by
this Act. shall not be revived by any subsequent acknowledgment or pay-
ment”. ‘

The effect of the new sub-section seems to be to prevent a cause of action

from reviving once the limitation périod has expired.

Section 18. Explanation (ले : section 19 Explanation (b).

3Damodaraswam: Naicker v. Sundararaan, (1972) 1 M.LJ. 346. |
_ 3G. Venkatanarayanan, “Step-in-Aid steds out with acknowledgment from execution
proceedings (1972), 2 M.LJ. Gournal) 13 Adjective

“Stokes, Anglo-Indian Codes (1885) Vol. 2. (Adjective Law). page 950.
४ भाप, Mitra, Law of Limitation and Prescription (9th Edition). page $50.

Section 25(5), proviso and 2%6), proviso. Limitation Act, 1939 (Ens.).

THalsbury, 4th 80... Vol. 28. page 383. para-393, and page 408? para 916-911.


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 18—Section 18—Acknowledgement.)
{Chapter 19—Section 19—Part Payment.)

Chane not 18.6. So far as could be ascertained, no serious controversy exists at present
needed i on the form or substance of section 18 and we do not -therefore see any need to
recommend a change in the section. *
CHAPTER 19
SECTION 19: PART PAYMENT
Seton आई 19.4. Analagous to the acknowledgment of liability, dealt with in section 18
peymeat (on is payment of a part of the amount due, made by the person liable. Such payment
secount of debt may be regarded as an implied acknowledgement, or at least analogous thereto.
oo legacy) and, In any case it preserves evidence, and the demand is no longer a ‘stale’ one. The
rationale.

subject is dealt with in the next section—section 19. The main paragraph of the
. section provides for computing a fresh period of limitation when the person lia-
ble to pay a debt or legacy (or his agent) makes, on account of the debt or of
interest on the legacy, payment before the expiry of the prescribed period. The
Gee to the section enacts that (save in the case of a payment of interest made
Sore the Ist day of January 1928), an ‘acknowledgment of the payment must
aj

ir in the handwriting of the person making payment, or in a Writing signed
by that person.”

The Explanation to the section consists of two clauses defining in certain
respects the ambit of “payment” the ambit of “debt”. In clause (a), it provides
that where mortgaged land is in the possession of the mortgagee, the receipt of
the rent or produce of such land shalt be deemed to be “payment”. Under clause’
(0) of the Explanation, “debt” does not include money payable under a decree
or order of a court.

.

Suits for 19.2. In the past, the section (as occurring in the Act of 1908 gave rise to

redemption. some debate as to its application to a suit for redemption.’ It is now well settled*®
that the section applies only to shits for the recovery of a debt (and not to a suit
for the recovery of property), To put the matter beyond doubt, we recommend
that the section 19 should be amended so as to indicate expressly that the’ section *
is meant for a suit of recovery of a debt or legacy*

’

Co-elation of 19.3. The Explanation to section 19 provides that receipt by thé mortgagee

de i of rent or produce of the land mortgaged “shall be deemed to be a payment”

Explanation. However; the Explanation dees not link itself up with the proviso preceding it,
which requires that the “payment” should appear in the handwriting of, or in a
writing by, the person making the payment. The non-mention of this requirement
in the Explanation to section 19 has been interpreted to mean that the proviso
does not apply to cases covered by the Explanation.’ This construction can be
said to be supportable on the fact that the physical possession of the property be-
ing with the mortgagee, it is not possible for the mortgagor to make the “payment”
of produce which the mortgagee might appropriate to the debt. To put the mat-
ter beyond doubt, we had contemplated the addition of a clause somewhat as
under: .

“Notwithstanding anything contained in the proviso to titis section, it

*. shall not be necessary to have the acktiowledgment required by the proviso
in respect of such payment”, at the end of clause (a) of the Explanation.
But the judicial interpretation being in conformity with the philosophy of

. lMohammad Akbar Khan v. Motai, A.B. 1948 PC. 36,38.
‘Mohammad Akbar Khan v. Motai. ALR, 1948 P.C. 36, 39.
See para 19.12, infra, for a draft of the revised. section.
‘India v, Vanad, A.LR. 1966 Gui. 59, 60.



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 19-~Section 19—Part Payment.)

“the section, we are refraining from making any suggestion in this regard.

It is apparent that in the case of land in the possession of the mortgagee, an
acknowledgment of the payment would not appear in the handwriting of, or in
the writing signed by, the, person making the payment for the simple reason that
the payer and the payee are one and the same person. As stated above, we are
not recommending any clarification in this behalf to the proviso.

19.4. One specific point requires attention in connection with section 19, Section 19,
Explanation (a). Where mortgaged land is in the possession of the mortgagee, Explanation (a)
the receipt of the rent or produce of such land is deemed to be a payment for to “land”.
the purposes of that section, thus enabling the computation of a fresh period of
limitation from the time the payment is made. Now, the expression “land” has
been differently interpreted. The Madras High Court, construing the word ‘rent’
as ejusdem generis with ‘produce’, holds that the word ‘land’ in the section re-
fers only ‘to cultivable land and would not include a house—or even the site on
which a house might have been built.

19.5. On the contrary, the Madhya Pradesh High Court,’ dissenting. from Conffict.
the Madras view,’ and relying on the meaning as given in judicial dictionaries,
holds that there is mo warrant for reading the word ‘rent’ as ejusdem generis
with ‘produce’. According to it, the section applies not only to the rent received
from the cultivable land, but also to the rent received from a house or house-
site.

To the same effect are rulings of the High Courts of Bombay‘, and Gujarat’.

196. In our opinion, there is no rationale in limiting the. provisions of the neeg for
section to cultivable land, simply because the section uses the word ‘produce’, clarification.
Tn theory, one could enlarge the applicability of the principle to cases involving
moveable property, because it is conceivable that a person may hand over his
Property to a creditor whogin his turn, can appropriate the income derived from
the uso-thereof towards payment of the debt (e.g. a taxi driver taking a loan from
a bank and hypothecating his taxi to the bank). However, to avoid any further
controversy on the question whether the word ‘land’ includes house property
or not, we recommend that the Explanation to section 19 should be suitably
amended by using the expression simmovable property’ for the word ‘land’

19.7, Another point concerning section 19 Explanation (a) concerns the ६५५० 19
word ‘mortgage’, as occurring in this explanation. There is no reason why Explanation (a)-
clause (2) of the Explanation should not include a ‘charge’. But the Chief Court Application to
‘of Oudh' has held otherwise, and, to avoid controversy on this point, it is desi-
rable that the section should be suitably amended to cover a case of ‘charge’
also.*-°

1Gudur Ramakrishna Reddi_v, Muniratnammal, ALR. 1954 Madras 890, 893; LLR.
(1954) Mad. 1226: (1954) 1 M.LJ. 546.

Radha Krishna v. Anoop Chand, A.1.R. 1973 M.P. 248, 251

*Paragraph 19.4, supra.

{Manik Chand v. Rachappa, ALR. 1952 Bom, 266

$Dadia Bhailal v. Vannad Maganlal, है... 1966 Guj. 59, 60, 61

See para 19.12, infra for a draft

IGurden v. Rajkumar, ALR. 1943 Oudh 211; LLR. 18 Luck.. 637.

३0६, Muthuswami v. Chennamalai, (1970) 1 M.LJ. 341, 343,

356९ para 19.10, infra for a draft.

9-14 M of LI&CA/ND/83


58

Payment by
cheque.

Need for
clarification

‘Agreement for
deferring
presentation
of the

cheque.

89TH REPORT OF 1.4W COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 19—Section 19—Part Payment.)

19.8. We now turn to the question of payment by cheque. With the pro-
gress of institutionalised banking, payment by cheque has become the normal
Practice, especially in urban areas. If the cheque, accepted by the creditor, is
ultimately honoured, no problems present themselves. The “payment” consti-
tutes part payment.' In fact, Halsbury* has gone further to say that “the accep-
tance by the debtor of a bill drawn upon him by a creditor, or the delivery to
the creditor of a bill drawn by the debtor on a third person, on account of part
of the debt, is also sufficient part payment, ‘whether the bill is paid at maturity
or not; it seems that in that case the part payment is deemed to be made at
the time of the delivery of the bill, and not when it is paid.” The effect, it is
stated, would be the same if a cheque is given on the day. with an agreement
that the same should not be presented to the bank until a later day and, acting
upon the agreement, the creditor presents the cheque on the agreed day and
receives payment.?

However, opinion in India on the subject is not uniform. The High Courts
of Bombay‘, Patna‘, and Punjab’ have held that ihe accpetance of a cheque
which is subsequently dishonoured does not constitute “payment” within the
meaning of section 19. The Madhya Pradesh High Court has held to the con-
trary.’ According to the Andhra High Court, whether payment by cheque
amounts to “payment” depends on whether the payment was accepted as such
or not.*

19.9. There appears to be a substantial case for clarification on the sub-
ject. We see no reason in principle why the benefit of section 19 should not
be extended to such cases, ie., to cases where a cheque is accepted in payment
irrespective of whether it is honoured or not. Such a wide view would not be
doing violence to the rationale” oy which payment is regarded as giving a
fresh lease of life. Even in the substantive law, so far as a dishonoured cheque .
is concerned, a new cause of action accrues upon delivery of the cheque to the
creditor”.

19.18. We are not oblivious to the fact that whil® giving and accepting a
cheque, the debtor and the creditor may enter into a private agreemeft that
the creditor will defer the actual presentation of the cheque to some agreed”
future date, by which date the debtor is expected to arrange to ensure adequate
funds to his credit with the drawee. Even in such a contingency, there appears
to be no reason why the benefit of section 19 should not be extended to the
creditor. If, in the hypothetical situation mentioned above, the debtor manages
to have adequate funds in his account by the agreed date, none is worse off. If
the debtor fails so to do and litigation becomes necessary, a fresh period of
limitation would accrue in favour of the creditor. By not allowing the benefit
of section 19 to cases of dishonoured cheques. the law may precipitate matters
and drive the creditor to court, by denying the parties a chance to settle their
accounts amicably.

'Marreco २. Richardson. (1908) 2 K.B, 584 (C.A.).

*Halsburv, 4th Ed. Vol. 28. page 404, para 900 and f.n. tf

SMarreco ४. Richardson (1908) 2 K.B, 584: (1908-12) AN E.R. Rep. 55 (CA).
‘Chinttaman v. Sadgurn Narain Maharaj. A.LR. 1986 Bom. 553, 554.

SAriun Lal ९. Dava Ram, AR. 1971 Pat. 278, 279, 280.

‘Northern India Finance Corpn. v. R._E, Soni, ALR. 1973 Punjab 35, 37, para 5.
"Gori Lal v. Ramee, ALR. 1961 M.P. 346, 347

*Subrahamanvam V. Verkataratlinam. A.1.R. 1956 Andhra 108

°CE. para 19 1, supra,

WHalbury, 4th Ed., Vol. 28, page 300, para 668.



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT. 1963

{Chapter 19-—Section 19--Part Payment.)
(Chapter 20—Section 20-—Acknowl:dgement or Payment By Another Person)

19.11. For these reasons, we coisider it desirable that payment by cheque
should be expressly covered, on lines to be indicated in the amendment that
we are suggesting.

59

19.12. In the fight of the above discussion. we recommend that seciion 19 Recommendation.

should be revised as indicated below :—
Revised Section 19

Where payment on account of a debt or of interest on a legacy is made
before the expiration of the prescribed period for a suit or application for the
recovery of such debt or legacy by the person liable to pay the debt or legacy
or by his agent duly authorised in this behalf, a fresh period of limitation shall
be computed from the time when the payment was made, in respect of any
suit or application for the recovery of such debt or legacy, as the case may be

Provided that, save in the case of payment of interest made before ‘the
first day of January, 1928, an acknowledgement of the paymicnt appears in the
handwriting of, or in a writing signed by. the person making the payment.

_ Explanation \.—For the purposes of this section.

{a} Where immovable property which is mortgaged or charged is in the
possession of the mortgagee or charge-holder, the receipt of the in-
come of such property shall be deemed to be a payment.

(b) “debt” does not include money payable under a decree or order of a
court.

Explanation 11.—Where payment on account of a debt or of interest on @
legacy is sought to be made by a negotiable instrument, the tender of the nego-
table instrument, if accepted by the payee in such payment, amounts to pay-
ment of the amount for the purposes of this section whether or not the nego-
tiable instrument is subsequently honoured.

CHAPTER 20

SECTION 20: ACKNOWLEDGMENT OR PAYMEN?Y BY ANOTHER
PERSON

I. Introductory

20.1. The two sections discussed in the preceding chapters---sections 18 Section 20,

(acknowledgment) and 19 (payment)--operate in situations of considerable
variety. Thus, in business and commerce, where debts and other liabilities are
dealt with through agents—-the more so when’ the debtor is a corporate body—
there might, be cases where more persons, than one share the burden of a lia-
bility, but the correspondence is carried on by only one of them. Hindu law
also presents certain peculiar situations. There may be limited owners of pro-
perty, on the expiry of whose limited interest others will succeed to the property.
Or, which is the more common case now—a liability may have been incurred
by or on behalf of a Hindu undivided family as such, but its affairs are (as is
the usual practice) managed by the manager, who transacts dealings on its be-
half. In all these cases, the question may arise whether, and if so, how far, a

1Para 19.12, infra.


Joint

897TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 20—Section 20—Acknowledgement or Payment By Another Person.)

person is bound by an acknowledgment signed by another person e.g. () agent,
(ii) another joint contractor etc. (iii) or limited owner in Hindu law or manager
of a Hindu undivided family. To put it differently, to what extent is a person
vicariously bound by an acknowledgment or payment made by another persen,
in the context of the statutory provisions under which the acknowledgment or
payment has the effect of giving a fresh period of limitation.

Section 20 seeks to answer these questions, in three sub-sections—Sub-sec-
tion (1) gives, to the express “agent duly authorised in this Dchalf’—an expres-
sion that occurs in section 18 (acknowledgment) as well as-in section 19 (pay-
ment),—an extended meaning, whereunder, in the case of a person under disabi-
lity, it includes his lawful guardian, committee or manages or an agent of such
guardian, committee or manager.

Sub-section (2) of section 20 reads as under: —

(2) Nothing in the said section [i.e., sections 18-19} renders one of several
joint contractors, partners, executors or mortgagees chargeable by reason
only of a written acknowledgement signed by, or of a payment made by, or
by the agent of, any other or others of them.”

Sub-section (3) deals with the special situation arising under Hindu
law, mentioned above. Briefly—(a) an acknowledgment or -payment in
respect of liability by a limited owner of property governed by Hindu law
is valid as against a reversioner succeeding to such liability and, (b) an ac-
knowledgement or payment in respect of a liability {incurred by or on be-
half of a Hindu undivided family), made by the manager of the family for
the time being is deemed to have been made on behalf of the whole family.

This is a statement of the significant features of the section. We now pro-
ceed to consider some of the important points.

IL. Joint. Obligees

20.2. A point worth some discussion arises from section 20(2). Section
20(2) provides that nothing in sections 18 and 19 (dealing with the effect of
acknowledgment in writing or effect of payment on account of debt) renders,
one of several execution on mortgagees: chargeable by reason only of a written
acknowledgment signed by, or of a payment made by or by the agent of, any
other or others of them. The controversies that require discussion can be better
appreciated if a look is had at the English Law on the subject and its execu-
tion.

20.3. In England ruling’ by Lord Mansfield' that any acknowledgment or
payment by one co-debtor was sufficient to take the case out of the statute of
limitation, even as regards other co-debtors, raised a number of protests which
resulted in curbing the ambit of the rule, as regards acknowledgments, by Lord
Tenderten’s Act? and, as regards payments, by the Mercantile Law Amend-
ment Act. The language of Lord Tenderten’s Act was as under:—

“No such joint contractors, executors or administrator shall lose the bene-
fit of the said enactments (i.e. enactments as to limitation) so as to be
chargeable in respect or by reason only of any written acknowledgment or
promise made and signed by any other or others of them.”

‘Withcomb v. Whiting (1781). Sm. L. Cas (13th Ed.), page 633.

tLord Tenderien’s Act, 9 Geo C.14. 1828. .

Section 14, the Mercantile Law Amendment Act, 1856 (19-20 Vic. ८. 97) (Now repeal-
ed)-see section 24!2), Limitation Act, 1939, (Eng.).


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 20—Section 20—Acknowledgement or Payment By Another Person.)

20.4. 11 is interesting to note that within two years of the passing of the Developments
Mercantile Law Amendment Act, 1856 the Indian Government passed Act No.'" India,
14 of 1859, section IV of which read as under: —

“IV. If, in respect of any legacy or debt, the person who, but for the Revival of
law of limitation, would be liable to pay the same, shall have admitted anneal
that such debt or legacy or any part thereof is due, by an acknowledg- in writing.
Ment in writing signed by him, a new period of limitation according to the
nature of the original liability, shall be computed from the date of such

admission :

Proviso.—Provided that, if more than one person be liable, none of
them shall become chargeable by reason only of a written acknowlcedge-
ment signed by another of them.”

20.5. This general provision was expanded in section 20 of the Limitation
Act, 1871 by specifically mentioning: “partners or executors” and read:

“Nothing in this section renders one of the several partners or executors
chargeable by reason only of a written promise or acknowledgment signed
by another of them.” ny

2046. Joint contractors and mortgagees were added to the list of partners
and executors by section 21 of the Act of 1877.

20.7. It has been the view of the majority of High Courts that sub-section Section 20(2)
* (2) of section 20 is more or less of an Explanation to sections 18 and '+« 19. छठ 2xPlanation
18 and 19.
208. The expression “chargeable by reason only of” in section 20 has Interpretation
been borrowed from the English Acts on the subject, where it has not given #2 England and
tise to any difficulty. In England, the matter is left to be determined by thein India as to
general law as to whether the action of one of the jaint obligees should bind /int obligees.
the other. All that the two English statutes referred to above intended to do
was to nullify the effect of a ruling of Lord Mansfield’ on -the subject. Thus,
when the question arose whether a payment by a partner of a firm would bind
the firm, the answer was in the affirmative.’ However, in India, arguments con-
tinued to be advanced as regards the co-relation between the expression “by
reason only” appearing in this sub-section and the effect of the general law of

contracts and partnership.
The Allahabad High Court, dealing with the point observed as under*:—

“T understand this section to mean that the mere fact that persons are
partners does not make one partoer liable under an acknowledgment, etc.,
by another partner. But in the present case, the liability arises under sec-
tion 251, Contract Act, because the acknowledgment was made in the
course of the partnership business.”

Ta this context, it may be mentioned that in a going mercantile concern,
such authority may be presumed.”

aman v. Shunmugam, A.1.R. 1917 Madras 895.
02070. v. Muthukumaraswant, & LR: 192? Mag. 881.
a Prasad v. Babu Ram, A.1.R. jaha‘ पर
किक v. Whiting, (1781) 1 Sm._L. Cas. (100 Ed.) 561; 2 Dougl. 652.
3Goodwin ४. Parton & Paze. (1880) 42 L.T. 568.

‘Debi Dayal v. Baldeo Prasad, A.1.R, 1928 All. 491.
ta) Gordhandas Vv. Bhutabliai. (1932) 34 Bom, LR. 623.
(0) Premji v. Dossa, (1886) LL.R. 10 Bom. 358.

61


62

No change
needed.

No change
as to
Partners
needed.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMLFATIUN ACT. 1963
(Chapter 20—Section 20—A cknowledgement or Payment By Another Person.)

20.9. In-the result, no change is needed in the section. A recent ruling’ of
Andhra Pradesh High Court deals with a case of joint contractors who have
signed a promisory note. it was held that even though onc of the promisors
was the son of the other two promisors, that cannot make him liable for the
endorsement made by the other two promisors on the promisory Note.

The word “only” was again noticed in a Bombay case? which ruled that
the meaning to be given to the word ‘only’ in section 21(2) is that it may, also
be shown that the partners signing the acknowledgment had authority, express
or implied, to do so and that, in a going mercantile concern, such agency is to
be presumed as an ordinary rule.

20.10. Similar is the approach adopted when the question arises’ us to the
effect of an acknowledgment by the principal’ on the obligation of the surety
and the repercussions of the acknowledgment by the surety' upon the principal.
Most of the High Courts are agreed that the liability of a surety cannot be
equated to that of a co-debtor or joint-contractor within the meaning of sec-
tion 20(2) of the Act* and that the debt of the surety is distinguished from the
debt of the principal debtor.”

The Bombay High Court in onc case’ observed:

“The payment of interest by the debtor within limitation docs not give
fresh starting point for limitation against the surety under section 20 of
the Limitation Act (XV of 1877) even ‘in the absence of a prohibition by
surety against the payment of interest by the debtor on his account, Let
us apply the words of section 20 to the case: the principal is not the per-
son fiable to pay the debt of the surety, so that even if the payment of
interest could be regarded as a payment of interest on the debt of the
surety, still it was not made by a person liable to pay the surety’s debt.
Can it then be said that there was a payment of interest on the surety’s
debt by an agent duly authorised in this behalf? Apart from the difficulty
of ‘treating the interest as due on the surety’s debt. we think this must be
answered in the negative, the question propounded in the reference ex-
cludes an express authority, and (in our opinion) the relation of principal
and surety does not give rise to any implied authority.”

Tn this context it may be proper to emphasis that in a going mercantile

concern a partner has an implied authority to bind the other partners y aq
acknowledgment of liability’

हि 20.11. We have given anxious thought to the questio; (९! ;

tion should be added to section 20(2) 1० make it clear that notting ‘in रकम a
(2) shall prejudice the effect of any acknowledgment as binding any other poviner,
under the general law of Partnership or contracts. The object was to make it
explicit that the Limitation Act. 1963, though fater in point of time to the Partner.
ship Act and the Contract Act, does not purport to over-ride, in any manner, the

'Tayaranma v. Ramanjaneya Mercantile Co. 21

3Gordhendas ५. Bhulabhai—A.LR. 1932 Bombay Woe AP. 205,
(a) Federal Bank v, Bom De LR, 1956 Junj. 26,34 para 12.
tb) Divalu Mal v. Mundu, ALR 1991 Lah. 691, 694. “

‘fay Hazarg Singh पर, Bakshish. ALR. 1962. Punj, 495, 496.

afb) Ranitt Kuwnar v, Kishor? Mohan, ALR. 1940: Cal, 401 402,

AW. 3. Chits v. Mathew (1979) K.LT. 566, 569 es

Som Nath Raju v. Ramamurthy. ATR. 1987 Ori va
‘opal Daji Sathe v, Gopal Bin Sonu 5772 दा वह Bara, 8

remit v. Dossa (1888) 11.1. 10 800 ashe oe) FER. 28 Bombay 248,
Gordhandas ¥. Bhulabhai (932) 34 om LR, 623, ALR. 1932 Bom. 315.



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN, OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT. 1963

(Chapter 20—Section 20—-Acknowiedgement or Payment By Another Person.)
Chapter 21--Section.. 21 Addition or Substitution of Parties

relevant provisions of these earlier statutes. But the exposition of this sub-section >
by the Courts (as discussed above) shows that the Courts are examining the facts

and circumstances of each case and ascertaining whether, an agency (express or
implied) is made out therefrom. In this position, we do not propose any amend-

ment in this regard.

20.12, As regards joint contractors and mortgagees, certain questions : arise Personal law-
when Mohamedan co-heirs succeed to the estate of the deceased in severalty. The No change
part-payment by one of the Mohamedan co-heirs cannot avail to save limitation ww
against the other heirs.’ This also is a matter of the personal law of succession
and falls outside the scope of the present enquiry. Different considerations apply
to the case of an acknowledgment of the viability by a Hindu father® but. as a
general rule, it can be stated that where a part-payment by one of the joint deb-
tors is made, the mere presence of the other debtors at the place of payment will
not save limitation, ualess it is praved that they also made the payment or that the
person who actually paid it did so, being authorised by the others.’

Consequently. we do not recommend any change in the text of section 29(2)
on this count.

20.13, We have given anxious thought to the question whether we should No change
recommend deletion of the words ‘joint contractors, partners, executors or mort. geeded 302).
gagees’ and bring the language of sub-section (2) back to the stage it was in sec- हु
tion 4 of the Limitation Act, 1859, thereby doing away with the embellishments
and illustrations added to the section in the course of time. However, we do not
think that this would amount to a practical improvement and are not inclined to

1 gecommend any such change.

20.14. The position is that in applying section 20 the court will have to bear Substantive
in mind not merely the Limitation Act, but also the general law relating to the faw.
particular field, such. as agency. joint promises, suretiship, guarantee, partner-
ship and succession. Such an inquiry cannot be avoided. Courts have taken a
commonsense view of the matter.

20.15. In the result, no change is needed in section 20. No change
जी needed.

CHAPTER 21
SECTION 21 : ADDITION OR SUBSTITUTION OF PARTIES

I, Introductory

21.1. The sections of the Act that have been so far considered were about Section 21-

computing the period of limitation—something concerning the period prior tosttect. of ot
the institution of proceedings. The Act now, (in section 21) devotes some atten- substitution
tion to determination of the date when the proceedings are deemed to have been? Laer on.
instituted, The general rule, of course, is that a suit commences when the plaint

js presented.’ This rule creates no problems when all the parties are before the

Court from the very beginning. However. often it so happens that in the course

*Pathumma Boovi ५. Rajakrishna Menon, AIR. 1975 Ker. 91.
2Deen Narain ए. Bhagauti Din, ALR. 1952 All, 116,

SAnnoda Charan v. Jhatu Charan, A.1.R, 1935 Cal. 648,
Section 32Xa).

63


Newly added
VISO to
Section 2101),

d its

exposition by
the Supreme
Court,

Law before
the addition

” of the

proviso,

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

Chapter 21-—Section -21—Addition or Substitution of Parties

of litigation, a new plaintiff or defendant is substituted or added. In.such a case,
the general rule, if taken literally, cannot apply, and one needs a specific provi-
sion in that regard. That is to be found in section 21.

Section 21(1) enacts (in the main paragraph) that as regards a new plaintiff or.
defendant substituted or added after the institution of a suit, the suit is deemed
to have been instituted “when he was made a party”—a date which would neces-
sarily“be later than the date of presentation of the plaint.

There is, however, a proviso to sub-section {1}—inserted at the instance of
the Law Commission'—under which, where the court is satisfied that the omis-
sion to include a new plaintiff or defendant was due to a mistake made in good
faith, it may direct that the suit shall, as regards such plaintiff or defendant. be
deemed to have been instituted on any earlier date.

Sub-section (2} of section 21 makes it clear that sub-section (1) does not
apply to, the following two cases :—

@ where the addition or substitution is due to assignment or divolution
of any interest during the pendency of a suit, or.
(ii) where the parties are transposed.

The reason for making this clarification is obvious. In the first case, the
predecessor-in-interest of the added party was already on the record, and the
suit is only sought to be continued against the successor. In the second case, the

party transposed was himself on record, though arrayed on the opposite side

21.2. As stated above acting upon the recommendations of the Law Com-
mission,’ a proviso has been added to sub-section (1) of section 21 to enable the
court to direct that a suit shall as regards a newly added plaintiff or defendant,
be deemed to have been instituted on an earlier date, if certain conditions are
satisfied.

The Supreme Court also regretted that this newly addéd proviso had no
application to the facts of the case before it, with the result that it had no power
to direct that the suit should be deemed to have been instituted on a date car-
lier than November 4, 1958. ‘

21.3. Before the addition of the proviso in section 21(1), there was consi:
derable difference of opinion as regards the power of the court to add new par-
ties on a date when the relevant limitation period had already expired. In a
Calcutta case an eminent judge, Ameer Ali J. refused to permit the addition of
one of the partners after the expiry of the limitation period and observed :—

- “What was the reason for leaving him (i.e., one of the partners) out I do not

know. These people have innumerablé combinations and for all kinds of
reason, firms with different names but the same partners, firms with the
same names and different partners and so forth. They take undue advan-
tage of the facilities provided by the law and they must not be surprised if
the law sometimes takes advantage of them”.

Same was the view of the High Courts of Madras.‘ Rajasthan* and Jammu
and Kashmir.

ICE. Law Commission of India. 3rd Report lation Act. 1908), page 23, vara 54.

‘Law Commission of India, 3rd Report. (Limitation Act, 1908), page 23, para 54, and
page 81-82, section 20. See Remprasad v. Vijay Kumar, A.1.R. 1967 S.C. 278, 284.

*Bhairobux v. Deokaran. A.1.R. 1934, Calcutta 253.

‘*Vyarathammal v. Somasundaram, 1960

‘Firm Seth Hiralal v. Jagan Natl

"Mohi-ud-din v. Chandra Mohan, A.LR. 1966 I



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 65
(Chapter 21—Section 2!—A ddition or Substitution of Parties.)

21. 4-5. On the other hand, in a Madras case, a foreign firm instituted a
suit in its own name which it could not do in view of Order 30, Rule 1, Code of
Civil Procedures, 1908. Upon an objection being raised regarding the maintain-,
ability of the suit, the firm sought an amendment of the plaint by the substitu-
tion of the names of the partners. It was held that-there was no addition of new
plaintiffs, but merely a classification of the individuals already on record.' It is
unnecessary to multiply the authorities.

21.46. The Calcutta’ case was criticised, and dissented from by the Madhya
Pradesh High Court* in which a comparison has been drawn between the draft-
ing of Order 30, Rule 2 of Civil Procedure Code and Order 1, Rule 10 thereof.
Whereas the latter specifically makes a mention of the Limitation Act, the for-
‘mer does not do so and the court for this reason concluded that in the absence
of any reference to section 22 of the Limitation Act in Order 30, Rule 2, Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908, it would not be proper to apply it to the disclosure of
names. The omission to sign the plaint by one partner was allowed to be cured
in a case from Himachal Pradesh,‘ on the ground that this was not a case of
addition of new plaintiff.

21.7. A peculiar situation arose in a Patna case,’ where the names of only
two out of five partners appeared in the certificate of registration and the remain-
ing partners were sought to be added as proforma defendants after the expiry
Of the period of limitation. By harmonious construction of section 69 of the
Partnership Act, Order 30, Rule 1, of the Code of Civil Procedure and section
22 of the Limitation Act of 1908 (corresponding to present section 21), the court
allowed the application on the ground that the provisions of section 22 of the
Limitation Act 1908 were not attracted in such a case.

of the party who, on account of a bona fide mistake, had failed to add a neces: हट by
sary party to a suit. In Madras® the court allowed the plaintiff to bring on re- Courts,
cord the Jegal representatives of a defendant who had died on or before the date

of filing: of the suit—which fact was not within the knowledge of the plaintiff.

वा, Joint Familiies

21.9. Even though the newly added proviso to section 21(1) takes care of Joint Hindu
such contingencies where the plaintiff has inadvertently forgotten to implead a gamilice
necessary party, it must be conceded that suits by or against joint Hindu families genio.
form a class by themselves and need an express provision. The legislative history pagistative
of this section throws considerable light as regards the thinking on the subject

“even in 1907, when the draft Bill which led to the Limitation Act, 1908 was

circulated for comments.

21.10, Mr. H. 5. Phadnis, Acting District Judge Khandesh, while commen-Comment-~1907 +
ting upon the newly added sub-section (2) to section 21 exempting certain cases
from the operation of sub-section (1), observed: that at the end of sub-section
(2), the following words should be added?:—

IMohideen v. V.0.A. Mohamed. A.1.R. 1955 Mad. 294.
*Bhairo Bux Mangilal v. Deokaran, ALR. 1934 Calcutta 253. (para 21.3, supra).
'Firm Narain Das v. Anand Behari. A.1.R. 1958 Madhya Pradesh 408.
‘Bijai Ram ¥, Jai Ram. A.LR. 1955 HP. 57.
’Chaman Lal v. Firm New India Traders, A.LR. 1962 Pat. 25.
*Ramamurthi v. Karuppa Sami, (1979) 1 M.L.J. 298. -
._ "No. 2751 dt. the 30th November. 1907, National Archives File relating to the Indian
limitation Act 1908,

10-14 M of L) & CA/NDs3-



66

Comment
Nasik.

Comment-
Bombay High
Court.

ved:

897TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963,
(Chapter 2i--Section 21—Addition or Substinnion of Parties.)

“Nor to a suit by or against the members of a joint Hindu family to enforce
a joint family right or liability, where one or more of the members being
originally omitted are brought on tecord in the course of the suit at the
instance of either party.”

Explaining the ‘reasons in support of his proposal, the District Fudge obser-

“By reason of improved facilities for travelling and other courses, different
members of a joint Hindu family are now-a-days generally found living in
different places. A joint family creditor, being unaware of the existence
of the whereabouts of a particular member. often omits to make him a
defendant. Or, in a suit by the family, the resident members may omit to
join another member living in some distant place as @ co-plaintiff, under a
bona fide belief that he was not a necessary party or that he had 70
active concer in the debt sued for. It is distinctly hard that in such cases 8
just claim should fail simply because one of the members of the family is
brought on the record after the expiry of the period of limitation. The
proposed addition seems desirable to meet cases of such hardship, vide
Nooranji v. Moti Covanj' where it is laid down that in a suit in respect of
the property of a joint family it is essential that all the persons who compose
the family should be joined as party plaintifis.”

21.11, In the comments in 1907 Mr. 8. C. Kennedy, District Judge, Nasik

pointed out the inequities of the section?

“There is a general feeling that it is inequitable that when ABC. are joint
obligees and the suit is brought within time against A and B alone and C is
subsequently added after the limitation period elapses the suit must neces-

| sarily fail as against all three. It is fyequently the case that the existence

of C is not known till after the Limitation period expires. ता should be
in the discretion of the court to allow or not allow C to be brought on the
record even after the statutory period. The High Courts * ‘ differ in their
views as to the present state of the law.”

21.12. Honourable Mr. Justice Knight of the Bombay High Court, being

well-versed in Hindu Law as prevailing in the Bombay Presidency, desired that

the
the

suits brought by a manager of a Hindu joint family should be exempted from
purview of section 21 (T} of the Act:

“I advocate the addition of a clause io the following effect:

(3) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to a case where a party is added
by the direction of the court, .

or where the addition is made for the protection of the opposite party
against the separate advancement of the same claim by the party so added,
and the claim itself is not modified or extended by such addition.”

“The first of these two paragraphs will embody the case law’ in the Act,
at least so far as added defendants are concerned. The object of the second
paragraph is to protect claims brought by the manager of a Hindu Joint
family who has omitted to join all his co-parceners as co-plaintiffs. Ac-
cording to Hindu ideas. though not according to the law as laid down in

Nooranji v. Moti Govanii 9 Bom. LR, 1126.

२७. 16 dt. 4th December. 1907. National Archieves file.
241. XIV, 524.

‘Calcutta XXVIL 540.

SEL. 12 Cal. 642, 24 Cal. 640 and 27 Cal. 540.



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMSTATIUN ACT, 1963
(Chapter 21—Section 21—Addition or Substitution of Parties.)

our courts, a Hindu manager is competent to institute suits on behalf of
the family; and there docs not seem to be-any good or equitable reason for
allowing a defendant to escape from the payment of a just debt by a techni-

cal plea of non-joinder The Hindu sentiment the exemption suggested
will assuredly commend itscJf: and it is not easy to see why others should
object.”

21.13. Though these comments were tabulated and duly placed before the Suggestions spot
Select Committee, for some obscure reasons the suggestions were not incorpora- in 1908.

ted in the Bill.

21.14. This resulted in avoidable litigation: and conflict of opinion amongst Privy
various High Courts which was ultimated settled by the Privy Council in 1911 * Council
Three managing members of undivided Hindu joint family where the plaintiffs in हु
2 money suit who sought to bring other members of the family as co-plaintifis
after the period of limitation. Holding that the amendment was not fatal to
the suit, the privy Council observed : ~-

“The Indian decisions as to the powers of managing members of an un-
divided Hindu joint family are somewhat conflicting. It is, however, clear
that where a business, like money lending has to be carried on in the
interests of the family as a whole, the managing members may properly be
entrusted with the power of making contracts, giving receipts and compro-
imising or discharging claims ordinarily incidental to the business.”

21.15. The law was re-aftirmed by the Privy Council in 19147 and the lead pescription
thus given has been followed’, by the High Courts. But the Patna High Court of the
insisted’ that the plaint must show that the suit was by the present managing plain 29
member as managing member.. This view was not followed by the Bombay member.
High Court* which ruled that the plaint need not contain a statement or indica-

tion to the effect that the plaintiff was suing as a manager.

21.16. In the Privy Counci] decision’ relating to the position of suits filed Gist of
concerning the affairs of a joint Hindu family and the addition of parties in Privy
such suits, two propositions seem to have been laid down with reference to sec- ruling
tion 21 of the Limitation Act of 1908. corresponding to section 21(1) of the
present Act;

6) The manager of joint Hindu family is entitted to sue in his own name
on behalf of the family, without joining the other members of family,
where the suit concerns affairs of the family.

(ii) If ‘the other members of the family are later impleaded on the objection
of the defendant, but by that time limitation has already run out, the
plaintiff is nevertheless entitled to a decree.

To put it more briefly, in the case of a Hindu Joint Family, the manager
sufficiently represents the family where he acts in the interests of the family,
the other members will be bound by the result of the litigation, and the addition

Umdad Ahmed v. Pabitra Partap Narain (1910) LL.R. 32 All 241 (P.C.).
°Kishan Pershad v, Har Narain Singh, (1911) LL.R, 33 All 272 (P.C.
3$heo Shankar Ram v. Jaddo Kunwar, (1914) LL,R, 36 All. 383 (P.C.).
an Banari v. Sekhrai, A.LR. 1931, All 585; Chetan Singh v. Sattal Singh A.LR. 1924
5Girwar v. Makbulunnessa AIR. 1916 Patna 310.
‘Medguuda ५, Halappa, A.1.R. 1934 Bom. 178.
‘Kishan Prasad, supta.

67


68

Amendments
needed to
suits
concernin|
affairs of

a Hindu
family.

Position
tegal

Order are
Bom, Rule 10
९९७०.

Date of
impk

Three

interpreta
tions,

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 हु
(Chapter 21—Section 21—A ddition or Substitution of Parties.)

of the other members -at a later stage would not be material in regard to the
issue of limitation, such addition being regarded more as the addition of proper
parties rather than the addition of necessary parties.

The situation of defendant’s objection in regard to a joint Hindu family is
illustrated in another Privy Council case’ also. Subsequent rulings are con-
veniently collected in a Madras case. The Supreme Court has ruled® that failure
to describe oneself as a ‘manager’ in the plaint is not decisive of the question
whether the suit was instituted by him in his capacily as a manager, this will
depend upon the circumstances of each case. It could well be that the suit
is instituted by the Manager in his personal capacity or it could be that he
tepresented the family. The Supreme Court summarised the Jaw as follows: —

“in a suit by the manager of a joint Hindu family for enforcement of a
mortgage, an adult member who is interested in the mortgage security, is
not a necessary party though he can be joined as a proper party; and failuce
to join a person who is a proper party not necessary party, does not affect
the maintainability of the suit nor does it invite the application of section
22, Limitation Act.”

21.17. In the above position we recommend that suitable words may be
added in section 21 (2) on the above point. The amendment that is being. re-
commended‘ is merely intended to codify the well understood position as to
suits.concerning the affairs of the Hindu Undivided Family to which the managing
member of the family is a party.

21.18 It may be incidentally mentioned that under Order 30, Rule 10, as
amended in 1976, a Hindu undivided Family carrying on business has been equa-
ted with a firm for the purposes of the rules contained in that order. But even
before that amendment. the Bombay High Court’ had allowed the substitution of
the names‘ of the co-parceners in regard to what was admittedly a joint family
business, on the ground that it is no more than a correction of mis-description,
and not an addition of a party*.

Ill. Effective Date

21.19. We now come to one point of detail. In section 21(1), it has been
provided that the suit shall, as regards the added party, be deemed to have been
instituted when he was so made a party. The expression “when he was so
made a party” has given rise to three different interpretations.

21.20. The first view is to the effect that a person becomes a party only
when he is actually brought on the record as party. The Madras judgment’ on
the subject observes as under :—

५ “It cannot be said that a suit is instituted, if the plaintiff, who wants to
file it in court, puts it into his drawer or keeps it in vakils’ chambers. In
the same manner, when a person is sought to be added as party, the person
becomes a party only when he is actually brought on record as a party.”

Mmdad Ahmed v. Pabitra Partap Narain (1910) LL.R. 32 All 241 (P.C.).

*Venkatanarayana v. Somragu. A.LR. 193:

SDevidas ४. Shrishailappa, A.LLR. 1961 S.C. 1937.

‘See para 21.34 irifra.

*Ram Prasad v. Shrinavas, A.LR. 1925. Bombay 525, 527.

See further Law Commission of India, Report, (Code of Civil Procedure 1908;
Chapter 30.

TAmmayya १, Narayana, A.LR. 1925 Mad. 487.


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 21—Section 21—Addition or Substitution of Parties.)

The reasoning in the Madras case is, with respect, obscure because an appli-
cant who wishes to add other persons as parties has done all that is in his*power
by filing an application in court. The analogy of keeping the plaint in the
vakils’ drawer does not appear to be cxactly applicable.

21.21. The second view on the subject is that a diligent applicant who had
applied within the period prescribed should not suffer merely because the court,
for some reason or other, cannot, or does not, give him the relief within the
period. On this principle it has been held by the same High Court! that a new
person is made a party not on the date of the order of the court directing to
implead him, but on the date of the application to implead.

21.22, A third view has been propounded in a Patna case’, The ratio of
the judgment seems to be that the limitation in relation to claim as against the
newly added defendant commences from the date of service of the summons on
him. Reliance has been placed on Order 1, Rule 10(5), of the Code of Civil
Procedure 1908 which speaks of the service of summons as the date when pro-
ceedings are deemed to have started. But the judgment also’ contains a sentence
to the effect that the suit shall be deemed to have been instituted against the
newly added defendant “when he was made a praty to the suit”.

24.23. In view of the relative uncertainty of the position and to avoid any Need for
controversy on this point, it is desirable that a suitable explanation’ should be 2mendments.
+ added to section 2101) to make it clear that the date of the application for im-
pleading a party will be deemed to be the date from which section 21(1) becomes
effective, .

IV. Misdescription

21.24. We now turn to cases of misdescription of partics. The Railway Rarilways and
Administration being the largest net-work of public utility, a number of cases are the issue of
filed against the Railways for tort or breach of contract, arising out of their misdescription.
function as carriers of goods and passengers. Owing to inadvertence of the
counsel, the suits against Railways often contain a misdescription of parties and
prayers for amendment to correct the mis-description have been agitated right
apto the higher courts.

21.25. In a Calcutta’ case', the suit was against the Railways for non-delivery Case Jaw.
of certain goods. In the plaint, the name of the defendant was given as “Agent
of the Bengal Nagpur Railway Saheb Bahadur”. An objection was taken that
the frame of the suit was bad, being in contravention. of the provision of Order
29, rule 1 and Appendix A to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. The plaintiff
applied for leave to amend the plaint. Reliance was placed on a decision’ in
which the Bombay High Court had (under similar circumstances) allowed the
correction of the clerical error. However, the Calcutta High Court refused to
allow an amendment and distinguished the Bombay case by observing that even
though, in the Bombay case, there was a mis-description in the title of the suit,
the plaintiff therein had made sufficient averments to make it known to the
defendant that he was seeking relief against the Railway administration, and
not against the Agent. है

‘Trustees of Port of Madras v. Good Year india A.I.R. 1973 Madras 316.
*Indu Bhushan v. Hare Ram, A.1.R. 1972 Patna 229,

°For a draft see para 21.34 infra.

‘Agent B. N. Rly, v. Behari Lal Dutt. ALR.

1925 Cal. 716.
*Saraspur Mfg. Co. v. B. B. & CLRI

ALR. 1923 Bom 452.



70

Deity.

Summary of
the position-
no change

recommended

as to mis-
description,

Appeals «and

the addition
of parties.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMAIN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 21—Section 21—Addition or Substitution of Parties.)

21.26. Same fate was met by the plaintiff in a Patna case’. But the Madras
High Cou eld that a notice claiming damages for loss of goods in railway
transit which was sent to the Member-in-charge of the Railway Board was good
and the mis-description in the plaint was allowed to be corrected. The court
quoted from the Report of the Civil Justice Commitice regarding the proper
function of procedure.

“Procedure is the machinery of the law after all~-the channel and means
whereby law is administered and justice reached. 11 strangely departs from
the proper office if in place of facilitating it is permitted to obstruct and
even to extinguish the legal rights and is thus made to govern where it
ought to subsérve.” .

24.27. Apart from cases involving Railways, a mis-description can also take
place while fiting a suit against a deity. In a Calcutla cuse, where a suit for
possession was filed against the shebait and there was nothing in the plaint to
indicate that the plaintiff was proceeding against the deity and not against the
shebait, it was held that section 22 of the old Limitation Act of [908 applies and
so far as the deity was concerned the suit was barred.

—
21,28. A review of the above case law shows thut the courts, in their anxiety
to see that a plaintiff does not get non-suited merely because of bad ‘drafting of the
plaint, have been scanning the entire plaint to see whether the averments therein
manifest, at some place or the other, the person who has been really the plaintiff. ,
Here again, this exercise may prove to be futile in the case of a plaintiff who (10
doubt, erroneously) believes that suing the Manager or Agent of the Railway is
tantamount to a suit against the Railway administration, or that filing a suit
against the shebait or pujari of the temple is equal to filing a suit against the
religious institution (i.e. the institution of which the natural person is shebait or
the pujari). However, it would be an arduous task to re-draft the proviso to
section 20(1) so as to include cases discussed above. Ultimacly, it will have to
be left to the good sense and judgment of the courts as to when the ‘proviso
should be pressed into service. पु

V. Appeals and applications,
21.29. Under 0.41, r. 20 C.P.C. an appellant must implead all the parties

within limitation. However O. 41, 1, 2022), 09.0. gives power to the court te

allow the impleading of a party after the expiry of limitation. The case is,

of course, outside section 21, Limitation Act. ,

The position may be considered in some detail. A suit is instituted (in an
ordinary case) when the plaint is Presented to the proper officer under section 32)
(aXi); (Other sub-clause of section %2) deal with a suit by a pauper and a
suit against a company). Now, what section 2101) provides is that, if, after the
“institution of a suit” which is defined in section 3(2)(8), “a new party is added,
etc.”, then, as regards that new party, the suit is deemed to have been instituted.
when he was so made a party (subject to the proviso). In this manner, section
2101) modifies section 3(2Xa) and makes it necessary for the plaintiff to show
that even on the date of impleading the new party, the suit is within time.

21.30. It would be of interest to mention, in this context, that in one of
the decisions of the Patna High Court, the following observations occur regarding
section 22 of the Act of 1908 (corresponding to present section 21):

‘Bast India Rly Co v. Ram Lakhan, ALR, 1925 Pat.37. 7
2G.C.-in-Council ¥, Sankarappa, ALR. 1953 Mad. 838, ‘
*Pravakar Roy v, Bibuti Bhushan, A.UR. 1957 Gal. 177.


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 21—Section 21- -Addition or Substitution of Parties.

“If it were not for section 22 of the Limitation Act (1908), it could
not be urged that a suit. as regards the added party should be regarded as
having been instituted when he was made a party'”

24.31. Coming concretely to the position relating to appeals, Order 41, rule
20 of the Code of Civit Procedure, 1908 (as amended in 1976) reads as under:-—

“20. Power to adjourn hearing and direct persons appearing interested to be
made respondents.

(1) Where it appears to the Court at the hearing that any person who
was a party to the suit in the Court from whose decree the appeal is pre-
ferred, but who has not been made,a party to the appeal, is interested in
the result of the appeal, the Court may adjourn the hearing to a future day
to be fixed by the Court and direct that such person be made a respondent.

(2) No respondent shall be added under this rule. after the expiry of the
period of limitation for appeal, unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded,
allows that to be done, on such terms as to costs as it thinks fit.”

21.32. 1 would thus appear that as regards the addition of parties to an
appeal, where the case falls within Order 41, rule 20, that rule takes care of the
situation and we do not consider it Necessary to suggest any provision in Section
21.

21.33. As regards applications, would seem that although section 3 of the Applications
Limitation Act specifically deals only with applications made in the High Court
by notice of motion, the principle would be the same regarding applications in
general, namely,, it is enough if the application is made within time as on date
of presentation to the proper officer of the court. The case law at present does
not regard section 21 as applicable to applications. It has “generally been re-
cognised that if section 21 is regarded as applicable to applications, it would
benefit the opposite party and not the applicant. The most important case is
application for execution. to which also section 21 does not, at present, apply.

t
21,34, It is well-established that section 22 of' the Act of 1908 (correspond-
~ ing to present section 21) did not apply to applications, so that the addition of a
party during the pendency of the application does not necessarily mean that as
regards him, the application will be taken as filed only on the date of the implead-
ing of that party. This principle has been laid down by decisions of the High
Court of Calcutta, Judicial Commissioner of Nagpur and High Court of
Patna.

21.38. In a Kerala case', present section 21 has been held to be inapplicable
to a petition for revision. >

[~~ दि
21.36. We think that section 216) should be amended so as to bring appli- Applications कर
cations within its scope by an express provision. This will settle the position. within rousl
section 21.

iChandrika Roy v. Ram Kuer, A.1.R. 1923 Pat, 88.

ndu Bhushan v. Hari Charan, A.LR.193t Cai. 385, 387.

8Amolakrao v. Govindrao, A.LR. 1919 Nag. 150. न
‘Gulab Kuer v. Syed Mohammed Zafar, AIR. 1921 Pat. 180.

SChandrika Rov v. Ra mKuer, ALR. 1933 Pat. 88.

*See also Zahumd Hussain v. Badi Narain, A.IR. 1930 Ail. 597.

*Rugmani ४. Chatlappa Rawther, (1969) Ked. L'T. 789.


72

Recommendation.

Section 22-
continuing
breaches and
torts.

History.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter _2\—-Section 21---Addition or Substitution of Parties)
(Chapter 22-—Section 22—Continuing Wrongs)

VI. Recommendation

21.37, In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section 21

should be revised as under:
Revised section 21

21. (1) Where, after the institution of a suit, or the making of an
application, a new plaintiff or applicant, or a new defendant or respondent, as
the case may be, is substituted or added, the suit or application shall, as
regards him, be deemed to have been instituted, or made, as the case may be,
when he was made a party ;

Provided, that where the court is satisfied that the omission to include
a new plaintiff or application or a new defendant or respondent, as the case
may be, was due to a mistake made in good faith, it may direct that the
suit, or application as regards such plaintiff or applicant or defendant or
respondent shall be deemed to be have been instituted, or made, as the case
may be, on any eatlier date. “Explanation—For the purposes of this
section, and subject to the provisions of the proviso to this sub-section, 6
person is deemed to have been made a party was the application for making
his a party is made to the court.

(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply—

(a) to a case where a party is added or substituted owing to assign-
ment or devolution of any interest during the pendency of a
suit or application, or,

(b) where a plaintiff is made a defendant or an applicant is made a
respondent, or

{c) where a defendant is made a plaintiff or a respondent is made
an applicant, or "४

(d) to a suit or application by or against the members of a joint
Hindu family to enforce a right or liability relating to the
affairs of the joint Hindu family, where one or more of the
members of the family, not being originally impleaded, is in
the course of the suit or application, brought on the record at
the instance of the other party.”

CHAPTER 22 ५
SECTION 22: CONTINUING WRONGS
22.1. Section 22 provides that in the case of a continuing breach of contract

or in the case of a continuing tort', a fresh period of limitation begins to run at
every moment of the time during which the Breach or the tort, as the case may
‘be, continues. The object of the section is to enable the injured party to wait
for so long as the breach or the wrong is persisted in and then to bring a suit
to recover all the damage he may ‘have suffered, instead of being compelled to
bring innumerable separate suits, one aftet the other’.

22.2. Section 23 of the Act of 1877, which dealt with the subject, ran as

under :—

1Compare section 2(m)—sdefinition of tort.
386०0. of State v. Venkayya, (1977) LL.R. 40 Mad. 910, 920, 921.


11-44 M of LI & CA/NDjs3

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 22-- Section 22—Continuing Wrongs.)

“23. In the case of a continuing breach of contract and in the case of a
continuing independent of contract, a fresh period of limitation begins to
at every moment of the time during which the breach or the wrong, as the
case may be, continues.” ,

223. This section was continued verbatim 85 section 23 of the Limitation
Act, 1908.

When the draft bill for the Act of 1908 was circulated for comments, the
section came to be noticed in a rather oblique way. Article 35 of the Limitation
Act of 1877 provided for a period of limitation of two years for a suit for restitu-

“ tion of conjugal rights and provided (in the third coluran) that the time would
begin to run when restitution is demanded and is refused by the husband or
wife, being of full age and sound mind. . .

22.4. Dealing with this article, the Statement of Objects and Reasons anne-
xed to the Bill of 1907 stated as under :— .

“Atticle 35, of the Act is also proposed to be omitted.

“The scope of this article is very limited. It does not apply to cases arising
under the Indian Divorce Act. The Allahabad High Court has held that
it does not apply to Hindus or Muhammadaas, as their personal law does not
require an antecedent demand to sustain a suit, for restitution of conjugal
rights, nor make restitution unenforceable against a minor, and it has further
held that the withholding of conjugal rights by either party is a continuing
wrong, and that a claim for restitution cannot be barred by Limitation:
Binda ९. Kausilia, 1.L.R. 13 All. 126, 146. The same view was taken in Bai
Sari v. Saukla, 1.L.R. 16 Bom 714. , Those viéws jhave been so far modified
by the rulings of tne Calcutta and Madras: High Courts and by the lates
rulings “of the Bombay High Court as to make the article applicable to
Hindus and Mohammadans in cases of suits preceded by demand and’ refu-
sal a3 mentioned in the third column; Thunijibhoy v. Hirabai, 1.L.R. 25 Bom.
TLR. 28 Mad 436. The operation of the article may be easily avoided by a
644 R.B.; Asirunnissa v. Bugloo, 1.L.R. 34 Cal. 79; Saravanal v. Poovavi,
party if he simply refrains from making a demand which, it may be noted,
is not, under the Hindu or Mohammadan Law, necessary to give rise to a
cause of section. It is a very usual thing in Hindu and Mohammadan
families for a wife to go and stay with her parents or brothers and. the effect

of this article is that if owing 10 any domestic quarrel the wife should in -

. @.fit of temper refuse to return, the husband would be compelled to take the
matter into court within two years.” . .

. 22.5. The Government Pleader’, Assam Valley Districts, and the Judge’ of
the. Assam Valley Districts, while commenting om the’ Statement of Objects ‘and
Regsons quoted above, noted as under’ :—

, ‘It appears from Objects and Reasons under Article 35 that the Legis-
lature would adopt the suggestion (made. in LL.R. 13 All. 126, 145) that
withholding of restitution of conjugal rights is-a continuing wrong. In a

recent Calcutta case (11 C.W.N. 437) it has been held that section 23 (now -

section 25) does not apply to such a cage. In view of this decision of the
Calcutta High Court, the intention of the legislatnre should be made clear
by an itlustration.”

‘Babu Kali Charan Son.
°Mr. W. 8. Brown. .
On 3rd September, 1907—National Archives File.

3


74

‘
जज 1963.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT. 1963

(Chapter 22-- Section 22—Coritinuing Wrongs.)

7326. This omisison of article 35 of thé Act of 1877 from the Act of 1908
was noticed by Wazir Hasan AJ.C. in an Qudh case', in which a comparison
was drawn between the cause of action for 3 suit for restitution of cénjugal

‘rights and that for dissolution of martiage. It was observed that ‘in the former
case the ‘cause of action is founded on a ‘breach of contract of marriage, in which
the breach continues so long as the person of the wife is withheld from the
husband, while, in the latter case the residuary article 120 (of the Act of 1908}
applied:

22.7, Section 23 was not disturbed in 1908. The Law Commission in its
Report? on the Act of 1908 recommended expansion of the concept of “tort”,
and had suggested a draft clause which ran as under: — .

“21. Continuing: breaches and wrongs.—In the case of a continuing
breach of contract and in the case of a continuing wrong independent of
contract, a fresh period of limitation begins to run at every moment of the
time during which the breach or the wrong, as the case may be, continues.”

“The Law Commission had also recommended that the expression: edn?
should be defined to include “all civ wrongs independent of contract.”

22.8, However, in section 22 as it emerged in its final form in the Act of
1963, the words “continuing wrong independent of contract” have been substi-
tuted by the words “continuing tort”. The definition of “tort” in section 2(m)
‘efines it as a civil wrong which is nat. exclusively the breach of a contract or
breach of trust. This is not the definition that was recommended by the Law
Commission’. : हु

229, The language used has introduced a deficiency in the section, The
Law Commission had recommended intlusion of all continuing wrongs in the
section, but, in the present language (1286 with the definition of “tort”) section, 22

does not cover breach of trust or violation of statute.
~ r

22.10..We have considered the matter carefully. It appears that there is no
redson for excluding from section 22 continuisig ‘breaches of trusts or continuous
violations of statute, No doubt, section 10 does take care of certain breaches of
trusts; but the topic under discussion is of cantinwing wrongs. It is proper that
section 22 should cover all continuing wrongs:coritractual and non-contractual.

The word “wrong” can be given thé widest possible connotation, and would
include infringement of trade marks or other forms of intellectual property, viola-
tion of easements (and breach of statutory duty.. In a Punjab case‘, the fixing
of a Persian Wheel over a well which - was: in the enjoyment of the other co-
owner was held to amount to a continuing wrong Similarly, in a Lahore case’,
it was held (disregarding the technical aspect) that under Muslim Law, marriage,
being a civil contract, the husband’s impotency was a continuing breach of
contract of marriage. As section 22 jembpdies: a ‘general enunciation of the
principal of continuing wrongs, we are of the view that it would be desirable to
put the matter beyond any doubt. पु

'Mad. Hamidullah Khan v. Mt. Bakhurijahan 82280. ALR. 1922 Oudh 109.

3Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation: Act, 1908) page 12, paragraph 20,
page 5, paragraphs 10 and’ 117 page 10. paragraph 14 and Bill at page 72, Clause 2(3);
page 73, clause 2(ii) and page 82 clause (21), है

‘Spatagraph 22.7 supra.

“Thotdm Singh v, Sohana, A.LR. 1950 Bast Puniad 21.

‘Sahib Zaiaa v. Abdul Ghafoor, A,1LR. 1939 Lalipre 454,


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 है 75

(Chapter 22---Section 22-- Continuing Wrongs.)
हर (Chapter 23—Section 23--466 not Actionable without Special Damage.)

22.11. Accordingly, section 22 should be revised, so as to make it clear Need to
that the section is not limited only to breaches of contract or torts {as defined widen, the

.in the Act), but covers ali continuing wrongs. cover all
wrongs,

22.42. 11 is also necessary to refer to another aspect of section 22, which Relief claim-
figures in a recent Madhya Pradesh ruling'. That ruling seems to assume that jiamaterial.
section 22 (continuing wrongs) is confined to suits fot damages and does not, in
“terms, apply to suits whefe the relief for prayer is an injunction. Of course,

in that case, the court did hold that the cause of action for a'suit for an injunction

restraining the defandants from (illegally) recovering a sum of money from the

‘plaintiff arises every time a threat of such recovery is made. However, to avoid

recurrence of such a controversy, we think that it should be made clear by an .
express provision that section 22 applies, isrespective of the nature of the relief
‘claimed for the continuing wrong. . oe

22.13, In the light of the above discussion, we recommended that section 22 Recommendation
should be revised as under: — है

Revised section 22
“22—Continuing Wrongs.—In the caseof a continuing breach of con-
tract and in the case of a continuing wrong independent of contract, a fresh

period of limitation begins to run at every momdat of the time during which
the breach or the wrong, as the case may he, coptinues.

” Explanation. —This section applies whatever be the relief claimed.”

ऊँ

४2 CHAPTER 23

SECTION 23: ACTS NOT ACTIONABLE WITHOUT
SPECIAL DAMAGE

23.1. Section 23 provides that in the case of a suit for compensation for af section 23—
act which does not give rise to a cause of action unless some “specific injury” Condutt not
actually results therefrom, the period of limitation shall be computed from the Sect

+... time when the injury results. In a sense, .it mogifies the general rule. damage.

The general rule is that “Limitation runs from the earliest time at which an
action could be brought”. Accordingly, time would, in general, run from the
‘occurrence of the act of omission complained of, and not from the time when the

- consequential damage causes. However, where specific damage is itself the gist
of the cause of ‘action’, this general rule ‘requires qualification. Time should
commence to run only when the damage actually results, because the right to sue
arises only then.’

23.2. The history of the section is of some relevance and may be briefly dealt The ‘Act of
‘and

with. Section 24 in the Limitation Act (15 of 187%) ran as under:— Dae Me

“24, In the case of a suit for compensation for an act which does not ot that ral
give rise to a cause of action unless some specific’ injury actually results .
therefrom, the period of limitation shail be computed from the time when
the injury results.

1Mohanlal v. State of M.P., A.LR. 1980 M.P.-KF.BY
. Pasar’ v. Oe eeronen (18910 2 20740 :
eos Sof sation for sla +t
J Ses 70720 % Corporation of गन] हक a
Lo as |

ULR. 18 Cal. 91, 99,
‘ .


76

“27 1

i

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 23— Section 23-- Acts not Actionable without Special’ Damage.)
Hlustrations

(@) A owns the surface of a field. B owns the subsoil. B digs. coal
iiercout without causing any immediate apparent injury’ to the

Surface, but at least the surface subsides. The period of limitation

{ in the case of a suit by A against B runs from the time of the
subsidence. .

(b) A speaks and publishes of ‘B slanderous words not actionable in.

themselves without special damage caused thereby. 0 in conse-
quence refuses to employ B as his clerk. The period of limitation
in the case of a suit by B-agninst A for compensation for the sland-
er does not commence till the refusal.”

23.3. Illustration (a) of the above section 24 (Act of 1877) was probably dic-

‘tated by the facts of a House of Lords Judgment’, in which A was the owner

of certain houses standing on land which was surrounded by the lands of B, C

& D. E was the owner of mines running underneath the lands of all these per- है

sons. E worked’ the mines in such a manner (without actual negligence) that the
lands of 8, C and D fank in; and, after more than six years’ interval, their sink-
ing occasioned an injury to the houses of A. It was held that a right of action

acctued to A when this injury actually occurted, and that his Tight” was not

barred by the Statute of Limitations.

This view was affirmed by the House of Lords in a later case’, in which it
was held that the cause of action in respect of further subsidence did not arise

“till the subsidence occurred and therefore, the injuréd party could maintain an

action for the injury thereby caused, although more than six years had passed
since the last working of the coal mine.

234. We now come to illustration (b) to the Act of 1877, When the. draft of
ie Act of 1908 was circulated for comunents,«Sir Lawrence 0. Jenkins, Chief
Justice of the Bombay High Court’, suggested the omission of illustration (b)
as “it may ‘be open to question whether special damage is necessary in India”.

. This was in the context of slander‘.

|

23.8. Acting upon this Suggestion, the ‘Act of 1908 did not repeat illustration
(b). When the Act of 1963 was passed, even illustration (a) was omitted, in con-
formity with the general recommendation of the Law Commission to omit ilius-
trations‘.

23.6. Thete is a controversy on the question whether the section, in terms ©

applies also to suits based on contract, or whether it is confined to suits based
on torts. हु

-The Rangoon High Court consistently’ held that section 24 applies only to

. Suits based on torts.

However, the Allahabad High’ Court’ seems: to have taken a somewhat
wider vjew and the following observations of Arghworth J. are worth quoting :

~Wackhouse v. Bonomi (1861) 9 LG. 503... v. Bonomi (1861) 9 BLL.C, 503. . *

"Darley Main Colliery Company v. Thomas Bilfried Howe “Mitchell, 18 LR. It
Appeal Cases 187 (H.L.). (1866)

~~ _4No. 2469 dated 18th Bec. 1907 from the Acting Registrar High Court, Appellate Side
Bombay to the Secretary to the Government, Judicisl Deptt.. Bombay—National Archives

/
हे
Agi, 1908), 4-5, 8.
Att, 1908), pages 4-5, para
po, 258,

tCf. discussion as to articles 75-76 (libel and ‘
‘Law Commission of India, 3rd Report
‘Ss 1. M. Cany v. Loong Ghye, ALR. 1936;
(b) Annamalai Chetyar ९. Cowasjee, ALR.
. Kedar Neth.v. Har Gobind, ATR. 1925 Ad.
“See also-Kothari & Sons v. Krishna



‘897TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chupter 23—Section 23—Acts not Actionable without Special Damage)

?
“Where there is no sum named to be paid in case of breach of stipulation .

. by way, of penalty, under Indian Law a mere ‘breach of the covenant by a
omission to pay, as in this case, gives no right to a ‘claim for compensation, -

and the suit will come within the language i tion 24 of the Limitation
Act. I may. mention that the word ‘act’ in of the Limitation Act
will include an omission (sce section 3(2) of the Clauses Act, 10 of

1897). It has been urged that section 24 is énly applicable to suits based
on tort, but no reason appears for holding this.”

23.7, The Bombay High Court' while dealing with'a case in which misfea-
sance summons had been taken out against the Director of a company under sec-
tion 235 of the Companies Act, 1913, observed:

“The case of Cavandish Bentink vy. Fann also shows that a misfeasance app-
lication, to be successful, must establish. that actual loss resulted to the com-
pany from the .misfeasance. But by section 24, Limitation Act, in the case
of a suit for comipensation for an act which does not give rise to a right
of action unless’ some specific injury actually arises the reform, the period
of limitation is to be computed from the time whem the injury results......
In this connection I think that ‘injury’ in section 24 includes a legal injury;
and that the present application is clearly one ge omipensation’, which is

. the expression used in section 235, Companies ori eee And in so far,
if at all, as the case is not covered by section 24 4 ik it comes within
section 23”, .

‘ 23.8, Meredith J. of the Patna High Court? having takan stock of the con-
troversy on this subject, ultimately observed that “the better view is that section
24 _is. applicable in the case of action ex contracti-in proper cases”. The case
was, however, one in which the breach of contract itself had furnjshed the cause
of ‘action (and. the aspect ‘of special damage was not material). ’

23.9. The matter came up in some other cases’* in an indirect way, but
no concluded view was expressed on the above point.
ry :

> , 23.10. It would appear that in section 23, the use of the word ‘injury’ iD Meaning of
juxtaposition with the expression ‘cause of action’ indicates that all types of ac- cause 0।
tions, irrespective of their form, are contemplated: Holloway J. in a Madras case * 77:

has gone in detail as to what constitutes a “cause of action”, and observed as

तल: .* .

“Parke, B in Nicklin v. Williams, 10 Exch. 259 and. Campbell, CJ. in
Bonomi v. Backltouse, 8.8. & 8, 622, talk of a canse of action not being
an injury” to a right, but of consequential damages: being that cause. It is
clear, however, that this language is incorrect; and the only meaning in cases
in which the cause of action is said to arise from consequential damages, is
that until that damage, there was no injury at’ all. In that same case, Cole-
ridge, J. says—“The right of. action vests in a party whose rights are injuri-
ously affected by the act of another person at the time when the right is so
affected. Erle, J—“A cause of action arises wheh this right is violated,”
and again, “as a general principle, it is difficult to qpnceive a cause of action
from damage when no right has been violated, and no right has been violated,
है +

IGovind v. Rangnath, A.1.R. 1930 Bombay 585, 7
Sagat Kishore Prasad v. Parmashwar Singh, A.LR. 1951 Pat, 348 ILR 28 Pat 974,
*Rajagopala Naidu v. Aiyyaswamy Chattier, A.LR. 1965 Madras 532.
SJaganmati Marwari v. Kolidas Roh, A.LR. 1929 Patnay24s,
303, Emer Traders (0) Lid. New Delhi. Punjab Nawong! Bank, A.LR. 1966 Punjab
“ 615. Bhajan Hardt Singh v. Karson Agency (India) os) ॥ 1987 Delhi 101.
- "Desouza v, Colas + (1866-67) M.H.C, 384, 407, गे is tad हे



* §97H REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapie? 23—Section—23—Acts not Actionable without Special Damage—Chapter
24—Section 24 Computation of Time)
and no wrong has been done,” dad in the Exchequer Chamber, “Wilkes,

—“the question in this case depends upon what is the character of the.

right”. The is this case was to a right in rem. This right was not
to prevent the de! from excavating, but to have his land in its nafural

state. There was no ‘juris vincudum’ at all until that state was distarbed; |

there was no disturbance until the damage accrued, and at the accruing of |

the disturbance arose the injury, the cause of action.”

१23.11, From the above discussion it. transpires that the doubts expressed
about the applicability of the section to suits -based on contracts have beea 16-
solved by the courts mostly in favour of its applicability. However, in order to
obviate, further controversy, on the point, it is desirable to extend the section
expressly to suits on contracts, =,”

23.12. In fact, while making it olear that section 23 is comprehensively and
is not confirmed to tort, etc, opportunity can also be taken of clarifying that the
section applies to all wrongs (for example breach of statute or breach of trust).'

23,13. Another point on which the section seems to require verbal improye-
ment relates to the weptds “specific injury” occurring in the section. The word
‘injury’ is now-a-days used in the context of civil fiability for the wrong Seself
(which is a legal concept), while the word “damage” is used to indicate the
harmful physical consequence of the injury. The section has obviously in mind

* the consequence and from this angle “specific damage” is better than the present
wording “specific injury”. In:fact, the Limitation Act itself {in the articles relat- |

Recommendation.

ing to libel and slander); uses the expression “specific damage”. These words
were also used in illustration (9) to section 24 of the Limitation Act of 1877, The
words “specific injury”, therefore, should be replaced by “specific damage”.

23.14, In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section 23
should be revised as under:

Revised soction 23
“93, In the case of a suit for contpensation for an act which does not
“give rise to a cause of action unless some specific damage actually results

therefrom, the period of limitation shall be computed from the.time when
the damage results.

Explanation—The provisions af this section apply to a wrong witch
constitutes a breach of contrast, as‘ alsa to an act which constitutes a wrong
independent of contract.

Oo CHAPTER 24
SECTION 24: COMPUTATION OF TIME.

.- 24.1. Dates or periods of time for the performance of ‘contractual obliga-
tions are often mentioned in instruments with reference to an Indian calendar or
some calendar other than the Gregorian. Ip regard to such instruments, a gone-
tal rule is enacted in section 24 of the Lintltation Act—expressed in the form of
a. legal fiction. The section provides set afl instruments shall, for the

of the Act, be deemed to be mad wilt réference to the Gregorian calendar. Ip

Raman)



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN.-OF INDIA ON ‘THE LIKITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 24—Section 24—Computation of time—CI hapter 25—Section 23— ,
Acquisition of Easements by Prescription)

effect, by virtue of the operation of the section, dates or periods mentioned with
reference to any other calendar are to be converted into the corresponding dates
‘or periods of the Gregorian calendar and the tinte limits prescribed by the Limi-
tation Act would be computed on that basis.

Thus, for the purposes of the Act, the parties to. every instrument are dee~
med to have used the terms “year” and “month” in wa sense which they bear
_in the Gregorian calendar’. The section is not subject fo a different intention?"

242. The law on this topic is now fairly welisettled and the section No change
‘ appears to need no change. © nee

woe CHAPTER 25
SECTION 25: ACQUISITION OF EASEMENTS BY..PRESCRIPTION

25.1. Tt is well-known that the running of time hag two important facets in Acquisition
law—the barring of a remedy and the creation or extinction of rights. The latter by prescrip.
has come to be known as “prescription”, while the former is known as. timita- tion—The. हि
tiom. . Prescription as creating certain rights (known as acquisitive prescription)
is dealt with in the Limitation Act in sections 25 and 26, in the context of ease-

‘ments.

These two sections apply only to those areas whete the Indian Easements
Act, 1882 (5 of 1882) does not extend’. The reason why the Indian  Stafute’
Book, in two enactments extending to two different areas, deals with the subject
of easements is historical. Provisions for the-acquisition of casements by pres-
cription on the analogy of the English 306 were. intredwged for the first time
in India in 1871 in the Limitation Act, 1871, and repeated in the Limitation
Act of 1877. [The English Act on the subject had been regarded as applicable
in the Presidency towns]. Later, as a part of the plan for a civil code, the
Fasements Act, 1882, was passed, but it was-not. apphied throughout India in
view of ‘the reservations expressed by some of the local Governments. Hence,

+ the provisions in the Limitation Act relating. to easements continued to apply
‘to areas where the Easements Act had not been appltiéd, either initially or by
subsequent extension, This position continues today. AltNough the Law Com:
mission, in its Report on the earlier Limitation Act, recommended’ the extension
of the Easements Act, 1882 to the whole-of India (and repeal of sections 26-27,
Limitation Act, 1908) that could not be done, owing’ to certain constitutional
difficulties felt by the Ministry of Law’. Sections 26 and 27. of the Act of 1908
have been re-enacted in sections 25 and 26 of the present’ Limitation Act. For

_ the purposes.of the present Report, it is unnecessary. to make any detailed
comments as to the constitutional aspect. Accosflingly, we proceed to a con
sideration of the provisions contained in the relevant sectoits.-

1

, 28.2. Section 25 deals with the acquisition of eagements by prescription Section 25°
Sub-section (1) makes a two-fold provision. The fis ‘half deais: with access
and use of ‘light or air to and for any building, which ham been peaceably-en-
joyed with the building as an easement and as of right:without interruption for

\Nilkanth v. Dattatraya, (1879) 1.L.R. 4 Bom. 103.
Kenkata Subramaniya Sastri v. Bhairavasami, (19277 53 MML.I.; 447. \
‘ishnu Bhatia ५. Domakka, A.UR. 1958 Ker. 326.
*Ruwgo v. Babaj, (1880) LL.R. 6 Bom. 83
‘Section 29(4), Limitation Act, 1963.
prescription Act, 1832 § af ).
Ww mmission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Agt,. 1 i page para 5
, Statement of Objects and Reasons annexed to the | 24 para 56.


80

a

- No change,

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 25—Section 25~~Acquisition of Easements by Prescription-—Chapter
26—Section 26-—Reversioner-—Chapter 27— Section 21~—Extinguishment of
Right to Property)

20 years, At the expiry of the twenty years’ period, the right to euch acess
or use of light and air becomes absolute and indefeasible. The second halt of
the section provides that where any way or watercourse or the use of any water
or any other easement (whether aifirmative or negative) has been peaceably and
already enjoyed by any person claiming title thereto as an easement and ai of
sight without interruption and for. twenty years, the right of such way, water-
course, use of water or easement becomes absolute and indefeasable.

Sub-section (2) of section 25, in substance, requires ‘that the period ‘of
twenty years should be 2 period ending within two years next before the insti-
tution of the suit wherein the claim to such period relates is contested. By: sub:
section (3), where the property over which # right is.claimed under sub-section
(1) belongs to Government, the period must be thirty years. The meaning of *
“interruption” for the purposes of the section is explained by the Explanation
to the section.

28.3. No change is needed in section 25. Section 26 is dealt with in the
next Chapter. .

CHAPTER 26
SECTION 26 : REVERSIONER

264. Continuing the subject of easements in section 25 dealt with section |
26 provides that in computing the. period of twenty years mentioned in section
25, if the-servant tenant has been held by vittue of any life interest or any other
Gimited) interest for a term exceeding thie years, the time of enjoyment of syclt
easement during the continuance of such life interest or Limited. interest shall be
excluded in computing the period of twenty years, in case the claim to the oase-
ment is, within three years next after the determination of such interest or term,
resisted by the person entitled, on such determination, to the deminant tenenteat.

The object of this section is to preclude any easement from arising .whese:
the servient tenement is enjoyed or held for a limited period—obviously because:
a person having a liniited interest may not have any enthusiasm in opposing or
resisting any enjoyment that might ultimately ripen into an easement.

26.2, No change is needed in the Section.

. CHAPTER 27°
SECTION 27. : EXTINGUISHMENT OF RIGHT TO PROPERTY ~

27.1. In the context. of prescription, the-more important provision is to -be
found in section 27, which may bd desdtiboi as the shortest but the most: im-
portant section of the Act. In terms, i dealg with the extinction of rights—ex-
tinctive prescription—but, in effect, ‘it aimoutits to the creation of 4 correspond:
ing right, which in practice, has come to be known as title by adverse posses-
sion. The section reads as under

“27. At the determination ‘of- the period hereby limited to any person
for instituting a suit for possession of any property, his right to such pro
perty shall be extinguished.”



89TH REPORT OF LAW.COMMN, OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION Act, 1963 \ $!

(Chapter 27-- Section 27— Extinguishment of Rigot to Property.
Chapter 28—Section 28—-Amendment of Certain Acts

Chapter 29-— Sections 29 to 32—Savings, Transitional Provisions and Repeal.)

27.2. The theoretical as well as practical importance of ihe extinction and Other points
acquisition of title to property by prescription is, by now, well understood and section" i"
it is hardly necessary to spend much time over the subject. While the principle
enacted in the section is confined to property which it is sought to possess, at
the same time, it applies to property to all kinds—movable and immovable, in-
cluding a hereditary office. Again, while the section, as already stated above,
purports only to deal with the extinction of rights, itis well established that ac-
tual ownership of the property is also acquired’by another person who was in
adverse possession of the property for the period specified in the section. In
other words, a good title is also conferred upon the person in possession de
facto!

27.3. On a consideration of the case.law in question, no change appears to No change
‘be needed in section 27.

न : CHAPTER 28
SECTION 28 : AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN ACTS

28.1. Section 28 makes two amendments in other laws by directing that— Section 28-- >
mendment of

() in section 15 of the Indian Easements Aci, 1882, for the words “sixty ‘Be, Easements
years”, the words “thirty years” shall be substituted; and Gial Procedure
le.

i) in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, section 48 shall be omitted.

The first amendment is in harmony with thé policy of the law to substitute
thirty years for sixty years in regard to claims against. the Government. The
second amendment is Consequential on the decision to simplify and reform the
law relating to time limits for the execution of decrees,

28.2. As the section has created no serious problem, no change is needed. No change
nee I.
CHAPTER 29

SECTIONS 29 to 32: SAVINGS, TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS AND
' REPEAL है

I. Introductory

29.1, It remains now to consider (so far as the body df the Act is con- Section 29—
cerned), the provisions of the Act in the nature of savings, transitional provisions General
amd, repeal. Of these, the most important is section 29, consisting of four sub-°°"*™
sections. Sub-section (1) provides that nothing in this Act shall affect section 25
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872. It may be recalled that by virtue of section
25(3) of the Contract Act, a time barred debt may, by means of a fresh promise
satisfying the formalities required by that section, be revived even though there
is-po consideration for the promise. It should, however, be noted that a right
other than a right to debt does not fall within the purview of that section of the
Contract Act. Thus, a right: to property or to a legacy or to damages does not
fatt within it.

1Ganga Gobind Mandal v, The Collector of the Twenty-four-Pergunnahs, (1867) 11
Moo. 1A. 345, 360;

Amirunnisa Begum v, Umar Khan, (1872) 8 Geng. 1.1२, 540;-
3. Gossein Dass Chunder v. Issur Chunder Nath, (1878). ULB. 3 Cal. 224.

Radhabai v. Ananttao, (1885) LL.R., 9 Bom. 198,

12-14 M of LHECA/ND/83


82

Section 29(2)—
Barier .
Tecommendation
of the Law
Commission. as
fo spe ial and
t laws.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 29—Sections 29 to 32—Savings, Transitional Provisions and Repeal.)

Section 29(2) of the Limitation Act deals with those special or local laws
which prescribe a period of limitation for any suit, appeal or application. The
sub-section consists of two parts. According to the first half, where a special or

jocal law prescribes a period different from that prescribed in the Limitation

Act, then section 3 of the Limitation Act will apply as if that period had been
set out in‘ the Schedule to the Limitation Act. In other words, the suit, appeal
or application to which the special or locat law applies must. under section 3,
be dismissed if it is instituted or made after the expiry of that particular period.
The second half of section 292) provides that the provisions contained in sec-
tions 4 to 24 apply only in so far as, and to the extent to which, they are not ex- -
pressly, excluded by such special or 1004 law. Although apparently simple, sub
section (2) has given rise to ‘a number of questions of interpretation and appl
cation, some of which will be referred to in due course."

Sub-section (3) of section 29 reads as under:

“(3) Save as otherwise provided in any law for the time being in force}
with respect to marriage and divorce, nothing in this Act shall apply to any
suit or othér proceeding under any such law.”

This sub-section has also created certain problems in regard to suits for.
dower, which will be mentioned in due course.

Finally, sub-section (4) of section:29 ‘provides that in the provisions of the
Act relating to easements do not apply to cases arising in the territories to
which the Indian Easements Act. 1882, for the time being extends.

, IE. Specia? and Local Laws

29.2, With reference to the savings effected as regards special and local
laws, the Law Commission in its Report on the Act of 1908, while dealing with
section 29 of the Limitation Act. 1908 (corresponding to present section 29), ob-
served® as under:— ‘

“The combined operation of sub-clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (2)
is that so far as special and local laws are concerned, only sections 4, 9 to
. 18 and 22 of the Act apply, and that too subject to such modifications as
may be prescribed. We consider that there is no need for this restriction and.
that the principles contained in sections 4 to 25 should be made applicable
to all special and local laws, leaving it open to the legislature to exclude the .
application of any or all of these sections, in any given case.”

Implementing this recommendation. section 292) as re-enacted in the pre-
sent Act, reads as under :—

“(2} Where an special or local law preseribed for any suit, appeal or
application a period of limitation different from the period prescribed by the
Schedule, the provisions of section 3 shail apply as if such period were the
period prescribed by the Schedule aad for the puspose of determining any
period of limitation prescribed for any suit, appeal or application by any spe-
cial or local law, the provisions contained in sections 4 to 24 (inclusive) shall
apply only in so far as, and to the extent to which, they are not expressly ”
excluded by such special or local law.”

'Para 29.2, et seq, intra,

TLaw Commission of india, 3rd Report (Limitation Act 1908), page 24, para $9 and
Pages 82-83, section 250),

‘


a

हु
-..391प्न REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT. 1963

(Chapter 29—Sections 29 to 32-Savings, Transitional Provisions and Repeal.)

29.3. Several decisions of the Supreme Court “2 have made it clear that “Special” and
a “special law” is a law relating to a particular area or territory. “Tecal” Taw. |
29.4. The Supreme Court has also noticed’ the. important departure made
by Limitation Act, 1963 (from the Act of 1908) in so far as the provisions con-
tained in section 29, sub-section (2) are concerned. The Court concluded that
since, under the new Limitation Act,. section 5 is’ specifically made applicable
by section 29(2), it can be availed of for the purpose of extending the period of हट
limitation prescribed by a special or local law, if the applicant can show that he
had sufficient cause for not presenting the application within the period of limi-
tation. The court took notice of the fact that a time limit of 60 days was laid
down by section 417(4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1898, which‘ was a
“special” law of limitation. But the mere fact that the special law has, by peremp-
‘tory and imperative language. prescribed a period of limitation in section 417(4)
was held as not a sufficient ground to displace the applicability of section 5.

295. In view of the above authoritative pronouncement, there appeats to Definition of
be 7 need to define the expression “special law” and ‘local law’ as occurring in fPecial or
the Limitation Act. not needed.

29.6. The expression “expressly excluded” by such special or local law, as “Expressly
* occurring in ‘section 29(2) also, came up for consideration before the Supreme **!ded .
Court’ in a case dealing with section 81 of the Representation of the Peoples
Act 1951, The Supreme Court overruled an earlier view about the interpretation
of this expression as occurring in section 29(2Ka) of the Limitation Act, 1908—
a view to the effect that the exclusion must be by express words i.e., by express”
reference to the ‘sections of the Limitation Act. The Supreme Court held that
what had to, be seen was whether“the scheme of the special Jaw and the nature
of the remedy provided. therein “are such that the Legislature intended it to be
a complete code by itself which alone should govern the several matters provided
by it.” “If, on an examination of the relevant provisions, it is clear that the pro-
visions of the Limitation Act are necessarily excluded, then the benefits conferred
therein cannot be called in- aid to suppleméyt the provisions of the Act.” The
Supreme Court further held that even in a ase where the special law does not
exclude the provisions of sections 4 to 24 of the Limitation Act by an express
reference, “it would nonetheless be open to the Court to examine whether and to
what extent the nature of those provisions or the nature of the subject-matter and
the scheme of the special law exclude their operation.”

29.7. In view of the pronuncement of tbe Supreme Court mentioned above, Cases in
Courts enter upon'a comparative study of the scheme of the special or local law High ‘courts,
and the Limitation Act, 1963, with a view to finding out whether an exclusion is
Suggested, even though the exclusion does not appear in so many words in the text
of the special or local law.

29.8. For example, a Full Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High Court® has
applied section 5 of the Limitation Act to an objection petition filed under sec-
tion 11(3) of the Madhya Pradesh Ceiting on Agricultural Holdings Act. 1960,

‘Kaushalya Rani v. Gopal Singh. A.1.R. 1964 S.C. 480,

3Mangu Ram v. Municipal Corporation of Delhi, ALR. 1976 S.C. 105.
21, A. De -Piedade v. A.V, De Fonse A.LR. 1979 S.C, 984
‘Maucu Ram ५, Dethi Municipality. 1976 S. 105.
SHakumndev v. Lalit Narain, ALR. 19 C. 480,

‘Vijay Singh v. Competent Authority, ALR. 1978 M.P. 72



4

No chai
needed ra
to the
expression
“expressly
excluded”.

, Section 292)--
Local laws.

Portuguese
Civil Code,

Freuch
Civil Code.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 29-—Sections 29 to 32—~Savings, Transitional Provisions and Repeal.)
with a terse observation: — है है

“The provisions contained in the Ceiling Act do not specifically ex-
clude the application of section 5 of the Limitation Act. Consequently, it can-
not be doubted that to an objection application’ as provided for in sub-sec-
tion (3) of section 11 of the Ceiling Act, section 5 of the Limitation Act will
be applicable,”

29.9. The Calcutta High Court has held’ that the appellate Cooperative
Tribunal, established by the Bengal Cooperative Societies Act, 1940, would be
governed by the provisions of the Limitation Act which are applicable to “courts”
and accordingly section 292) of the Act would also be applicable. A certified
copy is not required to be filled along with the appeal, but even then the Court
came to the conclusion that the provisions of section 12(2) of the- Limitation
Act, (963 [regarding excluding the period for obtaining copy of the award] would
be applicable, because an aggricved persen cannot make up his mind whether to
file an appeal or not unless he reads the reasons given by the lower court.

29.10. From the above discussion, it appears that the expression “expressly
excluded” occurring in‘sub-section (2) of section 29 has been construed liberally
in determining the question whether sections 4 to 24 are available to proceedings
under special or local laws. Jt may We difficult to devise a verbal formula that
will cover the variety of situations, and we do not, in the present state of the
case-law, propose to make any verbal change.

गा, Local laws—The problem of Poxteguese and French awa.

29.11. As to the savings effected for “local laws”, two cases decided by the
Court of the Judicial Commissioner and the Madras High Court regarding Goa
and Pondicherry respectively, have brought to surface the anomalous situation
prevailing in these (wo former foreign enclaves. है

29.12. In a Goa case’, it was held that articles 529 and 535 of the Portu-

guese Civil Code are “special or local law” within the meaning of section 2%(2) °

of the Limitation Act.‘1963, and a not, on the coming into force of tha Limita-
tion Act 1963, in the Union Terg&ory of Diu, Daman Goa, stand repeated by
the corresponding articles 74, 31 Whd 65 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act,
1963. A reading of the judgment shows that the articles of the Portuguese Civil
Code in question are more liberaf to the plaintiff than the corresponding psovi-
sions of the Act of 1963. So vast was the disparity between these two provisions
as regards the prescribed limitation periods that the Counsel for the defendant
went to the extent of arguing that articles 529 and 535 of the Portuguese Civil
Code (which prescribed a period of 30 years) were demonstrably discriminatory
and irtational in natuce. The argument was dismissed. but the ruling accentuates
the fact that a system substantially different from the Indian Act has been re-
garded as continuing in force in the Union Territory of Goa.

29.13, The Madras High Court (which has jurisdiction over the former
French Possession of Pondicherry) has also held in the same refrain’ that arti-
cles of Limitation laid down in the French Civil Code answered the description
of “local law” ia section 29(2) of the Limitation Act, 1963. The French Civil
Code was a “local” law because it applied, and was inforce, in the former French
establishments of Pondicherry. 1६ was not in. force anywhere else in India. After

‘Nirmal Kumar v. Paniheti Co-op. Bank, ALR. 1977 Calentta 246,
4], A. Da P. Barreto v. A. V. De Fonsece, ALR. 1969 Goa (24.
*Chockalinga Mudatiar v. Nanivanna Piltai, (1976) 2 MLL. 544,


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 85
{Chapter 29—Sections 29 to 32—Saving, Transitional Provisions and Repeals.)

the de jure merger of Pondicherry in the Indian Union on 16th August, 1962, all
the laws formerly in force in that territory were continued, by force of section
4(1) of the Pondicherry (Administration) Act, 1962. This meant that the laws
so preserved continued to remain “local laws”. The law of limitation continued
in the French Civil Code had thus to be regarded as “local law”, because that
was 108 character at the time when Parliament passed the Limitation Act, 1963.

29.14. The French Civil Code shares the common trait of liberality to the Long periods’

plaintiff with the Portuguese Civil Code prescribing a period of 30 years for of limitation.
५ all-rights of action whether in rent or in personam. The arguments advanced—
albeit without-success—before the Judicial Commissioner of Goa about the
discriminatory nature of the Portuguese Civil Code, vis-a-vis the Indian Limita-
‘tion Act acquired an added refinement here. The French Civil Code not only
prescribed a 30 years limit for actions in rem or in personam (on the pattern
of the Portuguese Civil Codc), but also distinguished between actions for the
price of goods sold to private persons and those where -the purchasers were
merchants. In the former case, a very short period of one ycar has been pres-

cribed.! . ,

29.15. The complexity of the problem can be gauged from the fact that understanding
even the plaintiff didnot seek to support his. case by pleading the continuance of the —
of the French Code as regards limitation whea he filed the suit on 23rd June, mercantile
1971 in the Court of the principal District Munsiff Pondicherry. It was for the
first time in the appeal before the Principal District Judge, Pondicherry that a
submission was made that the question of limitation must be considered under
the French Civil Code, and not under the Limitation Act of 1963. Even at
this stage, no attempt was made by the plaintiff to wriggle out of the short period
of limitation prescribed by article 2272 of the French Civil Code by pleading
that the goods for which the action is based were sold to a merchant. There
is, thus, ample justification for concluding that th mercantile community is
assuming that the Limitation Act 1963 is now in force in Pondicherry.

.29.16, While interpreting section 29(2) of the Limitation Act 1963, the
Madras High Court bas observed that the sum total of the consequences of
section 29(2) is to “preserve unity in diversity in our laws of limitation”. The
sentiments expressed and the ideals aimed at cannot be faulted, but it will have
to be seen whether such a diversity is in keeping with the smooth functioning
of the legal system and with the intention of Parliament and the social and
political ethos of our country. :

| 29.17. No one would have a quarrel with the anxiety of all concerned for section 29-- .
preserving the special characteristics and attributes of the system of adminis- Recommendation
« tration of justice in these erstwhile foreign enclaves. With that end in view, अत
a continuity with the past has been maintained in some areas. However, as laws relating
regards limitation, the mental orientations of the business community of Pondi-'© limitation,
cherry towards the Indian laws as reflected in the judgment of Chockalinga
Mudaliar’s , case’ persuades us to recommend to the Central Government that
the provisions in the erstwhile French and Portuguese Civil Codes governing
limitation in force in the Union Territories of Pondicherry and Goa respectively,
should be expressly repealed,” after ensuring that no legal hiatus is created by
“such a repeal’. :

TArticle 2272, French Civil Code contrasted with Article 2262 of the same Code,

. +For implementation in connevtion with French and Portuguese Laws relating (० limi-
tation, है


\

Supreme Court
case.

Travancore,

Act.
‘

SOTH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 29—Section 29 10 32—Savings, Trapsitional Provisions aud Repeal.y

29.18. 1६ may be mentioned in this vomext tia. ine question — wikether
the provisivns of the Portuguese Civil Procedure (०0० as to क्राद्रपणा snl
sucvive im the Union Territory of Gou, Daman and Diu came up odciore the
Supreme “Court, where the point al issuc was whether the appeal in ‘question
was governed by the Portuguese Code by article 116 of the Limitauon Act,
1903. It it was the former, the appeal was out of time. li it was the latter,
the appeal was in time. The court of Judicial Commussioner, Gea bad held
(in the case under appeal) that the Portuguese Civil Procedure Coué was still
applicable and that section 32 of the Limitation Act, 1963 had repealed -only
ibe Indian Limitation Act of 1908 and not the Portuguese. Code. Moreover,
acction 29(2) of the Act of 1963 saved a'“local” law and hence the Provisions
contained in the Protuguese Civil Procedure Code still applied, sa that the
appeal was out of time. However, on appeal to the Supreme Court, the Suprenie
Court, after posing the question, considered it unnecessary to decide it, since
it held that in the circumstances of the case, the delay (if any) should be
condoned, It is sullicicnt to quote ‘the following passage trom the last Para-
graph of the judgment of the Supreme Court: ~

“However, the other prelintinary objection upheld by ithe ‘learned
‘Additional Judicial’ Commissioner is more important and the question that
teally arises for our consideration is, what was the Jaw of limitation appli-
cable in the Union Territories of Goa, Daman and Diu to proceedings
launched therein prior to and pending at the date of liberation?

“In other words, whether the period of iimitation for .the appeal in
question was the one prescribed by the Portuguese Code or by Article 116
of the Limitation Act 1963? 1६ was not disputed that if it was the former,
the appeal was out of time and if it was the latter, the appeal was well
within time.  {t is really unnecessary for us to decide this question in view
of the application for condonation of delay for tiling the said appeal in
the Judicial Commissioner’s Court at Goa, that has been made by the
appeliants before us which we are inclined 10 grant. {¢ cannot be gdinsaid
that the aforesaid question of limitation is a complex one and not free
from doubt, and if in such a situation the appvilants, bona fide deliev-
ing that the appeul could be filed: within 90 days as provided by article 116
of the Limitation Act 1963, filed their appeal within that period, it would
be a clear case of sufficient cause which could be said to have prevented
them from filing the appeal within the- time Prescribed by ‘the Portuguese
Code. Where two views are equally possible on this complex question
and where a party, being guided by one of such views, adopts a course
consistent with that view, it would equally be a case of ‘just impediment’
within the. meaning of article 145 of the Portuguese Code, which could
be said to have prevented the party from filing the appeal within limita-
tion prescribed by the Portuguese Code.”

The aboyg passage indicates that the position as regards the limitation faw
in force in the area in question is still uncertain.

IV. Local Laws
The Travancore Limitation Act

29.19. Another question of a similac character pertains to the Travancore -
Act. The areas at present‘ comprising the Kanyakumari District and Shen-

‘aria, Christine Vv, Maria Zurna, AAR. 1979 5.0. 1352, 1354, 1355, para 35,
“Emphiasis added. ‘


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT. 1963

(Chapter 29- -Sections 29 to 32—Savings, Transitional Provisions and Repeal.)

- 5
cottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District of Tamil Nadu and the southern portion

of Kerala together formed erstwhile the Travancore State ‘where the Travan-

core Limitation Act (IV of 1100 N.E.) was in force. Section 20(1) of the Act
read:

“If before the expiration of the period prescribed for redemption of a
Mortgage, the mortgagee accepts from the’ mortgagor a puravaippu or
purakkadam deed creating a further charge on the mortgaged property
- and duly registered, the prescribed period of limitation shail be comput-
ed from the date of such puravaippu or purakkadam deed.”

The Part. B States (Laws) Act, 1951 extended the Indian Limitation Act,
1908 (which was the Central Act then extent) to the erstwhile Travancore-
Cochin State, with effect from Ist April, 1951, with the result that the above
provisions of the Travancore Limitation Act were repealed.

29.20. Two judgments of the Madras High Court, however, appear to have

Case Law on

the Travancore

created certain difficulties in the matter of computation of limitation in situa- yc.
tions envisaged’ by section 20(1) of the Travancore Act, which relates to prra-

vaippu or purakkadam deeds (deeds of further charge). A provision similar to
this was not found in the Indian Limitation Act 1908, and does not appear in
the Act of 1963. Briefly. this section provides that if. before the expiration of

-the period prescribed for redemption, the mortgagee accepts a deed of further

charge; then a fresh period starts running.

29.21. The first judgment? on the subject (delivered by Mohan J.) held that

_ ॥ Mortgagor ought to consolidate both the mortgages and a piecemeal redemp-

tion was impossible. Mohan J. held that in spite of the repeal of Travancore
Limitation Act, the suits are not barred by limitation and the period had to
be counted from the purakkadam deed (deed of further charge).

29.32. A somewhat contrary view? was expressed by the same High Court
(in a judgment by Varadarajan 3.) holding that puaravaippu or purakkadam

cannot be used to get fresh period of limitation after the extension of the Indian

Limitation Act, 1908 ta Travancore-Cochin and that the doctrine of consolida-
tion cannot be applied at all. The easlier Madras ruling does not appear ta
have. been cited before him.

29.23. As the period of limitation under the Travancore Act was 50 years,

Conclusion as
to Travancore

suits based. on puraveippu or purakkadam can technically continue till first act.

April, 2001 A.D. No doubt. in all probability, in view of the State laws: re-
garding the liquidation’ of rural indebtedness, the incidence of such suits would

be negligible. All the same, we have miade a brief note of this matter and trust

that the State Governments of Tamil Nadu and Kerala would examine the
points raised in the judgment. with a view to ensuring that no hardship is caused
by such an extended period of limitation. *

3Section 20, Travancore Limitation Act (TV of 1100 M.E)}.
*Thomas v. Victor, ALR. 1976 Madras 273: (1976) 2 M.LJ. 5.

*Parameswaran Thampy v. Kanakama Thankack (977) 90 L.W. 258 quoted by P.
Mohana Chandran. Advocke. Kuzhithnrai “Limitation when mortgagee gefs puravaippu or

purakkadam from mortgagers” (1977) 2 M.L.J. 78.

‘Far-.consideration in connection with the Travancore Limitation Act by State Govern-

ments of Tamil Nadu and Kerala:

37


88

Suits for
dower,

Need for
clatification.

Law Commission
recommendation
departed from,

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, [963
(Chapter 29-. Sections 29 to 32-—Savings, Transitional Provisions and Repeal.)
V. Section 29(3)—Position regarding suit for dower

29.24, At this stage, it is necessary to refer to the part of section 29¢ ay
which excludes the applicability of the Limitation Act in regard to “a suit
proceeding under any Jaw for the time being in force relating to marriage and
divorce.” In view of an Allahabad ruling’ on this sub-section, an amendment
of section 293) seems to be needed. According to the Allahabad ruling, the
Limitation Act, 1963, does not apply to a-claim for dower made by a Muslim
woman under the Muslim Jaw of marriage and divorce, and is, by section 29(3).
excluded from the purview of the Limitation Act.’ The reasoning underlying हु
the judgment, is as under. In the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, the exception
was only in respect of proceedings under the Indian Divorce Act. and there.
were specific articles 103-104 which prescribed the limitation period for a suit
for dower. In the present Act, there are (the High Court has observed) no
corresponding articles prescribing the period of limitation for a suit for dower.
According to the Allahabad ruling, in view of the express provisions of section
29(3), nothing in the Limitation Act can bar the suit for dower.

29.25. This ruling raises an important point that needs clarification. So
far as .we could ascertain, it was not the intention of the Legislature that the’
Limitation: Act 1963, should not apply. to claims for dower. The exclusion
clause in section 29(3) is not really intended to exclude such claims from the .
purview of the Act. Its object is to exclude matrimonial litigation proper com-
menced under some statute, i.e. statutory proceedings for divorce, judicial sepa-
ration and the like, which themselves terminate or suspend the legal bond of
marriage. The reason for not making the Limitation Act applicable to matri-
monial causes was presumably that these statutes themselves have their own
in-built doctrines such as condonation, laches, and the like, which can be taken
into account by the court. Subject to these doctrines, the court has a discre-
tion as to the grant of matrimonial relief, in the exercise of which it can take
into account the conduct of the parties, the interests of the children and other
relevant factors. These considerations have no application, however. to a
Muslim wife’s claim for dower, which is a purely monetary claim that can be
decided on fairly precise rules, It, therefore, stands on a different footing from,
say, a petition for divorce or judicial separation is regard to which (as stated
above) special considerations of laches, discretion and the like apply.

29.26. We need not, pause to discuss .if-the Allahabad ruling mentioned
above is ‘correct, on the present wording of section 293). But obviously the
position resulting therefrom needs to be set right. The point being one of re-
curring frequency, some step needs to be taken to ensure that a claim for dower
does not remain totally outside the Act.

29.27, A’ few words appear to be needed about the changed wording in
the present Act (in contrast with the earlier Act).. The difficulty seems to have
been created because the Act goes beyond what the Law Commission recom-
mended. Section 2%3) of the Act of 1908 made the Act inapplicable to suits
under the Indian Divorce Act. 1869. Commenting on this. the Law Commis-
sion, in its earlier Report. observed as under®:—

“There are other Acts like the Parsi Marriage Act and the Special Marriage:
Act dealing with marriage and divorce. The reason for excluding proceed-
_ ings under the Divorce Act, 1869, are equally applicable to proceedings

VAhmadi Bibi v. Muhamed Maboob, ALR. 1979 All. 374 (Deoki Nandan, J.),
*Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1908), page 24, para 60.


89TH REPORT GF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 89

(Chapter 29— Sections 29 to 32—Savings, Transitional Provisions and Repeal.)

under these other Acts. We recommend ‘that the sub-section may be am-
plified to include all Acts relating to matrimonial causes. The Acts to be
included may be specified when drafting the amendment to the section.”

29.28. The draft provision suggested in the Report of the Law Commission
“to give shape to its recommendation as regards the relevant part of section 29
of the Act of 1908 was as under’: °

25, Savings.—(1) Nothing in this Act—

(8). ..... -०« «००३०० ००००

(b) shall apply to proceedings under any taw for the time being
in force relating to marriage and divorce (Acts to be specified
in the Bill.”

Thus, the Commission’s proposal (i) was confined to Acts and (ii) further
was confined to Acts to be specified. However, the section as enacted, provides
as under* :—

(3) Save as otherwise provided in any law for the time being in force
to marriage and divorce, nothing in this Act shall apply to any suit or other
. procteding under any such law.” ‘

29:29. The section, as enacted, does not specify the enactments which are
to be excluded. Presumably, it was thought that it would be too cumbersome
to enumerate the various enactments—there were at least six Central Acts on
the subject and there might be State or Provincial Acts, including even some
enactments of princely States.’
_ 2930. Incidentally, it may be useful to mention here that the Law Com Residuary
mission (in the earlier Report) contemplated that/ suits for dower would fall article,
. under the residuary article. {ie. articlé 38 as proposed in the 3rd Report to
replace article 120 of the Act of 1908 corresponding to article 113 of the pre-
sent Act}. The Report observed*:-— 7

8७, ००००० Articles 103 and 104 which relate to suit for dower might
be left to be governed by the residuary article. All these articles may there-
fore be deleted.”

2931. The Law Commission did not contemplate that a suit for dower
should be totally outside the purview of the Limitation Act.

29.32. Now that the point has arisen, it seems proper to revise section 29(3), Recommendation.
so as to define its scope more precisely than at present. We recommend that पु
the following possible redraft should be considered :--

«29(3). Save as otherwise provided in any enactment for the time being
in force providing for the dissolution of 6 marriage by a decree of divorce,
or for the grant of other matrimonial relief, nothing in this Act shall apply

5 to any suit or other proceeding under any such enactment.”

wo” Commission of India, 3rd Report, (Limitation Act, 1908), page 82, clause 25
"section 29(3), Limitation Act, 1963.

'8Cf. Maniben v. Ramanbhai, (1979) 20 Guj. LR. 924. (Baroda Hindu Nibandh Act,’
1937, section 152). station :

‘Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limi Act, 1963), page 60, para 157, See

also ibid, page 87, article 38.
13-14 M of LI. & CAYND/83


Section 30—
transitional
provisions. ,[

Section 31—
‘Pending suits.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 29—Sections 29 to 32—Savings, Transitional Provisions and Repeal.)
(Chapter 30—Limitation and the Amendment of pleadings.)
As to French and Portuguese laws, see above.’ As to Travancore Act also,
see above.’

29,33. Section 30 makes transitional provisions for cases where the period
of limitation prescribed by the present Act is shorter than that prescribed by
the earlier Act of 1908, which stands repealed by the present Act. The section
needs no change. हि

29.34, Section 31 makes certain provisions for proceedings for which the

period of limitation prescribed by the earlier Act has already expired, and also
for proceedings pending at the commencement of the present Act. The section

* . needs no change. .

Section 32—
Repeal.

Scope of *
the Chapter.

0. 6, R. 17,
CPC.

Privy Council
cases.

29.35. Section 32 repeals the Act of 1908, and needs no change.

CHAPTER 30

LIMITATION AND THE AMENDMENT OF PLEADINGS
1. Position’ in Lndia

30.1. It is proposed in this Chapter to deal with the subject of amendment
of pleadings in so far as it is relevant to the question of limitation.

.

30.2. The most important provision on the subject is in the Code of Civil
Procedure, 0.6, R. 17. That rule, being intended primarily to confer a general
power on the court to allow amendment of the pleadings (in the interests of
justice), naturally does not deal in detail with the ramification of the exercise
of that power in the varieties of situations that occur in life. It does not, for
that reason, deal with the question in what circumstances the power may be
exercised,

Amendment by adding a party is primarily taken care of by a specific pro-
vision in the Limitation Act.’

30.3. The leading case in India on the subject of amendment of pleadings
is a Privy Council 006." The plaintiff's object in that suit was/to exercise his
right of pre-emption, but, while drafting the plaint the plaintiff (who had asked
for declaration of pre-emption rights) forgot to include a prayer for possession
of the property. Later, he sought to amend the plaint to include the prayer
“for possession. Allowing the amendment, and dealing with the aspect of timi-
tation, the Privy Council observed : —

“That there was full power to make the amendment cannot be dis- ,
puted, and though such a power should:not as a rule be exercised where
its effect is to take away from a defendant a legal right which has accrued
to him by lapse of time, yet there are cases (see for example, Mohummed
Zahoor Ali Khan vy. Mussumut Thakoorance Rutta’ Koer, (1867) 11 M.I.A.
468 (P.C.), where such considerations are outweighed by the special cit-
cumstances of the case.

“If this be so, all that haopened.was that the plaintiffs, through some
clumsy blundering, attempted to assert rights that they undoubtedly pos-
sessed under the statute in a form which the statute did not permit. But if +

¥Para 29.17, supra. है .
Section 21° Litt 963; Chapter 2!

ion 21, Limitation Act, 1963; 1, supra.
‘Charan Das v. Amir, Khan, ALR. 1921 Srivg Council 50, 51, 52.

‘


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 30—Limitation and the Amendment of Pleadings.)

once it be accepted that they were attempting to establish those rights, there
is no sufficient reason shown for disturbing the judgment of the Judicial
Commissioner, who thinks they should be at liberty to express their inten-
tion in a plainer and Jess ambiguous manner.”

30.4, The earlier case! cited by the Privy Council arose out of a suit to
recover a stated sum due on a bond alleged to have been executed by Mussumat
Thakooranee Rutta Koer. Alter the institution of the suit some more defendants
were added on the allegation that they had combined with the obligor and had
“colorably”* procured her estate to be transferred to them in order to deprive
the plaintiff of his remedy against the property. The main defence was that
on the date of the execution of the bond in question, the property of Mussumat
‘Thakooranee Rutta Koer was in charge of the Court of wards and hence the

_ Thakooranee was not competent to incur any debt.

The Privy Council found that as the bond was ७ simple money bond to
which the other defendants were not parties and as the bond did not purport
to be a mortgage, no case was made out against the other defendants. But, as
regards the obligor, ic. Mussumat Thakooranee Rutta Koer, the Privy Council
did not agree with the findings that she was incompetent to incur a debt. How-
ever, they were averse to pronouncing in favour of the appellant without an
amendment of the pleadings and a full trial. The Privy Council observed as
under : —

“Though this Committee is always disposed to give a liberal construc-
tion to pleadings ‘in the Indian courts, so as to allow every question fairly
arising on the case made by the pleadings-to be raised and discussed in
the suit, yet this’ liberality of coustruction must have some limit. A plain-
tiff ‘cannot be entitled to relief upon. facts or documents not stated or
referred to by him in his’ pleadings............They have, however, felt some
doubt as to the Order which it will be theit duty to recommend Her Maj-
esty to make on this appeal. They have already intimated that the appeal
must be dismissed against all the Respondents except Rutta Koes; and
they have felt some doubt whether, inasmuch as the suit was wholly mis-
conceived, the proper course was not to dismiss this appeal altogether,
without prejudice to the rights of the appellant to bring a new suit against
Rutta Koer upon this Bond, treating it as a mere money Bohd. Considering,
however, that such a suit would probably be met by a plea of the Act of
Limitation; that in the circumstances of this case such a defence would be
inequitable; and that, the Respondent not having appeared, their Lord-
ships are not in a condition to ‘put her on terms as to her defence to a
fresh suit; they have come to the conclusion that the fairer course is to do
what the judge of the Court of First Instance might, under the Code of
Procedure, have done at an earlier stage of the course,—namely, allow the
appellant to amend: his plaint so as to make it a plaint against Rutta Koer
alone for the recovery of money due on a Bond,”

30.5. Even in the later case* the Privy Council cautioned that such a power
should not, as a rule, be exercised where its effect is to take away from a defen-
dant a legal right which had accrued to him by lapse of time. These general
observations have also been repeated by the Supreme Court!:—

dfs etinoe सनक A Khan 5 Zahoor Ali Khan, v. Mussumat Thakooranee Rutta Koer, (1862) 11 M.LA.

8 (P.C).
3This looks like an American spelling but has been taken verbatim he rt.
*Charan Das v, Amir Khan, A.1.R.«1921 P.C. 50. im from the Repot
‘Ganga Bai v. Vijay Kumar, ALR. 1974 S.C, 1126,

Power to
advance the
interest of
Justice.

श्र


Ovesbroad
argument.

Amendment not
to ‘introduce
new case,

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 30—Limitation and the Amendinent of Pleadings.)

“The power to allow an amendment is un-doubtedly wide and may at
any stage .be appropriately exercised in the interest of justice, the law of
limitation notwithstanding, But the exercise of such far-reaching discre-
tionary powers is governed by judicial considerations and wider the discre-
tion, greater ought to be the care and circumspection on the part of the
court.”

30.6, At the same time, an overbroad argument that no matter whether a
fight to property has been extinguished under statute, an amendment of the
Pleadings should be allowed, was rejected by the Supreme Court in the very:
case cited above. Nevertheless, it continues to be Pressed now and then, with &
gloss. So was it done in an Allahabad case', in which the question was whether
the execution application could be amended even after the expiry of the period
of limitation. The application was filed by a person other than the decree
holder and the. amendment was disallowed,

30.7. On the other hand, in Madhya Pradesh case,’ reliance was placed
on the observations of the Supreme Court? in Leach & Co. Lid. v. Jardine
Skinner & Co, and an amendment was allowed at the second appellate stage,
in a suit for partition and separate Bossession of property, to implead a person
‘for the first time. The court observed : --

“Even assuming that the amendment might be barred by time, this
would eminently be a case to allow time barred amendment.”

38. In this case the Supreme Court had allowed the plaintiff to raise an 5
alternative claim for damages for breach of contract for non-delivery of goods
when ordinarily the suit was for damages ‘for conversion of goods as an action
in trover. The Court found that all the allegations which are necessary for 508५
taining a claim for damages for breach of contract were already in the plaint
and all that was lacking was only the allegation that the plaintiffs wete in the
alternative entitled to claim damages,

309. In this context the Supreme Court referred to the leading case of
Charan Das* and observed :—

“It is no doubt true that Courts would, as a rule, decline to allow
amendments, if a fresh suit on the amended claim would be barred by
_ limitation on the date of the application. But that is a factor to be taken
into account in exercise of the discretion as to whether amendment ‘should
be ordered, and does not affect the Power of the court to order it, if that
is required in the interests of justice.” पु

Such verbal amendment has always been allowed by courts .

30.0. Where the plaintiff in a suit for Tecovery of money which was insti-
tuted on the basis of a chit acknowledging receipt of money borrowed and also
@ promissory note executed on ‘the same day, sought, to amend the plaint by —
introducing a relief on the basis of the*promisory note alone, such an amendment
which was based entirely on facts stated .in the original. plaint itself, could be
Permitted despite the fact that the suit would have been time barred had it been

“iKitshore 700 v. Guman Behari Joo Deo, ALR” 1976 Busey Joo ¥. Gumun Behari Joo Deo, ALR.. 1978 Allahab: id 1,
3Anandibai v. Sundarbai, ALR. 1965 MP. 88 88 ee

‘Leach & Co. Ltd. ५. Jardine Skinner & Co, ALR. 1957 SC. 357,
‘Charan Das v. Amir Khan, ALB. 1921 P.C. 50 3

‘Leach & Co. Ltd. ५, Jardine Skinner & Co., ale 1957 S.C, 357, 362,


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 30—-Limitation und the amendment of Pleadings.)

instituted on the date when the amendment was sought for.’ But when the plain-
tiff originally based his pre-emptive claim on the basis of relationship, he was
not allowed to plead co-shareship as an additional ground when such an amend-
Ment based on new ground would have been time batred.? A pre-emption suit
filed on behalf of a major, showing him to be a minor, was not allowed to be
amended in a Punjab case.* The Supreme Court has in one case,‘ touched on
the question of limitation in a contract containing an escalation clause of labour
rates. The plaintiff had originally claimed only a declaration about the enhance-
ment of the tendered rate. Subsequently, the. plaintiff sought to amend the
plaint by adding 4n extra relief for a decree for the contract-money. The amend-
ment was allowed, on the ground that the amendment sought to introduce a
claim based on the same cause of action. However, the Supreme Court obs-
erved:-— .

“No amendment will be allowed to introduce a new set of ideas. to

the prejudice of any right acquired by any party by lapse of time.”

3@.10A. The dictum of the Supreme Court that the power can be appropria- Summary of
tely exercised in the interests of justice, the law of limitation notwithstanding,' the, position
shows that the power has been regarded as a wide one. All the same, one can
discern from the judgments certain guiding lights that indicate the proper app-
104०) to be adopted in exercising the judicial discretion in the matter.

‘WA review of the judicial pronouncements in India on the subject of amend-
ment of pleadings brings to surface the following broad principles:

(1) The courts have a plenary power to permit amendment of pleadings at
any stage of the proceedings. But the power can be exercised appro-
priately only in the interests of justice and the discretion should be
exercised with due care and circumspection.

(2) When all the allegations which are necessarily for sustaining a claim
already éxist in the plaint, the court should exercise its discretion to
allow a technical amendment, even though the claim would be barred
by limitation on the date of the application.

(3) A suitor should not suffer on account of merely technicality or clumsly
blundering.’

(4) A suitor-should not suffer because he failed to amend his plaint at any
early stage of the proceedings.

(5) When all the allegations which are necessary for sustaining a claim were
already in the plaint and what was lacking is only a prayer for an
alternative claim, the amendment should be allowed.*

(6) Amendment should be allowed if no prejudice is caused to any party
and the amendment is based entirely on facts stated in the original
plaint.

(7) Except in special circumstances, an amendment should not be allowed
to introduce a set of ideas to the prejudice of any right acquired by any
party by lapse-of time.

IGovinda Chetti v. M. V. Chinnappa, A.1.R. 1973 Mad. 400.
*Gurmukh Singh ५. Dalip Singh, ALR. 1971 Punjab & Haryana 419
*Suraj. Bhan v. Balwant Singh, A.1.R. 1972 Punjab & Haryana
*4A.K. Gupta v. Damodar Valley Corp., 41.8. 1967 $.C, 96, 98.
SGangabai v, Vijay Kumar, AJR. 1974 S.C. 2216 (supra).
‘Charan Das ९. Amir Khan, A.LR- 1921 PC. 50.
'Mohmmud Zahoor Ali Khan, v. Mussumat Thakooranee Rutta Koer, (1807) Moore's
Indian Appeals 468
Co. v. Jardine Skinner & Co., AIR. 1957 8.0. 357. }
K. Gupta v. Damodar Valley Corporation, ALR. 1967 S.C. 96.



94 ” 9TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 30—Limitation and the Amendment of Pleadings.)
प्र, Position in England

Developments 30.11. Developments in certain other countries are also of interest. In Eng-

10 England. land, as long back as 1887, Lord Esher refused’ to a plaintiff leave to amend to
add to her action for slander (after the expiry of the period limitation), claims .
for assault and false imprinsonment. But, while doing so, he made certain gene-
ral observations which were, until recently considered almost an immutable guide-
line in practice :--

“We must act on the settled rule of practice, which is that amendments are
not admissible when they prejudice the rights of the opposite party as exist-
ing at the date oP such amendments. If an amendment were allowed setting
up a cause of action, which, if the writ were issued. in respect thereof at the
date of the amendment, would be barred by the statute of Limitations, it
would be allowing the plaintiff to take advantage of her former writ to
defeat the statute and taking away an existing right from the defendant, a
proceeding which, as a general rule, would be, in my opinion, improper and
unjust, Under very peculiar circumstances the court might perhaps have
power to allow such an amendment, but certainly as a general rule it will
not do so.” .

हर Even though Lord Esher (in the last sentence of the above passage) had
made ‘reservations for “every peculiar circumstances”, it has been generally as-
sumed ‘that whenever an amendment sought would change the cause of grtion
-after the expiration of the period of limitation, allowing the same could "cause
injustice to the defendant which cannot be compensated for by cost.

Rules of the 30.12. This position practically, held the field in the England till the coming
eal in force of the Rules of the Supreme Court, 1966. Order 20, Rule 4-of these
. Rules provide as under :—

“§ (1) Subject to Order 18, rules 6, 7 and 8 and the following provi-
sions of this rule, the court may at any stage of the proceedings allow the
plaintiff to amend his writ, or any party to amend his pleadings, on such
terms as. to costs or otherwise as may be just and in such manner (if any),
as it may direct.

(2) Where an application to the court for leave to make the amendment
mentioned in paragraph (3), (4) or (5) ig made after any relevant period of
limitation current at the date of issue of the writ has expired, the court may
nevertheless grant such leave in the circumstances mentioned in that pard
graph if it thinks it just to do so. .

(3) An amendment to correct the name of a party may be allowed under
paragraph (2) notwithstaning that it is alleged that the “effect of the amend-
ment will ‘be to substitute a new party if the court is satisfied that the mis-
take sought to be corrected was a genuine mistake and was not misleading
or such as to cause any reasonable doubt as to the identity of the person
intending to sue or, as the case may be, intended to be sued.

(4) A amendment to alter the capacity in which a patty sues (whether .
as plaintiff or as defendant by counter-claim) may be allowed under para-
graph (2) if the capacity in which, if the amendment is made, the party will
sue is one in which at the date of issue of the writ or. the making of the
counter claim, as the case may be, he might have sued.

‘Weldon v. Neal (1887) 19 Q.BD. 394, 395; 56 LJ. QB. 621 (CA)


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 30---Limitation and the Amendment of Pleadings.)

(5)-An amendment may be allowed under paragraph (2) notwithstand-
ing that the effect of the amendment will be to add or substitute a new cause
of action if the new cause of action arises out of the same facts, or subs-
tantially the same facts as a cause of action in respect of which relief has
alréady been claimed in the action by the party applying for leave to make
the amendment.”

30.13. Doubts were expressed by-a writer' that such a sweeping provision.’ Doubts ex-
which in a sense, qualifies the limitation. Acts might be argued to be ultra vires Treg mo
the statutory authority for making the rules of the Supreme Court. However,
the point has not come up for judicial decision. .

3014, The rule came to be considered by Lord Denning in one case* wherein Lord Denning’s
he boldly stated that the above rule has “specifically over-ruled a series of cases “*™
which worked injustice. Since the new rule, I think we should discard the strict
mule practice in Weldon v. ‘Neal.” “The court should allow an amendment when-
ever it is just to do, even though it may deprive the defendant of a defence under
the Statute of Limitations.”

30.15, These observations were not approved in a later case,‘ but when the
question came up again’ before Lord Denning, he réiterated his earlier statement.

30.16. About a hundred years ago, Bowen L.J., while addressing American Address by
Judges and lawyers emphatically gave his assurance‘. “It may be asserted without Bowen LJ.
fear of contradiction that it is not possible in the year 1887 for an honest litigant
in Her Majesty’s Supreme Court to be defeated by any mere technicality, any
slip, any mistaken step in his litigation.”

By and large, this proposition seems to be true of, the amendment of plead-
ings also by provisions giving the court a general discretion to allow an amend-
ment. notwithstanding that it raises a barred cause of action, whenever justice”
80 requires.” ‘

The author, at the end of above article, has prepared a chart giving a list
Of about 20 cases showing the nature of the original action and nature of the
amendments sought and whether the amendment wag allowed or refused. The
chart graphically brings home the point that the law on the subjects is in-a fluid.
state and firm guidelines should be incorporated in the statutory rules to enable
the courts to exericse their discretion in such matters predicated upon certain
principles.

III. Avstralia snd Canada -

30.17. The position in Australia may ttow be dealt with. In a recent, article Hardship of
in the Australian Law Journal,’ the writer has listed the hardships which the rule the Tule in

“tn Weldon ९, Neal creates for a plaintiff who desires to amend the statement of onan
1. claim after the expiry of the limitation period. He observes :— realleed ia

‘Michael J Goodman “Problems of Limitation” 119 New Law Journal 814,
Gener virtually identical provisions appear in the rules of the Federal Court of Canada

(Genera! Orders pnd Rules GORS) and in the Nova Scotia 2S Lute Rules).
Wwoi Investments Ltd, v. Cussins (Contractors) Ltd., 1 All 8. Reports 143.
‘Braniff ९ Holland and Hennad & Cubitts (Southern) Lt, Another, (1969) AER.

“‘$Starman v. E.W. & WJ. Moore Ltd, (1970 1 ANLE.R. 581.
1.70 ae by ‘Bowen LJ. quoted in Potin v. Wood, (1962) 1 0.8. 609 (C.A) (Pearce
“Wer Glass J.A. in Megee v. Yeomans (1977) 1 NS.W.L._ R. 273 (C.A.).
Susan Campbell, “Amendment and Limitations: The Rate in Weldon v, Neal” (Nov.
be le Auctralien ‘Law Journal, p. 643, 644 Footnotes given in the! original article are omitt-
} except a few,

959.


"Saskatchewan
Law.

Alberta Act

Ontario Law
Reform
Cammission’s
Report,

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 30—Limitation and the Amendment of Pleadings).

“Although the relevant provisions of the Supreme Court Rules have been
amended in England’ and: in some Australian jurisdictions? to displace (at
least partially) this ‘settled rule of practice’, the rule in Weldon y. Neat stilt
applies in Victoria, Tasmania, the Australian Capital Territory, the Nor-
then Territory and in actions governed by the present High Court Rules.
It is the purpose of this article to discuss the difficulties experienced by the
courts in defining the exact scope of the rule with particular reference to a
line of decisions of the Victorian Supreme Court and to argue that, in the
light of the present interpretation of the rule, it should be teplaced.........

A comparison of the position in England and New South Wales is found in
an English case.

30.18. In Canada, Lord Denning’s observations in the later case‘ have been
followed by the Federal Court of Canada,‘ in a case in which an amendmeht
was allowed alleging a different voyage and different bills of lading, though ori-
ginally the claim for damage to goods carried was based on 2 specific voyage
and no specific bills of lading of a particular case.

* 30.19. In Canada, the Saskatchewan, jurisdiction has gone a step further,
The Queen's Bench Act® provides as under :—

“Where an action is brought to enforce any right, legal or equitable, the
court may permit the amendment of any pleading or other proceeding therein
upon such terms as to costs or otherwise as it deems just, notwithstanding
that, between the time of the issue of the writ and the application for amend- -
ment, the right of action would, by reason of action brought, have been —
barred by the provision of any Statute; provided that such amendment does
not involve a change of parties other than a change caused by the death of
one of the parties.”

Unfettered discretion given by the Saskatchewan law to the courts to permit
amendments has been severally criticised’ as going too far, because it is pointed
out that the primary consideration underlying the Limitation Act is that the ©
defendant ought not to be called on to resist a claim when evidence has been
lost, memories have faded and witnesses have disappeared.

30.20. If the Saskatchewan law grants blanket power of amendment to the
court the Alberta Limitation of Actions Act, (R.S.A. 1970 Chapter 209) in its
section 61, gives a long list of various ‘types’ of _Situations which have given
tise to difficulties in the past such as misnomers, cases involving dead persons,
ete. in which the courts may allow amendments to the pleadings notwithstanding
the expiration of the period of limitation.

"30.21. In 1969 the Ontario Law Reform Commission in its Report on the
Limitatton of Actions, recommended that :

“In any action, the court should be able to allow the amendment ot
any pleading or other proceedings, or.an application for a change of party,

“RSCO.255. 7777 पगणणयणणएण।एणएण।णए 20, 1. 5. *
हे ॥० SW Pt 20 1. 4: Queenstand: 0.32, ri: South Australia, 0.28, 1.1; Western Anse
ralia: 0.21, 1. 5.
‘Brickfield Properties Ltd. vs. Newton (1931) 1 W.L.R. 862 (CA). .
{Chatsworth Investment Ltd. v. Cussins (Contractors) Lid. (1969) 1 AN] E.R. 143, 145.
a, Motor Sales Corp. Ltd. vs. Madonna, 24 DLR. Grd) 593.
‘Section 44(11), Saskatchewan Queens Secret Act (1965) (Ch. 73).
bag Cay, D, Watson, “Amendment of proceedings efter रा Periods”, 53 Canadian

.



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 30—Limitation and the Amendment of Pleadings.)
(Chapter 31-—Articles 1 to 5 : Suits Releating to Accounts.)

upon such terms as to costs or otherwise as the court deems just, notwith-
standing that, between time of the issue of the writ and the application for
amendment or change of party, a fresh cause of action disclosed by the

amendment or the cause of action against the new party would have been
barred by a limitation provision.”

IV. Position in U.S.A. ‘

30.22. The U.S. Federal Rules of Civil Procedure read as under: — Us. Federai
‘ules,

(0) Relation Back of Amendments.—Whenever the claim or defence as-
serted in the amended pleading arose out of the conduct, transaction, or occur-
rence set forth or attempted to be set forth in the original pleading, the amend-
ment relates back to the date of the original pleading. An amendment chan-
ging the party against whom a claim is asserted relates back if the forego-
ing provision is satisfied and, within the period provided by law for com-
mencing the action against him, the party to be brought in by amendment
(1) has received such notice of the institution of the action that he will not
be prejudiced in maintaining his defence on the merits, and (2) knew or
should have known that, but. for a mistake concerning the identity of the
proper party, the action would have been brought against him.

The delivery or mailing of process to the United States Attorney, or his
designee, or the Attorney General of the United States, or any agency or
officer who would have been a proper defendant if named, satisfies the re-
quirement of clauses (1) and (2) hereof with respect to the United States or
any agency or officer thereof to be brought into the action as a defendant.”

VI. Summary of developments elsewhere

30.23. The developments elsewhere outlined above show a certain amount Diverse

of diversity of approach. The Saskatchewan Act.? which is at the one end of the approaches.
spectrum, confers a very wide power on the court—an approach also favoured

by the Ontario Law Reform Commission. However, this approach has not es-

caped criticism. At the other end of the spectrum is the Alberta Limitation of

Actions Act, 1970 which defines certain types of situations in which an amend-

ment could be allowed. The English Rules of the Supreme Court, 1960 stand

between the two. According to Lord Denning, “the Court can allow an amend-

ment whenever it is just so to do.” But the position in English law should be

regarded still as fluid.

CHAPTER 31
ARTICLES 1 to 5: SUITS RELATING TO ACCOUNTS

31.1. We now proceed to a consideration of the articles contained in the article 1.
Schedule to the Act laying down various time limits. Article 1 reads as follows :—

“For the balance due on a mutual, Three The close of the year in which the
open and current account, where years. last item admitted or Proved is
there have been reciprocal de- entered in the account; such year
mands between the parties. to be computed as in the account.”

It 3s idextcal with article 85 of the Act of 1908 and 1877.

‘Ontario Law Reform Commission Report on the Limitation of Actions, 1969. +
*Para 30.19, awvra. oo

14—14 M of BI&CAIND!33


Atticle 2,

Article 3,

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 31—Articles 1 to 5: Suits Relating to Accounts.)

This article made its first appearance as article 87 of the Act of 1871,
where it read as under: —

“For the balance due on a mutual, Three The time of the last item admitted
open and current account where years. or proved in the account.” -
there have been reciprocal de-
mands between the parties.

The phrase “mutual account”, which is the crucial expression in the article,
has come to acquire a well established meaning." No difficulties at present exist
as to the other words used in the article. It therefore needs no change.

31.2. Article 2 reads as under:—

“Against a factor for an account. _ Three When the account is, during the
years. continuance of the agency, demanded.
. and refused, or where no such
demand is made, when the agency
terminates.”
It is identical with article 88 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877. It corresponds
td article 64 of the Act of 1871, with slight verbal changes in the last column.

» No change is needed in the article.

31.3. Article 3 reads as under:—

“By a principal against his agent Three When the account is, during the
for movable property received years. continuance of the agency, demanded.

by the latter and not accounted - and refused or, when no such
for. . demand is made, when the agency
terminates.”

It is identical with article 89 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877. It corresponds
to article 90 of 1871, with slight verbal changes. The last column in the Act of
1871 read—“When the account is demanded and refused.”

3K. Article 3, during its development from 1871, has given rise to three
types of problems. The first was—

Does the article apply to a case when the principal sues, not the original
agent but the legal representatives of the agent?

The High Courts of Madya Pradesh,? Punjab? Nagpur,‘ Calcutta,’ Madras*
and Allahabad’ have held that the article has application to such a case. The
Privy Councif has held article 89 of the Act of 1908 to be applicable in a suit
for accounts instituted by the sons for an account against their deceased father’s

-agent."

31.5. In an earlier Allahabad case’ which was a suit under the Act of 1877,

| it was held that a suit to recover, from the sons of the deceased as representative

of his father, money which had been received by the deceased as pleader in his
professional capacity on behalf of a client was governed by article 120 of the Act

cere
'See Hindustan Forest Co. v. Lat Chand, A.LR. 1959 SC. 1349.
*Kashirant ४. Santokbhai, A.LR. 1968 M.
Yagir Singh v. Dheru, ALR. 1958 Pun
‘Deorao Zolba ४. Laxmansingh, A.LR. 1943, Nagpur 227.

*Bikramt Kishore ४. Jadab Chandra, ALR. 1935 Cal. 817.

‘Appa Rao v. Subba Rao, A,L.R. 1927 Madras हु
‘Ramrup Goshain v. Ramdhari Bhagat, A.LR. All. 683, ४
हप०#॥ Chandra प, Chandra Madhah, A.LR. 1916 7.0. 1

*Bindraban Behari v. Jamuna Kunwar, (1903) 1.1... 25 Allahabad 55.



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 31—Articles I to 5: Suits Relating to Accounts.)

of 1877 (residuary article) and a period of 6 years was allowed. When article 89
of the Act of 1877 was pressed during the arguments, the court observed:

“Article 89, which is suggested as the article applicable to this case, has clear-
ly no application, because the suit is not against the agent, but against the
legal representative of the agent. It has been held by the Punjab Chief Court,
in a case undistinguishable from the present one, that under such circumstances
article 120 applies, and that the terminus 4 quo is the time when the right
to sue accrues. The right of the plaintiff to sue the present defendant could
not have accrued until he (the defendant) had received the money from his
father on his father’s decease.”

Similar observations appear in another Allahabad case,’ which was a suit
against the heirs of an agent and, on the facts of the case, instead of article 89,
the Court held that article 116 of the Act of 1908 applied.

31.6. In view of the definition of the word “defendant” occurring in section No change
2(e) of the Act of 1908 and the later decisions mentioned above,’ the controversy to legal s
could be said to have been put at rest, and no amendment of the text of the’ arti- tative,
cle on this point is called for.

31.7. The second question that arose under article? was whether the demand Refusal whe-
and refusal contemplated by the third columa of the Schedule should be an ex- theron va

press one?

31.8. Whitley Stokes, while dealing with this article, has added a footnote Whitley |
against the word “refused”, whick runs as under :~—~ Stokes view

“That is, expressly refused—but see III C.L.R. 446.” casalaw,

Coming as it did from the pen of one who was also a Legislative Secretary
to the Government of India, this comment was noticed by the Calcutta High
Court‘ and the Court observed as under :--

“The mere failure of the agent to render accounts on demand does not
amount to refusal to render accounts within the meaning of article 89. The
question whether the failure of the agent to render accounts amounts to refusal
within the meaning of article 89, depends upon the circumstances of each case.”

This pdint was again argued in a Bombay case’ by Mr. Setalvad and the
court observed : —

“Mr. Setalvad refers to one or two decided cases in which it seems it was
held ‘that the refusal to render an account within the meaning of Col. 3,
article 89, must be express. With all respect I differ from this view. In my
opinion, whether an account was demanded and refused or not, must de-
pend upon the circumstances of each case, and I see no reason why a refu-
sal may not be inferred or implied from the facts of the case,”

31.9. This reasoning appears to have been followed by the Calcutta High No change
Court*-’ and the Chief Court of Sind’, needed at bd
- “tel usal”.

‘Mathura Nath v. Chheddu, A.LR. 1917 All. 14. ~

*Paragraph 31.4, supra.

80006 Anglo-India Codes (1388), Vol. 2, page 987,

‘Bhabatarini Debi v. Sheikt: Bhahadur Sarkar, ALR. 1919 Cal. 458.

SKarsondas Dhunjibhoy v. Swrajbhan Ramrijnal, A.LR, 1933 Bombay 450, 457.
‘Abdul Latif v, Gopeswar Chattoraj, A.1.R. 1933 Cal, 204.

1Pran Ram Mookerjee v. Jagadish Nath Rey, ALR. 1922 Cal, 355.

*Ganeshdas Lokuram v. Gangaram Dhingar, ALR. 1930 Smd, 142.


100

Termination
of icy—
Commenis of

Gatth and
Mr, Hobhouse.

Viows of
various High
Courts,

No change.

| 89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATIONACT, 1963

(Chapter 31—Articles 1 to 5: Suits Relating to Accounts.)
31.10. As the judicial view now seems to have been fairly well settled, we

do not think it Necessary to add any Explanation to indicate that the “refusal”
could be an implied one.

31.41. The third Point that arises under article 3 is: what should be taken
as the point of time ‘when the agency terminates’, within the meaning of the

third column of the schedule?

This was also a doubt lingering in the mind of Sir Richard Garth,’ when he
commented on the draft Bill that Jed to the Act of 1877,

“I now proceed. to clause 90, by which the period of limitation fixed for a
principal to bring his action against his agent for moveable Property receiv-
ed, and not accounted for, is three years from the timt when the account is
demanded and refused.”

-“This clause would virtually give the principal an almost indefinite time
for bringing his action. He may wait for ten, twenty or thirty years after the
agent has left his service, when the latter may have lost every means of explain-
ing or refuting any demands made upon him, and then at the end of that time
the principal may demand money or any other property he thinks Proper, and
Place the agent in the unfair position of having to discharge himself at that dis-
tance of time from the claim.”

Upon this, Hon’ble Arthur Hobhouse Q.C., commented ;:

“Surely if the relation of Principal and agent comes to an end, there
must be a time at which it is Teasonable to presume that all accounts have
been settled, and it is those reasonable Presumptions which we are trans.
lating into definite rules in framing a statute of limitations, T think the time
should run from the demand, or the close of the relation, whichever first
happens. But then section 20 ought to extend to acknowledgements given in
answer to such demands, whereas it appears to be confined to debts and
legacies.” ‘

31.12. The Madras High Court? held that the agency terminated with the sell-
ing of goods, and did not continue till the accounts were settled and money re-
mitted. A contrary view was expressed by the Calcutta High Court in an early
case,’ its decision’ being to the effect that the agents continue to be liable to the
plaintiff till they accounted to him.

31.13. The Sind‘ and Allahabad’ -view is that the duestion of termination

. Gepends on the circumstances of each case.

’

31.14, It appears that the pharaseology used in the article will have to be
applied and interpreted in the facts of each case. A change in the pharaseology
would be no improvement in practice. In the result, article 3 needs no change.

flon’ble Sir Richard Garth D.Q. letter to the Hon'ble Arthur Hobhouse, Q.C., dated
80 March, 1876—National Archives File pertaining to papers of 1877,
jNagavva and another v. Thommandra Yerrikalappa, ALR. 1934 Mad. 691 (1).
3Fink ४. Buldeo Dass, (1899) LL.R. 26 Cal. 715, sina
[ *Gordhandas v. Firm’ of Gokal Khataoo, A.LR. 1926 Sind 264,
" sBabu Ram v, Ram Dayal, (1890) LUR. 12 Ali 541.



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 .

(Chapter 31—Articles 1 to 5; Suits Relating to Accounts.)
(Chapter 32—Articles 6 to 55: Suits Relating to Contracts.)

31.15. Article 4 reads as under.— Article 4.
“Other suits by principles against Three When the neglect or misconduct
agents for neglect or misconduct. years. becomes known to the plaintiff.”

It is identical with article 90 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877.

Under Article 91 of the Act of 1871, the starting point was—
“When the neglect or misconduct occurs,”

The present ‘provision is sound in principle, and has created no difficulties.
No change is therefore recommended.

31.16. It would be seen from the genesis of the present article that a very
serious defect in article 91 of the 1871 Act, namely, the omission of a reference
to the time when the neglect or misconduct becomes known to the plaintiff, has
been cured by adding the words “becomes known (0 the plaintiff” after the
word “misconduct”. In fact, the draft of the 1877 Act which was circulated for
comments contained the clause “when the neglect or misconduct occurs or be-
comes known to the plaintiff”, but the words “occurs or” were omitted in the
final draft. .

On this reasoning, the High Courts of Allahabad’, Calcutta? and Madras’
1896 also brought, under the purview of article 4, cases involving movable pro-
perty entrusted to the agent, whenever there was an allegation of neglect or mis-
conduct against the agent though article 3 deals with recovery of movable pro-
perty.

We do not deem it necessary to express any final view on this matter, ex-
cept saying that the applicability of the article would depend upon the facts and
circumstances of each case.

No change is, therefore, needed in this article. ~

31.17, Article 5 reads as under :— Article 5,

“For an account and a share of the Three The date of the dissolution.”
# profits of a dissolved{partnership. years,

It is identical with article 106 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877, and with article
106 of the Act of 1871.

The article needs no change.

CHAPTER 32 .

ARTICLES 6 TO 55 : SUITS RELATING TO CONTRACTS

32.1. Article 6 prescribes a limitation period of 3 ycars for a suit for a sea- Article 6,
;tan’s wages. The starting point is the end of the voyage during which the wages
are earned—thus differing from’ the starting point under the general article relat-
ing to wages (article 7), where limitation starts running as soon as the wages
accrue due.

The article needs no change.

Yaganji v. Bandan, ALR. 1930, All. 397. ८

°Saktiprasanna Bhattacharya v. Naliniranjan Bhattacharya, ALR. 1931 Cal. 738.

*Sankaramarayana Ayyar and another, ¥. Trichondur-Dharmanarinalam Sakthithara
Bhajana Sobha through A. Sivaramakrishna Iyer, ALR. 1939 Mad. 114.

iot


102

Article 7.

Salary.

Suits for
arrears of

reinstatement
in service.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 32—Articles 6 to 55: Suits Relating to Contracts.)

32.2, Article 7 reads as under :--

“7, For wages in the case of any Three When the wages accrue due’.
other person. years.

‘The subject was covered in the Act of 1908 by two articles,

There was no parallel provision in the Acts of 1871 and 1877. The two
articles on the subject occurring in the 1908 Act have been combined, on the
recommendation of the Law Commission in its Report on the Act of 1908.

32.3. Some questions need to be discussed in connection with the article.
The first is—Does the expression ‘wages’ include ‘salary’? Arguments have been
addressed before thé Courts time and again that the salary of a Government
servant cannot be called “wages”. In a case before the Supreme Court, where
the appellant was a clerk in the Accounts Department of the Railways, the
Supreme Court observed’ :--

&, ,.,,५०००००० a good deal can be said of the contention that a claim for arrears
of salary is distinguishable from a claim for wages. But, our difficulty is
that the question appears to us to be no longer open-for consideration afresh
by us, or, at any rate, it is not advisable to review the authorities of this
Court, after such a lapsé of time when, despite the view taken by this Court
that Article 102 of the Limitation Act of 1908 was applicable to such cases,
the Limitation Act of 1963 had been passed repeating the law, contained
in Articles 102 and i20 of the Limitation Act of 1908, in identical terms with-
out any modification. The Legislature must be presumed to be cognizant of
the view of this Court that a claim of the nature before us, for arrears of salary
falls within the purview of Article 102 of the Limitation Act of 1908.”

In a later case? the Supreme Court, relying on a judgment of the Federal
Court’, held that the term “wages” appearing in article 102 of the 1908 Act
includes salary and a suit for the recovery of pay is covered by this article. It
has also been held to include pension.*

It is proper that the judicial interpretation should be codified by amending
the article.’ ‘The clarification can apply to article 6 as well.

32.4. The second question in connection with article 7 relates to the situa-
tion where the dismissal of a Government servant is set aside and, on re-instate~
ment, he sues for arrears of salary. The Supreme Court has dealt with the matter
thus’, . है

“When the order of dismissal or removal is set aside by the Court on the
ground of failure to afford the constitutional protection, the order is dec-
Jared invalid ab initio, 1.6., as if it, in law, never existed, and the public ser-
vant concerned was unlawfully prevented from rendering service. If that ‘be
the correct view, salary due to the public servant concerned must be deem-
ed to have accrued month after month because he had been wrongfully pre-
vented from rendering service. The period of limitation under Article 102

18, 0. 5. Srivastava v. Union of India, ALR. 1974 5.0. 338, 341; (1974) 2 SCR 485.
*Maimoona Khatun v. State of U.P. (1980) 3 SCC. 578.

3punjab Province v. Tarachand, AIR. 1947 F.C. 23, para 28, 33 (1947) F.C, 89.
‘Anand Swarup V. Punjab A.L.R. 1972 S.C. 2638,

SSee paragraph 32.8, infra.

SJai Chand Sawhnes ¥. Union of India, (1970) 2 S.C.J. 288, 289.


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, $963

(Chapter 32—-Articles 6 fo 55: Suits Relating to Contracts.)

to run when the wages accrue due’, and wages accrue due when jn law
the servant becomes entitled to wages.” ,

32.5. These observations gave rise to a view that a period of three years
for filing the suit for arrears of salary would be computed from month to month,
irrespective of the date when the dismissal is held to be invalid.

However, considering the fact that courts may take a longer time than three
years to pronounce upon the validity or otherwise of the dismissal of a Govern-
ment servant, some High Courts have been referring to the service conditions
to enable such a Government servant to dompute the period of limitation from
the date when his dismissal was set aside by the court. The Bombay' High Court
teferred to the effect of Fundamental Rulés 52 and 53 upon the Government
servant’s salary, which ceases upon his suspension when he becomes entitled
only to get subsistence allowance. and ceases, altogether upon his dismissal. As
a result of the Fundamental Rules, the Government servant cannot even osten+
sibly put a claim to salary so long as the orders of suspension and dismissal
stand. On this basis, the Bombay High Court held that the right of a suspended
or dismissed Government servant to claim arrears of salary can arise only when
the order of suspension or dismissal is quashed and set aside, either by the de-
partment or by the order of a civil court. On this reasoning, the Court held the
date of quashing of the order to be the starting point of limitation for a suit by
such a Government servant for salary.

The Gujarat High Court?—like the Bombay High Court—has made the
statutory rules as the plank upon which to base its judgment in this regard.

32.6. The Cuttack High Court’, on the facts of-a case before it, held that
the Government servant was illegally - prevented from performing his duties,
although he was ready and willing to perform those duties, and hence the cause
of action arose only on the day when the court quashed the impugned order of
transfer.

The Madras High Court‘ had, before it, a case of an employee who was
informed that the period during which he was off from service would be treated
as if he was on duty. The Court observed:

“In the light of our observations as above, the third column in article 7,
‘when the wages accrue due’, in a case Jike the one with which we are faced,
has to be interpreted, as we said, liberally and equitably. When an employee
whose services have been illegally terminated has been reinstated and when
he is informed that the period during which he was off from service would
be treated as if he was on duty, then a fresh cause of action would arise on

the date when he was reinstated and on the date when a communication to

that effect was issued to him.”

The Calcutta High Court’ also held that a claim for arrears of salary of 8
public servant who had been wrongfully prevented from attending to his duties
followed from the declaration that the relevant order was void and a nullity.

Stare of Bomb Sarjoo Gumasta, 1.L.R. (1968) Bom. 1024.
*Laxmiben v. State of Gujarat, (1970) 1 Gujarat Law Reporter 5’

'Baikunthanath Pratihari v. State of Orissa, (1974) Cuttack Law Times, 532.
{Union of india v. Venkatarama Naidu, (1975) 1 M.L.J. 345, 3:

SUmasankar Das v. State of West Bengal, (4972-73) 77 C.W.N. 899.

103


104

Later Judg-
ment of the
Supreme Court.

noe

Recommendation
article 7,

Article 8.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 32—Articles 6 to 55: Suits Relating to Contracts.)

32.7, It is now no longer necessary to cull out niceties from the facts pecu-
liar to each case, because the Supreme Court has itself, in a recent judgment’,
distinguished its earlier case*. The Supreme Court has observed :

“We are clearly of the opinion that in cases where an employee is dismiss-
ed or removed from service and is reinstated either by the appointing autho-
rity-or by virtue of the order of dismissal or removal being set aside by a
civil court, the starting point of limitation would be not the date of the
order of dismissal or removal, but the date when the right actually accrues,
that is to say, the date of the reinstatement, by the‘appointing authority
where no suit is filed or the date of the decree where 4 suit is filed and
decree:

The earlier case? having not been overruled, the observafions made therein
that even if the dismissal or removal is declared ab initio. invalid, the salary due to
the public servant must be deemed to have accrued monthafter month, may be
construed as still holding the field. The result is, that except in cases where the
Government servant has been suspended and thereafter reinstated, the ratio of the
earlier case may disentitle a Government servant from claiming arrears of
salary for a period three years prior to the institution of the suit for such arrears.

328. In this position, we think that the matter should be put beyond doubt
by amending the third column of article 7 as follows :—

“When the wages accrue due or, where the suit is for relief consequential
on the setting aside of an order of dismissal or removal, when the order of
dismissal or removal is aside.”

Further, as already recommended‘, an Explanation should be inserted be-
low article 7, as under :—

“Explanation—In this’ article and in article 6, the expression “wages” in-
cludes salary and pension.”

32.9. We now proceed to article 8, It reads as under:—
“For the price of food or drink Three When the food or drink is delivered.”
sold by the keeper of & hotel, years.
tavern or lodging-house.

It corresponds to article 8 of the Act of 1908, quoted below : —

“For the price of food or drink One When the food or drink is delivered.
sold by the keeper of a hotel, year. ५ .
tavern or lodging-house.

This was identical with article 8 in the Acts of 1877 and 1871.

The Law Commission recommended in its Report on the Act of 1908 that

“the period of limitation should be increased from one year to three years’, This

has been implemented in the Act of 1963. No further change is needed in the
article.

\Maimoona Khatun v. State of U.P. (1980) 3 S.C.C. 578, 586.

aichand Sarl ’s case, (1970) 3 S.C.R. 222; (1969) 3 S.C.C. 642; (1970) 2 SCI.
288 See 32.4, supra.

Be an ney V. Union of India, (1970) 3 &C.R. 222; (1970) 2 S.C.J. 288. See para~
graph 32.4, supra.

‘Paragraph 32.3,

5Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1908), page 30, para 71.


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 32—Articles 6 to 55: Suits Relating to Contracts.)

32.1. Article 9 reads as under :— Article 9
“For the price of lodging. + Three When the price becomes payable.”
years.
Article 9 in the Act of 1908 was as under:—
“For the price of lodging + One When the price becomes payable.”
year,
Article 9 in the Act of 1908 was as under:— ‘
“For the price of lodging . One = When the price becomes payable”
year.

This was identical with article 9 of the Acts of 1877 and 1871.

In the Act of 1963 (the present Act); the Period of limitation has been
raised from one year to three years, as recommended by the Law Commission
in its Report ७9 the Act of 1908!

No further change is necded in the article,
32.11. (a) Article 10 reads as under :--

“Against a carrier for compensation Three When the Joss or injury occurs,”
for losing cr injuring goods. years,
Article 30.0 the Act of 1908 reads as under: —
«

‘Against a carrier for compensa-J§One When the loss or injury occurs.”
tion for losing or injuring goods. yeary

Article 30 of the Act of 1877 and artivte 36 of the Act of 1871 were iden-
tical, except that the period was two years. .

, (0) Article 11 reads as under: —
“Against a carrier for compensa- Three When the goods ought to be deliver-

Articles 10
and 11.

jon fe ivery of, or पु |!
in delverng gooae RY Years ot
Article 31 of the Act of 1908 reads as under: — .
न Assi पु iver.
jon for nomdelvery of oF delay Sear. ede” 'M 80094 CuBht 10 be deliver
in delivering goods.
Article 31 of the Act of 1877 and article 37 of the Act of 1871 were identi-
cal, except that the period was two years.

Acting upon the recommendations of the Law Commission; the period of
limitation has been raised from one year (Act of 1908) to three years, in both
_ the articles,

32.12 Articles 10-11 came to be noticed. by the Sepreme Court’ in a case 10 Compensation=
which it was argued that because articles 30 and 31 of the Limitation Act, 1908 Railways Act,
(corresponding to articles 10 and 11 of the preseat Act), provided different points '°””
of time from which the period of limitation was to run, the claim covered by those
articles is not for compensation for loss, destruction or deterioration of the goods”
within the meaning of sections 72 and 77 of the Indian Railways Act, 1890. This
argument was, however, repelled by the Court, overniling a full bench judgment
of the Allahabad High Court’ to the contrary. Even though the Supréme Court
has noticed the different starting points of limitetion.in articles 10 and 11, it has
not commented adversely upon it, nor has it made any suggestion for improve-
ment.

iLaw Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation <Act, 1309 page 30, para 71.
*Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation 01८ 70386 30_para 72,
‘Governor General in Council ९. Musadi Lal ALR. 1 C. 725.

‘Governor General in Council v. Mahabir Ram ALR. 1952, All. 891 (F.B.),

15-14 M of LI & €A/ND/S3

105


106

Recommenda-

tion as to
articles 10-11.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 32~ Articles 6 to 55: Suits Relating to Contracis.)

32.13. A single Judge of the Madras High Court’ has held that article 31 of
the Act of 1908 (now article 11) applies to a suit against a carrier for compensa-
tion for misdelivery of goods, and not article 30 of the Act of 1908 (now article
10). The High Court placed reliance on Supreme Court case? which, though not
exactly on the point, contains observations interpreting the expression “goods ought
to be delivered”. The Dethi High Court’ also relying on a Supreme Court case‘,
has ruled otherwise. In the case relied upon by the Delhi High Court, however,
the Supreme Court had not decided the question at ail, as would appear from
the following excerpt from the judgment’ of the Supreme Court :

“The learned Counsel for the appellant argued that article 30 would apply
to the suit claim, whereas the learned Counsel for the respondent contended
that Article 31 would be more appropriate to the suit claim. We shall assume
that Article 30 governed the suit claim and proceed to consider the,question on
that basis.”

On an examination of the matter, we see considerable force in the reason-
ing of the Madras High Court that misdelivery should be included in non-deli-
very {article 11), because, in such a case, the carrier has neither 108 nor injured
the goods {article 10). To put the matter beyond doubt, we reconimend that the
first column of article 11 should be revised so as to cover misdelivery.*

32.14. The third column of article 10, which prescribes as the Starting point
the time “when the loss or injury occurs”, has created difficulties in the minds
of consignors. They argue that if the goods have been lost by the Railways some-
where in transit, it is impossible for them to know the date of such 1085. Dealing
with the subject, the Madtas High Court? has held that the period runs from
the date of knowledge, and not the date of quantification of the damage, and
has observed that the article ought to be grammatically interpreted while apply-
ing “the commonsense rule” that the period begins to run from the knowledge
of damage or injury. However, observations in another Madras case* indicate
that the starting point would be the date of actual loss. The Allahabad High
Court? has observed :--

“The period of limitation runs from the actual date of loss and not from
[16 0406 when it comes to the notice of the plaintiff; the date when he comes
to know of the loss is utterly irrelevant, not being an ingredient of the cause
of action. It is axiomatic that the date,of the happening of an event is
different from the date of knowledge of the happening. A consignee may
not know of loss of the consignment as soon as it takes place and if the
law’of limitation contained in‘ article.30 Operates harshly upon the consignee,
the remedy is with the Legislature and not in distorting the language used
in article 30.” हु

32.15, Whenever open delivery of goods is taken, the courts have been
holding that limitation would begin to’fin from the date of open delivery which

iUnion of India v. Ramchand Kishanchand & Co., A.LR. 1974 Mad. 335, 337.
*Bottamai v, Union of India, A.1.R. 1962 S.C. 1716. .
31972) 74 Punjab Law Reporter 101
‘Union of India ए. Amar Singh, A.1.R. 1960 $.C. 233.

‘Union of India. v. Amar Singh, A.LR. 1960 $.C. 233 para 18 (1960) 2 S.C.R. 75.
See pera 32.17, infra for a draft, :

1M. K. R. Chattiar & Co. v. Union of India, ALR, 1971 Mad. 34.

8Union of India v. Ramchand ‘aram Chand: «Co, ALR, 1974 Mad. 335.

*Oudh and Tirkut Rly. v. Mrs. Karam ABR. 1958 All. 234, 243.

7,
wh


89TH REFORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 107

(Chapter 32—Articles 6 to 55: Suits Relating to Contracts.)

brought to surface the damage to-the 80005. But the problem still survives
when open delivery of goods is not given. In order to avoid hardship to consig-
nors, we recommend that the third column in doth the articles (articles 10-11)
should be amended so as to make knowledge of ‘the loss, injury, delay, mis-deli-
very, non-delivery or delay the starting point of limitation.

IV. Short-Delivery

32.16, There was previously some conflict of opinion on the question whe-
ther short delivery amounted to “loss” within the meaning of article 10 or whe: delivery
ther it amounted to “non-delivery” within the meaning of article 11. But the
conflict has now been set at rest by the Supreme Court, which has held that
where a part of the consignment has been delivered, that should be taken to be
the date when the goods ought to have been delivered as a whole within the
meaning of these words in article 31 of the Act of 1908 (vow article 11). Conse-
quently, no amendment of the article on this count is called for.

९. Recommendation

32.17. In the light of the above discussion‘, we recommend that articles Recommendation
and 11 should be revised as under: as to articles 10-11.

“10. Against a carrier forcompen- Three When the plaintiff has knowledge of

sation for losing or injuring years. the loss or injury.”
goods.

“It, Against a carrier for com- Three When the plaintiff has knowledge
pensation for non-delivery of, or years. of the nonedelivery, mais-delivery or

delay in delivery of, goods. delay as the case may be.”
32.18. This takes us to article 12, which reads as under ;— Article 12.
“For the hire of animais, vehicles, Three When the hire becomes payable.”
boats or household furniture. years. .

It is identical with article 50 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877, and with article
49 of the Act of 1871.

In the original Bill of 1871, the starting point of limitation (as mentioned
in the third column) was “the date of the hiring”. The Select Committee changed
this to “when the hire becomes payable’.”

The article needs no change.

32.19. Article 13 reads as under :— Atticle 13.

‘For the balance of money advanc- Three When the goods ought to be deliver- *
ed in payment of goods to be deli- - years. ed.”
vered.

It is identical with article 51 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877, and with article
50 of the Act of 1871.

Articles 51 to 54 of the Act of 1908 formed the subject matter of discussion
in the Report of the Law Commission on the Act of 1908. -The Commission

Whyion of India v. Kewal Parkash, AVR. 1977 Delbi 146

245 to article 11, First column, see also paragraph 32.14, supra.
3Boota Mal v. Unior of India, A.1.R. 1962 S.C. 1716, ,

‘Paragraphs 32.13 and 32.15, supra.

5National Archives File No; LEG. Act FX-XVI of 1871, pages, 15, 63.


Acticle 14.

Articles 15-16.

891 REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 32~ Articles 6 10 55: Suits Relating 10 Contracts.)

tecommended’ that these should all be replaced by one article for suits based on-
contract or on tort. However, no change has been effected in the Act of 1963 in
this regard.

We also do not recommend any change in the article.

32.28. Article 14 reads as under :--

“For the pr rice of goods sold and Three The date of the delivery of the
deli where no fixed period years. goods.
of credit is agreed upon.

Tt is identical with article 52 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877, and with article
51 of the Act of 1871.

32.21. A question that needs to be considered is what should be the start-
ing point for limitation under article 14, when the goods are delivered at differeat
times? The view of the Madras High Court’ is that when goods are supplied
from time to time and the payment is also made from time to time, article 52 of
the Limitation Act, 1908 (corresponding to article 14 of the present Act) would
apply after the payments are appropriated under sections 60 and 61 of the Indian
Contract Act, 1877. The result would be, that if the date correspondiag to the
delivery that is unadjusted falls beyond three years from the date of institution
of the suit, the claim would bo time-barred.

The Rajasthan High Court’ has, on the other hand, regarded a payment in
such case of goods sold at different dates as “payment” within the. meaning of
tection 20 of the Limitation Act, 1908 (section 19 of the present Act), so as to
give a fresh period of limitation to the items which are not barried by limitation
00 the date of that payment. The Kerala High (0७6 has held that even though
some payments by cheque were made by the defendant towards the price of
goods supplied from time to time on account, such a payment cannot be cons-
(1000 as amounting to an acknowledgement of the debt under section 19 of the
Limitation Act, 1963.

32.22. The manner in which payments are to be applied by the creditor has
been codified in sections 59 to 61 of the Comtract Act. The applicability of arti-
ele 14 to such a situation would primarily depend upon the facts of each case,
and on the mode of agreement between the purclaser and the seller.

Consequently, 10 amendment of the article is called for, to deal specifically
with cases of delivery of goods from time to time.

32.23. (a) Article 15 reads as under:— —-

“For the price of goods sold and Three Whea the period of credit expires.
iv to fod soe for after the — yesrs.
expiry of a tiod of credit.

It is identical with article 53 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877. In the Act of
1871, article 52 was in the same terms but the starting point was—“The expiry
of the period of credit”.

FF
1Law Commission of India, 3cd Report (Limitation Act. £908) pages 31-32, para 74,
and wage 83, Article 1
tan & Co. ४. Manickam, A.1.R. 1961 Mad. 388.
*Chandra Nath v. Prahlad Narain, A.J.R. 1961 Raj. 154.
‘Charunni १. Purushothama, A.LR. 1973 Ket.


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 32—Articles 6 to 55: Suits Relating to Contracts.)
(b) Article 16 reads as under: —

“For the price of goods sold and- Three When the period of the proposed bill
delivered to be paid for by a years. elapses.”
bill of exchange, no-such bill
being given.

It is identical with article 54 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877, and with article
53 of the Act of 1871.

The recommendation of the Law Commission in its Report on the Act of
1908, to consolidate articles 51 to 54 of the Act 1908, has not been accepted.

(©) On a consideration of the articles and the cases thereon we do not con-
sider it necessary to recommend any change.

32.24, Article 17 reads as under :— Article 17.

“For the price of trees or growing Three The date of the sale.”
cops sold by the plaintiff to the years.
defendant where no fixed] period
of credit is agreed upon, .
It is identical with article 55 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877, and with article
54 of the Act of 1871.

The article needs no change.

32.25. Article 18 reads as under :--

“For the p tice of work done by the Three When the work is done.”
plaintiff for the defendant at his years.
xoquest where no time has becn
fixed for payment.

It is identical with article 56 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877, and with article
55 of the Act of 1871.

Article 18.

32.26. The Patna High Court? has held that when a contractor executes a Article 10 and
work for the Government under a contract which is finalised after the invitation Government
of tenders, it cannot be said that the work was done at the “request of the Gov-
ernment” (article 56 of the Act of 1908); Hence, the case is outside article 56,
and is governed by the residuary article (article 120 of the Act of 1908, now
article 113). .

A contrary view has been taken by the Andhra High Court,’ which has held
that such a suit is one for claiming price for work done and not “for compensa-
tion for breach of any contract”. A similar view has been taken by a Full Bench
of the Allahabad High Court.’ ‘

Now that the period of Limitation under article 120 of the 1908 Act {resi-
duary article) has been reduced to three years in article 113 of the 1963 Act, the
plaintiff is not likely to get any advantage whether article 18 or article 113 applies
to the facts of his case.

Consequently, no change is recommended in article 18.

JLaw Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act. 1908), pages 31-32, paragraph
14,

*S$tate of Bihar v. Rama Bhushan, A.1.R. 1964 Pat. 326.

§Subbaraju v. Village Panchayat, ALR. 1965 AP. 186. 1,

‘Zila Parishad v. Shanti Devi, A.LR. 1965 All. $90-(F.B.).


110

Article 19.

Atticte 20,

Article 21

Article 22.

" Deposits.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION AcT, 1963

(Chapter 32—Articles 6 to 55: Suits Relating to Contracts.)
32.27, Article 19 reads as under :—~

“For money payable fot money Three When the loan is made.”
lent. years.

The article is identical with article 57 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877 aud with

article 56 of the Act of 1871.

The article needs no change.

32.28. Article 20 reads as under :--

“Like suit when the lender has given Three When the cheque is paid.”
atcheque for thefmoney. years.

It is identical with article 58 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877, and with article

57 of the Act of 1871. No change is needed in this article.

32.29. Article 21 reads as under :
“For money lent under an agrec- Three When the loan is made.”
ment that it shall be payable on years,
demand. पु

It is identical with article 59 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877.
Article 58 of the Act of 1871 reads as under!
“For money lent under an agree- Three When the demand is made.”

ment that it shall be payable on years,
demand. ‘

No change js, needed in the article.

32.30, Article 22 reads as under :

“For money. deposited under an Thrce When the demand is made.”
agreement that it shall bc payablo years,
on demand, including money of
28 customer in the hands of his
banker so payable,

It is identical with article 60 of the Act of 1908.
Article 60 of the Act of 1877 was as under:—
“For money deposited under an . Three, When.the demand is made.”
agreement that it shall be payable years.
on demand,

There was no corresponding provision in the Act of 1871.

32.31. Controversies often arise a8 to period of limitation applicable

where a transaction is on the border-line between deposit and loan. The
Supreme Court has observed! as under, regarding such border-line cases :—-

“Further, as this was a deposit, limitation would run at the earliest

‘from the refusal and not from the date of demand. It was contended that

the plaintiff had made a demand as far back as 1948 and therefore the
period of limitation would run from that date, and hence the suit was
hopelessly barred by limitation, because six years expired some time in the
year 1954.”

‘Abdul Karim v, Dy. Custodian General, ALR. 1964 S.C. 1256, 1259.

i


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF [NDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

{Chapter 32—-Articles 6 to 55: Suits Relating to Contracts.)

Earlicr also, the Court’ had made general observations indicating the
Suidelines to be followed for determining whether a transaction is one of deposit
or a loan:

“Even though the transaction was a transaction of deposit as above
stated, the deposit could be coupled with an age&ement that it would be
payable on demand.” .

“Such an agreement could be expressed or implied and if an express
agreement in that behalf was recorded in the document in the terms above,
the transaction of deposit could not be thereby converted into a transaction
of loan and the words ‘we shall pay the said sum’ could not convert the
document into a promissory note.”

“The promise to pay would be involved in a promissory note as well
as in-a deposit within the meaning of Article 60. Limitation Act and the
court would have regard to the intention of the parties and the circumstances
of the case in order to arrive at the conclusion whether document was a pro-
Missory note.” रे

32.32, In this position, it does not seem necessary to suggest any amendment No change
in the article, The question of fixed deposits (deposits for a specified period) will needed.

be dealt with separately”

32.33. Although the Limitation Act contains fairly elaborate Provisions re- Article 324
garding suits for the recovery of money, it does not deal specifically with claims (Proposed)-
for the recovery of money which is placed in fixed deposits with banks or cthercover money

companies. As a result, one cannot immediately locate the article that is applica-
ble to suits which are instituted for getting back money deposited for a stipulated
period. It appears to us that the law of limitation should contain a specific provi-
sion on the subject, since the placing of money in fixed deposits with companics
and banks is now a very common practice. The articles of the Act which might
“possibly become applicable to such transactions—-article 27 or article 55 are not
specifically meant for fixed deposits, If the law is to be casy of understanding.
it is necessary that a spccific article should be inserted in the Act to cover such
suits. This will help in removing the obscurity of position which has been referred
to above.

> According to a Supreme Court judgment, the period of limitation in the case of
money deposited for a specified period would start running on the expiry of the
period of deposit and a demand. as such. is not a condition precedent to the
starting of the period of limitation.? According to the Allahabad High Court‘ and
the Nagpur High Court’, article 60 of the Act of 1908 (present article 22) docs
nat apply to fixed deposits.
According to the High Court of Patna? article 22 applies where 2 demand
efter the termination of the period is necessary.

According to the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir’ and the High Court of
Punjab. and Haryana’, a demand is required before money placed in fixed deposit

tAnnamalai v, Veerappa, A.1,R. 1956 S.C. 12.

2908 discussion relating to article 228, infra.

8K. 5. Wani v. New Akola Cotton Ginning Press, ALR. 1958 S.C. 437, 438, 439.
4Bank of Upper India v. Arif Hussain, A.LR. 1931 All, 592), 62.

SKashinath ४. N.A.C,G. & Co., ALR. 1951 Nag. 255.

SNokhlal Sarjuneasad v. Mojiban. A... 1939 Pat, 261.

Yammu and Kashmir Bank v. Nirmai Devi, A.LR. 1959 1&K 95.

8Hindustan Commercial Bank v. Jograr Singh A.LR. 1974 P&H 211, 212, paragraphs

laced in
xed deposit,

व]


112 89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 32- -Articles 6 to 55: Suits Rekttting to Contracts.)

in bank can be claimed and, therefore, limitation starts from the date of demand.
The Jammu and Kashmir ruling referred to above seeks to distinguish the Supreme
Court judgment of 1958 (mentioned above)' on the ground that the Supreme
Court case was a case of “debt”, but, with Tespect, this does not appear to be a
correct reading of the facts to which the Supreme Court judgment relates. The
Punjab decision (referred to above) seeks to distinguish the Supreme Court ruling
of 1958 on the ground that that was not a case of deposit with a bank.

The difficulty seems to have arisen because the distinction between money
payable on demand and money payable without demand does not seem to have
been given its due prominence.

Where money is deposited with a bank, no doubt, the question whether it is
to be paid only on demand depends on the intention of the parties and the terms
of the agreement. Where money is payable only on a demand -being made. limi-
tation does not commence until the demand is made However, the case is
different where the period of deposit is fixed. It should be noted that banks and
companies accepting deposits do not, in general, pay interest for the period after -
expiry of the term of deposit. This shows that on expiry of the term of deposit
the money becomes payable.

From the case law on the subject, it appears that there is considerable obs-
curity as to the position concerning the. computation of the period of limitation
for money placed in fixed deposits. In the absence of a specific provision on the
subject, courts have had to hunt out the article to be applied and to take resort
to some provision or other which was not perhaps specifically intended for a
fixed deposit (i.e, deposit for a stipulted period), For example. in an Orissa
case,’ it was held that the deposit of money was covered by article 145 of the
Act of 1908, corresponding to article 70 of the present Act (Deposit of “movable
Property”), and that the limitation for a suit to recover money so deposited start-
ed not on the date of demand, but from the date of the refusal following the
demand.

Position under 32.34, By way of a statement of the legal position under the earlier Act

. (Act of 1908), it may be mentioned that the situation was not unarabignous
under the Act also. Article 59 of that Act, for example, applied to a suit “for
money lent under an agreement that it shall be payable on demand.” Again,
article 60 covered certain other suits for money. But none of these articles was
specifically applicable to a suit for the recovery of money deposited for a fixed
term. Sometimes, the residuary article as to “compensation for the breach of
any contract’ was resorted to’. It is to be remembered that generally where
money is placed for a definite term, the liability to repay commences as soon as
the term expires—which is the reason why articles dealing with money payable
“on demand” do not take within their fold fixed deposits. The result of this
position is that both under the earlier. Act and under the present Act, the courts
have to fall back upon the residuary article governing a suit for “compensation
for breach of any contract” (article 115 of the Act of 1908, corresponding to
article 55 of the present Act) or on some article not specifically intended for fix-
ed deposits.

1K. S. Wani v, New Akola Cotton Ginning Press, A.I.R. 1958 S.C. 437, 438, 439,
*Annamalai v. Veerappa A.L.R. 1956 S.C. 12, 15.

‘Gouri Shankar Misra v. Bannamali Babu, 1.L.R. (1979) 2 Cut. 108.

*Article 115, 1908 Act, article 55. 1963 Act,

4. 5. Seema v. R. K. Banerjee, ALR. 1936 Rang. 388.



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDI4 ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 #13
(Chapter 32—Articles 6 to 55—Suits Relating to Contracts.)

32.38. This is hardly a satisfactory situation. Once the deposit becomes Recommendation
payable, Jimitation should start running and there is need for 2 specific provi- पान
sion on the. subject. For these reasons, we recommend that a specific article on
the subject, to be numbered as article 22-A should be inserted in the Limitation
* Act, after article 22. It should run somewhat on the following lines :—

“224” For money deposited under an Three When ‘the stipulated period
agreement that it shall be payable Years  expires.””
on the expiry of a stipulated period,
inchuding money of @ customer in
the hands of is banker so payable.

32.36. This takes us to article 23. which reads as under : Articte 23.

“For money payable to the plain- Three When the money is paid.”
wef for money paid for the defen- years.
t.

It is identical with article 61.0 the Acts of 1908 and 1877, and with article
59 of the Act of 1871.

32.37. A question may arise whether the payment contemplated by the ar- Voluntary
ticle should be voluntary payment or जाल व lieu of the coercive process of law. था.
‘The following observations’ of Anson (in the context of the substantive law of
contracts) may be of interest in this connection, though they do not deal with
limitation as such:

“The payment made by the plaintiff may be purely voluntary. It need not
be the result of any legal liability, or compulsion. Nor need it operate so
as to relieve the defendant of a fiabili for the claim to reimbursement is
not affected by the fact that payment & not made in discharge of a debt
for which the defendant would himself be 1 ना

The basis of the cause of action for the claim in such cases is a matter of _
- substantive law. There is a Madras judgment® from a very distinguished Judge
@bashyam Ayyangar, J.) to the effect that it is immaterial whether the party
seeking contribution made thé payment voluntarily or involuntarily. In cither
_ case, he is damnified and the parties against whom -he seeks contribution have to
that extent been benefited. A Calcutta judgment® bases the right and duty of
- contribution on the doctrine of equity {and not on contract). When a person’s
froperty is sold for ‘a debt where the liability is joint, he does have, even accor-
ding to the Calcutta view, a claim against his joint debtor for the amount paid
in excess of his half share (though he cannot be said to have “paid” the amount).
Yn either view of the matter. the person making payment is not left without a
remedy, We would not therefore recommend any amendment in the article under
consideration.

32.38. It can happen’ that when the plaigtiff pays the money which the de-Two causes
fendant is legally bound to pay, the payment will give rise to two causes of ac- of action,
tion—{i) cause of action for recovery of the money so paid by the plaintiff, of contract.
governed by article 61 (of the Act of 1908) (corresponding to the present article
23). Gi) cause of action arising on the date when the contract is broken, thus

Yanson’s Law of Contract (23rd Ed}, pata 594.

SRajah of Viziauagram v. Rajah Setrucherla Somasokhararaz, (1903) LLR. 26 Mad.
686. 693, 696 (F.B,).

8Cope Hath Munshi v. Chandra Nath Munshi, (1896) LL.R. 25 Cal. 814.

4Vishvam ¥. Pannatal, A.I.R. 1937 Nag. 152.”

1ge14 M of LJ & CA/ND,83


वाद

Volunteers

making pay- -
ment.

Article 24.

Case law.

No need to
amend.

897TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 32—Articles 6 to $5—Suits Relating"to Contracts.)

giving tise to a suit for damages for breach of contract. It is for the plaintiff to
elect between the two. No amendment of the article is called for on this’ count.

32.39. As to the persons who make payment in a matter in which they have
No interest (volunteers), this aspect does. not appear to have come to surface in
decided cases. But Anson’ observes :

“Secondly, the plaintiff have been under a legal liability to pay the
money. If he chooses voluntarily to pay money in discharge of the defen-
dant’s liability, he will have no claim to reimbursement............ English law
does not favour the negotiorum géstor, the ‘officious bystander’, who inter-
venes, without being requested to do so, on another’s behalf.”

Though this facet of the matter, namely, that the article applies only when
the plaintiff has paid money for the defendant where he has a legal interest has
not been brought out in the text of the article, the decided cases do not seem to
entertain any doubt that it is so?

In the result, no change is needed in article 23.

32.40. Article 24 reads as under:

“For money payable by the defen- > Three When the money is teceived.”
dant to tbe plaintiff for money years.
received by the defendant for the
plaintiff’s use.

The: article is identical with article 62 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877, and

with article 60 of the Act of 1871.”
: का

3241, The. Supreme Court has ruled? that in order to attract article 62 of
the Act of 1908 (present article 24), it is not necessary that at the moment of
the receipt of money the defendant should have actually intended to receive it
for the use of the plaintiff. As the same time, the article cannot apply if the
right to refund does not arise immediately on receipt by the defendant, but arises
only by reason of facts that transpire subsequently. The philosophy of the ar-
ticle is that the plaintiff has a cause of action for instituting the suit at the very
moment of the receipt.

32.42, The article in its actual operation has been held to encompass 2
variety of situations, such as (i) co-shares,* (ii) Hiabifity’ of the legal representa-
tive of a deceased person who has received the money, (fii) transferee of a dec-
tee, (iv) suits’ by auction-purchaser for the refund of sale price when it is dis-
covered that the judgment-debtor did not have a saleable interest (in the pro-
Pperty) and (९) payment® to benamidars. .

32.43. The case law on the article, extensive though it is, does not disclose
any need for amending the article.

‘Anson’s Law of Contract (23rd Ed.}, page 592.
Cf. sections 68 to 70, Indian Contract Act, 1872.
*Venkata Subbarao v. State of AP.. ALR. 1965 S.C. 1773.
‘Asharfi Kuor v. Ram Pearey, AYR. 1939 All. 442.
5Ramheri v. Rohini Kanta, A.1.R. 1922 Cal. 499.
a) Shanmughan v. Offiial Receiver, ALR. 1938 Mad. 532.
{b) P, Malliah v. Brahmayya, AIR. 1960 A
गुड) Thakur Lal v. Nathulal, ALR. 1964 Raj.
(0) P. Malliah v. Brahmayva, AIR. 1960 AP. 89.
‘*Karanmurthi v. Ramanatha, A.LR. 1946 Mad.

ie

Bi
Se,

oe
sa

@B).


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN, OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 us

(Chapter 32— Articles 6 to 55—Suits Relating to Contracts.)
32.44, This takes us to article 25 which reads as follows : Article 25.

“For money payable for interest Three When the interest becomes due.”
upon money due from the defen- years.
dant to the plaintiff.

‘The article is identical with article 63 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877, and
with article 61 of the Act of 1871.

No change is needed in the article.

32.48. Article 26 reads as follows : Article 26.

“For money payable to the plain- Three When the accounts are stated in
tiff for money found to be due years, writing signed by the defendant of
from the defendant to the plain- his agent duly authorised in this
tiff on accounts stated between behalf unless where the debt is,
them. by -a simultaneous agreement in

writing signed as aforesaid, made
at a future time, and then
when that time arrives.”

It is identical with article 64 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877.
In the Act of 1871, article 62 was as follows :—

“For money payable to the plain- Three When the accounts are stated, unless
tiff for money found to be due years. where the debt is made payable at a

’ from the defendant to the plain- future time and then when that time
uf on accounts stated between arrives.”
> them.

No change is needed in the present article.

32.46, Article 27 reads as under: Asticle 27.

“For compensation for breach of a Three When the specified time arrives or
promise 10 do anything ata spe- years. ‘the contingency happens.”
Cified time or upon the happen-
ing of a specified contingency.

It is identical with article 65 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877.

Article 63 of the Act of 1871 was in the same terms, with slight verbal differ-
~ ences.

The present article seems to ७००० no change.

32.47. Article 28 reads as follows: © Article 28.
“On a single bond, where a day is Three The day so specified.”
specified for payment. years.
It is identical with article 66 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877, and with article
65 of the Act of: 1871.

No change is needed in the article.

32.48. Article 29 reads as follows: Article 29.
“On a single bond, where no such Three The date of executing the bond.”
dey is specified. years. हि
It is identical with article 67 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877. and with article
66 of the Act of 1871. a

No change is needed in the article. :


:
FF

$
89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 32—Articles 6 to 55—Suits Relating to Contracts.)
३249, Article 30 reads as under:

“On a bond subject to a condition. Three When the condition is broken.
दि years.
It is identical with article 68 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877 and with article
67 of the Act of 1871.

32.50, Since the group or articles (28, 29 and’ 30) deals with limitation for
suits based on a bond, the use of the expression “single bond” occurring in arti-
cles 28 and 29 needs some comment. The simple definition of “single bond” is
that it is a bond merely for the payment of a certain sum of money, without any
condition annexed to it.-

But even Halsbury,! while discussing “singlo bond”, to fall back on Shakes-
peare and quote from “Merchant of Venice” :*

“Go with me to a notary, seal me there Your single bond, and, in a merty
sport. In such a place, such sum or sums as ate Express’d in the condition,
Tet the forfeit 8८................ .«--०--०---

Halsbury comments that such instruments have become rare and the term
“single bond” acquired various meanings, including a bond given by one obligor
as distinguished from one given by two or more.

32.51. Application of articles 28, 29 or 30 would depend upon the terms and
conditions of the bond in question. Such being the case, it is not surprising that
certain amount of conflict did arise regarding the application of these articles. The
conflict was, however, predicated more on the interpretation of the term of the
“bond”, that on any conditions of interpretation of the text of the articles.”

Article 27 is a general article covering breaches of promise to do anything
at a specified time or upon the happening of a specified contingency. Certain con-
flict has emerged when the article is applied to breaches arising out of the bonds.
For example, in a Madras ०४४०, where a bond was executed for subscriptions
payable to a chit fund in specified instalments, with the condition that the whole
amount would become exigible on failure to pay any instalment on demand, the
Court laid emphasis on the expression “on demand” contained in the bond and
held that the claim for the whole amount due could be based only on the bond
itself, and not on the original cause of action. This ruling did not follow an ear-
lier one of the same High Court’

e

32.52, Liabilities of the principal and surety" and computation of the period

of limitation based on a promissory note,” have also given cise to some conflicting

32.53. However the conflict regarding the application of these articles to the
facts of a particular case turns more on the construction to be put on the particular

tHalsbury's Laws of England (4th Edition), pe
‘Merchant of Venice, Act I, scene 3, lines 4 oe
SBalakrishnudu v. Narayanaswami, A.LR. 1914 Mad. 4, at page 6.
» *Hari Lal ¥. Thamman Lal, A. 923 Oudh
‘Narain Das ४. Marnoo Lal 1935 All. 405.
SRamiah v. Sankaranarayana, ALR. 1958 K
7Gauri Shankar ¥. Surju, (1881) LL.R. 3 All. 276, 279 (D.B.).
®Seetharamayyar V. Munisami, A.1.R. 1919 Mad. 462.
*Surayya V. Tirumalandhan papier irasu, ois al 36 1916 Mad. 496,
WCharu Chandra Vv. Faithful, R, 1919 Cal. 836.
USomanath Raju Ramamiurty, A.LR. 1957 106.



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 32—Articles 6 to 55-—Suits Relating to Contracts.)

document in question, rather than on a defect in the phraseology used in these
articles. We therefore recommend no change in the text of these articles on
these points,

32.54, Article 31 reads as under:— Article 31.
“On a bill of exchange ot pro- Three When the bil] or note falls due’.
inisory note payable at a fixed years

time after date.

It is identical with article 69 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877, and with article
68 of the Act of 1871.

No change is needed in the article.

32.55. Article 32 reuds as under:— Article: 32,
“On a bill of exchange payable Three When the bill is presented.”
at sight, or after sight, but years.

not at a fixed time.
It is identical with article 70 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877.
Article 69 of the Act of 1871 read as under: —
“On a bill of exchange payable Three When the bill is presented.”

at or after sight. years.
No change is needed in the article.
32.56, Article 33 reads as under:— ' .
Article 33,
“On a bill of exchange accepted Three When the bili is presented at that.
payable at a particular place. years place”

It is identical with article 71 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877, and with article
70 of the Act of 1871.

+ No change is needed in the article.

32.87. Article 34 reads as. under:— Article 34.

. “On a bill of exchange or pro- Three When the fixed time expires.”
missory note payablefat a fixed years.
time after sight or after de-
mand.
It is identical with article 72 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877, and with article
71 of the Act of 1871.

No change is néeded in the article.

,

32.58. Article 35 reads as under:—~
“On a bill of exchange of promi- Three The date of the bill or note.”

ssory note payable on demand years,
and ‘not accompanied by any

writing restraining or postpon-

ing the right to%suc.

The article has not undergone any change in the phraseology used, except
that article 72 of the Limitation Act of 1871 had provided the starting point
of limitation as the date of demand, which, in the Act of 1877, was changed to
the date of the bill or note. This brought the law of limitation in line with the
technical meaning of “on demand”.

Cf, Rowe v, Young, (1820) 2 Brod & 8, 165, 180; 21 RR. 91.

, Article 35,

uy


118

Article 36—
Introductory.

7 State Acts
for the relief
Of indebtedness.

Instalments by

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 32— Articles 6 & 55—Suits Relating to Contracts.)

32.59. Conflicting views expressed by the Bombay' and Allahabad* High
Courts are sometimes referred to under this article. But the decisions referred to
relate to problems of Hindu law and obligations imposed thereunder upon the
son for the debts of the deceased father. Recently, this article (along with
article 112) ‘came up for consideration in the Allahabad High Court; which
held that when the claim of a private person was barred by time on the date
of bis death, the devolution of his property on the Government by escheat would
not enable the Government to take advantage of tlc extended period of article
112, so as to bring the cause of action within limitation. Herein also, the text
of article 35 bas not presented any difficulty and we recommend no change
therein. , है

32.60. Article 36 reads as under :--

“On @ promissory note or bond Three The expiration of the first term
payable by instalments. , Years of payment as-to the part then
. payable; and for the other parts,
the expiration of the respective
terms of payment.”

It is identical with article 74 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877 and article 74

of the Act of 1871.

32.61. With the increased solicitude for the welfare of the oppressed villagers
and landless labourers, the Legislature has stepped in to relieve the borrower
of the hardship inherent in the unpleasant prospect of facing a decree, when, owing
to natural calamities or failure of crops, he is unable to discharge his obligations.
One such Act is the Madras indebted Agriculturist (Repayment of Debts) Act,
1955, which defines a “debt? as including even a decree or order of a court,
Section 3 of the Act provides that no suit for the recovery of a debt shall be
instituted, and no application for execution of a decree in respect of a debt shall
be made, against any agriculturist in any civil or revenue court before the expiry
of four months from the commencement of the Act. Section 4 prescribes 8 mode
‘of payment of debt in instalments, while section 8 excludes the time during which
the institution of the suit was barred from computation of the period of
limitation. -

Similar provisions exist in “other State Jaws, like the Bengal Agricultural
Debtors Act, 1936 and C.P. & Berar Relicf of Indebtedness Act, 1939,

32.62. There was previously some difference of opinion as to whether article
36 of the Limitation Act could apply to cases where the debt had been made
payable in instalments as a result of statute. This controversy was resolved, as
regards the Madras High Court, by the case of Bichal Naidu v. Muthuramanlin-
gam. As was observed in another case* :

“It is ordinarily not open to the parties to plead that the debt was divisible,
unless the contract had expressly stipulated therefor. But where a special
enactment, which is invested with a overriding power with regard to any
other law, creates this effect of liability to pay the debt only in instalments,
it is reasonable interpretation te hold that each instalment will furnish

\Narottamdas v. Chitta, A.LR. 1939 Bom. 464, 465.
*Narsingh Misra v. Lalji Misra, (1901) LL.R. 23 All, 206, 208, 209.

~

SRoop Kishore Seth v. State of U.P., 1978 A.W.C, 162, teferred to in (1978) Yearly -

Digest column 2555, .
‘SBichal Naidu V. Muthuramalingam, LLR, (190%)
“SGopal Udayar Vv. Mangala Udayar, et 74 LW. &

\

1144,



89TH RBPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION Act, 1963 Js

(Chapter 32—Articles 6 10 55—Suits Relating to Contracts.)

a distinct cause of action. At least for the purpose of limitation, and the
right to sue, the integrality of the debt must thus be held severed into dis-
tinct parts.”

\ .. हि
32.63, It is axiomatic that where a contract undergoes a change cwing to No change

statutory intervention, the original contract is not the only document to be scanned "ee
for on identification’ of the cause of action. In determining the nature of the’
cause of action, one will have to take into account the statute also, Having taken

all these aspects into consideration, we do not think that the article needs any
change. है

32.64. Article 37 reads as under : Article 37+
« . Introductory.
‘On a promissory note or bond Three‘ When the default is made, unless
payable by instalments, which years. where the payee or obligee waives
provides that, if default be the benefit of the provision and
made im povment af one or then when fresh default is made
is, the whole i ic ete is 10
shall be due. auch peat of which there's

7 It is identical with article 75 of the Act of 1908. In the Act of 1877, in
article 75 the wording was slightly different. Article 75 of the Act of 1871
reads as under: हु

“Ona promissory note or bond : Three The time of the first defauit
yable by instalments, which years. ‘unless where the payee or obligee
provides that if default be made waives the benefit of the provi-
in payment of one instalment, sion, and then when fresh
the whole shall be due. default is made.”

The law under the earlier Acts, is discussed in three cases of different High
Courts. .

‘No change in the relevant article was recommended by the Law Commisison
in its Report on the Limitation Act, 1908. :

32.68, In spite of the changes effected in the first and third columns of the Confiict as
article as detailed above. certain amount of conflict, did arise in the application ९ inti
of this article to practical situations. It has been held by the Patna High Court’ हु
that in the case of an ordinary money instalment bond with a default clause
which provides that if any instalment is not paid the whole sum would be due,
the limitation for a claim to recover money due under the bond runs from the
date of the first default that is not waived. The creditor cannot stop the period
of limitation from running by waiting till the whole of the sum ‘becomes due.
Therefore, in such cases, it was no longer at the option of the creditor (unless
he had waived the default) to stop the period of limitation from running.

32.66. However, a different view has been taken by a single Judge of the
Madras High Court’ holding that the creditor in such a case may sue (at his
option) either for the instalments that have become overdue or for the whole
amount, Article 75 (of the Act of 1908), it was held, was no bar to a suit
on the instalment bond itself filed after or before the expiry of the instalment
period. for the recovery of the instalments which the debtor had contracted to

'arat Lakshi v. Narendra, (1928) 33 C.W.N. 250; ATR. 1929 Cal, 292.
2Hurropath v. Maheroolab Moolih, (1876) LLR. 1 Bom, 125.

S4hmed . Ali ¥. Hafiza (1881) VLR. 2 All. 514%

‘Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limiption Act, 1908) page 36 para 92.
Gokul Makion v, Skeoprasad, A.LLR. 1939 28. 433, 442, LL.R. 18 Pat 459 (F.B.).
*Ayyathurai v. Ibramsa Rowthar, 1949 Mad, 592, paragraph 4-5.



120

No chen,
Needed. we

Article 38,

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 ,

(Chapter 32~ Articles 6 to $5—Suits Relating to Contracts.)

pay and which had not become themselves time-barred ander asticle 74 of the
Act of 1908 (now article 36). The two remedies are co-cxistent, and both are
open to the creditor. The creditor has his choice either to wait and sue for the
instalments in default under article 74, or to enforce the default clause in a suit
contemplated by article 75 (both of the Act of 1908). A suit filed under article
75 may be dismissed on the debtor proving waiver by the creditor of the default
that entitled the creditor to file such a suit, in which case the creditor can, of
course, still fall back on his right to sue for instalments within the time limits
prescribed by article 74. The creditor has also the other ‘alternative of suing to न
force the default clause for a subsequent default which he has not waived within the
period prescribed by article 75. Reading the two articles together, the contention that
because the whole amount becomes payable on default, the creditor must sue on
the whole’ bond within three years of.such a default could not be accepted. Thus
the plaintiff has the option of enforcing the default clause in article 75, and if he
does not do so, he must be deemed to have waived the benefit of the provision;
and he then can fall back on his ordinary right of suit on the covenant to
pay by instalments under article 74 (present article 36).

32.67, In one case before the Kerala High Court,’ an argument was addressed
that once a default has taken place in the payment of instalments, tim¢ starts
running from the date of default and a suit filed three years after the first defaujt
js also barred by time. But the High Court held that default in eaclr instal-
ment creates a separate cause of action and causes of action within three years
before the suit are not barred.

32.68. Tt seems that the applicability of article 37 to a particular case de
pends largely on the terms of the bond and on any statute which may govern or
modify the terms of the bond as a matter of substantive law. The words “creditor
shall have liberty” may, for example, create an option, while more stringent
words may rule out an option. Waiver, again, is a mixed question of law and
fact, and whether the waiver was express or implied will have to be discerned
from the facts of each case’. This is evident from numerous rulings of High
Courts, involving different facts situations."

In this position, no amendment is recommended in the articte.
32.69. This takes us to article 38, Article 38 reads as under :

“On a promissory note given by Three years. The date of the delivery to the
the maker to a third person to payee.”
be delivered to the payee after
a certain event should happen.

Tt is identical with article 76 of Acts of 1908 and 1877.
Article 76 of the Act of 1871 read as under: ,
“On a promissory note given by Three years. The time of the delivery to the
the maker to a third person to . Payee.”
be delivered to the payee after a
certain event should happen.

No change is needed in the article.

MKochappan v, Palmland Corporation, ALR, 1977 Ker. 201.
SDeviddas v. Parma Gokalia, ALR: Lg MP. 413, 414
Mjudhia ५. Kunjal, LU.R, 30 All. 123 125.

‘Mohan Lal y. Tika Ram, UR. 41 All 104, 106. .

‘Latta Prasad v. Gojadhar, ALR. 235-241.


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 125

(Chapter 32- Articles 6 to 55: Suits-Relating to Contracts.)

’

32.70. Article 39 reads as under:— पु Article 39.

“On a dishonoured foreign bill Three yecrs. When the notice is given.”
where protest has been made
“and notice given.

It corresponds to article 77 of the Act of 1908, which was as under:

“On a dishonoured foreign bill Three years. When the rotice is given.”
where protest has {been -made
and notice given. पु

Article 77 of the Act of 1877 was in the same terms. So was article 77
of the Act of 1871.

The article needs no change.

- 32.71. Article 40 reads as under:— Article 40.

“By the payee against the drawer Three years. The date of the refusal to accept.’
of a bill.of exchange which has
been dishonoured by non-
acceptance,

It is identical with article 78 of the Acts of 1908. 1877 and 1871.
No change is needed in the article.

32.72, Article 41 reads:as under :— Article 41,
“By the acceptor of an accommo- Three.years. When the acceptor pays thé
dation-bill against the drawer. amoung of the bill.”
It is identical with article 79 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877.

Article 81 of the Act of 1871 was as follows:—

“By the acceptor of an accommo- Three years. When the acceptor pays the
dation-bill against the drawer. amount.”

No change is needed in the article.

32.73. Article 42 reads as under : -- Article 42.

“By a surety against the principal Three years. When the surety pays the credi-
debtor. है tor.”
Tt is identical with urticle 81 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877, and with article
82 of the Act of 1871.

32.74, A resume, of the case law under this article shows that while diffe-
rences of opinion do arise in regard to the rights and liabilities of the surety
under the general law of contract and the terms of, the surety bond. the wording

- of the article, alone and by itself, has not given rise to any serious difference of
opinion and hetice no textual change is recommended in the article.

Case law.

32.75. We now proceed to article 43. Tt reads as under:— Article 43,

“By a surety against a co-surety. Three years. When the surety pays anything
in excess.
It is dentical with article 82 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877. and with article
83 of the Act of 1871.

No change is needed in the article.
17-14 M of LI&CAIND/83


122,

Article 44.

Article 45.

897 REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapicr 32- Articles 6 10 55: Suits Relating 10 Contracts.)

32.76. Article 44 reads as under :-—

“(a) On a policy of insurance
when the sum insured is paye-
ble after proof of the death has
been given to or received by the
insurers.

पु
The date of the death of the
deceased, or where the claim
on the policy is denied, either
partly or wholly, the date of
such denial.”

“b) Ona policy of insurance when Three years. The date of the occurrence
the sum insured is payable after causing the loss, or where the
proof of the loss has been given claim on the policy is denied,
‘te or received by the insurers. either partly or wholly, the date

of such denial.”

Article 86 of the Act og 1877,read as under:—-

“(a) Ona policy ofinsurance when Thice yeats. The date of the death cl the
the sum insured is payable after deceased.
proof of the death has been
given to or received by the in-
surers.

“(b) On 3 policy of insurance Three years. The date of the occurrence caus-
when the sum insured is payable ing the loss.”
after proof of the loss has been
given to or received by the insu-
Ters.

Article 86 of the Act of 1877 read as under:—

“On a policy of insurance when Three years. | When proof of the death or loss

the sum assured is payable is given or received to or by the
immediately after proot of the insurers, whether by or from
death or loss.has been given tc the plaintiff or any other per-
or received by the insurers. son.”

This was identical with article 88 of the Act of 1871.

Article 86, as quoted above from the Act of 1908, was substituted ia it by
the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1941, section 68. Previously, the time ran from
“when proof of the death or loss was given to or received by the insurer.”

In the Act of 1963, the words “or where the claim on the policy is denied,
either partly or wholly, the date of such denial” in the third column of both the
clauses of the article are new and were bronght in at the Joint Committee stage.
They provide an alternative starting point of limitation with reference to life
insurance policies and other policies. .

The article feeds no change.

32.77. Article 45 reads as under :-— ‘
“By the assured to recover premia Three years. When the insurers elect to.avoid

paid under a poticy voidable the policy.”
at the election of the insurers.

It is identical with article 87 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877. and with article
89 of the Act of 1871.

The article needs no change.


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 123

(Chapter 32— Articles 6 10 55: Suits Relating to Contracts.)

32.78. Article 46 reads as under :--- Article 46qp3istory.
“Under the Indian Succession Three years. The date of the poyment or dis-
Act, 1925 (XXXIX of 1925), tribution.”

section 360 or section 361, to
compel a refund by a person to
whom an executor or adminis-
trator has paid a legacy or dis-
tributed asse s.

It corresponds to article 43 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877. In the Limitation
Act, 1871, this article found no place. The phraseology of the article has con-
sistently remained the same except that the Repealing and Amending Act, 1930
substituted the words “Indian Succession Act, 1925 (KXXIX of 1925), section
360 or section 361,” in place of the words “Indian Succession Act, 1865, section
320 and section 321 or under the Probate and Administration Act, 1881, section
139 and section 140.” ‘

The article needs no change.

32.79, Article 47 reads as under : Article 47

“For money paid upon anexisting Three years. The date of the failure.”
consideration which ¢ fterwards
fails.

It is identical with article 97 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877, and with article
98 of the Act of 1871,

The Law Commission in its Report' on the Act of 1908, recommended a; _
proper placement of the article under the category of contracts, and this recom-
mendation has been accepted.

32.80. Though the article has not evoked any controversy in its application, Conflict
a solitary judgment of the Judicial Commissioner’, Oudh, held that when the का
plaintifis were in possession of some portion of the property transferred to consideration
them by the defendant, it would not amount to “failure of existing consideration,” in aor

as a part of the consideration is in the hands. of the plaintiffs.

This view (for which no authority was cited) has not gained currency and
has not been followed in any subscquent cases. In a Bombay case’, it was con-
ceded by both the parties that article 97 of the Act of 1908 applied even when
there was partial failure of the consideration. In a Madras case’, a feeble at-
tempt was made to contend that article 97 (of the Act of 1908) did not apply
where there was partial failure of consideration, which was brushed aside by the
court:

“J can find no authority for such a proposition and I am not prepared to
accept as there is no reason why the words ‘an existing consideration’ in
article 97 should be read as meaning ‘the whole consideration for the con-
tract”.””

To the same effect is 2 Punjab case.’

tLaw Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1908), page 38. para 101.
Karim Bux and another Vv. Abdul Wahid Khan, A.LR. 1924 Oudh 377.

3Bapu v. Kashiram, A.1.R. 1929 Bom. 361.

SMeenakshi Vv. Krishna Royar, A.1.R, 1917 Mad. 296.

SGillu Teekan v. Damodar Dass, A.ILR. 1972. Punj. 23.



124

No
needs

Adar

Arlicte 49,

Article 50.

S9TM REPORI OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT. 1963

(Chapter 32-- Articles 6 to 55: Suits Relating to Contracts.)

32.81. In this position. no clarificatory amendment of the article is cated
for.

32.82. Article 48 runs as under :--

“For contribution by a party who Three years. The date of the payment in excess
tas paid the wholc or move than of the p:aintil’s own share.”
his share of the amount due .
under a joint decree. or by a >
sharer in a joint estate who has
Paid the whole or more than his
share of the amount of revenue
due from himself and his co-
sharers.

Tt corresponds to article 99 of the Acts of 1908, 1877. and to article 100
of the Act of 1871. {n the course of its evolution, it has undergone certain verbal
changes, but there is no surviving controversy on the article and no change is
needed in the article.

32.83. Article 49 reads as under :--

“By a co-trustee to enforce Three years. When the right to coniributicn
against the estate of a deceased accrues.”
~ trustee a claim fot contribution.
It is identical with article 100 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877, and with article
101 of the Act of 1871.

No change is needed in the article.
32.84, Article 50 reads as under :—

“By the manager of 3 joint estate Three years. The date of the payment.”
of an undivided femily for con-
(ribution, in respect of a pay-
Ment made by him on account
“of the estate.
It is identical with article 107 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877.
छा the Act of 1871. article 107 read as under>—

“By a Hindu Manager of a joint Three years. The date of the payment.”
estate for contribution in res-
pect of a payment made by him
on accouat of the estate.

32.85. When the 1871 Act and other Limitation Acts were sought to be
consolidated by the Indian Limitation Bill of 1877, the Government Pleader of
Dacca commented! :

“Why should a different rule obtain when a manager of a joint estate is

a Muhammadan and not a Hindu? It is well known that Muhammadans in

- Lower Bengal recognise the joint family system almost as much as the

Hindus.”

When the varicgated nuances of prevalence of the joint family system
extending from Dacca to Malebar were explained to the members of the Select
Committee, they decided to omit the word “Hindu” from the article, and the article
without the word “Hindu” appeared as article 107 of the Act of 1877. This is
tle present position also.

"Mr. 0, N. Milter. Government Pleader. Dacca, Letter No. 1. dated 2nd March, 1877,
National Archieves File 1877, Paper No. |, page 3.


891H REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 125

(Chapter 32-- Articles 6 to 55: Suits Relating to Contracts,)
32.86. As the articte has not given rise to iy fecent controversies, nu change Change not
is recommended therein. necded.

32.87. Article 51 reads as under:-— Article 51.
“For the profits of immovable Three years. When the profits are reccived.”
Property belonging to tie plain-
tiff which have been wrongfully
received by the defendant.

it is identical with articic 109 of the Act of 1908,

Article 109 of the Act of 1877 differed in some particulars and read as
+ Under: —
“For the protits of immovable Three years,

Properly belonging to the

plaintiff which have beep .

wrongfully received by the de-

fendant.

When the profits are received.
or where the plainti® has been
dispossessed by a decree after-
wards set aside on appeal;

\ when he recovers povsession.”
Article 109 of the Act of 187) was as under: —

“For the profits of immovable Three years. When the protits are received,

property belonging to the plain- or where the plaintiff has becn
ut wrongfully received by the dispossessed by a decree after-
defendant.

wards set aside on appeal,
the date of the decree of the
appellate court.” )
32.88. Cases of wrongful dispossession of Property and recovery of profits Classification—
arising out of that property wronfully received by the defendant can broadly be profit wrongs
classified under two types: fully received.
(a) The first is the case of the rank trespasser, against whom the’ rightful
owner files a, suit for recovery of Possession and profits wrongfully re-
ecived by the defendant. In such a case no Previous litigation is involved
and no problems would. present themselves, because the real owner
would ordinarily couple a prayer for mesne Profits along with a prayer
for ejectment and possession of the property in question while filing a
suit. ¢

(0) The second type of cases would arise when the wrongful nature of the
Possession of the defendant and the conscquential reccipt of profits by
him is declared to be so by a judgment or decree of an appellate court.
In such a case. the possession, and receipt of profits would have been
lawful, but for the reversal of the judgment appealed against and it is
in the fitness of things that a department of the-court should take upon
itself the responsibility of restitution so has it been done by section
144, CPC.

3289. The second situation’ merits detailed discussion. It would be interest- Comments from
ing to take a stock of the comments which were received when the draft bill Of court Node
1871! leading to the Act/was circulated Mr. N. H. Thomson? Esq. referred Calcutta,
to some High Court judgments? and observed :

"Paragraph 32.88 (b) supra.
*Officiating First Judge, Small | Causes Court Calcutta, Letter dated 1th December,
1870; National Archives-File 1871, Paper No. 1. हे
4a) Jovkurun v. Rance Ashinudh Koer. SWRA,
(0) Mashook Ali Khan v. Jowata Bukhs, LLR. 2 Ail. 290.


126 89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 32--Articles 6 t0 55: Suits Relating to Contracts.)

“But what should be the rule when the party suing for the mesne profits
has been dispossessed of the Jand in respect of which mesne profits are claim-
ed, by a decree of court afterwards set aside on appeal.”

Restitution. i 32,90. From the legislative history’ of article 51, it woukt be seen (hat the
हे clause Pertaining to recovery of possession consequent upon a decree being set
aside an appeal (obtaining in the third column of article 109 of the 1871 Act
and the 1877 Act) has becn omitted in the 1908 Act. Commenting on this
omission, the Mysore High Court’ after comparing the phraseology of the two
Acts, observed:

“da my opinion, this deletion indicates the intention of the legislature that
article 109 (article 51 in the Act of 1963) would not be applicable to a
suit for restitution.”

-This reasoning has been adopted by the Allahabad? and Andhra Pradesh‘
High Courts,

32.91. Earlier, the High Courts of Lahore*, Allahabad and Bombay’ had
held otherwise.

The change in the phrascology of the third column was noticed by the
Madras High Court’:

“The reason for omission was probably the change which section 144,
_ Glause (2), C.P.C. 1908 introduced, as a separate suit for recovery of such
Profits was barred by that section.”

Sup reme Court 32.92, The Supreme’ Court has since held that an application for restigu-
judgment as'to tion under section 144, C.P.C. is an application for execution of a decree and
restitution. is therefore governed by article 182, Limitation Act, 1908 (present article 136)
. —and not by article 181 of the Limitation Act, 1908 {present article 137)—a

residuary article of limitation for applications. This Position needs no change.

32.93. Tne Calcutta High Court" has held that the true test for determining
when a cause of action has accrued is to ascertain the time when the plaintiff
could first have maintained his action to a successful conclusion. Carrying on this
analogy of “cause of action” to the Limitation Act, the Court held that a plaintiff
who could sue for mesne profits for the period from 1913 to 1918 only on 22nd

* June, 1918 is not debarred from maintaining the suit which was instituted on
28th April, 1921.

32.94. However, the general trend is represented by an cartier Allahabad
judgement" which ruled that the period of limitation cannot be suspended once it
has begun to run (unless that suspension is itself provided for in the Limitation
Act) and that the plaintifis are not entitled to get a decree for mesne Profits for
more than three years prior to the date of the suit:

a
'Para%32.87 supra.

*Balappa ४. Waman, A.1.R. 1962 Mys. 235, 237.

'Ram Krishna Kapoor y, Behari Lal. A.V.R.1963 All. 44.
‘Venkata Ramanayya ४. Singavya, A.I.R. 1967 AP. 78.

SBasheshar Das v. Diwan Chand. A.1.R. 1933 Lab. 615.
'Ubaid-Ullah Khan v. Abdul Jalil Khqn, A.J.R. 1937 All. 481.
*Dullabhbhai Hansji v. Gulabbhai Morarji, ATR. 1938 Bom. 158.
SRangaswomi ५, Alagayammal, A.L.R. 1918 Mad. 1133.
*Mahijibhai v. Manibhai, ALR. 1965 S.C. 1477.

“Dwijendra Narain Rov ४. Joges Chandra De, A.LR. 1924 Cal. 600.
"Ram Charan Sahu v. Mata Prasad, (1927) LR. 49 All, 565, 573.



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 32 Articles 6 16 55: Suits Relating ta Contracts.)

“It would be dangerous to lay down generally that there is some prin-
ciple outside the Indian Limitation Act under which Limitation can be sus-
pended. Such a conclusion would be quite contrary to the intention of the
legislature.”

32.95. “Their Lordships of the Privy Council in the case of Soni Ram ४.
Kanihaiya Lal,’ themselves remarked that there was nothing in the Indian Limi-
tation Act which would justify the Board in holding that once the period of limi-
tation had begun to run it could be suspended. Their Lordship considered that if
they were to hold that by some reason the period of limitation was suspended.
they would be deciding contrary to the express enactment of section 9 that ‘when
once time has begun to run, no subsequent disability or inability to sue stops iv.
This remark of their Lordships clearly indicates that the period of limitation can-
not be suspended once it has begun to run, unless that suspension is itself pro-
vided for in the Act. We are, therefore, unable to accept any universal principle
of suspension of limitation outside the Limitation Act’. पु

32.96. The Calcutta High Court’ ruled in 1908 that the words “when the PTO- No change as
fits are received” mean “when the profits are acially received”. As the point has है,

not recurred in recent cases, there appears to be no need to suggest any amend-
ment on that score. .

32.97, Most of the suits under this article coming from the-mofussil relate Starting
to agricultural property and the point of time from which limitation should be Point in
deemed to be running (in regard to mesne profits of agricultural land) became a agricultural
matter of controversy. Unlike the occupant of a tenement or a building (the rent and.

whereof is payable on a fixed date of a month), a person in possession of an agri-
cultural farm would be cutting the crops, drying them and selling them in the
Mandi at various times of the year, and, depending upon the fertility of the soil,
might reap two or three crops a year. When the Draft Bill of the 1877 Act was
circulated for comments, two views were expressed. The National Archives file
for the 1877 Indian Limitation Bill contains a summary of the various opinions:

“Balu Opendro Nath Mitra, Government Pleader, Dacca is of the opi-
nion—and.in this opinion the judge of that District by whom he was con-
sulted, concurs—that the time allowed (three years) should be at least ‘six
years, if not twelve—the time allowed for a suit for the recovery of the land
‘from the wrongful holder: and that the cause of action for profits receivable
in each year, should be. held to accrue on the first of the following year. In
any case the judge thinks that time should begin from when the profits were
“receivable”, not “received”, whatever the number of years the legislature
may allow.”

“Mr. W. J. Money, Officiating Judge of Maimansingh, said the clause is very
gonerally worded and it is not clear whether it is applicable to suits for mesne
profits. Added that it would seem, from the time when -the period. begins to run
being fixed to be “when the profits are received”, that the clause is not applicable
to cases of dispossession and suits for mesne profits thereon; inasmuch as the
rule for the calculation of the latter is that their determination is not limited to
the amount actually recéived. but to that which, according to the assets, might
with due care and diligence. have been realised, and the period of limitation dates
from the time of dispossession.”

lgoni Ram v. Kanithaiva Lal, (1953) 1.L.R. 35 All, 227, 237. (RC).
*Peary Mofian Roy v. Khelaram. Sarkar, (1908) LL.R. 35 Cal. 996.

127


128

Points arising
from earlier
comments—

. how far they
survive.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, £963

(Chapter 32 Articles 6 1 5S: Suits Relating to Contracts.)

32.98. “Mr. Charles D. Field,’ a practising Barrister of Calcutta, comment-

ed in 1877 as under:

“{ think the time in the third column ought to be, in respect of each
year’s profits, the close of the year in which they were collected. It would be
extremely inconvenient to count the time for cach instalment of profits re-
ceived on the gale days within the year.”

The Judicial Commissioner, Central Provinces also wrote in the same

breath ;

“Profits {as for example, rents from the ryots) might be received in
small sums and on various dates. and it would be a matter of no small difti-
culty to determine when they actually reached the wrong doer. Mesne profits
as a general rule, cannot be ascertained until after the end of the year, and

time ought to run from the date when they Become annually due according
to the custom obtaining in the place.”

32.99. The Nagpur Judicial Commissioner's Court? held that the appropria-

tion of crops commences from the date when the crops began to be cut and
limitation runs frém that date, notwithstanding the fact that the standing crops
were sold without the knowledge of plaintiff much earlier. This was a case under
the ९. P. Tenancy Act, 1920. Bat earlier the same court. while dealing with a
case* under article 109 of the Limitation Act, 1908, had held that the actual re-
ceipt of profits gives the starting point for limitation. In this judgment, the earlier
views of Calcutta High Court. to the effect that the cause of action does not arise
till the end of an agricultural year, were not followed.

32.100. For reasons not appearing from the Archives file. no attempt was

made to pin-point the starting point of limitation with any exactitude. The pro-
blems posed in the comments were two-fold : the first was, whether the article
applied at all to the cases of mesne profits and second, whether the starting point
- of limitation should be taken to coincide with the actual cutting of the crops.

(i) As regards the first poimt (applicability to mesne profits), it can be said

that the definition of “mesne profits” in section 202) of the Code of Civil Proce-
dure, 1908 and the elaborate manner in which section 144 of that Code deals with
an application for restitution makes it clear that the article is inapplicable to cases
of mesne profits to which the plaintiff is entitled. as a result of reversal of a lower

court’s order or decree. This has now been finally settled by the judgment of the
Supreme Court

(ii) Coming to the second question (starting point) raised in 1877, it appears

to us ‘that in these days of advanced methods of agriculiure and crop rearing.
when as many as three crops can be taken from the same land within a year. it
would be impracticable to stipulate a particular day of the year, (such as the end
of the agricultural year under the Land Revenue Codes), as the starting point of
limitation. 1 could happen in some cases that the farmland in question has been
leased out by the defendant to a third party and the lease deed contains detailed
stipulations about the mode of payment of the lease moncy In such a case, it
would be open to the plaintiff to compute the running of time from such dates

Letter dated 19th April, 1877, National Archives Fite (877, Paper 8. page 9.”
‘Nathulasa v. Shankerlal. AUR. 1924 Nag.

है. Jangaia, A.L.R. 1914 Nag 65.
‘Mahifibhai_ v, Pate? Manbhai, A.1.R. 1965 5.0. 1477."


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN..OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT. 1963

(Chapter 32. Articles 6 to 55: Suits relating to Contracts.)

stipulated in the lease deed. But amending the third column of the article under
discussion would be no answer for meeting such a contingency, because the phra-
seology even now is adequate enough to take care of such cases.

32.101. As a result, no change is needed in article 51. न No change
needed in
article 51, |

32.102, Article 52 reads as under:— है Article 52.

“For arrears of rent. Three years. | When the arrears become due.”

It is identical with article 110 of the Acts of 1908, 1877 and 1871.

The article needs no change.

32.103. Article 53 reads as under:— Article 53,

“By a vendor of immovable pro- Three years. The time fixed for completing
perty for personal payment of the sale, or {where the title is
unpaid purchase money. accepted after the time fixed

. for completion) the date of the
acceptance.”*

It is identical with article 11 of the Act of 1908.
In the Act of 1877, the corresponding article was article 111. which read as

under: —

“By a vendor of immovable pro- Three years. The time fixed for completing the
perty to enforce his lien for un- sale, or (where the title is
paid purchase money. . accepted after the time fixed

for completion) the date of the
acceptance.

This was identical with article 111 of the Act of 1871,

32.104. The stages through which article 111 of the Act of 1871 has passed! History.
show that in 1908 there was a shift from the concept of enforcement of lien for
unpaid purchase money to a contract for personal payment of unpaid purchase
money. The earlier position about treating the suit as based on the lien gave rise
to considerable difficulties, as is apparent from the statement of objects and rea-
sons annexed to the Biil’ which became the Act of 1908.

“The amendment proposed will make it clear that this article is appli-
cable only to suits to enforce the personal liability of the purchaser.”

“It has been held by the High Courts of Bombay, Madras and Allahabad
that a suit by an unpaid vendor to enforce his charge on the land for the un-
paid purchase-money is governed by article 132 and not by this article: (आल
nilal v. Bai Fetha, 1.L.R. 22 Bombay 846; Virchand v. Kamaji, LL.R. 18
Bombay 48; Har v. Muhamdi, L.L.R. 21 Allahabad 454; Ramakrishna v.
Subrahmania, 1.L.R. 29 Madras 305 F. B., overruling Natesan v. Soundra,
ILL.R. 21 Madras 141 and Avuthala v. Dayumma, 1.L.R. 24 Madras 233.”

32.105. The Draft Bill which was circulated for. comments evoked two. sug-
gestions. The Advocate-General, Madras’ wrote :—

“In article 110, in the first column, the words ‘as a personal claim’ may
be added to make (the) meaning quite clear.”

1Paragraph 32.103, supra

*National Archives File, 1908, page 6

मृत, P. S. Sivaswamy Ayer, Actirig Advocate “General Madras, letter dated 26th De-
cember, 1907, National Archives File 1908, paper 5, page 1.

18-14 Mof LI&CA/ND/83


130

‘The starting

point of
fimitation, *

No change
needed. .

Article 54,

Comment on
the Bill ‘of
1877,

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 32—Articles 6 to 55: Suits relating to Contracts.)
And the Chief Justice of Bombay! suggested that:—

“This amendment is capable of improvement as it stands, it would cover
a bit to enfogce a fien for unpaid purchase money. ¥ would suggest some such
words as these ‘for personal payment of unpaid purchase money’.”

That is how the present emphasis on “personal payment” came to be incor-
porated in the article.

32.106, The third column of the article does not specifically refer to the

1 date of registration of the sale deed, probably because the draftsman intended

to cover cases of sale of immovable property worth Rs. 100/- or less, which can
be conveyed by delivery of possession without any writing.

All the same, the tenor of the text of third column points out to the date
of registration of the sale deed as the startng point, and the Patna High Court*
has heid that a suit for recovery of unpaid consideration would be time-barred
if not filed within three years from the date of the accrual of the cause of action,
which was the date of compulsory registration of the document.

32.107, There is suggesion in 2 Madras case’ to the’ effect that time should
start running from the date when the vendor suffers some damage by the pur-
chaser’s default in not honouring promises to pay a part of the consideration
of the transaction to a third party. Such a contingency cannot, however, be

* generalised and put in the language of the article. Depending on the facts of the

case, the vendor may not take recourse to this article at all, but to the agreement *
to pay a part of the consideration to a third party at a future date incorporated
in the deed of conveyance.

32.108. In the result, no change is recommended in article 53.

32,109. Article 54 reads as under :

“For specific performance of a Three years, The date fixed for the perfor-
contract. mance, or, if no such date is
fixed. when the plaintiff has
notice that performance is

refused.”

It is identical with article 113 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877.
Article 113 of the Act of 1871 was as under:

“For specific performance of a Three years. | When the plaintiff has notice that
contract. his right is denied”. .

32.110, The history given above shows that the language | in 1871 was
different. Whén the draft Bill of 1877 Act was circulated for comments, the
Secretary. Legislative Department commented:*

“No, 113—Specific performance—‘When the plaintiff has notice that
his right is denied’. This is from Angell on Limitation. 5th ed., p. 73, citing

Chief Justice L. Jenkins letter No. 2469, dated 18th December, 1907 from Acting
Registrar, Bombay National Archives File, 1908, paper 6, page 13. .

Kazim Sher v. Jaswant Devi (1969) B.L.I.R. 500.

*Navamani Nadar v. Vedamanicka Nadar, A.LR. 1933 Mad. 424. 5

‘Note by the Secretary, Legislative Department on Sir Richard Garth's remarks (on
the Limitation Act) dated 22-10-1876, National Archives File 1877, page 7.


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 131

(Chapter 32--Articles 6 to 55: Suits relating to Contracts.)

Brown v. Tilson, 25 N.Y. 194, and seems in substance correct. But after
‘night’ insert ‘to have the contract specifically performed.”

Further, Mr. Charles D. Fieid' suggested the following improvements:

“I would add in the last column as to all these articles ‘or might with

due diligence have become known’.”
The expression “right is denied” in third column was replaced in 1877 by
words referring to refusal of performance.
32.111. The article has not given rise to any conflict of views. There was Arbitration
a suggestion in earlier cases of the Allahabad High Court’ (though not followed awards,
later on)’, that an award can be equated as a “contract” and a suit to claim
specific performance on the basis of the award comes within the purview of this
article. The point has lost its practical importance, because,’in view of section
32 of the Arbitration Act, 1940, no suit can be filed to enforce an award. ५

32.112. However, even now it is possible to envisage certain awards saved No change
from the purview of the Arbitration Act by virtue of sections 46 and 47 of that 17०१०
Act, but in such cases, the statute setting up the machinery of arbitration would
usually itself provide for the enforcement of the award. If not, the residuary ar-
ticle in the Limitation Act can apply. Consequently, we recommend no change
in article 54,

32.113. Article 55 readsas under : Article 55,

“For compensaticn for the breach ‘ihree years: “When the contract is broken or
of any contract express or im- (where there are successive
plied not herein specially pro breaches) when the breach ip
vided 1 respect of which the suit ‘s

instituted occurs or (where the
breach is continuing} when it
‘opases.

Articles 115 and 116 of the Act of 1908 were as follows :
#115. For compensation for the Three years. When the contract is broken or

breach of any contract, express (where there are successive
or implied, not in writing regis- breaches) when the breach in
tered and not herein specially respect of which the cuit i:
provided for. instituted occurs or (where the

. breach is continuing) when it
ड़ ceases.

“116, Fot compensationfor the Three years. | When the period of limitation
‘breach of a contract in writing would begin to run against a suit
registered. brought on a similar contract

not registered.”

This was identical with articles {15 and 116 of the Act of 1877. In the Act
of 1871, articles 115 and 117 were in the same terms.

32.114, In the Act of 1908, article 115 dealt with unregistered contract, Law Commis:
either oral or in writing, while article 116 provided for registered written con. ‘ion’s Report.

*

Wetter dated 19th April, 1877; National Archives File 1877, page 9.
369) Talewar Singh & Ors. v. Baheri Singh, LLR. 26 All. 497.
(0) Raghubar Diaf v. Madan Mohan Lal,” (1893) LLR. 16 All. 3.

(ce) Sukho Bihi & Ors. v. Ram Sukh Das, (1883) LR. 5 All. 263.
a) Surat Singh & Ors. v. Umrao Singh & LR, 1922 All. 410,
b) Sheo Narain v. Reni Madho, (1910) LER. 23 All, 285.


132

Article 56.

_89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 32— Articles 6 to 55: Suits relating to Contracts.)
(Chapter 33 —Articles 56 to $8: Suits relating to Declarations.)

tract. This dichotomy was found unnecessary by the Law Commission which’,
in its Report on the Act of 1908, recommended as under:

“IE simplification is desirable, as undoubiedly it is, all the above-men-

~ tioned articles may be omitted and a provision may be made as in’ the
- English Act, that in case of suits founded on contract, time runs from the
date on which the cause of action accrues and a uniform period of three
years may be prescribed. It is not necessary to retain the period of six
years in case of registered contracts on the analogy of speciality debts under

English law.”

The change has put af end to many of the earlier controversies which had
centered on the difference between the two articles. No further comments are
needed on article 55.

हे CHAPTER 33
ARTICLES 56 TO 58: SUITS RELATING TO DECLARATIONS
33.1. Article 56 rans as follows:—

“To declare the forgery of an Three years. When the issue or registration
instrument issued or registered. . becomes known to the plain-
tif.”
Originally a single article 93 appeared in the Act of 1871, which ran as
under :—
“To declare the forgery of an Three years. The date of the issue, registration
instrument issued, or registered or attempt.”
or attempted to be enforced.
‘When the Act was proposed to be replaced in 1877, a Draft Bill containing
the article in the following revised form was circulated for comments :—

“To dectare the forgery of an Three years. The date of the issue, regis

instrument issued, or regis- tration or attempt, whichever
tered, or attempted to be en- last happens.””
forced against the plaintiff. .

33.2. Sir Richard Garth* found fault with the last paragraph of the proposed
article and wanted that discovery of the forgery should be made the starting
point:

“{ do not understand this. Suppose an instrument is first forged and a
month afterwards registered, and three years afterwards attempted to be
enforced. From what time does the limitation run? I should have thought
the time ought to run from the discovery of the forgery.”

On these comments of Chief Justice Garth, the Legislative Secretary, Arthur
Hobhouse, noted:*

No. 93. Declaration of forgery of Does it not want the addition,
jnstrument—The mere fo whichever jast happens,”
of an instrument is not a cause and attempt to enforce against
of action, it is the issuing of the plaintiff 7”

it, or the attempt to enforce it.
that is the important matter.
“I think the number is right as it
stands.

1Law Commission, 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1908), page 39, para 107.

8D.O, from the Hon'ble Sir Richard Garth (Chief Justice of Calcutta High Court) to
the Hon’ble Arthur Hobhouse, Q.C., dated 24th July, 1876.

*Noted by the Secretary Mr. Arthur Hobhouse, Legislative Department on Sir Richard
Garth's remarks on Limitation Act dated 12-12-1876; Natioaal Archives File 1877, Paper 1,
page


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 33-- Articles 56 to 58: Suits Relating to Declarations.)

33.3. In addition to the point taken by Sir Richard Garth the draftsman
had also to consider the opinion given by the Judicial Commissioner, Central
Provinces, Nagpur, who made out a case for splitting up of article 93 into two”
articles, one when the plaintiff seeks to declare that an instrument is a forgery
and another when a person attempts to base a claim on such instrument. He
commented :—

“Art. 91, Col. 3, “WHICHEVER LAST HAPPENS”. Better “‘as the

. case may be,” otherwise, it might be pleaded in the case of an instrument

issued only that as the period of limitation begins to run from the date of

the attempt to enforce it, and as no such attempt had been made, the period

of limitation had not begun to run, and a suit could therefore be brought

though more than three years had elapsed since the issue. If this is the
intention of the Article had better stand:

Col. 1 Col. 2 Col. 3

To declare the forgery of an ins- Three years. When the instrument is attempted
trument. to be enforced.

“But, if not, it would seem better to divide the article into two parts thus:—

To declare the forgery of anins- Three years. When the issue of registration
trument issued or registered. becomes known to the plaintiff
(See Arts. 89, 90, 92, 93, 94).

To declare the forgery of an ins- Three years. | When the instrument is attempt-
trument attempted to be en- ed to be enforced 8475 the
forced. : plaintiff.”

33.4. One can recapitulate that the draftsman also aware of the provisions Section 42,
of section 42 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 which had been just passed and Specific,
hence the suggestion of the Judicial Commissioner, Nagpur, regarding declaration 1877.
simpliciter was accepted readily.

33.5. As a result of that article 93 was split up into the following two arti- Act of 1877.
cles in the 1877 Act:

“92. To declare the forgery of an Three years. When the 5506 or registration
instrument issued or registered. becomes known to the plaintiff.

93. To declare the forgery of an Three years. The date of the attempt”.
instrument to be — enforced
against the plaintiff.
This scheme was continued in the 1908 Act and the present article 56 and
the general article 58 cover the old articles 92 and 93.

33.6. It would be of interest to note that the shift from the date of issue
or registration to the date when such issue or registration becomes known to
the plaintiff only brought the statute book in harmony with a pronouncement
of the Calcutta High Court' which had interpreted old article 93 of the 1871 Act
as under :—

“The time when the period begins to run in such suits is ‘the date of
the issue, registration or altempt’, I should be disposed to hold that these
dates were applicable respectively to the circumstances in which the instru-
ment has been. published,—that is to say, where it has been issued, the time
begins to run from the date of the issue, where it has been registered, the

1Pakharooddeen v. Pogose, (1879) LLR. 4 Cal 209, 212.


134

No change
needed.

Article 57.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. GF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1903

(Chapter 33—Articles 56 tv 58: Suits Relating to_Dectlarations.)

time runs from the date of registration, and so on. But it is clear that the
suit at any rate would be barred at the expiration of three years from some
one or other of the acts described in the third column,—that is to say, the
issue, registration, or attempt. The acts or matters specified in the third
column of that schedule are acts which, accdrding to the intemlion of the
legislature, put the plaintiff upon the assertion of his rights, and in the case
of an instrument which is said to be forged, and which prejudices the plain-
tiff, the legislature apparently’ thought that he ought to commence the suit
as he has notice of the igstrument by the issuc, registration, or attempt to
enforce it.””

33.7. As the present article has not given rise to any controversies, no
change is recommended.

33.8. Article 57 reads as under :--

“To obtain a declaration that an Three years. When the alleged adoption
alleged adoption isjinvalid, or becomes known to the plain-
uever, in}fact, took place. tiff.”

This is identical with article 118 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877.

In the earlier Act of 1871, the corresponding provision was in article 129:
“To establish or set aside an adop- Twelve years. The date of the adoption, or
tion. {at the option of the plaintiff)
the date of the death of adoptive

father.”

33.9. The expression “to establish or set aside an adoption” in the first
column (1877 Act) was found to be a curious one by the Privy Council:'

“Te must be confessed that the words of the article are not such as to
prevent doubt or difficulty ia its construction. The expression ‘suit to उठा.
aside an adoption’ is not quite precise as applied to any suit. An adoption
may be established, but can hardly be set aside, though an alleged or pre-
tended adoption may be declared. to be no adoption at all.”

And further:

“Tt thus appears that the expression ‘set aside an adoption’ is and has
been for many years applied in the ordinary language of Indian lawyers to
roceedings which bring the validity of an alleged adoption under question,
and applied quite indiscriminately to suits for possession of land and to suits
of a declaratory nature.

33.40. Article 129 of the Act of 1871 was in 1877 split into two articles, viz.
articles 118 and 119. The expressions ‘set aside’ and ‘establish’ were also dropped
and the starting point was altered. This scheme continued in the Act of 1908 and
the Act of 1963. This change of expression is discussed in a Privy Council’ judg-
ment, thus

“In the Act of 1871, as observed in the judgment in Jagadamba Chowdhrani’s
case, the words used had no technical meaning, and they were treated as ex-
pressing popular language to which in popular reasoning the meaning which
prevailed could attach. In the Act of 1877 and 1908, the matter is otherwise,
The words ‘a suit to obtain a declaration’ are terms of att. They relate back to

” Wavadamba Chaodhrani v, Dakhina Mohun Roy Chaodhri, (1886) 11.10, 13 Cal. 308,
319, 320 (PC, ,
*Kalyandappa V. Chanbasappa, 1.L.R. 48 Bombay 411; 425 (P.C).


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 33—Articles 56 to 58 Suits Relating to Declarations.)

the Specific Relief Act passed in the same year 1877, being Act No. 1 of that
year, whereas the Limitation Act is No. XV.

Section 42 of the Specific Relief Act deals with declaratory decrees, and
the illustration (Letter f) is much in point: —

“A Hindu widow in possession of property adopts a son to her de-
ceased husband. The person presumptively entitled to possession of the
property on her death without a son may, in a suit against the adopted son,
cebtain a declaration that the adoption was invalid.”

It is to this class of suit that this particular limitation applies. The date from
which the time begins to run is a subjective or personal date; and the condition
of obtaining the particular relict which is sought,in a declaratory ‘suit is that the
plaintiff should not be guilty of laches. the measure of laches being fixed by the
statute as six years.

33.11. The alternative starting point of ‘death of adoptive’ father in the Act 1871 Ast
criticised.

of 1871 was criticised by Mr. A. 8. Falcon’ thus :— _

“With reference to No. 139. Mr. A. B. Falcon. officiating Judge of
Rangpur, raises the question whether the time allowed should not be extend-
ed to twelve years from the death of the adopting parent; otherwise suits
might, he observes, lic to recover possession from an adopted son many
years after a suit to set aside the adoption was barred.”

33.12, The Limitation Bill 1877 reproduced article 12% of the older Act in
corresponding article 125 of the Bill’, When this Bill was circulated for comments
and opinions, Babu Opendro Nath Mitter, Government Pteader, Dacca wrote: —

“The cases of adoption which come before the Court are generally cases
of adoption made by a Hindu widow, after the death of her husband. Suits
to set aside adoption are therefore generally brought by reversionary heirs,

“who might or might not be in existence at the date of the adoption or the
death of the adopting father. It need hardly ‘be said that they must be in
existence at the date of the death of the adoptive mother or her daughter.”
“The clause in column 3 is wholly insufficient to meet the necessities of the
case. The suit should be allowed to be brought (during the life of the adop-
tive mother) at any time within twelve years of the date when the ‘plaintiff's
right to sue accrued, or after her death, within twelve years of the time
when the plaintiff acquires a vested right in the property Jeft by her husband.”

“The wording of No. 125 is likely to induce a son illegally adopted

by a Hindu widow to believe that after twelve years from the date of his
adoption, his title as adopted son of the widow's husband will be un-
impeachable. But under No. 138 a Hindu rteversionary heir may bring
suit for possession at any time within twelve years of the death of the widow
or other female heir of the last male owner.”
ह “Suit to set aside an adoption should be expressly limited to declaratory.
suits. Invsuits to establish an adoption, the period of limitation should run
from the denial cf the adeption by the adoptive father. if 01९ a:toption took
place during his lifetime. Tn other cases, it shoult run from the time when
the plaintiff's right as adoptive son are interfered with, on the allegation that
he has not been Jegally adopted.”

Wetter No. 416 dated 2nd February 1871 National Archives File 1871 paper 5, page 21.
‘National Archives File 1877. nage 19.

Letter dated 2nd March 1877. National Archives File 1877 Paper No. 1. page 4.
‘Emphasis added.

135


136

Suit for

Comments as
to adoption.

Draft article-
1908.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 33—-Articles 56 to 58: Suits Relating to Declarations.)

“In declaratory suits to sct aside an adoption, the period should run
from the time when the plaintiff knows of the adoption: while suits for posses-
sion by setting aside an adoption, should be allowed to be brought within
twelve years of the time when the plaintiff's right to possession accrued.”

33.13. Another point of view, expressed in 1877, as summarised by Mr.
N. H. Thomson was as follows’ :—

“There seems to be a doubt whether a suit to set aside an adoption will
lie unless consequential relief be asked, I.L.R. 1 Bombay. 248 and see L.R.
3 Ind. Ap. 72, 84.”

33.14. Adoption offered a fertile ground for litigation and evoked comments
from many quarters :—

Mr. 0. Kinealy’s note is instructive.

“The period of limitation given for these suits seems intended to meet
two cases of adoption, in the lifetime of the adoptive father, and adoption
after his death by a widow under a power. The time fixed from which
the period of limitation begins to run seems open to objection as giving an
option to the plaintiil. Since, as far as possible, this period should com-
mence at the time the cause of action avises, except in cases of fraud or
concealment. and these are provided for by section 19, would it not be
better if the third column ran thus: (where the adoption has taken place
in the lifetime of the adoptive father) the death of the adoptive father,
{where the adoption has not taken place in the lifetime of the adoptive
father) the date of the adoption?*

Another comment on this point was as under: —

“The adoptive mother’s death should also be added to the third
.column, . Having reference to article 138, a reversioner can sue for posses-
sion within twelve years from the death of. the widow {adoptive mother) by
proving the invalidity of the adoption set up by her.”*

Yet another comment was as under:—'

“These sections provide for suits to obtain a declaration that an adop-
tion is valid or that it is invalid. They do not provide, however, for
a third class of cases, namely, those where a declaration is sought that an
alleged adoption which is set up by the opposite party+never in point of
fact took place."

33.15. The draft article in the Bill’ that led to the Act of 1908 read:

“To obtain a declaration that an Six years. When the alleged adoption be-
alleged adoption is invalid, or comes known to the plaintiff, *
never in fact, took place. or to some person who is a

nearer reversionary heir to the

mn to whom the adoption
is alleged to have been made.
than the plaintiff.”

'Note by Mr. N. H. Thomson, National Archives File, 1877 paper No. 2, page 3.
*Note by 1.0. Kinealy, Additional Judge, 24-Parganas National Archives File 1877,
paper No. 5, page 3.
SLetter dated 22nd May 1877 from Babu Ramdas Sen for the members of Committee of
the Murshidabad ‘Association, National Archives File 1877 paper No, 18, pase 2,
‘Letter No. 233 D.A. dated 14th May, 1877 from Mr. W. H. Rattigan, Officiating Gove-
rnment Advocate. National Archives File 1877, paper No, 24, page 12. :
sNational Archives File, 1908 :


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 33° Articles 56 to 58: Suits Relating to Declarations.)

The necessity of this amendment was brought out in the statement of
Objects and Reasons' annexed to the Bill that led to the Act of 1908, in the
following words :—

“The amendment is proposed to remove a conflict of authority, and
it adopts the view taken by Bhashyam Ayyanger, J., in Chirwvolu v. Chiru-
volt, 1.L.R, 29 Madras 398

In a suit to set aside an adoption where, but for the adoption, the estate
would be in a Hindu female, remote reversioner has been held to claim through
the presumptive reversioner in the. following cases :-—

Ayyadore v. Solai, LL.R. 24 Mad. 405;

Chiruvolu v. Chiryvolu, LL.R. 29 Mad. 390 F.B;

Harnath v. Mandil, LL. 27 Cal. 379, at page 403:

Srinivasa v. Hania. LL.R. 24 Bom. 260 at page 266;

Siddeswar v. Sham Chand, 23 W.R. 285 (decided under Act IX of 1971);

Mrinomovee v. Bhoobim, 23 W.R. 42 (decided under Act XIV of 1859).”

The contrary view has been taken in the following cases :—
Abinash vy. Harinath, 1.L.R. 32 Cal. 62, at page 71;
Bagwanta v. Sukhi, 1.L.R. 22 Cal. 33, at pages 44, 45.

“In the case of Chiruvolu v. Chiruvolu, LLR. 29 Mad. 390 F.B., however,
the Court observed that in suits relating to the alienations by a qualified owner
(such ‘as a Hindu widow) the presumptive reversioner cannot, on the current
of authority, be held to represent remote reversioners (at page 411). The con-
flict therefore is limited to suits relating to adoption.”

33.16, Oni this darft, Sir 38. K. Bose, Government Adyocate, Nagpur®, made
the following comment

“The High Courts arc in disagreement as to the scbpe of these articles,
whether they apply to suits where consequential relief in the shape of
possession of property is asked for or to mere suits for declaration without

~ any prayer for possession’. The present opportunity to clear up the
matter should not be lost. The legislatute waits until the Privy Council
happens to settle the existing conflict of opinion.”

* 33.17. Similar arguments were put by Rai Bahadur Sharat Chandra Sanyal.

Divisonat Judge, Nagpur':—

i
~ “The proposed amendment introduces a, curious state of affairs and
_ it is. that limitation will run against one. when the knowledge of the alleged
adoption is in another.

‘National Archives File 1908. page 7.

?Letter No. 2063/V. 4-5 dated 19th December 1907 National Archives File 1908, Paper
No. 2. page 5.

Emphasis added.

‘Ustier No. 2063/V. 4-5 dated 19th December, 1907 National Archives File 1908. Paper
No. 2, page 7.

19-14 M of LIRCAIND/83

Comment-
jovernment

Advocate.

Nagpur.

Comment-
ivisionst

Jodge, Nagpur.

137


138 "89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION: ACT, 1963
(Chapter 33. Articles 56 to 58: Suits Relating to Declarations.)

Declaratory suits are often availed of as a matter of precaution for
perpetuating evidence. The nearer reversionary heir may be an old man
who may not care to undergo the worry and expenses of a litigation whose
fruits he may not live to enjoy. Why should a remote reversioner (who does
not claim through the presumptive reversioner) be deprived of his rights
because he hears of the alleged adoption later? Though remote the eventual
chance in his favour may be greater by x of youth. This is after all a
kind of ‘suit in which the court has 8 liscretion. I would word the
amendment thus:—‘or to some person who is a nearer reversionary heir
to the person to whom the adoptioh is alleged to have been made, then
the plaintiff and through whom the plaintiff claims.”

“T have assumed that article 117 (persent article 118) applies to decla-
ratory suits only’. But there are judicial authorities holding that it is
available against possessory suits where the displacement of the alleged
adoption is the substantial dispute, and that the case of Jagadamba Chou-
dharani (LLL.R. 13 Cal. 308 P.C.) is still good law; (see I.L.R. 20 Mad. 40,
LL.R. 24 Mad. 405: I.L.R. 26 Mad. 261; LL-R. 24 Bom. 260 F.B. over-
ruling I.L.R. 21 Bom. 159 and EL.R. 25 Cal. 354: LL.R. 27 Cal. 242; °
LLR. 24 All. 195; I.L.R. 26 All. 40). .

“In a Privy Council case (I.L.R. 25 Bom. 337) Lord Hobhouse ignored
the distinction between a declaratory: suit and a suit for possession in which
the same issue arises; observing that there was no principle in the ‘doctrine
of subserviency’. The case came under article 12(a) of the 2nd Schedule’
of the present Limitation Act. But the opinion, coming from such an
eminent authority might be quoted to support the view adverted to.

“It is desirable that the litigant public should know what Yhe law is
intended to be on this point by some contrivance ‘in the ‘Description of
Suit? column whether this ‘article applies purely. to declatory suits or
extends to pessessory suits as well.”

Comment- 33.18, This uncertainty and conftict of opinion was also pointed out by the
Oudh, Judicial Commissjoner and Additional Judicial Commissioner of 0001:

“Here, again, no one knows what suits will ultimately be held to be
governed by this aiticle. Some authorities consider that it applies only to
cases in which a declaration is sought by the plaintiff: others held that it
applies to a suit for possession of property where the plaintiff became en-
titled to possession on the death of a Hindy or Muhammadan female. It is
needless to elaborate the difficulty, which is well known.”

Comment- * 33.419. This argament was supported by Babu Durga Charan Banerji
Keon, Honorary Secretary Vakils Association, North-Western Provinces

“Article 117 (old article 118) is another article upon which there is a
great deal of conflict of authority. Cases of adoption are generally cases
relating to ptoperty of large value and affect very large interests. The first

. Point of controversy is whether the article applies only to declaratory
suits, or is also applicable to suits for possession of land in which the defen-
dant in possession sets up an adoption which the plaintiffs must show was in-
valid or never in fact took place. The Calcutta and Allaiabad High Courts

‘Emphasis added.
“Letter No. 2196/VII-I. dated 16th December 1907 from F.M. Desc. Chamier Judicial
Commissioner Oudh. 1 Archives File 1908, Paper No. 7. vage 3.
*Letter No. 2196-VII-), dated 16th December. 1907 from F.M. Desc.
Commi: sioner Oudh, National Archives File 1908, Paper No. 7, nace

fog

Chamier Judicint



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACI, 1963

(Chapter 33—Articles 56 to 58: Suits Relating to Declaration.)

and the Punjab Chicf Court takes one view and the Madras and the Bom-
bay High Courts take another.”

33.20 Some other aspects of the subject were discussed by Mr. F.D.P. Comment-

District Judge.

Oldfield! Acting District Judge, Tanjore, whose comments, however, are not Tanjore.
material for the present purpose.

33.20(a) The Advocite-General, Madras, Shri P. S. Sivaswami Aiyar, Couiment-

wrote*—

“It is to be regretted that these articles have nor becn amended so as
to exclude from their scope suits jor the possession of property in which a
question may be raised as to the validity of an adoption’. lt may, on the
one hand, be urged that questions affecting the status of persons should be
set at rest in as short a period as possible. On the other hand, the view
adopted by some of the High Courts that these articles govern a suit for
possession also has led to very serious hardship and in my opinion
much greater than the hardship supposed to arise from the opposite view.
The object of declaratory suits being merely to preserve evidence, the omis-
sion to bring such a suit ought not to be made to affect substantive rights.
The subject is exhaustively discussed in the dissenting judgment of
Bhashyam Aiyangar, J., in 26 Mad., 291 and the hardships and anomalies
flowing from the view of the majority in that case are fully pointed out
by him.”

33.21. Sir Lawrence Jenkins, Chief Justice, Bombay High Court, expressed

himself this* :

“It is most necessary to set at rest the question whether these articles apply
where the assertion or denial of an adoption is a necessary step towards
relief. It is a question of policy which view should be taken. शा
strongly in favour of the article being made applicable, as this will tend to
diminish litigation and prevent hardship. I think it most undesirable that
questions as to adoption should be raised aber a long lapse of time when
proofs have disappeared and modes of life ed on the assumption that
the adoption is good.”

33.22. Mr. Justice N. G. Chandaverkar of the Bombay High Court agreed

with the Chief Justice,’ and commented as under*.

“TI concur in all the suggestions made by the Chief Justice in his minute.
I too think that the conflict of authority as to the -applicability of articles
118 and 119 of Schedule 2 to the Limitation Act:should be set at rest and
that the shorter period of limitation (6 years) should be definitely, prescribed
by the Legislature for all suits relating to adoption, whether they are for
the recovery of the possession of property or not. The necessity for
which a.clear pronouncement on the part of the legislature will be taken
from a few considerations relating to adoption cases and an adoption is made
generally of a minor and it is made either by a sonless Hindu or by his

\Letter No. 11304, dated 9th December 1907, National Archives File 1908, pages 14-15.
*Letter No. 352, dated 30th April, 1908 National Archives File 1908 Paper No. 27,
’

page 11.

Emphasis added. ,
‘Chief Justice L. Jenkins, Bombay High Court lettér No. 2469, dated 18th December,

1907, National Archives File 190%, Paper No. 5, page 13.

'parapragh 33.21, supra.

P. 8. Shivaswamy
Tyer-—

Advocate
General,

Madras.

Comment-
Chief Justice
L Jenkins,
Bombay.

Comment- -
Mr. Justice N.G,
Chandaverkar,

‘Letter No. 2469, dated 18-12-1907, National Archives file 1908, Paper No. 5, page 14. ह

ह


140

Comment-,

Bar Associa- «

‘ou, Aamroat

Comment-
District Judge.
Vizagapatnam.

Alternatives

०

presumptive
4 Teversioner

+ Pal

89TH REPORT UF LAW COMMN. UF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 33—Articles 56 to 58: Suits Relating to Declarations.)

widow on his death. When it is by the former, generally again, in fact
in 99 cases of a hundred, he adopts when he is about to die. On his death,
if the widow is favourable to the adoption, there are the so-called reversio-
naries of the deceased who are ready to take advantage of her position and
involve her and the boy in litigation. In such cases it is adding to the
difficulties of the widow and the minors to prescribe a longer period than
6 years for a suit attacking the adoption cither on the ground of its facium
or invalidity. [1 is the same if the widow és aot favourably to the adop-
tion or where the widow herself has adopted a boy. In advocating the
shorter period of limitation 1 am relying upou what 1 belicve has been
the beneficial result of the Full’ Bench decision of the Bombay High Court
in Hanmanth v. Srinivas. Before the decision, litigation relating to adop-
tion had been much more ripe in this residency than il has since been now.
Fhe shortness of the period has made it more difficult for the party to
fabricate evidence, because genuine evidence is more available 10 the other
side and perjury and forgery can be more easily exposed than was the case
formerly.”

33.23. tu addition to the vpinions above quoted, there were some sugges
tions regarding the drafting of the article. The Honorary Secretary, Bar Asso-
ciation, Amroati’, gave following suggestions : --

‘Articles 118 and 1!9.—The words ‘merely’ should be added after the
word ‘declaration’ in both these articles.

- 33.24, The other drafting suggestion was from Mr. V. A. Brodie, District
Judge. Vizagapatnam,’ as follows :— पु

.

“It is better to make it clear that this article is applicable only to suits
brought for” such dectarations without consequential relief for the sake of
perpetuation of testimony (vide XVII, Allahabad 167, XIV Aliahabad 156
and XI Bombay 160). tn both 1 would 18801 the words ‘without conse-
quential relief? aftcr the word ‘declaration’. ‘This would leave it free from
doubt that. where consequential relicf is sought, and the declaration only
asked for as an ancillary relief. limitation is governed by the article appli-
cable to the main relief prayed. for.”

~33.25, A presumptive reversioncr who secks to challenge an adoption made
by' a Hindu female has two courses open to him.. In the first place, he can
straightaway file a suit for declaration (governed by this article) without claim-

ing any consequential relief. because, as on the date of the suit, his right-is

merely a spes successionis liable to be defeated by subscyucnt events taking
place tifl the succession opens upon the death of the Hindu woman. Or in the

“alternative, he, may wait till the succession opens upon the death of the Hindu

fdimale and file a suit within twelve years from the opening of the succession.

Such was the view of the Privy Council’, which relied on illustration (0 to

. Section 42 of the Specific Relief Act. 1877 as being indicative of the fact that the

legislature intended a period of six years prescribed under article 118 of the

Limitation Act, 1908 as a reasonable period beyond which a plaintiff sceking a , ,

declaratory relief would be deemed to be guilty of laches.

‘Letter No, 5/8-V. 4-5. dated 2150 March, 1908. National Archives File 1908. Paper
P
ter No, 264. dated 3rd February 1908, National Archives File 1०08. Paper No, 27,

| *Kalvandappa v. Chanbasappa, A.LR. 1924 PC. 137.

No.



89TH REPORT OF LAW CUMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 141

(Chapter 33-- Articles 56 to 58: Suits Relating’ to Declarations.)

33.26. This case came up for. consideration before a Full Bench of the Privy Councit
Andhra Pradesh High Court’ and Subba Rao Chief Justice. (as he was then) ¢#°*, considered

had to write a separate concurring judgment to make the point that a ptesump- Pradesh High
tive reversioner, in his representative capacity, can file a suit for a declaration "77४५
that an alienation, ‘ither by the widow or by the alleged adopted son or even
by a third party, is invalid and is not binding on the reversioner, Viswanatha.
.Sasiri, J. stressed the fact that a failure to bring a declaratory suit under article
118 of the Limitation Act, 1908 would not bar the plainuft from filing a regular
title suit under article 14! of that Act (now article 65). The dissenting judge
Umamaheswaram, J. was. however, emphatic that a declaratory suit of the
nature does not lic under section 42 of the Specific Relief Act. nor docs any alic-
nation effected by a trespasser during the widow's life-term afford a cause of
action to the reversioner.

33.27, The Bombay High Court’ drew a distinction between (i) suit for Bombay view.
declaration simpliciter and (ii) a suit to recover -possession after the death of
the Hindi’ widow and held that the question whether article 118 (now article 57)
or article 141 of the Limitation Act, 1908 (now article 65) applied, depended upon
; Whether the plaintiff was seeking. in substance, to escape the period of limitation
by ignoring the-adoption and basing his right on some other act consequen-
tial on the adoption. हु

33.28. In view of the dissenting opinion expressed in the Andhra Predesh Recommends-
case,’ and the dichotomy introduced in the judgment of the Bombay High Won.
Court’, “ we are of the view that the matter deserves to be clear2zd once and
for all.. because such suits generally involve claims to large properties. The
necessity of clarification acquires an added edge Wheg one appreciates that the
illustration () to the old section 42 of Specific Relief Act. 1877 has now been
omitted in the new section 34 of the Specific Relief Act. 1963.

. \

33.29, Consequently, we rccomm ("५ that article 57 should be revised us Kecommenda-

follows: ॥ Hoa,” 1|

\
“57. To oblain a declaration that an Three When the alloged adoption becomes
“alleged adoption is invalid. or years. known 10 the plaintit”.
never, in fact, took place, where
no further relief is sought,

33.30, This takes us to Article 58 which reads as under: Article $8, ¢
“To obtain any other declaration . Three When the right ( sue first accrues,
. years,

The corresponding articles 93. 119 and 129 of the Act of 1908 were as
follows : —

“93. To declare the forgery of an inst- Three The date of the attempt.
rument attempted to be enforced years.
against the plaintiff.

119. To obtain a declaration that an Six Whea, the rights of the adopted

adoption is valid. yeats.  Son,’a8 such ate interfered with.
129. By a Hindu for a declaration of Twelve When the right is denied.”
his right to maintenance. . years. '

IN, Janikamma ९. Mattareddi, ALR
“Vithoba Bhanji v. Vithal Sakrod
ON, Janikumma v. Matiaredc

1986 ALP. 141. +
1.7, 1958 Bom, 270, .
- 1956 A, 144. (supra).



Comment
iy 1877.

Applicabitity—
Suits for
declaration.
with conse-
quentiat

relief.

Calcutts ”
view.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 33- Articles 56 10 58: Suits Relating to Declarations.)
Asticles 93, 128 and 129 of the Act of 1871 were as “under: ---

“93. To declare the forgery of an ins- Three’ The date of the issue, registration or
trument issued. or registered, or yeats. attempt.
attempted to be enforced.

128. By a Hindu for maintenance. Twelve When the maintenance sued fer is
years. claimed and refused.

129. To establish or set aside an adop- Twelve The date of the adoption, or (at the
tion. years. option of the plaintiff) the date of
5 the deathsof the adeptive father.”

33.31. The present article applies only to- suits for declaration sinpliciter
and combines articles 93, 119 and 129 of the Act of 1908. The different periods
of limitation in the carlier Act are, now made uniform (three years) in the Act.
This amalgamation of articles follows the recommendation of the Law Com-
mission."

33.32. Some comments received at the time of drafling of the 1877 Act
have been discussed earlier’, but onc additional. comment deserves notice. . (आर
Mr. N. H. Thomson’ expressed the following view on the subject matter of arti-
cles 119 and 129 of the Aci of 1877 :— {the gist whereof is now combined in
article 58).

“No. 124.—Where no maintenance has been received 1 would make the
period begin to run from the time when the right to maintenance accrued.
Where the suit is for arrears, from the time they were payable.

“No. 125.—There seems to be a doubt. whether a suit to sct aside an
adoption will lic unless consequential relief be asked.”

33.33. The doubts expressed by Mr. N. H.. Thomson about the applica-
bility of the article to suits for a declaration coupled with consequential relief
persist even now. In a case which went upto the Supreme Court’ (though not
directly concerned with the implications of this article) it was observed as
under :--

“A suit for declaration with a consequential relief for injuaction, is not a
suit for declaration simpliciter: it is a suit for declaration with further
relief. Whether the further relief claimed-m a particular case is conse-
quential upon a declaration is adequate must always depend upon the facts
and circumstances of each case. v A suit for a declaration of a right
and an injunction restraining the defendants from interfering with the exer-
cise of that right is governed by article 120 of the Limitation Act and in
such a ‘suit the right.to sue arises when the cause of action accrues.”

33.34. Though the Supreme Court did not refer pointedly to article 58,
the above observations have been interpreted by the Calcutta High Court’ to
mean that a suit for declaration of title aad for permanent injunction restraining
the defendants from interfering with possession is governed by article 58, when
the properties are not trust properties and the plaintiffs are not in possession
However, the Orissa High Court? has held that article 58 will apply only to a

1Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Aet 1908). page 53.
3586 discussion of articles 56 and $7, supra.

‘Letter in National Archives File 1877, Paper No. 2, page 3.

‘Mohd. Yunus v. Syedunnissa, AJR. 1961 5.6. 808, 810!

Radita Gobinda v. Kewala Devi. AAR. 1974 Cal: 383.

"Gouranga ¥. Bhaga Sahu, A.L.R. 1976 Orissa 43, (7



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 33-- Articles 56 to 58: Suits Relating to Declarations.)
(Chapter 34—Articles 59 io 60: Suits Relating to Decrees and fustruments.)
suit for declaration simpliciter and will have no application to a suit seeking a
declaration that the plaintiff's adoption, in fact, took place and claiming parti-
tion.

143

33.35. The tenor of the passage from the judgment, of the Supreme Court recommenda-

quoted above! shows that the court regards this article to be applicable only to "0".

a suit for declaration simpliciter. We recommend that the matter should be put
beyond doubt by revising article 58 as follows :--

>
“To obtain any other declaration Three When the right to sue first. accrues.’
without seeking further relief. years.

CHAPTER 34

ARTICLES 59-60: SUITS RELATING TO BECREES AND
INSTRUMENTS:

34.1, Article 59 reads as under :—
“To cancel or set aside an instruy Three When the facts entitling the plain-
ment or decree or for the rescis- years. tiff to have the instrumert or
, Sion of a contract, decrze cancelled or set aside or
’ the contract rescinded first be-
come known to him.”

* It combines the substance of articles 91 and 114 of the Act of 1908, which
. were as follows:—

“91, To cancel or set aside an instru- Three , When the facts entitling the plain-
ment not otherwise provided for. years. __ tiff to have the instrument cancel-
led. or set aside become known to
him”.
“114, For the rescission of a contract. Three When the facts entitling the plain-
years, tiff to have the contract rescinded
first become known to him’.

Atticles 91 and 114 of the Act of 1877 were in the same terms.
Articles 92 and 114 of the Act of 1871 were as under: —

“92. To caricel or set aside an instru- Three When the instrument is exccated.
ment not otherwise provided for. years, .
114. For the rescission of a contract. Three ‘When the contract is executed by
years. — the plaintiff”.

Acting on the recommendation of the Law Commission’, articles 91 and 114
ofthe Act of 1908 were combined into a single article 59 in the Act of 1963, and
the scope of the article was also enlarged so as to make it applicable to the can-
cellation to decrees as well.

Article 59,

34.2, The expression “set aside” in the article under discussion was adver- The expression
sely commented on by a District 10080, in 1907. He suggested that the words 7 #46".

“or to declare the inoperative character of” should be added after the words “set
aside”. . ‘

Mohd. Yunus v, Syedunnissa, ALR, 1961 5.0, 808 supra,

‘Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1908), page 53, para 139,

‘Diwan Bunadur S. Gopalachariar Avergal, Disitict Judge, Guntur, Letter No. 2/55,
dated 30th December, 1907, National Archives’ File 11908, paper No. (1, page 10.

ag


144 . 89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION act, 1963 |

पु
(Chapter 34-- Articles 59 to 60: Suits Relating to Decrees and Tustiument.)

It may be revalied' that the expression “set aside” was also adversely com-
mented upon by the Privy Council in the context of adoption*:—

“It must be confessed that the words of the article are not such as to prevent
doubt or ‘difficulty in its construction. The expression “suit to set aside an
adoption” is not quite precise as applied to any suit. An adoption may be

; - established, but can hardly be set aside, though an alleged or pretended
adoption may be declared to be no adoption at all.”

And further: .

“It thus appears that the expression “set, aside an adoption” is and has
been for many years applied in the ordinary~language of Indian lawyers to
proceedings which bring the validity of an alleged adoption under question,
and applied quite indiscriminately to suits for Possession of land and to
suits of a declaratory nature”,

No change 34.3. However, article 59 deals not with adoption as such but with setting

aoeded. a4, 1 . 5 a
aside instruments and decrees, and so does the next following article 60, dealing
with the transfer of property. Consequently, though the wording “setting aside
an adoption” may be unhappy, there appears to be no reason why the expression
cannot be used in article 59 as well as article 60. Hence, no change is needed
in the article,

Article 60. 34.4. Article 60 reads as under -—

“60. To set aside a transfer of property
made by the guardian of a ward—

(a) bythe ward who hasattained Three When the ward attains majority.
majority; - years. - .
(0) ७५ the ward’s legal represen-
. tative—
(i) When the ward dies with- Three When the ward attains majority.
in three yeats from the years.
date of attaining ma-
jority.
(ii) When the ward dies Three When the ward dies.”
before attaining majority. years.
Article 44 of the Act of 1908 read as under:

“44. By a ward who has attained ma- Three . When the ward attains majority,
jority to set aside a transfer of years.
Property by his guardian.

Article 44 of the Act of 1877 was as follows:

“44, By ward who has attained majo- Three When the ward attains majority,
“s Tity. to set aside a sale of his guar- years.

dian.
The Act of 187} had no corresponding Article. .
De facto 34.8. The courts are sharply ided as to whether the word “guardian”

suardian. 1 occuring in this article, includes a “de facto” guardian. The Madras High

Court? the Punjab High Court, and the Jammu and Kashmir High EE Ser and the Jammu and Kashmir High Courts,

See discussion as to article 57, supra. . -
aChaodhrans v. Dakhina Mohun Rox Chaodhri, (4886) LL.R. 13 Cal. 308, 320,
218) Ramachandran v. Rumkangadan, A.LR. 1975 Madras 60.

{b) Sivaumalai Goundon v. Arinchaia Goundan, ALR. 1938 Madras 822,
*Pran Nath ¥. Bai Kishan, A. 1959 Punjab 313. .

*Lok Noth v. Rohiw Rum. KAR. 1951 IRR 25. | .



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 34—Articles 59-60: Suits relating to Decrees ard instruments.)
(Chapter 35— Articles 61 10 67: Suits relating to immovable property.) 4

shave held that an article takes care of. “de facto guardian”. On the other hand,
the Patna High Court’ has held that another article (article 144 of the Act of
1908*} would apply to a suit to set aside an alienation made by the de facto
guardian of a Hindu minor.

° 34.6. We. should mention in this context that the Law Commission.’ in its Reco
Report on the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890, has recommended the addition, 2 Game
in section 4(2) of that Act, of a suitable Explanation which would make it clear reiterated.
that a de facto guardian is included within the definition of ‘guardian’ for the
purposes of that Act. We are of the view that if this recommendation is accept-
ed, the controversy should not survive in relation to. the law of Limitation also.

We reiterate the recommendation made with reference to the Guardians and

Wards Act,’ 1890.

CHAPTER 35
ARTICLES 61 TO 67: SUITS RELATING TO IMMOVABLE PROPERTY

5

"38.1. Article 61 reads as under : ! पर Article 61.7

"61. By a mortgagor— .
(a) to redeem or recover posses- Thirty. When the right to redeem or to
sion of immovable property years. recover possession accrues,

mortgaged

(b) to recover possession of im- Twelve When the transfer becomes known
movable property mortgaged years. to the plaintiff.
and afterwards transferred
a by the mortgagee for a valu-
ble consideration;

(c) to recover surplus collections Three When the mortgagor re-enters
‘ reéeived by the mortgagee years. on the mortgaged property”. 7
after the mortgage has been
satisfied
This article replaced articles 105, 134 and 148 of the Act of 1908, which
were as follows

$148. Against a mortgagee to redeem Sixty When the right to redeem or to”
* of to recover possession ofimmo- years. recover possession accrues; pro- ©

- yable property mortgaged vided that all-claims to redeem
पु arising under instruments of mort-
/ . gage of immovable property situa-

\ te in Lower Burma which had
been executed before the first day
of May, 1863, shall be governed

. by the rules of limitation in force
in that State immediately before
the same day.

“134, To recover possession of immo- Twelve When the transfer becomes known
vable property conveyed or be- years. _ to the plaintiff.
queathed in trust or mortgaged . .
and afterwards transferred by the
trustee or mortgagee for a valu- |
able consideration.

'\Kailash Chandra Pradhan v. Rajani Kanta, ALR. 1945 Patna 298.
30.6, Present article 65.

a 3Law Commission of India, 83rd Report (Guardians and Wards Act, 1890), Paragraph
‘To be carried out with reference to the Guardian’. and Wards Act, 1890.

2014 Bt of LIRCAIND] 83 *

‘


that the period of limitation 0!

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN, OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

{Chapter 35—Articles 61 to 67: Sults relating to immovable property.)

105. By a mortgagor after the mortgage Three. . When the morigagor re-enters on
has been satisfied, to recover sut- years. the mortgaged property.”
plus collections received by the
mortgagee.

The corresponding _ provisions in the Act of 1877 were articles 148, 134 and
105, respectively. ~

38.2, The Law Commission, reconsmended' in its Report on the Act of 1908

(60 years allowed for the redemption of a mort-
gige in article 148 of the Act of 1908 should be cut down to 12 years, on the
analogy of the practice available in England. As regards article 105, the Com:
fiission recommended the retention of the period, and, as regards article 134,
the Commission recommended that it should be split up in so far as it related
to mortgages. However, all these articles were clybbed into one article and enac-
ted as article 61 in the Act of 1963, with the reduction of the period of limitation
for redemption from 60 years to 30 years orlly.

35.3. The Bombay High Court has held* that a suit by a puisne mortgagee
who had not been impleaded by a prior mortgagee and who sought to enforce his
Mortgage rights~ against his mortgagor was governed not by article 132 of the
Act of 1908 (now article 62) but by article 148. The Calcutta High Court has
held’ that where a prior mortgagee obtained a decree on his mortgage without
impleading a puisne mortgagee, purchased the property in execution and entered
into possession, a suit by the puisne mortgagee (who also purchased the property
under his decree without impleading the mortgagee) ‘for redemption and posses-
sion against the prior mortgage was governed by article 132 of the Act of 1908
(now article 62) and not by article 148 (now article 61). A puisne mortgagee is
an assignee of the equity of redemption and is, therefore, entitled to redeem a
prior mortgage in Accordance with the provisions of sections 92 and 94 of the
Transfer of Property Act which -incorporate the familiar rule ‘redeem up, fore-
Close down’, The distinction seems to be this, A suit to redeem'is governed
by article 61, A suit to enforce payment falls within article 62.

354. The Madras High Court has held* by ‘majority that article 134 of the
Act of 1908 (now article 61) did not 8999-10 a transfer from a trustee or mort-
‘Gage, White possession was not taken by the -triinsfetce. Wallis, CJ. and Coutts
Trotter, JJ, however, dissented from the aforeddid (maajority) view and held that
the article 134 applied to a transfer froma trustee or mortgagee under which
pokvession was not taken by the transferee. Wallis, C.J. further Observed that it
‘cobld not be held that the intention of the Legislature in enacting article 134
‘Wits to make ‘a provision in favour of the cestua que trust or mortgagor and give

him a further period than ‘he would otherwise have had, On the contrary, the

intention was clearly restrictive. The Indian Legislature must have been perfectly
well aware that in the case of sales and mortgages alike, possession was rarely

“given on the date of transfer and if the legislature had intended the date of taka
- ing possession under the sale or mortgage to be the starting point, nothing

would have been easier to say so.. It had hot 09016 '80, and it was not open to
the judiciary to effect this by taking out of the ‘article nearly all the cases which

- would therefore fall within it.

shaw Commision of India, 3rd Report Giriation Act, 1908, ras. 48-49, 129-130,
*Nagu Tukaram v. Gopal Ganesh, ATR. 1963 Born. HOS” paras 48-49, 129-150.
“Mulla Vint SAP RG. ME Soci bavhuemma, ALR. i
la Vittit Setti Kutti v. K. M. K. Kunhi Pal ALR, 1919 Mad. 972; LLR.
40 Mad. 1040; 1054 (FB). 0४०७ “ ss


QO1H REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON ‘THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 35—Articles 61 to 67: Suits relating 10 immovable property.)

However, it should be stated that most other High Courts have taken that -
view that article 134 (now article 61) does not apply where possession is not
transferred?" The Madras High Court has, in a later case,’ held that for ihe
application of article 61, it was not the intention or belief of the mortgagee who

. transferred the property: that mattered, but the fact that, though he was a mort-
gagee, he, in fact, purported to transfer absolutely to a third party the property
covered by the mortgage in his favour. The fact of his belief that he was trans-
ferring some other property could not’ make any difference, so long as it was
ultimately found that the property transferred by the mortgagee was the pro-
perty which was the subject of the mortgage.

38.5. In the post-1963 period article 61 has not given rise to any serious No change
controversy, and hence needs no amendment. मं needed,

35.6, Asticle 62 reads as under :— Article 62.

62. 10 enforce payment of money Twelve Wien the money sued for becomes
secured by a mortgage or other- years. due”. ४
wise charged upon immovable
property.

Article 132 of the Act of 1908 was as under:—

“132. To enforce payment of money Twelve When the money sued for becomes
charged upon immovable property. years. due.

, Explonation:~For the purposes of this articke—
(७) the allowatice and fees respectively called malikhana and haqgs, and

_@) the value of any agricultural or other produce the right to receive which
is secured by a charge upon immovable property, and

{© advances secured by mortgage by deposit of title deeds shall be deemed
to be money charged upon immovable property.”

Article 132 of the Act of 1877 was as under:

“132. To. enforce payment of money Twelve When the sioney sued for becomes
charged upon immovable property. years. due.”

Explanation.—The allowance and fees respectively called malikhana and
haqgs.sball, for the purpose of this clause, be deemed to ‘be money charged upon
immovable property.” |,

Article 132 of the Act of 1871 was in identical teems. +

38.7. Article 132 of the Limitation Acts of 1871, 1877 and 1908 provided Law Commis-
_-for, gpforcigg payment of money charged uyon immovable property. ‘Though 170 Report.
the article did not specifically refer to mortgages, the Privy. Council held* that
a.spit. ona simple mortgage bond to enforce paynient Was governed by article
132. ,In the Report on the Act of 1908, the Law Congmigson recommended®
amendment of the article to extend it specifically to mortgages. The Commis-
sipn_algo recommended deletion of clause (c) of thé Explanation to the article.

eIn.¢he present Act, not merely clause (c) of the Explanation, but the eptire
Explanation, -has been omitted. ~

re

“Wagan. ‘Das, v. Heji Abdur Rehim, (1920) LER, 47 Cal,
YY. bushila, ALR. 1947.Cal, 461 866, #0.

% 194: |. 461.

°Dhenatakshmi Amunal v. G. Anthurai, A.LR. 1972 Mad. 186,

> “Fhe ExBlanation.does ‘not appear in the ice Act.

SVasudeva Mudalior v. Srinivasa Pillai (1907) ILR 30 Med 42607).

‘Law Copsmission of India; 3rd Report (Limitation Act,!1908hpagd 48 para 128.
पु — 4 : oe



No changes
needed.

: ;

+ Law Comunis-
sion’s Report.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 35—Articles 61 to 67: Suits relating to immovable property.)

35.8. Controversies may, in practice, arise as to the applicability of the
article to a particular case, where the exact nature of the bond may be in
issue, but these do not necessitate any amendment of the article.

389. Article 63 reads as under :—

“63. By a mortgagee :
(a) forforeclosure. Thirty When the money secured by the |
years. mortgage becomes duc.
(b) for possession of immovable Twelve) When the mortgagee becomes entit-
property mortgaged. yeats.” led to possession.” 5

. The corresponding provisions in the Act of 1908 were articles 135, 146 and
147, which read as under:— हु

“135. Suit instituted in a Court not es- Twelve When the mortgagor's cight to
tablished by Royal Charter bya years. possession determines.”
mortgagee for possession of tm- .
movable property mortgaged. .

146. Before a Court established by Thirty When any part of the principal or ©
Royal Charter in the exercise of years. interest was last paid on account
its ordinary original civil jurisdic- of the mortgage debt.
tion by a mortgagee to recover
from the mortgagor the possession
of immovable property mortgaged.

147. By a mortgagee for foreclosure or Sixty | When the money secured by the
sale. years. mortgage becomes due.”

का the Act of 1877, articles 135, 146 and 147 were in identical terms,

in the Act of 1871, Articles 135 and 139 contained the jaw on the topic in
these terms:

“135. Suit instituted in a Court notes- Twelve When the mortgagee is first entitled .
tablished by Royal Charter by years. to possession. हु
mortgagee for possession of im-
movable property mortgaged.

139. Like suit when the purchaser had Twelve The date of the dispossession.”
Possession, but afterwards dis- ~ years.

Possessed. va

36.10. The Law Commission, in its Report on the Act of 1908, observed as
ander on the corresponding article of the Act of i908" :

“125. Before the decision of the Pirvy Council in Vasudeva v. Srinivas?
the view was taken that a suit by a mortgagee for sale of the property was
governed by article 147 which gives a period of 60 years for foreclosure of
sale. This view is no longer tenable in’ view of the decision ofthe Privy
Council, where it was pointed out that article 147 applied only to an Eng-
lish mortgage under which the mortgagee has the alternative of either bring-
ing a suit for foreclosure or for sale agd. that the proper article to apply in
the case of a suit for sale under a sinmple mortgage was article 132, which
provides a period of 12 ycars from the date when the money sued for be-
comes due. Under the existing law, the English mortgagee has no right

a7. ‘Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1908) pages 47-48, pera: 125+
“sVasudeva-y. Srinivasa, (1907) LLR. 30, Mad. 426; 433, 434, PC).

‘


897H REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA OF THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 7h.

५ (Chapter 35-—Articles 61 to 67; Suits relating to immovable property.)

of foreclosure. Like a simple mortgagee, he has to institute a suit for sale.
“Whether in view of the definition of English mortgage in the Transfer of
Property Act he is entitled to recover possession also is a debatable point.”

“126. In the Limitation Act there are two articles, 135 and 146 which
provide a period of limitation for recovery of possession by a mortgagee.
Hf the suit is instituted in a court not established by Royal Charter,- the
period is 12 years (Art. 135) and if the suit is instituted in a court establi-
fhed by a Royal Charter the period is 30 years (Art. 146). In the former
case, time begins to run when the mortgagor's right to possession determines
while, in the latter, time begins to run when the principal or interest was
last paid on account of the mortgage debt. It seems to be unnecessary to
maintain this distinction, even assuming that under the present law the
English mortgagee is entitled to recover possession of the property. The
usufructuary "mortgagee is undoubtedly entitied to recover possession ’ of
the property, cither from the date of mortgage if possession is not delivered
or, subsequently, if having been put in possession, his possession is disturb-
ed. It would be sufficient, therefore, to provide only one article for a suit
by a mortgagee for possession of immovable property mortgaged to -him

» A period of 12 ycars may be allowed. Time should run from the date when
his right to possession accrues.”

“127. As, under an English mortgage, there is no right of foreclosure or
tale in the alternative, article 147 which in view of the Privy Council deci-
sion applies only to such mortgages, should be deleted. It is, however,
necessary to make a fresh provision for a suit for foreclosure. A period of.
12 years for such a suit may be provided, counting limitation from the date
when the movey secured by the mortgage becomes due, as in the case of a
suit for sale,”

The legislature. has, however, inserted a period of thirty years, in confor:
mity with the period prescribed in the new Act for suits for redemption of mort:
898०8. हु ~

35.11, After the passing of the Act of 1963, no controversy 198 arisen justi- No change
fying a change in the. Act.

35.12. This takes us to article 64, which reads as under :— Article 64

“64, For possession of immovabk¢ pro- Twelve The date of dispossession.”
perty based on previous posses- years.
sion and not on title, when the
plaintiff white in possession of the
property has been dispossessed.

+ — Article 142 of the Act of 1908 was as under:

“142. For possession of immovable Twelve ‘The date of dispossession or dis-
Property wien the plaintiff, while ycars. continuance.”
in possession of the property, has
been dispossessed or has discon-
tinued the possession.

This was identical with article 142 of the Act of 1877 and article 143 of
the Act of 1871. |


15% _ 89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN, OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 35—Articles 61 to 67: Suits relating to immovable property.)

The present article adds the words ‘based on previous possession and not
' on title". The change, to some extent, follows the scheme suggested by the Law
Commission in its Report* on the Act of 1908.

_This article needs no change. - .

Article 65. * 38.13. Article 65 reads as under :--
“65. For possession of immovable Tweive When the possession of the defen- हैं

property or any interest therein years: dant becomes adverse to the plain-
based on title.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this article—

(a) where the suit is by a remainderman, a revisioner (other than a Jand-
lord) or a devisee, the possession of the defendant shall be deemed to
become adverse only when the estate of the remainderman, revisioner _
or devise, as the case may be, falls into possession;

(b) where the suit is by a Hindu or Muslim entitled to the possession of
immovable property on the death of.a Hindu or Muslim female, the
possession of the defendant shall be deemed to become adverse only
when the female dies;

(०) where the suit is by a purchaser at a sale in execution of a decree when
the judgment-debtor was out of possession at the date of the sale, the
purchaser shall be deemed to be a representative of the judgment-<deb-
tor who was out of possession.”

1

This article has replaced article 144 of the Act of 1908, which was as
under:—

144. For possession of immovable Twelve When the possession of the defen-
property or any interest therein years. dant becomes adverse to the plain-
not hereby otherwise specially tiff.”
provided for.

This was identical with article 144 of the Act of 1877:

Article 145 of the Act of 1871 was as ander

“$45. For possession of immovable Twelve When the possession of the defen-
property ण any interest therein years. damit, or of some person through

not hereby otherwise specially whom he claims, became adverse
provided for. to the plaintiff.” :
‘The position 35.14. The doctrine of acquision of title by adverse possession is deeply
of the iHesal rooted ia-our system of jurisprudence. The doctrine is derived from the Roman

1

Law concept of usucapio and longi temporis ipraescriptio, but in Roman: Law,
there was an added requirement that the possession must be bona fide and for
“fusta causa”. English law has not insisted on the requirement of justa causa.
The U.K. Law Reform Committee’ has defended the doctrine by obsérving that”
“certainty of title to land is a social need and occupation of land which has long
been unchallenged should not be disturbed.” Thus, the English version is just
the opposite of the Roman concept.

- See para 35.17, infra.
, Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limi Aat), pages 49-52. दि
‘Law Reform Committee, 14th Report (< cquisition of easements and profits by
prescription), cmnd. 3100, page 12, para 36.


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON. 7" LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 35—Articles 61 10 67; Suits relating to immovable property.)

In the registration systems of certain Commonwealth countries, @ distinc-
tion is. made between the acquisition of title by an adverse possession to regis-
tered land and unregistered land, with the result that a tank trespasser or a
squatter ig not able to extinguish the litle of a registered proprietor.'*

35.15: This, however, is not the position in England. A person with evil Argument of
prentions ions can usurp somebody else’s land, even after forcibly evicting him, and injustice,

still perfect his title by adverse possession. On the other hand, if he enters
into possession in a bona fide manner and with “justa causa”, he would not be
able to perfect his title. When the inequity of the position resulting from the
interpretation of the word “adverse” was argued in England. before Harman J,
{as lve thon was), he had interjected as under:

“You are worse off when you enter lawfully”

To this, the reply from the Bar was—“Yes, often; the case is by no means
as startling as it sounds, because one has a comparable situation in detinue.”

38.16. In view of the possibility of unjust results flowing from the applica- Questions
posed as to

tion of this doctrine, one writer’ poses two questions:

(1) Has “squatter’s title” to land, with its undertones of “land-stealing”, any
place in a civilised society, particularly a society committed ultimately to univer-
sal state registration of title to land? (2) If, “squatter’s title” can still perform a
useful, indeed a necessary, function, ought it to require that the “squatter”
sheyld ‘have a particular intention or motive before allowing him to acquire
title? - However, after an exhaustive discussion of .the merits, the same writer
proposes the following answers to the questions so posed: .

(1) Acquisition of title by adverse possession is not immoral and can have
benign influence on the social policy that security should be given to the long
possessor of ‘land. हु

(2) The motive, intention or belief of the ailegodiy adverse possessor is im-
manterial. The deliberate evicter and the mistaken encroacher should both be
able to acquire title. Long-continued possession should ipso facto confet title,
unless it is proved that that possession began and continued tinder a valid tran-

_ Section with the true owner, ie. that the possession was purely derivative, ad-
‘verse possession. But if the defendant trespasser is a person who wishes to oust
ie plaihtiif who was himself a prior trespasser or a persen Who did not come
itito posession as a trespasser but continued to hold # aa such, in order to
¥aable the plaintiff to continue his wrongful possession without disturbance,
thé law must undoubtedly step in and give relief to, the plaintiff. As against the
Yue wher, a person who is in possession for a length -of time short of the
statutory period is not entitled to any protection, but the eet result of the deci-
sioris ‘under article 142 is that the true owner must prove that he had a subsist-
ig title on the date of suit. हु

‘We therefore suggest that in order to avoid injustice and inequity to the
true owner and to simplify the law, article 142 should be restricted to suits based
oh pdssessory title and the owner of the property should not lose his right to
it unless the. defendant in possession is able to establish adverse possession.”

'Michmel J. “Goodman,” Adverse Possession, Morality 4ad Motive (1970) 33 Modern
Law Review 281, 282. -

ACE. 1. S. Williams, “Title by Limitation in a registered conveyancing system” (1968)

6 All Law Rev. 69.

9 भर. Bdees, (1957) 1 Ch. 475, 481 : (1957) 2 All ER. 577. See Michael Goodman.

“Ailyérie “Possession—Miorality and Motive” (1970) 33 Moéern Law Rev, 281, 285, 286

‘SMichael_J, Gostimen , “Adverse Possession—Morality aad Motive” (1970) 33 Modern
Law Review 281 ‘(Quettion’) 288. fAnswers). ee) a

354


152

Law Com-

Law Com-
Whission's:

Summary of the

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 35—Articles 61 to 67: Suits Rekiting to Immovable Property.)

35.17. Reverting. to the text of article 65, the articles relating to possession
were examined in great detail by the Law Commission’ in its Report on the
Act of 1908. There was a preliminary observation that articles 142 and 144
had introduced a good deal of confusion in the law relating to suit for posses-
sion by the owners of property, The law, Commission also discussed the Privy
Council case’ on the subject, which had settled the proposition that the rule of
Prescription should be applied not to cases of want of actual possession by the
Plaintiff, but to cases where the plaintiff had been out of possession and another.
Person was in possession for the prescribed time. The Cémmission then made
the following recommendation on the subject:

“Ih ‘our opinion, article 142 must be restricted in its application only to

suits based on possessory title. The plaintiff in such a suit seeks protection’ _

of his previous possession which falls short of the statutory period of pres-
cription, to recover possession from ‘another trespasser. The plaintiff's
" prior possession no doubt entitles him to protection against a trespasser,

+ though not against the true owner. The true owner’s entry. would be 8
rightful entry and would interrupt.

35.18. For these reasons, the Law Commission (in that Report) recom.
mended a re-draft of article 142 as under:— .

For possession of immovable property based on  possessory title
where the plaintiff while in possession of the property has been dispossep>
sed-—12 years from the date of dispossession.”

A new article was to govern suits based on title—the 12 years period to be
counted from the time when possession becomes adverse.

५. 35.19. The amended article, though’ phrased somewhat differently has not
given rise to any serious controversy and the Supreme Court. in a recent judg.
ment on the subject, has succintly summarised the law on adverse possession or
hostile title thus:?

“Adverse possession or hostile title must be established by’ a consistent
course of conduct and it cannot-be shown by a stray or sporadic act of
possession. However, all that the law requires is that the possession must
be open and without any attempt at concealment. It is not necessary that
the possession must be so efféctive so as to bring it to the specific knowkdge
of the owner. Such a requirement may- be insisted on, where an ouster of
title is pleaded but that is not the case here. One of the important facts,
which clearly proves adverse possession, may be that the possessor had let
out the Jand for cultivatory purposes and used it himself from time to time
without any protest from the owner or any serious attempt by the owner
fo evict the possessor, knowing. full well that he was asserting hostile title
in respect of the land. If a person asserts a hostile title even to a tank
which, as claimed in the present case by the owner, ic. the municipality,
belonged to it and despite the hostile’ assertion of title no steps were taken
by the owner, to evict the trespasser, his title by prescription would be
complete after thirty years,

> OOOO SS er
‘Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1908), pages 49 to 52, para,

13!

to 136.
१. Short (1888) 13 AiC. 793 (९.
*Kashitish ‘Chand dra Bose v, Commingonet of Apnchi’(1981) 2 S.C.C. 103.


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 13

(Chapter 35—+Articles 61 to 67: Suits Relating @ Immovable Property)

35.20. Yn England, certain developments in the theory of adverse possession Developments
have taken place as regards proiccting.the real owner of the land (who has. in UK
reserved the same for development or some specific’ purpose in mind, to be exe-
cuted at a future date). In Wallis’s case', Lord Denning M.R. observed as
under:* .

“Possession by itself is mot enough to give a title. It must be adverse
possession. The true owner must have been dispossessed and another must
have discontinued possession or have been dispossessed and another must
have taken it adversely to him. There must be something in the nature of
an ouster of the true owner by the wrongful possessor.”

35.21. The Law Reform Committee’ in. England (after some discussion) law Reform
concluded as under, on the subject: दर Views of.

“There has now apparently been established a quite. general doctrine of an
implied licence from the true owner to the would-be adverse possessor
permitting him to commit the acts of possession upon which he seeks (०
rely, without any specific or factual basis 10" such'an implication. The effect of
implying such a licence is to prevent .time ‘running ir favour of the adverse
Possessor, since time does not run in favour of the licensee. If this doctrine
extends as far as it appears to have been extended (by Gray v. Wykoham=

- Martine), वा amounts, in effect, to a judicial repeal of the statute. The phito-
sophy behind this approach has been expressed by Lord Denning M.R., a3
follows;

“The reason behind the doctrine is because it does’ not lie in that other
petson’s mouth to assert that he used the land of his qwn wrong as a trespasser.
Rather, his user is to be ascribed to the licence or permission of the true owner.”

“We, however, prefer the more traditional approach recently restated by
Sir John Ponnycuick, delivering the judgment of the Coutt of Appeal in Treloar
v. Nute' in which he said

‘If a squatter takes possession of land’ belonging to another and

, femains in possession for twelve years to the exclusion of the. owner, that repre-
sems adverse possession and accordingly at the ‘end of the twelve years the title
of the owner is extinguished. That is the plain meaning. of the statutory provi-
sions......,..... ".

‘4

" 35.22, The Law Reform Committee further considered it clear that the’ two
. approaches could not be reconciled. It concluded as under:

“We consider that the law should be restored to the law as stated'in Treloar v.
Nute* There can, in’ our view, be no iustifigation fog implying a licence, or
other similar position, in any case where there is no thetwet basis for such an
implication. The precise formula for such a: restoration is not easy, since the
present law is that if the land is in the possesstén of some person in whose
favour the period of limitation can run, then such’ possession is ‘adverse’
(imitation Act 1939, s:10(1) and this appears to be quite plain. We do not
a
‘Wallis's Cayton Bay Holiday Camp Lid, v. Shell Mex'and B.P. Lid. (1975) QB. 94,
109... for further discussion. (1980) Current Law Part 5, nage 244.
‘Law Reform Committee Report. (September 1977) Ci “3 6928, Para 3.50 to 3.92.

“+ ATréloar ९. Nate, (1977), All, BR. (230); (1976) 1° WLR, 120 CCA
*Treloar v. Nute (1977) 1 Atl E.R. 23

MS Ea Wwe OAIND/83



154 89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 35—Articles 61 to 67: Suits. Relating to Immovable Property)

consider that the suggestion of the Institute--that there would be a presunip-
tion that possession is adverse—-would really add anything to this existing
provision. Accordingly, we think that it may be necessary. for amending
legislation expressly to provide that for the purposes of the Limitation Act
“possession” is to bear its ordinary. meaning in law, so that it is not to be
artificially stripped of its character of being adverse by the application of any
implication or presumption not grounded upon the actual circumstances of the
” धर

case”,
7 -
‘Limitation 35.23. As a result of the recommendations of the Law Reforms Committee,
yeaa the Limitation Amendment Act 1980 was passed in England. The following sub-
of section has ‘been added as sub-section (4) of section 10 of the Limitation Act

1939, by the Amendment Act of 1980.

“{4) For the purpose of determining whether a Person occupying any Jand
is in adverse possession of the land it shall not be assumed by implication
of law that this occupation is by permission: of the person entitled to the
land merely by virtue of the fact ‘that his éccupation is not ‘inconsistent with
the latter’s present or future enjoyment of the land.

This provision shall not be taken as prejudicing a finding 1o the effect
that a person’s occupation of any land is by ingplied permission of the person
entitled to the land in any case whete such finding is justified on the actual /
facts of the case.” . .

The Commentator of the Current Law Statutes ‘Annotated’ has observed (with
reference to this provision) that this amendmegt is: “another round in the Legis. 1
lature v. Lord Denning saga”. 7 :

Looe . :
No chase . 35.24. We have made a passing reference to the fact that like Tany other
nemded. .. “well established iegal doctrines, the doctrine of adverge possession has also attracted

~ the. adverse notice of some jurists. However, as ystated above, the philosophy

. underlying the same has become an integrat patt of our jurisprudence. Both
on the merits and on the ground just now mieationed. the doctrine deserves not
to be disturbed in its essence. . oo

- ७. No change - We have also referred to the developshenty it land as a matter of interest.
eae In India, these controversies have not atisen, ’ Adcordingly, we do not recom- हे
a 2 mend any change in the article. po :

2 pote Fd
Atticle 66... 35.28. This takes us to article 66, which junder :—

“6: For possession of immovable pro- Twelve Whep the forfeiture is incurred or
perty when.the plaintiff has be- years. .. the condition is broken.”
come entitled to possession by पर fF,
Teason of any forfeiture or breach . :
of condition. oR

Article 143 of the Acts of 1908 and 18T1-was as under:—

“143, Like suit, when the plaintiff has Twejve Wheb the forfeiture is incurred or-
become entitled by redson of any years. ‘the tondition is broken.”
4 forfeiture or breach of condition. : .

In the Act of 1871, article 144 was in identical terms.

T3(4980) Part 5 Current Law page 24/4, ०४७एछछाणछ


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 35--Articles 61 to 67: Suits Relatian to Immovable Property)

_ 35.26, Many of the judicial decisions usuaily discussed under this article Casetaw
involve matters of substantive law and we need not pause to discuss them. It is हु
enough to mention one important aspect which was if issue in a Madras case!
Defedants in that case were in possession of a laad on tenancy basis by virtue of a
deed executed in 1836. In 1871, the defendants’ set up a right of permanent
tenancy. In 1894, the plaintiff gave notice to the defendants to give up possession
of the lands and filed a suit for eviction:. The deferdants contended that the
suit was barred by limitation. The High Court held that the suit was not
batred by limitation and that the tenant repudiating the title of land became
> fiable for immediate eviction at the option ofthe landlord, but until the landlord
. indicated that he intended to exercise: the option, the tenancy subsisted from year
60 year and article 139 of the Limitation Act of 1908" (present article 67) applied.
But the same High-Court, in a later case, held that the landlord had got a right
“to récover possession the moment the forfeiture was igcurred, and no overt act
(ie. no act or intimation of an election to avoid the 1685९) was necessary before
bringing an action for ejectment.- In such a gase, article 148 (present article 66)
applied and limitation began to run from the’ date of forfeiture incurred (i.e, the
‘date of wrongful alienation of the Property), unless the lessor, by a positive act,
-affirmed the tenancy and thereby waived the forfeiture. These and similar rulings’
are concerned essentially with the law of landlord and tenant. Depending on the .
’ view taken on the question of substantive rights of the Parties, there may result
a difference as to the precise article ‘of the Linkifation Act that would be attracted
to the particular situation. For that reason, it seems hardly necessary to-pursue
the matter further, : }

* + 38.27, It may also be mentioned that tenahcies of agricultural lands are Limited.
now mostly regulated by the Land.Reform Laws. enacted: by various States. As Othe ieee
regards non-agricultural land, again, various rent Conttol laws now contain the of forfeiture.
Jaw in respect of residential buildings in urban artas. The area where the pro-
_ Visions of ‘the general law of landlord and tenant is licable to tenancies has
now considerabl, ly shrunk. Thus, the article under, tis ; eon has limited utility,
which is’ practicably: confined to residual grounds mot tquched by “special

Kgislation? : .

35.28. In the above position, a change’ in the article is not considered No change
1 “necessary, . needed, — -

ticle 67. 38.29. Article 67 reads as under:—

, “67. By a landlord to recover posses- Twelve Whew the tenancy is determined.”
sion from a tenant. years. a .

“It is identical with article 139 of the Acts of 1968 and 1877, and with article,
140 of the Act of 1871,

. 38.30, Some controversy seems to exist ab regards’ the legal representatives Representative
of a tenant. In one case,‘ the Madras High Court observed that a tenant holding a peel _
over after the expiry of his term became a tenant on sufferance. The High Court Whether a.
further held that the representatives of a tenant on sufferance were mere trespassers tenant.
and -the lessor could not (by his assent alone) canvert such representatives into
“tenants” without their concurrence. However, in.attothér case of the same High

Srinivas Ayvar vMuthusami Pillai, (1901) WLR» 24 Madi 246.

1. Mianamalai ९, Vythilinga, AR, 1937 Mad, 4 ae

Feats also para 35.32, infra, a ol हि
Ht सिक्का ९. Dronamraju, (1908) LB: At Mad. 163.

a

के


156

Article 68.

t

-
89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON’ THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 7S

(Chapter 35- Articles 61 to 67: Swits Relating to tmmovable Property)
(Chapter 36- Articles 68 to 71: Suits Relating to Movable Property)
. NX

Court, this view was dissented from and it was-held that a suit against. the
representatives of a tenant after the determination: of the tenancy was governed’
by article 139 of the Act of 1908 (present arti¢le 67). The Allahabad High Court*-*
has also concurred in the latter Madras view. In such a case, the landlord
" should’ be able to give his assent to their cofitinuing in the possession,—as he
Ss could have done if the deceased had been alive. As the latter view seents to
meet the requirements of the provisions of section 116 T.P. Act.

35.31. In one case, the erstwhile Hyderabad High Court held that where the
mortgagee leased the mortgaged property to the mortgagor as his tenant and
Subsequently sued the mortgagor for ejectment, the. claim for possession was not
by the mortgagee as such, and would be’ governed by article 139 of the Act of
1908, But the Lahore High Court has observed’ that the plaintiff was not suing
the defendant merely as a landlord-for their bjectment, but he had brought the
‘suit on the basis of his right as a mortgagee wath possession.

35.32. Ordinarily, we would have gone into details of such controversies,
fevealing a disparity of views. | However, ‘the general law of landlord and tenant
-has now very'limited apptication,’ and the article. is how needed’ only for tenancies °
not controlled by special legislations Its utility being so limited, we would leave
the matter at thal. ,

+ In the result no change is needed in the article.
; CHAPTER 36,
ARTICLES 68 ७ 71: SUITS RELATING/TO MOVABLE PROPERTY

36.1. Article 68 reads as under:— °

“68. For specific movable property Thtge When the person having the righ
lost, or acquired by theft, or dis: years. to Possession of the property firs’
honest misappropriation o7 con- dears in whose possession it is.”
version. . ‘

This corresponds to the first part of an article, 48 of the Act of 1908. The’
second part of that article forms part of Bresent article 91{a). Article 48 of that
Act is reproduced below :—

“48. For specific movable property Thrée -Whea the person having the right
lost or acquired by theft, or dis- years. to the possession of the property
honest misappropriation or con- first learns in whose possession,
version-or for, wrongfully taking itis” +
or detaihing the same. .

Article 48 and 49 of the Act of 1877 wére as under: —

5. “48. For specific movable property Thrae -When the person having the right
lgst; or acquired by theft, or dis- yeats. to the possession of the property,

honest ntisappropriation or con- + © \first learns in whose possession
version, or for compensation for it is.
wrongfully taking or detaining the Ld

same.

a.
'Subbraveti Ramiah v. Gundala Ramanna, (1910) EL.R. 33 Mad. 260,
°Shea Dulare Lal Sah ४. Anant Ram, ALR. 508 A ae 5

‘See also Sardaraman v. Sundar Lal, A.L.R. 1968 AN: 36:

‘*Ranba v. Bansilal, AIR. 1953 Hyd. 231. 1 * ’

sAmru ¥. Sania, ALR, 1936 Lah, 441.0 St i

‘See discussion relating to article $6, para 3847, iia. a


89TH REPORT OF Law CONMN, OF INDIA ON’ THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 ‘

(Chapter 36-' Articles 68 to 71: Suits Relating to Movable Property)
“49. For other specific movabie pro- Three When the Property is wrongfully

petty or for compensation for years. taken or injured, or when the
wrongfully taking or injuring or detaincr’s possession becomes un-
wrongfully detaining the same. ~ lawful.”

Articles 26, 33, 34, 35, 47, 48 of the Act of 1871 were as under:—,

"26, For taking or damaging movable One When the taking or damage octurs.
property. year. °

33. For wrongfully detaining title Two Whten the title to the property com-
deeds. ° years, ptised.in the deeds is adjudged to

the plaintiff, or the detainer’s

possession otherwise becomes un-

awful.
34, For ‘wrongfully detaining any Two ° When the detainer’s possession be-
other movable property, years. comes unlawful.

35, Fot specific recovery of movab- Two When the property is demanded and
le property in cases not provided years. refused.
for by this Schedule numbers 48
and 49, .

a lea : .
47, For lost movable Property not Three. When the property is demanded
used, .

ishonestly misappropriated or years. and refused. ,
converted. हि

48, For movable property acquired Three Ditto.”
-by theft, extortion, cheating, or years.
dishonest misappropriation or
conversion. है है

a ड़

36.2. The: Law Commission, in its Report! oni the Act of 1908, recommended Law Com-

that in respect of article 48, the period of 3 years might be retained, but the Report.
date of accrual of cause of action should be made the ‘starting point of limitation,
In the present Act, article 48 of the 1908 Act has been split up.
ry हि .
oad 36.3. Some case law has gathered around the expression “movable Property” No No chasue
“as occurring in the article. However, this is 4 का of art and we do not wish ‘

to change the same. We would not therefore ‘fecommend any change in the
article. J *

36.4. Article 69 reads as under :— हैं DG Article 69.
£69. For other specifig movable छा०- Three When the property is wrongfully
हे perty. years, taken.”

**: This corresponds to the first part of afticks 49 62 .the Act of 1908. [The
second part of that article forms part of prestnt deticle, 91(b)]. The whole article
was as under: — :

“49. For other specific movable pro- Three When the property is wrongfully
Perty ‘or for compensation for — years., not injured or when the de-
wrongfully taking or injuring or :; -talner’s' possession becomes un-
wrongfully detaining. the same. - Tawfut.*

+
Article 49 of the Act of 1877 was in identigal terms.

“Law Commision of India, 3rd Report Wimaiod ke doo ous रु प्रजा Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limagion gph 4908), pase 45 pare DO a



158 89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMNN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 36—-Articles 68 to 71: Suits Relating to Movable Property) हु
Articles 26, 33, 34, 35, 47 and 48 of the Act of 1871 read as under: ~~
“26. For taking or damaging movable One ‘When the taking or damage occurs,

property. year.

33. For wrongfully detaining title Two When the title, to the property
deeds. years. comp¢ised in the deeds is adjudged
. to the plaintiff, or the detainer’s
Possession otherwise becomes un-

lawful.
34. For wrongfully detaining any Two ‘When the possession becomes un-

other movable property. years. . lawful.

35. For specific recovery of movable Twd Wheh the property is demanded and
. Property in cases not provided for years. . tefuscd.
r by this schedule pumbers 48 ard
49.

47. For lost movable property not Three Wheh the pr-perty is demanded and -
dishonestly misapp.opriated or years, — refured. ~
converted.

48. For movable property acquired by Three Ditto.”
theft, extortion, cheatiig or dis- years,
honest misappropriation or con- हे
> version,

No change is needed in the article.

Article 70. 36.5. Article 70 reads as under :-— ‘a

. “10. To recover movable property de- Thret . The date of refusal after demand.”
‘ posited or pawned from a depo- years.
sitary or pawnec.

It corresponds to article 145 of the Act 91908, which was as under:-—

145, Against a depositary or pawnee Thirty ~The date of the deposit or pawn.”
to recover movable property de- years.
posited or pawned.

This is identical with article 145 of the 1877 Act. Article 147 of the Act of 1871
was as under : +. .

“147, Against a depository or pawnee Thirty. The date of the deposit or pawn
to recover movable property de- years. " unléss where an acknowledgement
posited or pawned. ’ ‘of the title of the depositor or

: हु pawner, or of his right of redemp-
tion, has before the expiration of
the ‘prescribed period been made
in writing, signed by the deposi-
tary, ot pawnee, or some person
claiming under him, and in such
0356 date of the acknowledge

# meqt.”
In the present Act, the period is three {yearby buf it is to be computed from the
date of refusal after demand. : :
पंप Com- 36.5. The Law Commission, in its Réport onthe Act of 1908,’ observed
faisaion’s - that in article 145 of that Act it would bé more appropriate to make the date of

Tefusal after demand as the starting point. of lithitation and that the period
should" be fixed as three years from that date.. - The recommendation has been

accepted in article 70 of the Presemg act, enacted in place of article 145 of the
Act of 1908, . og i

1. पक Compassion, 3rd. Report (Limiation |AcgylpOW) pene 48, pam 12 Commission, 3rd Report (Limitation jActy pos) page 45, para 121,


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 36-~ Articles 68 to 71: Suits Relating 720 Movable property)

* 36.6. There is some diversity of views as to the expression “movable pro- Money—

- perty” as occurring in the article. One’ view is that money is “movable property” whether mon?
for the purposes of this article. A contraty view has, however, been taken by conflict.
some High Courts’. In an Allahabad case, the niain relief claimed by the plaintiffs
was the recovery of certain sum which represented the price of goods deposited,
and interest on ‘the same. Tt was held that such a suit could not be described to
be a. suit for the recovery of “specific movable Property deposited or pawned”
within article 145 of the Act of 1908.

The expression “movable property” has been defined in various Central Acts.
Thus, section 22 of the Indian Penal Code restricts the expression “movable
Property” to ‘corporeal property, that is, property which might be perceived by
the senses. Section 3(36) of the General Clauses Act, 1897, defines “movable
Property” as meaning property of every description, except immovable property:
The Transfer of Property Act, 1882, does not-define the term at all. Section 209)
of the Registration Act, 1908 makes a sptecial provision for including certain
items as a species of movable property. Séction' 82 of the Companies Act, 1956

\ makes a share or other interest of any mespber in a company to be a “movable
Property”. None ‘of these Acts, however, specifically provides that money is
movable property.

. 36.7. Ordinarily such a conflict of views would need to be attended to, But No change
» we note that in the Andhra Pradeshscase, this was only one of the grounds of

decision, and the decision was based on a nuthber .of alternative grounds. We

do. not therefore consider it necessary to reconimend: any change in the wording

of the article. We may add that the recent.trend is mot to include money in this*

article,

36.8. Article 71 reads as under :— : Article 71.

“11. To recover movable property ¢ de- Three. When the sale becomes known to
sited or pawhed, and rds years. — the plaintiff.”
~ aght’ from the depositary or
pawnee for a valuable considera-
tion.

It corresponds to the latter half of article 48-A. of, the Act of 1908. This,
splitting up of the article was done on the recbmmendation of the Law Commission,
in its Report on the Act of 1908! | ’

Article 48- A of that act was as under:—

“48-A.To recover movable property Three: When the sale becomes known to +
conveyed or bequeathed in trust,* years. ‘the plaintiff.”
deposited or pawned, and after-
wards bought from the trustee,
depositary or pawnee for a valu-
able consideration. ‘

In article 133 of the Act of 1877, the starting point was the date of the
purchase and the period prescribed was 12 years, |

1(8) Soya Hor housing Corpn., New Delid v. Central Bank of India, Hyderabad,
1974 8.

{b) Ahilyamba y. Subramania, A.LR. 1954 Mad, 101:

(० Lala Govind ९. Chairman, 6 CL.

3(3) Khairul Basheer v. Thanna Lal, ALR. ied AIL, 553.

ry (b) Balakrishna v. Naravanswami, LL.B.
‘Law Commission of India, 3rd- Report (Limijati

$1908), page 45, para 121.

19


160"

Eatlisr report ~
of . the: Law
Commission.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 36—Articles 68 to 71: Suits Relating to Movable Property)
Chapter 37—Articles 72 10 91: Suits Relating to tort)
In the Act of 1871, article 133 reads ag under :-- ;

“133.To recover movable property Twelv2 The,date of the purchase.”
conveyed in trust. depdsited or years.
pawned and afterwards bought रा _
from the trustee, depositary or
pawree, in good faith-and for
value.

The article needs no change. हु

, CHAPTER 37

ARTICLES 72 TO 91: SUITS RELATING TO TORT
37.2, Article 72 reads as under :—» -

“72. For compensation for doing or One When the act or omission takes

for omitting to do an act alléged year... place.“
te be in pursuance of any enact- :

ment in force for the time being =,

‘in the territories to which this Act

extends.

Article 2 of the Act of 1908 was in the same language, but the period was
90 days. .

Article 2 of the Act of,1877 was as under:—

“2. For compensation for doing, or Ninety’ When the act or omission takes
for omitting to do, an act alleged days. ~ place.”
to be in pursuance of any enact-
ment in force for the time being in
British India. पु

-Article 2 of the Act of 1871 was in identical terms. .

37.2. The Law Commission,’ in its Report ‘ort the Act of 1908, recommended
»a period of 3 years for such suits. The reasons given were as under:—

“Article 2 is for a suit for compensation for dging or for omitting to do an
act alleged to be in pursuance of any enactmest in force for the time being
im India. - The period of limitation ig 90 days and time beings to rua when
the act or omission takes: place. Thfs article is intended to cover the case
provided: for in England; by section 8 of the Public Authorities (Protection)
Act; 1893. The provisions thereitr are sottiewhat elaborate and the period of
limitation is six months. The object of. the Legislature in England and in-
India seems to be to provide a shorter period of limitation in the case of
actions against public atithorities for any ket done in pursuance or execution
or intended execution of any Act.or of public duty, or authority, or in”
respect of any neglect or default or in the execution of such Act, duty or
authority. It protects the public fat 0 कप + providing a shorter period
of limitation. It has been held that, so Jong as the officer concerned acts
honestly and bonafide. he gets the advantage of the shorter period of limita-
tion. If the statute authorises the injury, mo action lies. If an officer pur-
porting to act, in pursuance of statute; doex, sontéthing which causes an
injury or by reason of his omission to-do an act an injury results, the person

$$$
1Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (CLiqnitatto ApO, wages 40-41.
Ee ica 4


891TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 37—Articles 72 to 91 : Suits Relating to Tort)

30 injured is entitled to claim compensation for the neglect or default. If
he abuses the power, the shorter period of limitation will not apply and the ac-
tion will be outside the article. The law in England was altered by
the Limitation Act of 1939 (section 21) which “provided a period of
one year instead of six months. Time was made to run from the
date of the accrual of the cause of action instead of from the act or
neglect or default complained of, as under section 8 of the Public Authorities
(Protection) Act. Owing to public agitation, the English Limitation Act was
amended in 1954 and the period of limitation was increased to three years
for actions relating to personal injuries. By the amending Act, section 21
of the Act was repealed and a proviso to sub-section (1) of section 2 was
added. cutting down'the period of six years, which applies for actions founded
on torts, to three years in such cases. The period, therefore, under the
English Law for actions on tort as respects personal injury, whether caused by
4 private individual or by a public authority is now three years instead of six

years as in the case of other actions based on tort. This article would ~

céme under the general provision for all suits on tort for which we propose
1 to prescribe a period of three years from the date of accrual of the cause
of action. There does not seem to be any justification for making a distine-

~ tion between public authorities and a private citizen except in matters like
notice under section 80, C.P.C. Further, if a shorter period for suits against
public authorities is prescribed, it will compel parties to rush to a suit with-
out exhausting the possibility of getting redress by negotiations which neces-
sarily take time. One of us, Dr. Sen Gupta, is inclined to take a different
view and has added a separate note to this Report on the subject. After
a full consideration of his views we think that the consideration mentioned
above in favour of a uniform period for suits against public authorities and
private citizens should prevail and that no change is needed in the proposals
suggested above.” .

37.3. The dissenting note of Dr. N. C. Sen Gupta,’ to the Report of the Law

Commission on the Act of 1908. was as under: —

2-14 M of

“The reasons for the proposed amendments in respect of article 2 are firstly,
that there should be no difference between the State and private parties
in respect of suit on tort and that a suit for compensation in respect of a
thing purported to be done by an officer under some enactment in force
is nothing but a tort for which the Government is liable. To the general
principle of parity between the Government and private persons in respect
of limitation, I have no serious objection. But there are important differences
between suits for ordinary torts by private persons and suits under this
Article. There may be suits of this character which are purely suits for
damages for a particular wrong against a particular person. But most of
these cases would be cases in which an officer of the Government has been
acting or purporting to act under authority of an enactment and in most
of these cases, questions about the validity of the enactment or of the inter-
pretation of it upon which the officer is acting would be in question. In
such cases it is by all means necessary that such suits should be disposed
of as quickly as possible.—-so that if the decision goes against the action of
3 particular officer. the Government may take early steps that further action
May not be taken on the erroneous view of law. Further, it must be re-
membered that the Government is made vicariously responsible for the acts
of: its officers and havine regard to the extremely large area of Government
activities and its responsibility for acts of a multitude of officers, it is neces-

Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act, (908) pages 69-70...
LI & CAND ]83

16)
masons
the cartier
Report.


162

‘Need for

amendment
-aad Tecom-
‘Tendation.

nary steps.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION act, 1963

(Chapter 37—Articles 72 to 91: Suits Relating to Tort)

sary that the courts’ decision about the correctness or otherwise of the ,
act of such officers should be made known to the government as soon as
possible.

“Public policy requires that acts of government officials purported to
have been done under the provisions of some enactments in force should be
tested, if necessary, as soon as possible in order that public administration
may not be affected by an erroneous course of action based on wrong
application of the law for a Jong time; and if there has been an error,
it should be rectified as soon as possible. *

“I am afraid that the principle that this makes a discrimination between
the government and a private person does not provide a correct approach to
the problem. The difference in the provisions lies not in the character of
the person against whom the suit is brought, but in the nature of the claim
which justifies a short period.”

374, The tecommendation made by the majority of the Law Commission
in its Report on the Act of 1908 was to increase the period to three years, but
the period has been increased (by the Act of 1963} only to one year.

374A. In this connection. an aspect to which attention must be drawn 1s
the fact that where a private person wants to sue the Government or a public
officer in respect of an act alleged to have been done under an enactment, consi-
derable time of that private person is taken up in certain preliminary steps. These
preliminaries include— .

(i) collecting the necessary information:

(ii) getting the necessary copies of documents etc. from the public office
concerned;

{iii} taking legal adyice: and
{iv) arranging for the payment of court fee and other expenses.

Furthermore. the scope and importance of suits governed by article 72 is
daily increasing, as almost every official action affecting the rights of a citizen
now takes place under the colour of some enactment or the other. To put the
Matter in different words, the sphere of common law wrongs is diminishing and
the sphere of wrongs taking place under the colour of statute is expanding in
volume. day by day. Tt is. therefore, necessary that the increased importance of
such acts should be realised and reflected in the law of limitation. For this
important reason, we recommend that the change mentioned above so as to
increase the period of limitation to 3 years should be carried out. In reaching
this conclusion. we have not overlooked the points that were raised in the dis-
senting note of Dr. Sen Gupta appended to the report of the Law Commission’
on the Act of 1908. However, on deep reflection. we have come to the conclu-
sion that the increasing importance of suits falling under article 72 and the
difficulties of the litigants (in the shape of time consumed by preliminaries to such
litigation) must be given great weight. It-is true that there is need to ensure that
the validity of an offici2! act is decided without unreasonable delay—which was
one of the points made by Dr. Sen Gupta. However. three years would not be

- too long a period or an unreasonable one! having regard to the considerations

that have been mentioned above.

"Law Commistion of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act. 1908), Sce paragraph 373,
supra.



897TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 163

(Chapter 37—Articles 72 to 91: Suits Relating to Tort)

37.5. We must also state that recently there has been a spate of cases alleging Difficulty
torture of undertrials' and these were detected after a long time. Thus, the 1-०
litigant against the Government suing for acts done under alleged statutory autho- Government.
rity has to face a serious practical difficulty. In fact, the Judicial Commissioner,

Nagpur,’ had as tong back as in 1877, anticipated that damage caused by a
public servant may not come io be noticed for quite some time: =

“The period of limitatiun provided is very short. In many cases notice of
one month has to be given before suits of the kind referred to in this article
can be instituted, so that the party injured has only two months after the
act or omission takes place. within which he must make up his mind to
bring his action. Section 424 (Bill No. IV) Code of Civil Procedure. pro-
poses six months as the period of limitation for a suit “against a public
officer for compensation for an act alleged ta be done in his official capa- ‘
city.” The same period might well be allowed, for actions of the kind
referred to in Article 2, specially when it is remembered that material
damage would in many cases not have resulted in the short period allowed
by the present law”.

37.6. We are mentioning this to show that a tort committed by public servant Recommenda-
may remain undetected for a considerable time and hence we re-iterate the earlier 8%
recommendation of the Law Commission about enlargement of the period of
limitation to three years.

37.7. This takes us to article 73, reading as under :-- . Article 73,
“73..For compensation for falseimpri- One | When the imprisonment ends.”
sonment. year.|

It is identical with article 19, of the Acts of 1908 and 1877.
In the Limitation Act of 1871, article 21 was as under:—

“21. For false imprisonment. One ‘When the imprisonment ends.”
year.

The words ‘For compensation’ were added in the year 1877 in the first column.
«This, probably, was done as a result of the suggestion received through the Com-
missioner, Central Provinces. on the draft article of 1877 Act:

™

“Better say” for damages or compensation “for false imprisonment.

The Law Commission’ made the following observations on the corresponding
article of the Act of 1908, in its Report on that Act:—

“Article 19 provides for suits for compensation for false imprisonment, a
period of one year from the time the imprisonment ends. This is a suit
based on tort. 11 is a continuing wrong within the meaning of section 23 of
the Limitation Act and terminus ad quem is reached when the imprisonment
ends.”

As the article has not given rise to any serious controversy, no change is
recommended,

‘Khatri v. State of Bihar, (1981) 1 S.C. 623, 627.

t4nil v, State of Bihar, (1981) 1 S.C-C. 622.

Judicial Commissioner, Central Provinces, letter No. 461 dated [2th March, 1877,
National Archives File, Paper No. 7, 5. c. .

4Letter No. 778 dated 12th April, 1877, Judicial Commissioner, Central Provinces,
Nationat Archives File, 1877. Paper 11, page 6.

‘Law Commision of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1908), page 41, para 110.


164 है 89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 37—Articles 72 to 91: Suits Relating to Tort)

Article 74, 37.8. Article 74 reads as under :—
“74, For compensation for a malicious’ One When the plaintiff is, acquitted or
prosecution. year. the prosecution is otherwise ter-
. <Mminated.”

it is identical with article 23 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877.
Article 23 of the Act of 1871 was as under:

“23, For a malicious prosecution, One When the plaintiff is acquitted.”
year,
History. + 37.9, When the draft Bill of 1877 was circulated for comments, the carlier

phraseology (Act of 1871) was changed by adding the words “or the prosecution
is otherwise terminated”.! The following comment was received on the propused

change :--

“When can a prosecution be said to have terminated? Has it terminated
if the accused be released on the ground that a conviction was held before
a Court which had no jurisdiction, or upon some other technical ground which
Jeaves the accused still liable to be prosecuted? See Chambers v. Robinson,
2 Str. 691; Wicks v. Pentham 4 T.R. 247; and Tipper vy. Nearn, 4 B. &
Ald, 634, An acquittal upon a technicality is a different thing from a convic-
tion set aside for want of jurisdiction.”*

The other comment seems to be more pertinent and applauded the proposed
change as follows: —

“The ‘note in ‘Thomson’ as to this is quite correct— an acquittal is not
necessary for the purpose of bringing an action. The termination of the
prosecution is the time from which limitation should rua.’**

> The then Secretary, Legislative Department agreed‘ with the latter view and
the text of the article was ultimately passed as it was proposed.

Law Com: 37.10. The Law Commission in its Report on the Act of 1908 recommended*®

dnission’s a uniform period of 3 years for suits founded on tort. [It had no specific comments
Tecommenda- on the corresponding article of that Act as such}.
tion .

हि However, the recommendation to increase the period to three years was not

accepted, and the period of limitation has remained the same as before (one year).

Article 74— 37.11. A controversy still exists in regard to the starting point of limitation

contr eT period in the third column. There are two starting: points given in the third

हु Faint of column. They are—(1) when the plaintiff is acquitted, or (2) when the prosecution

is “otherwise terminated,”—a test added’ in 1877. According to the Bombay
High Court’, these two different points are applicable to two dissimilar circum
stances. The order of acquittal or of discharge passed by the trial court remains
{according to this view) operative for the purposes of limitation and the filing of

‘Statement of Objects and Reasons ; National Archives File 1877,
~ a No, 8) og 19th April, 1877 from Charles D. Field, National Archives File 1877,
per No.
3Demi icial letter from the Hon’ble Sit Richard Garth to the Hon’ble Arthur Hob-
house dated 24th July, 1876, National Archives File 1877, Paper 2, page
ee ‘Note in National Archives File 1877, Paper 1.
‘Law Commission of India, 3rd¢ Report (Limitation Act, 1908), page 44, para 116,
Paragraph 37.9 supra.
\a)Bhaskar ५. Kishanlal, A.1.R. 1968 Bom. 21
(b) Purshottam Vithaldas v. Ravji Hari, ALR. 1922 Bom, 209,


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 165
(Chapter 37—Articles 7210 91: Suits Relating to Tort)

an appeal or revision in superior courts does not stay its operation so far as
limitation is concerned. In one of its more receat cases on the subject, that High
* Court observed! as under

“The original acquittal is still operative and on the language of the provi-
sion, it is the date of acquittal fram which time begins to run. The other alter-
native is that ‘the prosecution is otherwise terminated’. Now, whenever a prose-
cution is started, it may not necessarily end in an acquittal. - A prosecution may
end, either in acquittal or conviction. If it is the first, then, it is governed by
the first part of this provision, and if it is the second, there can be 00 case for a
suit. It may also result in an order of discharge, or im a dismissal of the com-
plaint if the complainant is abscnt on the date fixed for the hearing of the com-
plaint. ‘The latter part of the provision “the prosecution is otherwise terminated’
is intended to meet such cases, and here again. it is the end of that proceeding
which is operative for all intents and purposes and governs the point of time
when the period begins to run.”

"The High Court further puinted out that whenever the Legislature intended

that the time should commence to run from the final order, it had expressly

5 said so. The following observations of the Allahabad High Court in its earlier
case’ on the subject reflect the same approach :—

“A perusal of article 23 of the Limitation Act (of 1908) goes to show ,
that that article deals with two alternative cases: one envisages acquittal
and the other termination of the prosecution. So far as the second alternative
or the expression ‘termination of the presécution’ goes, that is not applicable
to the present case. That governs such cases as those of discharge. It is the
first alternative which will govern the case of acquittal; and ‘acquittal’ would
mean acquittal from the trial court or if there is conviction from a trial court,
then the order of acquittal was passed in appeal or revision. In a case where
acquittal has been ordered by the trial court and the complainant has filed
revision, the filing of revision cannot affect the order of acquittal already
passed. it will remain an order of acquittal till the acquittal is converted
into an order of sentence. It would thus appear that under article 23 of the
Limitation Act, the limitation would run from the date when the plaintiffs
were acquitted by the trial court or in appeal if there was conviction from the
trial court. Filing of a revision against an order of acquittal cannot suspend
the period of limitation, which started running from the date of the order of

acquittal.”
On this view, the filing of a revision against acquittal does not suspend
the running of limitation which has once started.

te
37.12. The opposite view has, however, been taken in a later decision of the school of

Allahabad High Court’ A full Bench of the Madras High Court took this view thought.
quite a long time back.’ A Same view has been taken in comparatively more re-
cent judgments of the Mysore’ and Rajasthan’ High Courts.

The pivotal objection of the Bombay High Court to the acceptance of the
Madras view’ is contained: in these observations in one of iis judgments."

1phaskar v. Kisanial, ALR. 1968 Bom. 21. 22,

*Madho Lal v. Hari Shankar, ALR. 1963 Ail. 547, 548, para 5 (M. Lal 3),
AMadhe Lui पे, Shyam Sundar Vaish, (1969) All LJ. 587, (See paragraph 37.13, infra).
‘*Kulasekara Chetty v. Tholasingam Chetty, A.LR. 1938 Mad. 349 (F-B.).

sBasappa Sangappa v. Narayanappa Kriyappa, 1-L.R. (1973) Mys. 201, 206 (See infra).
*Ramvilas v. Gopal Lat, (1979) Ra). 1..W. 92 {See paragraph 37.14 infra).

?Kulasekara Chetty v. Tholasingam Cheity, A.LR. 1938 Mad. 34: .
“Bhaskar v. Kisantal, A.I.R. 1968 Bom. 21, 24. . .


ab
89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION AcT, 1963

(Chapter 37--Articles 721091: Suits Relating to Tort)

“Tn our view, therefore, there can be no justification to add the word
‘final’ before the word ‘acquittal’ according to the Madras .High Court,
and the word ‘finally’ before the words ‘otherwise terminated’.”

‘

This objection has becn met by the Mysore High Court, which has observ-
ed:!

“The criticism, therefore, that the Madras view illogically imports the
idea of finality or actually adds the word ‘finally’ or ‘final’ to the language
of the third column is, with respect, not justified. Finality is actually inher-
ent in the choice vf the word ‘terinination’. Taking, therefore, the two
things together, viz., that onc of the essential clements in the cause of action
for malicious prosecution is termination of proceedings in favour of the
plaintiff and that there can be no termination if proceedings are continued
until one reaches the stage where further continuance is not possible, then
it follows that 1 the acquittal cntered by the trial court is taken up’ on
appeal, the plaintiff is not in a position to say that the proceedings have
terminated in his favour, and that, therefore, the cause of action itself is
not complete so as to stait the running of time in favgur of the defendant.”

37.13. The Allahabad High Court has also, in a later case held? as under :--

“The phrase uscd in article 23 of the Limitation Act fixing the point
of time from which the period of limitation begins to run as ‘when the
Plaintiff is acquitted or the prosecution is othcrwise termipated’, must be
construed as equivalent to ‘when the Prosecution of the plaintiff is termi-
nated by acquittal or otherwise’; and determination of the prosecution by
acquittal shtbuld be deemed to occur only when all appeals and revisions
that may have been filed against the basic order of acquittal have been
finally disposed of. This interpretation obv'ates the necessity for making an
illogical distinction between cases of acquittal and cases where the prosecu-
tion is terminated by discharge, and it bas the further merit of avoiding the
possibility of hardship for the plaintiff by permitting him to wait until his
acquittal has been placed beyond doubt before he files his suit for compen+
sation for malicious prosecution.” |
37.14, In the Rajasthan judgment,’ the following passage represents a simi-

far view:—

“The phrase used in article 23 fixing the time from which the period
of limitation begins to run as ‘when the plaintiff is acquitted or the prose-
cution is otherwise terminated’, must be inter das meaning ‘when the
prosecution of the plaintiff is terminated by acquittal or otherwise’ and the
termination of the prosecution by acquittal should be deemed to occur only
when the appeals and revisions that may have been filed against the order
of acquittal have been finally disposed of. 1 am further of the opinion
that the words used in article 23 of the Limitation Act ‘when the plaintiff
is acquitted’ must not be read independently of the words or the prosecution
is otherwise terminated’. The illogical distinction pointed out by the Bom-
bay High Court between the cases of acquittal and those where the prosecu-
tion is terminated by discharge would only lead to hardship and one will
have to incur expenditure of filing the suit even before the order of acquittal

*Basoppa Sangappa v. Narayanappa Kariyappa, 1.L-R. (1973) Mys. 201, 206 :kin shasis

3Madho Lat. v. Shyam Sunder Vaish, (1969) All, LJ. 587. (D.B.) (The earlier case of
1963 does not appear to have been cited]. ह
5Ram Vilas ४. Gopal Lal, (1973) Raj. L.W. 92, 94 (Modi J.).



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 37—Articles 72 to 91: Suits Relating to Tort)

passed in his favour is still sub-judice under appeal or revision filed by the
compjainant or the State.”

37.15. In this context—though this is a matter of substantive law-—it miay American
be worth mentioning that the Restatement of the Law (Second) on Torts' has Restatement,
this to say regarding the termination of proceedings for the purpose of the tort,
of malicious prosecution: — .

“658, General Rule : To subject a person to liability for malicious pro-
secution, the criminal proceedings must have terminated in favour of the
accused.”

“659. Manner of Termination: Criminal proceedings are terminated
in favour of the accused by

(a) a discharge by a magistrate at a preliminary hearing, or
(b) the refusal of a grand jury to indict, or

(c) the formal abandonment of the proceedings by’the public prose-
cutor, or

(d) the quashing of an indictment or information, or
(९) an acquittal, or

(f) a final order in favour of the accused by a trial or appellate court.”

37.16. Street has dealt’ with this ingrediant of malicious prosecution thus: English
“The proceedings must have terminated in favour of the. plaintiff. hood

Even though the plaintiff has been convicted of a lesser offence’, or has had of ecm
his conviction quashed on appeal, or has been acqiitted on a technicality, proceedings,
e.g. a°defect in the indictment, this requirement is satisfied. If the conviction
of the plaintiff stands, then even though there is no right of appeal from
ft and although he can satisfy the court in the instant proceedings that the
conviction was grossly unjust, there is no cause of action in this tort. The

1 plaintiff seems to satisfy the present requirement if he proves that the defen-
dant has dis-continued the proceedings; the plaintiff cannot sue, it seems,
while the proceedings are still pending.”

37.46A. It may also be added that Charles D. Field hit the nail on the head
im 1877 when he asked the question: “when can a prosecution be said to have
terminated”? Even now, the difference of opinion continues. A review of the -
state of the law made above shows that the majority of the courts would be
reluctant to entertain an action for damages for malicious prosecution unless they
are satisfied that the judgment may not be rendered infructuous by a subsequent
decision in the criminal proceedings. ¢

37.17. The net result of the above discussion is that there is an obvious con- Recommendé~
flict of views between the Bombay High Court on the one hand and the other tion हु
High Courts on the other hand. There seems to be a need for clarifying the

‘American Law Institute Restatement (Second) on Torts (1977) Vol. 3, Articles 658,
159,

1 शब्राए Street. Law of Torts (1976), page 397.
SThis requirement is not imposed whete, for example, an arrest or search warant is

_SCases cited in suport of the discussion have been omitted.


168

Artictes 75-76.

English (५.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 37-.-Articles 72 to 91: Suits Relating to Tort)

position. In conformity with the majority view (that is to say, the later ruling |

of the Allahabad High Court and the rulings of the High Courts of Madras,
Mysore and Rajasthan), we recommend that in article 74, before the word
“terminated”, the word “finally” should be added. Apart from the fact that
such an amendment would be in harmony with the majority view, it will be of
considerable practical utility and avoid the difficulty that might be caused. if
limitation is to start running even where the proceedings constituting the cause
of action have every possibility of being re-opened in a higher court.

37.18. The next two articles are concerncd with defamation, and may
10ए be taken up.

(a) Article 75 reads as under:—

“75, For compensation for tibel. One* ’ When the litel is published.”
year.

It is identical with article 24 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877.
_ Article 24 of the Act of 1871 reads as under ; --

“24. For libel. हि One When the libel is published.”
year.

(b) Article 76 reads as under:— हि
“For compensation for slander. One When the words are spoken, or,
year. if the words are not actionable

in themselves, when the special
हे damage complained of results.”

It is identical with Article 25 of the Act of 1908.
“Ta the Act of 1877, Article 25 was as follows: —

“For compensation for slander. One When the words are spoken, om
हर year. if the words are not actionable

in themselves, when the special °

damage complained of results.’”
Article 25 of the Act of 1871 was as under:—

“For compensation for slander. One When the words are spoken.”
year.

Though libel and slander fall under the general heading of the tort of defa-
mation, the Limitation Acts, right from 1871, have been treating the causes of

action for these two types of torts as. distinet—though the period of limitation is

one year in both the cases.
1

VWs. Halsbury states the position in England thus! :

“To an action of libel time runs from the publication, but where, for exam-
ple, a blook or néwspaper is published and offered: for sale, a fresh cause of
action arises on cach sale, notwithstanding that more than six years have
clapsed since the first publication. In an action for slander where the words
are actionable without proof of special damage, time runs from the utter.
ing of the slander. Where the words are not actionable without special
damage, time does not ran until the dainage occurs.”

‘Halsbury, 4th Ed, vol..28, para 689,


$978 REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON ‘THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 37—-Articles 72 to 91+ Suits Relating to tort)

37.20, Before 1871, the period of limitatiom in India probably followed Legislative
the English practice. The period of one year proposed for suits for libel was
explained in the statement of Objects and Reasons anttexed to the Bill that lead
to the Act of 1871, as follows: —

“On the other hand, we have diminished to one year the period fixed for
suits for false imprisonment, for any other injury to the person, for a mali-
cious prosecution, for libel, for slander, for taking or damaging movables,
for loss of service occasioned by seduction, for inducing breach of contract,
for illegal distress, and for wrongful seizure of movables under legal Pro-
cess!”

37.21. When the draft Limitation Bill 1877 was circulated for comments,
plea was made for counting the period from the.time when the libel came to
the knowledge of the person libelled. One comment, making-such a suggestion,

<Iay be quoted:—-

‘ “I would suggest an alteration in the period applicable to libel;. for
I think the term now fixed, namely, one year from publication, may, as I
know it has done, work a great hardship on the person libelled. The term
should in my opinion, run from the date when the libel became known to
him. I do not refer to cases of libel published in newspapers, for there a
man reads at once what has been written of him, and can generally bring
his action without further delay: but I alude to private communications, or
those written under a sense of duty to a public official, where the person
libelled, although he may have sustained loss from what he knows has been
said of him, still is unable, through obstacles’ pat in the way either by the
writer or receiver of the communication, to discover what has been said
against him until the year from the date when it was sent has expired, and
so, though the statements or charges made. against him may have been
totally unfounded and grossly calumnious, and. he‘has suffered the greatest
Joss, still because of the present state of ‘the law. his suit would be barred
unless it was brought within a year of the titte when it was sent to the post.
Section 19 of the Act would not help him, for he may have been kept from
the knowledge of his right to sue without any fraud on his libeller's part, but
by simple obstructions which he has put in his way. Or if it be said he knew
of his right to sue before the time of limitation expired, inasmuch as he had
been told he had been libelled, still he might not have been able to bring a
suit, because. he could not, until it was too late, see or get a copy of the libel-
fogs document. A case of this kind occurred same few years ago in Calcutta
where great injury resulted to a merchant whose coaduct in a certain mer-
cantile transaction had been improperly and falsely gepresented by hig Coun-

‘+ sel to the Minister of Foreign Affairs of their country. The High Court
was of opinion that the communications were: highly libellous, and that the
plaintiff would have been entitled to heavy damages, had it not found’ that
the suit had been brought beyond. the period aflowgd from the date of pub-
lication, although it was brought at the earliést opportunity. The case is

1. Charriol v. Lombard, and is reported ig 1 Endiay Jurist N-S., page 209 at
seq.”
Another suggestion made by Mr. Field was to combine the two articles deal-
ing with ‘libel’ and ‘slander’ into one composite’ article for defamation? :

e Statement of Objects and Reasons; National Archivés Fie 1871, page 4.
2C. J. Wilkinson, Recorder of Rangoon to the Sectetary.to Chief Commissioner, British
Burma, Letter No, $7-33, dated 27th April 1877.
National Archives File 1877, Paper No. 19,
Letter No. 19th April 1877, Charles D. Field, National Archives File 1908 Paper 6,
page ‘

Sete ast a कआाए०83.:


Comment
(1907)

‘Law Com-
mission’s
Report.

Position in
India as to

defamation,
and need for
amendment pf
the Limitation
Act.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 37---Articles 72 to 91: Suits relating to tort.)

“For ‘libel’ and ‘slander’ might be. substituled “defamation” which in-
cludes both, and which is the peculiar term of Indian Law—see section 499 -.
of the Penal Code”.

37.22. In 1907, Sir Lawrence Jenkins, Chief Justice of the Bombay High
Court also expressed himself thus :?

‘Article 25 and 24 should be only one article providing for defamation”

37.23, The Law Commission, in its Report on the Act of 1908, did not exa-
ming the above question, because it preferred one article for all tortious acts
and observed thus®:-—

“Article 24 relates to an action for libel and the period of limitation is one
year from the time when the libel is published. Article 25 relates to slander
and the period provided for is one year from the date when the words were
spoken or, if the words are not per se actionable. when the special da:
complained of results. It is settled law that the cause of action for libel
accrues from the date of the publication of the defamatory statement. When
slander is actionable per se, the cause of action is its publication and time
runs from that date. If the action is merintainable only on proof of the
special damage, the happening of the damage is the cause of action. (See
Burry v. Perry’ and also Darley Main Colliary. Co. ¥. Thomas Wilfria’y.
In respect, therefore. both of libel and slander, the time from which limita-
tion runs coincides with the accrual of the cause of action. The suits under
all these articles are suits founded on tort and a uniform period of three
years may be fixed for the institution of these suits, time running from the
date of the accrual of the cause of action.”

37.24, As regards the article relating to slander in the Act of 1877, in the
third column of the schedule, the words “or, if the words are not actionable in
themselves, when the special damage complained of results” were added, slong-
with the pre-existing words “when the words are spoken”. Since then, there has
been no change. The addition of these words was presumably intended to. cover
the cases which can arise under the rule of English Law that slanderious words
ate not actionable per se and a suit is maintainable only after when special da-
mage is caused.

37.25. We have given anxious thought to the question whether articles 75
and 76 (tibel and slander} should be retained as they are. This necessitates an
examination of the substantive law of defamation as a tort. The common law
position is that libel is actionable per se, while slander is actionable without proof
of special damage (unless the case falls within certain exceptional categories).
This distinction, however, hardly possesses any realistic importance in India, since
most High Courts do not recognise the distinction between libel and slander. It
can be asserted that net result of Indian judicial decisions is that both libel and
slander are actionable as torts, without the need to prove special damage. We are
aware that there is one solitary ruling’ which hokds that the distinction is still
valid in the town of Calcutta, but the majority of the High Courts have, as stated
above, taken the view that the technical distinction made by English common law

IChief Justice L. Jenkins, Bombay High Court Letter No. 2469 dated 18-12-1907,
National Archives File 1908, paper 6, bi

%Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act), page 44.. para 116

(1725) Raym. 1588.

$1886) 11 A.C, 127.

SBhooni Money v. Naobar, (1901) LL.R, 28 Cal. 432, 452, 462, 463 (Case relating to
Town of Calcutta).


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 37—-Articles—-72 to 91 —Suits relating to tort.)

has no validity in India, and is not in harmony with justice, equity and good
conscience and is out of tune with the notions of Indian society.'-*

It should also be pointed out that even in the West, the distinction between
libel and slander has not been regarded as satisfactory, and has been very strong-
ly criticised both by academic writers and by law reform agencies who have had
occasion to deal with the subject. Though the distinction still exists in the United
Kingdom. the English Committee of Defamation, popularly known as the Faulks
Committee in its Report recommended its abolition and removal from the law
of England and Wales, so that for the purposes of civil proceedings in England
and Wales, slander should be assimilated to libel.

In fact, im at least one Commonwealth country, namely, New Zealand, tho
distinction has been abolished by statute.*

It should also be recorded here that the reform effected in New Zealand
has not given rise to any serious problems. Sir Denis Blundell (who later became
the Governor-General of New Zealand), in his evidence given to the Faulks Com-
mittee, stated that in New Zealind the abolition of the distinction between libel
and slander had not resulted in any spate of petty actions for slander.

The retention of the two articles in the present form in the Limitation Act
thus tends to perpetuate a distinction which is unfair in principle, anachronistic.
in nature and, in any case. in the Indian context, almost out of tune with reality.
It is also not in conformity with the position in substantive law, as generally
understood in India. The Law of limitation should, as far as possible, maintam
harmony with the substantive law and should not give a fillip to a distinction that
is already discarded.

m!

"37.26. In the light of the above considerations, we. arc of the opinon, and Recommenda-

we recommend, that in place of articles 75 and 76, one single article should be ०
substituted, to deal with compensation for defamation, the period being one year
and ‘the starting point being the date of the publication or, where the defama-
tory statement is not published in a permanent form, the date when the defamatory
matter comes to the knowledge of the plaintiff. When the words are not
published in a permanent form, it is fair that the Starting point should be the
plaintiff's knowledge, so that the short period of limitation available does not
commence to run until he has knowledge.

We, therefore, recommend that articles 75-76 should be replaced by one
single article to read as under :--

“75, For§compensation for defamation. One When the defamatory Statement is
year. published, or where the defamatory
Statement is not published in 2
हि permanent form, when it comes to
[To be substituted for present ar- the knowledge of the plaintiff”
ticles 75-76.] हर a. .

37.27. This disposes of articles 75-76. Article 77 Prescribes a time limit of Article 77
one year for a suit “for compensation for loss of service occasioned by the seduc- १54७०. बा
tion of the plaintiff's servant or daughter”. The time limit is to be counted from हु
the date when the loss occurs. The article is identical with article 26 of the Acts
of 1908 and 1877 and article 27 of the Act of 1871.

, 4० ली अली हि िए Suh ५ Kannanmma (930 TLR. §S Mad क्र ATR. Ws 2, Narvana Saha v. Kannanma (1930) LLR. 55 Mad 727; ALR. 1931 Mad 445,
. 451, 452. व
SHirabai v, Dinshaw (1926) 11.1९, 51 Bom. 167. ह
28ukhan ५४. Bipad (1907) LL.R. 34 Cal 48.
‘Section 4 of the (New Zealand) Defamation Act, 1954.


172

Comments
1908.

Present
English
Law as to
seduction.

Need for
change in
the faw,

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 37—-Articles 72 to 91—Suits relating to tort.)

The first case on this article is from Allahabad, in which a Hindu father claim-
ed damages for the seduction of bis married daughter and consequential loss of ser-
vices as a result of abduction by the defendant. He also claimed the costs incurred
by him in prosecuting the defendant for the offence of abduction, The trial court
gave him a decree for Rs. 200 for the Joss of his daughter's services and Rs. 300 for
costs incurred by him in prosecuting the defendant. In appeal, the High Court dis-
allowed the sum of Rs. 200 decreed as damages for the loss of service, while main-
taining the decice for the costs incurred in prosecution. Stuart, C.J. discussed the
English theory on which the remedy for seduction is based and expressed himself
a8 against encouraging its introduction into the Indian legal system. He pointed out
that in Scotland and other European countries, the seduced woman needed no
help from her father or other relation “but may sue directly for the wrong done
to her.” His colleague on the bench, Oldfield, J. was of the view that the English
cause.of action for seduction was founded not upon the wrongful act of the defen-
dant but upon the loss of service of the daughter in which service the parent is,
by fiction, supposed to have a legal right or interest. He observed as under: —

“It would be very undesirable to introduce a fiction of this kind into
the law of this country. The plaintiff cannot be allowed to maintain a suit
on a contract for service which is not seriously asserted, nor indeed found
to exist in fact, and which is not consonant with Hindu custom. Hindu
women are no doubt dependent to a great extent on their male relatives, and
they have certain household duties which they are expected to perform, but

their position is not one of servitude, from which any contract of service
can be implied.”

37.28. In a Nagpur case, Mr. Justice Niyogi, while awarding damages for
seduction, held that it was more appropriate to look at such a wrong as consti-
tuting an invasion of the right of the family to the security of domestic relations,
rather as an interruption of the service rendered by the daughter to her father.
However, this reasoning was not approved by the Division Bench that beard the
matter on appeal. It held that the law of torts was administered in the Central
Provinces and Berar (as then constituted) under section 6 of the Central Provinces
Laws Act as a rule of justice, equity and good conscience. The only law of se-
duction was that found in the English law of torts applicable to India and it was
not open to Indian courts “to invent new heads of law not covered by the Eng--
lish law, though the legislature can.”

37.29. It may be of interest to note that when the draft Bill which led to
the Act of 1908 was circulated for comments, the District Judge, Guntur suggest-
ed that the words “or daughter” should be omitted from the article? On the
other hand, Mr. Justice Knight of the Bombay High Court suggested a widening
of the article by adding the words “or ward”;

37.30. It may also be mentioned that in England, by statute, actions for sed-
uction have been abolished.’

37.31. Taking note of the case law as well as current thinking on the subject,
we have come to the conclusion that there are two special aspects that necessitate
a change in article 77. In the first place, the element of “loss of service” is em-
Phasised in the article, but, in India, as a matter of substantive law there is some

2Ram Lal v. Tula Ram (1882) L.L.R. 4 All 97.

*Babu v. Subanshi Dhobi, ALR. 1942 Nag. 97.

‘Dewan Bahadur S. Gopalachariar. Avargal Distt. Judge, Guntur. National Archives
File 1908, letter No. 3073. dated %h December, Paper No. 8, page 10.

‘Letter No. 2469. dated 18-12-1907. National Archives File 1908, Paper No. 6.

‘Section 5, Law Reform (Misccliancaus provisions) Act, 1970 (Eng.).


897TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 37— Articles 72 70 91—Suits relating to tort)

uncertainty in this regard. This is apparent from the Allahabad decision men-
tioned above.' How far the English common law rule which stresses the element
of Joss of service applies in India thus itself becomes doubtful. Secondly, in
article 77, the laying of stress on joss of service amounts to lending prominence
to an aspect that is totally out of tune with the views of society. No right think-
ing member of society seeking compensation for seduction would attribute any
relevance to the economic factor represented by “loss of service” of the female.

37.32, In this situation. the present wording of article 77 needs change. as
it accentuates an unjust rule of the common law which. even if it is applicable
at all, should not be given promiuence in the Jaw of limitation. We would, there-
fore, re-word the article as one applicable to a suit for compensation for seduc-
tion, thereby removing the objectionable part. By way of anticipating a possible
objection to such an amendment. we may state that if, as a matter of substantive
law, any High Court still takes the view that an action for seduction on the com-
mon law pattern is still permissible in India, there will not be any casus omissus
in the Limitation Act. If article 77 as sought to be amended is regarded as in-
applicable to such an action, the residuary article would still apply.

37,33. In the light of the 2bove discussion, we recommend thai article 77
should be revised as under : --

“77. For compensation for seduction. One When the seduction occurs.”
year.

37.34. This takes us to aritcle 78. Article 78 prescribes a period of limita-
tion of one year “for compensation for inducing a person to break a contract
with the piaintiff’. The period is computed from the date of the breach. The

article is identical with article 27 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877, and with article
28 of the Act of 1871.

In this article also, having regard to- the position in substantive law, there
appears to be need for a small change. This need arises from the fact that the
concept of inducement of breach of contract as an actionable wrong is, as a

matter of substantive law, subject 10 certain limitations. We deal with this aspect
in the succeeding paragraphs.

37.35. Inducement of breach of contract is actionable as a tort if certain
conditions are satisfied. But this is subject to two important limitations. In the
first place, by legislation, certain inroads have been made into the common law
doctrine, legalising conduct that would otherwise be tortous under this head.
Secondly, in some cases, even al common law, special circumstances supply a
justification for conduct that would be otherwise actionable under this head.
These circumstances constitute an exception to the general rule that the direct
inducement of breach of contract is a tort, and that where “the intervener, assum-
ing he knows of the contract and acts with the aim and object of procuring its
breach (he) will be liable if he directly intervenes by Persuading A to break it?

To this general rule, however, there arise exceptions in specific circums-
tances. It is enough to cite the classic test of what constitute the essential ingre-
dients of this tort as formulated by Romer, LJ. namely, “......regard might be
had to the nature of the contract broken: the position of the parties to the con-
tract; the grounds for the breach: the means employed to procure the breach:

Para 37.27 (supra), हु

{Thomson v. Deakin (1952) (का. 646, 670 (Lord Evershed).

"Smithies v, National Association of Operative Plasterers, (1901) 1 K.B. 310, 337.
‘South Wales Miners Federation ४. Glamorgan Coat Lid. (1903) 2 K.B. 545.

Need for
change.

Recommenda-
ton.

Asticle 78.

The tort
and its
limitations.

173


174

Cases where
inducing
breach of
contract is
Rot wrongful.

Recommenda-
tron.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 37—Articles 72 to 91-—~Suits relating to tort.)

the relation of the person procuring the breach to the person who breaks the con-
tract; and............ to the object of the person in procuring the breach.”

37.36. 1६ is not every inducement of breach of contract that is actionable.
Sometimes, the justification constituting a legal defence is said to be analogous
10 privilege in defamation.“ At other times, it is described ds “acting in exercise
of equal or superior right.’ It is the latter test that has been more current as the
accepted one in recent years.'-- The more serious difficulties have arisen in regard
to bonafide advice given to a person to withdraw from a contract, particularly
in the performance of a duty to give the advice that is given to a person to with-
draw from a contract. This situation arises particularly in the case of advice to
terminate a contraci of marriage which the person giving the advice regards as
harmful 10 the interests of the parties concerned.’ Similarly, in modern times,
many cases concern the use of unlawful means such as violence, restrictions on
liberty, intimidation, defamation and so on.’ The substantive law on the subject
has thus developed extensively, and it is desirable that article 78 should be re-
vised in the light thereof.

37.37. Having regard to the above considerations, it appears to us that the
language of the article is capable of improvement, so as to make it conform to
the substantive law without, at the same time, making it too cumbersome. Woe,
therefore, recommend that article 78, first column, should be revised to read as

under: — .
“For compensation for wrong- (Rest of the columns as at present).
fully inducing a person to break
a contract with the plaintiff.”
37.38. (a) Article 79 reads as under :-—

“For compensation for an illegal, One The date of the distress.”
irregular excessive distress. year.

It is identical with article 28 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877.
Article 29 of the Act of 1871 was as under:

“For an illegal. irregular or cxces- One The date of the distress.”
sive distress. . . year.

(b) Article 80 reads as aader : --

“For compensation for wrongful One The date of the seizure.”
seizure of movable property under —_year.
legal process.

It is identica! with article 29 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877.

Article 30 of the Act of 1871 was as under:

“For wrongful seizure of movable One The date of the seizure.”
Property under lega! process. year.

ICE. section 768, Restatement of Tort (Second) (1970).

%See note in (1902-1903) 16 Harvard law Rev. 299.

SRead V. Friendly society etc. (1902) 2 K.B. 96.

‘Sayre, “Inducing breach of contract” (1923) 36 Harvard Law Rev. 663, 687, 696.

SCarpenter, “Interference with contract relations” (1928) 41 Harvard Law Rev. 728.

24, D. Heydon. “Tustification in international economic torts laws” (1970) 20 University
Toronto Law Journal 139. 161, 163, 168 and 182.

33, D, Heydon, “Sustification in intentional economic torts law? (1970) 20 University
of Toronto Law Journal 139, 161, 163, 168 and 182.


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF (NDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 37---Articles 72 70 91-—Suits relating to tort.)

Antcles 79 and 80 are taken together, since they represent one group of
articles dealing with the subject to distraint of property under legal process or
seizure by extra-legal methods. The Law Commission’ in its Report on the Act
of 1908 had suggested their inclusion in one general article, dealing with torts,
with a period of three years.

“...,,there is no reason why they should not be brought under the general

category of torts and the period of three years applied to them. The dates
in column three coincide with the dates of accrual of the causes of action”.

37.3%. The expression ‘legal process’ occurring in article 80 had given rise Expression
“tegal process”

to certain conflict. The Allahabad High Coust? ruled that it included all processes
issued under any law. In regard to the seizure of crops under tenancy law by
the landlord, the High Court observed: —

“In my opinion, 3 distraint effected under the local tenancy Act (No. TH of
1901) is a seizure of movable property under legal process, because it is
“done under the special provisions of the local act and subject to the due
observance of the procedure therein laid down.”

A contrary view was taken by the Bombay High Court,’ to the effect that
the “legal process” envisaged by this articie necessarily implied some process
through the Court and accordingly 2 direction from the Collector, acting under
the Bombay Land Revenue Code. was outside the scope of this article. Beamount
C.J. observed thus:—

“The learned Government Pleader has argued that the words ‘under legal
Process’ in article 29 means ‘according to law is legal process’. In my opinion.
that is not the meaning of the words. I think ‘legal process’ denotes proce-
dure by some sort of Court, and the Collector acting under section 154,
Bombay Land Revenue Code, is not acting as a creditor. He, as the officer
entitled to regover arrears of land revenue, is given power to seize the de-
faulter’s goods. He is in a position analogous to that of a creditor who is
given power under the contract to seize his debtor's goods. if his moneys
are not paid. If legal process merely means process according to law, it
seems to me that seizure under a valid contract would be just as much sei-
zure according to law as seizure under a statute. In my opinion, Article 29
applies to seizure under a process issued by a Court. Possibly a revenue
Court may issue legal process, but in my view the Collector was not acting
in any sense as a Court when he seized these goods.”

However, in a later judgment of the Bombay High Court,’ the meaning of
the expression “legal proceedings” was considered and the following observations
made:—

“It must be remembered in this context that the expression ‘legal proceedings”
is not synonymous with ‘judicial proceedings’, Proceedings may be legal
even if they are not judicial proceedings, if they are not authorised by law;
‘and Mr. Palkhiwala, by his argument undoubtedly requires us to equate the
expression ‘legal proceedings’ in $. 48 sub-section (200) with judicial pro-
ceedings. for which. in our opinion, there is no warrant in law.”

‘Law Commission of India. 3rd Report. (Limitation Act, 1908), pages 44-45, para 118,

*Man Singh ४, Ram Nath, A.L.R. 1924 All. 828.

'Shivraa Shsgiri_v. Secretary of State, ALR. 1942 Bombay 300. Also see Pahart ह,
Surat, (1948) LL.R. 27 Pat. 680. .

‘Abdul Aziz v. State of Bombay A.LR. 1958 Bombay 279, 282.

175


176

No change
as to legal
process,

Starting
point-com-
ments (1908),

Suggestions
considered.

Need for
change in
the law.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

+ (Chapter 37--Artiéles 72 to 91—-Suits relating to tort.)

37.40. It is likely that the expression “legal process’ would also be held to
encompass all processes issued under any law, as has been held by the Allahabad
High Court.' As the matter has not been specifically raised after 1958 in report-
ed cases, we would not recommend any amendment of the article on that score.

37.41. The starting point under this article requires some comments. When
the draft Limitation Bill 1908 was circulated, Dr. H.S. Gaur made the following
comments also on the starting point of limitation : —

“At present, the starting point for Limitation is the date of attachment and
not the release (Ramnarain v. Umrao Singh, LL.R, 29 All. 615). 1 submit
that the starting point should be the release, not the date of attachment. In
the view of the law, it may be that enquiry into the propriety of attachment
may take a year or more and the party aggrieved may, in the meantime, lose
its remedy’-*

The opinion of Mr. Justice Banerji also dealt with the same difficulty in
these words :--

“Articles 29-30: In case of wrongful distress or seizure. limitation should be
computed from the date of distress or seizure and where the distress or sei-
zure continues, from the date of the termination of the distress or seizure,
If property remains under wrongful distress or attachment it is difficult for
the plaintiff to assess his compensation until the property is released, The
atlachment may continue for a period exceeding one year. In such a case
the owner of the property cannot, under the present law. get the compensa-
tion to which he might be justly entitled. It is doubtful whether the attach-
ment can be held to be a continuing wrong."

The Chief Justice of Bombay wanted to extend the scope of this article fur-
ther, suggesting, as under: —

“This might be extended to a prohibitory order.”

37.42, It is not clear from the file of the Act of 1908 as té why these sug-
gestions were not accepted. We have however given some thought to the matter
and find considerable force in these suggestions. It is true that generally
the person aggrieved would kaow about the wrongful attachment within a few
days thereof, and can move the court or other authority issuing the process of
attachment for relief. If the attaching authority takes only a few months to pass
the final order upholding the contentions of the petitioner. the latter would still
have enough time left to file a civil suit for damages, as the prescribed period of
limitation is one year.

37.43. However, considering the long duration of pendency of cases in courts
and the time taken in their disposal, it is likely that the attaching authority may
take a Iong time before objections regarding the attachment are decided. In
such a case, a period of limitation starting from the attachment may cause serious
hardship. Till the result of the objection filed before the attaching authority is
known, the civil court cannot decide the matter. It would rather be harsh to
drive an aggrieved person to a civil court even before a cause of action has acc-
tued in his favour. or at least before his claim can be effectively decided,

\Man Singh एप. Ram Nath AAR. 1924 All. 828.

°Dr. H. 5. Gaur. Bar-at-Law. Raipur. Letter No. 2063/V. 4-5 dt, 19-12-1907 Nationat
Archives File 1908, Paper No, 2, page 9. .

SCE. Eng. Gim Moh ९, Chinese Merited Cont. Ranking A.L.R. 1940 276 (FB).

‘Mr, Justice Banerji, High Court of Judicature N.W. Provinces letter No. 4021 dated
18th December. 1907 National Archives File 1908. Paper No. 4, page No, 8,

‘Sir Lawrence Jenkins, Chief 111०९, Bombay High Court. letter No. 2469 dated =
18-12-1907, National Archives File 1908, Paper No. 6, page 13.



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 177

(Chapter 37-—Articles 72 to 91—Suits relating to tort.)

37.43. To obviate such hardships as well as to avoid a multiplicity of litiga- Recommenda-

tion, we recommend that the third column of article 79 should be revised as oracles 80.
follows :?

“The date of release of the distress.”

Similarly, the third column of article 80 should be revised as under;—-

“The date of release from the seizure.”

37.44. Article 81 reads as under:— Article 81

“$1. By executors, administrators or One The date of the death of the person
Tepresentatives under the Legal year. wronged.”
Representatives’ Suits Act, 1885.

It is identical with article 20 of the Act of 1908,
Article 20 of the Act of 1877 was as under:

“20. By executors, administrators or One” The date of the death of the person
representatives under Act No. XIT year.’ wronged.”
of 1855 (to enable executors, ad- .
ministrators or representatives to
sue and be sued for certain wrongs).

Tt was identical with article 12 of the Act of 1871.
(0) Article 82 reads as under:-—

“82, By executors, administrators or Two The date of the death of the person
fepresentatives under the Indian years _ killed.”
Fatal Accidents Act, 1855.

It is identical with article 21 of the Act of 1908 except that the period in that
Act was one yéar.

In the Act of 1877, article 21 was as under:—

“21, By executors, administrators or One The date of the death of the person
Tepresentatives under Act No: year. _ killed.”
XUI of 1855 (to provide compen-
sation to famities for loss occa-
sioned by the death of a person
caused by actionable wrong)

Article 13 of the Act of 187! was in identical terms.

(c) ‘Article 83 16808" 8६ under :—

“83. Under the legal Representatives’ Two When the wrong complained of
Suits Act, 1855 against an execu- years. is done.”
tor, an administrator or any other
representative.

Articles 33, 34 and 35 of the Act of 1908 were as under: —

“33. Under the Legal Representatives’ Two ५ When the wrong complained of is
Suits Act, 1855, against anexecu- years. done.”
tor.

“34. Under the same Act against an Two | When the wrong complained of is
administrator. years. done.

‘Compare articles 73, 74 and 90 and see Manga v. Changa Mal A.LR. 1925 “Al 331.
24—14 M of LI&CA/ND/83


178

Law com-
mission
Report—

point con-
cerning survival
‘of cause of
action on
death.

History,

Law Commis-
sion Report-

point concern-
ing limitation.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 37—-Articles 72 to 91—Suits relating to tort.)

35. Under the same Act against any Two | When the wrong complained of is
other representative. years, done.”

Article 33 of the Act of 1877 was as under:—

“33, Under Act No. XII of 1855 (to Two | When the wrong complained of is
enable executors, administrators, years, done.””
or representatives to sue and to be
sued for certain wrongs) against
an executor, administrator. or
other representative.

Article 39 of the Act of 1871 was in identical terms.

37.45. The Law Commission’ in its Report on the Act of 1908, while consi-
dering the scheme of the relevant Act, observed as under: —

“The maxim of English Law “actio personalis moritur cum persona’ has
been modified in India by various Acts. The Fatal Accidents Act provides
that in the case of death of a person injured by a wrongful act, neglect or
default, 8 right to suit accrucs to recover damages for the benefit of the wife,
husband, parent and child. if any, of the person who dies. “But the suit
has to be instituted in the name of the executor, administrator or representa-
tive of the deceased person. Under the Legal Representatives’ Suits Act,
XIE of 1855, the executor, administrator or representative of any deceased
person has been given a right to bring a suit for a wrong committed in the
life-time of such person which occasioned pecuniary loss to his estate, provi-
ded the suit was in respect of a wrong committed within one year before
the death. Death will not abate any cause of action relating to loss of
damage to property. Thc damages recovered form part of the estate of the
deceased.” A suit may be maintained against the executor, administrator
or representative of the deceased for any wrong committed by him in his
life-time for which he would have been subject to an action if the wrong
was committed within one year before his death. Section 2 of that Act
further provides that the death of either party to a suit shall not abate the
suit. Section 306 of the Indian Succession Act provides that the right to
Prosecute or defend any action or special proceeding existing in favour of or
against a person at the time of his death survives to and against his executor,
administrator or representative. But an exception is made in respect of a
cause of action based on defamation, assault as “defined in the Indian Penal
Code, or other personal injury not causing the death of the party. In
England, until recently, the maxim above referred to applied generally till it
was abrdgated by the Law Reform {Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1934.
But even under this Act, a cause of action for defamation or seduction or
for inducing one spouse to leave or remain apart from the other and for
damages on the ground of adultery were excepted. The law, therefore,
both in England and in India at the present moment is more or less the
same. The difference lies only in the exceptions existing under the Indian
Law and the English law.”

37.46. Article 83 of the Act of 1963 replaces articles 33, 34, and 35 of the
Act of 1908. The period under this article is two years, whereas under article
81 it is one year. In article 82. the period of one year has been increased to
two years (suits under the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855). .

37.47, The Law Commission* in its Report on the Act of 1908, observed
as under: —

‘Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act 1908), page 41,

para 112.
114: ता Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act 1908), pages 42-45, para 113,


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF JNDIA UN THE LIMITATICN ACT, 1963 179

(Chapter 37—Articles 72 to 91-—Suits relating to tort.)

“113. Article 20 relates 10 a suit filed by a legal representative for torts
causing pecuniary loss to the estate, while article 21 relates to a suit filed
by a legal representative for damages ior death, which has to be a
representative action. he other group of Articles 33, 34 and 35 relate to
suits against the Jegal representatives. Under articles 20 and 21, the date
of death of the person is taken as the starting point of limitation. Under
the Fatal Accidents Act, the suit is for damages for causing death by any
wrongful act, neglect or default and the suit is for the benefit of the depen-
dants. The suit under the Legal Representatives’ Suits Act is restricted to
wrongs which occasion pecuniary loss to the estate of the deceased and
cause of action in respect of which, according to the law then prevailing, did
not survive. Under the Succession Act, all rights of action survive to the
executors or administrators except actions for defamation, assault or per-
sonal injuries not causing the death of a party. The substantive law preven-
ting the abatement of the cause of action is laid down by the said Acts. The
cause of action under the Fatal Accidents Act is the death and time under
Article 20 begins to run from the date of the accrual of the cause of action,
However, under the Legal Representatives’ Suits Act, as the suit is in respect
of a wrong committed in the life time of a person but time is made to run
from the date of the death, the running of time does not synchronise with
the date of accrual of the cause of action. On the other hand under Articles
33 and 35, a period of 2 years is provided which runs from the date when the
wrong complained of is done. This synchronises with the date of the
accraal of the cause of action. The suits contemplated under the two
Acts, ic. Legal Representatives’ Suits Act and the Fatal Accidents Act relate
to torts. No special period of limitation is provided for actions contem-
plated by section 306 of the Succession Act, as it was assumed that the pro-
visions laid down in the Limitation Act will govern such actions.”

“114. A provision for the survival of the right of action having been
made, the action may be treated as one founded on tort whether it is by or
against an executor, administrator or representative and the time for limita
tion may be made to commence with the accrual of the cause of action.
If a period of three years from the accrual of the cause of action is provided,
no hardship will be caused to either party. In view of the proposed period
of 3 years from the date of accrual of the cause of action the period of one
year before death provided in the Legal Representatives’ Suits Act will
have to be abrogated. It may be observed “here that instead of leaving
the question of survival of the cause of action to be dealt with by three
separate Acts, a consolidating amendment in an appropriate manner may be
made in section 306 of the Indian Succession Act.

“115, There is also a conflict of decisions under section 306 of the
Indian Succession Act as to whether a right to an action for malicious prose-
cution is one relating to personal injury not causing the death of the party
and whether it survives. This conflict may be set at rest by specifically
bringing within the exception to section 306 of that Act, actions for malicious
prosecution if it is intended that the cause of action in respect of such wrongs
should not survive the death of the person aggrieved.”

3748. There is a period of limitation of one year under ail these articles, Joint Com-
except in the case of fatal accidents under article 82, where it has been increased mittee Report,
to two years in the Act of 1963 on the recommendation of the Joint Committee.

‘The Joint Committee Report stated’ thus:

‘Joint Committee Report, (1963 Act).


180

Comment.

Causes of
action surviv-
ing on death.

Reason for
special

provision.

Article 84,

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMICATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 37—Articles 72 to 94—-Suits relating to tort.)

“The Committee feels that the limitation of one year provided for suits under
the Indian Fatal Accidents Act, 1855, is short and should be increased to
two years.”

37.49. The period of one ycar in earlier articles (corresponding to present
articles 81 and 83) was commented upon by W.J. Moncy, Officiating Judge
Maimansingh, in his old opinion of 1871,'as to be 100 short for the purpose in
hand:

“That, under Act XII of 1855, there was a limitation of two years in the
case of actions of a certain kind against executors, & c. points out that delay
in instituting actions of this class may often be unavoidable, owing to the
difficulty of obtaining full information, and urges that it is not apparent.
therefore, why the period of limitation should be reduced to one year. He
submits whether in such cases it would not be more for the public interest
that the limitation should be fixed at two years in the cases of actions both
by and against executors, such limitation being in respect of wrong committed
within one year of the death of the person, and to be calculated from the
date of decease, and not from the commission of the wrong.”!

37.50. So much as regards matters of primarily historical interest. A ques-
tion that may need to be looked into is this. Under section 306 of the Indian
Succession Act, the right to prosecute or defend an action or proceeding in
favour of or against a person at the time of his death survives to, and against,
his executors, administrators or representatives. It seems desirable to refer to
the impact of this provision on the law of limitation. In contrast with the gene-
ral position, the starting point mentioned in article 81 is the date of death of
the person wronged, and not the date of commission of the wrong, In other
words, though the suit is in respect of a wrong committed in the life-time of a
person, time is made to run from the date of the death, and the running of time
does not synchronise with time with the accrual of the cause of action.

37.51. The reason why this special provision was made might be that the
wronged person, when alive, might not have found time to take legal steps, and
if the starting point is counted immediately from the date of commission of the
wrong, then the prescribed period may, in many cases, terminate very soon while
the executors, administrators or representatives are still taking time to settle dowa
and to take stock of the situation.

In this context we have considered the question whether the enactment of
the Indian Succession Act (which is not referred to in articles 81 and 83) had
any impact on the articles uader consideration. It appears that this question
can, if necessary, be more conveniently considered when the Succession Act is
itself taken up for review by the Law Commission.’

37.52. This takes us to article 84, which reads as under:—

“84, Against one who, having a right Two When the perversion first becomes
to use property for specific pur- years. ' known to the person injured there-
poses, perverts it to other pur- by.”

Poses.

It is identical with article 32 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877.

‘Officiating Junior Secretary, Government of Bengal fetter No. 416 dated 2nd Feb-
tuary, 1871, National Archives Fite 1871, Paper No. 5, page 14.

2Articles 81 and 83 10 be considered when the Indian Succession Act, 1925, is taken
up for review. .


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMM. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION AcT, 1963

(Chapter 37—Articles 72 to 9{—Suits relating to tort.)
Article 38 of the Act of 1871 was as under-—

“38, Against one who, having a right Two The time of the perversion.”

to use property for specific pur- years.

poses, perverts it to other pur-

poses.

37.53(a) Article 85 is as under :— Articles as

and 86.

“5, For compensation for obstruct- Three The date of the obstruction.”

ing a way or a watercourse. years.

It is identical with article 37 of the Acts of 1998 and 1877.
In the Act 1871, Article 37 was as under :——

“37, For obstructing a way or water- Two The date of the obstruction.”
course. years.
(b) Article 86 reads as under :—

“g6, For compensation for diverting Three The date of the diversion.”
watercourse. years.

It is identical with article 38 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877.
Article 32 of the Act of 1871 was as under:—

°32, For diverting a watercourse. Two The date of the diversion.”
years.
37.54, The starting point of limitation under these two articles is the date The starting
of the obstruction or the daie of the diversion, as the case may be. One learned point of
a * ५ limitation.
writer has commented adversely on this point: —

“The starting point of limitation is the date of the obstruction. If obstruc-
tion to way or water-course is, as has been recognised, a continuing wrong,
it is rather difficult to reconcile it with the third column which provides that
the starting points of limitation is the date of the dbstruction and aot the

. date of the cessation or removal of the obstruction. It is noteworthy that
articles 53, 73, 74 and 90 do prowide for commencement of limitation
from the date of the cessation of the branch of coniract or the wrong, 35
the case may be. The point js, therefore, not free from difficulty, due
perhaps to illogical drafting.”

The above quoted passage referred to a single bench decision from Madhya
Pradesh, wherein a suit had been filed to recover mesne* profits from a tres-
passer, wrongfully occupying a house. Shri Dayal, J. observed in that case: —

“The time begins to run from the “date of tresspass” mentioned in the article
which means every date on which the tresspass continues and is not restricted
to the date on which tresspass commenced. A suit will be within time for
the entire period of tresspass which falls within three years immediately
preceding the suit, but not beyond three years.”

37.85, We have given thought to the matter. However, if one treats the No change
obstruction as a continuing wrong. it would have the effect of making the cessa- needed.
tion of the wrong the starting point. The practical result would not be different
from what it is now. No change is, therefore, recommended.

50 N. Mitra’s Law of Limitation and Prescription AT पु क्रक्ा एं Cf Limitation and Prescription (9th Edition), page 1801.
dantoolal v. Chitarmal, (1964) M.P.LJ. (Notes) 106, "

181


182

Article 87.

No change
needed.

Article 88.

Case law on
Act of 1871

as to “dama-
ges”.

View of
Dr, Stokes.

Period of
limitation.

897TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 37—Articles 72 to 91—Suits relating to tort.)
37.56. Article 87 reads as under :—

“87. For compensation for tresspass _ Three The date of the tresspass.””

upon immovable property. years.

It is identical with article 39 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877.

In the Act of 1871, article 43 was as under:—

“43. For tresspass upon immovable Three When the tresspass takes place.”
property. . years.

By the Act of 1877, the words “for compensation” were added in the first
column (before the words “For tresspass upon immovable property”). This
addition clarified the position that the article is applicable only to suits for
damages, and not to suits for recovery of possession.

37.87, As there is no controversy under this article, we do not recommend
any change.

37.58. Article 88 reads as under :—-

“88. For compensation for infringing Three The date of the infringement.”
copyright or any other exclusive years.
privilege.
It is identical with article 40 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877.
In the Act of 1871, article 11 was as under :—

“11. Por damages for infringing copy- One The date of the infringement.”
right or any other exclusive pri- year.
vilege.

37.59, The Calcutta High Court, dilating upon the word “damages” in the
Act of 1871, observed as under: —

“Jn my opinion article 11 of schedule (ii) embraces any suit or action brought
under section 22 of the Act XV of 1859, and there was no intention of
drawing any distinction between a suit framed as an action for damages, and
one framed as a suii for an account. The taking of an account of profits is
only 2 mode of compensating an inventor for the infringement of his pri-
vilege other than by an assessment of damages, and it seems unreasonable
that if the period of limitation is one year in the one case, it should be six
years in the others”.

37.59. This view was also favoured by Dr. Stockes, in the following

words :— > .
“The article should be extended expressly to suits for an account of the
profits obtained by infringement.””

Accordingly, in the Act of 1877, the word ‘damages’ was replaced by the word
‘compensation’.

37.60. The present period of limitation under article 88 is three years. Chief
Justice Sir Richard Garth and the then Secretary, Legislative Department had
made certain comments on article 11 of the Act of 1871 (which had fixed a
period of one year).

'Kinmond ४. Jackson, (1877) ILL.R. 3 (1. 17, 19.
*Stokes, The Angio-Indian Codes, Vol. 2 page 981.


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 37—Articles 72 to 91—Suits relating to tort.)

“By clause 11, one year only is fixed as the period of limitation in case
of infringement of copyright. This, certainly, seems an unreasonably short
time. It must be remembered that infringements of copyright are from
their very nature frequently. indeed generally, not discovered until long after
the infringement has occurred. It is often the work of months, if not years,
to make a book or a piece of music (unless it is of the very striking charac-
ter) well known to the public; and in the greatest majority of cases, if such
book or piece of music is an infringement of some author’s copyright the
author might probably not hear of the infringement until some time after it
had taken place. This is, therefore, one of those instances, as it seems to
me, in which it would be right to allow a plaintiff a much longer period of
limitation.”

And again observed :—

“Clause 11--The limitation, I think should be three years instead of one.”

Mr. 3. H. Nelson stated:-—

“Article 39—Literary piracy is theft: I would make the starting point the
discovery of infringement.”

37.61. These views were endorsed by the Secretary, Legislative Department,
in the following note :—

“No. 11—Infringement of copyright—The Chief Justice objects that the period
of one year is too short. So it is, but it was the period prescribed by
‘Act XIV of 1859, section 1, clause 2, and in framing Act IX of 1871, the
old periods were, for obvious reasons, kept when possible.” “T think we
should Tengthen the period if we alter the Jaw at all”

37.62, Thus, the period of one year in the Act of 1871 and Draft Limita- Earlier
tion Bill, 1877 was changed in 1877 to three years. The Report’ of the Law Report of
Commission on the Act of 1908 did not suggest any change in this regard. Commission.

37.63. There is a defect in the third column of the article under considera- Amendment
tion. We think that it would not ‘be reasonable to allow time to run against ans regards
person, when he does not know that any of his rights have been infringed. It is point, and

also necessary to widen this article so as to add, in the first column, at the end, alse for

the words “or for restraining such infringement”. The object is to cover a SUit intellectual
injancti property
for injunction. and

; वि _ a . injunction.
As to the meaning of the words “exclusive privilege” occurring in article 88,

some comment seems to be in order, because these words are not very precise.
We are of the opinion that in order to introduce a modicum of precision in this
article, right to “Intellectual Property” should also be mentioned. alongwith
“copyright”.

\Sir Richard Garth, Demi-Official Letter dated 8th March. 1876 to Arthur Hobhouse,
National Archives File 1877, Paper No. i, 7986 2.

geal शॉप आर Garth, Démi-Oficial letter dated 24th July 1876 National Archives File
1877, Paper No. 1, page 3.

मे, H, Nelson, District Judge, Cuddapah, letter No. 34 dated 2nd April 1877 National
Archives File 1877, Paper No. 25, page 3.

WNote by Arthur Hobhouse. Secretary, Legislative Department on Sir Richard Garth's
remarks, National Archives 1877, paper No. |. page 5

masks Conumission of India. 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1908), page 45, para 1.


184

Recommenda-
tion,

Article 89.

No change
needed,

Article 90.

Need for
amendment
to cover
wrongful
attachment.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 37—Articles 72 to 91—Suits relating to tort.)

37.64, To make the discussion concrete, we recommend the following re-
draft of article 88, so as to cover the points made above':

“88. For compensation for infringing Three When the infringement first becomes
copyright or right to other intellec- years. known to the plaintiff.”
tual property, or any other exclu-
sive privilege, or for restraining
such infringement.

37.65. We now proceed to article 89, which reads as under:—

“89. To restrain waste. . . . Three When the waste begins.”
years.

It is identical with article 41 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877.

There was no comparable provision in the Act of 1877.

37.66. In the absence of practical difficulties, we see no reason to disturb
the present article.

37.67. Article 90 reads as under:—- : nee

“90. For compensation for injury cau- Three When the injunction ceases.”
sed by an injunction wrongfully years.
obtained.

It is identical with article 42 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877.
In the Act of 1871, article 86 reads as under :--

“36. For compensation for damage Three When the injunction ceases.”
caused by an injunction wrong- years.
fully obtained. ड़

When the draft of the Act of 1908 was circulated for comments, a District
Judge suggested that attachment should be brought within the scope of those
provisions. His suggestion was as follows: —

“Article 41—After the word ‘an’, I would insert? ‘attachment’ ”

However, this suggestion does not seem to have been accepted.

37.68. We have given some thought to the matter.-In our view, there is a
case for adding in article 90 a suit for compensation for wrongful attachment. -
No doubt, as a summary remedy, section 95 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 provides for the grant of compensation for artest before judgment or attach-
ment before judgment or issue of a temporary injunction, but this does not, bar a
regular suit for compensation for such wrongful act? arrest, attachment or injune-
tion. At present, it would appear that wrongful attachment is not a continuing
wrong’. The article relating to compensation for statutory acts may not apply
to attachment. As to attachment before judgment, old article 29 of the Act of
1908 {relating to wrongful seizure} seems to have been applied’, under the Act of
1908. However, it is desirable to make article 90 comprehensive, and, for this
purpose, to cover an attachment wrongfully obtained.

wWaragraph 37.63 supra.

*Dewan Bahadur S. Gopalacharia Avargal, District Judge, Guntur, Letter No. 2155
dated 30th December, 1907. National Archives File 1908. Paper No. 11.

3Harkumar v. Jagatbandhu, A.LR. 1927 Cal. 247.

*Pannaji v. Firm Senaji, (1930) LL.R. 53 Mad. 621.

*¥ellammal v. Ayvappa Naick (1914) LL.R. 38 Mad. 972. (Scope of article 29 of the
Act of 1908 fully discussed). ,


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMIN, OF INDIA ON THF LIMITATION ACT. 1963

(Chapter 4 abtictes 72 to 91: Suits recating to tort.)

37.69. Accordingly. we recommend that article 90 should be revised as Recommenda-
under :—~ ° 5

“90. For compensation for injury cau. Three When the injunciion छा atfac Ament
sed by aninjunction or quachment — years, — ceases.
wrongfully obtained,

[One could even add arrest but for the fact that certain specific articks
exist on the subjects.]

37.70. Article 91 reads as under:—- पु Articte 9.

“91. (a) Forcgmpensation for wrong- “Three Wher the person having ihe right
fully taking or detaining any years. 10 the possession of the property
specific movable property first learns in whose possession it
fost, or acquired by theft. or is.
dishorest misappropriation
or conversion.

(b) For compensation for wrarg- see When the property is wrongfully
fully taking or injuring or years. taker or injured. or wien. the de-
wrongfully detaiving any tair: passessign becerncs (une
other specific movable pro- lawful.”
perty.

It corresponds to article 48 and 49 of the Acis ef 1908 and 1577.

In the Act of 1871, six articles covered the subject matter, viz. atticles 48, 47,
35, 34, 33, and 26, with varying periods. It is unnecessary to quote them for
the present purpose, since they do not throw particular light on many important
ingredients of the present article. In. 1877 and 1908, all these articles were
Drought under two articles. and a uniform period of limitation of 3 years was
provided. The Law Commission in its Report’ on the Act of 1908 recommen-
ded a different arrangement of the articles, but that recommendation has not
been accepted.

37.71. The expression specific movable property” occurring in the article Case Jaw as

renders relevant a discussion of two cases of application of the article 10 money to money
न in specie {as against simple money claims). The first case is an Allahabad one,‘ 16

in which a company Kad instructed its bankers to make payment of excise duty

amounting to Rs. 50,000 in the sub-treasury and got the challan duly stamped

and signed by the accountant and the treasurer. The amount paid was, however.

defalcated by the treasury officials. and was not credited to the account of the

Collector of Central Excise. As a result. the company had to make payment

of the excise duty for the sccond time. The company then filed a-suit for re-

covery of the money from the State Government. The Allahabad High Court.

inter alia, held? that the suit was neither for certain “specific movable property”

nor for the return of particular coins or currency notes (which the plaintiff had

deposited) and, therefore. articles 48 and 49 of the Act of 1908 did not apply to

the case. Holding that the suit was based on the liability of the Government

for the misconduct of its servants, the High Court applied the residuary article

120 of the Act of 1908, which gave a longer period of six years to the plaintiff.

37.72. In the second case; which is from Rajasthan, a person had deposited
money with thé municipal council for the construction of a septic tank and soak-
pit for the disposal of waste water. On the failure of the Municipality to carry

Maw Commission of India. 3rd Report (Limitation Act 1908) page 45. para 121 and
page 83. articles 1.2.6, .

°State of U.P. ५, Hindustan Lever Lid. AJR. 1972 All, 480.

{Chandrabhan Bansital v. Bikaner Municipality, ALR. 1975 Raj. 35.

. 25--14 M of LI&CA/ND/83


186

No change
needed.

Article 92.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 37—-Articles 72 to 91 Suits retating to tort. Chapter 38 Aritcles 92 ta 96:
Suits relating to Trusts and Trust Property.)

out the work, the plaintiff demanded the money from the Municipal Council,
which refused the payment. The High Court observed that under article 91(b),
a suit for compensation for wrongfully detaining the movable property has to be
instituted within three years from the date on which the detainee’s possession
became unlawful. The suit, filed within three years from the date when the
Municipality refused to adjust the amount towards house tax, was in time.

he judgment has not pin-pointed the exact article applicable. Articles
91(b) and 55 (in addition to the residuary article 113) of the Act of 1963 have
been taken as the articles possibly of relevance.

37.73. In this state of the case-law—which does not rule out the residuary
article—we do not consider it necessary to amend the wording of article 91.

CHAPTER 38

ARTICLES 92 TO 96 : SUITS RELATING TO
TRUSTS AND TRUST PROPERTY

38.1, Article 92 reads as under :

“92. To recover possession of immo- Twelve When the transfer becomes known
vable property conveyed or be- years. to the plaintiff.”
queathed in trust and afterwards
transferred by the trustee for a
valuable consideration.

The article corresponds to a part of article. 134 of the earlier Acts. In the
earlier Acts, the relevant articles were as under:

Article 134 of the Act of 1908.

"134, To Tecover possession of immo- Twelve When the transfer becomes known

vable property conveyed or be- years. to the plaintiff. बी 1929, the
queathed in trust or mortgaged third column read, “the date of the
and afterwards transferred by transfer]”

the trustee or mortgagee for a

valuable consideration.

Article 134 of the enactment of 1877.

134, To recover possession of immo- Twelve” The date of the purchase.
vable property conveyed or be- years.
queathed in trust or mortgaged
and afterwards purchased from
the trustee or mortgagee for a
valuable consideration.

Article 134 of the Act of 1871.

134, To recover possession of immo- Twelve The date of the purchase.
yable property conveyed in trust years.
or mortgaged and afterwards pur-
chased from the trustee or mort-
gagee in good faith and for value.

The amendments effected by the 1963 Act are in consonance with the
recommendations of the Law Commission’.

‘Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1908), paragraphs 122-130.


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 38--Articles 92 to 96: Suits Relating to Trusts and Trust Property.)

38.2. In a Calcutta case! decided with reference to article 134 of the Act of Successor

1908 as it stood before 1929, a trustce executed on 8th February, 1910 a lease frastec.
of the trust property in derogation of the trust, and subsequently appointed a
successor trustee who filed a suit to set aside the lease on 215६ January, 1932.
The successor to the original trusice was appointed only on 30th September,
1931. However, relying on section 2(8) of the Limitation Act, 1908, the court
held the successor trustee to be within the definition of the word “plaintiff” and
held that the suit was barred by time. With respect, this overlooks the context.
The time should now begin to run only from the date of the knowledge of the
succeeding trustee who brings the suit’.

38.3. No other points requiring discussion from the point of view of possible No change
need for amendment in the article have come to our notice. In this position, no needed.
amendment of the article is called for.

38.4, Article 93 reads as under:— Article 93.
“93, To recover possession of movable Three When the transfer becomes known

property conveyed or bequeathed years. to the plaintiff.”

in trust and afterwards transferred

by the trustee for a valuable cor-

sideration.

The parallel provisions may be found in afticle 48A of the Act 1908 and
in article 133 of the Act of 1877 and 1871. They were as under:—

Act of 1908

“48A.To tecover movable property Three When the sale becomes known to
+ conveyed or bequeathed in trust. years. the plaintiff.”
deposited or pawned, and after-
ward bought from the trustee, de-
pository or pawnee for a valuable
consideration.
Act of 1877
“133. To recover movable property Twelve The date of the purchase.”
conveyed or bequeathed in trust, years.
deposited or pawned, and after-
wards bought from the trustee,
depository or pawnee for a valu-
able corsideration.

Act of 1871
133. To recover movable property con- Twelve The date of the purchase.

veyed in trust, deposited or pawn- years.

- ed and afterwards bought from

the trustee, depository or pawnee,

in good faith and for value.

Article 48A in the Act of 1908 was inserted by Act I of 1929. It corres-
ponded to the old article 133 which was repealed, with the third column chan-

‘The starting point of limitation was changed from “the date of purchase”

ged. हु
Certain verbal changes were

to “when the sale becomes known to the piaintift.
made in 1963, when the Act was re-enacted’.

'Wrikissan Kh ३. Tarachand Ghanashyamdas, ALR. 1949 Cal. 228, 232.
2200 है?7 5 & Co. y. M. Lakshminarasimhalu Chetti, 1.8. 1940 Mad. 920-
923. {Decision on that part of article 134 Veron forms part of article 61(b)).

' saw Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1908). para 122.

187


188

No change
needed.

Article 94
and 95.

State laws
बह 0 public
arusts.

Recommenda-
tien as to
atticles 94

to 9,

३9111 REPORT OF LW CUMMIN, OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 963 ‘
(Chapter 38 Articles 92 tw 96: Suits Relating to Trusts and Trust Property.)

38.5. No difficulties have arisca under this article as cnacted 1964, and vo
change appears necessary in the article.

38.6. Acticle 94 reads 38 under:--

“94. To set aside a transfer of immo- Twelve , When the transfer becomes known
vable property comprised in a years, to the plaintiff.”
Hindu, Muslim or Buddhist re-
_ ligious or charitable endowment,
made by a manager thereof for a

valuable consideration.

In the Act of 1908, the corresponding provision was article 134A, which was
introduced by Act 1 of 1929. It was identical with present article 94.

(b) Article 95 reads as under:—

“95. To set aside a transfer of movable Three Whea the transfer becomes known
properiy comprised in a Hindu, years. to the ptaintilf.”
Muslim or Buddhist religious or
charitable endowment, made by a
gmanager thereof for a valuable .
consideration,

The corresponding article in the Act of 1908 was article 488. which was
introduced for the first time by Act | of 1929. That article was as follow:

“48B.To set aside sale of movable Three When the sale becomes known to
Property comprised in a Hindu, years. the plaintiff.”
Muhammadan or Buddhist reli-
gious of charitable endowment,
made by a manager thereof for a
valuable consideration.

38.7. Several States have cnacted their owa laws to regulate and make better
provision for the administration of public trusts. These enactments — contain,
inter alia, provisions relating (0 suits concerhing public trus Thus, under sec-
tion 50 of the Bombay Public Trusts Act. 1950 permission of the Charity Com-
missioner is necessary for the institution of a suit. Then, by section 75-C of the
Madras Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1959 the right of suit
has been specifically granted to any trustee or any person having av interest in
the trust property.

38.8. Reverting to the articles in the Limitation Act, article 94-95 of the
Limitation Act have nol given rise 10 textual controversies. But we see no
reason why articles 94 to 96 should not apply ta religious or charitable endow-
ments created by persons professing the Sikh or Jain faith, The fegal doctrines
and rules applicable to these endowments are not subsiantially different trom
those applicable to Hindus‘.

We therefore recommend that articles 94 to 96 should be extended to Sikh
and Jain endowments also.

‘Compare & recommendation as to section 10, supra,


i
8911 REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON 10: LIMETATION AcE. 1963

(Chapier 38° Artides 92 6 96: 51018 Relaticg to Tests aud Teast Property.
38.9. Article 96 reads as under:~-

“O96. By the manager ofa Hindu, Mus Twelve The date of death. resignation छा
jim or Buddhist refigious or char years. removal of the fransforor or fle
table exdowmert 10 recover .p 3 - date of appointment of the plain-
session of movable or immovable tiffas maragcr of the endowment
property comprised in the endow- whichever fs totter.”
ment which has been, transferred
by a previous manager for a value
able consideration.

The corresponding provisions in the Act of (908 were articles 1348 ant
(34C. 686 articles read as under: -~

“1348. By th manager of a Hindu. Twelve The death. resignation or 1 moval

Muhammadan or Buddhist reli- years, of the transferor,

gious or charitable endowment

to recover possession of immova-

bte property comprised in the

endowment which has been trans-

ferred by a previous manager

for a valuable consideration.

“134C. By the manager of a Hindu. Twelve The death. resignation or removal
Muhammadan or Buddhist religi- years. of the seller.” .
ous or charitable endowment to
recover possession of movable
property comprised 10 the enduw-
ment which has been sold by a
previous manager for a valuable
consideration,

38.10. In.the Act of 1908, these articles were inserted in 1929, resolving the
conflict between two Privy Council rulings.’ They have been consolidated in
article 96 in the Act of 1963, with the added advantage given to the plaintiff
as respects the computation of time. The Law Commission, in its Report on
the Act of 1908, took notice of the fact that an interregnum might arise between
the removal of 066 manager and the appuiniment of a successor, and the succes
sor should not be hamstrung from filing a suit only because of such interregnum.’
Under the present Act. the succcssor can compute the running of time from the
date of his appointment. At the same time, the right of a person interested who
niay not be the manager to challenge the alicnation of a previous manager why
is no longer in office has been retained, ay otherwise sucli a person would be
required to wait for the appuintment of the successor manager which may
umnecessarily be delayed'.

189

Article 96.

History,

38.11. The only change required in article 96 is its extension to Sikh and Recommenda-
Jain endowments, as already recommended by us’ while  vonsidering articles Hen.

94-95.

Widva Varuthi v. Batisami. AAR, (922 PLC. 123.

@Uhdil Rahim v. Narayan Das, 1.1... 11922) 50 Cal, 329 (PC).

‘Law Commission cf India. 3rd Repore (Limitation Act, 190%), page 46 para 12.3.
*Articles 94-95,

‘Para 38.8 supra.



Article 97.

Preemption

laws.

No change
needed. -

Article 98.

S911 REPORT OF LAW COMMN, OF INDIA THE ON LIMITAWON act. 1963

(Chapter 39--Articles 97 to 12: Suits Relating to Miscellaneous Matters.)
CHAPTER 39

ARTICLES 97 TO (12 : SUITS RELATING TO MISCELLANEOUS

MATTERS

39.1. Article 97 reads as under :-—
<

“97. To enforce a right of pre-emption One
whether the right is founded on year.
law or general usage or on special
contract,

When the purchaser takes under the

sale sought to be impeached.
physical possession of the whole
or part of the property sold,
or, where the subject matter of the
sale does not admit of physical
possession of the whole or part of
the property. when the instrument
of sale is registered.”

The corresponding article in the Limitation Acts of 1908, 1877 and 187t
was article 10, which in the respective Acts read as under :—

Act of 1908

“10. To enforce a right of pre-emption One
whether the right is founded on year.
law, or general usage. ot ot. spe-

When the purchaser takes, urder
the sale sought to be impeached,
physical possession of the whole

cial contract. of the property sold, or, where the
subject of the sale does not admit
of physical possession, when the
instrument of sale is registered.”

Act of 1877

Same as in the Act of 1908.

Act of 1871

“10. To enforce aright of preemption, One | When the purchaser takes actual
whether the right is founded op year. Possession under the sale sought

law, or general usage. or on spe-

y to be impeached.”
cial contract.

39.2. Though the article recognises the right of pre-emption in law as well
as under general usage, most of the cases of pre-emption arose out of Acts
Passed by the State iegislature in respect of agricultural land. However, many of
the State Jaws granting a right of pre-emption have now been amended, abolish-
ing that right.

39.3. Though there has been some controversy regarding the date when
Possession could be deemed to have been taken under the sale, the matter is inte-
grally connected with the substantive law. We do not therefore recommend any
change in the article. ,

39.4. Article 98 reads as under :-—

“93. By a person against whom an One
order referred to in rule 63 or in year.
tule 103 of Order XXI of the Code
of Civil Procedure. 1908 or. an
order under section 28 of the
Presidency Smalt Cause Courts

The date of the finat order.”


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 191
(Chapter 39 ctrticles 97 to F142: Suits Relating to Miscellaneous Matters.)

Act, 1882, has been made, to es-
tablish the right which he claims
to the property comp-ised in the
Order.

The corresponding articles in the Act of 1908 were 11 and 118, which read
as under: -—~

“LD. By @ persou, against whom any Ore The date of the order.”
of the following orders has been year.
made to establish the right which
hie claims to the property comp-
prised in the order
(1) Order under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, on a claim
preferred to, or an objection
made to the attachment of,
property attached in execu-
tion of a decree;

(2) Order under section 28 of the
Presidency Small Cause
Courts Act, 1882.

“IIA. By & person against whomt an) = Qne — The date of the erder.*
order hus been made under the — year.
Code of Civil procedure, 1908,
upon an application by the holder
vl a decree for the possession of
immovable property or by the pu-
rehaser of such property sold in
execution of a ५ ecree, complain-
ing of resistance or obstruction
to the delivery of possession there-
of, or upon an application by any
person dispossessed of such pro-
perty in the delivery of possession
thereof to the decree-holder or
purchaser, to establish the right |
which he claims to the present
Possession of the property com-
prised in the order.

Corresponding provision in the Act of 1877 was article 11, which we are not
quoting.

Corresponding article in the 1871 Act wgs article 15, which, again, we are not
quoting. The reason is that the connected provisions have changed.

39.5, The adjective ‘final’, qualifying the word ‘order’ in the third column, did Starting
not occur in article 11 of the 1908 Act. A controversy raged as to whether the Po!t
Starting point of limitation should be taken as the date of the order of the execut-
ing court passed in proceedings under Order 21, rule 58, Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 or the date of the final order of the revisional court (where the objector chose
to challenge the order in revision). The Kerala High Court,’ in a Full Bench judg-
meat, by majority, decided that ‘limitation for a suit under Order 21, Rule 62, or
103, Code of Civil Procedure, runs from the date of the order of the executing
court on the claim petition (under Order 21, rule 101, Code of Civil Procedure in
the instant case) and not from the date of the order on an infructuous application
for revision thereof.’

Ihveattusari Church v. Sicilvamma, A.LR, 1963 Ker. 137 (F.B.).


0.21, R. 58.
CPC. as
amended in
1976.

Scheme of
the amended
Code.

Scope of
article 98
now limited.

Change
needed in
artiste 98.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION act. 1963

(Chapter 39° Articies 97 to 112: Suits Relating to Miscetlancous Matters.)

39.6. The Kerala Judgment. being a case arising out of the old Limitation
Act, would not throw light upon the interpretation of the expression ‘final order’
now occurring in the third column of article 98 of the 1963 Act. The use of the
word ‘final’ would now seem to shift the starting point of limitation from the date
of the order of the executing court to the date of the order passed in revision, and
an argument on this scope. as well as on the applicability of section 14 to such
cases and the period available should not now arise. Moreover. as is elaborated
below,' the scheme of the procedural provisions with which article 98 is linked
has been radically revised in 1976.

39.7. The very important amendment made in 1976 in the Code of Civil Pro-
cedure, 1908, concerning Order 21, Rule 58, deserves to be noticed at this place.
This amendment sustantially implements the recommendation of the Law Com-
mission? in its Report on the Code.

39.8. Under the amended Code of Civil Procedure. there has been a drastic
change in the procedure. the mode of approach and the method by which the court
should arrive at a decision. when an application under Order 21, Rule 58 of the
Code is filed. Under the law before 1976. such an investigation into a claim or
objection was summary in its nature, and was, in a very large number of cases, lia-
ble to be set aside by a-regular suit. The present law, after 1976, on the other hand,
making a significant departure in the method of disposals und adjudication of such
claims and objections. contemplates a full enquiry into all questions. including
questions of right. तर and interest in the property. Its mandate is that the court
inquiring into such a claim or objection shall determine all such questions. Except
in the very limited number of cases mentioned in Order 21, Rule 58(5) there is a
t6tal embargo on a separate suit. Order 21, Rule 58(4) now provides that the order
made in such adjudication shall have the same force and be subject to the same
conditions as to appeal or otherwise. as a decree. Thus. the order passed in these
proceedings is a substitute for a decision in an ordinary litigation resulting in a
decree. The adjudication contemplated by amended Order 21. Rule 58 as amended
is not summary. the intention being that it should be like a decision rendered in a
regular suit, and should resuft in an appealable decree, so that. in these very pro-
ceedings, the court could ultimately decide and adjudicate all questions. including
questions relating to right. title or interest in the property attached, which might
arise directly or indirectly between the parties.*

39.9. In other words. the scope of article 98 is now confined to those very
limited number of cases where in respect of claims or objections to an attac'-ment,
a suit can still be instituted or permitted under the Code of Civil Procedure {as
amended in 1976). Once the claim filed in execution proceedings is entertained,
and adjudicated, the adjudication by the court has now been given the status of
a “decree”. Hence. the scope for filing a suit to assert a claim in respect of the
attached property is very limited after the amendment of 1976.

39.10. It is desirable to amend the article in the light of the changed posi-
tion as resulting from the amendment made in the Code of Civil Procedure. 1908.
Tt is necessary that. in this article. the reference to the rules of Order.21 C.P.C.
should be made more precise. by framing it as a reference to Rule 58(5) of Order
21 of the Code. that being the only provision under which a suit can be filed to
challenge any attachment.

'See para 39.7 infra.
3Law Commission of India S4th Report (Code of Civil Procedure. 1908), Chapter 21.
3Southern Steelmet & Allovs Ltd. v. V.M, Steels, Madras, ALR. 1978 Mad. 270; LL.R
(1978) 3 Mad. 140; (1978) 1 M.L.J. 468.



SOTH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 193
(Chapter 39--Articles 97 to 112: Suits Relating to Miscellaneos Matters.)

39.11. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that article 98 Recomenda-
. jon.
should be revised so as to read as under: ---

“98. By 4 person against whom an * Ore The date of the final order.”
order referred to in sub-rule (3) Year.
of rule 58 of Order XXU in the
First Schedule to the Code of Civil
Procedure. 1908 or an order under
section 28 of the Presidency Sm:
Cause Courts Act, £88
made. to establish the ri
he claims to the property com-
prised in the order. where such a
suit is permissible in law.

39.12. This takes us to article 99, which reads as under :-- Article 99.

i

“99. To set aside a sale by aciv

wvre- One When the sale ©. confirmed — or
venue court or a sale for

af Year. — would otherwise have become fina!

Government revenue or for any and conclusive had no such suit
demand recoverable 3६ such been brought.”
arvears.

Article 12 in the Act of 1908 read as under: — °

“12. To set aside any of the following १986 When the sale is confirmed
sales : Year. would other
(a) sale in execution of a decree . firal and conc!

of a Civil Court: suit been brought.”
(b) sale in pursuance of a decree

or order of a Collector or

other officer of revenue:
(०) sale for arrears of Govern-

ment revenue. or for any

demand recoverable as such

arrears;
(d) sale of a patai taluq sold for

current arrears of rent.

or
ise have become

had no such

Explanation—tn, this article. ‘patni’ includes any intermediate tenure sale-
able for current arrears of rent.”

Article 12 of the Act of 1877 was in the same terms. Article 14 in the 1871
Act was also in the same terms.

39.13. On the applicability of article 99 to a suit filed by a Hindu son to Suits by
have a court sale in execution of a decree against his father set aside, there exists Hindu son,
a conflict of views. The first view is represented by a judgment of the Kerala
High Court.' It was a suit brought by Hindu son, alleging that bis share in the
joint family properties was not liable to be sold in execution of a decree obtain-
ed against his father and that the sale in execution was not binding on his share.

Tt was -held that the son was by the decree against the father precluded from
questioning the existence of the debt on which that decree was obtained, and
that it was open to him to chalfenge the decree and the execution proccedings on
the ground that the original debt itself was non-existent or fictitious. The court
relied on a Madras judgment for holding that if the son’s interest is found not to
have been sold or if the execution sale ix void as against hin: it is unnecessary to

iLakvhmandas v, Karunakeran, AAR. 1957 Ker. 126.
*Lakvhmadu v. Ramudu, AR. 1939 Mad. 867.

26—14 M of LJ & CAJND/83


194

Condict—
the earlier
comments,

Comments—
District
Judge,
Cuddapab
(1877).

Comments-~
Divisional

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION AcT, 1963

(Chapter 39—Articles 97 to 112: Suits Relating w Miscellaneous Matters.\

make a prayer for setting aside the sale in a suit for recovering possession of his
share and article 12 ef the Limitation Act: 190% (present article 99), can have no
application to such a case.

The Punjab High Court! dissenting from the above view, has held that in
such cases the sale is a voidable one and not a void sale, with the result that such
a suit by a Hindu son to have set aside a court 0 in execution of a decree
against his father is governed by article 12(a) of the Limitation Act. 1998 (pre-
sent article 99), A Travancore-Cochin case takes th: same view? A Supreme Court
decision, while touching the point, docs not settle this particular conflict?

39.14, The conflict dates back to the days when the draft Bill of the 1877 Act

was circulated for comments. The problem was mentioned in the comments on
the 1908 Bill.

39.15. The District Judge, Cuddapah, commented! in 1877 as ander, when
offering his suggestions on the Bill then circulated :—

“I have known repeated instances in which a suit brought really for the
establishment of one’s right to own ond possess an immovable that has been
the subject of a court sale has been wrongly dismissed as barred by the lapse
of time as being a suit to set aside a sale and brought more than one year
after the date of the sale. If there are suits that can properly be brought to
set aside a sale ordered and effected by a court of Justice. Tf think it desirable
to introduce (the section) into words descriptive of fhe nattire of such suits.
Tr any case. something should be done to remove the impression that exists.
perhaps very generally. that if C is ousted from his possession of an immov-
able in consequence of a sale to A of B’s supposed right over that immov-
able, C cannot recover possession unless he sues within ore vear from the
date of the sale being confirmed.”

“The starting time (in this article 13) apnears 10 me to be illchosen, ine
asmuch as ordinarily in this Presidency. at Icast the courts seem not to trou.
ble themselves to confirm a sale unless and until a dispute about the regula.
rity thereof actually arises and not always then.”

39.16. Thirty years thence. when the Limitation Bill, which led to the Act of
1908 was circulated, the Divisional Judge. Nagpur.’ made the following com-
ment:—

“Defendants frequently argue with subtle plavsibility thot a decree or
order must be ‘set aside’ before a possessory relief can be obtained and try
to put this and like short period of limitation in the way of th: plaintiff. The
counter-argument often is that it is not necessary ta ‘set aside’ the order or
decree as it is mere nullity by which the plaintiff is not bound. One exnect-
ed that the Legislature would give an expression of its opinion in embar-
rassing cases of the kind unless it has taken some recent Privy Council cases
(LL.R. 25 Bom. 337: TLL.R. 32 Cal. 296) as settling the controversy.”

VAjit Singh v. Hem Raj. A.LR. 1956 Punjab 139,

INellakanta Iver Vanchiswarn Iver v. Narayana [ver Venkitasubha Iver, ALR, 1956
Trav. Co, 262.

SFagirchand v. Harnam Kaur. A.1.R. 1967 S.C. 727. 730 [See para 39.17. infra.)

शा, H. Nelson, Feq. District Judge, Cuddapah to the Officinting Chief, Secretary to
Government. 2nd Aoril. 1877, No. 34 .

SNole_by Rai Bahadur Sharat Chandra Sanyal. Divisional Tudge, Nagpur. Accompani-
ment to FS.A, Slocnck Esa. LCS. Chief Secretary to Chief Commissioner. Central Pro-
vines dt. 19-12-1907, No. 2063. V. 4-5. National Archives File on Limitation Bill, 1908.



Q97H REPORT OF- LAW ‘COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 39-—Articles 97 to’ L12: Suits Relating to Miscellaneous Matters.)

Unfortunately, the National Archives file does not show what action was
faken on these comments, but the problem even, now survives, because, under”
section 6 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956, the rights of 'a member of coparce-
nary in the Mitakshara coparcenary property have been saved.

39.7, ‘The current conflict of views has’ been already adveried to, Even supreme
though the Supreme, Court has not, in so many words, ruled on this subject, Comt ove.
there are observations in. one case’ to indicate that the Court would treat such a
sale ag a voidable one:—

“{4 iy the existence of the father’s debt ‘that enables the creditor to
the property in execution of १8 money, decree against the father.
if a mortgage decree against the father: directs the sale of the property for
the payment of his debt, the creditor may sell: the pooperty in execution of
tho decree. it is ‘true that the procedure for tile execation of a money decree
is different from that for the enforcement of a thottgage decree, A moncy
decree is executed by attachment and sale of the debtor's property. For the
execution of the mortgage decrec, an attachment .of the property is not

hi

20065 *

gary and the property ig sold by force of the decree.”
But’ this distinction ini procedure docs not affect the pious obligation
of @ Hindu son to pay'‘his father’s. debt..As in the case of & money decree, -

under a mortgage decree’elgo the property. is sold for
debt.'"Tho father could भागा fily bell the

f
F
ड़

. If there is no voluntary sale by- fatisez, the creditor can ask the Court to
_ ., do compulsorily what the father could have dom> vountarily. The theory is
+” that as the father may, in ondér-t0 pay 8 just debt, legally sell the’ whole
estate without suit, 60 his creditor say bring about each a sale by the
intervention of 8 suit. Ske Ramasarsayyan V. Virasami Ayyar." Even where
the mortgage is not for, legal necessity ot for payment an antecedent debt,

: of
the creditor can, in execution ‘of a mottgage decree for the realisation of a

195



196

Meaning of
the term
‘Officer of
Government’.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE UAUTATION ACT. 1963

(Chapter 39- Articles 97 to 112: Suits Relatis € to Miscellancoas Matters.)

thy a sale for arr
ment rev
Tegover

Article 100. 39 19 Article 100 reads as under :

“100. To alter or set aside any decision
ज order of a fcourt ia cny
proceeding other than a suit oF
any act or order of an offi Af
Government in his official capa-
city.

Ore
year.

The date of the lina! decision or
vider vy the court or the date of
the act cr order of the officer, as
the case may be.”

Acticles 13 and 14 of the Limitation Act. 1908 read as under:

“13. To alter or set aside a decision ot
order of a civil court in any pro-
ceeding othe Gian a suit,

“44. To set aside ary बल or order of
an office: of Government in his
official capacity. net herein other-
wise expressly provided for,

One = The date of the final decision or
year. order in the case by a court

competent to determine i€ finally.”
Cre 31६8 date of the act or order.”
year.

Parallel provisions im the 1877 Act (articles 13 and [4) were identical:

“13. To alter or set aside a decision or
order of a civil court in any pro-
cceding other thar a su:t.

“14. To set aside uny act ता order of
an officer of G.verument in his
officia! capacity. not herein other-
wise expressty provided ror.

Cne the date of the final decision or
year. ovder in the case by a Court

. competent to determine i! finally.”
Onc — The date of the act or order.”
year

In the 1871 Act. articles 15 and 16 read as under:

“15, To alter or sel aside a decision or
order cf a civil court in any pro-
ceeding other than a suit.

“16. To set aside any act of an officer
of Government in his offteial capa-
city, not herein otherwise express-
ly prov.ded for.

One Fhe date of the final devision or

“year. order in the ease by a court com:
peent to determine it finally.”

One — The date of the suit.”

year,

The two articles were put into one article (in place of articles 13 and 14 of
the Act of 1908) as article 100. This change had been recommended by the Law

Commission.*

39.20. The expression “Officer of Goverument” (which eccurs in the article)
is nowhere defined. The Madras High Court’ as long back as 1895 was required
10 decide the status of a “karnam” with reference to article 3 of Schedule H to
the Small Cause Courts’ Act (9 of 1897). The Court observed as under:

“Officers of Government are, no doubt, public servants, but every pub-
lic servant is not an officer of Government. This is clear from the article
iisel€ in which the Court of Wards is expressly mentioned, indicating that
otherwise it would not come within the article.”

‘Law Commission of India. 3rd Report, page 57, para 149.
7Orr and another v, Neelumegum शरीक, (1895) LLR. 18 Mad. 395,


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMS. OF INDIA ON THE LIMUAMUON ACT. 1963

(Chapter 39 Articles 97 ० 112: Suits Relating to Miscellaneous Matters.)

The Supreme Court. while deciding’ that the office of a Governor of a
State is not an “employment” under the Government of India, referred to its
earlier rulings’ in support oi the proposition that a High Court Judge is not a
Government servant and observed that a Judge of the Supreme Court also fails
in that category.

39.21. The difficulty 88 0 whe is, and who is not an ofticer of Government Camments—
is not of recent origin, Even when the draft Bill of the Act of 1877 was circulat- Pigtrist
ed for comments, the District Judge of Cuddapah’ observed: “ Cuddappah
11877).

. “Acticle 15 contains the troublesome expression that 1 objected to, in
remarking on the new Code of Civil Procedure, namely, ‘Officer of Govern-
ment’. What it means 1 have not the slightest idea. Is a District Judge one?
Is a Batta Peon? Is a Magistrate? [sy a ‘public servant’ as defined in the
Indian Penal Code?

“And, besides his, there is the same difficulty as in article 13 as to
what kinds of suits can be brought to set aside an act of an officer of Gove

emment, and being so drought. must be brought within one year from the
date of the Act?”

39.22 Notwithstanding such queries and also the dificultics that do arise No ned to
from time to time. we have come t the conclusion that the insertion ofa defini- define the
tion of the expression “Officer of Government” may create problems. We would of Govern.

not therefore recommend any amendment in this regard, ment”,

39.23. The third column of the article puts the date of the order as the start- Recommenda-
ing point for the purposes of computation of limitation. It is based on the assump- sara to
tion that the order in question will be communicated to the affected party in point under
good time. However, if. by negligence or oversight, the order is not communi- article 100.
cated, the person aggrieved would have no remedy if the communication is de-
layed by one year. To provide for such a contingency. we recommend that the .
third column of article 100 should be revised to read as under: --

“The date of communication of the final decision or order by the court, or
the date of communication of the act or order of the officer. or, where there
has been no such communication, the date on which the plaintill first had
knowledge of the act or order of the officer, as the case may be.”

39.24, Article 101 reads as under :--- Article 101.
“101. Upon a judgment, including a Vhree The date af the judgment or ree

foreign judgment. or a recogni- years. — cognisance.
sance,

In the Act of 1908. artictes 117 and 122 read as under: —

“|17, Upon a foreign judgment as de- 5
fined in the Code of Civil Proce: years.
dure, 1908.

“$22. Upon a judgment obtained in Twelve 1 he date of the judgment or recug-
the Provinces. or a recognisance. years. —_nisance.”*

The date of the judgment.”

SHargavind ४. Rashukel Tilak, AAR, 1979 §.C. 1109.
*4a) Union of India ४. $.H. Sheth. AGR, 1977 S.C.
th) Baldev Rai Gulani v. Piatiah and Haryana High Court, AAR. 1976 5.0, 2490.

Mr. J. S. Nelson, District hu Cuddapah Let No. 34, dated 2nd April, 1877 to
i Chief

tary to Government. — National Archives file relating 10 1877
Limitation Bill.

197


198

Law Cammis-
sion’s Report.

No change
needed.

Article 102,

Failure to
make enquiries
—Does this
postpone run-
ning of tims?

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMA. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION 1९0, 1963

(Chapter 39-- Artictes 97 10 112: Suits Relating ta Miscctlancous Matters.)
The corresponding provisions in the Act of 1877 were articles 117 and 122,
which read as under :---
“U7. Upon a foreigi: judgment ity de-

fined in the Code of Civil शिए-
cedure.

110 date of the judgmeni.”
Years.

“122. Upon a judgment obtained in Twelve The dae oi the judgment or recog
British India. or a recognisance. years. irisanee.”

39.25, The Law Commission, ia its Report on the Act ot 1908, observed that
articles 117 and 122 of the Act of 1908, relating to suits upon a foreign judgment
and upon a judgment or recognisance, the periuds prescribed being six years and
twelve years from the date of judgment or recognisance, that in England, such
suits were treated as suits on contracts. Adopting tbis principle, the Law Com-
mission recommended a period of: timitation of three years to bring the article on
par with those dealing with contracts. The Law Commission also recommended
the substitution of one composite article in place ef two arti

Accordingly, the preseni provision was enacied in 1963.

39.26. No further controversy has arisen in vespect of the article and no
amendment is therefore needed.

39.27. Article 102 reads as under:

“102. For property which the pi
tiff has conveyed wiile insane. years, silnily acd 1
conveyance.”

- Three Wher te piaintd? iy restured to
४७ Knowledge of the

In the Act of 1908, articie 94 read as ander

“94. For properiy h the paintiY Three Shen the piaini ts restos to
has conveyed while insane. years. sanity and has knowledge of the
conveyance.”

The corresponding provision in the Acts of 1877 and 1871 Acts was in iden-
tical terms.

39.28. The first point that arises for consideration in connection with this
article is: if the plaintiff. upon attainment of sanity. willully neglects to make en-
quirics about the siate of affairs of his property while he was insane, should such
wilful default on his part postpone the running of time?

Dr. Whitley Stokes:

“For the purposes of Schedule 1. articles 32, 48, 90, 91, 92, 94, 95,
113, 114, 118 and 127, it should be declared that wilful ignorance is equivae
lent to, or carries with it the consequences of. knowledge.”

his Anglo-Indian Codes, commented as under:—

He quoted 4 Suth. $.C-C. Rel. 19:9 Suth Civ. R. 329: 11 ibid 163 in support of
his suggestion.

This suggestion about constructive knowledge’ being made the starting point
of limitation has not, however. been countenanced. probably because it would
fack exactitude in the matter of proof. We recommicnd no change as to the start
ing point. °

‘Law Commissio itation Act, 1. para. 168.

“Stokes, Anglo-Indian Codes (1889), Vol. 2. page 949.



SOTH REPORT OF LAW COSIIX, OF ENIAA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 199

(Chapter 39 Articles 97 fu F412 Suits Relating to Miscellaneous Matters.)

39.29, The secon! point that arises is as to the period, which is three years The period.
Jn actual practice, it may not be casy Upon the person who has regained sanity to
prove the date of knowledge of the conveyance: he would then be faced with the
carcument that the suit should have been brought within three years from the ces-
ser of disubility, Tr such cases the period available would cause hardship.

39.30, We are of the view that the period in article 102 should be increased Recommenda-

. + A + v2 ton 10 in-
from 3 years to 6 years. having regard to the considerations mentioned above. crease the
ran end i ingly. period to |
We recommend accordingly. vm Six years in
articte 102.
. “7 Article 103,

39.31. Article 103 reads as under:— ticle

$103. Ta make goad aut af the gener
estate of used trestes the
lass occasioned fy a by
trust.

Three The date of the trustee’s death or
years. if the less has not ther resulted.
af the date of the loss.”

It is identical with article 98 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877.

The corresponding article in the Act of 1871 was article 99. which read as
undec :——

“99. To make goad out of पाए geveral Three The date of the trustce’s death, or
estate of a deceased trustee the years. if the loss has not then been ocea-
loss occasioned by a breach of sioned. the date of the loss.
trust,

The present article needs no change.

39.32. Article 104 reads as under :—
Article 104

“104, To establish a periodically re- Three When the piaintiff is first refused
curring right. years. — the enjoyment of the right.”

Tn the Act of 1908. article 131 read as und

“131. To establish a periodically re- Twelve When the plaintiff is first refused
curring tight. years. the enjoyment of the right.”

The period of 12 years under the old article 131 and the period of 6 years
under the residuary article 120 have both been reduced to three years, upon the
recommendation of the Law Commission! in ifs Report on the Act of 1908. One
consequence of this is that the conflict of decisions as to whether old article 131
(2 years) applied to the facts of a particular case or the residuary article 120
(prescribing a shorter period) applied. has now lost its practical importance.

No change is rieeced in the article.

39.33. Article 105 reads as under :-—
« indu f. on Article 105,
105. By a Hindu for arrears af main- ‘Three When the arrears are payable.
tenance. . years,
In the Act of 1908. article 128 read as under:---
“128, By a Hirdn for arrears of main- Twelve When the arrears are payable.”
tenance. years.

"Law Commission of India. 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1१0९), Appendix 1, pages 83
amd 87 (articles } and 38).


200 89TH REPORT OF LAY COMMS. OF INDIA ON TIED LIsnrATION acT. [963

(Chiupier 39

eles OF 10 LED?

Suits Relating co Miscellaneous Matters.)

Reduction ef the period of limitation from twelve years (Act of 1908) to

three years was a result of the recommendation of the Law Commission‘. made
in its Report on the Act of 1998.

No change is recommended in the present article.

Article 106, 39.34, This takes us to article 106, which reads as under :—
“106. For a legacy or for a share ofa Twelve When the legacy or share becomes
residue bequeathed by a testator years. payable or deliverable.”

or for a distributive share of the

property of an intestate *

an executor or an administracor

or some other person legally char-

ged with the duty of distributing

the estate.

Tn the Acts of 1908 and 1877, article 123 read as under: —

“123. For a ‘egacy or for a share of 2 Twelve Whei the iegacy or share hecomes

Tesidue bequeathed by a testator, years. payable or deliverable.”

or for a distributive share of the

property of an intestate.

In the Act of 1871, article 122 read as under: —

122. For a iegacy or for a distribu. Twelve When the legacy or share becomes
tive share of the moveable pro- years. payable or deliverable.”

petty of a testator or intestate.

In view of a Privy Councii case! the article in the Act of 1908 was held to
apply only where the suit is brought against an cxccutor or administrator or
some person legally charged with the duty of distributing the estate. The Law

- Commission’ in its Report on the Act of 1908, recommended an amendment of
article 123 of the Act of 1908 to bring it in accord with the above tuling, This
recommendation has been implemented in the present article. The article has
not given rise to any further controversies. and may be retained as it is.

Article 107, 39.35. Article 107 reads as wider :--

107. For possession f a hereditary Twelve When the defendant takes posses-

office years. sion of the office adversely to
the plaintiff.

Explanation—A hereditary office is possessed when the properties thereof

are usually received. or (if theresare no properties) when the duties there of are
usually performed.”

In the Acts of 1908 and 1877. article 124 read: as under: —-

“124. For possession of av hereditary Twelve Where the defeedant takes posses-

office. years. sion ef the office adversely to the
paint.

Explanation—An hereditary office is possessed when the profits thereof are

usually received. or (if there are no profits) when the duties thereof are usually
performed.”

Yaw Commision of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act. 1908). page 60, para 165
and page $7. artic!

SGhutean Mabon
PC. 81

“aLaw Commission of India. 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1908), page 61, para 160 and
page 86, para 30. °

kis Ghulam Hussain, VAR. 54 Al 193. ALR. 1932


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 39- Articles 97 to 112; Suits Relating to Miscellaneous Matters.)

In the Act of 1871, article 123 differed very slightly (and only in the last
column), by expressly mentioning “some person through whom he (defendant)
claims.”

The present article needs no change.

39.36. Article 108 reads as under :— Article 108

“108. Suits during the life of a Hindu Twelve The date of alienation.”

or Musiim femate by a Hirduor — years.

Muslim who, if the female died at

the date of instituting. the suit,

would be entitled to the posses-

sion of land, to have an alieration

of such land made by the female

declared to be void except for her

life cr until her re-marriage.

In the Acts of 1908 and 1877, article 125 was in identical terms.

Parallel provision in the Act of 1871 was article 124, which read as under: —

“124. Suit during the life of a Hindu Twelve The date of the alienation.”
widow by a Hisdu entitled to the years.
possession of iand on her death to
have an alienation made by the
widow declared ta be void except
for her life.

39.37, Article 124 of the Act of 1871 restricted the scope of the article to Mustims.
estates held by Hindu widows. Later on, however, the ambit of the article
was extended in order to include life estates held by Muslims females of the
Punjab who were governed by customary Hindu law. Such instances 98४८
dwindled after the passing of the Muslim Persone! Law (Sheriat) Application Act
of 1937, which has overridden any such customs under certain circumstances.

39.38. After the passing of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956, utility of the Section 14,
article has declined even as regards a Hindu female. Section 14 of that Act Hindu Succes
confers absolute title ia the property upon her’, The exceptions to this general .
tule have been enumeraied in sub-section (2) of that section. Thus, the practical
utility of the article is decreasing. However, the time has not yet come for
outright deletion of the article.

ez

“=" 39,39. In the result, the article needs no change. No change
. needed.

39.40 We now Proceed to article 109, which reads as under :— Article 109.

“109. By a Hindu governed by Mitak- Twelve When the alience takes possession
shara law to set aside his father’s years. of the property.”
alienation of ancestral property.

39.41. In the Act of 1908 and 1877, article 126 reads as under :— History.

“126. By a Hindu governed by the law Twelve When the alienee takes possession
of the Mitakshara to set aside his years. of the property.”
father’s alienation of ancestral
property.

17, Tulasammma v. Sesha Reddy. (1977) 3 S.C.C. 99.

27-14 Mof LI & CA/ND/83

201


202

Prot
covered by
the articte.

Period.

No change
needed.

Article 110,

Recommendation

Article 111.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 39—Articles 97 to 112—Suits Relating to Miscellaneous Matters.)
In the Act of 1871, article 125 read as under: — ‘

“125. By a Hixdu governed by thelaw Twelve The date of the alienation.

of the Mitaks > sei aside his years.

father’s alienation of ascestral

property,

39.42. The article unedr consideration applies to alienations of ancestral
ptoperty moveable as well as immovable’. As regards the onus on the Hindu
son to challenge the alienation made by his father, the Supreme Court? has made
it clear that after the sale has taken place, the son is bound by the sale, unless
he shows that the debt was non-existent or was tainted with immorality or illega-

lity.

39.43, The period of 12 years aliowed under the article is in symmetry with
the general approach of the Act in regard to suits concerning affairs of a Hindu
family. Moreover, most of the suits governed by this article are, in practice,
suits mainly involving immovable property. The period of 12 years is under-
standable on that account also.

39.44, No change is needed in the article.

39.45, This takes us to article 110, which reads as under :-—

“110. By a person excluded from a Twelve When the exclusion becomes known
joint family property to enforce a —yeavs. to. the plaintiff.”
right to share therein.

Article 127 in the Acts of 1908 and 1877 was in identical terms.
Yo the Act of 1871, article 127 read as under:

“127. By a Hindu excluded from |;
fami.y property to enforce 8 7
to share thereta.

nt- Twelve When the plairtif claims and is
ight years. refused his share.

39.46. The “exclusion” contemplated by article 110 of the present Act (and
its predecessors) has been held to be a sofal and absolute exclusion and when
a coparcener is in receipt of cash maintenance or in possession of some lands in
lieu of the same, he was not entitled to main a suit under this articl?-"- How-
ever, certain rulings have expressed a contrary view. namely, that the exclu-
sion need not be total’. To put the matter beyond doubt, we recommend that
article 110 should be revised as under:

“110. By a person totally and absolutely Twelve When the exclusion becomes known
excluded from a joint fai Pro- years. _ to the plaintiff.
perty to enforce a right to share
therein,

39.47, Article 111 reads as under :—

“111. By or on beha'f of any loco! au- Thirty The Yate of the dispossession or
thority for possessior: of any pub- years. —_ discontinuance.
lic street or road !/ part
thereof from which it has been
dispossessed or of which it has
discontinued the possession.

Article 146A of the Act of 1908 was in identical terms.

1 Hunia Goundan v. Ramasami Chetti, ALR. 1918 Mad. 19,
hand ५, Hacnem hour, A. 196

; i ivikten, ALR. 1958 Ker, 178 (FB)
SLingangouda v. Sangangouda, A.1.R. 1933 Bom. 3


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 39—Articles 97 to 112- -Suits Relating to Miscellaneous Matters.)

3948. In an Allahabad case’ it was held that the word “Gispossess” in this Gow law as
Article should be given a wide meaning, and even if the defendant was in possession of
possession of the road much before the road come to be vested in the District qefendant at
Board, the District Board should be deemed to have been “dispossessed” of the vesting.
toad immediately on the date of vesting thereof, and limitation for a suit under
article 146A of the Act (1908 Act) should be deemed to have started from the
date of such vesting.

A contrary view was taken in a Calcutta case2

In our view, it would be straining the language of the ‘article too far to say
that a person was “dispossessed” of a property when, on or before the date of
alleged dispossession, he was not in possession of ‘the same.

39.49. It is, we think, probable that the view taken in the Calcutta decision Change
will be followed by other High Courts also. For that reason, we do fot suggest needed.
any clarificatory amendment of the article on this particular point. The point, in
any case, may not recur frequently.

39.50. We should mention another question that is somewhat related to Summary
article 111. Various State Acts esiablishing Municipal Corporations, Zilla Pari- after
shads and other local authorities contain provisions empowering the local autho- fxeisy of
rity to require a person to remove any projection, obstruction or encroachment ,
upon a public road’. Usually. a Municipal Corporation takes recourse to the
expeditious process of eviction prescribed by such special Acts, rather than go in
for the time consuming process of a civil suit. However. the question sometimes
arises whether the Corporation is legally entitled to take recourse to such sum-
mary proceeding if, for the period of thirty years (prescribed by article 111), the
Corporation has acquiesced in the encroachment. There has been a conflict of
opinion on this subject. According to the High Courts of Bombay‘ and Punjab’,
the right of the Corporation to remove the encroachment by the summary pro-
cedure is not lost, even after such acaiescene. But a contrary view has been
expressed by the Madres* and Lahore’ High Courts. The question primarily
concems interpretation of the state laws, which is the reason why it cannot be
dealt with by- amending the Limitation Act.

39.51. This takes us to article 112, which reads as under :— Article 112,
“112, Any suit (except a suit before the Thirty When the period of limitation would

Supteme Court in the exercise of years. begin to run under this Act against

its original jurisdiction) by or on a like suit by a private person.

behalf of the Central Government

or any State Government, includ-

ing the Government of the State

of Jammu and Kashmir. -

Article 149 of the Act of 1908 read as tinder: —

“149. Any suit by or on behalf of the Sixty | Whenthe period of limitation would
Central Government or any Pro- years. begin to run under this Act against
vincial Government (except a suit a like suit by a private person.”
before the Federal Court in the
exercise of its original jurisdiction).

Zila Parishad v. Ram Khelawan—A.LR. 1976 Allahabad 209.

2Dhajadhari Ghosh v. Union Board of Kendrogoria—A.LR. 1942 Calcutta 151.

*See, for example, section 172 of the Punjab. Municipal Act, Act 3 of 1911; section
179, 79, Maharashtra, Muniipatties Act, Act 40 of 1965; section 182, Madras District’ Muni-
Ci ct, है,

‘Tayabali Abdullabhai Vohra v. Dohab Municipality, AIR. 1922 Bom. 9.

SPyarelal v. Municipal Committee, Ludhiana, ATR. 1955 Punjab 185.

SBuseveswaraswami v. Eellary Municipal Councit—ALR. 1916 Mad. 613.

"Mralcipal Committee, Amritsar ¥. Mt. Gujri, ALR. 1936 Bah. 182.

avid M of LY & CAIND/B3

aN


Banks—

suggestion
considered
but not
accepted.

Afticle 113,

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

. (Chapter 39—-Articles 97 to 112—Suits Relating to Miscellaneous Matters.)
(Chapter 40—Article 113—-Suits for Which there is no Prescribed Period.)

In the Act of 1877, article 149 reads as under: .

“149. Any suit by or on behalf of the Sixty When the period of limitation
Secretary of State for India in years. would begin to run under this
Council: Act against a like suit by a private

person.”

Tn the Act of 1871, article 150 read as under:

“150. Any suit in the name of the sec- Sixty | When the right to sue accrues.”
retary of State for Indian in  yeats.

Council. a

As the period of 60 years available to Governmenf under the earlier Acts
for filing any suit was rather on the high side, it was reduced to 30 years by the
present Act, on the recommendation of the Law Commission’.

39.52. In an article published in 1980, a plea has been made* to extend the
benefit of article 112 of the Limitation Act, to banks and other financial institu-
tions, on the ground that in view of the extensive lending by the banks, several
debts are getting barred, and this has happened even though the banks try to
keep all.the security documents relating fo the advances alive and enforceable. It
has been stated that the shorter loans granted by the banks, like over-dratts and
cash credits, have to be renewed or rc-loaned at the expense of vast manpower,
just to save the loans from getting barred under the Limitation Act and this
process involves considerable delay and expense.

We are afraid that the case of banking institutions can hardly be treated like
Government. Unlike the Government is often faced with multiple problems
that require decision making at various points (somehow right upto the Cabinet
level), and the process is time-consuming. This is not the position in the case of
banks which are run on commercial line. Secpndly, if a period of 30 years is
made applicable to banks, similar demands for a special treatment would also be
put forth by other large business houses, who have.a network of offices through-
out the country. For example, a large tea industry may claim’ that it has
offices throughout India in every village, and should be given an enlarged period
of limitation when it comes to the question of filing suits arising out of supply
of tea to its retailers. Tt would obviosuly be impossible to extend the conces-
sion to all other cases. :

We do not, therefore, favour acceptance of the suggestion.

CHAPTER 40

ARTICLE 113: SUITS FOR WHICH THERE 1S NO PRESCRIBED
PERIOD

40.1. Article 113 is the residuary article regarding suits and reads as under :—~-
“113. Any suit for which no period of Three When the right to sue accrues.”

limitation is provided elsewhere years.
in this Schedule.

- "Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act, £908), page 61, para 162.
3K. Chalapati Rao (Law Officer, State Bank of India Hyderabad), “Limitation Act,
1963—Articte 112: Necessity to extend its benefit to banks”, ALR. 1980 Journal 16,


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 40—Articles 113—Suits for Which there is no Prescribed Period.)

‘This article corresponds to article 120 of the 1908 Act, which read as
under :—
“120. Suit for which no period of limi- Six When the right to sue accrues.”

tation is provided elsewhere in years.

this Schedule.

Corresponding provisions in the Act of 1877 {article 120) and the Act of
1871 (article 118) were identical.

It may bé noted that article 120 of the Act of 1908 provided a period of
limitation of 6 years, whereas the present Act has reduced the period of limita-
tion to 3 years, as recommended by the Law Commission’ in its Report op that
Act. No change is recommended in the present law.

CHAPTER 41
ARTICLES 114 TO 117: APPEALS

41.4. Article 114 reads as under :—

+ «144, Appeal from an order of acquittal,
(a) under sub-section Ninety Thedate of the order appealed
(i) or sub-section (2) of sec. days. from.
tion 417 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1898 *
(b) under sub-section (3) of sec- Thirty The date of the geant of special
tion 417 of that Cide.g days. leave.”

In the Act of 1908, article 157 read as under :--

“157. Under the Code of Criminal Six है The date of the order appealed
Procedure, 1898. from aa order of months from.”
acquittal.

In the Act of 1877, the paralfel provision was found in article 157, which
read as under: —

“457, Under the Code of Criminai Pro- Six The date of the judgment appealed
cedure from a judgment cf months against.”

acquittal.

The Law Commission’, in its Report on the Act of 1908, noted that the
periods provided for appeals in England were shorter, in contrast with the period
of three months allowed, by article 157 of the Act of 1908 (as amended in 1955).
The Commission did not recommend a general reduction of the period for
appeals. But it recommended a limitation period of one month in the case of an
appeal against acquittal by a private party with special leave.

41.2 While we do not propose any changes of substance in this article, a
verbal change is necessary in view. of the passing of: the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1973, which repeals and re-enacts the Code of 1898, referred to in the
article: For the reference 10 the article to sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 417,
a Teference to sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 378 should be substituted, and
for the reference to sub-section (3) of section 417, a reference to sub-section (4)

TLaw Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act 1908), page 61, para 159.

२ now section 378 (1) and (2), Cr. 7.0. 1973.

5C£, now section 378 (4) Cr. P.C., 1973.

SLaw Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act 1908), page 63, patas 166-167
and page 87, article 39.

Article 114.

Revommenda-
tion to make
verbal change,

205


Article 115,

Recommenda~
tion as.to
article, 115.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 41—-Articles 114 to’ 117. Appeals.)

of section 378 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 should be substituted’,
these being the provisions of the new Code corresponding to those of the Code
of 1898. .

41.3, The next article is also concerned with appeals under the Code or.
Criminal Procedure and reads as under: —

“115. Under the Code of Criminal
Procedire, 1898-- .

(a) from a sentence of death Thirty The date of the sentence.
passed by a court of session — days.
ot by a High Court in the
exercise of its original crimi-
nal jurisdiction;

(0) fiom any other sentence or
any order not being an
order .f acquittal—

() to the High Court. Sixty The date of the sentence or order.
. days.

(#3) to any other court. Thirty The date of the sentence or order.”
days.

This article corresponds to articles 150. 1506, 154 and 155 of the Act of
1908. They read as under:

"150. Under the Code of Criminai Seven The date of the sentence.

Procedure, i898. from a sentence days.
of death passed by a court of
Session or by a High Court in the
exercise of its origina’ cirmiral
jurisdiction.
150A. Under the Cade of Criminal Seven The date of the finding
Procedure, 1898. from a finding days.
tejecting a claim under section
443 of that Code.

154. Under the Code of Criminal Thirty The date of the sentence or order
Procedure. 1898, to any court days. appealed from.
other than a High Court.

155. Under the same Code toa High Sixty The date of the sentence or order
Court, except in the cases provi- days. —_ appealed fiom.”
ded for by article 150 and article
157.

The Law Commission’, in its Report on the Act of 1908, recommended that
the period of seven days available under articles 150 and 150A of the Act of
1908 (Death sentence) should be increased to thirty days. This recommendation
has been accepted. The Commission also recommended a uniform period of 30

days irrespective of the forum—a recommendation which has not been carried -
out. . .

41.4, The reference in this article to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898,
should now be revised and a reference to the present Code of 1973 should be
substituted in the opening part of the article. We recommend that article 115
shouid be so amended.

\For the earlier history of section 417, Cr. P.C., see Kaushalya Rani v. Gopat Singh,”
ALR, 1964 S.C. 260. 262.

"Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1908), page 61, Para 163, aod
page 88, article 40 (first part). हु


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMIN, OF INDIA ON THE LIMIFATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 41- Articles 114 to 117 —Appeats.y

41.5. This takes us to article 116. which provides for limitation for civil Article 116.
appeals as under: — .

“116. Under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 -

(a) to a High Court from ary Ninery The date of the dvcree or order.

decree or order. days.
(8) to any other Court from any Thirty The date of the decree or order.”
decree or order. days.

The corresponding articles in ii: Aci of 1908 wre 156 and 152, which read as

under :--

“156. Under the Code of Civil Pro- Nineiy The date of the decice or order
cedure, 1908, to a High Court. days. appealed from.
excepi in cases provided for by
article 151 and article 153. :

152, Urder the Code of Civil Pro- Thirty The date of the decree or order
cedure, 1908. to the Court of a days. appealed from.”
District Judge.

Appeals under the Code of Civil Procedure, provided for in articles 156 and
152 of the Act of 1908, had different periods of limitation; a larger period of
ninety days for appeals. to High Courts and a shorter period of thirty days for
appeals to the court. of a District Judge. The Law Commission’, in its Report
on that Act, took the view that in the light of improvement in the means of
quick transport enabling the litigant to undertake travel to the seat of the High
Court, the period of ninety days was unrealistic and should be reduced to thirty
days. The Limitation Bill, 1962, as introduced, sought to implement this recom-
mendation. However, when the matter came up before the Joint Committee, the
Committee accepted an amendment moved by an Honourable Member (Shri
S. K. Basu) which sought ‘o retain the period of ninety days. That is how
article 116 (combining the cartier articles 156 and 152) came to be enacted in the
present form.

41.6. We should reiterate the carlier recommendation of the Law Commis- Rew
. 5 हु हद है ommenda~
sion for reduction of the period for appeal to the High Court to thirty days. tion as to
Reduction of the period is justificd for the reasons given in the Report on the शत 146.
earlier Act. It may, to some extent, also help to reduce the number of appeals
to the High Court, since a shorter period might dissuade a wavering appellant
from taking a chance.

41,7. This takes us (0 article 117, which reads as under =~ Article 117.
_ “117. From, a decree or order of any’ Thirty The date of the decree or order.”
High Court to the same Court. days.

Article 151 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877 read as under :--

“151, From a decree or order of any of Twenty The date of the decree cr order.”
the High Courts of Judicature at’ days.
Fort William [Madras] [and Bom-
bay, of of the High Court of East
Pyniabj in the exercise of its o-i-
ginal jurisdiction.

‘Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1908), page 62-63, para 165
aad page 88, article 40, fatter part.

x»


203

Article 118.

Order 37,
९.९.८.

Qutline of
the procedure.

89PH REPORT OF LAW COMMN, OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 41--Articles 114 to 117—Appeals.}--(Chapter 42—Articles 118 10 136 ~
Applications in Specified Cases.)

«Increase of the period from 20 days to 30. 4895 was recommended by the

" Law Commission in its Report on the Act of 1908—which also recommended 8

uniform period for all High Courts.! The recommendation has been carried out.
The Commission observed that the then existing period (20 days) was too short
“and attempis ate often made to get an extended period by first applying for
leave to appeal as a pauper (for which a period of 30 days) is provided and then
on failure to obtain such Icave, 10 ask for time for payment of court fee, the
delay in such payment being excused by the Court”.

No further change is needed in the article.

CHAPTER 42

€

ARTICLES 118 TO 136: APPLICATIONS IN SPECIFIED CASES

42.1, Articts 118 reads as under :--

“For leave to appsar anddefundasuit Ten When the summons is served.”
unde: summary,provedure. हर days.

This corresponds, in subsiance, to article 159 of the Acts of 1908 and 1877.
They read as under: —

“For leave to appear and defend a suit Ten Wy hen the summons is served.”
under summary procedure referred to days.

in section 128(2) (f) or under Order

XXXVIL of the same Code (Code of

Civil Procedute, 1908).

42.2. The article has to be read with Order 37, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
which lays dowa the procedural Jaw applicable to suits iriable under the summary
procedure. The Courts and 8४1 governed by the Order are enumerated in
Order 37, rule 1. It is enough 10 note that thei: range and ambit have been
considerably widened by the amcndmenis made in 1976 in the Code. The pro-
cedure to be followed step-by-step is provided for in Order 37, rules 2 and 3. The
remaining rules of the Order dea] with matters of detail. हु

The scheme Jaid down in Grder 37, rules 2-3, for the trial of a suit under the
summary procedure (so far as is snuierial for the present purpose) can be said °
to comprise several stages, of whicl: «wo are important—

(i) appearance by the defeadant, and

(ii) seeking leave 1७ defend.

There are two disliact categories of summons envisaged by Onder 37, rule 3,
corresponding to the two stages mentioned above.

42.3. In outline, the procedure under Order.37, 18 as under:—

After the summons for appearance is issued to the defendant, he may, under ,
Order 37, rule 3(1), enter an appearance within 10 days.

गुण Commission of of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1908), page 62, para 164 and
page 88, article 40, latter part.


SOrn REPORT OF LAW COMMS. OF IND'A ON THE LIMITATION Act, 1963 209

(Chapter 42—-Articles 118 to 136- -Applitations in SpecifiedCases.)

has to file in court an address for service.

वह he enters an appearance. he 1
or send a “notice of

On the date of entering the appearance, he has. io setve
appearance” to the plaintiff. .

the plaintiff has to serve 6n the defen-
d form), returnable not less than
t he accompanied by an

After the appearance is so entered.
dant a summons for judgment (in the piescribe
10 days from the date of service. The summons mus!
application verifying certain facts.

(2) The next—and the second most important—stage is the seeking by the
defendant of leave to defend. Under Order 37, rule 36), within ten days from
“the service of the summons for judgment. the defendaat may. by affidavit or
otherwise disclosing sufficient facts. apply for leave to defend the suit, If leave
js not sought or (though sought) is nat granted, a decree follows. Tf leave is
granted, the trial proceeds.

(We are not, in the present Report, concerned with the vonsiderations to be
taken into account by the Court while considering the grant of leave).

42.4. We have referred above fo the provisions in the Code of Civil Proce- Proposal of
dure in view of the fact that we find that the Government of Maharashtra has, Government of
for sometime, been actively considering a proposal for amending article 118 of
the Limitation Act and also the relevant provisions of Order 37 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, with a view to mitigating certain difficulties that have been ex-

petienced under the present provisions.

The Government of Maharashtra has stated’ that the period of limitation
of ten days under article 118 is found to be too short, by persons residing outside
the jurisdiction of the court and by the big concerns (including Government
departments and local authorities) who require more time to obtain, orders of
their appropriate authorities. Similarly. the present procedure (in order 37,
CPC) of first entering appearance and then obtaining leave to defend. results in
avoidable delay and cost to both the parties. To save the litigant from such
hardship, the State Government has proposed that in a summary suit when the
summons is served, the defendant should apply for leave to defend and, for this
purpose, the period of limitation should be extended to thirty days from the
date on which the summons is served on him. The proposal is to amend article
118 in its application to the State of Maharashtra for this purpose, after which
amendment, it is expected that the High Court will take necessary action to
amend Order 37 C.P.C. suitably. The High Coust, it is stated, has been con-
suited and is in favour of the amendirer The proposal was forwarded. by
the State Government to the Government of India for administrative approval
according to the instructions of the Government of India regarding legislative
proposals concerned with matters in the Concurrent List. Copies of the rele-
vant papers were forwarded to this Commission by the Legislative Department
of the Government of India, with a recuest for information as to whether any
proposal for amendment of article 118 has beon considered by the Commission
for amendmeni of article 118 and. if so, with what result. Though there is,
before us, no formal suggestion for smendment of the article, we have found the
Proposal of the Government of Maharashiva as deserving of favourable considera-
tion. .

“Papers in Government of India Logilative Department Fite F.14(138)/Si-Leg. Tt
Maharashtra State L.A. Bill No. 94 of 1981 entitled “The Limitation (Maharashtr ‘Amend:
ment) Bill, 1931” introduced in the State Assembly 30 Nov. 1981, °

'


210

|
em
viewed

favourably,

Recommenda-
tion,

Article 119.

89TH REPORS OF LAW €OMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1953
(Chapter 42--Articles 118 to (39 —Applications in Specified Cases.)

42.5. Since the proposal of the Government of Maharashtra is a composite
one, involving an amendment both of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and of
article 118 of the Limitation Act, we are not, in this Report, recommending any
amendment of article 118 of the Limitation Act on an all-India basis. At the
same time, it*appears to us that acceptance of the proposal of Staie Government
of Maharashtra for amendment of the Limitation Act in its application io that
State is ultimately likely to improve the expeditious disposal of Summary Suits,
and our recommendation for the present is that any such proposal by a State
Government for replacing the vasinus siages of Order 37. rule 2. by a simpler
mode of trial should. in principle. be“ viewed favourably. {f the experience of
working of the proposed procedure in the State or States where such an amend-
ment is effected shows good results, it will be worthwhile to consider the in-
corporation of similar amendmenis ~n an all-India basis in the Code of Civil’
Procedure, 1908, Order 37 and in ariicle 118 of th: | imitation Act, 1963.

42.6, A verbal point concerning article 118 any be mentioned at this stage.
The first column of the article describes the application as one “for leave to
appear and defend a suit under summary procedure”. However, it should be
mentioned that Order 37 rule 3, as it now stands. does not require leave for
appearance of the defendant. though leave is still required for defending the
suit. In order to ensure that this position is refected in the Limitation Act, we
would have considered recommending a verbal change in the first column.
However, it should. at the same time, be pointed out that a number, of time
limits, for taking various steps contemplated by the rules of procedure are speci-
fied in the rules also—Order 37, rule 31) to 3(5).

Somewhat elaborate amendments may be required in Order 37, Rule 3.

42.7. In view of what we have stated above in our comments on the pro-
posal of the Government of Maharashtra—a proposal involving substantial
amendments in the procedural provisions—we think that it would be more bene-
ficial if. instead of a mere verbal amendment of article 118, the procedural sche-
me itself receives consideration from the point of view of the numerous stages
envisaged at present by Order 37, Rule 3 C.P.C. After the State amendments
@when they materialise) are given a trial, this can be taken up. Along with
an amendment of Order 37 C.P.C., Article 118 of the Limitation Act can also
then be amended so as to increase the period to 30 days.!

42.8. This takes us to article 119, which reads as under :—

“119. Under the Arbitration Act. 1940—

{a) for the filing in court of an Thirty The date of service of the notice
award; days. of the making of the award;

(0) for setting aside an award Thirty The date of service of the filing of
remitted for reconsideration. days. the award.”

Articles 158 and 178 of the Act of 1908. as substituted by the Arbitration
Act, 1940, read as under:

“158. Urder the Arbitration Act. Thirty The date of service uf the notice of
1943, to set aside 39 award orto = days. —sfiling of the award.
get an award remitted for recon-
sideration. .

\For future action at the appropriate time.”


89TM REPORT OF LAW CUMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 21

(Chapter 42.--Articles 118 to 136: Applications in Specified Cases.

178. Under the Arbitration Act, 1940, Ninety The date of service of the notice of
for the filing in court ofanaward. days. the making of the award.”

Corresponding provisions in the Act of 1877 were articles 158 and 176, which

read as under: -
“158. Under the Code of Civil Proce- Ten When the award is submitted te the
dure to set aside an award. days. Court.

176. Under the Code, of Civil Proce- Six The date of the award.”
dure, section 516 or 525, that an months.
_award be filed in Court.

Corresponding provisions in the 1871 Act were articles 155 and 165, which

read as under
“155, Under the Code of Civil Proce- Ten ‘When the award is submitted to the
dure to set aside an award days. Court and notice of the submission

has been given to the persons and
in mannec prescribed by the
High Court.
165. Under the Code of Civil Proce- Six The date of the award.”
dure, section three hundred and months
twenty seven, that an award be
filed in Court.

it may be mentioned that in the present Act. the period has been made uniform.

42.10. The question of the arbitrator filling an award is of interest. In 8 arbitrator

Nagpur case’, after summarising the case law, the court observed: filing award
in

“Tt has been held in a series of cases that article 178 of the Limitation Act
(of 1908) does not apply to {the) arbitrator.” i.e. to the arbitrator who himself
files the award.

42.11. This matter was considered by the Law Commission’ in its Report ह aw.commis-
on the Act of 1908. It recommended that there should be a time limit for thesion’ |, Report
arbitrator to file the award, and that the period should be thirty days from the of isos.
fast date of service of notice of the making of the award on any one of the
parties. This recommendation of the Law Commission was not, however, ac-
cepted at the drafting stage. One of the comments’ received was that the arbi-
trator should have uo right at all under the Arbitration Act to file an award in
court by himself. without the parties moving within 90 days or the court ordering
“him to file the award in court.

.. . Another District Judge* opposed the recommendation for curtailing the period
of 90-days under article 178. Ultimately, the article emerged as quoted above.
We have no further suggestion to make on this point. It would seem that the
filing of an award by an arbitrator need not be accompained by an application’.

_ | 42.12. As to the scope of the words “otherwise invalid”, which occur 1M 86९ Recommenda-
tion 30{b) of the Arbitration Act. 1940, the Law Commission‘ in its Report om tion as to
ay
C

*Goonda Lal पर. Mathura Dass, ALR. 1957 Nagpur 32.
*Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation 1908), page 66,
District Judge Shri J. Sambasivrac, Andbra Pradesh Legislative Department file (1963

Bill).
; ‘District Judge, Shri B.M. Nigam, Uttar Pradesh Legislative Depariment file (1963 Bill).
SCf. State v. Thomas, ALR: 1973 Ker, 262, 264,
‘Law Commission of India, 76th Report (Arbitration Act, 1940), page $3.

_ 8-14 M of LY ACAIND/83


212

Article 120.

Applicability
tioder spect

law.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN, OF INOIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 42—Articles 118 to 136: Applications in Specified Cases.\

yt Act has recommended that an Explanation should be added to section 30 as
follows :—— °

“Explanation —The expression ‘or is otherwise invalid’ includes the ground
that there was no valid arbitration agreement or no valid reference to arbi-
tration”,

We reiterate this recommendation, which makes the statement of the law
in the section comprehensive.

42.13. Article 120 reads as under :—

“Under the Code of Civil Procedure,’ Ninety The date of death of the plaintiff,
1908, to, have the legal representative days. ‘appellant, defendant or respondent
of a decease plaintiff or appellant or ‘as the case may be.

of a deceased defendant or respondent, *

made a party.

This article corresponds to articles 176 and 177 of the 1908 Act, which read
+ as under:—

“176, Under the same Code to have Ninety The date of the death of the de-
the legal representative of a de- days. ceased plaintiff or appellant,
ceased plaintiff or of a deceased
appellant made a party.

177, Under the same Code to have Ninety | The date of the death of the de-
the legal representative of a de- days. ceased defendant or respondent.”
ceased defendant or a of a de-
ceased respondent made a party.

Corresponding provisions in the Act of 1877 were contained in articles 175A,
1758 and 175C, which we need not quote.

42,14, The Delhi High Court’ has held that under section 53 of the Land
Acquisition’ Act, 1895, the provisions of Order 9 as well as Order 22 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 apply to proceedings before the District Court
under that Act and. the District Court must bring the legal representatives on
record on the death of a party to such proceedings; at the same time, the coust
held that the provisions of the Limitation Act would not be attracted, and the
application for substitution should be made within reasonable titne.

42.15, On principle, a person whose land has been acquired and who claims
more compensation than that given by the Collector should be vigilant, and, if
the original owner dies during the pendency of the proceedings, it should be
obligatory for the legal representative of the deceased to apply for being brought
on record in the same manner-—as he would do if the deceased was a plaintiff in a

‘regular civil suit.

To permit the legal representative to apply within a “reasonable time” might
encourage undue pendency of the proceedings. However, we are not recomi-
mending an amendment of the Limitation Act, as this question has to be dealt
with in the special laws, rather than in the Limitation Act.

We may incidentally mention here that in discussing certain other sections,
we have dealt with the position of Tribunals.

Union of India v. Sanwalia, LL.R, (1975) Delhi 837.
See discussion as to section 29 and article 137.


8971 REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 42—Articles 118 to 136: Applications in Specified Cases.)

42.16. The third columu of the article under discussion speaks about the Starting
date of death of the plaintiff (or the appellant, defendant or the respondent), as the Point
starting point of limitation. The Supreme Court (in another context), while inter-
preting article 171 of the Act of 1908 (corresponding to present article 121), held‘
that the date of the appellant’s knowledge of the death of deceased respondent
was irrelevant for the purposes of computation of time under that article.

However, the Judicial Commissiouer, Goa has held’ that the period of
limitation under article 120 starts on the day on which the parties opposing the
deceased party acquire knowledge of the death of the deceased. When it was
argued that the text of column 3 leaves no margin to accommodate such an
interpretation, the Court observed : —

“However, it seems to me that ‘if such an interpretation had been accepted,
jt would lead to starting results in cases in which deliberately or otherwise
the death of a party was kept in secret by the party interested in not having
the heirs brought on record in time so that they might raise the defence of
limitation. The party who did not have the knowledge of the death would
in such circumstances be put in serious jeopardy. This leads me to believe
that the interpretation placed by Shri Usgaonkar on the passage quoted
above is not correct, The words “the date of death of the plaintiff, appel-
lant, defendant or respondent, as the case may be’ apply to the heirs or
legal representatives of the plaintiff, appellant, defendant or respondent as
the case may be when such heirs or legal representatives have the duty of
being brought on record or the duty of informing the other side about the
fact of the death. The period of limitation under Item 120 therefore starts
on the day on which the parties opposing the deceased party acquire know-
ledge of the death of the deceased.”

42.17. No other. case has come to our notice to support the interpreta-
tion of the Judicial Commissioner, Goa, and in a sense, such an interpretation,
with respect, runs counter to the one placed by the Supreme Court on article 171
of the Act of 1908.

42.18. Nor does the present position really cause serious hardship. An abate- No change
ment that follows on non-substitution can be set aside under article 121, and, in re- needed.
gard to an application under that article, section 5 of the Act is also applicable.

Bonafide ignorance of the death of a party is sufficient cause in this context

42.19. Article 121 reads as under — . पु _ Atticte 121.

“Under the same Code for an order to Sixty The date of abatement.”
set asipe an abatement. days.

Asticle 171 of the Act of 1908 reads as under:—

“Under the Code of Civil Procedure, Sixty The date of abatement.”
1908, for an order to set aside an aba- days.
toment.

This article has not given rise to any controversy, and needs no change. It
should be noted that though the period is sixty days, it can be extended under sec-
tion 5. Further, ignorance of death is a factor to be taken into account in applying
section 5.'

TWnion of India v. Ram Charan, A.LR. 1964 S.C. 215, 220 (case under article 121).

°Polpoto ९. Nilkhunt, ALR, 1972 Goa 31. . हि
0.22, 1९. 45), Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, as inserted in 1976.
4Order 22, Rule 4(5), Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 as inserted in 1976.

21


214 89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDSA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 42—Articles 118.10 136: Applications in Specified Cases.)
Article 122, 42.20, Article 122 reads as under :—

“To restore a suit or appeal or appli- Thirty Date of dismissal.”
cation for review or revision dismissed days.

for default of appearance or for want

of prosecution or for failure to pay

costs of service of process or to fur-

nish security for costs.”

1
Articles 160, 163, 168 and 172 of the Act of 1908 read as under :—

“160, For an order under the same Fifteen When the application for review
Code, to restore to the file an days. Tejected.
application for review rejected in
consequence of the failure of the
applicant to appear when the app-
lication was called on for hearing.

163. By a plaintiff for an order to set Thirty The date of the dismissal.
aside a dismissal for default of days.
appearance or for failure to pay
costs of service or process or to
furnish security for costs,

168, For the re-admission of an appeal Thirty The date of dismissal.
. dismissed for want of prosecution. days.

172. Under the same Code by the Sixty — The date of the order of dismissal,
assignee or the receiver of an in- days.
solvent plaintiff or appellant for
an order to set aside the dismissal
of a suit or an appeal.

The corresponding provisions in the 1877 Act were contained in articles 160,
162, 168 and 171, which need not be quoted.

On the recommandation of the Law commission,’ articles 160, 163, 168 and
172 of the Act of 1908 were consolidated into one article, and a uniform period
of 30 days from the date of dismissal has been Provided in. the present Act.

Failure to 42.21, Article 122 has been differently interpreted as respects its ‘application
Seposit cost, _ 10 the restoration of appeals dismissed for failure to deposit the cost of paper
Paper "book. The Rajasthan High Court has observed":

“An application for restoration of an appeal which is dismissed because of the
failure of the appellant to pay the cost of Preparing the paper book as re-
quired by Rules of High Court is governed by Art. 168 of the Limitation Act
(of 1908). Such a dismissal can only be called dismissal for want of presecu-
tion and Art. 168 applies to all cases where there is an application for te-
admission of an appeal which has been dismissed for want of prosecution,
even though the application may not be under O.XLI, R.19, C.P.C.”

In an old case, the Calcutta High Court held® that such an application ‘was
made under the rules of the High Court and not under section 558 of Code of
Civil Procedure, 1882 and is, therefore outside this article.

This view was also followed by the Patna High Court’,

Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1908), page 67, para 174.
*Ram Niwas v. Sulaman, LUR. (1951) 1 Raj. 827, 829. .
‘Ram Hari Sahu v. Madan Mohan Mitter, (1896) LL.R. 25 Cat. 339, 347. पर
145 ‘Minnie Lal v. Mahadeo La Marwari, ALR. 1949 Pat, 112, para 2; LL.R, 27 Pat.


891H REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION Act, 1963
(Chapter 42—Articles 118 to 136: Applications in Specified Cases.)

42.22. The Mysore High Court’ has held that when the High Court has
dismissed an appeal for non-payment of costs for Preparation of paper book,
such dismissal is in the exercise of the inherent powers under section 151 of the
Code of Civil Procedure 1908, and the Limitation Act does not apply to an
application for restoration of the appeal. The Court took the view that an
application for restoration should be made within reasonable period, and what
the reasonable period is depends upon the facts and circumstances of cach
case,

However, a contrary view has been taken by a ruling of the Full Bench
of the Orissa High Court? in which the expression “for want of prosecution”
occurring in article 122 has been given a wide connotation so as to cover
any class of appeal dismissed for non-compliance with the High Court rules,

The point may not, in practice, arise very frequently. It is for that
reason that we refrain from recommending a clarificatory amendment.

42.23. The next article—article 123 reads as under:— : Article 123.

“123, To set aside a decree passed ex Thirty The date of the decree or where the
parte or to rehear an appeat dec- days. summons or notice was not duly
creed or heard expgrte. served. when the applicant had

knowledge of the decree.”

Explanation——For the purpose of this urticle, substituted service under rule
20 of Order V of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1980, shall not be deemed to be
due service.”

in the Act of 1908, articles 164 and 169 read as: under: —

“164, By a defendant, for an order to Thirty The date of the decree or, where
set aside a dectee passed ex parte. days. the summons was not duly served,
when the applicant has know-
ledge of the decree.”
“£69, For the re-hearing of an appeat Thirty The date of the decree in appeal or,
heard ex parte. days. where notice of the appeal was
not duly served when the applicant
has knowledge of the decree.”

42.24. The Law Commission had, in its Report oa fe Act of 1908, taken Law Commis-
notice of the different interpretations of the expression “duly served” in column 3 sion Report
of the relevant article and observed that it would be unjust to impute knowledge cf its.
of the decree to a party when the party was not served with summons (in the
ordinary manner). The -recommendation' of the Commission was to amend the
article suitably on this point. The recommendation has been accepted, and an
Explanation added in the article (by the Act of 1963) so as to ensure that substi-
tuted service is not ‘due service’ within the meaning of the article! No further
change is needed in article 123.

42.25. Article 124 reads as under :— ,
Article 124
“124, For a review of judgment by a Thirty The date of the decree or order.”
court other than the Supreme days.
Court.

sBaswantarava १, Gurappa, A.LR. 1968 Mysore 329, 330, 331.

2Binla Devi v, Patitapaban, A.1R. 1973 Orissa 169, 171 (FB).

SLaw Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1908), page 67, paragraph
175 and page 88, article 46.

4८1. Kanshi Ram ¥, Bhagwan Kaur, A.LR. 1970 Punjab 300.

215


216

Court Fees
Act and other
aspects—

No change
needed,

Article 125.

Format
application.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 42- Articles 118 to 136: Applications in specified cases)
Article 161, 162 and 173 of the Act o£ 1908 read as under :—

“161. For a review of judgment by a Fifteen ‘The date of the decree or order.
Court of Smail Causes (other than — days.
a Presidency Smail Cause Court)
or by a Court invested with the
jurisdiction of a Court of
Small Causes when exercising that
jurisdiction.
162. For areview of judgment byany Twenty The date of the decree or order.
of the following Cours, ramely, days.
the High Courts of Judicature at
Fort William, Madras, Bombay
and Nagpur and the High Court
of East Punjab in the exercise of
its original jurisdiction.
173. For a review of judgment except Ninety The date of the decree or order.”
in the cases provided for by article days.
161 and 162,

Corresponding articles in the Act of 1877 were 160A, 162 and 173, which we
need not quote.

42.26. Articles 4 and 5 of Schedule | to the Court Fees Act, 1870 make a
distinction between applications for review of judgment if presented on or after
the ninetieth day from the date of decree (on the one hand) and applications pre-
sented before the ninetieth day from the decree. An applicant pays one-half court
fee. in the latter case. However, this is a matter separate from limitation.

Several other aspects of the article under consideration have practical import.
ance, but the case law discloses no need for amendment or clarification of its
wording.

42.27. Article 125 reads as under:—

“125. To record an adjustment or satis- Thirty {jWhen the payment or adjustment
faction of a decree. days. is made.”

It corresponds to article 174 of the Act of 1908 and to article 173A of the Act
of 1877, They read as under: —

Act of 1808 °

“174, For the issue of a notice under Ninety When the payment or adjustment is
the same Code, to show cause days. made.”
why any payment made out of
Court of any money payable
under a decree or any adjustment
of the decree should not be re-
corded as certified.

Act of 1877

“173. For the issue of & notics under Ninety The date of the decree or order.”
section 258 of the same Code, to days.
show cause why the payment or
adjustment therein mentioned
should not be recorded as certi-
fied.

42.28. Some contrayersy exists as to the need fur formal application for
recording an adoption. But the matter primarily relates to the law of procedure
and an amendment in the form or substance of the Limitation Act would hardly
be appropriate.


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMM. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT. 1963 217

(Chapter 42-~Articles 118 to 136: Applications in specified cases)
42.29. Article 126 reads as undet:— Article 126.

“For the payment of the amount of a Thirty , The date of the decree.”
decree by instalments. days.

Article 175 of the Act of 1908 read ‘as under: — .

“For payment of the amount of a Six The date of the decree.”
decres by instalments. months.

The period of limitation in this article has been cut down to 30 days as
envisaged by the Law Commission in its Report on the Act of 1998. The article
needs no change.

(९ ४» Asticle 127 reads as under:— Article 127.

“To set aside a sale in execution of a Sixty The date of the sale.”
decree, including any such application days.
by a judgment-debtor. (Substi-

tuted in

1976 for

“Thirty

days”).2

Article 166 of the Act of 1908 was as under :—-
“Under the same Code to set aside a Thirty The date of the sale.”

sale in execution of a decree, including days.”
any. such application by a judgment-

(The last seven words were added in 1927.)

In the Act of 1877, article 172 read as under:—

*By a purchaser at an execution-sale Sixty The date of therale.
to set aside the sale on the ground that — days.””

the person whose interest in the pro-

perty purported to be sold had no

saleable interest therein.

In the Act of 1871, article 159 read as under :—
“To set aside a sale in execution of a. Thirty The date of the sale.”

deciee, on the ground of irregularity in days.
publishing or conducting the sale.

42,31. A question arose in the past as to the applicability of this article to Insolvency
an application to set aside a sale in insolvency proceedings. The Judicial Com- एक
missioner, Nagpur, held that the provisions of Order 21, Code of Civil Procedure,

1908 (Execution), were applicable to insolvency proceedings and the period of
limitation applicable to 2 petition for sctting aside a sale in insolvency proceedings
must be thirty days under article 166 of the Limitation Act of 1908 (present article
127). But the Chief Court of Punjab took a contrary view,‘ and held that article
166 (Act of 1908) was not applicable to such an application, as it was not an
application to set aside a sale in “execution of a decree” and that an application
to set aside a sale that had been conducted by the court in realising the assets

1Law Commission of Jn 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1908), page 88, article 49.
98, Code of ] Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1976 (104 of 1976).

Balaji v; Gopal Mali, AIR. 1927 Ng. 262.

*Afzal Ali १. Aman Ali, ALR. 1914 Lab, 209-



218

Parties to the
application
joinder, of.

subsequent,

Effect of
fraud of
alone on
decree holder
auction-pur-
chaser al lone.

89TH REPORT OF LAW CONMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 42---Articles 118 to 136: Applications in Specified cases)

of the insolvent was governed by article 181 of the Limitation Act, 1908. These
two are comparatively old cases, and since then, the controversy does not appear
to have come on the surface during the last fifty years. Hence no explanatory
amendment on this count appears to be needed.

42.32, Another controversy is concerned with the joinder of parties in an
application under 0.21, Rule 92, C.P.C. The Patna High Court has held! that the
auction-purchaser is a necessary party to an application under Order 21, Rule 92,
to set aside an execution sale and where he is not made a party within the time
allowed, the application cannot be entertained. A contrary view has been taken
by Rajasthan High Court, holding’ that it is not necessary to mention the name
of the party in the heading of the application and if any party is left out, it is
the duty of the Court to give notice under the proviso to 0.21, R.92(2) C.P.C.
and the application would not be barred by limitation. Since the passing, of the
Limitation Act in 1963, this article has not given rise to any controversy and the
above solitary conflict need not detain us.

‘

42.33. Then, there is the question of fraud, be antecedent and subsequent. In
one case’ the Kerala High Court has observed that on principle, if the fraud
antecedent to the sale was of such a nature as to suffice for the requirements of
section 18 (Limitation Act, 1908), such fraud could not be dismissed from consi-
deration as having had its origin earlier. However, the Patna High Court has
held that the petitioner must satisfy the court that he had been kept from the
knowledge of his right to file an application and that his right to set aside the
sale occurred after the sale. The Court further observed that fraud prepetrated
by the opposite party must be a fraud committed after the sale, and not a
fraud committed in bringing about the sale. In this context, section 17 of the
Limitation Act, 1963 does not differentiate between antecedent fraud and subse-
quent fraud, The limitation runs from the time the applicant has discovered
the fraud or could, with reasonable diligence, have discovered it. In the absence
of further case law on the point, we would teave the matter at that.

\

42,34, A question has arisen whether the fraud of the decree-holder alone or
of the auction-purchaser alone would be sufficient to extend the period of limita-
tion. The Mysore High Court holds‘ that section 18 (of the Act of 1908), could
be attracted where the fraud in question was practised either by the decree-holder
or by the auction-purchaser. In a Calcutta case,’ it was held that a judgment
debtor was not entitled to the benefit of section 18 for the purpose of making an
application under 0.21, R.90, C.P.C, to set aside an execution sale, if the decree-
holder was not a party to the fraud alleged. In an Allahabad Full Bench case’,
the view taken is that fraud of the decree-holder suffices and that it is immaterial
whether the decree-holder alone is guilty of the fraud. or whether the auction-
purchaser was also a party to the fraud.

KS. Hegde J. (in the Mysore case* referred to above) has taken stock of the
judicial opinion on the subject and concluded as under: —

Sumitra Kaur ४. Damri Lall, ATR. 1921 Pat. 498,

“Alladin v. Karimbux, ALR. 1955 Raj. 51.

8Malhan Simon v. Quseph looka, IR, 1964 Ker 88, 89, 90 Para 3.

‘Jagdhar Missir v. Dharai Kharwa. 1920 Pat. 725,

SD. Veerappa १. Bangarappa, /.1.1९. 1960 Mys. 297.

SAzizunnessa ५. Dwarika Prasad, A.LR. 1925 Cal, 1227, 1228. .

"Mt. Balkesha Kunwar v. Harakh Chand, A.LR. 1934 All 255, 258; LLR. 56 All
613 FB.)

*Veerappa १, Bangarappa, ALR. 1960 Mys 297, 299, LL.R. (1960) Mys. 324,



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN, OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 219

(Chapter 42- Articles 118 to 136: Applications in specified cases.)

“Both on principle and on preponderance of judicial authority, it appears
to me that the correct view is that section 28 of the Limitation Act (of 1908)
is applicable where the fraud in question is practised either by the decree-
holder or by the auction-purchaser.”

The controversy really appertains to section 17 of the present Act. Much may
depend on the manner in which the parties are arrayed and other relevant facts.
In view of this, we do not recommend any amendment on this point.

“ass However, we should refer to a connected provision in the Code of Recommenda-
Civil Procedure, 1908, which seems to need amendment. Article 127 of the ton 40 fo O21,
Limitation Act is concerned with applications, in regard to which 0.21, R.92(2) of CPC.”

the Code is relevant. The period of limitation for an application under article
127 is sixty days, after its amendment’ in 1976. The application is to be accom-
panied by a deposit. The period for making the required deposit under 0.21,
1२.१2, C.P.C. is, however, still thirty days. This disharmony between the two
statutory provisions should be removed. We may point out that the disharmony
has been adverted to in a recent judgment of the Kerala High 00017 also. To
remove this discrepancy, we recommend that 0.21, R.92(2) of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, should be suitably amended by increasing the period from 30
days to 60 days’.

42.36. We now turn to article 128, which reads as under :— Article 128.

“For possession by one dispossessed Thirty |The date of the dispossession.”
of immovable property and disputing days.

the right of the decree holder or pur- co

chaser at a sale in execution of a decree.

Article 165 of the Act of 1908 read as under:—

“Under the Cade of Civil Procedure, Thirty The date of the dispossession.”
1908 by a person dispossessed of im- days.

movable property and disputing the

tight of the decree-holder or purchaser

at a sale in execution of a decree to be

put into possession.

Tn the Act of 1877, article 165 was in identical terms. In the Act of 1871
also, article 158 was in identical terms.
. 42.37. Certain controversies on this article have ceased to be relevant after No change:
the 1976 amendment of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, 0.21, R.100, In view ommended.
of this position, we do not see any reason to recommend any change in the
article,

# 42.38. Article 129 reads as under :—

“For possession after removing resis- Thirty The date of resistance or obstruc-
tance or obstruction to delivery or days. tion.”

possession of inunovable property de-

creed or sold in execution cf a decree.

Yn the Act of 1908, article 167 reid as under: —

“Complaining of resistance or obstruc- Thirty The date of the resistance or obst-
tion to delivery of possession of im- — days. ruction.

movable property decreed or sold in

execution of a dectee,

Article 129.

‘Section 98, Code of Civil Procédute (Amendment) Act, 1976.
*Dakshayini v. Madhavan, A.LR. 1982 Ker. 126 (June).
STo be carried out under 0.21, R. 92(2), Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

30-14 M of LJ&CA/ND}83


’
220 89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

.
"(Chapter 42—Articles 118 to 136: Aplications in specified cases.)

In the Act of 1878, article 167 read as under :—- ‘
“Complaining of resistance or obst- Thirty The date of the tesistance, obstruc-
ruction to delivery of possession of days. tion or dispossession.”
immovable property decreed or sold
in execution of a decree, or of posses-
sion in the delivery of possession
to the decree holder or the purchaser
of such property.

Tn the Act of 1871, article 160 read as under :
- “Complaining of resistance or obst- Thirty The date of the resistance, obstruc-
! tucticn to delivery of possession of days. _tion or dispossession.”
immovable property sold in execu-
tion of a decree, or of dispossession ‘
in the delivery of possession to the
purchaser of such property.

Starting 42.39. There is some debate in the case law about the starting point in regard
point of to fresh obstructions, The Madras High Court has held that an application’

for the removal of a second obstruction, made-more than thirty days after acquiear
cence in a previous obstruction, was not barred by article 167 (of the Act of 1908)
and such’ acquiescence did not deprive the person entitled to possession of any
further right to obtain execution. The calcutta High Court held’ that the auction-
purchaser was not limited to one application under 0.12, Rule 95, C.P.C. and the
period of 30 days prescribed by article 167 (Act of 1908) was to be counted from
the date of the resistance or obstruction in respect of which the complaint was
made. However, the Bombay High Court has held’ that the time limit for a
subsequent application in respect of an obstruction by the same person would
count from the earlier obstruction. है

42.40, The Bombay view has been expressly dissented from in a Gujarat
case,‘ on the ground that though the Bombay ruling was a Full Bench decision the
observations in that ruling were obiter. The Gujarat High Court held that since
the law allows the decree-holder to make a second application for execution and
to complain about the obstruction within 30 days from the date. of resistance or
obstruction, it was immaterial whether the decree-holder came, or failed to come,
to court within 30 days of the date of the first obstruction. In view of the fact
that the observations in the Bombay case were obiter, we make no recommenda
tion regarding any change therein.

42.41, This takes us to article 130 which reads as under :—
Article 130-

Recommenda- «139, For leave to appeal as a pauper—

(a) to the High Court Sixty The date of decree appealed from.
days,

(b) to any other court. Thirty The date of decree appealed from.”
ys. मु

IMayappan Chetty v. Mayappan Servai, A.LR. 1921 Mad. 559, 561.

*Burma Sundari Devt v. Kiranshashi Chodhaurani, AUR, 1938 Cal, 352 cf, ALR.
1959 Cal. 613, 615 and Kedar v. Baijnath, AJR. 1939 Cal. 494.

‘*Mukand Babu ४, Tanu Sabbu, ALR. 1933 Bom. 457 (६.8.)
‘Maneklal v. Ochhavlal, A.LR. 1970 Guj. 49, 50, 10 Guj. LR. 654,


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 42—Articles 118 to 136: Applications in specified cases.)

Article 170 of the 1908 Act, article 170 of the 1877 Act and article 162 of
the 1871 Act read as under :— है .

“170; For leave to appeal as 2 pauper Tyrty The date of the decree. appealed
. /5.

ys. from.
170. For leave to appeal as a pauper. Thirty The date of the decrce appealed —
days. against.

162. For leave to appeatas a pauper. Ninety The date of the decree appealed
days. against.”

42.42. Prior to 1963, a uniform period of limitation of 30 days was prescribed beat sae
for an application for leave to appeal as a pauper. The present article provides °
for two different periods, namely, 60 days and 30 days. The change was made

at the committee stage.

42.43. We are of the view thatgthe period prescribed for such leave should Recommenda-

be the same as that prescribed for the appeal, and that this principle should be Article 130.
applied to ali courts. Such a procedure should, we believe, work smoothly. If

ultimately the leave to appeal as an indigent person is granted. the application

can be converted into an appeal. If such leave is not granted. the court would -

generally grant time for the payment of court fees and (where the limitation

period for appeal has already expired), allow condonation of delay under section

5. In either case, a period identical with the period prescribed for the appeal

itself would cause no inconvenience.

Accordingly, we recommend that article 130 should be revised as under :--
“130, For leave to appeal as an indi- The same period as is prescribed The date

gent person to any court. for the appeal inrespect of which of decree
the leave is sought. appealed
from.”
42.44, This takes us to article 131. It reads as under :— Article 131.

“To any court for tne exercise of its Ninety The date of the decice or ordet or
powers of revisicn under the Code of days. —_séntencz sougbt to be revised.”
‘Civil Procedure, 1908, or the Code of

Criminal Procedure, 1898.

There was no corresponding provision in the earlier enactments, though the
practice of the High Courts generally laid down a time limit of 90 days. The
Law Commission, in its Report’ on the Act of 1908, recommended the incorpora-
tion of a new provision for making an application to any court for the exercise
of its powers of revision under the C.P.C. or Cr.P.C. and recommended a period
of limitation of 30 days. The Joint Committee, in its Report, however, observed
that the period of thirty days was too short and recommended that it should be
ninety days. That is how the article came to be enacted.

42.45. A question concerning fhe starting point under article 131 needs atten- Case law as
tion. In framing this article, it was presumed that the aggrieved person would to starting
be 80 connected with the proceedings affecting him that the date of the decree Point.
ot order or sentence passed in the proceeding will be known to him immediately,
because he would (in all probability) be present in court at the relevant time, or
will be notified by his counsel about the order affecting him. But this is not

‘Law Commission of India, 3rd ‘Report (Limitation Act, 1908), page 89, suggested
article 57.


222

Recommenda-
tion,

Article 132,

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION Act, 1963
(Chapter 42-—Articles 118 to 136: Applications in specified cases.)

always the case in reality. A Gujarat case illustrates the maiter:’ An auto rick-
shaw was seized as a conveyance used for theft. The rickshaw was the subject
matter of hire purchase. Neither the pe owner of the auto rickshaw, nor the
one to whom it was given on hire purclgse, was directly connected with the case
relating to theft. A revision was preferred by one Balamal against the order of
seizure of the auto rickshaw. It was discovered that if article 131 was to be
taken literally, the revision would be barred by time, as being beyond ninety
days of the date on which the order of seizure was passed. .

Shelat J. (as he then was), realising the hardship that would arise if columa
3 of the article were given a literal meaning, relied upon the observations of the
Supreme Court in an earlier case? where the expression “the date of the award”
in section 18(2) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, was construed as requiring
either actual or constructive knowledge of the order. Such knowledge was an
essential requirement for fair play and natural justice. The Supreme Court had.
in that case, refused to put a literal or mechanical construction on the expression
“from the date of the Collector’s award”, ugéd in the proviso to section 18. On
the basis of this reasoning, Shelat J. held that it would be reasonable and fair
that the period of ninety days (in article 131) should also run from the date of
the knowledge of the order, and not from the date of the order, हे

42.46. With a view to preventing recurrence of the injustice which may re-
sult from a mechanical construction being placed on the language occurring in
column 3 of article 131, we recommend that column 3 of the article should be
revised as follows :—

" “When the applicant had knowledge of the decree or order or sentence sought *
to be revised.”

In the first column of the article, the reference to the Code of Ceimily
Procedure, 1898, should be replaced by a reference to the present Code of 1

42.47. Asticle 132 reads as under :—~

“132. To the High Court for a certi- Sixty The date of the decree, order or

ficate of fitness to appeal to the- days. sentence.”

Supreme Court under clause (I)

of article 132, article 133 or sub-

clause (९) of elause (I) of article

134 of the Constitution or under

any other law for the time being

in foree.

)
Articles 153 and 179 of the 1908 Act read as under : —

“153. Under the same Code toa High Thirty The date of the order.”
Court from af order of a Sub- days,
ordinate Court refusing leave to
appeal to His Majesty in Council.

“179. By a person desiring to appeal Ninety The date of the decree appealed
under the Code of Civil Proce- days. — from.”
dure, 1908 to His Majesty in
Council for leave to appeal. s

In the Act of 1877, articles 153 and 177 read as under: —

“153, Under the same Code, section Thirty The date of the order refusing the
60!, to a High Court. days. certificate.
1Batamal v. State of Gujarat, A.I.R. 1970 Guj. 26 29. 30 (1970) Cr. LJ. 46.
*Harish Chandra v. Deputy Land Acquisition Officer, ALR. 1961 S.C. 1500.



897TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF ENDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 223

(Chapter 42—-Articles 118 to 136: Applications in specified cases.)

177, For the admission of an appeal to Six The date of the decree appealed
» Her Majesty in Council. months against.”

42.48. The Law Commission, in its Report on the Act of 1908 observed,' Law Gomis
that new provisions prescribing periods of limitation were necessary for making som Repel
applications 10 the High Court for a certificate of fitness to appeal to the Supreme
Court, Article 179 of the Limitation Act, 1908, as it then stood, provided a
period of 90 days for an application under the Code of Civit Procedure and did
not prescribe a period of Limitation for other applications. The Law Commission
recommended that a comprehensive provisions should be made as to the limita-
tion for applications to the High Court for a certificate of fitness for appeal to
the Supreme Court, and that, for all such applications a period of 30 days might
be prescribed. But the Joint Committee felt that the period of 30 days was too
short and that the period should be 60 days. .

42.49, This newly added provision has not given rise to any controversy. Recommenda-
However, in view of the amendments that have been made in the Constitution’ tion.
it would be proper to revise the wording of article 132 of the Limitation Act so
as to make it conform to the changed constitutional phraseology.

Accordingly, we recommend 8 redraft of the first column of article 132 as
under: —- ‘

Article 132, First Column (Revised)

“To the High Court for a certificate of the nature referred to in clause
(1) of article 132, clause (1) of article 133 or sub-clause (c} of clause (1) of
article 134 of the Constitution, read with article 134A thereof, or under any
other Jaw for the time being in force.”

42.50. This takes us to article 133, which reads as under :-- Article 133.

“To ‘the Supreme Court for special leave to appeal_—

(a) inacase involving death seu- Sixty The date of the judgment, finat or-
tenec. days. der or sentence,
(0) in a case where leave to appeat Sixty The date of the order of refusal.
was refused by the High days. .
Court;
(c) in any other case. Ninety The date of the judgment or order.”
jays.

+ There was no corresponding provision in the earlier Acts,
1

42,51. The Law Commission had, in its Report! on the Act of 1908, recom- Report of
mended a period of limitation of 30 days in respect of applications to the Supreme the Tae ion.
Court for special leave in a ९१४९ involving death sentence. The Joint Committee, .
however, felt that the period was too short, and that it should be sixty days.

42.52, With reference to this article, a suggestion of the Supreme Court has Suggestion of

been forwarded to the Law Commission by the Legislative Department, being a the Supreme

‘Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1908), page 64, para 169.
tArticles 132, 133, 134 and 134A of the Constitution,
SLaw Commission on India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1908), pages 90, 168-169, article
59a). >


Constitutional *
Position ‘as to

appeal to
Supreme Court,

Position
as to
Limitation.

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 42-—Articles 118 to 136: Applications in specified cases.)

suggestion made by the Registrar of thé Supreme Court' for amendntent of the
article in regard to cases where a party against whom a judgment or order has
been pronounced by the High Court applies orally for a certificate of fitness to
appeal. The difficulty felt in regard to this article may be thus stated in brief.
fn some cases, in the High Court a request for a certificate of fitness for appeal
to the Supreme Court is made by counsel orally. When this oral request is refus-
ed, the question as to whether a petition for special leave to appeal to the Sup-
reme Court can be filed in the Supreme Court within 60 days—clause (b) of article
133 or within 90 days-clause (c) of article 133 of the Limitation Act—has arisen.
Under article 133(b), which deals with the cases of refusal of leave to appeal by
the High Court, the period of limitation is 60 days. Under article 13320), which
applies “in any other case”, the period of limitation is 90 days. The period of
60 days mentioned in article 133, clause (b) is to be counted from the date of
the order of refusal (by the High Court), while the period of 90 days mentioned
in article 133, clause (c), is to be counted from the date of the judgment or order
of the High Court. Once the High Court refuses leave (the correct expression is
certificate”), clause (0) would presumably apply and the proceeding can be ‘filed
in the Supreme Court only within 60 days from the date of refusal of the certifi-
cate. But, by adopting this course, the litigant is deprived of the benefit of the
longer period of 90 days, which would, under article 133(c), have been available
to him, if he had come directly to the Supteme Court for special leave, No doubt,
the Supreme Court can condone the delay under section 5 of the Limitation Act
in such cases, but in order to avoid unnecessary applications under section 5, it
has been suggested that it is better to provide that in such contingencies the peti-
tioner shall have the benefit of limitation whichever is more beneficial to him
That means that where the date of order refusing a certificate and the date of
the judgment appealed from are the same, the petition for special leave to appeal
to the Supreme Court may be filed within 90 days. The Registrar of the Supreme
Court has requested the Government to take appropriate steps for suitably amend-
ing the Limitation Act for bringing out above position,

42.53, We have carefully considered this suggestion, and are in broad agree-
ment with it. Before we make our concrete recommendations in this. behalf, it
may be convenient to set out briefly the constitutional position. Under article
136 of the Constitution, the Supreme Court may, in its discretion, grant special
leave to appeal from any judgment, decree, determination, sentence or order’ in
any cause or matter, passed or made by any court or tribunal in the territory of
India—with the exception of a court or tribunal constituted by or under any law
relating to the armed forces, In regard to judgments of High Courts, an appeal
to the Supreme Court lies under article 132(1), 133(1) and 134(1) of the Constitu-
tion in the specified cases on a specified ground, where the High Court gives the
requisite certificate under article 134A of the Constitution. In certain criminal
cases involving a sentence of death, an appeal lies to the Supreme Court under
article 134(1) (a) and (0). even without a certificate. Further, article 1342) and
article 135 deal with appellate jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court by
Parliament by legislation and appellate jurisdiction in any matter exercisable
by the Supreme Court inherited from the Federal Court, respectively. But we
are concerned only with appeals where a certificate can be applied for.

42.54, Now, while appeals from courts other than the High Court to the
Supreme Court upder article 136 would, as regards the position for special leave
filed in the Supreme Court, be governed by article 133(c) of the Limitation Act,--

‘Letter from thé Registrar (Judicial), Supreme Court of India to the Secretary.*
Government, Ministry of Law, Justice & Company Affairs dated 28th January, 199...
copy forwarded to the Law Commission by the Legislative Department under its O.Mo-~
No. 11 (14)/82/Leg. Hi dated 24th August, 1982.


हैं 89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 42—Articles 118 to 136: Applications in specified cases.)

or in the rare case of death sentence imposed by some special court undér statute
by article 133(a) of Limitation Act—applications for leave to appeal from judg-
‘ments and orders of the High Court by special leave can fall either under article
13300) of the Limitation Act or under article 133(c) of that Act. If the certificate
is applied for in the High Court and refused, clause (b) becomes applicable and
only 60 days, it seems, would be available from the date of the order of refusal,
while, if a direct application had been made to the Supreme Court, clause ()
would apply, giving a period of 90 days. This 90 days period is counted from
the date of the judgment or order. Where the date of the order of refusal is
much later than the date of the judgment or order of the High Court, the litigant
may stand to gain by relying on clause (b), but where the two are simultaneous,
he would stand to lose if clause (b) is applied. This is the anomaly which is
sought to be removed by the suggestion made by the Registrar of the Supreme
Court, referred to above. As far as we could understand, it is not the intention
shat clause (c) of afticle 133 should be disturbed, the only change desired is to
ensure that the litigant whose application in the High Court for certificate is re-
fused should get 90 days from the date of the judgment, if the judgment. of the
High Court and the order of refusal are simultaneous. We do not see any objec-
tion to the acceptance of this suggestion and are recommending a re-draft of
article 133 to achieve the object. है ~

42.55. It should be mentioned at this stage that under article 134A of the Article 12348
Constitution, every High Court passing or making a judgment etc. (appealable on Constitution,
certificate)—

“(a) may, if it deems fit so to do, on its own motion; and

(b) shall, if an oral application is made, by or on behalf of the party agg-
tieved. immediately after passing or making of such judgment, decree,
final order or sentence,”

determine, “as soon as may be after such passing or making”, the question whe-
ther the certificate in question should be given in respect of that case. Thus, the
Constitution contemplates that the grant or refusal of certificate shall be “as soon
as may be” after the passing of the judgment etc. . It can be presumed that in
most cases the grant or refusal would be simultaneous or at least within a very
short time. Hence. the amendment which we are’ contemplating would be of
some practical utility,

42.56, Accordingly, we recommend that article 133. of the Limitation Act Recommenda-
should be revised as under: tion,

“133. To the Supreme Court for special leave to appeal,

{a) in a case involving death Sixty The date of the Judgment, final
sentence; days. order or sentence.

(0) ina case where a certificate Sixty The date of the order of refusal.
of the nature referred to in days.

article 134A of the Consti-

tation was refused by the High

Court and the Order of refusal

was passedon a date later

than the judgment or order

in respect of which such

leave was applied for,


226

Article 134,

Reduction
of period
in 1963,

No change
needed,

Article 135,

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN, OF INDIA ON, THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 42—Articles 118 to 136: Applications in specified cases.)

(bb) in a case where a certificate Ninety The date of the judgment or order.

of fitness of the nature referred days.

to in article 1344 of the.Cons-

titution was refused by the

High Court, and the order of

refusal was passed on the

same date as the judgment or

order in respect of which

such lave was applied for. .
{c) in any other case. Ninety The date of the judgment,

days. .

42.57. This takes us to article 134, which reads as under :

“For delivery of possession by a pur- One When the sale becomes absolute.”
chaser of immovable property at a year. .
»sale in execution of a decree.

Article 180 of the Act of 1908 read as under:

“By a purchaser of immovable pro- Three When the sale becomes absolute.”
perty at a sale in execution of a decree years.
for delivery of possession.

There was no corresponding provision in the Acts of 1871 and 1877.

42.44, The period of Limitation (provided in article 180 of the Act of 1908)
has beeh reduced in 1963 to one year, upon the recommendation of the Law
Commission.’ The Statement of Objects and Reasons annexed to the Bill states*
the reasons as under:

“As existing article 182 is being omitted, article 180, (which the proposed
article 133 (now article 134) seeks to replace, will apply to all purchasers in
execution whether decree-holder or nat, The period, however, is being re-
duced to one year from three years.”

42.58. Certain controversies pertaining to this article have lost their impor-
tance after the amendment of 0.21, R. 97-101 of the Code of Civil Procedure in
1976. No change is, therefore, needed in the article.

42.59, Article 135 reads as under :

“For the enforcement of a decree Thtee The date of the decree or where 2
granting a mandatory injunction. years. date is fixed for performance,
. . such date.”

There was no corresponding provision in the earlier enactments. The Law®
Commission in its Report on the earlier Act, recommended a period of three
years in the case of mandatory injunctions. .

Accordingly, this provision came to be enacted in 1963.
42.60. The provision has not given rise to any controversy, and hence no

change is necessary. It may be mentioned that applications for such relief are
excluded from general article as to execution—article 13५

‘Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act of 1908) page 67, para 180.
Statement of Objects and Reasons, Limitation Bil, 1962.

3Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1908), page 65, pata 170.
‘Paragraph 42.61 infra.


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 42---Articles 118 to 136: Applications in specified cases.)
42.61. Article 136 reads as under : Article 136.

136. For the execution of any decree Twelve Where the decree or order becomes
(other than a decree granting a years. enforceable or where the decree or
mandatory injunction) oi order any subsequent erder directs any

ivi payment of money or the deti-

very uf any property to be made
at a certain date or at recurring
pericds, when defauit in making

.the payment or delivery in respect

ob Whi execution is scught,

takes place. provided that an
appication for the enforcement or,
execution of a decree granting

a perpeivat injunction shail not be

subject to eny period of limita-

tion.”

Corresponding provisions in the Act of 1908 were contained in articles 182
and 183, which were much more elaborate. As the entire scheme has been chang-
ed, no useful purpose would be served by quoting the earlier provisions.

Parallel provisions in the Act of 1877 were contained in articles 179 and
180, which also need not be quoted. Parallel provisions in the Act of 1871 were
contained in articles 167, 168 and 169,

42.62, The Law Commission, in its Report on the Act of 1908, observed as baw Commis
under, with reference to article 182 (applications for executions): Port.

“170. Article 182 has been a very fruitful source of litigation and is a wea-
pon in the hands of both the dishonest decree-holder and the dishonest judg-
ment debtor. It has given rise to innumerable decisions. The commentary |
in Rustomji's Limitation Act (5th Edn.) on this article itself covers nearly
200 pages. In our opinion the maximum period of limitation for the execu-
tion of a decree or order of any civil court should be 12 years from the date
when the decree. or order became enforceable (which is usually the date of
the decree) or where the decree or subsequent order directs any
payment of money or the delivery of any property to be made at a
certain date or at recurring periods, the date of the default in making
the payment or delivery in respect of which the applicant seeks to execute
the decree, Tire is, therefore, no need for a provision compelling the
decree-holder to keep the decree alive by making an application every three
years. There exists 2 provision already in section 48 of the Civil Procedure
Code that a decree ceases to be enforceable after a period of 12 years. In
England also, the time fixed for enforcing a judgment is 12 years. Either
the decree-holder succeeds in realising his decree within this period or he
fails and there should be no provision enabling: the execution of a decree
ल्‍ after that period. To this provision an exception will have to be made to
the effect: that the court may order thé execution of a decree upon an appli-
éation presented after the expiration of the period of 12 years, where the
judgment-debtor has, by fraud or force, prevented the execution of the decree
at some time within the twelve vears immediately preceding the date of the
application. Section 48 of the Civil Procedure Code may be deleted and its
provisions may be incorporated in this Act. Article 183 should be deleted...”

In pursuance of the aforesaid recommendation, the present article has
enacted in place of articles 182 and 183 of the 1908 Act. Section 48, Code of
Civil Procedure 1908 has been repealed.

tLaw Commission of India, 3rd Report, (Limitation Act, 1908), pages 64-65, para 170.
31--14 M of LI&CAIND/83

227


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN, OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter ¢2—Articles 118 to 136: Applications in specified cases.) Chapter 43:
Other Applications) ° .
(Chapter. 43—Article 137 : Other Applications)

42.63, There is extensive case law on the corresponding articles of the earlier
Act; and we have examined a large number of those cases. We find that most
of the controversies that once arose now do not survive, the matter having been
either settled by subsequent Supreme Court decisions or clarified or rendered
obsolete by the changes made by the Act of 1963. Hence, no change is needed
in the article under consideration,

CHAPTER 43
ARTICLE 137: OTHER APPLICATIONS

43.1. Article 137 reads as under:—

“137. Any other application for which Three When the right to apply accrues.””
nto period of limitation is provided years.
elsewhere in this Division.

This article corresponds to article 178 of Act 15 of 1877 and article 181 of
the Act of 1908. The latter article was as follows :—
“181. Applications for which no period Three When the right to apply accrues.”
of imitation is provided else- years,
where in this schedule or by sec-
tion 48 of the Code of Civil Pro-
cedure. 1908 (5 of 1908).

43.2. The recommendation of the Law Commission of India, in its Report
on the Act of 1908, was to have a residuary article for applications (including
prohibitions) as in thecase of suits. The period was to be the same as in the
Act of 1908, namely three years from the date when the right to apply accrues.
But the description of the applications appearing in the first column, as recom-
mended by the Law Commission was in a wider language than the Act of 1908.
The. matter will be clear from the following extract from the Annexure to the
Report of the Law Commission, which showed in a concrete form its recom-
mendation on the subject :—

“60. Other applications for which no” Three When the right to apply accrues.”

period of limitation is provided years. e

* any law for the time being in

TCs.

Earlier, by that Report, while dealing with the ambit of the word “applica-
tion” (which was not defined in the Act of 1908), the Law Commission had made?
the following recommendations:

“We recommend that a new definition of the word ‘application’ as to include
any petition original or otherwise, should be added. The object is to provide
a period of limitation for original petitions and applications under special
Jaws, as there is no such provision now. Consequential alterations in the
definition of the word ‘applicant’ should also be made.”

43.3. The Act of 1963, as enacted, however, does not carry out fully the
the recommendation made by the Law Commission in the above mentioned Re-
port, as regards the residuary articles. A controversy therefore arose whether

‘Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act, 1903), page 67, para 181 and
page 90, article 60.

Law Commission of India, 3rd Report (Limitation Act 1908) page 5, para 9 and page
90, article 60.


Q9TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 43—Article 137 : Other Applications)

the new article was intended for applications under special laws’. It was in 1977
that the controversy was resolved’, by a decision of the Supreme Court. This
decision of 1977 has practically overruled as much of an earlier decision of the
Supreme Court as had held that the article did not apply to applications under
special laws.-+ However, that part of the earlier decision of the Supreme Court
which had held that article 137 does not apply to bodies other than courts seems
still to hold the field.’

Courts and other bodies.

43.4, It is now necessary to refer to another aspect of the article under dis- article 227,
cussion. It is connected with the distinction between courts and tribunals. By Constitution.
way of analogy, it is of interest to refer to the text of article 227 of the Constitution,

Article 227, as amended by the Forty-second Amendment, reads: —

“<Bvery High Court shall have superintendence over ail courts subject to its appellate
jurisdiction.” .

Earlier, article 227 was 10 these terms :—

“Every High Court shall have superintendence over all courts ond tribunals throughout tae
territuries in relation to which it exercises ju.isdiction.”

43.5. The effect of the deletion of the word “tribunals” came up ia article Tyjpunal,
229 for consideration before a Full Bench of Bombay High Court*. The Court
observed :— है

“Tn the first place, neither the expression ‘court’ nor the expression ‘tribunal’
has been defined in the Constitution and therefore, the dictionary meaning
or the normal connotation of these expressions will have to be considered.
Secondly, the proposition is, well-settled that all courts are tribunals. but all
tribunals are not courts. If necessary. reference may be made to Justice
Hidayatullah’s judgment in Harinagar Sugar Mills v. Shyam Sunder where
the above proposition has been clearly stated; the proposition in other words
means that some tribunals would be basically courts, ic. courts in their
normal connotation, while some others would not be courts and therefore it
cannot be said that Parliament wanted to exclude all tribunals from the pur-
view of the High Court’s superintendence under the amended Article 227,
but it can be said that Parliament intended to exclude only such tribunals
as are not basically courts from the High Court’s superintendence.”

436. In M. Joshi v. Life Insurance Corporation of India’ the Suprme Court
held that article 137 of the Limitation Act, 1963, contemplates only applications
to courts and the scheme of the Act is, that it deals only with applications to
courts, and the Labour court is not a ‘court’ within the Limitation Act, 1963.

43.7. All the same, the observations of the Supreme Court in Athanis case” Article 137,
to the effect that article 137 does not apply to proceedings before bodies other Limitation
than courts (such as quasi-judicial tribunals and executive bodies), could not be” ” °

185 to “application”, see Beeravu v. Kathiyamma, A..R. 1973 Ker. 226.

*Kerala State Electricity Board v. T. P. Kunhiliumma; ALR. 1977 SC, 282.

*4thani Municipality v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Hubli, AIR. 1969 S.C. 1335.
M ‘For a eview of the earlier cases, see Mirza Ghouse Baig, “Article 135, etc.” (1977) 2

-L.J. 18, 21.

‘See also M. Joshi v. L.LC., (1969) 2 S.C.J. 749. ~~

5, D. Ghatge ९. State of Maharashtra, A1.R. 1977 Bombay 384 (F.B.).

‘Harinagar Sugar Mills v. Shyam Sunder, A.LR. 1961 S.C. 1669.

8M. Joshi % Life Insurance Corporation of India (1969) 2 S.C.J. 749.

*ALLR. 1969 S.C. 1035 ~

229


230

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 43-. Anicle 137 : Other Applications)

effected, for reasons which the Court itself gives in the Kerala State Electricity
Board's case’.

“But it has to be an application to a Court for the reason 4hat sections 4
and 8 of the 1963 Limitation Act speak of expiry of prescribed period when
Court is closed and extension of prescribed period if applicant or the appel-
lant satisfies the Court that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the
appeal or making the application during such period.”

438. Before the pronouncement of the Supreme Court in the Kerala State
Electricity Board case’, the High Courts, by an ingenious application of the prin-
ciples of interpretation of statutes, tried to mitigate the hardships suffered by
litigants seeking redress before quasi-judicial bodies and tribunals which could
not fall within the meaning of the expression ‘court’. But there again, it is the’
same story of reversed judgments. For example, in one of the cases‘, the Alla-
habad High Court observed that though section 14 of the Limitation Act does
not, in terms, apply to proceedings under the Sales Tax Act, its principle may
apply to them and an assessee may be able, in a subsequent proceeding, to ¢x-
clude the time spent in an earlier proceedings. This view was based on an ear-
lier Full Bench decision of the same High Court. But in that case also the dis-
senting Judge had struck a strong discordant note:

“In the absence of any statutory provision for enlarging the time, the time
cannot be enlarged on the basis of some principle of equity, justice or good
“conscience. The principle of s. 14 by analogy can be applied by courts on
the basis of justice, equity and good conscience only if there is no maximum
limit fixed by the statute for extending the period of limitation. If the ti-
bunal applies the principles of s. 14 of the Limitation Act for computing
the period of limitation for the revision, it will, in the guise of computing
the period of limitation, extend and enlarge the time for filing the revision
beyond the limit permitted by s. 10 (3-8) of the U.P. Sales Tax Act. When
limitation is prescribed by a special law and the provisions of the nature of
8, 14 have not been incorporated there, it would be outside the scope of the
tribunal created by the statute to import the provisions of s. 14 of the Limt-
tation Act by analogy and thereby virtually amend the provisions limiting
« the power to enlarge the period of limitation.”

The Parson Tools case’ went up in appeal by special leave to the Supreme
Court, which reversed the majority judgment and held that the appellate authority
and the Judge (Revisions) (Sales Tax), exercising jurisdiction under the U.P.
Sales Tax Act, were not Courts, but were merely administrative tribunals. In
view thereof, it was held that section 14 of the Limitation Act did not, in terms
apply to proceedings before such tribunals. The Supreme Court also negatived
the theory (propounded by the Allahabad High Court) that even though section
14, in terms, did not apply to proceedings before sales tax authorities, its principle
should apply. After scanning the scheme and language of the U.P. State Sales
Tax Act, the Supreme Court observed as under: —

“These provisions of the Limitation Act which the legislature did not, after
due application of mind, incorporate in the Sales Tax Act, cannot be import-
ed into it by analogy. An enactment being the will of the Legislature, the

12. 1.४. 1977 S.C. 282. हु

?Kerala State Electricity Board, A.1LR. 1977 S.C. 282.

a5. C. N, Kumar v. Sales Tax Cominisisoner, U.P. (1973) Tax Law Reports 2307 (ANaha-
bad)

‘Commissioner of Sales Tay, v. Parson Tools and Plants A.L.R. 1970 Allahabad 428,
“courts”.
439 {for later stages of the case. see infra.).

‘Parson Tools ¥. CS.T. (1976) 5.0 1 247, 247.


$9TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN, OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 43— Article 137 : Other Applications.)

paramount rule of interpretation which overrides all others is that a statute
is to be expounded according to the intent of them that made it.”

43.9. In another case,’ the Supreme Court has made a departure from its
earlier stand about the applicability of the Limitation Act 10 Tribunals and held
that section 12(2) of the Limitation Act, 1963, was applicable to proceedings before
the Judge (Revisions), Sales Tax.

43.20. It is possible that the Supreme Court may revise its thinking and take
a liberal view as regards the applicability of other provisions of the Limitation
Act to Tribunals.

43.11, The Allahabad High Court had held that the provisions of section 12 High Court
of the Limitation Act did not apply io the proceedings before a Registrar, cases as to
because a Registrar acting under the Registration Act is not a “Court”, as no 7९०७
judicial functions are exercised by him. The controversy arose because the
sub-Registrar refused to register a sale deed, against which refusal the aggrieved

party moved the District Registrar under section 73(1) of the Registration Act,

1908. The District Registrar gave the benefit of section 12, limitation Act, to

the vendee. The High Court reversed’ the judgement.

43.12, The Kerala High Court in U. Chacko v. P. Marakkar’ held that the
appellate authority under the Kerala Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act is
not a “court”, and where an appeal under the Rent Control Act is barred by the
Limitation, that authority has no power to condone delay wnder section 5 of
the Limitation Act. The High Court also held that the principle of section 14
of the Act cannot be extended by analogy where, owing to uncertainty in the
identity of the forum where the appeal had to be preferred, the appellant flitted
between one court and to another.

’

43.13. Similar view was expressed by the Madras High Court,’ holding that
the Rent Controller and Appellate Authority under the Tamil Nadu Buildings
(Lease and Rent Control) Act of 1960 are not courts and therefore sections
5 and 29(2), Limitation Act are not applicable to proceedings before them.

43.14. The Mysore High Court’ has held that a Munsiff before whom an
election petition is filed, challenging the elections of the Chairman and Vice-
Chairman of Village Panchayats, is nol a “court”,

43.15. On the other hand, in some cases it has been held’ that the question
whether the provisions of the Limitation Act are confined in their operation to
proceedings before courts is no longer res intergra, in view of the judgment of
the Supreme Court in Athani’s case’.

43.16. In a Delhi case, the argument that the Lt. Governor of Delhi before
whom an application was filed under section 91 of the Punjab Land Revenue
Act (17 of 1877) as applied to Delhi is not a court, but functions as a persona
designata was pressed before a Division Bench’. In that case certain property

ICS.T.U.P. v. Madan Lat, A.LR. 1977 SC. 523.

For comment, see $.N. Jain in (1977) 19 J.LLI. 484.

'Shiv Charan Das v, Rukmani Devi ALR. 1975 Alb 374.
38, Chacko v. P. Marakkar A.L.R. 1978 Kerala 161

88, Ganapathi vy. N, Kumaraswami ALR. 197६ Madras 383.
‘Nagreddy v. Khandappa, A.1.R. 1970 Mysore 366.

*Bando Banaji v. Bhaskar Balaji, A.LR. 1972 Mysore 311
TAthani’s case, supra.

®Raj Chopra १. Smi. Shanno Devi, A,1-R. 1891 Dethi 18

231


232

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 43- Article 137: Other applications.)

in Nizamuddin West, New Delhi, had been put to auction by the Collector, Delhi
in 1971, in order to realise a certain sum of money duc to the Department of
Rehabilitation of the Delhi Administration and had been purchased by the
appellant in the said auction, The sale was confirmed by the Lt. Governor of
Deihi on 23-12-1971 and the possession of the property was given to the appel-
lant/auction purchaser. ¥

Section 91 of the Punjab Land Revenue Act (17 of 1877) as applied to
Delhi, provides for making an application to set aside a sale within 30 days
from the date of the sale. However, respondent no. | filed an application under
that section on [9-2-1972 and pleaded condonation of delay under section 5 of
the Limitation Act, 1963, on the ground that he (respondent no. 1) came to know
of the sale only on 9-2-1972.

It was argued before the Delhi High Court that section 5 of the Limitation
Act was not applicable because the Lt. Governor before whom the application
was filed was not a court but a persona designata. In support of this conten-
tion, reliance was placed on a Full Bench judgement of the Kerala High Court

Dissenting from the Kerala view, the Delhi High Court held that the Kerala
view had been over-ruled by the Supreme Court?

43.17 Summarising the law on the subject after the Kerala State Electricity
Board’s case, the High Court said : —

“We feel that the argument based on the contention that the application
under a special law must necessarily be to a court, before the provisions of
Limitation Act ate attracted is not borne out by any precedent or principles
of law. This argument does not appreciate the dilference between case
where there is no period prescribed by a special law and where it is so
provided. In the former instance, a party will have to invoke Article 137
of the Schedule to Limitation Act, 1963, and this can be resorted to for
filing an application under any Act, vide ALR. 1970 5.0. 209, A.LR. 1977
S.C. 282, Such an application alone is required to be filed befote a civil
court. But in case of latter kind-—as in the present case—-where the period.
is prescribed under a special law like the Act, Article 137 of the Schedule
to the Limitation Act is not being resorted to at all and the requirement of
application being to a court does not necessarily arise.”

43.18. Even prior to the Kerala State Electricity Board’s case, the Supreme
Court had applied the provisions of the Limitation Act in computing the period
of limitation under a special law like the U.P. Sales Tax Act?

43.19. Considerable difficulties have been experienced in deciding whether a
functionary acting under a statute is a ‘court’ or not, for the purposes of enact+
ments using that expression. The Supreme Court has held‘ that the Registrar
of Cooperative Societies under the Bihat and, Orissa Cooperative Societies Act,
1935 was, to all intents and purposes. a court discharging the same functions and
duties in the same manner as a court of law is expected to do. In a Punjab
case’, it was held that a Commissioner under the Workmen's Compensation Act

Yokkim Fernundes v. Amina Kuphi Umma, A.T.R. 1974 Ker, 162.

Kerala State Electricity Board v. T. P. Kunhalinumma ALR. 1977 S.C. 282 para 21.
3Commissioner of Sales Tax, U.P. v. Madan Lal, ALR. 1977 S.C. 523,

“Jugal Kishore v. Sitamarhi Central Cooperative Bank Ltd LR. 1967 SC. 1494,
*Ram Sarup v. Gurdeb Singh (1969) Labour and Industries Cases 371 (Punjab).


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 233

+ (Chapter 43- Article 137 » Other applications.)

is not a ‘civil court’, within the meaning of section 110F of the Motor Vehicles
Act, 1939.

43.20. There are numerous decisions under article 136 of the Constitution Article 136
on the construction of the expression “tribunal”. The earliest case was Bharat OF ithe io n
Bank Lid, v. lis Employees.’ in which it was observed that tribunals adorned Case Law.
with the same trappings as courts which derive their power from the State and
are exercising the qudicial power of the State come within the scope of Article
136. This principle has been followed in later cases, *-? but the tests were with
reference to statutes other than the Limitation Act. °

43.21. The result is, that while the Bombay High Court‘, concluded that the
Commissioner of Workmen’s Compensation is a “court”, the Madhya Pradesh
High Court® took a contrary view.

43.22. A single Judge of the Calcutta High Court’ has listed no less than 11
conditions or criteria on whose touchstone an enactment creating a statutory
authority will have to be scrutinised, in order to decide whether that authority
is a “Court”. According to him. on the basis of the judicial decisions, it would
appear that a tribunal or authority shall be a court if the following conditions, in
effect, are present: (i) the source of power of the tribunal or authority is the

State as the fountain of justice and it is charged with and exercises the inherent
judicial powers of the State: (ii) the jurisdiction to adjudicate the His between
contending parties involving their rights is conferred on it by law and does not
depend on any voluntary act or submission of parties: (iii) the right to move the
tribunal or authority is conferred on the aggrieved party by law: (iv) the proceed-
ing on the lis commences by presentation of the case by the aggrieved party with
a corresponding right on the other party to meet the case: {v} in adjudicating the
dispute the tribunal or authority follows an established or prescribed procedure:
(i) if the dispute is on a question of fact, an opportunity to the parties is given
to adduce evidence and: the facts are to be ascertained through evidence, supple-
mented by argument; (vii) if the dispute is on questions of law, there will be a
submission of arguments on such questions of law by the parties before such
tribunal or authority: (viii) the tribunal or authority. in arriving at its decision,
acts judicially and according to law, following the principles of natural justice and
fair play and not on any other consideration of policy: (ix) there is a decision
wholly disposing. of the matter by a finding upon the facts and disnuted questions
‘of law (if required), 60 finality (subiect to appeal, if provided) and authoritati-
veness of the decisions. as heing binding on parties: (xi) enforceability of the
decisions by the tribunal or authority through the process of law.

43.23, The above exposition has been qnoted as of some interest for under- No change
standing the expression “Court”. We do not. of course, propose to introduce needed.
any definition of ‘court’ in the Act of Limitation?

43.24. Nor dd we recommend any change in article 137 on the above point-no change
needed in
article 137,

Bharat Bank Ltd. v. lis Employees, A.LR. 1950 S.C. 188.

*Engineering Mazdoot Sabha v. Hind Cycles Ltd. ALR. 1963 S.C. 874.
34.C. Companies Lid, v. है, N. Sharma, ALR. 1963 SC. 1595,

‘Rajvabi ¥. Mackinnon Mackenzie & Co. P. Lid, ALR. 1976 Bombay 278.
S¥ashwant Rao v. Sampat, ALR. 1979 M.P. 21 (F.B.)

‘indian Iron and Steel Co. v. Shish Ram, 83 Calcutta Weekly Notes 786.
7Certain points relevant to the concept of court have been dealt with under sec. 12.


234

89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA 9N THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 44—Summary of Recommendations.)
CHAPTER 44
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS

We summatise in this Chapter the recommendations for amendment of the
Jaw contained in the preceding Chapters.

Sections

1, In section 3(2)\aXii), the expression “paper” should be zeplaced by the
expression “indigent person” (paragraph 3.2).

2. In section 4 (Court closed on the last day of the period of limitation), a
clarification should be made regarding the combined applicability of sections 4
and 14. (Section 14 deals with infructuous legal proceedings) (paragraph 4, 3,
read with paragraph 14.23).

3. In section 5, an Explanation should be added to the effect that erroneous
Jegal advice given by a legal practitioner is a sufficient cause within the meaning
of the section for admitting an appeal or application after the expiry of the
period of limitation (other than an application for execution), if certain condi-
tions are satisfied (paragraph 5.14).

4. Section 7 (legal disability of one person) should be redrafted to eliminate
the ambiguity caused by the present use of the expression “time will not run”
(paragraph 7.9).

5. Section 10, Explanation (which provides that for the purposes of the
section any property comprised in certain endowments is deemed to be property
vested in trust for a specific purpose and the manager of the property is deemed
to be the trustee) should be extended to Sikh and Jain endowments. Further,
two new sub-sections should be added to the section, to deal with the case where
a trustee who is 950 a beneficiary under the trust receives or retains trust property
or its proceeds as a share on a distribution of trust property made in good faith
{paragraph 10.8).

6. Section 11 (suits on foreign contracts) should be widened so as to cover—
(a) proceedings other than suits. and (b) all causes of action arising in a foreign
country (instead of being confined to foreign. contracts. as at present) (para-

. gtaph 11,20).

7. In section 12 (exclusion of time in legal proceedings), the following
changes shoul be made :—

{a) the marginal note should be revised as recommended {paragraph 12.13):

(0) the Explanation should be revised by redrafting it so as to provide that
any time taken by the court to prepare the decree or order before an
application for a copy thereof is made shall not be regarded as time
requisite for obtaining the copy within the meaning of the section (para-
graph 12.13);

(c) a new Explanation should be added to Provide for a situation where
there is a legal impediment to the preparation of a decree or order on
account of a direction in the judgment or non-compliance with a direc.
tion or other legally permissible reason (paragraph 12.13):


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF SNDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 44 Summary of Recommendations.)

(9) the expression “decree” for she jurpuses of this section should be defined
to include the last paracraph of the judgment, where a copy of such
paragraph is proposed io be used under Order 20, rule 6A, Code of
Civil Procedure. 1908 (paracrash 12.13);

(e) 2 clarificatory Explanation should be added. declaring that the section
"applies to proceedings before quasi-judicial tribunals (paragraph 12.13).

8. In section 13 (exclusion ef time taken in prosecuting an application for
leave to sue or appeal as a paupsr). rhs oxprssion “indigent person” should be
sabstituted for the expression “pauper” (paragraph 13.4).

9. In section 14 finfruciuons Te

should be made:~—-
(६) The explanation should be -

-dings). the following amendments

ged. so as to provide that the time
teasonably necessary for peiforming journey from the place where the
former civil proce was pending to the proper court is deemed to
be time during which the former civil proceeding was pending (para-
graph 14.23).

(७) A new sub-section (2A) shoutl hs inserted in section 14, to provide that
in computing the period of finiiation for any appeal, the time during
which the appeilant has been orosecuting with the diligence another
civil proceeding, whether in a court of first instance or in a court of
appeal or revision against the same party for the same relief. shall be
excluded, where such a proc: is prosecuted in good faith in a
court which, from defect of jurisdiction or other cause of a like nature,
is unable to entertain it ‘paragraph 14.23).

(©) In order to remove the controversy as to the combined applicability of
sections 4 and 14, an Explanation should be added to section 4 to
provide that for the pu 2s of thet section, the word ‘court’ includes
a court which, from defect of jurisdiction or other cause of a like
nature, is unable to enteria'n the s:tit. appeal or application, as the case
may be, provided the suit. appeal or application was prosecuted in
good faith in that court.

(Paragraph 14.23. read with paragraph 4.3.).

10. With reference io section 15 (defendant's absence from India), amend-
ments should be made as under: —

(७) An Exception should be inserted below section 15(5); to the effect that
section 15(5) does not apply to a period during which both the parties
were residing in one and the same foreign country and the plaintiff
was aware of such residence of the defendant and there were, in the
foreign country. properly constituted courts or tribunals to which the

* parties had, or could have had. recourse for enforcing the cause of
action (paragraph 15.19).

(0) An Explanation should be added to the section to provide that the
attachment of a decree does not amount fo a stay of execution, (para-
graph 15.19).

(०) Another Explanation should be added to provide that a defendant shall
not be deemed to be absert irom India daring any period during which
he had io the plaintifi’s knowledge, a duly constituted agent in India

32~14 M of LJ & CA/NDj83


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963
(Chapter 44--Summary of Recommendations.)

authorised to institute and defend legal proceedings on his behatf in
India (Paragraph 15.19).

-() As recommended by the Law Commission in its 13th Report on the
Indian Contraci Act. 1872, a new section should be inserted in that Act
{the Contract Act) for resolving the controversy relating to the position
of a decree obtained against one promisor out of a number of joint
promisors (paragraph 15.19).

11. In section 17 (fraud and mistake), an Explanation should be inserted to
provide that for the purposes of this section, “fraud” includes conduct on the
part of the defendant or the opposite party, as the case may be, towards the
plaintiff or the applicant. as the case may be, which, having regard to some
special relationship between the parties. was unconscionable (paragraph 17.17).

12, In section 19 (part payment of a debt), the following amendments should
be made: —

(a) By suitable re-drafting. it should be emphasised that the section is con-
fined to a suit or application for the recoverv of a debt or legacy (para-
graph 19.12).

(b) The present Explanation to the section should be enlarged so as to pro-
vide that the Explanation covers every type of immovable property, and
also to provide that it covers not only the case of a mortgage, but also
the case of a charge-holder in possession of the property (paragraph
19.12).

(c) Annex Explanation should be added to section 19. to provide that where *
payment on account of a debt or interest on a legacy is sought to be made
by a negotiable instrument. then the tender of the negotiable instrument
if accepted by the payee in such payment: amoutns to “payment” of the
amount for the purposes of this section, whether or not the negotiable
instrument is subsequently honoured (paragraph 19.12).

13. In section 21 (effect of subsequent addition of parties). the following
changes should be made :—

(9 The provisions of the section (at present confined to suits), should be
extended to the addition of a party after the making of an application
(paragraph 21.34),

(b) An Explanation should be inserted below sub-section (1). to provide that
a person is deemed to have been made-a party when the application for
making him a party is made to the court. This will be subject to the
present proviso to section 2100, empowering the court to direct. in case
of a mistake made in good faith. that as regards 2 newly added party the
proceedings shal! be deemed to have been instituted on any earlier date
{paragraph 21.34).

(c) By amending section 21{2). it should be provided that the section does
not apply to a suit or application by or against the members of a joint
Hindu family to enforce a right or liabilitv relating to the affairs of the
joint Hindu family. where one or more of the members of the family.
not originally impleaded. is. in the course of the suit or application,
broueht on the record at the instanc:, other party (paragraph 21.34).



89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN, OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 44. Sunumary of Recommendations.)

14. Section 22 (continuing wrongs) should be re-drafted so as to provide
that it applies in the case of a continuing breach of contract and in the case of a
wrong independent of contract, and also that it applies whatever be the relief
claimed (paragraph 22.13).

15. Section 23 (act not actionable without special injury) should be amended
by substituting the words “specific damage” for the words “specific injury”, and
also by adding an Explanation to the cifect that the section applies to a wrong
which constitutes a breach of contract. a9 alsv to an act which constitutes a wrong
independent of contract (paragraph 23.15). पु

16. With reference to section 29 (savings regarding section 25, Contract Act,
special and local laws, proceedings under a law relating to marriage and divorce
and the Easements Act), the following recommendations have been made :—

(a) Section 2913) should be re-drafted as under:

“(3) Save as oiherwise provided in any enacument for the time being
in force providing for the dissolution of a marriage by a decree of divorce,
or for the grant of. other matrimonial relief, nothing in this’ Act shall
apply to any suit or other proceeding under any — such enactment.”
(Paragraph 29.32).

(b) The Central Government should take action for specifically repealing the
provisions in the erstwhile French and Portguese Civil Codes governing
limitation in force in the Union territories of Pondicherry and Goa res-
pectively, after ensuring that no legal hiatus is created by such a repeal
(Paragraph 29.17).

(c) The State Governments of Tami! Nadu and Kerala should examine the
points raised in certain judgments (referred to in Chapter 29), concerning
the period of limitation provided by the Travancore Limitation Act IV
of 1100 N.E.), with a view to ensuring that no hardship is caused by
the extended period of limitation allowed by section 20(1) of the Act in
relation to deeds of further charge (paragraph 29.23),

Articles 1 to 5: Suite relating to accounts

17, No changes are cecommended in articles | to 5 (Chapter 31).

Articles 6 to 55 : Suits on contracts.

18, Article 7 (suit for wages not otherwise expressly provided for) should be
amended as under :—

(a) where the suit is for relief consequential on the setting aside of an order
of dismissal or removal (from service). the starting point for limitation
should be the date when the dismissal or removal (from service) is set
aside (paragraph 32.8).

(b) an Explanation should be added to provide that “wages” includes salary
and pension (paragraph 32.8. reads with paragraph 32.3).

19, Articles 10 and 11 (certain suits against carriers of goods for compensation
should be revised as recommended in detail (paragraph 32.17),

237


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 44--Summary of Recommendations.)

20. A new article 22A should be inserted to deal specifically with a suit

for money deposited under an agreericnt that it shal! be payable on the expiry of

«a stipulated period, including the money of a customer in the hands of his banker

50 payable. The time limit should be 3 years, to be computed from the date of
expiry of the stipulated period (paragraph 32.35).

Articles 5610 58 : Suits relating to declarations

21, In article 57 (the general article relating to suits to obtain declaration
wbout invalidity, etc. of an adoption), the first column shculd be confined to suits
to obtain such a declaration where ny further relief is sought (paragraph 33,29).

22. Article 58 (suit to obtain any other declaration) should also be confined
to a suit in which the plaintiff does not seek further relief (paragraph 33.35).

Articles 59-60 : Suits relating to decrees and instruments

23. As regards article 60 (suii ० set aside ५ Caasler of property made by
the guardian of a ward), in order to resolve the controversy as to the coverage by
the article of a de 14९० guardian, attention has been drawn to the 83rd Report
of the Law Commission on the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890. In paragraph
4.13 of that Report a recommendation has been made for adding to section 4(2)
of that Act, a suitable Explanation which will make it clear that a de facto guar-
dian is included within the definition of “guardian” in that Act. Implementation
of this recommendation is expected to eliminate the controversy on the subject
in relation to the Limitation Act also (paragraph 34.6).

Articles 61 to 67: Suits to immovable property

24. No changes are recommended in articles 61 to 67 (Chapter 35).

Articles 68 to 71 : Suits relating to movzble property
25. No changes are recommended in articles 68 to 71 (Chapter 36).

Articles 72 to 91 ; Suits relating to tort.

26. In regard 10 article 72 (suit for compensation for doing or omitting to do
an act alleged to be in prrsuance of any enactment in force for the time being),
the recommendation made by the Law Commission in its 3rd Report (Report on.
the Limitation Act, 1908) to increase the period of limitation from one year to
three years is re-iterated (paragraph 37.6).

27. Article 74 (suit for compensation for a malicious prosecution) should
be amended in regard to the starting point of the period of limitation. At present,
the starting point is expressed as under :-—

“When the plaintiff is acquitted or the prosecution is otherwise terminated.”

The recommendation made is to insert the word “finally” before the word
“terminaizd” (paragraph 37.17).

28. Article 75 (suit for compensation for libel) and article 76 (suit for com-
pensation for slander) should be replaced by ‘one single articles, providing a-time
limit of one year for a spit for compensation for defamation. The starting point


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 44- Siunimary of Recommendations.)

should be—“when the defamatory statement is published, or where the defamatory
statement is not published in a permanent form, when it comes to the knowledge
of the plaintiff” (paragraph 37.26).

29. Article 77 (suit for compensation for loss of service occasioned by the
seduction of the plaintiff’s servant or daughter) shou'd be revised as under; so as
to eliminate the element of loss of service: -~

77, For compensation for seduction: One When the seduction occurs.”

year.
(paragraph 37.33).

*

30. Article 78, which prescribes u period of limitation of one year for a
suit “for compensation for inducing a person to break a contract with the plaintiff.”
should be amended by adding the ¢ before the words “inducing a
person to break a contract with the plaintiff” (paragraph 37.37).

_ 31. Article 79 (suit for compensation for illegal, irregular and excessive
distress) should be amended so as to alter the starting point of limitation. At

Present the starting point is the date of the distress. This should be revised

so as to substitute the date of release of the distress (paragraph 37.43).

32. Article 80 (suit for compensation for wrongful seizure of movable property
under legal process) should be revised so as to alter the starting point of limitation.
At present, the starting point is the date of the seizure. This should be revised so
as to substitute the date of release from the seizure (paragraph 37.43).

33. Articles 81 to 83 (certain suits under the Legal Representatives’ Suits Act,
1855 and the Indin Fatal Accidents Act, 1855) may be examined when the Indian
Sucession Act, 1925 is taken up for revision (paragraph 37.50).

34. Article 88 (suit for compensation for infringing copyright or any other
exclusive privilege), which provides a time limit of three years; to be computed
from the date of the infringement, should be revised in two directions.

@ In the first place, the nature of the suit (in the first column of the article)
should be described as a suit “for compensation for infringing copyright
or right to other intellectual property, or any other exclusive privilege,
or for restraining such infringement”. हु

(ii) Secondly, the period of limitation (three years) should be counted not
from the date of the infringement (as at present), but from the date when
the infringement first becomes known to the plaintiff (paragraph 37.64).

35. Article 90 (suit for compensation for injury caused by an injunction
wrongfully obtained) should be enlarged so as to cover compensation for injury
caused by an attachment wrongfully obtained (paragraph 37.68). ,

Articles 92 to 96 : Suits relating to trusts and trast property

36. Articles 94, 95 and 96 (suits to set aside a transfer of property comprised in
a Hindu. Muslim or Buddhist religious or charitable endowment made by a
manager thereof for a valuable consideration and suits by such a manager to
recover possession of such property which has been transferred by a previous
manager for valuable consideration) should be extended so as to cover Sikh and
Jain endowments (paragraps 38.8 and 38.11).

239


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF 1NDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chupler 44~-Summary of Recommendations.)
Articles 97 to 112 : Suits relating to miscellaneous matters

37. Article 98 (suit by a person against whom an oder referred to in Order
31, rule 63, U.P.C. or Order 21, rule 103, CPC. or under section 28 of the
Presidency Smali Canse Courts Act, 1882 has been made, 10 establish the right
which he claims io the property comprised in the order) should, in its first
column, be revised so as to apply to a suit by a person against whom an order
referred to in Order 21, rule 58(5), C.P.C. has been made or an order under
section 28 of the Presidcacy Small Cause Courts Act, 1882 bas been made, to
establigg” tae tight which he claws lo the property compriscd in the order, where
such a suit is permissible in law. The amenduicat bas been recommended in the
light of the altered scheme of the relevant provisions in Order 21, rules 58 to 63
of the Coce of Civil Procedure, 1908 gfter the amendiuent of the Code in 1976
(paragraph 39.11).

38. Arucle 99 (suit to set aside a sale by 4 civil or revenue court or a sale
fot arrears of Government revenue or for any detand recoverable as such arrears)
should, in its first column, be revised sv as to dexcribe ihe suit as a suit to set
aside-—

(3) a sale by a civil or revenue court, incliding a sale of the coparcenary

property of a Hindu undivided family governed by the Mitakshara law
in execution of a decree obtained against the father, or

(0) a sale for arrears of Government revenue or any demand recoverable
as such arrears. (paragraph 39.18)

39. Article 100 (suit to alter or set aside any decision or order of a civil
court in any proceeding other than a suit for any act or order of an officer of
Government in his official capacity) prescribes a time limit of one year, to be
computed from the date of the final decision or order by the court or the date of
the act or order of the officer, as the case may be. The third column should be
revised, so as to substitute the following as the starting point: —

“The date of communication of the final decision or order by the court, or
the date of communication of the act or order of the officer or, where there ©
has been no such communication, the date on which the plaintiff first had
knowldge of the uct or order of the officer, as (he case may be”. (paragraph
39.23).

40. Article 102 (suit for property which the plaintiff had conveyed while
insane} should be revised by increasing the present period of three years to six
years (paragraph 39.30).

41. Article (10 (suit by a person excluded from a joint Family property to
enforce a right to share therein) should be in the first column verbally amended
by describing the suit as one by a person, “totally and absolutely excluded” from
a joint family propgrty, to enforce a right to share therein (paragraph 39.46).

Article 113 : Suits for which there is no prescribed period

42. No change is recommended in article 113 (the residuary article relating
to suits) (Chapter 40).

Articles 114 to 117: Appeals

43. Article 114 (appeal from an order of acquittal) should be revised, by
making verbal changes as recommended (paragraph 41.2}.


89TH REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT. 1963

(Chapter 44--Summary’ of Recommendations.)

44, Article 115 (appeals under the Code of Criminal Procedure. 1973, from
certain sentences and orders) should be revised, by making verbal changes as
recommended (paragraph 41.4).

45. Article 116 {appeals under the Code of Civil Procedure. 1908) provides
for two different periods of limitation for civil appeals from decrees and orders.
The period. at present. is—

(a) 90 days for anpeal to a High Court: and
(b) 30 days for appeal to any other High Court.

The recommendation made in the Report of the Law Commission in its 3rd
Report (Report on the Limitation Act. 1908) was to reduce the period for appeal
to the High Court to 30 davs. The recommendation is re-iterated in the present
Report (paragraph 41.6).

Article 118 to 136 : Applications in specified cases

46. Article 118 (application for leave to appeal and defend a suit under sum-
Mary procedure) prescribes a time limit of 10 days. to be compnted from the
date when the summons is served. These is a proposal by the Government of
Maharashtra for increasing the period to 30 days. connected with a proposal to
simplify the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure. 1908 relating to sefmmary
procedure (Order 37, C.P.C.) so as to reduce the various stages of trial under that
procedure. The Commission is of the view that the proposal of the State Gov-
emment may be viewed favourably in principle. and if the working of the amended
procédure in the State of Maharashtra (when the amendment materialises) is
found to be successful. a similar amendment can be taken up on an all-India
basis in the Code of Civil Procedure. 1908 and in article 118. Limitation Act. 1963
(paragraph 42.7).

47. 10 the discussion relating to article 119 {certain applications under the
Arbitration Act. 1940). the recommendation made in the 76th Report of the Law
Commission, page 53 (Report on the Arbitration Act. 1940} for amending section
30(b) of that Act, in order fo clarify the scope of the expression “or is otherwise
invalid” has been re-iterated in the present Report (pragraph 42.12).

48. Article 127 prescribes a period of limitation of 60 days for an application
to set aside a sale in execution of a decree. including any such application made
by a judgment debtor. [This is the position after the amendment of the article in
19761. However, in Order 23. rule 9200), Code of Civil Procedure. 1908. the time
limit-for making the requisite deposit for setting aside the sale is 30 davs. thereby
creating a discrepancy with article 127 of the Limitation Act. The discrepancy
between the two sets of provisions should be removed by increasing the time limit
in Order 21, rule 92(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure to 60 days (paragraph 42.35).

49. Article 130 fapplication for feave to anpeal as a pauper. made to various
courts) should be amended—

(a) by prescribing. in the second column. the same period of limitation as is
applicable to the appeal in respect of which the leave is sought. and

(b) by substituting. for the word “nauper”, the words “indigent person”
(paragraph 42.43).

241


242

897H REPORT OF LAW COMMN. OF INDIA ON THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963

(Chapter 44. Summary of Recommendations.)

50. Article 131 {application to a court for revision) at present provides that
the period of limitation (90 days) is to be computed from the date of the decree,
order or sentence soughi to be revised. The recommendation is that the period
should be computed from the date when the applicant for revision had knowledge
of the decree, order or sentence (paragraph 42.46).

51. Article 132 (application to a High Court for certificate of fitness to appeal
to the Supreme Court under the specified provisions of the Constitution) should,
in its first column, be revised by carrying out certain verbal changes as recom-
mended in the Report— a recommendation made in view of the changed phraseo-
1629 of the relevant constitutional provisions (paragraph 42.49).

52, Article 133 (application to the Supreme Court for special leave to appeal)
should be revised as recommended. in view of certain anomalies brought out in
regard to cases where the High Court had orally refused the grant of a certificate
of fitness on the very date on which the judgement sought to be appealed from
‘was pronounced by the High Court (paragraph 42.56).

Article 137
Applications for which no specific period is provided
53. No changes are recommended in article 137 (Chapter 43).

- K.K. MATEHEW....... Chairman
NASTIRULLAH BEG... ... Member
J.P. CHATURVEDT.
P.M. BAKSHI

(Part-time)

Dated: February 28, 1983.

MGIPCBE—#4—14 M of LJ & CA/MD/g3—29-10-84—2,000.