“CONFIDENTIAL—Not for Publication”

7

न

LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

1 NINTH REPORT

(SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT, 1877)

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA @ MINIS


CHAIRMAN,
LAW COMMISSION
NEW DELHI,
JULY 19, 1958.
Shri A. K. Sen,
Minister of Law,
New Delhi.

My dear Minister,

T have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Ninth
Report. of the Law Commission on the Specific Relief Act.

2. At its first meeting held on the 17th September, 1955
the Commission decided to take up the revision of the
Specific Relief Act and entrusted the task to a Committee
consisting of Shri D. Narasa Raju and Shri S. M. Sikri.

3. It was subsequently decided that Shri P. Satya-
narayana Rao, the senior Member of the Section of the
Commission dealing with Statute Revision should assist the
Committtee in drawing its report. The consideration of the
subject was initiated by Shri Narasa Raju who explained
the scheme for the revision of the Act. The principles un-
derlying the scheme were discussed at a meeting of the
Statute Revision Section held on the 14th April, 1956. A
draft Report prepared on the basis of the scheme by किए
Sikri in consultation with the Members of the Committee
was thereafter circulated to all the Members of the Com-
mission and their views were invited thereon. These views
with the draft Report were discussed at meetings of the
Statute Revision Section held on the 13th July, 1957 and
the 7th December, 1957. Important suggestions made by
Members at these meetings were accepted and it was left
té the Chairman to finally settle the Report in the light
of the discussion. °

4, Dr, N. 0, Sen Gupta has signed the Report subject to
4 separate note which has been arnexed to the Report.

5. The Commission wishes to acknowledge the services
rendered by its Joint Secretary, Shri D. Basu, in coanec-
tion with the preparation of this Report.

Yours sincerely,
M. C. SETALVAD,



CONTENTS

Report
PARAGRAPHS Pages
1—2. History of the legislation . > . . . 1
3—4. Major suggestions of revision considered . . . I—2
5—8. Scheme adopted for revision . . . . . 2-3
g—106. Examination of the provisions of the Act, indicating
the changes required . + . . . . 3-56
APPENDICES

ApprenpIx I—Proposals as inserted in the body of the existing
Act + . . . . . 57-78

Appenpix II~ Comparative Tables

Taste A : Showing the provisions in the existing Act and the

corresponding provisions in Appendix I . 79—80
TABLE B : Showing the provisions in Appendix I and the

corresponding provisions in the existing Act . 81—82

AppENDIx III—Suggestions in respect of other Acts . . 83

Note by Dr. Sen Gupta , 84—85



+

REPORT
ON THE
SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT, 1877.

1. The Specific Relief Act was passed in 1877, and has
since been amended by Acts 4 of 1882, 12 of 1891, 9 of
1899, 21 of 1929, 10 of 1940 and 3 of 1951. It has also been
adapted by the Adaptation Orders, A.O. 1937, A.O. 1948
and A.O. 1950. In 1951, it was extended to Part B States
and now it extends to the whole of India except the State
of Jammu and Kashmir and the Scheduled Districts under
the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874.

2. The Act was originally drafted upon the lines of the
draft New York Civil Code, 1862, and its main provisions
embody the doctrines evolved by the English Equity
Courts, which had previous to the Act been applied in
India as principles of equity, justice and good conscience.
The Act, on the whole, has worked well ‘but “theré is room
for improvement both in the expression ai the
substance”!,

History of
the legisla-
tion,

3. In making our récommendations we hhave consider- Major
ed the various suggestions received by. us and have given ;uesestione
effect to such of them as appeared. to us to be suitable. considered,

We may, at the outset,-deal with two suggestions of a
fundamental nature. :

Tt has been suggested that there is no justification
for .a separate enactment on ‘specific relief? and
that the provisions of this Act should be transferred
tothe Code of Civil Procedure and other enactments. This
suggestion, is founded on certain observations .of Pollock
and Mulla.* है

“Specific Relief, as a form of judicial redress, be-
longs to ‘the law of Procedure, and, ina body
of written law ‘arranged according to the
natural affinities of the subject-matter, would
find its place as a distinct Part. or. other
division of the Civil Procedure Code.............-.

If the work were to be done afresh without regard
to historical accidents, there would be no reacon

“"y. Banerji, Law of Specific Relief, and Ed, p.34.
a Specific Relief Act, 8th Ed., Dp. 735, 737.



Scheme

revision,

2 °

for having a separate Specific Relief Act at all;
its contents would be divided between the
Civil Procedure Code and the Transfer of Pro-
perty Act. Such a drastic reform may: well, as
things are, not be worth the pains, but some
revision in detail appears desirable”.

It is to be noticed that even Pollock and Mulla did not
consider such a drastic change worth the labour involved.
We have given careful consideration to the suggestion, and
are unable to accept it. The main consideration which has
brought us to this conclusion is that the Specific Relief Act
deals with certain equitable principles and remedies which
stand apart, both historically as well as intrinsically, from
the common law rules which are embodied in our Code of
Civil Procedure. The subjects dealt with by the Act, such
as, specific performance, declaratory decrees, injunctions,
rescission and rectification, usually find a separate treatment
ir. legal literature. Moreover, the legal profession and the
Courts have become used to the present arrangement and a
change with the sole object of formal perfection would
not be justified.

4. A further suggestion. is that the Act should also deal
with compensatory relief. We are, however, ‘of the view
that compensatory relief is incorsistent with and generally
an alternative to specific relief atid is therefore best dealt
with separately. In so far as'it is complementary to
specific relief, the Act deals with it. :

5. The Act, as revised by us, deals only with certain

for kinds of equitable remedies. These are (1) Recovery df

possession of property, (2) Specific performance of contracts,
(3) Rectifi¢ation of instruments, (4 Rescission 6f con-
tracts. (5) Cancellation of instruments, (6) Detlaratory
decrees and (7) Injunctions. The other forms of specifi¢
relief mentioned in Appendix A; Forms 41-6 and 49, of the
Code of Civil Procedure and in statutes, such as the Transfer
of Property Act, Trusts Act. Partnership Act, are different
in origin and nature and no advantage will be gained by
including them in this Act. :

6..We have tried to improve both the language and the
substance of the Act. But it is difficult to avoid the
inherent defects which must exist in the codification of

1, Specific Relief Act, 8th Ed. pp. 735, 737+

os


3

equitable principles. As Sir Raymond Evershed, Master
of the Rolls, has said, “As an equity lawyer, let me acknow-
ledge that { have a natural inclination to favour the
undefined and undefinable in the form of principles which
have never lost, by unnecessary and constricting definition,
their capacity for useful growth. And I would like, here,
to make the important point that these undefined principles
of equity could never, as far as I can see (save to a very
limited extent) be effectively or usefully comprehended,
by codification, in the enacted law. At least in so far as
they were so comprehended, the furctions of the courts in
regard to them might thereby be changed—and surely not
changed for the public advantage—from the more or less
creative faculty of seeing whether the new relationship
or the new set णी facts was within or without the embrace
of the principle to the narrower task of interpreting the
Parliamer.tary language”.

7. Though we have suggested occasior.al changes in the
language of the Act we recognize that this is a matter for
the drafting expert and we have left it largely to. the
official draftsman.

8. In consonance with the recommerdations in our
previous reports, we propose that all the illustrations in the
Act should be omitted. It is true that Whitley Stokes, in
his Introduction to the Anglo-Indian Codes,? quoted
Macaulay’s expectation that the “illustrations will,
greatly facilitate the understanding of*the law’:'We dre of = +
the view, however, that the illustratioris have not 01 the
whole, served to clarify the provisioris of the Acti ‘Some of
the illustrations are not warranted by the’ terms of the
relevant sections; others have tended to preverit the
development of equitable jurisprudence: Moreover, the
Indian Legislature has for some time ‘past given up the
practice of inserting illustrations in Acts.

9. We now proceed to examine the provisions of the Act pyamina-
pointing out the difficulties which have arisen in the tion of
application of the Act and indicating’ our .propdsals’ for visions of
their solution. the Act,

’ the changes

10. We are of the opinion that the Act should ben re हु
extended to the territories known as the Scheduléd Dis-

1. 72 L.Q.R., pp. 43-44.
2. Vol. 1) 9. xxivy
*The reference in the margin is to the existing Sections.



Sec, 3.

Sees ty,

. 4

tricts. If the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 can apply to
the Scheduled Districts, there is no reason why the Specific
Relief Act should not, particularly in view of the fact that
Courts have applied the provisions of the Act to these
areas, as principles of ‘justice, equity and good consci-
ence’!,

No doubt, there are the Scheduled and Tribal Areas
for which special provisions have been made in the Fifth
and Sixth Schedules to the Constitution. Paragraph 5 of
the Fifth Schedule and Paragraph 12(1) (b) of the Sixth
Schedule empower the Governor of the State in which a
Scheduled or Tribal Area is included, to exclude the
operation of general Acts of Parliament or of the Legisla-
ture of the State to such Areas, by issuing notifications.
Thus, the present practice would appear to be to extend all
general Acts of Parliamer.t to the whole of India, leaving
it to the Governor to exclude the operation of such of
them in any Tribal or Scheduled Area, as he may deem
fit. It is therefore unnecessary to make any special pro-
vision for such Area.

We recommend that the Act should extend to the whole
of India except the State of Jammu & Kashmir.

11. The definition of ‘trust’ in section 3 of the Act is
not satisfactory) inasmuch as it refers to ‘express’, ‘implied’
and ‘constructive’ fiduciary ownership, without explain-
ing those terms. Since a definition of ‘trust’ has subse-
quently been enacted in the Trusts Act (II of 1882), it is
desirable that there should be parity between the provi-
sions of the two enactments. We, therefore, recommend
that the existing definition be replaced by one which
would comprise a trust as defined in section 3 of the Trusts
Act as well as all obligations in the nature of trusts
which are included in Chapter IX of that Act. Conse-

quential changes in the definition of ‘trustee’ have also ~

been suggested.”

A few other drafting changes have been suggested by
us in the section.

12, Clause (a) of section 4 may be omitted as un-

necessary. According to the definition clause, words
oceurring in this Act, which are defined in the Indian

व. Fanardan v. Bhairab, 30 1.0. 365 (Cal.)
2. Vide s. 2 (d), AppendixT.



5

Contract Act, 1872, are to have the meanings respective-
ly assigned to them in that Act. Under section 2(h) of
the Contract Act, only, “an agreement enforceable by law
is a contract”. A mere agreement is not enforceable in
law. There is, therefore, no question of any specific relief
being granted in respect of a mere agreement which is not
a contract. This position will be clear from the new
section 8 proposed by us.

13. We are of the opinion that sections 5 and 6 should Secs. 5-७
be omitted. They embody propositions too elementary
to be codified and serve no useful purpose. Whitley
Stokes! considered them unnecessary and recommended
their repeal.

14. Pollock and Mulla? have criticised the form of Se.7
section 7 in the following words—

“S. 7 is a negative statement of the principle more
clearly expressed by saying that, specific relief
being a civil remedy, the plaintiff must show
some individual right to it in every ease....”

We have suggested certain drafting alterations in the
section in order to meet this criticism.

15. Except for the substitution of the word ‘provided’ Sec. 8,
for the word ‘prescribed’, no change is proposed in
section 8.

16. As suggested in our earlier Report on the Limita-
tion Act, section 9 should be omitted.’ The object of this
section, which corresponds to section 15 of the Limitation
Act.! 1859, was to discourage people’ trom taking the law
into their own hands, however good their title. Tt pro-
vides a summary and speedy remedy through the medium
of the Civil Court for the restoration of possession to a
party dispossessed by another, leaving ‘the parties to
fight. out the question of their respective titles in a
regular suit.

But the section has not served its purpose. The
remedy has not been speedy because the evidence which
is generally led to establish possession is nearly the same
as would be necessary in a title suit. It has been felt
that the question of possession cannot be determined
without going into the questian of title to, some extent

Sec, 9,

x. Introduction to 318. Act in the Anglo-Indion Codes, Vol. 1. 9. 939.
2 Specific Relief Act, 8th Ed., p. 745.
3. Vide para. 145 of the Third Report of the Commission (Limitation

Act, 1908).
4+ Pollock & Mulla, Specific Relief Act, 8th Ed., 9. 749.



Sec, 10,

Sec. 11,

A decree under section 9 does not determine title, and it
is generally followed by; a suit for recovery of possession
based on title. The result has been a multiplicity of pro-
ceedings.

17. But for a verbal change, no alteration is proposed
in section 10.

18. It has been suggested that section 11 is unnecessary
and should be omitted. But this section confers a right
to a relief which is not given by any other provision of
the Act.

First, specifie delivery under section 11 is to be
distinguished from specific performance of a contract
inasmuch as the right of recovery in section 11 is not
based on contract but on the right to possess.

Secondly, section 11 is to be distinguished from section
10. The distinction between the two kinds of action is
fully explained in Banerji’s Tagore Law Lectures),
Under section 10, the suit is, in reality, a suit for recovery
of movable property: or damages in the alternative and
the decree and its execution are governed by the provi-
sions of 0.20, r.10 and 0.21, rr.30-31. Plaintiff himself is
obliged to state in his plaint the estimated value of the
movables [vide Form No. 32, Sch. I, App. A off the CP.
Code], which would be paid to him if delivery cannot be
had [0.21, r.31 (2), 0.9. Code].

Under section 11, the plaintiff seeks recovery of the
articles in specie and has not to state in his plaint the
estimated money. value of the article; on the other hand,
he. states that no pecuniary compensation can be assessed
or will be adequate relief to him (vide Form 39 of Sch. I,
App. A of the C.P. Code). Of course, even in such a case,
in default of compliance with the decree, the Court has
the power, inter alia, to attach and sell the judgment-
debtor’s property and pay compensation to the decree-
holder out of such sale proceeds, But in this case, the
amount of compensation need. not be equivalent to any
estimated value of the article; it is compensation in the
proper sense of the term,—the amount being left to the
discretion of the Court [0:21, r.31(2), CP. Code]. In
short, “The amount of legal coercion, which can be brought
against a defendant to enforce a decree for specific deli-
very under section 11, is therefore clearly greater than

x. Law of Specific Relief, and Ed., pp, 74-75.



1

7

that which can be employed to enforce a decree under
section 1077,

In fact, both sections 10 and 11 relate to what is called
an action of detinue in England, but while section 10 re-
presents the common law rule, section 11 represents the
equitable gloss upon it. As Pollock and Mulla? put it
briefly—

“In England a person entitled to the immediate
possession of a specific chattel was in principle
entitled to recover it by an action of detinue.
The writ in that action demanded specific
delivery. But owing to the defective proce-
dure for the execution of common-law judg-
ments, this could not in practice be enforced.
Then a court of equity, when applied to for

. Telief, had to be satisfied that the remedy in
damages to the value of the goods, which alone
was available for the plaintiff at common law,
would not be adequate, or that some specially
equitable right of the plaintiff under a trust;
for example, was involved.”

The equitable gloss, however, applied only to cases
where damages could not afford adequate relief® or where
there was a fiduciary relationship between the parties*
by reason of which the defendant would. be bound, in
conscience, to make specific delivery. These special cases
are specified in section 11, :

In the circumstances we are of the view that Section
11 should not be omitted.

19. We think, however, that it is necessary to clarify
the question of the burden of proof under the section. Tt
has been held by the Madras High Court® that in order
to obtain relief under the section, the plaintiff must allege
and prove not only that the defendant is in possession of
the property but that the plaintiff's case is covered by
any of the four clauses of the section. This view has been
eriticised by Pollock and Mulla’ as unjust and this
criticism has met with judicial approval’. Now, since

iL Nelson. Specific Relief Act, p. 115, quoted in Banerji’s Law of Specific

9. 75.
2. Spe cific Relief Act, 8th Ed., pp. 756-7.
SC aod. Romclife तक 3 che $5385)
be a १८ ४. Rowcelffe, (1847) 2 Le 32, )e
Venkatasubba tic Javigatia

Ay

+ Venkararubba Rao v, Asiatic Steam Navigation Go., (1916) 39 Mad,
1 (FB),

5 Sp ecific Relief Act, 8th Ed., 9. 757.

» Subbarayaly v. Annamalai, U.L.R. 1946 Mad. 174-179.

WHA w



8

in an action off detinue Courts in England direct a resti-
tution in specie whenever there exists a fiduciary relation-
ship between the parties, it should be for the plaintiff in
cases falling under Cl.(a) to establish such relationship.
In cases falling under clause (d) also, it should be in-
cumbent upon the plaintiff to establish that the possession
of the defendant originated in a wrongful transfer of
possession. But so far as cases falling under clauses (b)
and (c) are concerned, it should be for the defendant to
establish that the article in respect of which possession
is claimed by the plaintiff is an ordinary article of com-
merce having no special value or interest to the plaintiff
or that the damage is assessable in money. The principle
followed in an action of detinue, as explained by Swinfer
Eady MR.’ is that— पु
“The power vested in the Court to order the delivery,
up of a particular chattel is discretionary, and
ought not to be exercised when the chattel is
an ordinary article of commerce and of no
special value or interest, and not alleged to be
of any special value to the plaintiff, and where
damages would fully compensate”.

We recommend that the foregoing principle should be
incorporated into the section, as an Explanation.

20. In England? and in America’, one finds that the
text-books on Specific Performance deal with the defences
open under the law of contract as well as the defences
available in equity Courts in proceedings to enforce a
contract by way of specific performance. In India, the
defences that are available under the law of contract, such
as incapacity of parties, the absence of a concluded contract,
the uncertainty of the cortract, coercion, fraud, misrepre-
sentation, mistake, illegality, or want of authority to
enter into the contract, have all been dealt with in the
Contract Act. Further, it is provided by section 4(a) of
the Specific Relief Act that an agreement which is not a
valid ‘contract under the Contract Act is not specifically
enforceable, ह

Her.ce, a repetition, in the Specific Relief Act, of the
defences available “under the law of contract may be
avoided by inserting in the Act a specific provision to the

1. Whiteley Ltd. v. Hill, (1918) 2 K.B. 808 at 819.
2, Fry, Specific Performance, 6th Ed., pp. 125 et seq.3 Halsbury, and Ed,
Vol. 31, 9. 345.

49 American Jurisprudence, PP. 24 ef seq.



9

effect that all defences open under the law relating to
contracts shall be open to a defendant in a suit for specific
performance. We, therefore, propose to insert a new
section’ to the above effect and to omit clause (a) of section
4 which becomes redundant.

21. Clause (a) of section 12 relates to an obligation ae
arising out of a trust. Some jurists consider such an obli-
gation as appertaining to the law of contracts but, in view
of the definition of a trust in the Indian Trusts Act, such
an obligation arises out of an executed contract. The
relief by way of specific performance is, on the other hand,
available only in respect of executory contracts, to which
the other clauses of section 12 relate. It seems to us,
therefore, appropriate to delete clause (a) from section 12
and to place all the provisions relating to trusts together
in one section. The only references to trusts, so far as
specific performance is concerned, are in sections 12 (a) and
21(e). We propose to include both of them ina new
section>,

22. Clause (d) of section 12, as pointed out by Banerji,’ Cl. (d).
seems to sanction the doubtful doctrine that insolvency of
the defer. dant is a ground for decreeing specific performance.
The ability of the defendant to pay damages never entered
into the consideration of Courts of Equity. “Such a rule,”
as observed by Pomeroy, “makes one under such a contract
a preferred creditor”. Further, the inadequacy of the legal
relief, which is the basis of equitable remedies, is ordinarily
in the nature of that relief in cases of a certain type, not in
the difficulty of recovery of damages in the individual
instance. “Tt is the contract itself” said Andrews, C. J.,
“which gives to or takes away from the court its jurisdic-
tion; not the wealth or poverty of the party defendant”

Tn short, this clause is totally inconsistert with the basic
principle followed by the Courts of Equity in England in
granting specific performance, namely, the non-existence
or inadequacy of the remedy at law, but not merely the
impracticability of erforcing such a remedy. हि

We, therefore, recommend that this clause be ornitted. -

23. As regards the Explanation to section 12, we think
that the presumption relating to movable property is some- Expl,”

1, Vide s. 8, App. I.

2. Banerji, Law of Specific Relief, 2nd Ed., p. 84.
3. Vide s. 12, Appt.

4. Law of Specific Relief, and Ed., p. 129.

5. Ibid, p. 130.



Sec, 13.

10

what misleading in its present form and it would be
conducive to a better understanding of the law if the
exceptional cases where the presumption of adequacy’ of
damages is tot applied by the Courts, are also specified.
We, therefore, propose to split up the Explanation into
two independent sections,—one relating to immovable and
the other relating to movable property. While no change
is necessary as to the presumption relating to immovable
property,—we propose to specify the exceptional cases where
Courts in England and India grant specific performance of
contracts to transfer movable property, on the presumption
that damages would not in such cases give an adequate
relief. These are—

(a) Where the property is not an ordinary article of
commerce or is otherwise of special value or
interest to the plaintiff.

(b) Where the property is held by the defendant as
agent or trustee of the plaintiff?.

(c) Where the property consists of goods not easily
procurable in the market.

The last exception has been specially developed in the
United States’ Courts have enforced specific performance
of contracts to furnish gas, water or other necessary
materials to a manufacturing establishment, where the
thing contracted for is not immediately ‘available from
other sources and a breach of the contract would stop: the
operations of the plaintiff’s establishment. The same
principle is applied where the goods are such that they
can be supplied by no one except the defendant. A contract
to furnish stone from: a certain quarry for building was
enforced where the stone was of a peculiar colour and the
building was partially constructed from the stone already
furnished, Even a contract for the delivery of a motion-
picture film to an exhibitor has been, enforced.

In view of the vast economic developments which are
taking place in India, we would-recommend the adoption
of this exception from the American Law.

24 It is not clear from the language of section 13
whether the section has an independent existence or has
to be read along with the succeeding sections relating to

1. Cf. Pusey ve Pusey (168. ne Vern. 2733 Falcke v. Gray, 0859) Dtew Yew 65.
2. Wood v- Roweliffe, (1844) 3 Hare 304. °
3. 49 Am. Juris., ss. 126, 128, pp. 149, 152.



il

partial performance. Collettt as well as Banerji? have
taken the latter view. We think it should be made clear
that the principle embodied in section 13 is a general prin-
ciple which has to be borne in mind while applying
sections 14 to 16. We propose to amalgamate sections 14—17
into one section and to append section 13 in a modified
form as an Explanation thereto, omitting the reference
therein to section 56 of the Contract Act.

25. While section 17 enunciates the general rule that Secs, 14-17.
the Court will not enforce specific performance of a part
of a contract, sections 14, 15 and 16 provide exceptions to
this general rule, and the Privy Council has held’ that
sections 14—17 taken togetter constitute a complete Code
and that any claim for specific relief of a part of a contract
must be brought within the terms of these sections. In
these circumstances, it is desirable to amalgamate sections
14 to 17 into one section and to provide that the court shall

\ not direct the specific performance of a part of a contract
except as provided therein.

- \ 26. No change in principle is required in sections 14, Secs. 14,16
हि and 17. and 17.
X

27. Section 15 contemplates two types of cases, namely, Sec, 15.

(i) where the part, which must be left unperformed, forms
a considerable portion of the whole but admits of compen-
sation in money, and (ii) where it does not admit of
compensation. In our opinion, the principle embodied in
the section, as it stands, is inequitable so far as the former
case is concerned; for, where monetary assessment of the
part unperformed is possible, there is no reason why the
plaintiff should not get a proportionate abatement of the
consideration when he is to relinquish all claim to
further performance or any further compensation for the
breach. In the latter case, on the other hand, no question
of abatement arises because apportionment of the consi-
deration is not possible. है

We have, in Appendix I, suggested a redraft of the
section, in conformity with the above view.

28. There 18 8076 uncertainty as to whether section Sec, 18,

18 covers the case of an absence of title as distinguished
from that of an imperfect title. The section mentions only

1.Collett, Law of Specific Relief, p. 117.
2. Banerji, S: specific Relief, 2nd Ed. 9. 282.
3. Graham v.KrishnachandraDey, (1925) 52 Cal. 335 P.C, at p-338



12

‘imperfect title’. But according to a Nagpur decision,’ the
wording of clause (a) of section 18, whereby the vendee
can compel the vendor to make good the contract out of
‘any’ interest in the property subsequently acquired by the
vendor, “indicates that an imperfect title would include
even complete absence of title”.

The English law, as stated in Holroyd v. Marshall*, is
that—

eee if a contract be in other respects good and fit
to be performed, and the consideration has been
received, incapacity to perform it at the time of
its execution will be no answer when the means

of doing so are afterwards obtained.”

A defendant cannot be permitted to say that he did not
mean to acquire that interest’ Accordingly, it would be
advisable to make the position clear by including in sec-
tion 18 the case of a total absence of title.

29. The applicability of sections 14 to 16 in a case
falling under section 18(a) came up for the consideration
of the Supreme Court in Kalyanpur Lime Works Ltd. ,v..
State of Bihar and anr.! so

In that case, the facts,’ in short, were that A agreed
to grant a lease to B for a period of 20 years commencing
from a specified date. At that time A had no title to
grant the lease, but, subsequently, A acquired title at a
time when only 6 years were left out of the 20 year-
period of the lease agreed to be given to B. B brought
a suit for specific performance claiming a lease for a
period of 20 years from the date when A acquired title
to grant the lease. It was contended® on behalf of B
(plaintiff) that he was entitled to specific performance of
the original contract and that the Court was competent
to reconstruct the contract in the context of the changed
circumstances in order to give him the relief to whieh
he was entitled under the original contract. The Patna
High Court® held that section 18(a) gave no. power to the
Court to reconstruct the contract, but that the Court
could enforce the contract only to the extent that it was

1949 Nag. 83.

1. Pundlik, v.fainarayan, A.
2.10 H.L.C. 191 ‘Gib.
3, Fry, Specific Performance, 6th Ed., p. 464.

. S.C.R. 958.
$ $959 clone १७ & Co. Lid ०. K. L. Works, A. 1. R. 1952 Pat. 393.

6: Ibid., 99. 400-401.



we नि पड
possible in the changed circumstances, if the plaintiff so
desired, and that the plaintiff might get a decree for the
remaining six years of his term under the original con-

tract, provided he complied with the provisions of section
15. These two propositions of law were accepted by the

Supreme Court’.

It is, therefore, advisable to make it clear that sections
14 to 16 apply also to cases covered by section 18.

30. In Dalmia Jain & Co. v. K. L. Works?,—there was
a controversy whether section 18(a) of the Specific
Relief Act applied to executory contracts at all. Das J.
accepted the contention of the appellants that both section
18(a) off the Specific Relief Act and section 43 of the
Transfer of Property Act related to the same subject-
matter, viz., executed contracts and observed:

Cl. (@).

“T am of the view that the words used in clause (a)
such as ‘sale or lease’ are only apt and appro-
priate to executed contracts.”?

It is, however, to be noted that the opening words of
section 18 refer to ‘contracts to sell or let’ and thé word
‘contract’ is also mentioned in the latter portion off clause
(a) itself. It is obvious that section 18(a) refers to contracts
to sell or lease, i.e, executory contracts, while section 43
of the Transfer of Property Act applies to exectited: con-
tracts. Otherwise, it is difficult to distinguish between the
two provisions. The distinction is thus brought out by
Mullai—

“Section 43 follows the equitable rule in that until
the option is exercised, it treats the transferee
as the beneficiary of a trust......... But it départs
from the equitable rule in that it’ doés not
require the transfer to be effected by a ‘further
conveyance... If the transferee were en-
forcing the contract under section 18(8) of the
Specific Relief Act, the transferor would’ be
required to execute a further conveyance. But’
under séction 43 the exercise of the option or

3. (1954) S.C.R. 958.

2, A.TR. 1952 Pat. 392 (409); (see also Reuben J. ४६ pp. 404-5, who
observes that “the words ‘sale or lease’ appear to be used in contrast to
the word ‘contract’ ”).

3. Transfer of Property Act., 4th Ed., p.196.



Cl. (७).

CL ©.

14

the mere requisition of the transferee is suffi-
cient to bring the subsequent interest within
the scope of the original transfer.”

The words ‘sale or lease’, ag observed by Das J., do
appear to be apt or appropriate to executed contracts only.
We recommend that these words be substituted by the
word ‘contract’, which will refer to the ‘contract to sell
or let’ mentioned in the opening sentence of section 18.

31. Clause (b) of section 18 refers to cases like contracts
for the assignment ofi leasehold interest where the lessor’s
consent is recessary for the same. As was observed in
Bain v. Fothergill?—

“whenever it is a matter of conveyancing and not a
matter of title it is the duty of the vendor to do
every thing that he is able to do by force of his
own interest and also by force of the interest
of others whom he can compel to concur in the
conveyance.”

“But Equity will not compel a vendor to procure the
concurrence of parties whose concurrence he has no right
to require’,

The requirement of concurrence seems to be the
essence of the clause but there are cases where concurrence
alone may not be enough and if a conveyance by another
person, who is bound to convey at the vendor’s request, is
required, there is no reason why the vendor should not
be compelled to get the conveyance from that person by a
resort to legal proceedings, if it cannot be had amicably.
Suitable changes have been suggested in clause (b), to
make this clear.

32. Clause (c) imposes an obligation upon the vendor to
obtain a conveyance from the mortgagee, in case of sales
of mortgaged properties. A conveyance from the mortgagee
15 however not necessary except in the case of an English
mortgage or a mortgage by conditional sale, The words
‘where necessary’ should, therefore, be inserted in clause

(०.

* 33. Where a claim for specific performance is refused,
the plaintiff may, in certain cases, be entitled to get a

1. Dalmia v.K.L.Works, ALR. 1952 Pat. 393 (409).
2. (1874) 7 H.L. 158, 209.
3. Dart, Vendor & Purchaser, 8th Ed., Vol. IT, 9. 924+



oo 15

refund of earnest money or purchase money! or other
sum deposited by him as a pre-payment.

Section 18(d) of the Act deals only with the right of the
defendant to a refund in a case of refusal of specific
performance on the ground of imperfect title of the vendor
or lessor. But there are cases where the plaintiff who is
a purchaser or lessee and whose claim for specific perform-
ance is refused is entitled to a refund”.

In England, it was held in earlier cases? that where the
remedy of specific performance was refused on merely
equitable grounds, the purchaser could recover damages
for breach of contract but could not recover his deposit.
But section 49(2) of the Law of Property Act, 1925, now
provides that the Court may “order the repayment of any
deposit” either in an independent action for its return or in
a suit for specific performance “where the Court refuses to
grant specific performance”. Hence, either party may, in a
suit for specific performance, claim repayment.of any deposit
when the claim for specific performance is refused.

In India, in some cases, a claim for refund of the
earnest: money has been made in the alternative in a suit
for specific performance‘ and it has been held that even in
the absence of a specific prayer® for return of earnest
money, the Court may, in a suit for specific performance,
direct a refund while refusing specific performance, if the
facts disclose a case for such a refund.

On the other hard, there has been some uncertainty as
to the right of the plaintiff to ask for an amendment claim-
ing such a relief at a late stage of the proceeding. While
in some cases it has been held that such an amendment
should be allowed at any stage of the litigation® there is
a contrary view? that the appellate court should not give
this relief where the plaintiff has not jnitially claimed it
as an alternative relief in his suit for specific performance.

व. Munni v.Kamta, A.LR. 1923 All. 3213 Govind v. Miraji, (1944) Nag.
18. .
7 2, Amma v. Udit,(1898) 3141, 68 P.C.; Abdul Rahman v. Rahim_Bakshi,
AsLR. 1929 Lah, 332.3 Raghu Nath v. Chandra, y ‘C.W.N.100.3 Fibrosa v.
Fairbairn;(1942) 2 AMLE.R. 122 (H.L.); Munshi v. Vishnu, A.LR.1954 All. 450.
3. Cf. Re. National Provincial Bank, (1895) 1 Ch.190.
4. Amma v. Udit, (1898) 31 All, 68 P.C.; Karsandas v. Chhotalal, A.I.R.
1924 Bom nie ; Natesa Aiyar v. Appavu Paaayarhi, 38 Mad. 178.
5. A.J. Majith v.Krishnaswami A-I-R. 1955 Mad. 591 (593) $
Ragunath_v. Chandra, 17 C.W.N. 100.
6. Irbrahimbhai v. Fletcher Ors:s Road, (1896) 21 Bom. 827.
7. Somasundaram Chettiar v. Chidambaram Chettiar, A.ILR. 1951 Mad.

282.

oat


16

We are of the view that, as in the matter of compensa-
tion, the law should not allow a decree to be made with-
out a proper pleading, but that the Court should try to
prevent multiplicity of proceedings by allowing amend-
ment seeking to introduce a claim for a refund or a similar
relief, even at a late stage. We recommend that a specific
provision, on the above lines, should be inserted in the
Act, enabling a person to obtain a refund or similar relief
in a suit for specific performance.

34, We have next to consider whether it should be made
obligatory on the plaintiff to make the claim for a refund
in the suit for specific performance itself.

Pollock and Mulla' have suggested that it is “.........
desireable that the right to return of the
deposit should be determined in the suit for
specific performance........”

It has however been generally held that a separate suit
lies for a refund of the earnest money, even though the
suit for specific performance has been dismissed?.

Having regard to the fact that the number of such
suits cannot be considerable. We do not think it right
(0० recommend a provision barring such suits.

35. It will be useful, we think to introduce a rule which
has. been now settled by judicial decisions, that in order to
avoid multiplicity of proceedings the plaintiff may claim
a decree for possession in a suit for specific performance
even though, strictly speaking, the right to possession ac-
crues only when specific performance is decreed®.

No doubt, it has been laid down that possession can be
asked for in execution of a decree for specific performance
even though possession was not claimed in the plaint, on
the ground that the relief of possession is merely incident-
al to that of execution ofa deed of conveyance’. At the
same time it has been held that the plaintiff decree-holder
does not acquire title or the right to recover possession

1. Specific Relief Act, 8th Ed. p. 782.
2. Munni Bibi v.Kamta Singh, (1923) 45 All. 378. (This is. also the law
in England under the Law of Property Act, 1925). . हु
Of course, in the case of default by the vendor, the purchaser may, instead
of suing for specific performance, sue only for refund of the depo with.
‘or without damages (Naturam v. Uluk Chand, A.I.R. 1926 Cal. 1041)
Krishnaji v. Sangappa, A.1.R.1925 Bom. 1813 Velay uda v.Kumaraswami,
हैदर 6041 Ramachandracharyulu v. Rangacharyult ALR.
1926 Mad, 1117-
4. Kartik v. Dibakar, ALR. 1952 Cal. 3623 Arjun Sing v. Sahu, AUR

1950 All. 415.



‘ 7

unless a sale-deed is executed in execution of the decree
for specific performance’. We think it would be simpler
10 make a statutory provision enabling the plaintiff to ask
for possession in the suit for specific performance and em-
powering the Court to provide in the decree itself that
upon payment by the plaintiff of the consideration money
within the given time, the defendant should execute the
deed and put the plaintiff in possession’.

On the same principle, where the vendor or lessor is a
joint tenant, and the suit for specific performance is
brought by his purchaser against the co-tenant in posses-
sion of the entire property, it has been contended that the
plaintiff should be permitted to ask for a partition as well
as possession in the same suit’. In Bhagwan v. Krishnaji‘,
Heaton J., however, thought that on principle it was not
proper that a transferee should have specific performance
in such cases as it would lead to further litigation because
“he will be unable to obtain separate possession of it with-
out bringing a suit for partition.”

In the circumstances, we consider it advisable to pro-
vide that the plaintiff, in a suit for specific performance,
may also claim the ancillary reliefs of partition on pos-
session either initially or by an amendment at a later
stage without prejudice to his right to compensation under
section 19.

36. There has been some difference of opinion among Sec. 19

the High Courts as to the meaning of the word ‘compensa-
tion’ in section 19. The Calcutta High Court’, while inter-
preting Article 116 of the Limitation Act, has observed:
“As Lord Esher observed in Dixon v. Calcraft*, the ex-
pression compensation is not ordinarily used as,an equiv-
alent to damages, although as remarked by Fry, LJ. in
Skinner’s Co. v. Knight’, compensation may often have to
be measured by the same rule as damages in an action for
the breach. The term compensation as pointed out in the
Oxford Dictionary, signifies that which is given in recom-
pense, an equivalent rendered. Damages, on the other hand,

1. Enayat Ullah v. Khalil Ullah, A.1.R. 1938 811 432.

2. Cf. Abdul v. Abdul, 46 Ma

3. Rangayya v. Subrahmania, 40 365 (373-4)

4. (1920) 44, Bom. 967, 97:

5. Md. Mozaharai Ahad v. Md. Azimaddin Bhuiya, A.I.R. 1923 Cal. 507,
SII,!

6. (1892) 1 0.8. 458.
7 9890 2 QB. 542



oe 18

constitute the sum of money claimed or adjudged to be
paid in compensation for loss or injury sustained; the
value estimated in money, of something lost or withheld.
The term compensation etymologically suggests the image
of balancing one thing against another ....”

On the other hand, the Nagpur High Court’ has held
that the word compensation used in section 19 of the Speci-
fic Relief Act should be understood in the sense of damages
as contemplated in section 73 of the Contract Act. The
same conclusion might be said to follow also from the ob-
servation of the Privy Council in Ardeshir’s case* that sec-
tion 19 of the Specific Relief Act, with the exception of the
Explanation, embodies the same principle as Lord Cairns’
Act, which enabled a suitor to claim both specific perform-
ance and damages for breach of contract in the same pro-
ceedings, But the Privy Council did not disapprove of the
view expressed in the Bombay High Court? by Macleod
C.J. that the word compensation was used with the intent
to emphasise the fact that the Court in awarding com-
pensation was not bound to follow the ordinary rules with
regard to damages for breach of contract and that the
measure of damages was not necessarily the same as ina
suit for damages for breach of contract. Later,
however, the Privy Council in a case’ under S. 19 upheld a
decree on the footing of ‘damages’ for breach of contract.
In a Bombay case® Chagla J. (as he then was) has held
that in deciding whether the plaintiff is entitled to
compensation, the principle, which the Court must adopt,
is the same as underlies section 73 of the Contract Act,
that is to say, the plantiff is bound to prove some loss or
damage. But there may be cases where the injury can-
not be assessed in terms of money. In such cases, the
Court would award nominal damages.

In tkese circumstances, we think it is desirable to pro-
vide that compensation under the present section should
be assessed on the same principles as are followed under
section 73 of the Contract Act.

37. There has been a difference of judicial opinion as
to whether the Court has power to award compensation

1. Pratapchand v. Raghunath, A.I.R. 1937 Nag. 2433 Dwarkaprasad v.
Kathelen, AR. 1955 Nag. 28.

2, (1928) 52 Bom. $97P.C.

3. Sassoon v. Ardeshir A.LR. 1926 Bom. 189.

4. Ramjiv. Kishore, (1927) 117 1.6. 7 (P.C,).

3. Ramchandra v. Chinubhai, A.I.R. 1944 Bom. 76,



19

in a suit for specific performance, where the plaintiff has
not specifically prayed for it in the plaint.

The Lahore’ High Court has held that the Court has
the power to award damages whether in substitution for
or in addition to specific performance even though the
plaintiff has not specifically claimed it in the plaint.

The Madras? High Court has, however, held that the
Court cannot award damages in addition to specific per-
tdtmance in the absence of a specific claim for damages
atid a proper pleading stating why the relief of specific
performance would be insufficient to satisfy the justice
61 the case and the amount which should be awarded.

‘The Madras view would appear to be based on the
principle that there should be a proper pleading im every
case. While it is proper that the Court should have full
discretion to award damages in any case it thinks fit, one
cannot, on the other hand, overlook the question of un-
fairness and hardship to the defendant, if a decree is
passed against him, without a proper pleading.

What we recommend is that in nd case should com-
pensation be decreed unless it is elaimed by a proper
pleading. It should be open to the plaintiff to have an
amendment, at any stage of the proceeding; in order to
introduce a prayer for compensation; whether in lieu of
or in addition to specific performance.

38. Section 20 does not state the eHtité law célating to '

liquidation of damages as a bar to specific performance.
It appears that the principles of Eng! fish Taw on this 800-
ject have been applied by the courts in our ebiittry. It
would therefore be expedient to codify those principles.
In fiterpreting section 50 the Céutts’ in India and the
Jiiviat Committee! always Sought to ascertain the inten-
ti of the ‘parties, on the true constriction of the, con-
t, . an :

_ There may however be cases in. which the eiroums-
tances indicate that the parties intended. that in the
event of a breach of the contract only thenayment of
money by way ‘of damages should be ordered and not
specific performance’. 9. 8:41 57:07

1. A-P.Pratinidhi 3528 _v. Lahori, (1924) 5 Lah: 509. हु
2. Somasundaram v. Chidambaram, “ATR: vg Pied 282. Kanda
+ 3275 sami Shan-

3. Cf. Sadig Hussain v. Anup Singh,(192:
mugha, ALR. 1949 Mad. 1०27 (2923)
4. Bissessar v, Vas, (1927) 55 Cal. 238 ९.८.
5. Kandasami v. Shanmugha, A.I.R. 1949 Mad. 302, (303).



Sec, 21.

Cl. (a).

20

A reading of the decisions referred to will show that
our courts have followed the English law thus stated in
Halsbury’—

“Where the contract contains a stipulation that in
the event of non-performance a certain sum
of money shall be paid, that fact is not in itself
decisive in considering whether or not specific
performance should be granted. Nor does the
distinction between penalty and __ liquidated
damages affect the answer to this question.
The answer is to be found by considering the
intention of the parties, that is, whether the
party bound to performance has an alternative
choice given to him by the contract, to per-
form or to pay the agreed sum, or whether he
is bound to do a certain thing, with a penal
sum or sum by way of liquidated damages
attached as security. In the latter case the
Court, notwithstanding the penal clause, en-
forces performance, if the contract be such
that without the penal clause it would have
been proper for specific performance”.

We recommend that these principles should be incor-
porated into the section, with a proviso that the plaintiff
cannot have both specific performance and the sum spe-
cified in the contract.

39. Some of the clauses of section 21 require in our view
amplification.

Thus, while as a general rule, contracts to lend or
mortgage are not specifically enforced, as they come
under clause (a), there are certain exceptional cases
where specific performance has been granted by ,.the
Courts upon the assumption that damages would . not
afford adequaté relief in stith cases, and these exceptions
sould be mentioned in the section itself,’ to make it
comprehensive.

These exceptional cases are as follows:-+

1. Where a loan has been advanced’ either in whple
or in part by the lender on a contract to execute a

“y and Ed., Vol. 31, Para.3373,



at

wiottgage but the borrower refuses to execute the mort-
gage, specific performance of the contract can be
obtained if the borrower is not willing to repay: the loan
at once!. Where a part of the loan only has been advanced,
the lender must be ready and willing to advance the
remaining sum according to the agreemer.t.

2. Another such case is the specific performance of a
contract to subscribe for debentures of a company.
Though Section 122 of the Companies Act, 1956 provides
for the specific performance of such a contract we think
it would be expedient, for the sake of comprehensive-
ness, to make a provision in this Section.

40. No change is necessary in clause (b).

Cl. (०)

41. Pollock and Mulla? point out that clause (c) Cl. (©.

appears to be redundant inasmuch as under section 29
of the Contract Act, a contract “which is not certain, or
capable of being made certain,” is void. We agree with
this view and recommend that clause (c) be omitted.

42, As the illustration to clause (d) says, an agree- Cl. (d).

ment for partnership is not generally specifically en-
forced’, But there are some exceptional cases - where
such agreements have been enforced. Thus, where the
parties have actually entered on the partnership by
having commenced the business to be carried on in
partnership, a suit lies for obtaining execution of a
formal deed of partnership*. A contract for the pur-
chase of the share of a partner has also been speci-
fically enforced®.

We therefore propose to provide for such cases. We
also suggest that the word “revocable” in clause (9) be
substituted by the word ‘determinable’, for, as Pollock
and Mulla® observe, the expression ‘revocable contract’
is inaccurate.

AN

”

43. We have transferred clause (e) to a separate Cl. (०५

section relating to trusts which we have suggested’.
1. fewan Lal v. Nilmani, A.1.R. 1928 P.C, 803 Fry, Specific Performance,
6th Ed. p. 245 49 Am, Juris., S. 83, 9. 701.
2. Specific Relief Act, 8th 80... B., 79°:
3. Findley on Partnership, 11th Ed, 9, 582; Halsbury, 2nd 89., Vol. 31..
para, 486. ‘anda
4. Byrne v. Reid, (1902) 2 Ch. 7353 Viedachala v. Ramaswami, (1863) 1
M.ELC.R. 341.
5. Dodson v. Downey, (1901) 2 Ch. 620.
6. Specific Relief Act, 8th Ed., 9. 790.
7. See 8s 12, App. I

Oe


९. ७.

Cl. (४).

22

44. In view of the new section 8 proposed by us
clause (f) appears to us to be unnecessary and should be
omitted.

45. In clause (g), the limit of three years, which is a
departure from the English rule, is artificial and arbi-
trary. We have no hesitation in recommending the
omission of the time-limit and the substitution of the
proper rule, viz. that the Coyrt will not decree specific
performance if the contract involves the performance
of such a continuous duty that the court is not able to
supervise it,

46. A contract to build or repair would come within
clause (g) and would not, generally be specifically en-
forced’. But such a contract is enforced in England’ and
in America® in certain exceptional circumstances. Such
a contract would be specifically enforced if the building
or work is defined by the contract with sufficient parti-
cularjty so as to enable the court to determine the exact
nature of the work, or that the plaintiff has a substantial
interest, in the performance of the contract, so that com-
pensation for its breach would not be an adequate relief
and that the defendant has under the contract obtained
possssion of the land on which the work is to be carried
out.

- In our view provision should be made in the clayse
for such a case.

47. We recommend the omission of clause (h) in
view of the new provision recommended by us in
seotion 8.

48. Clause I of section 22, as it stands, is somewhat
vague. If the circumstances mentioned in the clause
are such as render the contract voidable, it is open ta
the party who has the option, to avoid it and no ques-
tion of specific performance'may thereafter arise.

There are, however, certain circumstances in which a
Court of equity refuses to decree specific performance,

1. Ramchandra v. Ramchandra, 1.L.R. 22 Bom. 46.

2. Halsbury, 2nd Bd., Vol 31, para, 36 5, P. 3333 Fry, 6th Bd. ए.48:
Dart, Nendor é Parchaser,Vol «IL, p. 879; Wolverhampton Corporation v.
Emmons (190), 1 KB. 515. है

है Pomeroy, Specific Performance, 3rd Ed., s. 23; Story, Equity Jurispru-
dence, 1920, p. 308. x



23

on the ground of unfairness, even though in law the cir-
cumstances are not such as to render the contract
voidable. Such unfairness may be due either to the
terms of the contract or the conduct of the parties, or
other circumstances, existing at the time of the contract.
Thus, the Court will not decree specific performance to
compel the defendant to perform an act which would
inevitably subject him to some penal consequences, such
as an action for damages or to a criminal prosecution.
Even if the performance of the agreement does not
involve a breach of trust. a court of equity is always
reluctant to enforce an agreement against trustees
which may injuriously affect their interest or that of
their beneficiaries. A contract of sale, therefore, made
by trustees in an unbusinesslike manner will not
generally be enforced, unless it is clearly established
that the price was adequate. The general doctrine in
regard to contracts the performance of which involvesa
breach of trust or an unlawful act applies not only; to
technical trustees but also to all persons occupying a
fiduciary relation or position of confidence towards
others, including agents, directors of corporations,
assignees in bankruptcy and the like. We, therefore,
suggest that the scope of clause I should be clarified by
providing that the unfair advantage referred to in this
clause may be due to circumstances which may riot be
sufficient to render the contract voidable.

49. It is not possible to exhaustively enumerate the
grounds of unfairness or of hardship mentioned in
clause II. As statéd by Pomeroy!, “the variety of forms of
hardship and unfairness is infinite; the Courts, therefore,
in dealing with these subjects have wisely refrained
from limiting themselves by: special rules. In this
particular field precedents are of comparatively little
value.” There are however certain circumstances which,
by themselves, have been held not to constitute an un-
fair advantage or hardship. Thus the fact that the con-
tract is onerous to the defendant or improvident in
nature®-*, or that there is inadequacy of consideration’,
will not be circumstances falling within clause II. It

1. Pomeroy, Specific Performance:

vis v. Maung Shwe Goh., 38 Cal. 805 (PC); Ram Sundar
een Maung 5 3 Ram Sundar v: Kali,

2 American Jurisprudence, p.
é 0७०४ v. Cope, (858) 25 Beav._ 140 (150 } c
5. larasinga Row v. mngasami Theran, 35 871; Pichat
Chaturbhuja A.LR., 1933 Mad. 736. ° , a] .



24

would be advisable to add an Explanation to the section
making this position clear.

50. It is not clear from clause II at what point of time
the circumstances causing the hardship must exist in
order to be a ground for refusing specific performance.

In England, it has been established that as a general
tule hardship, to operate as a ground of defence, must
have existed at the time of the contract, and not arisen
subsequently from a change of circumstances.12.

In India, too, it has been held that circumstances. which
have subsequently arisen such as a rise in prices owing to
external circumstances, like war conditions’, or the re-
sults of litigation’, do not constitute ‘hardship’ which can
be relieved against, under clause II:

A ‘subsequent change of conditions causing hardship
may, however, be a ground for refusing specific perform-
ance where it has been brought about by the acts of the
plaintiff®.

We recommend that the foregoing principles be incor-
porated in an Explanation to the section.

51. It is not clear from the Act, to what extent, if at
all, the doctrine of mutuality is applicable in India. The
principle of mutuality of remedy is thus stated by Fry®:

“A contract to be specifically enforced by the Court
must, as a general rule, be mutual,—that is to
say, such that it might, at the time it was en-
tered into, have been enforced by either of the
parties against the other of them. When,
therefore, whether from personal incapacity to
contract, or the nature of the contract, or any
other cause, the contract is incapable of being
enforced against one party, that party is gene-
rally, incapable of enforcing it against the other,
though its execution in the latter way might in
itself be free from the difficulty attending its
execution in the former.”

1. Halsbury, 2nd Ed., Vol 31, Para. 420.
2. Fry on Specific Performance, 6th Ed., Pp. }. 199, 202.
3. Sankaralinga v. Ratnasami, A.I.R. 1952 Mad. 389 (393).
4 Ramalinga v. Jagdammal, A.1.R. 1951 Mad, 612; Shib Lal v. Collector
of aril , 16 All. 423. है
5. Halsbury 2nd, Ed., Vol. 31, Para. 420; 49 Am. Juris., 9. 78.
©. Fry on Specific Performance, 6th Ed., 9. 219.



25

The doctrine has been criticised both in Hngland' and
the U.S.A?

According to Ashburner the doctrine of want of mutu-
ality as formulated by Fry “appears to be an unfortunate
invention of Lord Redesdale and although it has often
been spoken of with respect, it does not appear to form
the ratio decidendi of any line of cases.” He points out
that the illustrations given by Fry in support of his pro-
position do not support him.

Tn an illuminating article on the subject, Ames®
strongly criticizes the rule as ger.erally stated, and sets out
no less than eight propositions, each one of which is at
variance with the statement just quoted.

In Imdia, it was at one time thought‘ that the doctrine
of mutuality had been rejected by the Indian Legislature
on the ground of its artificiality. But the Privy Council
applied it in Sarwarjan’s case® and observed that sirce it
was not within the competence of a manager or guardian
to bind the minor or his estate by a contract for the pur-
chase of immovable property, the minor also could not
enforce such a contract, after attaining majority, because
there was a want of mutuality.

In the aforesaid decision their Lordships of the Judi-
cial Committee’ did not examine the provisions of the
Specific Relief Act nor consider the question whether
there was any reason for applying the doctrine of mutu-
ality under it. After this decision, the question has come
up for consideration before the High Courts on several
oecasions, particularly with reference to contracts for
the purchase or sale of immovable property entered into
by guardians on behalf of minors, The decisions are, by
no means, uniform and the attempt of the courts has, of
late, been to avoid as far as possible the application of
the doctrine. है

In cases governed by Hindu Law after a later decision
of the Judicial Committee’, it is settled that a guardian

1. Ashburner, Equity, 2nd Ed., Ri 405.
2. 49 Am. Juris., s. 35, p.49; Williston on Contracts, ss. 1439, 1440. +
3. Ames, Mutuality in Specific Performance, 3 Columbia Law Rev. 1.
4. Whitley-Stokes, Anglo-Indian Codes,{Vol-1, 9. 931 ; Krishnasami
¥. Sundrappayyar, (1894) 18 Mad. 415.
Pa Mir Sarwarjan v. Jakhruddin, (1911) 39 Cal. 232 P.C.
. Ibid., 9. 237.
7. Subrahmanyam v. Subba Ran, A.IR, 1948 P.C, 95.



26

is competent to alienate the property of a minor for pur-

poses of legal necessity or for the benefit of the estate.

and that, accordingly, such a contract is specifically en-
forceable both by and against the minor’, The Full Bench
of the Andhra High Court has extended this doctrine to
contracts for purchase of property entered into on behalf
of a Hindu minor, though the Court conceded that “It
may perhaps be more difficult in the case of a purchase by
a guardian on behalf of a minor to sustain it on the
ground of necessity or benefit.

In any event, where the personal law of a minor en-
ables a valid contract to be made by a guardian on behalf
of the minor, no question of mutuality really arises, for
the contract is binding on both parties. The position is
the same where such a power is conferred by or under
other law, e.g., the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890,

Now contracts made by the guardian of a Hindu minor,
whether for purposes of legal necessity or not, have ceas-
ed to create any problem which might necessitate the
application of the doctrine of mutuality, for, the Hindu
Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 (XXXII of 1956)
lays down the conditions under which only the guardian
can bind the minor’s property, and further enacts a speti-
fic prohibition that in no case can the guardian bind the
minor by a personal covenant [S. 8(1)].

There exists no such statutory provision in regard to
persons other than Hindus. But even under the Mahome-
dan law, it has been held that a contract for the sate of
a Mahomedan minor’s property by his de jure guardian
is enforceable both by and against the minor, if it is for
the minor’s benefit®.

There is still however scope for the application of the
rule in Sarwarjan’s case in. the case of contracts for the
purchase of property on behalf of a minor which cannot
be said to be for the benefit of the minor’. We do not con-
sider it necessary to import the doctrine of mutuality into
our codified law of specific performance to cover such
tases. Oni the contrary we would do away with the doc-
trine in Sarwarjan’s case® by inserting, in section 22, a

1. Sitarama Rao_v. Venkatarama Reddiar, A.1.R.1956 Mad, 267 (F.B.);
Suryaprakasam v. Gangaraju, A.1.R. 1956 Andhra 33 (40) 7.8.
2. Babu Ram v. Saidunnissa, (1913) 35 All. 499.
3. Imambandi v. Mutsaddi, A.1.R. 1918 P.C. 11
4. Amir Ahmmad v. Meer, A.T-R, 1952 Hyder. 120 (F.B.)
Mir Sarwarjan v. Fakhruddin, (1911) 39 Cal. 232 P.C.

a



i
bYovision embodying the law as stated in the American
Restatement! as follows: —

“The fact that the remedy of specific enforcement
is not available to one party is not a sufficient
reason for refusing it to the other party”.

There will thus be no room for the application of the
doctrine of mutuality in any suit for specific perform-
ance.

52. The words ‘his part’ in the concluding portion of Sec. 23.
clause (b) of section 23 are ambiguous and have led to a ७0):
difference of opinion amongst commentators. While
according to Banerji’, the representative or principal of
the contracting party can, in the case of a contract per-
sonal in nature, sue only if the party had himself per-
formed his part of the contract, Nelson’s* view is that the
representative or principal could sue after performing
what was to be performed by the party. But in a con-
tract of a personal nature, it would be unfair to impose
on the other party a performance by a third party except
where he has accepted such substituted performance. We
have suggested that suitable changes should be made in
the clause to make this clear.

53. In our coming report on the Contract Act, we in- Cl. ()-€),

tend to recommend a general rule that a third party to a
contract who is entitled to a benefit thereunder or has an
interest: therein is entitled to sue upon the contract, sub-
ject to certain limitations. Once such a general’ provision
is made, it will be unnecessary to retain the provisions
contained in clauses (c) to (f) of section 23 of the Specific
Relief Act. We suggest that these clauses be replaced by
one clause,—referring to the relevant provision of the
Contract Act.

54. In clause (8), we suggest the omission of the word Cl. (g).
‘public’, since the nature of the provision is such that it
should be made applicable to all companies governed by
the Companies Act.

A similar change should also be made in clause (d) of
section 27.

1. Contract, s. 72

2. Banerji, Law of. Specific Relief, 2nd Ed., 9. 399 (The same view ap-
pears to have been taken in Mahendra v. Samu, OWN. 229,

3. Nelson, Specific Relief Act, 203.



Cl. (h).

Bec, 24.

. 28

55. Clause (h) of section 23 and clause (e) of section
27 deal with the ‘pre-incorporation contracts of compa-

nies’,

Clause (h) of section 23 says that a company may,
after its incorporation, enforce contracts made by the pro-
moters of the company with third parties, provided such
contracts were within the purposes of the company and
the terms of its incorporation. Section 27(e) lays down
the converse rule of liability of the company in respect
of similar contracts made by the promoters. These two
provisions of our Act are founded on the English law as
it stood at the time when the Act was passed!,

Later English decisions have taken the view that a
company is neither bound by* nor entitled to take the
benefit ० the pre-formation contracts made by its promo-
ters.

The provisions of the Specific Relief Act have, how-
ever, been applied in India even recently‘, without refer-
ring to the change in judicial opinion in England, Though
a company cannot technically ratify a contract made be-
fore its incorporation, there would appear to be no reason
why the company should not be entitled to choose to take
the benefit or the burden of a contract made on its behalf
by its promoters, by communicating its acceptance of the
benefit or the burden to the other party to the contract.
There is no provision in the Companies Act, 1956 which
prevents a company from accepting the benefit or burden
of a pre-incorporation contract.

We, therefore, recommend that clause (h) of section
23 and clause (e) of section 27 be retained, with suitable
verbal changes indicating that the contract: would be en-
forceable by or against a company if the company accepts
the contract and signifies its acceptance to the other party
to the contract.

56. In clause (a) of section 24, the words ‘could not’
are not quite clear and have occasioned a differente of
views among the commentators as to their meaning®.

1, Earl of Shrewsbury v. North Stat,Jordshire Ry. Co., (1865-66) 1 Eq. ¥
2. In 1c nein & Colonial Produce Co., Ltd., (1906)2 Ch. 435 (८४.
3. Natal Land Co. v. Pauline Colliery Syndicate Lid. (1904) A.C. 1203
Newborne v. Sensolid Lid., (3953) 1 All, E.R, 708 (९02:
4. Commissioner of I.T. v. 2) rangi tya Coal Co., A.LR. 1953 Pat. 298 (300)
5. Collett, Law of Specific Relief, 3rd Ed, 9. 207; Banerji, Law of Spe-
Relief, 2nd Ed., Appendix 9.79. .



29

We, therefore, recommend that in clause (a) of section Cl. (@).
24 the words ‘would not be entitled to’ be substituted for
the words ‘could not’.

57. It has been laid down in England as well as in Cl. (०).
India that the plaintiff in an action for specific perform-
ance of a contract is disentitled to the remedy not only
where he has violated any of its essential terms but also
where he has acted in contravention of it, without violating
any of its terms.

Thus, in Fry? it is observed:

“We shall now consider the closely allied cases
where he (the plaintiff) has disentitled him-
self, not by default merely, but by acts in
fraud or contravention of the contract, or at
variance with it, or tending to its rescission and
the subversion of the relation established by it.
For where the party to a contract, who asks
the intervention of the Court, for its specific
execution, has been guilty of such conduct, that
circumstance may be put forward as a defence
to the action”.

This principle has been applied in India by the Privy
Council in Srish v. Banomali?. In dismissing a suit for
the specific performance of a compromise,—tke judicial
committee observed:

* “the conduct of Krishna was at variance with, and
amounted to a subversion of, the relation in-
tended to be established by the compromise”.

In our view this principle should be incorporated .
into the section by adding suitable words at the end of
elause (b) of section 24.

Cl. (०

58. We are of the opinion that clause (c) is ‘unnecessary
in view of the provisions of Order II, r.2 of.the Code of
Civil Procedure. If a person has obtained a decree for
compensation for breach of contract he cannot again sue
for specific performance, whether satisfaction of the dec-
ree is obtained or not, as his cause of action gets merged
in the decree. The cause of action in breach of contract,
whether the relief claimed is damages or specific perform-
ance, is the same and if the plaintiff is entitled to more

1. Specific Performance, 6th Ed., 8. 957, 9. 450,
2 (90७0 3x Ca, 584 G96) Bice हट P48



Cl. (d).

30

than one relief, either singly or in the alternative, he
must sue for the same in the same suit and cannot reserve
it except with the leave of the Court [O.II, r.2(3),C.P.
Code].

59. Clause (d) of section 24 and clause (c) of section
25 may be omitted as both of them are founded on the
English law as it stood under a Statute of the 16th cen-
tury, which has since been altered by legislation. A con-
veyance without valuable consideration was voidable at
the suit of a supervening purchaser for value with notice.
This has ceased to be the law in England since the Voluntary
Conveyance Act, 1873 (56 & 57 Vic.,),—now replaced by
the Law ‘of Property Act, 1925 (s. 173). Again, under our
Law, a prior settlement of property divests the title of the
settlor immediately and any conveyance thereafter from
the settlor to another, even if it be for consideration, would
be ineffective to convey any title.

60. It has been held by the Privy Council that in a suit
for specific performance, the plaintiff must show that all
conditions precedent have been fulfilled and also allege
and (where the fact is traversed) prove a continuous
readiness and willingness to perform the contract on his
part, from the date of the contract to the time of hearing!.
Though there is no express requirement to this effect in
the Specific Relief Act, it has been held that failure to
allege readiness and willingness will lead to a dismissal
of the suit?.

But the plaintiff need not prove performance of or
over readiness and willingness to perform non-essential
terms; or
terms of a separate or collateral contract; or

terms the performance of which has been prevented or
waived by the defendant; or

terms, the performance of which has became impossible
without the plaintiff's fault.
We consider that the doctrine of readiness and willing-
ness so formulated should be incorporated into our Act.

61. There is, however, a conflict of judicial opinion as
to the exact scope of the plaintiff’s readiness and willing-
ness required by the doctrine.

1. Ardeshir Mama v. Flora Sassoon, 52 Bom, 597.
3. Madan v. Kamaldhari, A.LR. 1930 Pat. 121-127,

\

esata anita aR



31

In England, it has been held? that a plaintiff claiming
specific performance, who insists on a wrong interpreta-
tion of the contract, does not lose his right to specific
performance in accordance with its right interpretation
where the defendant offers to perform the contract as
rightly interpreted.

In India, the Calcutta? and Nagpur? High Courts have
taken the view that the plaintiff must allege and prove
his readiness to perform the contract as it really was and
not as it was alleged by him to be. Thus, where a pur-
chaser sought specific performance alleging that he was
always ready and willing to pay Rs. 85 which, according
to him, was the price fixed by the contract, but the Court
found that the price fixed by the contract was, in fact,
Rs. 130, the suit for specific performance was dismissed‘.
Similarly, it has been held that, if the plaintiff insists on
a condition which he is not entitled to under the contract
as properly interpreted, his suit for specific performance
must fail®, .

The Madras High Court® has taken the view that even
where the plaintiff alleges that the consideration payable
by him was different from the real amount, there is a
sufficient averment on the part of the plaintiff of his readi-
ness and willingness to perform his part of the contract,
if he adds in the plaint that ‘he has no objection to paying
the defendant any sum that the Court should be pleased
to fix’®.

We are, inclined to prefer the Madras view and
recommend that the plaintiff should be entitled to
specific performance if he avers performance or readiness
and willingness to perform the contract according to its
true construction.

62. In connection with contracts for sale, a question
has arisen whether in order to establish his readiness and
willingness the plaintiff should have made a tender of the
money due from him to the defendant. The . further
question which has been raised is whether the purchaser
must, in order to show his readiness and willingness,
tender the money on the date fixed by the contract for

व. Berners v. Fleming, (1925) Ch. 264 (CA); Halsbury, 2nd Ad., Vol. 31,
8. 436.
Pa 2. Parul v. Saroj, A.I.R. 1948 Cal. 1475 Rustomali v, Ahider, 45 C.W.N.
37.
. Shamjibhai v. $agoo, 1949 Nag. 581 (607-10).
z Rustomali_v. Anader, 45 C.W.N. 837.
5.
6.

Shamjibhai v. Jasoo, LLR. (1949) Nag, 581 {ger-10).
|. 265.

Arjuna v. Lakshmi, और, (1949)



Sec, 25.

32

completion. In a Calcutta! case, it was held that such a
tender must be made, while in a Bombay case’, it was
held that an actual tender was not necessary for a suit for
specific performance, and it was enough if payment was
made as directed by the Court. The Bombay view seems
to have support in the observations of the Privy Council
in Bank of India v. Chinoy®, where it has held that the
plaintiff in such a suit need not deposit the money in
court or prove his financial competence.

Having considered the different aspects of the ques-
tion, we recommend that it should be provided that it is
not essential that the plaintiff should tender the money to
the defendant or deposit it in Court except when so
directed‘,

63. Section 18 speaks of property generally and sec-
tion 25 refers to movable and immovable Property. It is,
however, not clear how far the provisions of these two
sections apply to contracts for the letting of movable
property. Nor do the reported decisions throw any light
on this point,

It may not be strictly accurate to describe contracts for
the letting and hire of movable Property as contracts of
lease. Letting and hiring of movables is really a contract
of bailment which is governed by Chapter IX (sections
148 to 170) of the Indian Contract Act, 1872. If the bailor
does not deliver the movable property which is the sub-
jectematter of the contract, the bailee may have _ his
remedy against the bailor for recovery. of possession of
the property. There is no provision in the Indian Contract
Act for the enforcement of such a contract. The matter
must, therefore, be governed by, sections 10 and 11 of the
Specific Relief Act. After the termination of the period of
letting or hiring the bailor would be entitled to a return
of the property and a corresponding duty is imposed, on
the bailee by ss. 160 and 161 of the Indian Contract Act
1872. a न

Even in the case of contracts for the sale of ‘movablés
the scope for the application of sections 18 and 25 is rather
narrow inasmuch as it is only in the case of articles of

1. Manik v. Abhoy, 37 1.0. 257.

2. Potente % Games, 67 1.0. 865,
3. ALR. 0) P.C. 90 पु
4. Vide Expl. 3 to 8.24; App. I, «



33

special value that contracts for the sale of movables are
specifically enforced.

We therefore recommend that, for the sake of clarity,
sections 18 and 25 should deal only with immovable pro-
perty and, that, a residuary section should be enacted,
extending the provisions of these two sections, mutatis
mutandis, to movables, so that possible cases ealling for
the application of either of those provisions may be
covered.

64. We have already recommended the omission of
clause (c), of section 25 [Para. 59, ante].

65. Clause (b) contains certain non-technical words Sec. 26,
such as ‘surprise’ and ‘misapprehension’, the use of which Cl: (b)
has’ been commented upon. Thus, Pollock: says—

“The use of the word ‘surprise’ now seldom if ever
heard in an English Court,...........may be taken as no
more than a piece of abundant caution.”

Banerji? observes that at one time the word ‘surprise’
was used as almost synonymous with ‘fraud’. Collett’s view
ig that ‘surprise’ takes place “when something has been
done which operated to mislead or confuse the party on
the sudden”, ‘Surprise’, accordingly, does not go beyond
the concept of fraud. We have not been able to find any
Indian decision where specific performance has been
granted with a variation on the ground of surprise.

As regard ‘misapprehension’, Collett* suggests that it
means mistake in regard to the effect or consequence of
the contract as contrasted with mistake in regard to the
terms of the contract. Banerji®, further, says that the
addition of the word ‘reasonable’ to qualify ‘misapprehen-
sion’ does not make much material difference in its mean-
ing. While clause (a) deals with a mistake as to the
terms of contract, clause (b) seems ६0 deal with a mistake
as to the effects off the contract.

If so, it is possible to incorporate clause, (9) with clause
(a), with suitable drafting changes. ,

68. As Banerji® points out, clause (c) means nothing 2, (०,
more than that the terms of the contract in writing

1. Tagore Law Lectures on Fraud, p. 74,
2. Spec Relief, 2nd Ed., p 342. 4

- Collett, Law of Specific Relief, 3rd Ed, P. 220,
. Ibid., 3rd Ed., pp. 220, 244-5.

5. Specige Relief, and Hd, p. 343.

6. ly Be 247.

bys



CL (9.

Cl (०.

Sec, 27.

Sec. a7 A

34

do not embody the whole agreement between the parties,
and that the plaintiff must fulfil his entire engagement
before he can have specific performance.

That being so, clause (c) also may be amalgamated
with clause (a), with suitable drafting changes.

67. Clause (d), however, cannot be amalgamated with
clause (a) because here, as Banerji points out—

“Neither party is to blame; both were agreed as to
their object, viz., some legal result; but by reason of error
in drafting, they are both balked of their purpose......”.

In other words, the discrepancy in the written instru-
ment may not be due to any fraud, mistake or misrepresen-
tation of either party but may be due to the ignorance or
carelessness of the draftsman, and that is why clause (d)
does not start with the words “where by fraud or mis-
take... .”, as clauses (a) and (d) do.

We do not propose to alter clause (d).

68, Only a drafting change has been suggested in clause
(e).

69. In section 27, clause (e) has to be omitted in view
of the present state of the law relating to promoter con-
tracts (vide Para. 55, ante). In clause (d), the word ‘public’
should be omitted inasmuch as the principle embodied in
the clause is applicable to all companies.

70. In our report on the Registration Act?, we have re-
commended the exclusion of ‘agreement to lease’ from the
definition of lease in section 2 and the omission of clause
(c) from section 49. The result of these changes will be
that an agreement to lease, even if in writing, will not
require registration, and, even an unregistered deed of
lease will be admissible in evidence to prove an agreement
to lease. .

In the result, a person will be entitled to enforce speci-
fic performance of an agreement to lease even if it has to

» be gathered from an unregistered lease deed. Hence,

section 27A of the Specific Relief Act will be unnecessary,
whether it is interpreted to be applicable to an unregis-
tered agreement for lease or an unregistered deed of
lease.

1. Ibid. » 9. 87.
2. Sixth fee है the Law Commission, para. 21, p, To.



35

We theretore recommend that section 27A ne omittea.

71. The entire contents and arrangement of section 28 Se. 28.

have been severely criticised by Pollock and Mulla':—
“This section is incongruous, misplaced, and altoge-
ther an unsatisfactory piece of work. If it
means more than an exhortation to administer
the remedy now in question on the principles
declared in the Contract Act, secs. 15-22; if it
purports to confer on the Court a discretion to
apply, for this purpose, a standard different
from that of the general law; and if, in particu-
lar, IC. A., sec. 22 is to be considered inappli-
cable in suits for specific performance--then it
ought not to have been mixed up with provisions
relating merely to procedure, but, as materially
enlarging the discretion of the Court, should have
followed sec. 22 of the present Act ard should
have made the intention more explicit............ ”

Having regard to this comment we recommend the in-
corporation of the provision into section 22,—making it
clear that even where the mistake or misrepresentation is
not such as to render the contract voidable, the Court may
refuse to enforce specific performance where it would be
inequitable on the part of the plaintiff to obtain the relief
[See s. 21(2) (c) of Appendix qj.

Section 28 may, therefore, be omitted.

72. As we have included in the Act specific provisions
enabling a plaintiff to ask for reliefs such as a refund of
earnest money, in a suit for specific performance, we
recommend that, by way of abundant caution, it should
be made clear that the dismissal of a suit for specific per-
formance will not bar a suit ‘for any relief other than
damages. We have suggested suitable alterations in sec-
tion 29 in this behalf.

78: Section 30 provides, inter alia, that the provisions
of Chapter II relating to specific. performance of con-
tracts’ will also apply to a suit for the enforcement of an
award. When this provision was made there was no en-
actment in force in India relating to arbitration,

Since the enactment of a comprehensive law of arbit-
ration in the Arbitration Act, 1940, the scope of the

1. Specific Relief Act, 8th Ed, 9. 823.

Sec. 29.

‘Sec. ३०


36

application of section 30 has become very limited. Under
section 14(2) of the Arbitration Act, an award made by
arbitrators without intervention of Court may be filed in
Court for enforcement, by application made by either
party to the arbitration agreement, within 90 days of the
date of the service of notice of the making of the award
(Art. 178, Limitation Act). Thereupon follows en execut-
able decree under section 15, if the Court sees no reason
to remit or set aside the award. Hence, if the procedure
under Section 14(2) of the Arbitration Act be followed,
there would be no need for any of the parties to resort to
a suit for specific performance.

But under the provisions of section 30 of the Specific
Relief Act a party to an award may also bring a regular
suit to enforce such award without adopting the proce-
dure laid down in the Arbitration Act. Prior to the en-
actment of the Arbitration Act, 1940, it was held that the
procedure laid down in Schedule II of the Civil Proce-

_ dure Code was not exclusive and it was not imperative
upon a plaintiff who sought to enforce an award, to re-
sort to that procedure’.

But after the passing of the Arbitration Act, 1940,
there has been a difference of opinion on the question
whether a suit still lies to enforce the award under the
provisions of the present section of the Specific Relief Act
in view of section 32 of the Arbitration Act, which says:

“Notwithstanding any law for the: time being in
force, no suit shall lie on any ground whatso-
ever for a decision upon the existence, effect
or validity of an arbitration agreement or
award, nor shall any arbitration agreement or
award be set aside, amended, modified or in
any way affected otherwise than as provided in
this Act”.

The Madras? and Patna* High Courts have held that by
reason of the words ‘notwithstanding any law’ in the
above section, the only procedure for enforcing an award
now is an application under section 14 of the Arbitration
Act and that a suit is no longer maintainable.

1. Subbaraya Chetti vy. Sadasiva Chewti, 20 Mad. 490.
2. Moolchand v. Rashid, ALR. 1946 Mad. 346.
g. Ramchander v. Munshimian, A.IR. 1950 Pat. 48 (50).


37
The Nagpur? and Calcutta? High Courts, on the other
hand, maintain that section 32 of the Arbitration Act bars
a suit challenging an award and not a suit for enforcing
the award and that section 32 of the Arbitration Act has
not abolished the right to bring a suit under section 30 of
the Specific Relief Act.

The Arbitration Act is a consolidating enactment and
its territorial application is co-extensive with that of the
Specific Relief Act. The enforcement of the award under
the Arbitration Act takes place through the Court which
has jurisdiction, in the same proceeding, to remit, modify
or set aside the award. All the reliefs relating to the
award are, accordingly, available in the proceeding under
the Arbitration Act.

We are, therefore, of the view, that no separate suit
should lie in cases where the Arbitration Act is applicable
and that the scope of section 30 of the Specific Relief Act
should be confined to cases of arbitration under other
laws, the operation of which is saved by sections 46 and
47 of Arbitration Act.

It is, accordingly, suggested that the following amend-
ments be made:—

(1) Section 30 of the Specific Relief Act:

Add the words “to which the Arbitration Act, 1940
does not apply” after the word ‘awards’.

(2) Section 32 of the Arbitration Act 1940:

Insert the word “enforced” after the words “nor shall

any arbitration agreement or award be”, and amend the
marginal note in the section accordingly.

74. In England, the Court of Appeal has held? that Sec. ax,
the articles of association of a company cannot be rectifi-
ed by a court even though they: do not conform to the
concurrent intention of the signatories to the articles and
that the only mode of altering them is the passing of a
special resolution in the manner provided by the Com-
panies Act [vide s. 23 of the Companies Act, 1948 (11 and
12 Geo. 6, c. 38)]. Since there is a corresponding provision
in section 31 of our Companies Act, 1956, articles of
association may be excluded from section 31 of the

1. Nanhelal_v. Singhai, A.LR. 1944 Nag. 24.
2. Munshilal v. Modi Bros., (1947) 51 C.W.N. 563.
3. Scott v. Frank F. Scott Chong} Ltd. Ors., (1940) Ch. 794 (804) C.A,


38
Specific Relief Act, following the principle laid down in
the English decision.

75. The words “may institute a suit” are not quite
happy and seem to suggest as if the relief of rectification
can be granted only if a separate suit is brought for the
purpose. It has been held that in a suit for damages
for breach of contract, the court may allow the plaintiff
to ask for the necessary rectification by amending the
plaint', subject of course to the law of limitation.

The court has sometimes given substantive relief to
the plaintiff, after rectifying the instrument, even though
the relief of rectification had not been specifically, asked
for, A justification for such power is given in American
Jurisprudence? thus—

“According to strict practice, in a law action in which
an equitable cause for reformation is not asserted, the
written contract will be given full force and effect and a
plaintiff will not be heard to say that it does not express
the real agreement of the parties..................But in
jurisdictions............ in which the distinctions bet-
ween law and equity are abolished, or in which both
forms of relief are administered by the same court, in an
action at law upon an instrument the court may, in a
proper case, construe the contract as it was intended by
the parties, or supply matters omitted either by mutual
mistake or fraud, and render a proper judgment on the
basis thereof. as if there had been first a reformation of the
contract. The judgment may confer only the final legal
remedy, the preliminary equitable relief being assumed
as a pre-requisite, but not in terms awarded.”

There is greater reason for the exercise of such a
power in India where there exists no distinction between
Jaw and equity. It is therefore proposed that it should
be provided that the relief of rectification may be ob-
tained not only in a suit specifically brought for the pur-
pose but also in a suit in which any right arising under
the instrument is in issue.

76. It is not quite clear from the Statute itself whe-
ther a plea by way of rectification can be taken in de-
fence and, if so, what are the conditions subject to which
it is available.

1. Raipur Mfg. Co. v. Venkatasubba Rao & Co., ALR. 1921 Med, 664.
2. Kota v. Kannekant, ALR. 1916 Mad. 705,
3. 45 Ain. Juris. pp. 589-90.


39

In England, ii is now clearly laid down by s. 39(1) of
the Supreme Court of Judicature (Consolidation) Act,
1925 as follows:

“The Court or Judge shall have power to grant to any
defendant in respect of any equitable estate or right or
other matter of equity and also in respect of any legal
estate right or title claimed or asserted by him—(a) ali
such relief against any plaintiff—or petitioner as the
defendant has properly claimed by his pleading, and as
the court or judge might have granted in any suit ins-
tituted for that purpose by that defendant against the
same plaintiff or petitioner:”

In India, it has been held by the High Courts of
Bombay’, Calcutta?, Madras? and Nagpur‘ that even
where under the law of procedure the defendant is not
entitled to make a counter-claim, the defendant should
on the principle of ‘justice, equity and good conscience’,
be allowed ६0 raise in defence any plea that would have
enabled him to obtain rectification in a suit, instead of
being driven to a separate suit. So long as the remedy of
counter-claim is not available in all courts, it would be
desirable to enact the principle established by the cases -
just cited.

77. The question then arises, under what conditions
should the defendant be permitted to raise this plea. In
the case of Shiddappa v. Rudrappa®, the defendant’s
right to bring a suit for rectification was not barred by
limitation and emphasis was laid on that fact.

But there are cases? in which it has been held that
the defendant should be allowed to raise the plea even
though his right to sue for rectification is barred by
limitation.

We are of the view that the conditions in the case of
the plaintiff and the defendant should be the same. This
result could be secured by providing that either the plain-
tiff or the defendant may have relief by way of rectifica-

1. Shiddappa v. Rudrappa, A.1.R. 1954 Bom. 463; Dagdu v. Bhana, (1904
28 Bom. 420 (426).

Binns v. W. & T.Avery Zid. (1934) St Cal. 548.

Rangasami v. Souri, (1916) 39 |. 792.

Rajaram v. Manik ALR. 1952 Nag. 90.

Pollock and Mulla support this view (Contract and Specific Relief Act,

8th Ed., pp. 831-2). It is also in conformity with S. 92 (7) of the Bvid-

ence Act.

6. A.L.R. 1954 Bom. 463.

7. Kesho Singh v. Roopan Singh, A.1.R. 1927 All. 355.

vewp


Secs, 32-33,

Sec. 34.

40

tion, but only if it is specificaliy asked for in his plead-
ing, whetker initially or by amendment.

78. We propose to omit both sections 32 and 33.

So far as section 32 is concerned, it is an ambiguous
provision which has led to speculation amongst com-
mentators and we have not been able to find any decision
where this section has been applied or interpreted.

Pollock in his Tagore Law Lectures! observed—

“The 32nd section is a striking example of the misguid-
ed ambition that pervades the New York draft..............
What is the ‘equitable and conscientious agreement’
which the Court must be satisfied that the parties in-
tended to make? Is it something more than a lawful agree-
ment? And if so, what are the additional elements? On
what authority this section is supposed to be founded I
know not”.

Banerji* thinks that the section was enacted so that
the court may not be compelled to “go through the use-
less formality of rectifying the written expression of a
contract which it will not enforce specifically.”

It is doupttul, however, whether the scope of rectifica-
tion should be so narrowed down. For, a plaintiff suing
or intending to sue for damages, may be in need of recti-
fication. In the U.S.A.3, it has been held that the Court
will not rectify an instrument which will remain invalid
or inoperative even if it is brought into conformity with
the alleged intention of the parties.

In our view, there is no need for a provision that the
Court will not rectify an invalid agreement; for, the word
‘contract’ in section 31 means an enforceable agreement.

As to section 33, its object is only to enjoin the Court
to discover the real intention of the parties instead of in-
ferring the intention from the language of the instru-
ment itself. But no separate section is necessary for this
purpose. We propose to make this duty of tke court clear
by verbal changes in section 31, after dividing it into sub-
sections.

79. We recommend no change in section 34 except that
it may be amalgamated with section 31, as a sub-section

thereof.

1. Pollock on Fraud (T.L.L.).
2. Law of Specific Relief, 2nd Ed. APP., cp, 102,

3. 45 Am. Juris. p. 586.


4]

80. In England, where the defendant in an action for
specific performance fails to comply with a judgment
against him, the plaintiff may, at his election, move in the
action to have the contract rescinded'. This right ex-
tends to the vendor and the vendee. The Indian Courts
have taken the same view’.

Tn all probability, the English rule was sought to be
adopted, without modification,* in the third paragraph of
section 35(c) of our Specific Relief Act. But, as has been
pointed out by Collett,’ as well as in the cases mentioned
below*-*, the words, ‘in the same case’ are not happily
chosen and “It is not at all clear to what these words in
the same case refer whether to the second paragraph or
the first paragraph of clause (075

The question is, whether the vendor or lessor should
have the option of bringing a separate suit for rescission,
in a case coming under cl. (c). As the section stands, he
has the option of bringing a separate suit under the first
paragraph of section 35 or to apply for rescission in the
same suit under the tkird paragraph of the section.

But, as Banerji® observes, there is no reason why the
vendor or lessor should be allowed to harass the other
party in a separate proceeding when the remedy of rescis-
sion can be made available in the same suit.

We therefore propose a new section? which will enable
the vendor or lessor to apply for rescission in the suit for
specific performance, if the purchaser or lessee fails to
comply with the terms of the decree. In view of this new
provision, clause (c) of section 35 and the two succeeding
paragraphs become unnecessary and should be omitted.

81. While section 35(c) deals with the consequences
which will follow from the default of the purchaser or
lessee to comply with the terms of a decree for specific
performance, there is no provision in tke Act as to what
would happen if the purchaser or lessee makes the pay-
ments due from him but the vendor or lessor does not

1. Fry, 6th Ed., pp. 546-7.
2, Akshayalingam v. Avayambala & Ammal, A.I.R. 1933 Mad. 386.
3. Ramji v. Chinai, 82 1.C. 73;Kurpal v. Shamrao, A.I.R. 1923 Bom. 211.
Collett, Sp. Rel. Act, 3rd°Ed., p. 277.
5. Per Macleod C.J. in Kurpal vy.” Shamrao, 47 Bom. 589 (592).
6. Law of Specific Relief, 2nd Ed., pp. 46!
. 8. 26, App.

Cl. (०.


42

comply with the decree by executing a conveyance or
how the purchaser or lessee should obtain possession of
the property. At present. the latter contingency is dealt
with in proceedings for the execution of tte decree. But,
if in the former case, the vendor or lessor may obtain
relief by way of rescission in the same suit, there is no
reason why the other party may not have his reliefs
against the vendor or lessor in the suit itself. inasmuch as
the principle of avoidance of multiplicity of proceedings
is equally applicable to both cases.

We have already provided’ that consequential reliefs
like possession or partition can be claimed in the suit for
specific performance itself and included in the decree. We
are now speaking of the enforcement of such reliefs in-
cluded in the decree which are at preser-t available only by
executing the decree, in separate execution proceedings.

We recommend? that complete relief in terms of the
decree in a suit for specific performance shall be avail-
able by application in the suit itself, without taving to
resort to separate execution proceedings and that appro-
priate provisions should pe made in the Code of Civil
Procedure enabling such applications to be made and
orders thereon and also for appeals.

82, There are certain well-known limitations to the
equitable right to rescind which‘are not incorporated into
the existing section 35, but which have been applied by
our Courts, on general considerations. For the sake of
clarity and comprekensiveness, we may codify and in-
clude these principles in section 35, taking care not to
make the propositions rigid so as to restrict the powers of
the Courts to do justice. The Court may refuse to rescind
a contract in any of the following cases:

(a) Where the plaintiff has elected, whether ex-
pressly or impliedly, to abide by the contract;

(b) Where owing to the change of circumstances

which has taken place since the making of the
contract (not due to any act of the defendant

1. S. 19 of App. 1.

2. Cf. s, 26 (3) of App. I.

3, Fry, 6th Ed., 9. 3483 Clough v. L.N.W. Ry Co., (1872) L.R. 7 Ex. 26
640 Bangasaeet Gounden v. Nathiappa Gounden, (1918) é Mad. 523
(358) ०0५ Ramgoweda v, Bhausaheb, (2927) 52 Bom, 1 P-


हि 48

himself) the parties cannot be substantially
restored to the position in which they stood
when the contract was made’;

{c) Where the contract is of such a nature that it
is not severable* and a part thereof is sought
to be rescinded;

(१) Where third parties have, during the subsis-
tence of the contract, bona fide acquired rights
under it, without notice of the facts which
make the contract liable to be rescribed’.

It is proposed that the above propositions be included
in a new sub-section to section 35.

83. The requirement of ‘writing’ at the beginning of
section 35 has long been omitted by the Transfer of Pro-
perty Act, 1882, as regards the territories where that Act
is in force. We have made this clear by inserting an _
Explanation at the end of the section.

84. Section 36 has been riglitly criticised by Pollock sec. 36.
and Mulla‘, as being in conflict with section 22 of the Con-
tract Act, in these words—

“Tt is difficult to reconcile the language either with
sound principle or with the terms of LC.A,, section 22.
Mistake may prevent any real agreement from being form-
ed; we are not aware of any case in which, on the ground
of ‘mere mistake’, a contract is only voidable. ”,

We recommend that section 36 be omitted.

Sec. 37.

Sec, 38,
86. The second part of section 64 of the Contract Act

deals with another corollary which follows from the same

principle as underlies section 38 of the Specific Relief

Act, namely, “he who seeks equity must do equity”. While

section 38 of the Specific Relief Act enjoins the Court,

while decreeing rescission, to direct the plaintiff to make

any compensation to the defendant which justice may

require, the second part of section 64 of the Contract Act

enjoins the party who rescinds to restore any benefit

which ke may have received from the defendant under

85. No change is considered necessary in section 37.

1. Fry, pp. 346-3523 Hardei v. Bhagwan Sing, 24 C.W.N. 10, 8

: 72:72 228 86 4 के
3. Rey, 69 Eds p 318 00000 7. 12:09: Co. Hf
3, 180 ‘Reliet “Act, Sth Ed, 9, 836” 7Bx. 26(35),


Secs. 39-40,

Sec, 41.

44

the contract. It is desirable that the same equitable
principle should also be included in section 38, so that
while decreeing rescission the Court may direct not only
payment of compensation to the defendant (for instance,
for improvements made by him on the property) but also
restoration of any benefit received by the plaintiff under
the contractt.

We suggest that section 38 be amended accordingly

87. No change is recommended in sections 39 and 40.

88. We recommend that in section 41, the obligation to
restore any benefit obtained under the instrument in
question should be provided for, for the reasons we have
already given in connection with section 38 [Para. 86,
ante].

89. Under sections 38 and 41, a plaintiff who obtains

“gelief on the ground that a contract to which he was a

party is void or voidable, may be required by the Court to
make compensation to the defendant. To this we have
added the obligation of restoring any benefit which the
plaintiff may have obtained under the instrument.

The question is whether the equitable principle should
not similarly apply in favour of the plaintiff in a case
where the defendant successfully resists the suit of the
plaintiff on the ground (a) that the instrument is void or.
(b) that it is voidable and he has avoided it.

It may be pointed out, at the outset, that though the
above sections of the Specific Relief Act and section 19A
of the Contract Act provide the equitable relief only to the
defendant in the suit, section 65 off the Contract Act enables
the relief to be awarded against ‘any person’, The Privy:
Council? applied this section to give relief to a mortgagee,
who had brought a suit on his mortgage, to recover
the amount lent by him under the mortgage, with compound
interest. The principle followed by the Privy Council was
explained very clearly in a subsequent case arising out of
the same transaction*—

“A defendant .who when sued for money lent pleads
that the contract was void can hardly regard with surprise
a demand that he restore what he received thereunder.”

1 Lodge vy. National Union Investment Co., (1907) 1 Ch, 300.
हर रत “278 vy. Brahagambal, 39 C.W.N 109 P.C,).

2. Nisar Ahmad ¥. Mohan Manucha, A.L.R. 1940 P.C, 204.

3. Mohan Manucha v, Mansoor किक) A.1.R. 1943 0.0. 29 (34)»


45

A further question which arises is whether the same
principle should be made applicable to the case of voidable
contracts. The modern principle of unjust enrichment
does not make any distinction between void and voidable
contracts. There is an obiter dictum of the Privy Council’
to the effect that section 65 of the Contract Act extends
also to voidable contracts.

As however section 65 uses the word ‘void’ and the
observation of the Privy Council is in the nature of an
obiter dictum, we propose, by way of abundant caution,
that the principle underlying section 65 should be expres-
sly made applicable to avoidable contracts, where the
defendant relies on the voidability of the contract.

A specific provision to this effect may be.added at the
end of the Chapter on Cancellation [vide s. 36(1) of App].

90. Though section 65 of the Contract Act applies in
terms to void contracts, the Privy Council has held* that--~
that section has no application to contracts entered into
by parties who were not competent to enter into any
contract, and this view has been followed by the High
Courts*.

As to section 41 of the Specific Relief Act, the consensus
of opinion is that it applies where the minor is the plaintiff
and seeks to set aside a transaction on the ground of his
minority or asks for other relief on the footing that the
transaction is a nullity‘.

But as regards the application of section 41 as against
a minor defendant, there is a sharp difference of opinion
between the Lahore’ High Court on the one hand and the
Allahabad’ and Andhra’ High Courts on the other. Accord-
ing to the Lahore High Court’, the equitable principle
underlying the section should be equally applicable to the
plaintiff and the defendant, and that, accordingly, when a
minor enters into a contract on a false representation as
to his age, and in a suit on the contract refuses to perform
it on the ground of his minority, he must restore the pro-
prietary or pecuniary benefit derived by him from the
©. Satgur Prasad v. Har Narain, ALR. 1932 7.0, 89 (0. ~
2. Mohori Bibee v. Dharmadas, (2909) 30 Cal. $39 0.९...
3. Ajudhia v. Chandan, ALR. 1937 All, 610(613-4) F.B.; Tikkilal v. Komal,
T.L.R. (1940) Nag. 632; Punjabai v. Bhagvandas, A.1.R. 1929 Bom. 89.
4 Appaswami_v. Narayanasami, A.LR. 1930; Mad. 945 3 Mahadeo
V. Nana Banaji, A.I.R. 1946 Nag. 359.
5.Khan Gul v. Lakha Singh, A..R. 1928 Lah. 609 (617-8) 9.8,

6. Ajudhia v. Chandan, A.’ 7 All. 5251 (618) ४.8.
7, Lateh Arao v, Bhimayya, A.LR. (1956) Andhra 152,



46

contract, whether he is the plaintiff or the defendant in
the suit.

In other words, according to the Lahore High Court,
the minor defendant should be bound not only to restore
the property, if any, but also the monetary consideration
obtained under the contract.

Sulaiman, C. J., in the Allahabad case!, was prepared to
accept this principle so far as restoration of specific pro-
perty was concerned, but not to the extent of repayment
of the pecuniary benefit, for that, according to him, “would
be tantamount to enforcing the minor’s pecuniary liability
under the contract which is void?.” This view has been
followed by the Andhra High Court®.

Having considered the rival points of view we are
inclined to prefer the view of Shadi Lal, C. J., in the
“~ahore case’. We have already recommended the accept-
ance of tte doctrine of unjust enrichment’. According to
that doctrine, the obligation to restore an unjust benefit
should not depend upon the mere accident of a person
coming before the Court as a plaintiff or defendant. We also
agree with the view that restoration of status quo ante
would not amount to the erforcement of the void contract
against the defendant. The principle applicable to a minor
will also apply to the case of a person of unsound mind.

We recommend, therefore, that a sub-section should be
included in the new provision suggested by us® to the effect
that when a defendant successfully resists a suit on the
ground that the contract is void, owing to his incapacity at
the time of the contract, he must restore any benefit,
whether proprietary or monetary, which he has actually
received under the contract. But no question of liability
to make any compensation, would arise in such a case.

Ser 42- 91. We are of the opinion that in view-of the develop-
ment of this highly efficacious remedy both in Bnrgland
and in the U.S.A., the scope of section 42 of our Act requires:
to be enlarged. The increasing importance of this remedy

1, hia v. Chandan, A,I.R. 1937 All. 610 (618) F.B,

2. Ajudhia v. Chandan, A.1-R. 1037 All. 610 (617) F.B,

3. Lutcharao v. Bhimayya, A..R. (1956) Andhra 182 (187).

4. Khan Gul ए. Lakha Singh, A..R. 1928 Lah. 609 F.B,

5. Vide pp. 7-9 of our Report on the Limitation Act [Third Report of
the Law Commission}.

6. S. 36 of App. I,



47

in modern times is best expressed in the following words of
Prof. Jennings.’ “The declaratory judgment is the symbol
of twentieth century conception of law’”.

92. The first point on which our law differs from the
present-day English and American law is that a mere
declaration is not available where further relief is not
asked for, the plaintiff being able to claim it.

In England 0°25, r.5 of the R.S.C. provides—

“No action or proceeding shall be open to objection,
on the ground that a merely declaratory judg-
ment or order is sought thereby, and the Court
may make binding declarations of right whether
any consequential relief is or could be claimed,
or not.”

Similarly, the Federal Act and the Uniform Declaratory _
Judgments law in the U.S.A. empower courts to ‘declare
rights, status and other legal relations, whether or not
further relief is or could be claimed.

In the U.S.A., the provision relating to further relief
is an enabling provision®. It is left to the option of the
plaintiff whether he should ask for further relief in the
declaratory suit itself or reserve it for a separate action.

As has been observed: by American writers a simple
declarstory decree without further relief, where it has to
be sought for, is not necessarily useless, for, “this possi-
bility of further relief gives, in practice, an immediate
coercive effect to the declaration itself’. If the defendant
voluntarily complies with the declaratory decree by: giv-
ing up his unlawful interest, the parties:need not incur
further expense in litigation concerning consequential. re-
lief. This would particularly be the case where the, defend-
ant is a responsible person or some public body or the
State itself. In such cases, it can hardly be presumed that
the defendant would not set matters right as soon.as a
declaration is made by the Court and that some coercive
decree from the Court should-still be necessary‘.

1, Jeanings, Declaratory Judgments against Public Authorities, (1932)
41 Yale Law Journal, p. 407 (416).

2, 62 Harvard Law Review, p. 826,
Ibid., pp. 788, 78

4. (1955) 18 Modern Law Review, p. 138.



48

But the Proviso to section 42 of our Act expressly
prohibits such a decree where the plaintiff, being able to
seek further relief, has omitted to do so.

It.is to be noted that the Proviso marks a retrograde
step in the development of our law, for, at a very early
stage, it had been provided in section 29 of Act VI of 1854
and, then, in section 15 of the Code of Civil Procedure of
1859 that—

“No suit shall be open to objection on the ground
that a merely declaratory decree or order is
sought thereby and it shall be lawful for the
civil courts to make binding declarations of
right without granting consequential relief.”

The Proviso was introduced by the Specific Relief Act
with the object of preventing multiplicity of proceedings’.
. The Proviso has, however, given rise to a mass of case-law
as to what is ‘further relief’ and whether ‘further relief’
is such relief as could be sought for in the suit in which
or in the court before which the declaration is sought. It
leads to injustice in many cases and it only results in an
addition to the revenue to a certain extent.

We cannot, however, adopt the American provisions in
their entirety by reason of the fact that, we have, in our
Civil Procedure Code, a provision in Order II, r. 2, which
is salutary and which has been accepted in our country,
without any criticism, for a fairly long time. Sub-clause
(3) of that rule provides that if a person is entitled to
more than one relief in respect of the same cause of action,
he may sue for all or any of such reliefs; but if he omits,
except with the leave of the Court, to sue for any of such
reliefs, he shall not afterwards sue for the relief so omitted.
Hence, if the plaintiff sues merely for a declaration in
respect of a present right and omits other reliefs to which
he is entitled in respect of the same cause of action, he
will be debarred from suing for it. The expression “able
to seek” in the Proviso to section 42 has however a larger
import and includes not only the reliefs which arise out of
the same cause of action but also those which would follow
from the declaration sought by the plaintiff. In other

1, Kombi vy. Aundi,(1890) 13 Mad. 75, per Muthuswami Iyer J. at. 9 78.

2. In some cases (८. ap or std. v. Secretary of State,
(1917) 44 Cal, 352,it has been held that a second declaration asked on the basis

che first declaration was a further relief (contra Tewary v. Bi it, (1979)
go 1.0 298 Pat,), pa



49

words, the ‘further relief’ referred to in the Proviso to
section 42 includes “such relief as he would be in a position
to claim from the defendant in an ordinary suit by virtue
of the title which he seeks to establish and of which he
prays for a declaration'.”

Our irtention is not to affect the principle of Order II,
7. 2 of the Code in cases where it is properly attracted
except as regards suits for declaration as to the validity or
the invalidity: of statutes.

This object will be achieved if we omit the Proviso to
section 42 and make the first paragraph of the section
subject to the provisions of Order II, r. 2.

93. Under the existing law, a declaratory decree can be
obtained, apart from cases involving a legal character,
only in respect of a proprietary right. But there is no
reason, except an apprehension as to multiplicity of decla-
ratory suits, why this beneficial remedy should not extend
to all legal rights.

In the United States, both in the Federal and Uniform
laws, the word “right” alone is used, so that a party may
obtain a declaration as to any legal rights which, of course,
mean justiciable rights. The word ‘right’ has heen inter-
preted to include ‘liability’ also, so that actions have been
entertained against the Government and other public
bodies, to determine their liability’, duty or power’, Right
also includes immunity, e.g., that a statute is not applicable
to the plaintiff. Since the word ‘right’ is not confined to
proprietary right, the Courts have had no difficulty in
making a declaration as to a contractual right or a right to
practise a profession or the like’,

On the other hand, the first paragraph of section 42 of
the Specific Relief Act speaks only of a ‘right as to any
property’, there has been a prolonged controversy as to
whether section 42 is exhaustive or declaratory actions
lie in cases not covered by it, and whether any particular
right is a right as to property or not. Declarations under

1. Abdulkadar v. Mahomed, (1892. 15 Mad. 15 at 9. 18,

2. Cf, Ashwander v. Tennessee Valley Authority, 297 U.S. 288 (325); 80
L.Ed. 688 at है 699.

3. Cf, 62 Harvard Law Review, p 875-6,

4. Ibid., 9. 873.

5. Ibid., pp. 848-9.


section 42 have been refused in regard to pecuniary! and
‘contractual rights.?

In our view, if the relief is extended to legal rights of
all kinds, it might, instead of multiplying litigation, lead
to its reduction. Doubtless, a large number of persons
would give up a contest as soon as the dispute as to the
existence of the right is settled by a Court of law. More-
over, certainty and security with respect to ordinary legal
rights are as important as in the case of proprietary rights.
The purpose of laws similar to section 42 is, as the Uniform
Declaratory Judgments Act puts it, to afford relief from
uncertainty and insecurity with respect to rights.

We, therefore, recommend that the word ‘as to any
property’ in the first paragraph of section 42 be omitted.

94. Section 42 is also deficient in its omission to make
“any express provision for a declaration as to the constitu-
tionality of a law.

Under the Constitution, the Supreme Court has decreed
a declaratory suit on appeal® and declared the impugned
law to be unconstitutional. The basis of the declaratory
action was, of course, not determined in this case, but
since the Court held fhat the plaintiff’s fundamental right
under Article 31 had been violated, the suit fell clearly
within ‘the language of section 42 because a ‘right as to
property’ had been denied. The Court observed‘ that only
"@ person “whose own right or interest” had been violated
or threatened could impugn the law.

On principle, there is no reason why a person whose
rights are’ affected or likely to be affécted by an unconsti-
tutional statute or bye-law should not be entitled to obtain
a declaration from the Court that it is invalid. ‘Even unter
the existing law, it has been held® that when a ,perapn’s
rights are affected by an ultra vires governmental act, he
need not ask for any relief other than a declaration that
the executive act or order is null and void. The State
being the defendant, it is presumed that once the order is
declared null and void, the plaintiffs rights will be
restored. We think this principle should apply with a

1, Gopaldas v. Mul Raj, A.LLR. 1937 Lah. 389.

2. Ramakrishna v. Narayana, (1914) 39 Mad.80..

| 02 00 Spamid Gees SER 69 Gana
| v. 1 (1, 5) CR. 121-2),
3 6999) a2 Bad, 270 BG. 7*

holapur
5. Fischer v. Secy. of State,



61

Steater force where the law under which the executive has
purported to act, is itself unconstitutional and void. Thus,
if an individual’s possession has been disturbed under an
unconstitutional statute, he may ask for a declaration that
the statute is invalid and has not affected his right, without
specifically asking for the restoration of possession.

We propose to insert a sub-section. in section 42 embody-
ing the foregoing principle. We want to make it clear
that a plaintiff who seeks to have a law declared invalid
need not seek any further relief than that the law is in-
valid and that his right is not affected by it.

In order to prevent frivolous actions, we have provided
that no suit for declaring the constitutionality of a law
will lie unless the plaintiffs right or legal character which
depends on the validity or invalidity of such law has been
invaded or threatened to be invaded by the defendant.

95. No change is necessary in section 48.

96. The mode and effect of appointment of a Receiver,
his rights, duties, powers and liabilities are regulated by
0°40, rr. 1-5 of the C.P. Code. While Order 40, r. 1 of the
Code provides for appointment of a Receiver both before
and after the decree, section 44 of the Specific Relief Act
deals only with the appointment of a Receiver before
decree,

We are of the view that the section serves no useful
purpose and, therefore, recommend its omission.

97. Chapter VIII (sections 45—51) provides for an order
in the nature of mandamus. In view of Art. 226 of the
Constitution, there would appear to be no need for retain-
ing this Chapter. The scope of section 45 of the Act is
narrower than that of Art. 226. In fact, clauses (f) and
(g) of the Proviso to section 45 are inconsistent with Art,
226 and section 50 which was substituted by the Adaptation
Order, 1950, practically renders these clauses nugatory.

It was urged that while evidence can be taken in a pro-
ceeding under section 45, the High Courts while exercising
jurisdiction under Art. 226 are generally averse to investi-
gating disputed facts by taking evidence. But there is
nothing in Art. 226 to prevent their doing so.. In fact, we
find that just as the Rules framed under section 45 confer
discretionary power upon the High Court to take evidence,

Sec. 43.
Sec, 44.

Secs. 45-51.


Secs, 52-53.

Sec, 54.

Ci. (०.

Sec. 55!

52

go the Rules framed under Art. 226 by a number of High
Courts, such as those of Orissa, Mysore, Madhya Pradesh,
Allahabad, Rajasthan, Bombay and Assam, confer similar
discretionary power on the court to take evidence, oral or
documentary. For instance, Rule 7 of the Rules framed
by the Orissa High Court says—

“All questions arising for determination under this
chapter shall ordinarily be decided upon. affidavits, but the
Court may direct that such questions as it may consider
necessary be decided on such other evidence as it may
deem fit. Where the Court orders that certain matters
in controversy between the parties shall be decided on
such evidence, the procedure prescribed in the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908, for the trial of suits shall, so far as
applicable, be followed.”

We recommend that sections 45-51 be omitted, and
questions such as that of taking evidence, should be left
to the rule-making power of the High Courts, and that
Rules similar to the aforesaid Rule of the Orissa High
Court may be framed by those High Courts which have
not made similar rules.

98. No change is necessary in sections 52 and 53.

99. The use of the word ‘applicant’ in the first para-
graph of section 54 is not appropriate, for, a perpetual
injunction cannot be had upon an application as distin-
guished from a suit. Later in the section, the word
‘plaintiff is used. Accordingly, the word ‘applicant’ in
the section should be replaced by the word ‘plaintiff’.

400. Clause (d) of section 54 should be omitted for the
reasons for which we have recommended the omission of
clause (d) of section 12 [Para 22, ante.].

101, No change is considered necessary in section 55.

102. In England, it is well-settled that since the passing
of the Judicature Act, 1873, the High Court can, in an
action for injunction, exercise its discretion to award
damages either in addition to, or in substitution for, an
injunction, whether or -ot damages have also been speci-
fically claimed",

व, Vide Halsbury’s Laws of England. Second Edition, Vol, 18, Para. 335
page 23.



53

The same view has been taken in India’ even though
the principle adopted in section 19 was not extended by the
framers of the Act to an action for an injunction.

In the circumstances, it is advisable to make a specific
provision in the Act for this purpose. We recommend
that a new provision on the lines of section 19 of the Act
be added, to cover cases arising under sections 54 and 55
of the Specific Relief Act.

103. The expression used in clauses (a), (b) and (e)
of section 56 is “to stay” “proceedings”. This has led to
a controversy as to whether an injunction can be directed
to the Court itself before which the proceeding is pending.
We agree with the view taken by the Patna High Court’,
that an injunction is a remedy in personam which is
directed against the litigant and not against the Court.

We recommend that suitable changes be made in
clauses (a), (b) and (e) of section 56, to remove doubts
on this point.

104, Clause (d) may be omitted. The first part of the
clause, referring to any Government department in India,
is inconsistent with the principle embodied in the second
Proviso to Article 361(1) of our Constitution. The second
part is unnecessary because the immunity of a foreign
sovereign in respect of his sovereign acts is well accepted.

105, No alteration is necessary in the remaining clauses
of section 56, except verbal changes.

106. It has been suggested to us that section 57, which
is based on the decision in Lumley v. Wagner’, requires
to be modified in view of the subsequent decisions in
England.

Upon a careful examination of the authorities, however,
we find that the actual decision in that case has not been
the subject of adverse comment in the later case. What
has been objected to is the extension of the principle
involved in that case.

It is to be noted that in Lumley’s case‘, there was, in
fact, an express negative covenant not to sing at

‘diandas v. ALR. 1954 Sau. 139 3 Callianji Hiralal v. Narsiy

19 Bom: 764 ;Kalliadas v. Tulsi, 23 Bom. 786.
2. Rameshwar v. Baldeo, A.I.R. 1938 Pat, 606.
3. (1852) 91 R. R. 193 3 42 8. R. 687.
जे Lumley v, Wagner, (1852) 91 R. R. 1933 42 EAR. 687.

Sec. 56.

Cis. (०-०)

Cl. Ge

Sec. 57.



54

any other theatre; and so far as express negative coven-
ants are concerned, there is no difference of opinion that
the Court will, as a rule enforce them by injunction?

The controversy has arisen on the question whether a
negative covenant should, in any circumstances, be inferred
from an affirmative agreement. While granting the
injunction in Lumley’s case, Lord St. Leonards suggested
that a negative covenant not to sing elsewhere would have
been implied, in the circumstances of the case, even had
there been no such express covenant:

४,..,,. the engagement to perform....at one theatre
must necessarily exclude the right to perform at
the same time at another theatre........... I am
of opinion that if she had attempted, even in the
absence of any negative stipulation, to perform at
another theatre, she would have broken the
spirit and true meaning of the contract as much
as she would now do with reference.to the
contract into which she had actually entered”.

The above observation was, followed in subsequent
cases as implying negative covenants liberally almost in
every case and in Montague v- Flockton*, Malins v.c.
observed: “A negative covenant is as necessarily implied
as if it had been plainly expressed”.

The decision in Lumley v. Wagner* did not lay down
that a negative covenant must be implied in every case,
of an affirmative covenant. Against this wide extension
of the doctrine laid down in Lumley’s case protests were
raised in later cases like Wolverhampton & Walsall Rly.
Co. v. L. &N.W. Rly. Co. and Whitwood Chemical Co. v.
Hardman’. In the former case, Lord Selbourne laid down
the modern rule that whether a negative covenant fit to
be enforced by an injunction would be implied in a given
case was a question of substance and not of form. The
later case of Mortimer v. Beckett* says that an injunction
will not be granted unless the negative stipulation is

1. Kerr on Injunctions, 6th Ed., po. 422-3.

2. Lumley v. Wagener, (1852) 91 R.R. 193 3 43 E.R. 687, 693.
3. Montague v. Flockton, (1873) 16 Eq. 189 ; 201.

4. (1873) 16 Bq. 433.

§. (1891) 2 Ch. 416.

6. (1920) 1 Ch. $71.



55

independent of the positive part. The present position,
in short, is that the doctrine of implied covenants will be
applied with scrupulous care’.

But section 57 of the Act does not in any way suggest
that a negative covenant would be inferred from every
affirmative covenant. It simply says that a negative
agreemer.t may be either express or implied. The circum-
stances in which such an implication should be made is
left entirely to the discretion of the Court. Banerji*
rightly observes:

“As the jurisdiction is conferred by Statute in India,
there is no ground to treat it as exceptional or anomalous.
It is not a technical or artificial rule which the Indian
Statute Book professes to enforce, it looks te the substance
and not to the form of the contract..............0.005 ”

We do not wish to take away this discretion of the
Court, and any misunderstanding that might have
arisen by reason of some of the illustrations to the section
will now disappear as we have recommended their omis-
sion. There may be cases where a negative covenant
ean be properly implied and in such cases, it should not
be open to the defendant, to go back on his undertaking
to the plairtiff. In the words of Lord St. Leonards’, in
such cases the Court should operate “to bind men’s con-
sciences, as far as they can be bound, to a true and literal
performance of their agreements; and it will not suffer
them to depart from their contracts at their plea-
SUTC. ..... ७.०... ee ना

We are also in agreement with Maclean, C. J., of the
Caleutta High Court’ that if upon a consideration of all
the circumstances, the Court finds that an injunction
should issue, it is no argument to say that the defendant
would then starve: As Maclean, C. J. put it, “he
(the defendant) ought to have thought of that before he
deliberately broke his contract*”.

In our opinion, the section requires no change.
107. With a view to presenting a clear picture of the
recommendations made by us in this Report we have

1. Halsbury, 2nd Ed., Vol. 18, para, 87.

2. Law of Specific Relief, 2nd Ed., p. 626.

3. Lumley v, Wagner, (1852) 91 R. R. 193; 42 E.R. 687 at 693.
4. Burn & Co, ९, McDonald, (1908) 36 Cal. 354 (365).

&


56

made alterations giving effect to them in the text of the
existing Act as shown in Appendix I.

Appendix II contains two comparative Tables—
Table A showing the sections in the existing Act with the
corresponding sections in Appendix I, and Table B
showing the sections in Appendix I and the corresponding
sections in the existiong Act.

Appendix III contains the suggestions made by us in
respect of other Acts.

M. C. SETALVAD,
(Chairman).

M. C. CHAGLA,
. N. WANCHOO,
SATYANARAYANA RAO,
C. SEN GUPTA*,
. K. T. CHARI, ~
. NARASA RAJU,

M. SIKRI,
. 5. PATHAK,
. N. JOSHI,

_ A. PALKHIVALA,
(Members).

od 4uH

aan

प्र्य

K, SRINIVASAN,

DURGA DAS BASU,
Joint Secretaries.

New DELHI:
July 19, 1958.
” *Dr. Sen Gupta has signed ‘the: ‘report, subject to the
Note appended at the end.



APPENDIX I
Proposals as inserted in the body of the existing Act.
(This is, however, not to be treated as a ‘Draft Bill).

[Corresponding sections of the existing Act are noted
in the margin, and additions to the provisions of the
existing Act are shown in the text in italics, wherever
possible.]

THE SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT, 19...... oy
PART I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and extent.
() This Act may be called the Specific Relief Act,......... [Sec. 1.]

(2) It exterds to the whole of India except the State of
Jammu and Kashmir.. .

2. Definitions.
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires— {Sec. 3.]

(a) “obligation” includes every duty enforceable by
law;

(b) “settlement” means any instrument (other than
a will or codicil as defined by the Indian Succes-
sion Act, 1925), whereby the destination or 39० 1935.
devolution of successive interests in movable or
immovable property is disposed of or is agreed
to be disposed of;

(e) “trust” includes a trust as defined in section 3
of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, and an obligation 2 of 1882.
in the nature of a trust arising under Chapter IX
of that Act;

(d) “trustee” includes every person holding property
in trust; and

(e) all other words and expressions used but ‘not
defined in this Act, and defined in the Indian

57


है of 18721.

[Sec. 4]

[Sec. 4 (b)]

[Sec. 4 (०]
16 of 1908.

[See. 7.)

{Sec. 8.]

5 of 1908

[Sec, 10}

5 of 1508

(Sec, 11.]

58

Contract Act, 1872, have the meanings respec-
tively assigred to them in that Act.
3. Savings.
Except as otherwise expressly provided, nothing in this
Act shall be deemed—
* * *

(a) to deprive any person of any right to relief,
other than specific performance, which he may
have under any contract; or

(b) to affect the operation of the Indian Registration
Act, 1908, on documents.

4. Specific relief granted only to enforce civil rights.

Specific relief under this Act can be granted only for
the enforcement of individual civil rights and not for the
mere purpose of enforcing a penal law.

PART II
SPECIFIC RELIEF
CHAPTER I.
RECOVERING POSSESSION OF PROPERTY.
5. Recovery of specific immovable property.

A person entitled to the possession of specific immovable
property may recover it in the manner provided by the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

6. Recovery of secicfic movable property.

A person entitled to the possession of specific movable
property may recover the same in the manner provided by
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

Explanation 1.—A trustee may sue under this section for
the possession of property to the beneficial interest in
which the person for whom he is trustee is entitled.

Explanation 2—A special or temporary right to the
present possession of property is sufficient to support a
suit under this section.

7. Liability of person in possession, not as owner, to
deliver to person entitled to immediate possession.

Any person having the possession or control of a parti-
cular article of movable property, of which he is not the



59

owner, may be compelled specifically to deliver it to the
person entitled to its immediate possession, in any of the
following cases:—
(a) when the thing claimed is held by the defendant
as the agent or trustee of the plaintiff;
(b) when compensation in money would not afford
the plaintiff adequate relief for the loss of the
thing claimed;
(c) when it would be extremely difficult to ascertain
the actual damage caused by its loss;
(9) when the possession ofi the thing claimed has
been wrongfully transferred from the plaintiff.
Explanation—The burden of proving that the case does
not fall under clause (b) or (c) shall be on the defendant.
CHAPTER II.
SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE OF CONTRACTS
8. Defence relating to the existence or validity of the [New]
contract. हे
All defences open under the law relating to contracts
to a person contesting the existence, validity or enforée-
ability of a contract shall be open to him under this Act.
9. Jurisdiction to grant specific performance. {Sec, 12.]
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the
specific performance of any contract may in the dis-

cretion of the court be enforced—
* * * *

(a) When there exists no standard for ascertaining
the actual damage caused by non-performance [Sec. 12 (6).
of the act agreed to be done; or
(b) when the act agreed to be done is such that [Sec. 12(¢).
pecuniary compensation for its non-perfor-
mance would not afford adequate relief.
* * *

*

10. Presumption regarding contracts for transfer of im- छल
movable property. D
Until the contrary is proved, the court shall presume

that the breach of a contract to transfer immovable pro-

perty cannot be adequately relieved by compensation in

MONEY... ... cece eee eee e ee

11. Presumption regarding contracts for transfer of mov- [Bec, 12,
able property. 4]
Except in the following cases, the court shall presume

that the breach of a contract to transfer. ae



60
movable property can be adequately relieved by compeii-
sation in money..............:

[New] (a) where the property is not an ordinary article of
commerce and is unique or of special value or
interest to the plaintiff;

(b) where the property is held by the defendant as
agent or trustee of the plaintiff;

(c) where the property consists of goods not easily
procurable in the market.

12. Contracts connected with trust.

(1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, specific

performance of a contract may in the discretion of the

186०, 12 (०).] Court be enforced when the act agreed to be done is in the
performarice, wholly or partly, of a trust.

[Sec 2 (०.1 (2) A contract made by a trustee either in excess of his
powers or in breach of his trust , cannot be specifically
enforced,

[8००७५] 18 . Contracts not specifically enforceable,

(1) The following contracts cannot be specifically
enforced: —

[Sec. 27 (a).] (a) A contract for the non-performance of which com-
pensation in money is an adequate relief;

Notwithstanding anything contained in this clause, the
court may enforce specific performance: of a contract in
the following cases:—

(i) where the money was advanced in whole or in
Part on a promise to give security, and the
lender has advanced the whole of the loan or
has advanced part of it and is ready and willing
to advance the balance, and sues to obtain
specific performance of the contract, the defen-
dant having failed to repay the loan;

(ii) where it is a contract with a company to take
up and pay for any debentures of the company.

[sec. ar'(b).] (०08 contract which runs into such minute or

--* numerous details, or which is so dependent on the personal

qualifications or volition of the parties, or otherwise from

its nature, is such, that the court cannot enforce specific
performance of its material terms;



61
(c) a contract which is in its nature determinable: [Sec, 21 (4)]

' Notwithstanding anything contained in this clause, the
court may—

| 0) under the execution of a formal deed of partner-

‘ ship where the parties have commenced to
carry on the business of the partnership;

Gi) enforce the specific performance of a contract
for the purchase of the share of a partner;

* * * *

(d) a contract the performance of which involves the
performance of continuous acts which the Court cannot [Se 21 (s).]
supervise: .

Notwithstanding anything contained in this clause,
the court may enforce specific performance of a contract
to build or execute other work on land, provided the fol-
lowing conditions are fulfilled—

(i) the building or work to be executed under the
contract is defined by the contract with parti-
culars sufficiently precise to enable the court to हे
determine the exact nature of the building on
work; ™

(ii) the plaintiff has a substantial interest in the
performance of the contract of such a nature
that compensation in money for non-perform-
ance thereof is not an adequate relief; and

(iii) the defendant has under the contract obtained
possession, in whole or in part, of the land on
which the building or work is to be executed,

(2) Save as provided by the Arbitration Act, 1940, no
contract to refer present or future differences to arbitra- {See are
tion stall be specifically enforced, but if any person who graphy
has made such a contract (other than an arbitration (० of 19401
agreement to which the provision of the said Act apply)
and has refused to perform it sues in respect of any
subject’ which he has contracted to refer, the existence of
such contract skall bar the suit.
14. Specific performance of part of contract. [Sec. 17]
(1) The court shall not direct the specific performance
of a part of a contract except as provided by this section.

(2) Where a party to a contract is unable to perform [Sec. 14.)
the whole of his part of it, but the part which must be left

mee ee ee


[See. 15.]

{Sec. 16]

{ Sec. 13].

नी 62

unperformed bears only a small proportion to the whole
in value, and admits of compensation in money, the court
may, at the suit of either party, direct the specific per-
formance of so much of the contract as can be per
formed, and award compensation in money for the
deficiency.

(3) Where a party to a contract is unable to perform
the whole of his part of it, and the part which must be
left unperformed—

(a) though admitting of compensation in money, forms
a considerable portion of the whole, or

(b) does not admit of compensation in money, he is
not entitled to obtain a decree for specific performance.
But the court may, at the suit of the other party, direct
the party in default to perform specifically so much 6.
his part of the contract as he can perform—

(i) in the case ‘referred to in clause (a) above,
provided the plaintiff pays or has paid the
consideration promised by him as proportiona-
tely abated and also relinquishes all claim to
further performance and all right to compen-

. sation either for the deficiency or for the loss or

ia damage sustained by him through the default

of the defendant;

(ii) in the case referred to in clause (b) above,
provided the plaintif pays or has paid the consi-
deration promised by him without any abate-
ment and also relinquishes all claim to further
performance and all right to compensation as
specified in sub-clause (i).

(4) When a part of a contract which, taken by itself,
can and ought to be specifically performed, stands on a
separate and independent footing from another part of the
same contract which cannot or ought not to be specifically
performed, the court may direct specific performance of
the former part.

Explanation—For the purposes of this section, a party
to a contract shall be deemed to be unable to perform the
whole of his part of it if a portion of its subject matter,
existing at the date of the contract, has ceased to exist at
tke time of the performance.



63

15. Purchaser’s rights against vendor with no title
or imperfect title.

Where a person contracts to sell or let certain [Sec, 18]
immovable property, having no title or only an imperfect
title thereto, the purchaser or lessee (subject to the other
provisions of this Chapter) has the following rights: —

(a) if the vendor or lessor has subsequently to the
contract acquired any interest in the property,
the purchaser or lessee may compel him to
make good the contract out of such interest;

(b) where the concurrence of other persons is
necessary to validate the title and they are
bound to concur at the vendor’s or lessor’s
request, the purchaser or lessee may compel
him to procure such concurrence, and where a
conveyance by other persons is necessary to
validate the title and they are bound to convey _—___
at the vendor’s or lessor’s request, the purchaser ‘
or lessee may compel the vendor or lessor to
procure such conveyance by such proceedings
as may be necessary;

(c) where tke vendor professes to sell unincum-
bered property, but the property is mortgaged
for an amount not exceeding the purchase
money and the vendor has in fact only a right
to redeem it, the purchaser may compel him
to redeem the mortgage and to obtain a valid
discharge, and, where necessary, also a valid
conveyance from the mortgagee;

(d) where the vendor or lessor sues for specific
performance of the contract, and tke suit is
dismissed on the ground of his imperfect title
or want of title, the defendant has a right to
a return of his deposit (if any) with interest
thereon, to his costs of the suit, and to a lien for
such deposit, interest and costs on the interest
of the vendor or lessor in the property agreed
to be sold or let.



64

[sec. 25] 16. Person contracting to sell without title not entitled
to specific performance.
A contract for the sale or letting of.. .immovable
property cannot be specifically enforced in favour of a
vendor or lessor—

(a) who, knowing himself not to have any title
to the property, has contracted to sell or let
the same;

(b) who, though he entered into the contract
believing that he kad a good title to the pro-
perty, cannot at the time fixed by the parties
or by the court for the completion of the sale
or letting, give the purchaser or lessee a title
free from reasonable doubt.

* * * *
{New] 17. Application of certain sections to contracts for sale
or hire of movable property.

The provisions of sections 15 and 16 as to contracts for
the sale or letting of immovable property shall, mutatis
~~ Mnutandis, apply to contracts for the sale or hire of mov-

able property.
[Sec. 19] 18. Power to award compensation in certain cases.

(1) Where any person suing for the specific perform-
ance of a contract..........-- also claims compensation
for its breach, either in addition to or in substitution for
such performance, the court, in determining such claim,
shall be guided by the following principles: —

(a) if... the court decides that specific performance
ought not to be granted, but that there is a
contract between the parties which has been
broken by the defendant and that the plaintiff
is entitled to compensation for that breach, it
shall award him such compensation accordingly;

(b) if... the court decides that specific perform-
ance ought to be granted, but that it is not
sufficient to satisfy the justice of the case, and
that some compensation for breach of the con-

‘ tract should also be made to the plaintiff, it

shall award him such compensation accordingly.

(2) Compensation for the breach of a contract, in
addition to or in substitution for specific performance of
the contract, shall not be awarded unless it has been


है
Specifically asked for; but the court shall at any stage
grant leave to amend the plaint for including a prayer for
such compensation on such terms as may be just.
(3) Compensation awarded under this section may be
assessed according to the principles laid down in section

73 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, and under such proce- 9 of 1872.

dure as the court may direct.

Explanation—Tke circumstance that the contract has
become incapable of specific performance does not pre-
clude the court from exercising the jurisdiction conferred’
by this section,

19. Power to grant relief for possession, partition, refund
of earnest money etc.

(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary con-
tained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, any person
suing for the specific performance of a contract for the
transfer of immovable property may, in an appropriate
case, ask for—

NT eos,

(a) possession, or partition and separate possession, —-—~

in addition to such performance; or

(b) any other relief to which he may be entitled,
including refund of earnest money or deposit,
in case his claim for specific performance is
refused.

(2) If in any such suit the court decrees specific per-
formance and finds that the plaintiff is entitled to any of
the reliefs mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (1), it
may also award him the same accordingly.

(3) If in any such suit the court decides that specific
performance ought not to be granted, but that there is a
contract between the parties which has been broken by
the defendant and that the plaintiff is entitled to any of
the reliefs mentioned in clause (b) of sub-section (1), it
shall award him the same accordingby.

(4) Relief under clause (a) or (b) of sub-section
(1) shall not be granted unless it has been specifically
claimed: but the court shall at any stage grant leave
to amend the plaint for including a prayer for such relief
on such terms as may be just.

(5) The power to award relief under clause (b) of sub-
section (1) is without prejudice to the power to award
compensation under section 18.


66
20. Liquidation of damages not a bar to specific perform-
ance. ;

A contract, otherwise proper to be specifically enforced,
may be so enforced, though a sum be named in it as the
amount to be paid in case of its breach, and the party in ~
default is willing to pay the same, if the court finds from
the terms of the contract and the attending circumstances
that it was the intention of the parties that the sum was
named only to secure performance of the contract and
not as giving the party in default an option to pay money
in lieu of performance:

Provided that the court, when enforcing specific per-
formance, shall not also decree payment of the sum so
named in the contract.

21. Discretion as to decreeing specific performance.

[Sec. 22] (1) The jurisdiction to decree specific perforance is dis-
cretionary and the court is not bound to grant such relief
merely because it-is lawful to do so; but the discretion of
the court is not arbitrary but sound and reasonable, guided
by judicial principles and capable of correction by a
court of appeal.

(2) The following are cases in which the court may
properly exercise a discretion not to decree specific per-
formance :—

[Sec, 22-1] (a) where the terms of the contract or the conduct
of the parties at the time of entering into the
contract or other circumstances under which the
contract was made are such that the contract,
though not voidable, gives the plaintiff an unfair
advantage over the defendant; or

(Sec, 22-II] (b) where the performance of the contract would
involve some hardship on the defendant which
he did not foresee, whereas its non-performance
would involve no such hardship on the plaintiff;
or

(c) where the defendant entered into. the contract
under circumstances which, though not render-
ing the contract voidable, make it inequitable
to enforce specific performance. ~

Explanation 1—The question of hardship is to be
determined with reference to the circumstances existing

[Sec. 20]



67
at tne time of the contract, except in the case of hardship
which has resulted from the subsequent acts of the
plaintiff.

Explanation 2.—Mere inadequacy of consideration, or
the mere fact that the contract is onerous to the defen-
dant or improvident in nature, shall not be deemed to
constitute an unfair advantage within the meaning of
clause (a) or hardship within the meaning of clause (b).

(3) The following is a case’in which the court may [8९० 22-III]
properly exercise a discretion to decree specific perform-
ance:—

Where the plaintiff has done substantial acts or
suffered losses in consequence of a contract capable of
specific performance,

(4) The court shall not refuse to any party specific per- [New]
formance of a contract merely on the ground ‘that the
contract is not enforceable at the instance: of the other
party.
22. Who may obtain specific performance.
* Except as’ otherwise provided “by his Chapter, the [Sec. 23 (a)]

specific performance of a contract may be obtained—

(a) by any party thereto; हे

(b) by the représentative-in-interest, or the pricipal,

of any party thereto;

Provided that; where the learning, skill, solvency or any [86० 23 (b)]
personal quality of such party is a material ingredient in
the contractor where the contract provides that the
interest shall not be assigned, his. representative-in-
interest or his’ principal shall not.be entitled to specific
performance of the contract, unless such party has already
performed his part of the contract or the performance
thereof by his representative-in-interest or principal has
already been accepted by the other party;
(c) subject to the provisions of the Indian Contract [8०० 23 (०1
Act, 1872, by a person who, though not a party 7
to‘the contract, is entitled to a benefit’: there-
under or has an interest therein;

* * *

(d) when a......company has entered into a contract (Sec. 23 (g)]
and subsequently becomes amalgamated with
another.....company, by the new company which
arises out of such amalgamation;



[Sec. 23 (h1]

[Sec. 27 (0)]
[Sec. 27 (6)]

[Sec. 27 ©]

[Sec, 27 (4)]

[sec. 27 (€)]

[Sec, 24 (a)]

18०० 24 (b)]

68

(९) when the promoters of a .......- company have,

before its incorporation, entered into a contract
for the purposes of the company, and such
contract is warranted by the terms 01 the incor-
poration, the company, provided the. company
has accepted the contract and communicated
such acceptance to the other party to the
contract.

23. Relief against parties and persons claiming under them
by subsequent title.
Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter, specific
performance of a contract may be enforced against—

(a) either party thereto;

(b)

any other person claiming under him by a title
arising subsequently to the contract, except a
transferee for value who has paid the considera-
tion in good faith and without notice of the
original contract;

(c) any person claiming under a title which, though

(१)

prior to the contract and known to the plaintiff,
might have been displaced by the other party to
the contract;

when a .....- company has entered into a contract
and subsequently becomes amalgamated with
another........ company, the new company which

arises out of such amalgamation;

(e) when the promoters of a .....--.company have,

before its incorporation, entered into a contract
for the purposes of the company, and such con-
tract is warranted by the terms of the incorpora-

tion, the company, provided........ the compatyy |

has accepted the contract and communicated
such acceptance to the other party to the
2७५ .

24, Personal bars to the relief.

Specific performance of a contract cannot be enforced
in favour of a person—

(a)

(b)

who would not be entitled to recover compensa-
tion for its breach;

who has become incapable of performing, or
violates, any essential term of the contract that



69

on his part remains to be performed, or acts in
fraud of the contract, or wilfully acts at variance
with or in subversion of the relation intended
to be established by the contract;

(c) who fails to aver and prove that he has performed, [New]
or has been ready and willing from the date of
the contract till the hearing of the suit to
perform, the essential terms of the contract to”
be performed by him, except terms the perform-
ance of which has been waived by the defen-
dant.

Explanation.—For the purposes of clause (c)—

(i) it is not essential for the plaintiff to actually
tender to the defendant or to deposit in court
any money, except when so directed by the
court;

(ii) the plaintiff must aver performance of, or readi-
ness and willingness to perform, the contract «: i
according to its true construction.

25. Non-enforcement except with variation.

Where a plaintiff seeks specific performance of a con- [Sec. 26]
tract in writing, to which the defendant sets up a variation,
the plaintiff cannot obtain the performance sought, except

.with the variation so set up, in the following cases,

namely :— bea ied
" (a) where by fraud, mistake of fact or misrepresen- sae i)

tation the written contract of which perform-

ance is sought is in its ternis ‘or effect different

from what the parties agreed “to, or does not

contain all the’ terms agreed to between the

parties on the faith of which the defendant

entered into the contract;

(0) where, the object of the parties was to produce [Sec. 26. (4)
a certain legal result, which the contract as
framed is not calculated to produce;

(०) where the parties have, subsequently to the (Sec. 26 (०)]
execution of the contract, varied its terms.



5° . 10

26. Rescission of contracts for sale or lease on fawure
of performance by plaintiff.

[Sec. 35 (०, (1) Where a decree for specific performance of a con-
part] tract for the sale or lease of immovable property has been
made, all subsequent proceedings hereafter mentioned in
this section shall be taken only in the suit in which the
decree is made, in the manner provided by the Code of
sofr19s8 Civil Procedure, 1908.
[Sec. 35 (०), (2) ........If the purchaser or lessee does not, within the
part] time allowed by the decree or extended by an order of the
court made on the application of either party, pay the
purchase-money or other sum which the court has ordered
him to pay, the vendor or lessor may apply to have the
[Sec. 35, rd Contract rescinded and......... the court may, by order in
the suit, rescind the contract, either so far as
regards the party in default or altogether, as the justice
of the case may require.
(3) Where a contract is rescinded under sub-section
(2), the court—
(56० 35, (a) shall pass an order directing: the:purchaser or
2nd para.] lessee, #f he: has. obtained possession of the pro-
perty under the contract, to restore such posses-
sion to the vendor or lessor, and may also pass
an order for payment of the rents or profits
which have accrued in respect of the property
t . from the date on which the ‘possession was ..80
obtained by the purchaser or léssee until restora-
~° tion of possession to the vendor or lessor, and
(b) may, if the justice of the case so requires, direct
the venaor er lessor to refund any sum paid by
the vendee or lessee as earnest money or deposit.
[New] (4). If the purchaser or lessee complies, within the time
mentioned in sub-section (2), with the, terms of the decree
referred to: therein, the court may, by order-in the suit,
made on his application, award him such further relief as
he may be entitled to, including,. in. appropriate cases,
(a) execution of a proper conveyance or lease by
the vendor or lessor,
[New] (b) delivery of possession; or partition and separate
possession, of the property on execution of the
conveyance or lease.

(5) The costs of proceedings under this section shall
be in the discretion of the court.



nm

27. Bar of suit for breach after dismissal.
The dismissal of a suit for specific performance of a [Sec. 29]
contract or part thereof shall bar the plaintiff's right to
sue for compesation for the breach of such contract or
part, as the case may be, but shall not bar his right to sue
for any other relief to which he may be entitled by reason
of such breach.

28. Application of preceding provisions to awards and
testamentary directions to execute settlement.

The provisions of this Chapter as to contracts shall, [Sec. 30]
mutatis mutandis, apply to awards to which the Arbitra-

tion Act, 1940, does not apply and to directions in a will yo of 1940.

or codicil to execute a particular settlement.
CHAPTER III.

RECTIFICATION OF INSTRUMENTS.
29. When instruments may 9९ rectified.

(1) When, through fraud or a mutual mistake of the [Sec, 31.]
parties; a contract or other instrument in‘:writing (not
being the articles of association of a company to which
the-Companies Act, 1956, applies) does not“express their ! of 1956.
real intention, then—

(a) either party or his. representative-in-interest
may institute a suit to have the instrument
rectified; or :

(b) the plaintiff may, in any. suit-in which any
right under the instrument.is in issue, ask for
rectification of the instrument; or =

(c) a defendant in any such suit as is referred to
in clause (b) may, in addition to any other
defence that he may put forth, ask for rectifica-
tion of the instrument.

(2) If, in any suit in which a contract. or -other instru-
ment is sought. to be rectified under clause (a), (b) or
(०) of sub-section (1), the court finds that the contract or
other instrument, through fraud or mistake in framing it,
does not express the real intention of the parties........,
the court may in its discretion direct rectification of the
contract or other instrument so as to express that inten-
tion, so far as this can be done without prejudice to
rights acquired by third persons in good faith and for
value,



72

(3) The court shall not, in any such suit, direct recti-
fication of the contract or other instrument unless the
same has been specifically asked for in the pleading of
the party concerned; but the court shall at any stage
grant leave to amend the pleading. by asking for rectifica-
tion on such terms as may be just.

(4) A contract in writing may be first rectified, and
then, if the plaintiff has so prayed in his plaint and the
court thinks fit, specifically enforced.

CHAPTER IV.
RESCISSION OF CONTRACTS.
30. When rescission may be adjudged.

[See. 34]

(8 (1) Any person interested in a contract......... may sue
oor to kave it rescinded, and such rescission may, subject to
the provisions of sub-section (2), be adjudged by the
court in any of the following cases, namely: —
(a) where the contract is voidable or terminable by
the plaintiff;
(b) where the contract is unlawful for causes not
_apparent, on its face and the defendant is more
to blame than the plaintiff.

a * का *
{New] (2) The court may refuse to rescind the contract—
(a) where the plaintiff has, expressly or impliedly,
ratified the contract;

pe

(b) where, owing to the ‘change of circumstances
which has taken place ‘since ‘the making of the
contract (not due ta any act. of the defendant
himself), the parties cannot, be substantially
restored to the position in which they stood
when the contract was made; ..,.

(c) where third parties have, during the subsis-
tence of the contract, acquired rights in good
faith without notice and for value; or

“(d) where only a part of the contract is sought to
be rescinded and stich part is not severable from
the rest of the contract.

Explanation—In this section, “contract” means a con-
tract in writing, except in the territories to which the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882, extends for the time being.

(New)
4of 1882.



i

8

31. Alternative prayer for rescission in a suit for specific
performance,

A plaintiff instituting a suit for the specific perform- (Sec. 37)
ance of a contract in writing may pray in the alternative
that, if the contract cannot be specifically enforced, it
may be rescinded and delivered up to be cancelled, and
the court, if it refuses to enforce the contract specifically,
may direct it to be rescinded and delivered up accordingly.

32. The court may require a party rescinding to do
equity.

On adjudging the rescission of a contract, the court (sec. 38)
may require the party to whom such relief is granted,
if he has received any benefit under the contract from the
other party, to restore such benefit, so far as may be, to
that party and to make any compensation to him which
justice may require.

CHAPTER V.
CANCELLATION OF INSTRUMENTS

33. When cancellation may be ordered.

(1) Any person against whom a written instrument is [See, 39))
void or voidable, who has reasonable apprehension that
such instrument, if left outstanding, .may cause him
serious injury, may sue to have it adjudged void or
voidable; and the court may, in its discretion, so adjudge
it and order it to be delivered up and cancelled.

(2)'Tf the instrument kas been registered under the
Indian Registration Act, 1908, the court shall also send a 46 of 1908
copy of its decree to the officer in whose office the instru-
ment has been so registered; and such officer ‘shall ‘note
on the copy of the instrument contained 10 his béoks the
fact of its cancellation.

34. What instruments may be partially cancelled. [Sec. 40}
Where an instrument is evidence of differerit tights or

different obligations, the court ' may, in a propér 0४४९;

cancel it in part and allow it to stand for the rest:

35. Power to require party for whom instrument is
cancelled to make -compensation.

On adjudging the cancellation of an instrument, the [Sec. 41]
court may require the party to whom such relief is



[New]

9 of 1872,

[8०० 42]

[New]

4
granted, if he has received any benefit under the instru-
ment from the other party, to restore such benefit, so far
as may be, to that party and to make any compensation to
the other whick justice may require.

36. Power to require defendant to restore benefit when
instrument is void or voidable.

(1) Where a defendant successfully resists any suit on
the ground that the instrument sought to be enforced
against him in the suit is voidable, the court may, if the
defendant has received any benefit under the instrument
from the other party, require him to restore such benefit,
so far as may be, to that party, or to make compensation
for it.

(2) Where a defendant successfully resists any suit
on the ground that the agreement sought to be enforced
against him in the suit is void by reason of his not having
been competent to contract under section 11 of the
Indian Contract Act, 1872, the court may, if the defendant
has received any benefit under the agreement from the
other party, require him to restore such benefit, so far
as may be, to that party, to the extent to which he or his
estate has benefited’ thereby.

CHAPTER VI.

DECLARATORY DECREES.
37. Discretion of court 68 to declaration of‘ status or
‘rights.

(1) Any person entitled to any legal character, or.
right....may institute a suit against any person denying,
or interested to deny, his title to such character or right,
and the court may in its discretion make therein a decla-
ration that he is so entitled; and the plaintiff in such suit
need not ask for any further relief, though he is able to
seek such relief.

* * * ५

Explanation.—A trustee of property is a “person in-
terested to deny” a title, adverse to the title of some one
who is not in.existence, and for whom, if in existence, he
would be a trustee. :

(2) Without prejudice to the generality. of the provi-
sions of sub-section (1), any person entitled to any legal
character or right, the ewistence, extent or nature of

which depends on’ the validity or: invalidity ‘of any’ law,



%

may institute a suit against any person or authority (in-
cluding, in appropriate cases, the Government) denying
his title to such character or right or threatening to invade
such right, for a declaration about the validity or invali«
dity of the law and about his legal character or right
without asking for any further relief; and the court may,
in its discretion, make therein such a declaration.

Explanation.—In this sub-section, “law” includes an
enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, by-law, rule,
scheme, notification or other instrument having or intend-
ed to have the force of law in the whole or in any part
of the territory of India.

(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall, but the [New]
provisions of sub-section (2) shall not, be subject to those
of Rule 2 of Order II of the First Schedule to the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908, Sof 7902

38. Effect of declaration,

A declaration made under this Chapter is binding [Sec. 43)
only on the parties to the suit, persons claiming through
them respectively, and, where any of the parties are
trustees, on the persons for whom, if in existence at the
date of the declaration, such parties would be trustees.

CHAPTER VII,

INJUNCTIONS GENERALLY.
59. Preventive relief how granted.

Preventive relief is granted at the discretion of the (8०० $a}
court by injunction temporary or Perpetual. हु

40. Temporary injunction.

(1) Temporary injunctions are such as are to continue [8०८ $3)
until a specified time, or until the further order of the
court. They may be granted at any period of a suit, and
are regulated by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, Sof 7908

(2) A perpetual injunction can only be granted by the
decree made at the hearing and upon the merits of the
suit; the defendant is thereby perpetually enjoined from
the assertion of a right, or from the commission of an act.
which would be contrary to the tights of the plaintiff.



[8०० 54]

[6ec. 55]

{New]

6
CHAPTER VIII.
PERPETUAL INJUNCTIONS.
41, Perpetual injunction when granted.

(1) Subject to the other provisions contained in, or

* yeferred to by, this Chapter, a perpetual injunction may

be granted to prevent the preach of an obligation exist-
ing in favour of the plaintif, whether expressly or by
implication.

(2) When such obligation arises from contract, the
court shall be guided by the rules and provisions con-
tained in Chapter II of this Part.

(3) When the defendant invades or threatens to invade
the plaintiff's right to, or enjoyment of, property, the
court may grant a perpetual injunction in the following
cases, namely :—

(a) where the defendant is a trustee of the property
for the plaintiff;

(b) where there exists no standard for ascertaining
tke actual damage caused, or likely to be caused,
by the invasion;

(c) where the invasion is such that pecuniary com-
pensation would not afford adequate relief;

* * *

(d) where the injunction is necessary to prevent a
multiplicity of judicial proceedings.
Explanation—For the purpose of this section a trade-
mark is property-
42, Mandatory injunction.

When, to prevent the preach of an obligation, it is
necessary to compel the performance of certain acts
which the court is capable of enforcing, the court may in
jts discretion grant an injunction to prevent the breach

complained of, and also to compel performance of the
requisite acts.

43. Damages in lieu of or in addition to injunction.

(1) In any suit in which the court has jurisdiction to

grant an injunction under section 41 or 42, the court may,

if it thinks fit, award damages to the plaintit for any
injury, either in addition to or in substitution for such

injune



71 com Y
(2) No damages shall be awarded under this section
unless specifically asked for.

44. Injunction when refused.

An injunction cannot be granted—~

(a) to restrain persons from prosecuting a judicial [Sec. $6?
proceeding pending at the institution of the suit
jn which the injunction is sought, unless such
restraint is necessary to prevent a multiplicity
of proceedings;

(b) to restrain persons from instituting or prosecut-
ing proceedings in any other court not subordi-
nate to that from which the injunction is sought;

(c) to restrain persons from applying to any

legislative body;
* *

(9) to restrain persons from instituting or prosecut-

ही ing proceedings in any criminal matter;

(@) to prevent the breach of a contract the perfor-
mance of which would not be specifically
enforced;

(f) to prevent, on the ground of nuisance, an act
of which it is not reasonably clear that it will
be a nuisance;

(g) to prevent a continuing preach in which the
plaintif has acquiesced; *

} (h) when equally efficacious relief can....----
be obtained by any other usual mode of pro-
ceeding, except in case of breach of trust;

(i) when the conduct of the plaintiff or bis agents
has been such as to disentitle him to the
assistance of the court;

(j) where the plaintif has no personal interest in
the matter.

45. Injunction to perform negative agreement.

Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (e) of [Sec 5971

section 44, where a contract comprises an affirmative
agreement to do a certain act, coupled with a negative
agreement, express Or implied, not to do a certain act, the
circumstance that the court js unable to compel specific
performance of the affirmative agreement shall not pre-
clude it from granting an injunction to perform the



[New]
1 of 1877.

78

negative agreement: provided that the plaintiff has not *"
failed to perform the contract so far as it is binding on
him.

PART III
MISCELLANEOUS.
46. Repeal.
The Specific Relief Act, 1877, is hereby repealed,

o


APPENDIX IT

TABLE A
Showing the provisions in the existing Act and the corresponding provsions,
if any in Appendix I.
Existing provision Corresponding provision, if any, in
Appendix 1
I 2
Section I . . . . .
Section 2—{Repealed] ©. *«
Section 3 . . . . .
Section 4 (a) - . . . .
Section 4 g . . . .
Section 4 (८) . . . . .
Section 5 . . . . .
“Section 6 . . . .
Section 7 . . . . °
Section 8 . . . . .
Section 9 . . . .
Section 10. . . . . पु
Section 11. . . . . . Section 7
Section 12 of . . . . « Section 12(1)
Section 12 (९) & (6) न . . . Section 9
Section 12 + . . . + Omitted.
Section 12, Explanation . . . . ‘Sections ro and rr
Section 13. - + . . . + Section 14, Explanation
Section 14. . . . . . Section Tata)
Section 1§  . . . . . . Section 343
Section 16 Poof fff Section 14 2
Section 17 . न . . . Section 1401,
Section 18. . . . Section 15
Section 19. ५». + - : Section 18
Section 20. + : पु . Section 20
Section 21(a) . . . . . Section 13(1)(a)
Section 21 (6) . . . . Section 13(1)(6)
Section 21 i . . . . + Omitted.
Section 21 . . . . « Section 13(1) (c)
Section 21 (¢) . . . + + Section 122)
Section 21 (f). . . . . « Omitted,
21 . . . . + Section 13(x) (4)
Section 2r . ht . . डिक, ®
jection 21, Last paragrap! se . ion 13 (2)
Section 22—First paragraph . . . Section Be .
Second paragraph J & IT + Section 21(2,
—Third paragraph III. . Section 21 (3)
Section 23 (a) . . . . + Section 22 8
» 23 (/| . . . . + Section 226)
» 23 ©) . . . . . Section 22(c)
x» 23 (40. . + + + Omitted.
» 23 f + . . . > Omitted.
a» 23! . . . + + Omitted.
» 23 . . . + Section 22d)
». 23 0): . . . . + Section 22(e)

19



1 2
Section 24 (a). . . . . + Section 24 (a)
५. 2409) Dot ५51 + -+ Section 24 (0)
os 24 (८) . . . . Omitted.
3 oa@. . - {2 Omitted:
Section 25 (a) . « Section 16 (a)
25 (७) : fot 16 (5)
. . + Omitted.
. . « Section 25 (a)
. . . » 25 (७)
. . . Section 23 (a)
. » 23 (6)

1 23 @

» 27 (वी ee gs 23 4
2 27 (०) पु पु . + 23 (6)
Section 27A . . . + Omitted.
Section 28. . . . + Omitted.
Section29 . se +. Section 27
Section 30. . . . + Section 28
Section 31. . . . + Section 29 (1)—(2)
Section 32. . . . + Omitted,
Section 33 . . . + + Omitted.
Section 3. . . . पु + Section 29 (4)
Section 35 ५ (8) . . . + Section 3०1) =
Section 35 (c), : . + + Section 26 (1) 7
Section 35 (०), part . + +  « Section 26 (2), part
#> 35, आव paragraph =. weg) 26 (३) (०)
>, ३9) 3rd paragrap! + 9 + 145, 26 (2), part.
Section 36 se eee Omitted.
Section 37 . . . . + Section 31
Section 38. . . . « + Section 32 ‘
Section39 « . . . न « Section 33
Section 49. . न . नि + Section 34
jection 41 . . . » « Section : ‘
ection 42, Para. T . . . न + Section 37 (1)
3» 425 Proviso . . . . Omitted.
3. 42, Expl . . . . + Section 37 (1), Expl.
Section 43... - se. St
Section 44. « . . . . » Omitted.
Sections 45 to51 « . . . Omitted.
Section 52, - . . . . Section 39
Section 53»  - + +e Section 40
Section 54 First paragraph =. . + Section 41 ®
” }» Second . . »  =41(2
» 54 Third paragrap! clause ( 4 + 99 था (3) @)
»» 34; Third paragraph, clause न aT Be
» 54> Third paragraph, clause 9 . )(०)
33 34 Third paragraph, clause ( : |,
o» S45 कप paragraph, clause . Section 47 (3) (०)
545 + 8 oy AL .
Section 55 ‘ . . . + ‘Section 42
Section 56 ‘ . . . . Section 44 (a)
” . . . . . हम | ®
% मम 3 (०)
» 56 | é पु . . + Omitted. et
» 56 (e) Hee > » Section 44 (d)
» 56 “i + : » » 44(०-
» 56 (8) woe . - . oo 44
» 56 ® ee”
» 56) en » 44 8 i
34 j) पे . . . . ” 4 G
पु . » Section 45



= * a

TaBLe B
Showing the provisions in Appendix I and the correstonding provision.
if any, in the existing Act.
Provision in Appendix I Corresponding provision, if any, in the
existing Act.
T 2

Section 1 . . . . + Section 1
Section 2 (a) foot + fd Section 3

vs 2 (8) Popo bp op

a 2c) . . . पु . New

x» 2d). . . . . . New

3 20: 5 ff 1 2 Section 3 (ast para).
Section3(a2): . + se Section 4 (8

» 3080). 3 1 + + - ae
Section 4 . . . . . . tion 7
Section 5 पु . + . + « Secion8
Section 6 . . . . . + Section 70
Section 7 . . . + Section 11

\Section 7 Explanation (5 |). New

Section 8 पु . . . +
Sectiong .  . + «se Section 12 (6) & (०
SectionIo . . . . . . Section 12, Explanation (earlier portion)
Section 11 (1). . . . .

ss 11 (2). . + . . . Section 12, Explanation (last portion)
Section 12 (1). . . . . « Section 12 (a)

. . . + Section 21 (e}

Section 13 (1) (a) . . - Section 21 (०)

33... 73,(1) @ Exception

» B(N@  -
रे 13, (0 Exception

ew
1. Section ar (6)
. 33 2r

” YG Section 21 (g)

3s 1360) Exception - :

a 73 (2). . + Section 21, last

paragraph,

Section 14 (1) पु - . + + Section 17

a 14 . . . पु >. Section 14

2. 3, . . . . . Section 15

2” ®, s+ + + + Section 16

32 149 Explanation * . « Section 13
SectionIs . . पु . . + Section 18
Section 16 . . . . . Section 25
Section17 - + . . . + New
Section18 . . . . . + Section 19
Section19 . . रू . . . New
Section20 | « . . . . . Section 20
Section 21 (1). न रु . . . Section 22, first para,
Section 21 (2)(@) - . . ry . Section 22, second para, -- 1.
Section 21 (2) (4) + . . + Section 22, second para ~-IT,

>» 27(2)2(०) « . . . « New

21 (2), Explanations 1 & 2 ‘

- New
. . » Section 22, third para, —III
पु New



2
Section 22 8

vy 22 (0)

vy 22 (0)

v 22 (4)

yy 22 6
Section 23 (a)

x 23 (8)

as 23 (0)

x» 23 (व)

38. 23 (2)
Section 24 ®

” 4 @

O :

° 24, Explanation
Section 25 0

25 (8,

23. 25 (०)
Section 26 (1)-

» 26 2), part

#.. 26 (2), part.
ss 26 (3) (a)
» 26 (3, 1

2 26 04)& (9).
7

”

Section
Scction 32
Section 33
Section 34
Section 35
Section 36
Section 37 oy

37 (2).
Section 38
Section39 +
Section 40, -
Section 41 8

» 4 &

» 40 yey

: Ee

”

2 10008)

Section42 -

Section 43

Section 44 (2)
» 44९80
ao 44 ९9
» 44 (4)
a 44 R
” 4९ है
”
van) 8
» 440

2 44
Section 45 *
Section 46 +

30 (2) ..
+3 30, Explanation
31:

2
Section 23 (4)
>>. 23 (0
:
2:

33. 23, &
Section 27 (०)
EAC)
9-27 %

ao 27
as 27 (8)
Section 24 (a)
a 24 (6)
New
New
Section 26 (2) —(0)
» (4)

33... 26 (6)
Section 35 (0, part.
>>. 35 (2) part.
9. 35, 30d paragraph.
3s 33, 214 paragraph.

lew
_~
New जा

Section 29
Section 30
Sections 31 and 34
Section 35 (a) (6)
New

New

Section 37
Section 38
Section 39
Section 40
Section 41

Section 53
Section $4; first para.
third para. cl
3} 54; third para., clause (a)
3} 54 third para., clause 8
33 54, third para., clause (¢
3» 54; thitd para., clause (०)
Section 55

ew.
Section 56 @
568)
x» 356 (०
» 56 2
2” 4 36 (,
oof 56 aw
” 2४
७». 30 ५)
» 3600
33. 56 1/)
Section 57
New



APPENDIX III.
SUGGESTIONS IN RESPECT OF OTHER ACTS.

I. Arbitration Act, 1940,

See, 32.—After the words “nor shall any arbitration
agreement or award be” the word “enforced” should be
inserted and in tke marginal note the word “contesting”
should be substituted by “relating to”. [Para. 73].

Il. Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

Appropriate provisions’ should be: made in Orders
XX—XXI of the Code to the effect that all post-decree
proceedings necessary to get complete relief in terms of
the decree in a suit for specific performance shall be by
application in the suit itself, together with provisions for
appeal from orders passed in such proceedings. [Para. 81].



NOTE BY DR. N. ९. SEN GUPTA

1 generally agree with the provisions of the report
regarding the Specific Relief Act and have only a few
points to refer to.

Regarding section 4, clause (a) has been recommended
to be deleted. It has peen said that “There is no question
of any specific relief being granted in respect of a mere
agreement”. ‘As a statement of the law, it is hardly precise
and it depends first of all on the definition of ‘Contract’
in the Contract Act and its distinction from an agreement.
Secondly, even assuming the present definition of
‘Agreement’ and ‘Contract’ to be retained, which I should
say should not be done, this js not precisely correct.
There are some agreements which are enforcible, although
they are not contracts. The most apposite case is that
of an agreement under section 53A of the Transfer of
Property Act. Such an agreement is ordinarily negatively
enforcible as a defence. But as interpreted by the Cal-
cutta High Court, the right of the landlord, as provided
by the agreement, shall be enforcible, notwithstanding
section 53A being defensive. Therefore, this should
remain in any case. This paragraph has to be taken along
with the provisions in section 583A.

With regard to section 5, the propositions may be
elementary. Then this section serves aS the definition of
“Specific Relief”. There is nothing else to indicate what
in this Act specific relief means. This section may be
substituted by the section defining “Specific Relief”.

" Section 9—For reasons already indicated by me in my
note on-the Indian Limitation Act, I think it is necessary
to retain the provisions of section 9.

व्‌ must say that there is some justification for the
complaint that a suit under section 9 does not serve the
purpose of expediting litigation but often results in 8
further litigation on title. Nevertheless, 88 the question

84

“>


he tee

Se Ne at

85

vof title should not be made an issue in the suit, the party
in possession who is dispossessed gets an initial advantage
by getting back possession and throws the burden on the
disseisor to prove his title, this advantage should not be
taken away. A title suit would ordinarily be a long drawn
one followed by more than one appeal and it would be
inequitous to allow a trespasser who has taken the law
into his own hands to keep his possession for all the time
that the suit formed as a title suit would take. In a plaint
in a title suit the plaintiff will have to aver and prove his
title though he has a clear case of possession, and thus
bears an initial burden of proof of title. There is no posi-
tive law which would in such a case place the burden on
the disseisor. It is conceivable that where a plaintiff
-alleges dispossession while in possession the case may be
tried in two stages, first on the issue of possession and
-dispossession, the burden would shift on the defendant
who would then have to prove his title. But that would
not simplify the litigation, while it will keep the unlaw-
ful disseisor much longer in possession. In any case this
‘matter may be considered in connection with burden of
proof in the Evidence Act,

(Sd.) N. C. SEN GUPTA

«SMGIPND —~DME~2MofL—15-7-s8