LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

NINETIETH REPORT

ON

THE GROUNDS OF DIVORCE
AMONGST
CHRISTIANS IN INDIA: SECTION 10
INDIAN DIVORCE ACT 1869

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA : MINISTRY OF LAW


K. K. MATHEW D.O. No. F. 2(6)/82-L.C.

Chairman
Law Commission *
Government of India
Shastri Bhavan
New Delhi-110 001

17th May, 1983.

My dear Minister,

T send herewith the 90th Report of the Law Commission regarding “Grounds
of Divorce amongst Christians in India: Scction 10 of the Indian Divorce Act,
18697,

2. Revision of Section 10 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, was taken up by
the Law Commission suo moto in view of the existing element of discrimination
based on sex under the Indian Divorce Act as applicable to the Christians in
India. .

3. In the field of marriage law, extensive developments have taken place both
in law and in Society,-It is proper that these developments should”be taken note .
of and the law brought in tune with the tithes.

4. The Commission expresses its appreciation to Shri P. M. Bakshi, Part-time
Member of the Commission for the finalisation of the Report. °

With regards,

Yours sincerely,

Sd/-
(K. K. MATHEW,

Shri Jagannath Kaushal,

Minister of Law, Justice & Company Affairs,
Shastri Bhavan,

NEW DELHI.

84-L/B(D)117Mof LI&CA—1


CHAPTER 1

CHapTER 2
CHAPTER 3

CHAPTER 4
CHAPTER 5

CHAPTER 6

APPENDIX |

ApPENDIx 2

84-L/B(D)1 1 7Mof! LI&CA—I

CONTENTS
INTRODUCTORY wee पु
THE PRESENT LAW, AND THE ISSUES FOR CONSIDERA-
COMMENTS RECEIVED AND VIEWS EXPRESSED ON THE.
VARIOUS ISSUES. . or «५ oe oe
THE QUESTION OF NULLITY
MUTUAL CONSENT
RECOMMENDATION

APPENDICES
GROUNDS OF RELIEF IN INDIA MATRIMONIAL LAW

EXTRACTS RELATING TO CANON LAW

Pace
1-2
3-5

6-10
11-15
16
17-18
19
20-22


CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTORY

1.1, The Law Commission of India has taken up for consideration the ques-
tion whether the law relating to the grounds of divorce applicable to Christians
in India under section 10 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869 should be reformed,
and if so, on what lines. The inadequacies of the present law have been stressed
from time to time by individuals and social organisations. The Law Commission
of India itself had, a few years ago, made detailed recommendations for reform!
of the law on the subject, in a comprehensive Report dealing with the entire law
of marriage and divorce amongst Christians in India, supplemented by another
Report* dealing with certain matters arising out of the Bill prepared by Govern-
ment on the subject, While legislation for removing the defects in the law on the
subject has not been introduced, it appears to the Commission that it is urgently
necessary in the interests of social justice to take up some issues, even if a
comprehensive legislation by way of revision of the enactments on the subject
cannot be undertaken by Government.

Need for takiag up
the subject.

1.2. In a letter recently addressed to the Chairman of the Law Commis-The gist of the

sion,* there have been narrated certain actual cases of Christian women who seagestion of Ms,

were treated with severe cruelty by their respective husbands, as a consequence
of which the women had to undergo a lot of suffering, resulting in their mental
breakdown, The letter also mentions many other cases of cruelty by Christian
husbands (even of husbands putting their wives into prostitution), and of long-
continuing desertion by the husbands, who, notwithstanding their own past mis-
conduct, nevertheless expect their wives 10 accept them back, Because of the
difficulty of getting a divorce in such cases, these women, it is stated, have no

hope of redeeming their lives and finding happiness for themselves and their
children.

1.3. It has also been emphasised in the letter mentioned above that the
recent proposal to amend the Special Marriage Act and the Hindu Marriage
Act by way of introducing “irretrievable breakdown” as a ground for divorce
(in the two Acts) is the first step towards the liberation of unfortunate Indian
women and that the same should be extended to Christian$ also: Towards the
end of the letter, the need for a uniform divorce law covering every community
has also been stressed, “thereby enabling the Christian woman especially, to
break away completely from an unhappy union and start a new life while she
is still young and sane enough to do so.” हि $

‘It may be mentioned that the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill is pending
before Parliament, and is intended to implement a Report‘ given by the Law

3 Law Commission of India, 15th Report (Law relating to marriage and divorce amongst
Christian in India). .

3 Law Commission of India, 22nd Report (Christian Marriage etc. Bili).

3 Letter addressed to the Law Commission by Ms, Aud Sonia Roberts, New Delhi, dated 15th
September, 198).

4 Law Commission of India, 79 Report (Hindu Marriage Act—Irretrievable breakdown of
Marriage as a ground of divorce).

Beeakdcwn of
marsiage.


2

Commission on the introduction, in. the Hindu Marriage Act, of irretrievable
‘breakdown of marriage (evidenced by the parties living apart for a specified
period) as a ground of divorce. That report itself had been forwarded in response
to a reference ma@& by the Government of India in the Ministry of Law.

Equality of sexes. 1.4, Apart from the questions raised by the letter mentioned above, it is
also worthwhile considering whether section 10, Indian Divorce Act, does not
stand in urgent need of revision on the ground of equality of the sexes.'

Scope of the Re- 1.5. Accordingly, the present Report addresses itself to the question of
Port. reform of the law relating to grounds of divorce amongst Christians in India.

Working Paper. 1.6. For eliciting views on the subject, the Commission had’ prepared a
Working Paper which had been circulated to interested persons and bodies. The
gist of that Working Paper* and the views received thereon will be dealt with
in duc course.’

“1 Chapter 2, infra.
2, Chapter 2, infra.
3, Chapter 3, infra.


_— CHAPTER 2
‘THE PRESENT LAW, AND THE ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION

2.1. Section 10 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869 deals with the grounds of
divorce amongst Christians as under :—

“10. When husband may petition for dissolution—Any husband may present
a petition to the District Court or to the High Court, praying that his
marriage may be dissolved on the ground that his wife has, since the
solemnization thereof, been guilty of adultery.

When. wife may petition for dissolution—Any wife may present a peti-
tion to the District Court or to the High Court, praying that her marriage
aay be dissolved on the ground that, ‘since the solemnization thereof, her
husband has exchanged his profession of Christianity for the profession of
some other religion, and gone through a form of marriage with another
woman; हे

or has been guilty of incestuous adultery,

or of bigamy with adultery,

or of marriage with another woman with adultery,

or of rape, sodomy or bestiality,

or of adultery coupled with such cruelty as without adultery would

have entitled her to a divorce a mensa et toro,

or of adultery coupled with desertion, without reasonable excuse for
two years or upwards.”

Present law secs
tion 10, Indian

Divorce ‘Act 1869.

2.2. Having regard to the nature of the issues that fall for consideration,wWorking Paper as
we had circulated to interested persons and bodies a Working Paper on thesetting forth three
subjegt for eliciting opinion. The Working Paper so circulated set forth three alternatives.

alternatives for consideration, The reasons for putting forth these three alter-

natives and the possible justification that could be advanced in support of each

of them were set out at some length in the Working Paper. It may be convenient
_ to restate them in this Report (though not necessarily in the same words).

2.3. The first alternative put forth in the Working Paper focussed attentionDiscrimination writ

on the element of discrimination from which section 10 of the Indian Divorcelafge

in Section -10

Act, 1869 seemed to suffer in the Commission’s view, This is apart from any alternative).

other question that may fall to be considered as to the merits of the existing
law as tested in the light of the present day social notions in regard to affairs
of the family. The Commission was of the view that the provision in section 10
(as it now stands)’ was blatantly discriminatory against Christian women.

The matter would be clear if one compares the position regarding the two
sexes under the section. The ground of divorce available to the Christian husband
under this section is expressed simply as “adultery’—no other fact need be
provéd by the husband, But the ground of divorce available to the wife is
expressed in very narrow terms in ‘the section. To mention the position very
briefly, the section requires proof by the wife of one or other of the following

acts of the husband—(a) conversion accompanied by another marriage, or:

(0) rape, sodomy. or bestiality, or (०) adultery, which, however, must be accom-
panied by some particular aggravating quality factor or circumstance specified
in the section. Briefly, the section requires that the adultery comniitted by the
husband must have been (i) incestuous, or (ii) accompanied by bigamy, or
(ii) accompanied by “marriage with another woman”, or (iv) coupled with such

cruelty as would itself have entitled a woman to a divorce a mensa et toro, |

(v) coupled with desertion without reasonable excuse for at least two years,

Thus, the woman is placed in a much more unfavourable position than the
man, since she is required to prove, besides adultery, one or other of the addi-
tional facts enumerated above. In so far as the present provision in section 10,

ot, Paragraph 2.1., supra.


4

Indian Divorce Act, 1869, has imposed on the Christian woman these stringent
limitations in regard to adultery as a ground of divorce, it appears to be violative
of article 14 of the Constitution. Notwithstanding judicial dicta to the contrary,'
this seems to be the proper view to take, Under article 14 of the Constitution,
the State must not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal
protection of the laws within the territory of India, Section 10 violates that
mandate.

Further, section 10 would seem to violate article 15(1) of the Constitution,
under which “the Statc shall not discriminate against any citizen on ground
only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.” The Constitution

. favours special provision fer women, but not against them? Therefore, there
is an urgent need to remove the discrimination that is writ large in section 10,
Indian Divorce Act, 1869 and to introduce equal treatment of the sexes. This
was the first—and the most urgent—question to be considered, according to the
Commission, and was the first alternative put forth in the Working Paper.

Widening है ihe 2.4. The second question to be considered in regard to divorce was a
aa Christiane somewhat wider one, namely, whether the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, should,
(Second alternative) be so amended as to permit divorce amongst Christians on grounds not men-
. tioned in the present section, such as cruelty, desertion, insanity, and other
diseases and various other miscellaneous grounds available under other enact-

ments in force in India.* This constituted the second alternative put forth in the

Working Paper.

The Commission noted that it was possible to evolve a milder form of the
second alternative. One can think of introducing as a ground of divorce available
to either spouse (amongst Christians) :— —' ड़

(i) adultery;
ii) desertion for a period of two years without reasonable excuse, and
(iii) cruelty.

_ Irretrievable break- 2.5, The third alternative put forth in the Working Paper raised a still
oun of marriage much wider question, namely: whether the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, should
rd alternative). be amended more radically by introducing in that Act, as a ground of divorce
“irretrievable breakdown” of marriage (evidenced by the parties living apart for
a specified period). This would be on the lines of the- Bill now pen ding before
Parliament, whereby the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and the Special Marriage
Act, 1954 are proposed to be amended to introduce this particular ground.

This was the third alternative put forth in the Working Paper.

Comprehensive 2.6. It was also pointed out in the Working Paper that, in principle, there
Provision.” Law Re. May even be 8 case for still more extensive amendments या the matrimonial
pert ‘on. Christian Legislation applicable to Christians. If one were to embark on the task of revising
farriage © and the entire law relating to marriage and divorce amongst Christians in India, one
Divorce, could even think a comprehensive revision of Indian Christian Marriage Act,
1872 and the Indian Divorce Act, 1869—along with the introduction of neces-
sary reforms, both in the substantive rules and in the procedure. As already
mentioned,’ the Law Commission of India had forwarded to the Government
such a Report, being the Law Commission's 150 Report on the law relating to
marriage’ and divorce amongst Christians in India (1960). This Report was
followed by the 22nd Report of the Law Commission, in which the Commission
expressed its views on certain further issues which the Government of India had
referred to the Commission. These were issues relating to the Bill that had been
prepared in the Government to implement the 15th Report. The Commission’s
Reports on the subject have not been implemented. This past history of law

reform proposals on the subject was also set out in the Working Paper.

१, Dwarkabai v. Narhan, A.1R21953 Mad. 792.
2, Yusu/'v. The State, A.1.R. 1954 8.C. 321, (1954) S.C.R. 930, ; कि
‘ 8. The various grounds of divorce under Indian Matrimonial Legislation are summarised in
Appendix.
4. If a comprehensive definition of “desertion” is introduced, absence of reasonable excuse
woutd form part of the definition itself.

3, Para 1.1, supra.


5

2.7. Against the backgrouiid of the above material (which was included in Three alternatives
the Working Paper), the Commission invited opinions of the following alter-i2 the orking
native proposals. Per.

(i) Should the law relating to divorce amongst Christians in India
(section 10, Indian Divorce Act) be amended so as to remove the
element of discrimination against the wife at present apparent in the
Jaw ?

(ii) Should the law relating to divorce amongst Christians in India be
amended by widening the grounds available to both the spouses so as
to include the grounds available under the various matrimonial
statutes in force in India as they stand today ?

(iii) Should the ground of irretrievable breakdown of marriage, evidenced
by the parities living apart for a specified period (which is proposed to
be introduced in the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and the Special
Marriage Act, 1954) be made available to Christians also ?


CHAPTER 3

COMMENTS RECEIVED AND VIEWS EXPRESSED ON THE VARIOUS
ISSUES
. Introductory
Introductcry. 3.1. We have set out above the important proposition on which views were

invited in the Working Paper, We shall now summarise the views received on
the Working Paper.’ The first alternative poscd the query whether the law rela-
ting to divorce amongst Christians in India (Section*10, Indian Divorce Act,
1869), should be amended so as to remove the element of discrimination between
the scxes which is, at present manifest in the law. This was the narrowest ‘of the
alternatives formulated in the Working Paper.

The second alternative in the Working Paper raised the query, whether
the grounds of divorce available to both the spouses among: Christians should
be widened so as to include the grounds available under the various matrimonial
statutes in force in India as they stand today, The widest alternative was put
forth in the third query, which ‘solicited opinion on the question whether the
ground of irretrievable breakdown of marriage, evidenced by the ‘parties living
apart for a specified period (which is proposed to be introduced in the Hindu
Marriage Act, 1955 and the Special Marriage Act, 1954), should be made avail-
able to Christians also. .

Comments _favou- 3.2. The first alternative has been favoured by severil comments received
hing first alterna- in response to the Working Paper. It has also been strongly supported by many
e of the articles and letters in newspapers and magazines that we have had the
opportunity of perusing. For example, the Catholic Bishops’ Conference of India,
in its comment on the Working Paper, impliedly accepts the soundness of the
reasoning underlying the first alternative put forth in the Working Paper and
agrees that the discrimination between the husband and the wife as in section 10
of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869 is wrong and needs to be rectified, However,
the comment has made certain additional points which may be thus summarised.
In the first place, it has beci stated that India, being a secular State, should not
have special legislation concerning marriages of different religious communities.
The national legislation may limit itself to general issues, while areas peculiar.
to specific religions may be left to the provisions of the rules of each religion.

Secondly, the comment of the Conference suggests that since the canonical
provisions regarding and the form of marriage are accepted by the civil law
of the country, a declaration of nullity of marriage granted ~by the competent
ecclesiastical authority should also be recognised by the civil law. Thirdly, it
is stated that the Church also provides for separation of bed and board on
grounds of faith, infidelity (adultery), etc., and these provisions as in canon law,
could also be recognised by the State, Finally, the comment’ expresses an anxiety
to keep separate divorce and separation from board and bed. The last para-
graph of the comment makes the following concrete suggestion as regards the
querics made in the Working Paper of the Law Commission :-——

“In the light of the above, the answers to the three questions raised at the
end of the Warking Paper wouid all be “yes”, provided the matter refers
to separation from hed and board and not to dissolution vf the bond of
marriage with the resultant freedom to marry again.” s

Commerits  favou- 3.3. Some of the comments received orf the Working Paper favour the
ing the second second alternative ‘put forth in the Working Paper. Thus, one High Court,
alternative. definitely approving the first alternative put forth in the Working Paper, agrees
that discrimination between the sexes should be removed, That High Court

would even accept the sccond alternative, put forth in the Working Paper, but

with the rider that all the grounds of divorce available in all the matrimonial

statutes in force in India necd not be incorporated in the legislation relating to

’ Christians. “It would be sullicient to include the grounds available under the

1, Working Paper circulated on 29th November, 1982 paragraph 15. | हु हे
6


7

°
ed, Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, including mutual consent as provided
ees sg is comment does not, however, favour the third alternative (irretri-
evablé"breakdown of marriage as ground of divorce), which it regatds “as some-
what controversial and not yet tested in India.”

3.4, Certain comments received on the Working Paper favour a compre- Comments favons
hensive revision of the law—the third alternative put forth in the Questionnaire. 10% the widest
‘One High Court, for example, states that the Indian Divorce Act, 1869 needs alternative.
comprehensive amendment, “to help Christian couples 10 have resort to Courts

_ where both the spouses mutually agreed to separate and where there is irretriev-
able breakdown of the marriage”. The comment of this High Court further states
that the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, ‘‘as at present available is outmoded”. The
High Court also makes a plea for repealing section 7 of the Act (which requires
the Courts in India to follow the English practice in matters not specifically
provided for), and for abolishing the original jurisdiction of the High Courts
under the Act to try dissolution cases. The High Court further suggests: that the
need for confirmation of a decree of divorce by a full bench of the High Court
should be done away with and, further, that there is no need for a six month
period for the decree to be made absolute (which is necessary under the present
law), The comment ends with the following concrete suggestion :—

“The provisions of ‘the Act can be brought in accordance with the provi-
sions of the Special Marriage Act or the Hindu Marriage Act.”

3.5. The Government of fadia in the Legislative Department,’ while agree-Coniment of the
ing in principle with the need for amendment of the law, has, in its comment 6 overnment of
on the Working Paper, referred to the history of the past attempts at reform of '"°"*
the law on the subject, (a matter which was mentionéd in the Working Paper
of the Law Commission also). The Legislative Department has also referred to
abandonment of the Bill implementing the 15th and 22nd Reports of the Law
Commission, after the Bill was reported on by the Joint Committee of both
Houses of Parliament, The Department has also made a mention of the Starred
Question on the subject which was answered by Government in the Lok Sabha
on the 16th December, 1980. It appears from the comment that Government is
anxious that the views of the Christian community in the matter may be ascer-
tained, with special efforts. The basic approacif*of the Government seems to be
contained in the last paragraph of the comment, which we reproduce below :—

“While on first principles the answers to the three questions posed by” the
Commission in their Working Paper have to be in the aflirmative, it would
appear necessary, particularly in view of the past experience of the Govern-
ment, to make special efforts to ascertain the views of the Christian
community in the matter.” + :

3.6. Apart from the comments received on the Working Paper, we fave Articles and corres-

been able to have ५ look at articles and correspondence published in certain Pondence in news
newspapers and periodicals, which contain an expression of views on the subject, P*P**
The majority of the articles and letters reveal a deep dissatisfaction with the
present‘law, though there is a small shade of view favouring the status quo. The
remedy or reform suggested in the various aiticles and letters varies and many
of them raise a matter not raised in our Working Paper, namely, the need for
some provision in the law for facilitating the recognition, by the Civil Courts,
ofa pronouncement of nullity made by a competent authority of the Church.

Several points have been made. in the articles published on the subject in
newspapers and periodicals. By and large, the need for a revision of the law in
the light of the changing social conditions has been stressed, Further, it has
been argued that the absence of a provision for recognition, by the civil courts,
of a pronouncement of nullity granted by the Church leads to a serious anomaly,
inasmuch as (under the present position), a person stays married for the pur-
poses of the law of the land, while the Church has already declared his marriage
to be void. It has also been stated that Portuguese law, as in force in Goa,
recognises such pronouncements of nullity. made by the Church authotities.
(Reference has been made in this connection to a provision made by the Portu-
guese law in 1911 in regard to Goa).

1 Legislative Department F. 11 (2) 82 L. II, dated 12 January, 1983,


8

a . ० +6 ee oe . . “Si
Summary of view 3.7, It is unnecessary to réfer in detail to each and every point ma th le
in articles, articles ai di i id th iodica i

rticles and correspondence in newspapers and the periodicals. However, it Id
be useful to mention the important points. In broad terms, the salient points
made are as under :—

G.R. Rajagopaul, Necessity for changes in the law concerning
“Personal Law Integration” Christians pointed out, in the
(15 September, 1982) Light of the Supreme Court: judgment
Indian Express. (Mutual consent as a ground of divorce}.?
Kenneth A. Phillips, . Archaic nature of the Indian Divorce Act
“Christian victims of archaic pointed out. Reference made to certain
law” judgments pointing to the need.for reform.
(21 September. 1982) Necessity for removing discrimination
Times of India. against women highlighted. Desirability of

expanding the grounds of divorce and
“a total reconstruction of the system”
stressed.

Reference is also made to the law in Goa which, in effect, it is stated
recognises a pronouncement of nullity by the Church” Mention is further
made of a Madras ruling’ which points out the enomaly in the Indian
Divorce Act, in not recognising absence of the other spouse for seven years
as a ground for dissolution of marriage. The article ends with a quotation
of the following passage from an Encyclical of the Pope :

“Since women are becoming ever more conscious of-their human
dignity, they will not tolerate being treated as mere material instru-
ments, but demand rights as befitting a human person, both in domestic
and public life.”

George Menezes. letter published Need for grant of divorce on the ground of
in (1 October. 1982) Times of desertion for a continued period stressed.
India. Discrimination between the sexes under the
present law also pointed out. Absence
of geographical uniformity in the law also
emphasised, since Christians of Goa,’ Daman
and Diu have a. much more progressive
law, than Christians in the rest of India.

Father Cruz D’Soura. Sawant- The State must recognise annulments and

wadi. letter published in (11 dissolutions granted by the Church, as in

October 1982) Indian Express. Goa under the Portuguese law enacted in
1911.

Doris D'Souza. Bombay, letter The Indian Divorce Act is discriminatory

published in (16 October 1982) and archaic. Even though the woman

Times of India. obtains an annulment from the Church.

she has to go through the “long-suffering,

-oppressive, endless and impractical procedure

- of the court to obtain a divorce which in

any case is long time consuming. I wish

पर -our Parliamentarians would 9355 suitable

- legislation immediately to give much needed

relief to innocent, harassed victims of
the Indian Divorce Act, 1869."

Winston F. Saldanha Bombay, The status in society of a couple whose
letter published in (23 October marriage has been annulled by the Church -
1982) Times of India. is uncertain. “The remedy lies in codifying
the law and making it uniform. — Progres-
sive laws like the Hindu Marriage Act,
1955 and the special Marriage Act, 1954
should be the basis. _Irretrievable_break-
down of marriage and annulment by ‘the

“1, Cf. Chapter 5, infra.
2, On this point, see further paragraph 4.8 infra.

3, George Cornelius v. Elizabeth Depti Samadanam, A.ILR, 1970 Mad 240 (Palaniswam y,J.)
referred to in Reynold Rajmani y. Union of India A.L.R. 1982, $.C. 1251 (Sept.)


9°

Church should also be further grounds for
divorce/annulment by the courts of law.
It is unfortunate that the Government has
not reintroduced in Parliament the Chris-
tian -Marriage and Matrimonial Causes
Bill which had been introduced in 1962
but which lapsed.”

Ami Ashanti, Bombay, letter The writer draws attention to the need to
published in (4 October 1982) provide relief to couples who suffer from
The Examiner. mental cruelty. She refers to the battered
spouses of alcoholics who eke out their
existence and te the: husbands of “nym-
phomaniac and psychoaberrated’? wives.
She also refers to Her project experience
. in the Institute of Social Sciences (Bombay)
where she had met several Catholic women
who were living sub-humanly “only because
नि of the indissolubility of the marriage bond
cee eee eee ee eee tees * “tf Catholic
priests can scek and obtain Laicisation.. ..
why cannot the Catholic Laity.....seek and
obt: if not divorce, annulment, especially
when an be proved that the marriage
has irretrievably broken down १7

Teresa Albuqucrque, Bombay, (i) A church annulment of. marriage

letter in (11 December, 1982) should be recognised in law.

The Examiner. . (ii). The present law is an affront to
women, as’ it makes a distinction
between the sexes.

F.M. Pinto, Bombay, letter in The time has come fora reoriented thinking
(18 December, 1982) The Exami- on .the subject of divorce for Christians.
net, : .

Winson F. Saldana, letter in (24 The लाल mentions a large number of
December, 1982) The Herald tragic cases of Catholic couples all over the
and in (January, 1983) Home Life country whose marriages are void on one
and (January, 1983) The Exami- or more of the grounds specified in the
ner. article of Mr. Kenneth Phillips and who
are unable to obtain speedy annulment of
their marriage. This is just because the
number of clergymen learned in moral
. theology and in canon law to constitute
ecclesiastical tribunal to adjudicate upon
these cases and to grant relief is insufficient,
The cure, it is stated, lies is having zonal

interdiocesan tribunals.

Peter Figuerido, Calcutta, letter’ Commenting on the article of Mr. Kenneth

in (24 December, 1982) The Phillips. Mr. Figuerido states that the

Herald. . ns of the Indian Divorce Act as
to nuiiity are adequate. According to the
comment, the procedure in civil courts is
superior to that in Church tribunals. The
Divorce Act safeguards against collusion,
while in Church tribunals, there is secrecy
(of proceedings).

“There is no reason why a genuine case from the Church tribunals
should not, on the same evidence established before, be accepted by Civil
Courts, To accept blindly tht decision of a secret tribunal does not appeal
to the concept of equality before law. The Indian Divorce Act remains as
close to traditional Roman Catholic ethics as is possible in a. society where
libertinage is the order of the day. It is sad to see it attacked, in the name
of progress, in a Roman’ Catholic journal.”


10

News item in (31 December 1982) A resolution demanding that the provision
The Examiner. for divorce should be extended to the
Christian Marriage Act was passed on 30

“ December 1982 at Cochin at the three day

Biennial National Conference of. Women

Lawyers.

F.M. Pinto, Bombay, letter in (i) Annulment of a marriage by the

(January 1983) Home Life. Church should be recognised.

(i) It is unfortunate that the Christian
Marriage and Matrimonial Causes
Bill of 1962 -proved abortive.

\

Comment under “Current To- (7) Under the Indian Divorce Act, 1869,
pics’” in (6 January, 1983) Times divorce is available under very limited
of India. conditions, which virtually makes the

provision infructuous. The wife

cannot sue for divorce on grounds of
impotency, insanity or cruelty.

(ii) The archaic and cruel nature of the
law is evidence from the. fact that. it
does not accept the annulment order
passed by the Church. The Portu-
guese‘law in Goa is much more progres-

- sive and dissolves marriages a__ulled
by the Church.

(iii) The Act of 1869 needs to be changed.
also because it does not treat men
and women as equals. “In order to
update it, the legislators can draw
upon the provisions of the Hindu
Marriage Act and the Special Marriage
Act and take into account a wide
range of issues to make it easier for
men and women to separate when
marriages have broken down.”

Dr. L. De Souza, Bombay, letter The archaic law applicable to Christians
in (15 January, 1983) The Exami- needs revision. “‘In case of other religions,
ner. particularly the Hindus, there have been
progressive changes as seen in the Hindu
Marriage Act, 1955, where amendments
have been made. for divorce whenever
, there are cases’ of irretrievable break down
of the marriage among many other grounds,
neluding mutual consent. [t is not only
deplorable but very sad, to see Christian
couples whose marriages have fallen apart,
livitg a life of misery and undergoing all
. the hardships that prevent them from getting

married again”.

M.C. Abraham, ‘‘Dissolution of According to this article, there is no need
Christian Marriage” (Feb. 1983) to add any ground of divorce. “Union
Cr. LJ. Journal 2,4. for life is the method of Christian marriage
and not separation As we have already
stated’, the majority of views favours at
. least the introduction of equality between the _
sexes, in regard to divorce amongst Chris-
tians.

a, Paragraph 2.2, supra.


CHAPTER 4
THE QUESTION OF NULLITY

4.1. It is now necessary to consider in some detail the point regarding Pronouncement

nullity of marriage, raised in many of the articles and letters that have appeared of nullity made
on the लि ject.’ The point can be thus elaborated. Since a marriage performed PY, Church author
by the Church authorities according to sacred rites is recognised by the Jaw,
(it is stated that) it is anomalous that a pronduncement of nullity of marriage
made by a Church authority according to canon law should not be recognised
by the law, Although no reference to the relevant statutory provisions is made
in the articles and letters which have raised the question of recognition of such
a pronouncement, it appears that the allusion here is to section 5 of the Indian
Christian Marriage Act, 1872 which’ deals with the persons by whom a marriage
for the purposes of the Act, may be solemnised in India.

4.2. Sectlon 5, Indian Christian Marriage’ Act, 1872 reads as under :— Section 5— Indian

Christian Marriage
5. “Persons by whom marriage may be solemnized :— हि Act 1872.

Marriages may be solemnissd in India :--

(1) by. any -person who has received episcopal ordination, provided
that the marriage be solemnized according to the rules, rites,
ceremonies and customs of the Church of which he is a Minister;

(2) by any clergyman of the Church of Scotland, provided. that such
marriage be solemnized according to the rules, rites, ceremonies
and customs of the Church of Scotland;

(3) by any Minister of Religion licensed under this Act to solemnize
matriage;

(4) by, or in the presence of, a Marriage Registrar appointed under
this Act;

(5) by .any pefgon licensed under this Act to grant certificates of
marriage between Indian Christians.

Clauses (1) and (2) of the section are of particular relevance to the point
under discussion. . :

4.3. We have very carefully examined the suggestion for recognising a Rules of rainy
Church pronouncement of nullity and in this context have also had a look at of marziage.
the rules of canon law pertaining to “impediments” to marriage, as applicable
to Roman Catholics, These rules are fairly elaborate: they contain a lengthy set
of provisions that seem 10 have developed across the centuries, so as to
assume their present sophisticated shape. We da not consider it necessary to
quote or summarise them here.’ But having devoted careful thought to the
matter, we heve come to the conclusion that it would not be quite appropriate to
insert in the law a sweeping provision for the recognition of a pronouncement
of nullity made by a Church authority. We are afraid that this would have the
effect of introducing considerable confusion in the law and its administration.

Some of the grounds of nullity of marriage as recognised in canon law may over
lap the grounds of nullity expressly permittes! or impliedly recognised by section
19 of-the Indian Divorce Act, a section which we shall presently discuss in detail.
It is possible that in a particular case, the Church authority, while adjudicating
on the facts alleged as constituting a particular ground of nullity might have
taken one view of the matter, while the civil court, when moved by appropriate
proceedings, might take a different view on the same facts, .

3, Chapter 3, supra

2, These have been extracted in Appendix 2. The source from which they have been extracted
may not be uptodate, but we understand that there"have not been susbstantial changes. .

u


12

Anomaly बिक 4.4. The co-existence of two parallel adjudicating bodies on the same sub-
son of avo parallel ject could thus create scrious problems for all concerned. The view has been
expressed in one article that the present position (non-recognition of a pronounce-

authorities.
ment of nullity made by a Church authority) causes hardship to the parties.’ But
the suggested solution would hardly be an improvement. If anything, it would
make matters worse.

Difference between 4.5. Tho argument with which we are at the moment dealing seems to be

16777 roe based on section 5 of the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 18722 As already
nition of nullity. S‘ated, that section recognises marriages solemnised according to certain Church

rules and the argument seems to be that since a Church marriage is recognised
by law, a church pronouncement of nullity should also be recognised by law.
However, in this context, we would like to point that there is a difference between
the civil court recognising a marriage performed according to religious rites and
the civil court recognising a pronouncement of nullity made by a Church
authority. No doubt the relationship of marriage may originate in a particular
religious ceremony; but if, during the subsisterice (or alleged subsistence) of the
relationship, a question arises whether such a status has been created, there
will always be available, in conformity with the law of evidence, some other
factual material in proof or disproof of the alleged marriage.* The most impor-
tant species of evidence would be the factum of cohabitatiqn of the parties and
the acceptance of their spousal status in society. The point to make is that the
courts Would not, in a factual investigation about the existence of marital status,
be confined to evidence of the performance of religious ceremonies only.

This is the position regarding proof of marriage. The position would be
different where the question relates to the existence or effect of a pronouncement
of nullity granted by an authority outside the judicial hierarchy. If, in a court
of law. the question. arises whether such a pronouncement has, in fact, been
made or (if made) has been validly made, it is only that pronouncement which
would form the b of inquiry before the court. For a court of law, it would
not always be ९159 to determine these questions in a satisfactory manner. This
is a difficulty which would be additional to the other anomalics that are likely
to arise if two parallel authorities adjudicating upon the same dispute ere to be
recognised in law. These are anomalies to which we have already referred.‘

This is our general approach on the point at issue and it follows that con-
sistently with this approach, it would not be logical to accept the suggestion that
pronouncements of nullity made by eccelesiastical authorities should be recogni-
sed by civil courts.

Be substantia} 4.6, Even so, we have taken the opportunity of looking carefully at the

ta मी PFS concrete points made in this context. We have, for this purpose, examined at
length the articles published on the subject.’ We find that they do not (with one
exception to be presently noticed),° precisely pinpoint any specific lacuna (in the
Indian Divorce Act) linked up with a particular ground of rfullity recognised
jn canon law. On 4 preliminary study of the relevant provisions of canon law,’
we are not satisfied that any urgent amendment of the Indian Divorce Act is.
needed on the point at issue. Section 19 of the Act, which we quote below, 1
should cover a pretty large number of cases, where a serious defect in the
marriage may be-regarded as justifying a decree of nullity. If on a deeper exa-
mination of the law, some situations cause grave hardship are found to be left
uncovered by the section, the matter could still be considered when a comprehen-
sive revision of the Divorce Act is undertaken. But as already stated above, no
urgent reform appears to be needed on the point under discussion.

3, Paragraph 4.6, infra.

2, Paragraph 4.2, supra.

3. CF, Section 50, Indian Evidence Act, 1872 and sections 6-9 and 11 of that Act in particular,
4, See para 4.4., supra.

5, Chapter 3, supra.

*, Paragraph 4.8, infra..

+, Cf. paragraph 4.3. supra.


13

4.7 Let us quote section 19 of the Indian Divorce Act 1869, which reads Sectivn 19 Divorce
us under ::

“19. Grounds of decree—Such decree' may be made on any of tie foilow-
ing grounds :

(1) that the respondent was impotent at the time of the marriage
and at the time of the institution of the suit;

(2) that the parties are within the prohibited degrees of consanguinity
(whether natural or legal) or aflinity;

(3) that either party was a lunatic 06 idiot at the time of the marriage;

(4) that the former husband or wife or cither party was living at
the time of the marriage; and the marriage with such former
husband or wife was then in force.”

Nothing in this section shall affect the jurisdiction of the High Court to
make decrees of nullity of marriage on the ground that the consent of cither
party was obtained by force or fraud. पु

We proceed to examine if the section leaves out any important ground of
nultity that might have been canvassed in the view pressed on thy subject,

4.8. In this connection, we may again state that concrete points as to the Annulment in
uc.vets, if any, in the existing legal approach have been made in only one article cancn law-..concn te
on the subject. This is an article by Mr. Kenneth A. Phillips, Pleading for the Points considered
recognition by Civil Courts of a pronouncement of nullity made by the Church,
he states that the conditions laid down by the canon law of the Catholic
Church for an annulment of the marriage, among other grounds, are :—

(1): The inability to assume and perform the essential ‘marital obligations
and duties,

(2) The wilful deception of the other party with regard to a quality which,
by its owa nature, seriously perturbs conjugal life and this deception
is done in order to obtain the other's consent.

(3) Lack of will or intention to get married.

Concentrating on these three circumstances, we have devoted some thought
to the question whether, and if so, how far the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, as it
stands at present, provides for these circumstance: as constituting a ground for
mutrimoniat relief amongst Christians.

4.9. Taking up, one by one, the concrete tuations referred to by Mr. C tisen wi
Phillips, we note that the first situation mentioned above (inability of a spouse. Divorce Act with
te assume, etc. essential marital duties) is sub tantially covered by section
19 (1) of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869. Accordii x to that section, importency
of the respondent at the time of marriage and at th~ time of the institu ion of the
suit empowers the civil court tomake a decree of nullity of marriage.

4.10. The second situation mentioned abov2 (wilful deception), is «dso,
ti?) Wilfu' decep-

in substance, covered by the last paragraph of sec’'on 19 of the Indian Divorce
Act. That part of the section preserves the jurisdicti-1 of the High Court to make
decrees of nullity of marriage on the ground tha: the congent of cither party
was obtained by force or fraud. No doubt, the juris ‘iction to grant such a decree
{on this particular ground) is confined to the Hig’: Court. The r
seems to be that the High Courts in India have | therited their ju
the subject from the Supreme Courts, which, in their own turn, had inherited
the power to make a decree of nullity (on the gre ind of duress or fraud) frem

1, Decree of nullity.
3, Paragraph 4.7, supra.

~. Paragraph 4.8. supra,
84-L/B(D)1} 7MolLJ&CA—2


14

the ecclesiastical courts.! if the present position causes serious hardship, by
reason of the jurisdiction being so confined the point can, no doubt, be looked
into,’ at the time when the entire Divorce Act is revised. But what needs to be
pointed out is that the law applicable to Christians, even now,. does provide
some remedy to deal with citcumstances of fraud or duress, in the field of
matrimonial relief. Thus, the present law cannot be regarded as substantially
inadequate.

Nox can it be said that courts have not captured the spirit of the principles
On which the jurisdiction in question may ¥p exercised, From a study of reported
decisions, it appears that, on the whole, courts, when elaborating the concept of
fraud, have laid stress on the fact that the essence of a valid marriage is free
consent both in regard to the person with whom the marriage is undergone* and
in regard to the ceremony of marriage.‘ By and large, serious cases of fraud seem
to have been takeu care of by the present law.

iii) Lack of will 4.11. This leaves the third ground for nullity recognised in canon law (as
10 get married. referred to by Mr. Phillips)* namely lack of will or intention to get married,
To some extent this situation would, even now, be covered by the Indian Divorce
Act, if the other party has been guilty of fraud (section 19, last paragraph,
Indian Divorce Act). The case, of course, is not covered where the party
against whom relief is sought is unaware of the state of mind of the claimant
(ie. of the claimant’s lack of the will to get married). This would be a case of
unilateral minconception on the part of one spouse, not induced by other spouse.
But for that, all serious defects of the will seem to have been provided for in the
present law.

Lack of will to 4.12. Let us claborate the point made above, by dealing with the various
है जिया छठ factors that bring out lack of volition, Lack of will to get married may

ir lysed. हर नि
son analy generally arise as a result of one of the following factors :— :
(i) Insanity? ड़ .
(ii) misconception® induced by fraud of the opposite party;
(iii) duress?
(iv) misconception” not induced by fraud of the opposite party.
The first three factors are, in substance, taken care of by the present law
= applicable to Christians, as contained in the section 19(1), Indian Divorce Act."
The fourth situation, i.e., the situation where a misconception not fnduced by
the opposite party is responsible for a “marriage” undergone without the inten-
tion to get married, may not fall within four corners of the provisions of the
Indian Divorce Act, 1869. But such cases, we hope, will not be many, and: may
not, therefore, call for any urgent reform to be taken up in isolation from a
comprehensive review of the Act.
Other provisions 4.13. It may also be mentioned in this context that apart from section

of law providing 19 of the Indian Divorce Act, relief can be claimed on general principles of
for. declaration °F Jaw also, for getting a declaration of nullity of magiage, on appropriate grounds.
nuit. Thus, with reference to section 4 of the Divorce Act, it was held in a Delhi

3. T. Saroja David ९. Christie Francieg, ALR, 1965 A.P,

3, Point for further consideration (jurisdiction of High Courts).

8, Ayugut v. Ayugut, ALR. 1940 Cal. 75. (Decison under Specific Relief Act, 1877).
4

.. Mehta v. Mehta (1945) 2 All E.R. 690, (This is an English case, but the position will be the
same in India.)

Paragraph 4,8, supra.
Paragraph 4.19, supra.

See section 19(3) Indian Divorce Act, 1869.

See section 19, last paragraph, Indian Divorce Act, 1869.
. See section 19, last paragraph, Indian Divorce, Act, 1869,
. Not covered by the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, at present,
. Para 4.7. supra.

18, Paragraph 4.7, supra.

u


15

case! that a suit seeking a declaration of nullity on the ground of non-observance
of essential ceremonies stiould be diled in the ordinary court of original civil
jurisdiction, and not in the High Court. This indirectly implies that ‘relief on
the above ground could be claimed under the general rules of law. _

Again, it has been held that so far as a suit for declaring a marriage
null and void is based on the ground that the petitioner was an idiot at the
time of his margiage and that the petitioner’s consent was obtained by fraud,
the High Court had jurisdiction to entertain the suit. But a suit based on the
ground of non-observance of essential ceremonies must be filed in an ordinary

“civil court.” पु

Questions of validity of marriage have also been raised with reference to
personal law. Thus, it has been held by the Calcutta High Court that personal
jaw of a Roman Catholic woman forbids her to.enter into a marriage with a jew.
The marriage ceremony so undergone does not affect a valid marriage.’ A‘suit
can be filed, to declare the marriage to be a nullity, under section’ 42, Specific
Relief Act, 1877, (now section 34, Specific Relief Act, 1963):

4.14. In this connection reference may be made’ to section 34, Specific ६2५५, Specific
Relief Act, relating to declaratory relief to be granted by court. It reads as et # १87२1 7
under :— : og

“32: Any person entitled to any legal character, or to any property,

+ may institute a suit against any person denying, or interested to deny, his
title to such character or right, and the-court may in its discretion make
therein a declaration that he is so entitled, and the plaintiff need not in
such suit.ask for any further relief ; 1

Provided that no court shall make any such declaration where the
plaintiff, being able. to seek further relief than a-mere declaration of title,
omits to do so. .

Explanation : A trustee of proj operty is a person interested to deny a title.
t adverse to the title of some one who is not in existence, and
for whom, -éf in existence, he would be a trustee.”

4.15. Having regard to the present state of the statutory provisions relating 1 . .
to a declaration of nullity of marriage and in the light of the of considerations Nove टन जा
to which we have made a reference in the first few paragraphs of this Chapter, एंधण्ड ceactiont .
we do not consider it necessary to make any recommendation for the recognition, Potty, 7
in civil courts, of pronouncements of nullity made, by ecclesiastical authorities. .

1, Jordon Dienandoh v. Swaranjit Singh Chopra, A.LR. 1882 N.O.C. 313 (Delhi) (December
Issue) Matrimonial case No. 1 of 1980 decided in 19 Feb. 1982)

3, Mt. Title v. Alfred Robert Jones, AR. 1934 273.

3, A.LR. 1923 Pat201 referred.

3, Jude पर. Jude, A.I.R. 1949 Cal. 563.

5, Paragraph 4.14, infra.

*, Section 34,

a


Mutual consent
observations गा
Supreme Court
judgment.

No amendment
recommended,

CHAPTER 5
MUTUAL CONSENT

5.1. We now proceed to the question whether divorce should be allowed
on mutual consent, The question how far mutual Consent is a ground of divorce
under the Indian Divorce Act, 1869 came up recently for consideration before
the Supreme Court.’ It was held that the Court cannot add a new ground of
divorce to those mentioned in section 10 of the Act and resort could not be
had to section 7 of the Act for expanding the grounds of divorce on the lines
of the grounds recognised in England. The judges pointed out that it was for
Parliament to consider whether -a provision for divorce by mutual consent
should be included in the Act. The Court could not extend or enlarge legislative
policy by adding to the statute a provision which was never enacted. One of
the judges, Mr. Justice Chinnappa*Reddy, in his concurring judgment, after
stressing the need for equality between the sexes and: social Justice, made the
following observations as to reform of the law on the subject.

“Yes, 1 agree with Miss Lily Thomas (Counsel for appellants) that
divorce by mutual consent should be available to every married couple,
whatever religion thty may profess and however they were married. Let
no 1 compel the union of man and woman who have agreed on separation. *
If they desire to be two, why should the one insist that they be one ?”

However, these observations are suffixed by a qualification expressed as
under :— .

“But 4 have a qualification, The woman must be protected. Our
society still looks askance at a divorced woman. A woman divorcee is
yet a suspect. Her-chances of survival are diminished by the divorce so,
the law which grants the decree for divorce must secure for her some
measure of economic independence. It. should be so whatever be the ground
for divorce, whether it is mutual consent, irretrievable break-down of the
marriage, or even the fault of the woman herself, Every divorce solves a
problem, arid creates another. Both problems need to be solved, no matter
who is responsible for the breakdown of the marriage. If the divorce law
is to be a rea) success, it should make provision for the economic independ-
ence of the female spouse. After all, Indian society today is so constituted
that a woman is a generally helpless and her position becomes worse if
she is divorced. It is necessary that the law should protect her interest
even if she be an-erring spouse, lest she becomes destitute and a dead
loss to society.”

5.2. We have taken note of this judgment, and of the observations there-
from quoted above. The question whether mutual consent should be introduced
as a ground of divorce amongst Christians, is one which may require considera-
tion at the appropriate time. We do not express any opinion on the subject in
the present Report. It could be considered when the entire Indian Divorce Act
is revised.” '

_ } Raynold Rajamani v. Union of India, 8.1२. 1982 8,0, 1261, 41265 (September).

+ Point for further consideration when the Divorce Act is revised, हा

Ww



. CHAPTER 6
RECOMMENDATION

6.1 On a careful consideration of the views expressed on the subject, we Recommendation
have come to the conclusion that there is urgent need for amending section 10 72079 to Sec-
of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869. so as to remove the element of discrimination tion 1° Acne
from which that section definitely suffers. This does not, of course, mean that the , पु
other and more redical alternatives that we have sct out in an earlier Chapter* of
this Report are totally ruled out. On the.merits, there is much to be said for somé
of the other alernatives, However, having regard to the past history* of proposals
for reform on the subject. we shall for the present. content ourselves with the

above recommendatien.

6.2 The reason why we attach the highest importance to amending section First and second
1) as above may be stated. We regard such an amendment as a constitutional fired” °O™

imperative’.

In our view, if the section is to stand the test of the constitutional mandate
of equality before the Jaw and equal protection of the laws, in the context of
avoiding discrimination between the sexes, then the amendment is necessary. If
Parliament does not remove the discrimination, the Courts, in exercise of their
jurisdiction to remedy violations of fundamental rights, are bound, some day,
to declare the section as void. Once this happens, there will be created a hiatus
in the law, and a tidying up of the statutory provisions will then become even
more urgent than at present. In this sense, there is a very strong case for amending
section: 10, as above, for constitutional reasons. Of course, even apart from the
constitutional mandate of equality such an amendment would be eminently
sound on the-merits.

6.3 Our recommendation as put forth above must, thereture, be given priorities.
priority. The next step would be consideration of the second® alternative men-
tioned above, namely, introduction of certain new grounds of divorce, The third’
alternative (irretrievable breakdown of marriage) need not be mixed up with
the matters that require more urgent attention. It is likely to detract from the |
success of the attempt fo reform the law, with the result that even the improve--
ments most urgently needed may get defeated in the process.

As to the merits of the fourth alternative,’ we think that there may be a
strong case for a comprehensive reform of the law and for consolidating the two
enactments on the subject, as tecommended in the earlier Reports of the Law
Commission.” However, we are not sure if any such legislative proposal will have
a prospect of being passed within a reasonably short period. - .

6.4 For this reason, the amendment that we are recommending to introduce Hope as to tuture
equality between the sexes must be ‘piven priority. The other reforms adverted to 7
in this Report under the second and fourth alternatives’ should also receive serious
consideration in due course. We very earnestly hope that on the forwarding of this

1, Consequential changes may be required in other provisons of the Act.
2; Chapter 2, supra. ‘
3, Chapter 1, supra.
4, Paragraph 2.3, supra.
5, Paragraph 2.4, supra.
5, Paragraph 2.5, supra.
3, The fourth alternative—paragraph 2.6, supra.
_ 8. Chapter 1, supra. है - हे

*, Chapter 2, supra
: Ww


18

Report, Government will find it convenient to implement the very modest recom-
mendation made in this Report without delay. We also expect that the stage wilt

* then be set for contemplating the other reforms of. the law on the subject which
we have indicated. है ~

Concrete recom. 6.5 Our concrete recommendation, then, is that it is most urgently nece-
mendation. ssary that section 10 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869 be revised to remove the
element of discrimination. Adultery is a ground of divorse should be made avail-
, : able to the Christian wife also (without the need to prove any other aggravating
. or concomitant circumstances, as at present), Opportunity should also be taken,
to make available to the husband as a ground of divorce of conversion followed” |
by second marriage (a ground which is at.present available only to the wife).

Reéommendation 6.6 In the light of the above discussion, we recémmend that section 10 of the
for amendments Indian Divorce Act, 1869 should be revised as under :—
Indian Divorce Act,

SECTION 10, INDIAN DIVORCE ACT, 1869 (REVISED)

10, When husband may petition for divorce—Any husband may present a
petition to the District Court or to the High Court, praying that his marriage may
‘be dissolved on the ground that his wife has, since the solemnization thereof—

(a) exchanged her profession of Christianity for the profession of some
other religion and gone through a form of marriage with another man,

or , है हि +

(b) been guilty of adultery. पर नि

When wife may petition for divorce—Any wife may present a petition to
the District Court or to the High Court, praying that her marriage may be dissolv-

ed, on the ground, that her husband has, since the solenmizatian thereof-—
(a) exchanged his profession of Christianity for the profession of some other

, religion and gone through a form of marriage with another woman, Or

. है (0) been guilty of adultery .... or rape, sodomy or bestiality.”

Recommendation 5 6.7 Consequential changes may be necessary in the other provisions of the
288 to other provi- Act which may contain a reference to the grounds of divorce. हु
sions of the Indian
Divoroo Act, (K. K. MATHEW)
Chairman
(NASIRULLAH BEG)
Member

(J. P. CHATURVEDI)
Member
(०. M. BAKSHI)
Part-time Member
(CH. RAMAKRISHNA RAO)
Member-Secretary,

Dated : 17th May, 1983.


APPENDIX 1
GROUNDS OF RELIEF IN INDIAN MATRIMONIAL LAW

Taken alphabetically, the grounds for..divorce or other matrimonial relief
(including nullity) in Indian matrimonial statutes can be thus enumerated arrang-
ing them alphabetically— पु

(a) Adultery.
(b) Bigamy.
(c) Conversion to another religion

(d) Cruelty! [under section 22, Indian Divorce Act, cruelty is a ground only
for judicial separation].

(e) Desertion for a specified period?

(£) Duress (ground of nullity). .

(8) Fornication.’

(h) Fraud (ground for nullity or divorce)—Position in various Acts differs
(j) Imprisonment.*

(k) Insanity.
{1) Leprosy aot
[Mental abnormality—see “Insanity”]
(m) Non-consummation of marriage.’

(n) Non. resumption of cohabitation after decree for restitution or judicial
separation.

(०
©

Non-resumption of cohabitation after decree for maintenance.’

Pregnancy. (Pre-marital pregnancy of the wife.by a person other than
the husband—ground for nullity).

(q) Prostitution—Compelling the wife into.”
(r) Rape, sedomy or bestiality.”
(s) Renunciation of the world.”
(t) Unnatural offence.”
(u) Venereal disease.
(Some ___ (8078 of these grounds appear in the Indian Divorce Act these grounds appear in the Indian Divorce Act also)

section 1361) (1a), H.M.A. (“treated with cruelty”).
Cf. section 13(1) (1b), H.M.A. (desertion for not less than two years).

3. Cf, section 32(d), P:M.D.A. .

4, Of. section 326), P.M:D.A. (Imprisonment for 7 years).

5. Cf. section 13(1) (iii), H.M.A. and section 32(b), P.M.D.A.

*, Cf. section 13(a) (iv), H.M.A.

7, Of. section 32(a), P.M.D.A.

*, Cf. section 13(1A), H.MLA.

3, Cf. section 13(2) (ii), H.M.A.
30, Cf. section 32(०) P(M.D.A.
मे, Cf, section 32(2) (ii), H.M.A.
32, Cf. section 13 (1) (vi) HMA.
44, Cf. section 32(d), P.M.D.A.
44, C. section 13(1) (२ H.M.A.

LY

1p


‘

APPENDIX 2
EXTRACTS RELATING TO CANON LAW!

* Classification of Impediments. Impediments are :

1.
2.

8.

of divine law or of ecclesiastical lew, according to their origin;

Impediment (merely prohibitive) or diriment (invalidating), according
to their effect (C. 1036);

.” Absolute or relative, according as they affect the person regardless of,

or only in relation to certain other persons;

Public or occult, aéedrding as they can or cannot be, proved in the exter-
nal forum (C.1037):

Permanent ot temporary, according to their duration;
Certain or doubtful;

Dispensable or non-dispensable, according as they ‘can or cannot be re-
moved by dispensation;

Major or minor, according to their grade (C. 1042).

Number of Impediments के

1. There are two or three impedient impediments, according as legal rela-
tionship is counted or not, ‘depending on the law of the state. They are : simple

vow (C. 1058); mixed religion (C. 1060 sq.); legal relationship

‘ough adop-

tion, if according to the civil law it forbids marriage: (C. 1059).

2. There are twelve or thirteen- diriment impediments; want of age
(C. 1067) ; impotence (C. 1068) ; existing bond of. previous marriage (C. 1069) ;
disparity of cult (C. 1070); sacred orders (C. 1072); solemn religious vow (C.
1073) ; abduction (C. 1074) ; Crime (C. 1075): Consanguinity (C. 1076) ;
affinity (0. 1077); public property (C. 1078); spiritual relationship (९, 1079);
and legal relationship through adoption if according to the law of the state, It
invalidates marriage (C. 1080); .

Canon 1067

1, A man before completing his sixteenth year, and a women before comp-
leting her fourteenth, cannot contract a valid marriage.

2. Although a marriage contracted after the aforesaid age is valid yet pastors
of souls should try to deter young people from marrying beh fore'the age at which
according to the received customs of the country marriage is usually contracted?

* Canon 1068

1. Impotence, antecedent and perpetual, whether ‘on the part of the man
or the woman, whether known to 1 fe other party or not, whether absolute or
relative, invalidates marriage by the law of nature itself. -

2. If the impediment of impotence is doubtful either- in law or in fact,
the marriage is not to be hindered. न

3. Sterility neither invalidates marriage nor renders it illicit.

4, प्‌, Lincoln Bouscaren and 5.3. Adam C. Bilis, 8.0. Canon Law—A text and Commentary,
19497°426-427. (Bruce Publishing Co. Milwavkee). 7

3, Canon 1034 requires the pastor to dissuade minor from marrying without knowledge or

against reasonable wishes of parents.

2» -


21

Canon 1069

1, One who is bound by the bond of a prior marriage even though it was
not consummated, invalidity attempts marriage without prejudice, however, to the
privilege of the faith. हि

2. Even though the former marriage be invalid or. dissolved for any reason.
it is not, therefore, allowed tO contract another until the nullity or dissolution of
the former shall have been established according to law and with certainty.

Canon 1070

1. A marriage contracted by a non-baptized person with a person who was
baptized in the Catholic Church or who has been converted to it from heresy or
schism, is null

2. If a party at the time of marriage was commonly regarded as baptized.
or if his or her baptism was doubtful, the marriage must be regarded as valid
fecording to canon 1014, until it is certainly established that one ofthe parties _
was baptized and that the other was not.

Canon 1071

The prescriptions laid down in Canons 1060—1064 regarding mixed
marriages apply to marriages against which the impediment of disparity of cult
OXIStS.

Canon 1072

Clerics who are in sacred orders attempt marriage invalidly.
Canon 1073

Likewise, marriage is invalidly attempted by religious persons who have pro-
nounced eitlier solemn vows or vows which by special provision of the Holy See
are endowed with the power of invalidating marriage.

Canon 1074

1. Between the abductor and thé woman who has been abducted with a view
to marriage, there can be no marriage as long as she remains in his power.

2. If the woman, upon being separated from the abductor and placed in a
safe and free place, consents to have him for her husband, the impediment ceases.

3. As regards the nullity of marriage, the violent detention of a woman is
regarded as equivalent to abduction, that is, when a man, with a view to marriage,
violently detains a woman in the place where she is staying or to which she has
freely come. हु

Canon 1075 ।

The following person cannot validity contract marriage 3

"4. Persons who, during the existence of the same lawful marriage, have con-
summated adultery together have mutually promised each other to
marry, or have attempted marriage even by a mere civil act;

2. Those who, likewise during the existence of the same lawful marriage,
have consummated adultery together, and one of whom has killed the
lawful pouse;

a
3. Those, who, even without committing adultery have by mutual coope-
ration, phyical or moral, killed the lawful spouse.

Canon 1076

1. In the direct line of consanguinity marriage is invalid between all the
ancestors and descendants, legitimate or natural.


2. In the collateral line, it is invalid up to the third degree inclusive, but with
the understanding that the-matrimonial impediment is multiplied only as often
as the common ancestor is multiplied. .

3. Marriage must never be allowed if there exists any doubt that the parties
may be related by consanguinity in any degree of the direct line or in-the first
degree of the collateral line.

Canon 1077 . woe
1, Affinity in the direct line in any degree invalidates marriage; in the col-
lateral line it invalidates it up to the second degree inclusive,
2. 116 impediment of affinity is multiplied :

1. As often as the impediment of consanguinity from Which it arises is
multiplied; . हु

When marriage is successively repeated with the blood relative of a

decreased spouse. oo

v

Canon 1078

The impediment of public propérty arises from an invalid marriage, whether
consummated or not, and from public and notorious concubinage; and it invali-
dates marriage in the first and second degree of the direct line, between the man
and the blood relatives of the woman and vice versa.

Canon 1079

The only spiritual relationship which invalidates marriage is that mentioned
in Canon 768. °

Canon 1080.

Persons who according to the civil law are regarded as incapable of marrying
each other because of a legal relationshiptarising from adoption, cannot validly
contract marriage: together according to canon law.

* Sensb—D)LA TMotL18cA—o—25.5.85~aIPs