LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ON

. DOWRY DEATHS AND LAW REFORM:
AMENDING THE HINDU MARRIAGE ACT,

५ 1955, THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860

.| AND THE INDIAN EVIDENCE ACT, 1872 —

10TH AUGUST, 1983


No. F. 2(9)/83-L,C,

JUSTICE K.K. MATHEW : है

हि Shastri Bhavan,
. ह New Delhi,
Dated Dated the 10th August, 1983. 1983,
EN August, 1983

My dear Minister,

Iam herewith sehding the . Ninety-First Report of the Law
Commission on “Dowry Deaths”, |

2. The subject was taken up by the Law Commission suo moto.
, The.importance of the subject ig explained in Chapter 1 of the
: f न

3. The Commission is indebted to Shri P.M. Bakshi, Part-time
Member and Shri A.K. reinlvgsamrthy, Member-Secretary, for their
valuable assistance in the preparation of the Report,

With regards,“

Yours: sincerely,
Sd/-
(K.K. MATHEW) -

पु

Shri Jagannath Kaushal, लड़
Minister of Law, Justice & Company Affairs,
Shastri Bhavan, | |

New Delhi. |

- 437M of 1, 71& CA/ND/83
यु


Chapter 1.

Chapter 2.

Chapter 3.
Chapter 4.

Chapter 5:

CONTENTS

Introductory. ae

Factual components of Dowry deaths, and their impact
‘on the law of evidence.

Dowry deaths and the substantive criminal law.
Dowry and the law of divorce.

Cenelusion, and summary of recommendations.

PAGE


CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTORY हैं ,

-L.L. The last few months have witnessed an alarming increase in the num- ari
ber of cases in which married women die in circumstances which, to.say the :
least, are highly suspicious. In the popular mind, these deaths have come to
be associated with dowry, which is why, in popular parlance, they have come to i
ve called ‘dowry-deaths’. As the victim is often a young (and a recently inatried) | हि
woman, the phrase “bride-burning” has also come in. vogue. . 1

4

1.2. One need not quote statistics to show that there has been an unusual.N' en fx H
increase in such deaths. Many such deaths must be going unreported. But law} OFM
even those that come to be reported are enough to unnerve all right-thinking =; ‘
members of the society. Such incidents, and the frequency with which they go; ह
‘on occurring, may have their roots in several social economic and psychologival : ef

“factors, Those factors may be too deey-rooted and imperceptible to be tackled i
only by reform cf the law. .Nevertheless, it appears to be proper to consider,
some legal aspects of direct relevance to such incidents. .

।

1.3. If, in a particular incident of dowry death, the facts are ‘such as ey]
satisfy the legal ingredients of an wffence already known to the law, and if those to
facts can be proved without much difficulty, the existing criminal law can be 72807
ted to for bringing the offender to book., In\practice, however, two main impedi-
ments arise—-

@ either the facts’ do not fully fit into the pigeon-hole of any known
offence; or Mey ! हे पु

(ii) the peculiarities of the situation are such that proof of directly iacrimi-
nating facts is thereby rendered difficult. ‘

The first impediinent mentioned above is aptly illustrated by the situation
where a woman takes her life with her own hands, though she is driven to it
by ill-treatment. This situation may not fit into any existing pigeon-hole in the

list of offences recognised by the general criminal law of the country, except
where there is definite proof of instigation, encouragement or other conduct that
amounts to “abetment” of suicide. Though, according to newspaper reports, there
have been judgements of lower caurts which seem to construe “abetment” in this
context widely, the position is not beyond doubt.

The second situation mentioned above finds illustration in those incidents in
which, even though the circumstances raise a strong suspicion that the death was
not accidental, yet, proof beyond jreasonable doubt may not be forthcoming that
the case was really one of homi¢ide.* Thus, there is need to address oneself to
the substantive criminal law asiwell as to the law of evidence. - .

1.4. Speaking of the law, of evidence, it may be mentioned that one of na wae rag
devices by which the law uspally tries to bridge the gulf between one fact and Bvidence’
another, where the gulf is so widg that it cannot be crossed with the help of the हा
normal rules of evidence, is the device of inserting presumptions. In this sense,
it is possible to consider the question whether, on the topic’ under discussion,
any presumption rendering the ptoof of facts in issue less difficult, ought to- be
inserted into the law. : H : पु A


2

Substantive
criminal law

Importance-
vl ७ consi-
deration of
the subject,

Paramoun:
need for
preventive
measures,

Difficulty
of detection.

Suggestions
for reform

YIst Report on Dowry deaths and Law Reforni

1.5. Coming to substantive criminal law, if a deficiency is found to exist in
such law, it can be filled up only by creating a new oflence. Before doing so,
of course, the wise law maker is expected to take into account a number of
aspects, including the nuances of etiics, the ever-fluctuating winds of public
opinion, the Demands of law enforcement and practical realitics.

1.6. There are some of the important pros and cons that we have kept before
ourselves in formulating our recommendations on the subject. All the same,
the matter with which this Report is concerned is so important from the point
of view of social justice and so vital to the vindication of human dignity and the
protection of members of the society, that the time and labour devoted to an
examination of the relevant legal aspects requiring urgent attention may not be
considered ill-spent.

1.7. At this stage, we should also state that while the detection, investigation
and punishment of offences constituted by conduct leading to dowry deaths are
certainly matters of importance, there is still greater need for focussing attention
upon effective preventive legislation, To remove unhappiness in the family
is beyond the province and capacity of the law. But the law can provide suitable
legal remedies designed to avoid, or reduce the intensity of, the situations that
are found to precipitate tragedies in the family. This is the least that the law
owes to itself, where the tragedy is man-made. The enthusiastic law reformer
can think of measures that will make it easier for a suffering party to get out of
a situation laden with danger—get out at a time when it is not yet too late to do
so. In other words, the law reformer should ponder as to how the law can
prevent the emergence of long and sustained states of intensive tension and un-
happiness, at the very beginning while the situation is still under control. It is
in this spirit that we have approached the problem and we, therefore, attach a
very high value to the preventive measures that we are going to recommend in

this Report.

1.8. Those who have studied crime and its incidence know that once a
serious crime is committed, detection is a difficult matter and still more difficult
is successful prosecution of the offender. Crimes that lead to dowry deaths are
almost invariably committed within the safe precincts of a residential house.
The criminal is a member of the family: other members of the family (if residing
in the sanic house) are either guilty associates in crime, or silent but conniving
witnesses to it, Tn any case, the shackles of the family are so strong that truth
may not come out of the chains. There would be no other eye witnesses, except

for members of the family.

1.9. Given all these circumstances of the usual “dowry death”, it will be
conceded that even where there is in a particular case, moral certainty that the
death is the result of murder, the circumstances would be hostile to an carly or
casy discovery of the truth. Punitive measures—such that can be pursued with-
in the ambit of the existing law—may be adequate in their formal content. But
their successful enforcement is a matter of difficulty. That is why there is need
to supplement the punitive measures by appropriate preventive measures. This
Report secks to make a few modest suggestions as to what can be done in this
regard. It is possible that the measures recommended here will be regarded as
very mild by some persons. or as radical by others. But it is hoped that the
discussion will at least give a new stance to the thinking on the subject. Some
effective preventive measures. whatever be their content and drift. are needed
urgently. If this is not done soon, there is a grave risk that the problem of
bride-burning will grow out of control and a stage will come when one of the
two possibilities will become real. Either there will be no enthusiasm left for



YIst Report on Dowry deaths and Law Reform

trying out concrete solutions, or there will come to be adopted solutions that
might be worse than the problem. Hence the need for some concerete preven-
tive steps to check “bride-burning” or “dowry deaths”. “Incidentally, neither
of these two expressions is very happy; one of them is even inaccurate, because
the female who is burnt is no longer a “bride”. These two expressions will not
satisfy a linguistic purist. However, we are not, at the moment, concerned with
the purity of language, but with the purity of conduct.

CHAPTER 2

THE FACTUAL COMPONENTS OF DOWRY DEATHS,
AND THEIR IMPACT ON THE LAW OF EVIDENCE

2.1. Let us first examine the factual components of a typical “dowry death”. Seal
Ihe following analysis of these components, elementary though it may appear, is
basic to an understanding of this peculiar social phenomenon :—

(i) Sex—The person who dies in a dowry death is always a woman.

(ii) Age—She is 1nostly in her twefities. 7

(iii) Status—She is a married woman, totally dependent on her husband or
his relatives. In many’ cases, she has already become a mother, or is

about to become a mother. ~

{iv) Mode of death—In the vast majority of cases, the death occurs as a
result of burns sustained by the woman in a fire—though some cases of
injuries or poisoning have also been known.

iv) Condition—The woman ‘is exttemely unhappy, by reason of the demand
for dowry. She has no} other icayse for unhappiness, except that result-
ing from, or connected with, the demand for dowry. The demands are
persistent, determined and oppressive.

(vi) Nature of the act—Initially, a case of dowry death is presented (and

even recorded) as one of -acaident or suicide. Homicide takes a back
1 seat, and-is brought into the front only with great reluctance, and only
after great persuasion. This is not to say that the police or any other
enforcement authority is necessarily to blame for the situation. For
various reasons, the general stance adopted in law enforcement is not
fo rush to a conclusion of homicide, in the absence of some concrete
proof. In the cases of dowry death, such concrete proof is not easily
available.

(vii) Locate—The death mostly takes place within the house; the victim of
the “accident” is always behind closed doors, when she dies

(viii) Reporting—The death, where reported to the police by the husband or
his relatives, is reported as cased by suicide, but where it is reported”
by the woman’s own parents pr relatives, the suspicion of: homicide is
put forth. There are several! ther noteworthy features, but they need <
not encumber the present discubsion.

2.2. The features of dowry deaths; méntioned above’ are significant enough C
The first three factors mentioned above (age, sex and status of the victim) show =
that we are confronted here with the death of a person who is, or has ‘become,

too weak to resist. The will and power to resist has been largely eroded by_the oor

See STAT =F Troan Sn Ss
*Paragraph 2.1, supra, it aoe नह
+ . t : हू 7



The fourth
factual
component,

Recommendation
to amend the
Evidence Act.

Utility.

The fifth
factual
component. 7

YLst Report ot Dowry deaths and Law Reform

peisistent demands. ‘This aspect is highlighted here to substantiate the sugges-
tion (to be made in किया paragraphs of this Report) to raise a presumption as
to the cause of death in certain circumstances.

To recapitulate briefly the points already made above. there ure several note-
worthy factual components of a dowry death. In every case, the victim of the
supposed accident is a woman, young and married, dependent on her husband
or in-laws. Her desire to live is slowly croded by oppressive conduct which
emanates from no other source except the in-laws. Tension is built up to a high
pitch. All these features would prima facie seem to justify the inference that
such cases, occurring with regularity, frequency and monotonous uniformity, are
the result of some human act and are not the consequence of an act of .God.

2.3, The fourth factual component mentioned above--mode of death—fortifies
the argument advanced in the preceding paragraph’ as justifying a presumption
of non-accidental death until the contrary is proved.

2.4. On an examination of the several aspects of the matter, we have come to
the conclusion, and we recommend, that a presumption on the following lines
should be inserted in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872:—

“Where—

{a) a married woman dies, within five years of her marriage, of burns or
injuries sustained in the house in which she and her husband were resid-
ing together immediately before her death, or from other cause of a
similar nature, and

(b) the death takes place behind closed doors, it may be presumed that the
death was not accidental.”

2.5. Incidentally, it may be pointed out that the utility of such a provision
lics in this. The case becomes one in which the need for investigation by the
police or an inquest by the Magistrate into the cause of death becomes strong.

2.6. A presumption (as recommended above) to the effect that death taking
place in the specified circumstances was not accidental, would, of course, still
Icave unresolved the tie between suicide and homicide. One may now turn to
the fifth factual component of a dowry death,' namely, the condition of the victim
of the tragedy. Let it be pointed out that the woman had no other cause of
unhappiness such as ill health, failure in some big venture, death of a very near
relative, serious financial difficulty or the like.

Assuming that the death was due to suicide, which itself was impelled by a
fecling of disgust with life caused by great unhappiness, one can state that the
woman's unhappiness was not due to any other facet of her life, excepting the
demands for dowry. On this reasoning, persistent demands for dowry may be
Iegitimately presumed to be a major causative factor of her death. The manner
in which the chain of causation actually operated in a particular case would, of
course, still remain uncertain. We da not yet know whether the case was one
of suicide or homicide, but there is ground for presuming that it was one of the
two. Further, in the circumstances, there is ground for presuming that the
demand for dowry which the woman could not meet either forced her to take her
own life in the end or impelled the members of her husband’s family to take her
life.

1566 paragraphs 2.4 and 2.6. infra.
*Paragraph 2.2. Sura,
‘Paragraph 2.4. supra.
‘Paragraph 2.1, supra.



9151 Keport on Dowry deaths and Law Reform

2.7. The factor mentioned in the preceding paragraph seems to justify the Regommendt
insertion, in the law, of two provisions:— = -

see

() Besides the presumption already recommended for being inserted in the in

1 Evidence Act,’ another presumption should also be inserted in the same
1... Act, as under: —

| “Where a married woman dies, within five years of her marriage,
i of burn or injuries sustained in the house in which she and her husband
| were residing together immediately before her death, or from other
i cause of a. similar nature, and there is credible information that there
। had been persistent demands of dowry against the woman or her parents
| . or other relatives, it may be presumed that ‘her death was the result
i that : 1

{a) either of suicide to which the: woman was driven by such persistent’
demands of dowry, or

(b) of homicide.”

The definition of “dowry” for the purpose of the provisions to be newly in-
serted will be as under: — .

“‘dowry’ means money, or other thing estimable in terms of money,
demanded from the wife or her parents or other relatives by the husband
or his parents or other relatives, where such a demand is not properly referra-
ble to any legally recognised claim and is relatable only to the wife’s having
married into the husband’s family.”

(ii) Secondly, it would be proper to regard persistent demands for dowry
as amounting to “cruelty” within the meaning of matrimonial legisla-
. \ tion. This point will be developed later, when we come to the question
of divorce. i 1
2.8. The sixth factor mentioned abdve! relates to the nature of the act (acci- Sixth factos-
dent, suicide, homicide). This is ‘most @ifficult to detect. Incidentally, the diffi- the act.
culty is enhanced by the locale in which the death takes place (the seventh fac-  {
tual component). However, later in the course of this Report, a few recom-
mendations are proposed to be made, which might mitigate the difficulty to some ,
extent.

2.9. The seventh factual component of dowry death mentioned above’ con ae

to the locale of death. A dowry! death always takes place within closed doors. f
: Obviously this renders difficult tha fp ion of the cause of death.’ Proof of the. t
' cause of death is thus rendered af ardupus' task because of scanty available evi-

dence. It appears to us that a legal’ presumption as to the cause of death, if
otherwise justifiable on rational grounds, may help in this respect. This aspect
thus fortifies the reasons given abgve in support of inserting certain presumptions
where there is a dowry death® i

2.10. The eighth factual component ofa dowry death’ is concerned yee रु
reporting of the death. We propose tb deal with this in the next Chapter.’ |
St +ऊ ५
4Paragraph 2.4, supra.
In this case, death.need not take glace behind the closed doors.
Chapter 4, infra. :

“Paragraph 2.1, supra.
| *Paragraph 2.1 supra.

* “Paragraphs 2.4, 2.6 and 2.7, supra.
*Paragraph 2.1, supra.
*Chapter 3, infra,


the cighth
factor-
reporting.

Recommenda
ton as io
obligation to
report.

Recommenda-
tion’ to amend
the Indian
Penal Code
to punish
persistent
cruelty
driving a
person to
suicide.

91st Report on Dowry deaths and Law Reform
है
CHAPTER 3
DOWRY DEATHS AND THE SUBSTANTIVE CRIMINAL LAW

3.1. The eighth and the last factor mentioned above is concerned with report-
ing—-or rather with failure to report--by those who are near and dear to the
woman. Already, in law, there is a provision in the Code of Criminal Proce-
dure requiring every person aware of the commission of certain serious offences
to inform the nearest Police officer or Magistrate.'. The offences are specified in
the provision and (so far as is material) cover murder and culpable homicide
not amounting to murd But its language is not wide enough to cover deaths
that are apparently accidental, By virtue of this provision. a person is bound to
report the matter only if he is aware of the commission of murder or culpable
homicide amounting to murder. If the death does not proclaim itself as one
caused by murder or culpable homicide, no obligation 10 report arises.

3.2. In the circumstances, there is scope for an improvement in the law in the
context of the growing incidence of dowry deaths. It is not being suggested here
that an obligation to report the death of a woman to the police should be imposed
in every case. What can, and should, be inserted in the law is a provision of a
limited character, which would appear to be justified in the interest of prompt
reporting of dowry deaths. The provision could be to the following effect.
Where a married woman dies within five years of her marriage as a result of
burns or injuries sustained by her in the house in which she was residing with her
husband immediately before her death, or from other cause of a similar nature.
and her husband. on becoming aware that his wife has so died. does not. within
a reasonable time, inform the nearest police officer or Magistrate about her
death, the husband shall, in the absence of reasonable excuse (the burden of
proving which shall lie on him), be guilty of an offence punishable with imprison-
ment not exceeding three years, or with fine, or with both. This provision can
be appropriately inserted in the Indian Penal Code.

3.3. Having regard to the need to deal effectively with suicides that are the
result of ill-treatment within the family. it is also necessary to punish persistent
cruel conduct on the part of one person that drives another member of family
living with him to the commission of suicide. Such a recommendation was.
in fact. made by the Law Commission’ long ago in its Report on the Indian
Penal Code. That recommendation awaits implementation. The matter has
now become very urgent. The new Section may run on these lines :—

“Whoever. by persistent acts of cruelty. drives a member of his family
living with him to committing suicide shall be punished with imprison-
ment of either description, which may extend to three years, and shall also
be liable to fine.”

Of course. this will be a general provision covering all suicides impelled by

cruelty. Besides this. the law should expressly provide that persistent demands
for dowry shall amourt to “persistent acts of cruelty” for the purposes of this

Section.
The definition of “dowry” for the purpose of the above new provision will be
as under :—

ve ‘dowry’ means money. or other thing estimable in terms of money.
demanded from the wife or her parents or other relatives by the husband

1Sectign 39(v), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

2Section 302. 303 and 304. Indian Penal Code.

*Provision to be inserted in the Indian Penal Code.

‘Law Commission of India. 42nd Report (Indian Penal Code). page 245. para 16.35.
* This concerns the Indian Penal Code.



91st Report on Dowry deaths and Law Reform

or his parents or other relatives, whege such a demand is not properly referra:
ble to any legally recognised claim and is relatable only to the wife’s having
married into the husband’s family.”

CHAPTER 4 |
DOWRY AND THE LAW OF DIVORCE

4.1. The amendments recommended in the preceding Chapters of this Repart eis wt
touch the criminal law and its periphery, Once a dowry death takes place, there
is certainly need for inserting provisions designed to facilitate ‘investigation and
prosecution, if the case contains a criminal element. But the pressing. need is.
for effective measures which have, as their objective, preventing the recurrence
in soviety of situations that lead to dowry ‘deaths, whether such deaths are the
result of suicide or of murder. Close tefiection will reveal that dowry deaths
occur because the woman’s relatives in the husband’s family make a persisteat
and determined demand for dowry.’ in the! mind of the woman, this builds up
tension of an acute character. The tension fs built up step by step. Ultimately,
@ stage comes when the woman does nat see any way out of the situation, ex-
cepting suicide. Returning to. the' parents’ home would hardly suggest itself to
her as a permanent solution, ४० it is sometimes resorted to as a temporary’

expedient. Death becomes the of the woman. Side by side with -
building up tension in the woman’s a the situa: tion occassionally ‘develops
into one where the greed for mozfey, th हि. pealeinee provoked by resistance
and the ease with which the weaker sex, be exploited, all culminate in the.
desire to take the woman’s life. It is mpt 8 sudden or impulsive step, it is the
final catastrophe to which each of ‘the Ppl and social factors mentioned
above contributes. Students of dramatics might eyen discover a parallel between
this real life drama and the classical expbsition of the elements of tragedy. The ~
_ Slow ascent, the crisis, the catastrophe and the denouement, all are present here.
The object in stressing = gubstantiate the recommendation’
for reform that is going to ext. sentence: Stated in ‘brief, our
recommendation is that the law 2 ting १ grdnt of divorce or judicial separa-

tion should be reformed by, specit ling that a persistent demand for’
dowry shall be deemed to constitpte ५ ‘for the purpose of the grant “of
matrimonial relief. under the head ty... To: equate such conduct to cruelty,
is to our mind, a perfectly legitimate ap; Moreover, it is the only practicable

if she so chooses, to secure release
40 her life.

Goce ay a cy ae
‘Fecent events are any guide,
4 ioe roms ob
possibility of dowry death (whe-
४23 is not so remote or fanciful that
4 matter differently, the danger being
sure being ‘of the most substantial
medy itt poo potable hetp
ts! that will most :

ir

legal reform that would enable th
from a situation that is potentially

4.2. No doubt, every case whe!
necessarily result in a “dowry deat
case where the demand is persistent
that the situation is potentially dang
ther by suicide or marder)-in such qi

~ it can be disregarded by the law.
real and not fanciful and the harm dil
character, the law is justified in devising
in preventing further unhappy devé¢lo
in a tragedy. peda.
. It is true that in every such case the wifd may not necessarily prefer divorce.
But.the law can only provide a cf. ly. fAt'what stage the woman should start
thinking of going to court, is for her to Medgle. A faint suggestion that some
payment be made by her parents not $rdimarily evoke thoughts of divorce. A
repetition of the demand may inducé some} though not many, women to think of
divorce. Much depends of, the emotioy bob up of thé woman and meny
other factors. But where the demands persistent, the wornan should 06

bbl LI&CA/ND/83’



Stability of
marriage
weighed
against
problem

of life.

Factors to
taken
into account.

Recommenda-
tion for
amending

the Hindu
Marriage
Act, 1955,—
provisions
relating to
“cruelty”.

Other नकल
matrimoni
enactments
whether to
be ai

Gist Report on Dowry deaths and Luw Reform

on her guard and, in due time, take a decision as to her future course of action.
She must decide whether she would still continue to jive in a state of veasion
which might ultimately result in a tragedy, or whether she would prefer to secure
release from the situation for all time to come. For any woman, the decision
to seek divorce on this ground or on any other ground is a crucial one, often
an agonising one and always a difficult one. That difficulty noiwithstanding, the
framework of the law must take into account the haish realities of life and accord
the woman an appropriate and eifective remedy that will enable her to re-mouid
her life before it is too late.

4.3. Our recommendation amounts io a liberalisation of divorce. We are
aware that in any society a liberalisation of the law of divorce ought not to be
embarked upon unless there are strong and weighty reasons ia support of th
course proposed. Divorce, in itself does not put an end to the sociai ३.18 of the
family. It does not increase the emotional happiacss of ihe spouses, now sepa-
rated. It might have a serious impact on the iife of children. it must, in
the majority of cases, cause a heavy economic strain on ihe wife and may, for
years to come, weave a misty veii ot odium and disapprobaiion arou:d the hither-
to untarnished face of the woman.

4.4. In taking decision to widen the grounds of divorce by legislative action,
all these factors must naturally weigh with the authorities concerned. But we
would wish to point out that the siiuatioa deait with in the presest Report is a
very special one. One has to weigh, in opposing scales, two conilicting consi-
derations. The stability of the marriage is placed in one scale, while in the
other scale is placed the very survival of the woman. Persistent demands for
dowry must upset the mental poise of any ‘average woman. This much, we
believe, will be conceded by any reasonable human being. But this is not all.
Experience in India in recent years shows that such demands lead to the emer-
gence of a situation in which the wife is either diiven to suicide or is murdered
by (or at the instance of) those whose “interest” lies in demanding more and
more. Whether it is the wife’s exasperation {leading to suicide) or the unabashed
greed of certain persons {impelling them to commit murder), the situation is one
which ought to be prevented. In our view, the scale in which this consideration
‘finds a place, outweighs the needs of siability of marriage. No doubt, the iasti-
tution of marriage deservers io be protected against exiotional siorms which
the passing hour may bring. These are clouds that may soon disperse. But
persistent demands for dowry are a different matter. They show human nature
at its worst. And no woman should be forced to go on fighting human nature
at its worst.

Divorce, in such circumstances, is a lesser and milder evii than continuing
to live constantly in an atmosphere of terror.

4.5. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that in the sections
of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 dealing with the grant of divorce or judicial
separation on the ground of cruelty, an Explanation somewhat in the following
terms should be inserted.’-?

“Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, persistent demands for
dowry shall be deemed to be an act of the husband treating the wife with
cruelty, where the demands are made by the husband, or with his conni-
vance or acquiescence”.

the Hindu Marriage
nravicion in the
tionship amorz

4.6 We have, in the above paragraph. concentrated on
Act. There may be ao objzstion i incipic to wink!
other matrimonial enactments also. which govern ths

{This concerns the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.
3966 also para 2.7(ii), supra.


se j
91st Report on Dowry deaths and Law Reform

members of other communities. However, a firm decision in that respect may
have to be preceded by some study of the question whether, in other communities
also, “dowry deaths” present a substantial problem. The Dowry Prohibition ~
Act, 1961, no doubt, applies to all marriages, whatever be the religion of the
parties. But the subject with which this Report is concerned is not the regula-
tion of the practice of giving or taking dowry at or in connection with marriage,
but tne peculiar pucnomenon of deatn as a result of the desire to extract dowry

"after marriage. Whether this phonomgnon exists in other communities may
have to be first ascertained, before taking a firm decision to amend enactments
other than the Hindu Marriage Act on the point under discussion.

4.7. We may also state here that | persistent and oppressive demands for
dowry,..if they can be proved to have affected the wife’s mental health, may even te
now amount to cruelty. But we would prefer a specific provision® on the subject हें
in order to avoid all contioversy and the need to prove damage or likelihood of
damage to health. . - 2

4.8. This brings us to the definition of “dowry” that, may be needed for the
Purpose of the various recommendations made in this Report. It appears to be 2a
necessary to include a definition of “dowry” framed after specifically keeping in of
mind the objectives of the above recommendations. the

The definition in the Dowry Ptohibition Act, 1961 addresses itself to a some- tions: 2
what different.point of time. The emphasis therein is on contemporaneity or oS
immediate connection with the! event of fon To the’ tragic incidents with
which this Report is concerned, what ip more relevant is the relationship of
marriage, the way in which marriéd life'is lived, a cluster of post-nuptial facts
which bring untold unhappiness ard miséry to the women. The dowry Prohibi-
tion Act, 1961 focuses itself mainly on the economic hardship and social igno-
miny caused by demanding Sie हे ice for entering into the marriage. Our
recommendations, ‘in contrast, are with the physical agony and igno-
miny caused directly to the we fig her life in the husband's family.

This report is concerned with a. a continum, rather than with a
demand made at a particular point |of timp ‘Greed for money may be common
‘to both; scant respect for the wonjan 48 | था individual entitled to maintain her
human dignity may also be common to, both and yet, there is a shift on em-
phasis. The wife is now threatened or indirectly) that her social
status as a wife will be jeopardised+if the is not met. This threat is ad-
dressed to the wife and it is she who is th¢ visible victim. _ The threat ultimately
culminates in the extinction of rales life. "|For effectively covering these nuances
of the situation, the definition of d in the Act of 1961 would not be sufficient.
In any case, it would be ‘unrealistic in th¢ present context.

. के }

fe inserted a self-contained defini-
li¢able to all the provisions that may
endations (wherever those provisions:
शांत a definition somewhat in the

4.9. It is thus desirable that th¢re
tion of “dowry” which should be made #
come to be enacted as a result of our
contain the-word “dowry”). We

following terms, for the purpose: : . 7
1 *
“ ‘dowry’ means money, ar शान thine estimab'e in terms of money,

demanded from the wife or he ts: or other relatives by the ‘husband ~
or his parents or other relatives, such a demand is not properly refera,, ~
ble to any legally recognised clbim is relatable only to the wife’s having
married into the husband’s family”, | . as

1886 also paragraph 4.8, infra.
‘Para 4.4, sunra ~
3966 also paragraph 4.5, supra.

हर वर


91st Report on Dowry deaths and Law Refori:
CHAPTER 5
CONCLUSION, AND SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS.

5.1. Fiualty, by way of conclusion, let us state that the recommendations
made above would not put an end to “dowry deaths”. The root causes of this
phenomenon lie much deeper than is generally realised. The law and its appa-
tatus cannot put an end to human avarice, snobbery and desire to make a show
of wealth. If happiness comes to be measured by some sections of society in
terms of money only, the law can hardly provide a cure for it. The recommen-
dations made above are intended primarily :--

Conclusion.

(i) to introduce certain legal reforms that wili facilitate the taking of timely
steps to avoid future precipitate developments; and

ii) to strengthen certain other parts of the law, concerned with the detec-
tion of the causes of dowry deaths and the institution of criminal pro-
ceedings,

Summary of 5.2. For conven‘ense, we summarise below the recommendations made in
. earlier chapters of this Report.

(1) A provision as under should be inserted in the Indian Evidence Act.
1872:—
“Where—

(a) a married woman dies, within five years of her marriage, of burns
or injuries sustained by her in the house in which she and her
husband were residing together immediately before her death. or
from other cause of a similar nature, and

(b) the death takes place behind closed doors. it may be presumed
that the death was not accidental”.’

tions,

(2) Another provision should be inserted in the Evidence Act to the follow-
ing effect: —

“Where a married woman dies, within five years of her marriage,
or burns or injuries sustained in the house in which she and her hus-
band were residing together immediately before her death, or from
other cause of a similar natureand there is credible information that
there had been persistent demands for dowry against the woman or her
parents or other relatives, it may be presumed that her death was the
result either of suicide to which the woman was driven by such persis-

tent demands of dowry, or of komicide”.” -

(3) In the Indian Penal Code, a provision should be inserted to the effect
that where a married woman dies, within five years of her marriage of
burns or injuries sustained by her in the house in which she was resi,
ing with her husband immediately before her death or from other cau:
of a similar nature, and her husband, on becoming aware that the woman
has so died, does not. within a reasonable time, inform the nearest police
ofiver or Magist-ate about her death. he shall, in the absence of a reaso-
nable excuse (the burden of proving which shal! lie on him) be guilty
of an offence punishable with imprisonment not exceeding three years
or with fine or both.

*Para 2.4, supra.
*Para 2.7, supra.
*Paragrash 3.2, supra.


91st Report on Dowry deaths and Law ‘Reform

(4) A specific section should be inserted in the Indian Penal Code, punish- |
ing a person who, by. persistent act of cruelty, drives a member of the;
family living with him to committing suicide. Further, the new provi- *
sion should expressly provide that persistent demands ‘for dowry shall
amount to persistent acts of cruelty for this purpose! The punishment‘
should ‘be imprisonment of either description upto 3 years and fine?

(5) The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955,-should be amended to. provide that for :
the purposes, of the sections of that Act Providing for’ the gramt. of
matrimonial relief on the ground of cruelty, persistent demands for
dowry should be deemed to’ be an act of the husband treating the wife
with cruelty, where the demands are made by, or with the connivance
or acquiescence of, the husbaad.*. a

© For the purpose of the, provisions recommended above, “dowry” should -
be defined as meaning monty, or other thing estimable in terms ‘ef
money, demanded from the wife or her parents or other relatives by the
husband or his parents. or other relatives, where such a demand is not :
properly referable to any legally recognised claim and is relatable only
to the wife’s having married into the husband’s family

(K..K. MATHEW) Sd/-

Chairman (K. K. MATHEW)

* (NASIRULLAH BEG) “ \ sap.

Member Q The amendments app-
ear tame to’ be too light and
not sufficiently stringent.

Sd/-. ‘ ह
(NASIRULLAH BEG) 10.8-85_

(0. P. CHATURVEDI) Sdj-

Member: ; _ | GP. CHATURVEDI -

(P. M. BAKSHI) Sd/-

1 , Part-time Member - -(P. M. BAKSHI) a
(VEPA P. SARTHI) - 80/- है न
Part-time Member . (VEPA P. SARTHI)

(A. K, SRINIVASAMURTHY) ! : Sd/- ; :

Member-Secretary | (A. K. SRINIVASAMURTHY)

: Member-Secretary

Dated: August 10, 1983,

‘paragraph 33, आफ्व, जय प्खणएणफक फ  ्न्‍-+
Paragraph 3.3, supra. Cog
sParagraphs 4.1 and 4.5, supra.

*Paragraph 4.9, supra.

a
MGIPCBE—S IV—-37 M of LJ & CA/NIp/83—5411-b4—625.