LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

NINETY-SECOND REPORT -

. 5 ONE न
9408 678 IN APPLICATIONS FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW.  -

“Sa ‘RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LEGISLATION ~:~

August 1983


CHAIRMAN
LAW COMMISSION

Justice K. K. MATHEW GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
No. F.2(8)/83-L.C. Shastri Bhavan,
New DELHI

Aucust 16, 1983

My dear Minister,

1 am forwarding herewith the Ninety-Second Report of
the Law Commission on “Damages in Applications for Judicial
Review : Recommendations for Legislation’.

2. The subject was taken up by the Law Commission on its
own. The need for taking up the subject is explained in Para
l of the Report.

3. The Commission is indebted to Shri P.M. Bakshi, Part-
time Member and Shri A. K. Srinivasamurthy, for their valuable
assistance in the preparation of the Report.

With regards,

Yours sincerely.

Sd/-
(K. K. MATHEW)

Shri Jagannath Kaushal, का
Minister of Law. Justice & Company Affairs.

NEW DELHI
2.62
P53? Zo vf 7 7
. हे Po 2 4949
Encls, 92nd Report. ae S )o j Z
ad) 2 23 a]
5 SY per
हवा bay A __ } ) ita

$2 gor =
Gor ZS हि
जाउता या 4 be t é 7 (

a



CONTENTS

Page

Chapter 1--INTRODUCTORY ‘
Chapter 2 -THE QUESTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND

THE PRESENT LAW 2

Chapter 3--RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LEGISLATION. 4

Chapter 4TH SUBSTANTIVE LAW OF STATE LIABILITY 6

Chapter 5 - MISCELLANEOUS 6

APPENDIX
Appendix Extrsci of Section 31, Supreme Court Act, 1981 8

(Cr 54)



CHAPTER |
INPFRODUCTORY

1.1, This Report deals with a subject that touches the law of procedure as Need for
well as administrative law, namely. the need for legislation to empower High Tete ee
Courts, in proceedings for judicial review. to award damages. The point ap-
pears to be of considerable practical importance and has a vital connection, not
only with the aspect of reduction of compicxity and delay in litigation, but
also with broader considerations of justice. The Law Commission has accord-
ingly considered it proper to take up the subject on its own. The Commission
is aware that there are many other arcas falling within administrative law, or
bordering thereon, to which attention might, in due course, have to be devoted,
in the interest of making the administrative process more just and the results
more beneficial to all concerned. However, as a matter of practical importance,
the point proposed to be taken “up at the moment seems to deserve priority.
Further. the point appears to be one that can be convenienily dealt with in
a separate proposal, independently of wider and more extensive reforms.

1.2, We may stale that on deciding to take up the subject. we had cir- Working

culated to interested persons and bodics' a Working Paper on the subject invit- Paper and
ing comments thereon by the 15th June, 1983. received
thereon,

The Working Paper had teen circulated to the Secretary, Legislative De-
partment, Government of India. all State Governments, all High Courts, the
Attorney General of India. Bar Associations and other interested persons and
bodies. The Commission is grateful to all those who have been good enough
10 send their comments. Comments have been received from six High Courts’,
one Advocate General’, four State Governments', and one Registrar of a High
y who has forwarded his personal view’. As regards the six High Courts.
it should be mentioned that while in the case of five, the replies represent the
reaction of the High Courts, as such. in one case, the view of one Judge (agree-
ing with the proposal) has been communicated and seven other Judges’ have
no views to offer, while the rest of the Judges of that High Court have ex-

pressed no reaction.

As regards the remaining five High Courts, one has comments to make’,
three agree with the proposal put in the Working Paper for enacting suitable
legislation empowering High Courts to award damages in applications for judi-
cial review’, one High Court, while agreeing with the proposal in the Working
Paper, puts forth the suggestion that in implementing the proposal, the follow-
ing three aspects may be kept in view :--

(a) the basis on which damages can be awarded, particularly where no
evidence is taken:

(b) whether, where the award of damages is refused, the remedy by way
of suit will be barred or not;

1 Working Paper circulated 22nd April, 1983.

“Law Commission File No. F.2(8)/83-LC, $, No. 1, 2, 3. 6, 11 and 12.
3Law Commission File No. F. 2(8)/83-LC, 8. No. 7.

‘Law Commission File No. 208), LC, S. No. 5, 8, 9, 10.

5Law Commission File No. F. 2(8)/83-LC, S. No. 4.

®Law Commission File No. F. 2(8)/83-LC, S. No. 6.

tLaw Commission No. F, 2(8)/83-L.C, $. No. 1.

"Law Commission No, F. 2(8)/83-LC, $. No. 2,3,11.



Law Commission of India [Sections 1.2—2.1]

(0) whether, in such matters, service of notice under section 80, Code of
vil Procedure, 1908 will be necessary’.

We are happy to note that this High Court has specifically dealt with
the mode of implementing the proposal of the Law Commission. Its view is~
“Such power can be conferred cither by amending article 226 of the Constitu-
tion, or by enacting a separate legislation by the Parliament™.

The Advocate General of one state has expressed agreement in general
with the Commission's proposal", but has added that the proposed power to
grant damages should be exercised very sparingly and only where very gross
and unjust behaviour is involved and where no inquiry into disputed facts is in-
volved.

Of the State Governments that have sent replies, three’ are against the
proposal, while one’ agrees with it. The three who are opposed express an
opinion that the High Court’s burden might increase. The one that favours
the proposal emphasises that it will avoid long drawn out litigation in another
forum.

One Registrar of a High Court’, expressing his personal view. states that
articles 32 and 226 are wide enough and provide for award of damages where
a fundamental right is violated. He further makes the suggestion that District
Judges be alse invested with writ jurisdiction. Before proceeding to a consi-
deration of the various issues, we may states here that the apprehension ex-
pressed in some comments about disputed questions of fact should disappear.
once it is borne in mind that our recommendations’ do not contemplate that
the High Court must. in every application for judicial review, also go into
damages. /.s regards the query raised with reference to section 80, C.P.C. we
may mention that it is going to be our’ emphatic recommendation that section
80 should be repealed. <

CHAPTER 2

THE QUESTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND THE PRESENT LAW

The Censti-

tutional 2.1. Let us first state in brief the narrow point to which we propese to devote
provisions | the succeeding paragraphs. In the scheme of the Indian Constitution, judi-
or judicia है हि . woe

review. cial review is mainly pursued under two important provisions. applicable to

the Supreme Court and to the High Courts respectively. In the first place,

7 Law Commission File No, 7. 2(8)/S3-LC, $. No. 12.
*Law Commission File No. F. 2(8)/83-LC. S. No. 12.
*Law Commission File No, F, 2(8)/83-LC, S. No. 7.
‘Law Commission File No, F. 2(8)/83-LC, S. No. 5, 8, 9.
Law Commission File No. 2(8)/83-LC. S. No. 10.
“File No. F- 2(8)/83-LC, 8. No. 4.

*Chapter 3, infra.

SChapter, 3, infra.



{Sections 2 .1-- 2.4] . Law Commission of India

under article 32(1) of the Constitution. the right to move the Supreme Court
by appropriate proceedings for the enforcement of the rights guaranteed by
Part वा of the Constitution (ic. fundamental rights) is guaranteed. Under
article 32(2), the Supreme Court shall have power to issue directions or orders
or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibi-
tion, que warranto and certiorari, whichever may be appropriate, for the enforce-
ment of any of the fundamental rights. Secondly, under article 226 of the
Constitution, every High Court shall have power, throughout the territories in
relation to which it exercises its jurisdiction, to issue to any person or autho-
rity, including in appropriate cases any Government within those territories,
directions, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, man-
damus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, or any of them, for the en-
forcement of any of the rights conferred by Part की and for any other purpose.
This power, as is evident from the wording of the article, is not confined to
fundamental rights. It can be used “for any other purpose.”

2.2. We are mainly concerned with the power of the High Court’ under
article 226 of the Constitution that being the provision resorted to much more limited 0
frequently than the remedy wader article 32 to move the Supreme Court... The
latter though of basic imporiance in our constitutional scheme, is not so fre-
quently resoried to. We would also leave aside, for the present purpose, pro-
ceedings in courts subordinate to the High Court wherein the legality of Govern-
mental action is contested. In ६ proceedings, the relief claimed may in-
clude, inter alia, declaratory relief, injunction or damages. Our concern is with
the proceedings under article 226 of the Constitution, dealing with the power
of the High Court to make cer orders in the nature of writs. The point
to which we address ourselves is whether the power of the High Court in
proceedings under article 226 should, in the interest of justice, be enlarged so
as to authorise the award of damages by the High Court.

2.3. Now, the common understanding of the scope and ambit of erticle Scope of the
226, as at present prevailing, is that monetary compensation for an adminis- Leia pader
trative wrong cannot be claimed in these proceedings, and this is so even if
as a matter of law, the wrong is an actionable wrong, involving liability on
the part of the State. It is to judicial review in the traditionally limited sense

of that expression that the aricle mainly addresses itself.

2.4. Of course. it is well settled that the powers of the High Court under Power under
article 226 are not confined to the issue of “prerogative writs”, known to the *ticle 226.
English Jaw as it evolved through the centuries. The High Court can “mould
the relief to meet the peculiar an® complicated requirements of this country”.

The High Court can. in such proceedings, set aside an executive order, whe-
ther or not the writ of certiorari is attracted to the fact’. In proper cases,
declaratory relief may also be granted in a petition under article 226°. This
js so even though such relief could not be ordered by a prerogative writ under
English law. Further, the High Court, under article 226, has also the power
to give consequential relict, such as ordering the repayment of moncy realised
without the authority of law or under an invalid law’. However, it is generally

*Paragraph 2.1, supra.

“fani v. State of Madras, A.LR. 1961 S.C.
*Dwarka Nath v. L.7.0., ALR. 1966 . 81, 85, para 4.

“trani v. State of Madras, ALR, 1961 S.C. 1731, 1738.

°BBL. & T. Merchants Association v. State of Bombay, A.LR. 1962 S.C. 486, 496.
SState of M.P. v. Bhailal, ALR. 1964 S.C. 1006, 1010, 1011, para 16-18,

1731, 1738, para 14.



Law Coimntission of Inia [Seettons 2-4-3 - 2]

utd damuges fey

assumed that the High Court cannot, in such proceedings.
administrative actions that cause harm illegally.

We proceed to consider in the next Chapter whether there is seope for
improvement in the present position.

CHAPTER 3
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LEGISLATION

1. We have stated above the present position upder पीर... constiutional

Eriargement

wow provisions as io judicial review. It appears to us that it would be या. the
Article 226 interest of justice if the High Court is given power in proceedings under article
desirable, 226 to award damages also. Such an enlargemen: of tie powers of tic High

Jural set up. under

Court would remedy one defect in the present pre
a claimant secking both judicial review of the nature contemplated by article
226 and damages for the wro! 1) such review fs
mus! pursue each remedy in a diferent forum. He must seek the first relief
in the High Court and the second relic! in the ordinary court. It is true that
some High Courts in India have ordinary original civil jurisciction. in. the
exercise of which they can. inter alia, entertain a claim for damages. But
this jurisdiction itself is subj this juris-
diction, in so far as it is vested in the High Courts in the thece Presideney
Towns, confined to their own local. limits as defined for tie purposes of
their original jurisdiction. Apart from this. proceedings under article 226 tech-
nically belong to the extraordinary jurisdiction ef the High Court. A. claim
for damages cannot at present be included in such proceedings. even in the
High Courts exercising ordinary original civil jurisdiction as stated above. The
reason is, that article 226 of the Constitution is invoked by a petition seeking
the appropriate order. In contrast, the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of
a High Court, wherever it exists. in general, envisaged as invocable only
by a plaint framed in accordance with the provisions of the procedural law.
whether contained in the Code of Civil Procedure. 1908 or in the rules of
procedure framed by the High Court for the exercise of its own jurisdiction.

ng in respect of wh

et toa pecuniary minimum: morco’

3.2. It would. therefore, be necessary to amend the law. if the reform indi-
cated above is to be incorporated in our legal system, What we have in mind

Camrat’ Act is a provision to be enacted in a separate Central Act, under a suitable title.
erm pes The principal provision of such Central Act could be somewhat in the follow-
damages in ing term:

applicatio

for, judicial ~On an application for judicial review! under article 226 of the Constitu-
article 226, tion, the High Court may award damages to the applicant if—

(a) the applicant joined with his application a claim for damages aris-
ing from any matter to which the application relates: and.

(b) the High Court is satisfied that, if the claim had been made in a
suit instituted by the applicant at the time of making his applica-
tion, he would have been awarded damages”.

‘Judicial Review” is not an expression employed in ce Indian Consivation, but ar
is well understood.



[See ions

3

3.6] Law Commission of India

343. While conferring on the High Court the power to grant damages as Grant of
हि है rovisi zi . damages to
recommended above,’ some provisions should also be inserted to make it clear ge discre-
that even if the illegality of the act complained of is established, the High tionary.
Court is not bound to award the relief of damages in every case where the
relief is claimed. It is well understood that the High Court may, even now,
refuse to grant relief by way of writ under article 226, where there has been
undue delay in making the application or where there are other adequate
grounds for such a refusal. In our view, it is proper that in regard to the
newly added relicf also. such a discretion on the part of the High Court should
be recognised. The object can be achieved by inserting a provision somewhat.
in the following terms. in the legislation to be passed to give effect to our
main recommendation.”

“Nothing in this Act shel! be construed as reridering the award of
damages obligatory. on an application for judicial review under article
226 of the Constitution where the High Court considers that-— -

(a) there has been undue delay in making the application. or

(b) the grant of such relicf would involve the determination of questions
which cannot be conveniently gone into in a proceeding under that
article, or

(c) for any other reason it is inappropriate to determine the question
of damages in such application.
3.4. At the same time. it is necessary to provide that the refusa! by the Another
High Court of the claim for damages, under the above provision’ shall not neem!
be a bar to the institution of a regular civil suit for damages in a competent Effect of
court. Some such provision appears to be advisable, since refusal of the nature मी gamages
contemplated would be not on the merits or by reason of any mandatory
statutory bar, but would be attributable to the inconvenience of deciding a
claim for damages in the proceeding under article 226. We are not suggest-
ing any draft for the purpose, but the gist of the provision would be as above.

3.5. We have considered the question whether it is necessary to make _ it Limitation.
clear specifically that the power to nt damages would be subject to the law
of limitation. Tt appears to us that this is not necessary. The manner in
which we have formulated the proposal implics that limitation would be a
bar.’ Of course, this is in addition to the discretion of the Court to refuse
view for laches or for other adequate reason

3.6. To revert to the recommendation that we are making’ we have sevot- Legislative
ed some thought to the question whether the legislation that we have proposed S°mPetence.
would fall within the legislative competence of Parliament. On an exami-
nation of the matter, we are satisfied that it would so fall.” The proposal can
he viewed as dealing with the “procedure” for claims for “actionable wrongs”.

The topics of “civil procedure” (Concurrent list, entry 13) and “actionable
wrongs” (Concurrent list. entry 8) are both matters falling within the Concurrent
List. oat

‘Paragraph 3.2, supra

°Paragraph 3.2 supra.

“Paragraph 3.3 supra.

‘Paragraph 3.2 supra.

*Paragraph 3.3 supra.

“Paragraph 3.2 to 3.4 supra.

Constitution of India, Seventh Schedule. Concurrent List, entries 8. 118, 13 and 46.

on



6 . + Law Commission of India fSeciions 3.6—5.1}

In the alternative. the reconmendation could be viewed as relating to the
“administration of justi‘ce”—a matter now included in the Concurrent list (Con-
current list. entry 11A). If ths regarded as too general a source, the proposal
can be viewed as dealing wth “jurisdiction and powers of all courts except
the Supreme Court with epect to any of the matters in the Concurrent List”
(Concurrent list, entry 46). One or more than one of the entries referred to
above, taken singly or taken in combination, must cover the proposed legisla-
tion. We do not think that it should be necessary to go to the residuary entry.

Recommenda- 3.7. While carrying out the above changes in the law, it is also desirable
tion to that the provisions of section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure. 1908 requir-
Section 80, ing notice to be given where a suit is to be instituted against the government
ae dure or a public officer should be deleted. A recommendation to that effect has

Code. 1908. been made in successive Reports of the Law Commission’ and ii is our most
emphatic recommendation that the section should disappear from the statute
Book. Analogous provisions in other special laws should also be removed,
as recommended already by the Law Commission’ in a separate Report on the
subject. Such provisions are totally indefensible in modern society. The dele-
tion of section 80 of the Code, and of provisions analogous thereto as con-
tained in special enactments. should be regarded as a substantive recommenda-
tion of our own.

CHAPTER 4

SUBSTANTIVE LAW OF STATE LIABILITY

We may make it clear that the present report is not concerned with
ition in substantive law as regards the liability of public authorities.
The legal principles as to the cases in which relief can be claimed for adminis-
trative illegality remains unaffecied. However, we cannot help observing that it
is desirable that the reforms already recommended on the subject by the Law
Commission in various Reports--particularly, the recommendations relating to
government liability in tort\—should be implemented as early as possible, in the
interests of social justice and in conformity with modern trends.

Substantive 4.

law not the
affected © Pt

Court fees. 4.2. For the present purpose, we do not pause to consider the question
of court feces on a claim for damages. when such claim is included in an ap-
plication for judicial review.

ड़
CHAPTER 5
MISCELLANEOUS
Reforms in 5.1. The recommendations which we have made may seem very modest,
the Common- —_ in comparison with some of the more ambitious schemes concerning adminis-

wealth

' Law Commission of India, 27ih and S4th Reports (Code of Civil Procedure, 1908).
= Law Commission of India, £6th Report (Notice under certain statutory provisions).
3 [4७ Commission of India, Ist Report (Liability of the State in Tort).


[Sections 5.1—5.4] Law Commission of India

trative law, introduced elsewhere. Professor De Smith has summarised some
of them as under'\—

“A number of notable reforms to the procedural and remedial aspects
of the law of judicial review of administrative action had already been
introduced over the last few years in several common law Commonwealth
jurisdictions. For instance, legislation passed in New Zealand in 1972
conferred. jurisdiction upon the Administrative Division of the Supreme
Court to administer the new remedy of an application for review in
which an applicant may request any relief to which he would be en-
titled in proceedings for an order of certiorari, prohibition or mandamus,
or for an injunction or declaration. A broad'y similar scheme had been
introduced in Ontario in 1971 as part of a larger legislative package of
reforms covering a wide range of administrative law issues’. Also in
Canada, the federal Parliament had enacted in the previous year impor-
tant legislation establishing a Federal Court whose jurisdiction included
supervisory and appellate review of administrative agencies created by
federal legislation‘; for our purposes the most interesting aspect of this
Act is that it creates a new statutory remedy, the application for judicial
review, complete with a statutory list of grounds upon which the remedy
will be granted’. And more recently, important statutory reforms re-
lating to the judicial review of federal administrative tribunals have been

introduced by the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia’.

5.2. Those are far reaching and exhaustive reforms. In the present Report
we have limited ourselves to the narrow question posed at the outset, for reasons
already stated.

5.3. As to England, by recent reforms, it has been provided that in an Position ia

application for judicial review, not only a declaration can be made or an injunc- England
tion granted, but damages, if claimed, may also be joined with the application.
The law now appears as section 31 of the Supreme Court Act, 1981. This
section is a codification of (new) Order 53 of the Rules of the Supreme Court,
establishing the procedure for application for judicial review introduced in 1977.
The new procedure had implemented the recommendations of the English Law
Commission’. Codification was considered appropriate because of the importance
of the new procedure.

5.4. For convenience of reference’ we give, in an Appendix to this Re- Appendix
port, an extract of section 31 of the Supreme Court Act (Eng.) referred to in
the above paragraph’.

1§.A. De Smith, Judicial Review (1980), page 565.
“Judicature Amendment Act, 1972; see also Judicature Amendment Act, 1977, sections
यु

®Judicial Review Procedure Act, 1971; see J.M. Envas (1977) 55 Can. Bar Rev. 148.
‘Federal Court Act, 1970.

5Section 28, For a critical analysis, see David J. Mullan, The Federal Court Act
Administrative Law Jurisdiction (1977). a background paper published by the Law
Reform Commission of Canada.

“Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act, 1977. For a comment on this legisla-
tion, and the work of the Administrative Tribunal, see 0.0 5. Taylor (1977) 51 A.LJ.
804; H. Witmore and M. Aronson Review of Administrative Action (1978) 15—29.

7English Law Commission, Report on Remedies in Administrative Law, Comm. No.
73, Cmd. 6407 (1976).

*See Appendix.

‘Paragraph 5.3 supra,
3-38 M of LI & CA/ND/83



Law Commission of tidia
APPENDIX

EXTRACT OF SECTION 31, SUPREME COURT ACT, 1981'
(०. 54).

31. (1) An application to the High Court for one or more of the follow-
ing forms of relief, namely—

(8) an order of mandamus, probibition or certiorari;

{b) a declaration or injunction under sub-section (2); or

(c) an inianction under section 30 restraining a pezson not entitled to do
so from acting in an office to which that section applies,

shall be made in accordance with rules of court by a procedure to be known
as an application for judicial review.

(2) A declaration may be made or an injunction granted under this sub-
section in any case where an application for judicial review, seeking that relief.
has been made and the High Court considers that, having regard to—

(a) the nature of the matters in respect of which relief may be granted
by orders of mandamus, prohibition or certiorari;

(0) the nature of the persons and bodies against whom relicf may be
granted by such orders; and

(©) all the circumstances of the case,

it would be just and convenient for the declaration to be made or the injunction
to be granted, as the case may be.’

(3) No application for judicial review shall be made unless the leave of
the High Court has been obtained in accordance with rules of court; and the
court shall not grant leave to make such an application unless it considers
that the applicant has a sufficient interest in the matter to which the applica-
tion relates.

(4) On an application for judicial review the High Court may award
damages to the applicant if-—

{a) he has joined with his application a claim for damages arising from
any matter to which the application relates; and

(0) the court is satisfied that, if the claim had been made in an action
begun by the applicant at the time of making his application, he
would have been awarded damages.

(5) If, on an application for judicial review seeking an order of certiorari,
the High Court quashes the decision to which the application relates, the High
Court may remit the matter to the court, tribunal or authority concerned, with
a direction to reconsider it and reach a decision in accordance with the find-
ings of the High Court.

(6) Where the High Court considers that there has been undue delay in
making an application for judicial review, the court may refuse to grant—-

(a) leave for the making of the application; or

1Cf. 0. 53, +. 7, R.S.C. discussed in Chief Constable v. Envas (1982) 3 All E.R. 141.
156 (HLL)

[Appendix]


[Appendix] Law Commission of India

(b) any relief sought on the application, if it considers that the granting
of the relief sought would be likely to cause substantial hardship to.
or substantially prejudice the rights of, any person or would be de-
trimental to good administration.

(7) Sub-section (6) is without prejudice to any enactment or rule of court
which has the effect of limiting the time within which an application for judi-
cial review may be made.

(K. K. MATHEW)
CHAIRMAN (Sd.)

(NASIRULLAH BEG)
MEMBER (Sd.)

0. P. CHATURVEDI)
MEMBER (Sd.)

(P. M. BAKSHD
PART-TIME MEMBER (Sd.)

(VEPA P. SARATHI)
PART-TIME MEMBER Sd.)

(A. K. SRINIVASAMURTHY)
MEMBER-SECRETARY (Sd.)

Dated: August 16, 1983.

MGIPCBE—S1--38 M of LJ & CA/ND/83—31-8-1984—625.


PLD .92. LXXXXIL
. 1 (625—1984 CDSK. IV)

Price : Inland: Ro, 5.25 or Foreign £ 0.61 or $ 1.89

PRINTED. BY THE MANAGER GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, COIMBATORE-19 ©
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DBLHI-110 006
i . 1984 }