‘LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

NINETY-THIRD REPORT
ON
DISCLOSURE OF SOURCES OF INFORMATION
BY MASS MEDIA

September, 1983


LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

JUSTICE K. K. MATHEW
D.O. NO. F. 2(2)/83-L.C.

SHASTRI BHAVAN
NEW DELHI
SEPTEMBER, 9, 1983.

My dear Minister,

1 am forwarding herewith the Ninety-Third Report of the Law
Commission on “Disclosure of Sources of Information by Mass Media”.

2. The subject was taken up by the Law Commission on its own. The
need for taking up the subject is explained in Chapter I of the Report.

3. The Commission is indebted to Shri P. M. Bakshi, Part-time
Memter and Shri A. K. Srinivasamurthy, Member-Secretary, for their
valuable assistance in the preparation of the Report.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(K. K. Mathew)

Shri Jagannath Kaushal,
Minister of Law, Justice & Co. Affairs,
New Delhi.

Encl. 93rd Report.

@
1-443 LAD/ND/83



CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER

CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER

1

wo

Ce IAA ७ aA

CONTENTS
INTRODUCTORY . . . . . . .

THE LEGAL OBLIGATION TO GIVE EVIDENCE

EVIDENTIARY PRIVILEGES IN INDIA, AND THEIR
RATIONALE . . . पु : . . .

ENGLISH LAW . . . . . . . . .
COMMONWEALTH COUNTRIES. . . मु
POSITION IN THE UNITED STATES

THE ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION. o . .
COMMENTS RECEIVED ON THE WORKING PAPER).
RECOMMENDATIONS. . . . . . .

ii)

PAGE

16
19
25
28



CHAPTER 7
INTRODUCTORY

ia. This Report deals with the question whether a journalist or other
person responsible for a publication by way of mass media should be
compelled to disclose, in a court of law, the sources of information acquired
by him in confidence for the purpose of his profession. This, of course, is
a broad formulation of the question that is proposed to be dealt with in
this Report. There are several subordinate issues that are also proposed
to be considered in this context. The question pertains to the law of evidence,
but obviously a consideration thereof necessitates an examination of many
other fields of law. The question has been taken up by the Law Commission
of India, suo motu, having regard to its importance and relevance to current
thinking.

1.2. For a long time, there has been going on a debate whether
journalists’ should be given a right to refuse to disclose in court the source
of their information, According to the present position on the subject,
(as will be evident from the ensuing discussion),? no such privilege available
to journalists is recognised in Indian law.

In most countries, the Code of professional ethics expects that journalists
shall not disclose what is obtained by them in confidence. But this rule
of professional conduct has not so far received recognition in law courts or
in statutory provisions in India.

1.3. The justification for considering reform of the law on the subject
is mainly sought to be derived from the circumstances in which, and the
conditions on which, information is obtained by the journalist. As a rule,
when a journalist wishes to use information obtained professionally by him,
he normally credits the source by name, with such further identification as
may be necessary to establish the validity of the speaker’s knowledge.
However, to this general position, there are certain exceptions. In a study
undertaken by the International Press Institute, the position was stated as
under, a few years ago ४

“Very few reports appear in print without some specific attribution
to source. This is regarded as essential if the reader is to be able to
form a proper judgment of the weight to be given to a particular
statement. But there are exceptions. They are infrequent, but may
be impo tant. There are times and circumstanceS.........,..0066 When
an informant may not wish to be identified, as the source of a statement,

To the journalist who has established himself as a reliable reporter,

accurate and responsible in his approach to his task, the ‘source’. may

nevertheless be willing to provide certain information with the under-
standing that it will not be attributed to him.

‘Ihe informant (as was explained in the above study) may have good
teason for wishing to remain anonymous. It may be a personal reason; but
perfectly understandable and legitimate. There may even be a reason
bearing some direct relation to the public welfare. If the source really

‘The expression “journalist” is uscd for the sake of brevity, Other persons responsible
for any publication may also stand on the same footing.

2, Paragraphs 2.3 and 3.2, infra.

3, International Press Institute, Survey No. 6, Professional Secrecy and the Journalist
{Amo Press), (1972).

1

1

Scope and
genesis.

Position in law.

Journealistic
practice.



The moye for
reform,

Report on the
Evidence Act.

Scheme of
discussion.

2

wished to remain anonymous and if the journalist considered the information
worthy of use, he would use it without directly attributing the information
to a particular source,

The question that arises for consideration is whether the law should
recognise the practice followed by journalists and incorporate it as a privilege
that could be claimed if the journalist is called upon in a court of law
(or other authority having legal power to compel a witness to testify).

1.4. The present position in this regard, as already stated,' is that
there is no such privilege except in countries where it is conterred specifically
by statute. The position has been modified in certain countries, thougn
not in India. However, even in countries where such a reform has been
mooted, legislation in this direction has been rather slow. Thus, in a case
that arose before the English court of Appeal,’ Lord Justice Scarman (as
he then was), speaking in the context of an application for the production
under summons of an unpublished television film, observed that “while
the law offered the press and the broadcasting authorities some protection
against oppressive application it was arguable that more protection was
needed.” He expressed the view that this was a problem for law reform.
However, no such reform was, until very recently, effected in England.*
In fact, it may be mentioned that a journalist in England who refused to
reveal his sources of information whon ordered to do so by a judge was
proceeded against for contempt of court. Fortunately, it was found in this
case that the answer to the question was not relevant and necessary to the
issue before the Court. The journalist was, therefore, held to be not guilty.

1.5. Incidentally, it may be mentioned here that the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872, which codified the law of evidence in India, has been reviewed®
by the Law Commission in a comprehensive Report. But the particular
question now under consideration had not presented itself before the
Commission at that time. 5

1.6, In the present Report, it is proposed to deal first with the existing
law in India or the subject, and next with the position in a few selected
countries. The issues that require consideration will then be formulated,
followed by our concrete recommendations for amendment of the law.

Paragraph 1.2, supra.

Souier v. Haldguarh, (1975) 2 All E.R. 1009, 1022.

For the present English law, see Chapter 4, infra.

4-0, v. Indian, Tho Times, Pub, 20, 1982.

Law Commission of India, 69th Report (Indian Evidence Act, 1872).

29 # ४७४५०



CHAPTER 2
THE LEGAL OBLIGATION TO GIVE EVIDENCE

2.1. It is well settled that there is a general legal obligation upon all The generat
persons to give evidence in court concerning relevant facts. This obligation ov
has been regarded as essential to the administration of justice.'| Coupled
with this obligation is the obligation to answer all questions relating to
relevant facts ; without such an. obligation, the judicial enquiry, it is postu-
lated, could not be completed successfully.

2.2. A few exceptions to this general obligation (that is to say, the Theex eptiont.
obligation to give evidence and to answer all relevant questions), have been
created in most common law countries, based on considerations of public
policy. However, it may be stated that the exceptions have been narrowly
framed and the common law 88 been rather rigid in creating new
exceptions,

2.3. In common with most common law countries, the Indian legal Indian kw.
system also postulates that every person is bound to answer al] questions
held to be relevant by the court, unless there be applicable a specific legal
provision conferring immunity on the ground of public policy.

2.4. It is not necessary for the present purpose to enumerate all these The privilege”
exceptions, or to catalogue the recognised evidentiary privileges. The '? haw.
question immediately for consideration is whether, to the list of such
privileges, disclosure of the source of information obtained by a journalist
in confidence should be added. In this context, it should also be pointed
out at the outset, that while the breach of confidence in business and personal
relationships may often be actionable (or, in some cases, even criminally
punishable), the protection of confidence in itself as a basis for creating
an exemption from the obligation to give evidence of the matters concerned
has not so far been the approach adopted in most common law countries.
Whenever, in the sphere of the law of evidence, a privilege has been
recognised in respect of a confidential information, the law has generally
insisted upon the presence of some other elements that would justify the
recognition of an evidenciary privilege?

2.5. Traditionally, it has been the position of the law’ that the public Right «
has a right to every man’s evidence. Obviously, a contrary rule would Public 10. vid:
render orderly legal procedure both frustrating and futile. The interest of exec.
society favours the procuring from each person of relevant facts, in order
to resolve the issue being litigated or investigated. This principle is perhaps
implicitly assumed to be a postulate of fair trial.

As the Supreme Court of the United States has observed,’ there is a
long standing principle that the Grand Jury has a right to every man’s
evidence, “except that evidence which is protected by a constitution, a
common law or statutory privilege.” In England, as early as 1612, Lord
Bacon declared? that “all subjects, without distinction of degrees, owe to
the King tribute and service, not only of their deed and hand, but of their
knowledge and discovery.” Therefore, each citizen owed the King unfailing
ie: A ररन्‍क्््कओं ं  घ+--क्‍स्‍कन--+--++ 5

See further, paragraph 2.5, infra.

See, further, Chapter 3, infra...

Law Commission of India, 69th Report (Indian Evidence Act, 1872), page 627
Braamgburg v. Haves, (1972) 33 L. Ed 626.

Countess of Shrewsburv's case, (1613) 12 Coke..94; 2 How. St. Tr. 769, 773,

wR DS

3



History of
the law in
England.

Positloa in
India—
general
Obligation. 7

Considerations

of public
policy as
creating
peivile ze

Wagmore’s
statement of

the

vetionale,

4

duty to reveal all his knowledge, incliding its sources. To this general
principle, the law creates an exception in the public interest, whenever it
grants a privilege in the realm of evidence.

2.6. Historically, the legal obligation to give evidence is fairly old.
In England, by Act of 5 Eliz, Chap. 9, 5. 12, provision was made for the
service of process out of any court of record, requiring the person served
to testify concerning any cause or matter pending in the court, under a
penalty of £ ro besides damages to be recovered by the party aggrieved."
When it was that grand juries first resorted to compulsory process for wit-
nesses, is not clear.2 But, by 1612, the obligation to give evidence had
come to be recognised. And, by the Act 7 and 8 Wm. IIL, Chapter 3,
section 7 (1695), parties indicated for weason or misprison of treason were
given the like process to compel their witness to appear as was usually
granted to compel witnesses ७ ant xainst them: clearly evincing that
process for Crown witnesses was already in use."

Thus, the general obligation to give evidence is well recognised in
Common law systems.

2.7. Speaking broadly, this is the position in India also. Under the
Indian Evidence Act, there is a general obligation on all persons to give
evidence in Court, and to answer all questions held to be relevant by the
court, except in special cases in which the law confers protection.

2.8. No doubt, considerations of public policy have led to the emergence
of certain. privileges, available in certain special situation.4 In law, a
privilege is an immunity or exemption conferred by special grant to a certain
class or individual in derogation of a common rights Usually, a privilege
or disability is created by lw on the eround of some consideration of public
Policy. The law excludes. ur dispensés with, some kinds of evidence on
grounds of public policy. keravse it is thought that greater mischiefs would
probably result from requiring or permitting the admission of such evidence
than from granting a privilese or creating a disability in respect thereof.
Where privilege is granted, it is based upon a recognition that in appropriate
circumstances the public henefits more from protecting the particular relation-
ship, than it is injured by the impediments which such privileges may
cause to the administration of justice.

2.9, The situations in which a privilege should be recognised has been
the subject of much iearned discrssion. Four conditions must, according to
Wiemore, be fulfilled before a privilege against disclosure should be enacted
in the law of evidence. His stotement of the position has almost become a
classic, The conditions are: ©

(1) The commenication must originate in a confidence that the facts

communicated will not be disclosed.

1. See Havithbury v, Harvey, Cro. Eliz. nt. 1. 9. 131. 78 Eng. Rep. 1141 Growin v. West,
Cro. Car. 522, $40. 70 Eng. Rep. 1032-1066 (March 18, 1640).

2. Blair v. U.S. (1918) 63 L. Fd. 979, 987,
3. Blair v, US. (1918) 63 F Td, 979, 982

4. Chapter 3, infra.

5. Wabster’s New World Dictior:
6... & Wigmore Evidence (MeNaug

(1955), page 1160.
on Td. 1961), paragraph 2235.



5
(2) This element of confidentiality must be essential to the full and
satisfactory maintenance of the relationship between parties.

(3) The relation must be one which, in the opinion of the community,
ought to be sedulously fostered.

(4) The injury that would injure to the relation by disclosure of the
communications must be greater than the benefit gained by the
disclosure for the correct disposal of the litigation.

2—443 LAD/ND/83



The exceptions
to the general
rule,

The binding
thread.

CHAPTER 3
EVIDENTIARY PRIVILEGES IN INDIA, AND THEIR RA'T{ONALE

3-1. To the general rule that every person of sound mind is compellable
to answer before a Court all questions held by the court to be relevant to
matters under inquiry, a few exceptions are provided by law. There is,
in the first place, a constitutional privilege against self-incrimination,! no
person accused of an oflence shall be compelled to be a witness against
himself.

Secondly, under the Evidence Act,? certain matters are privileged from
disclosure in a court of law. The provisions on the subject are somewhat
elaborate. It would be convenient to quote from the Report of the Law
Commission on the Evidence Act’, where the matters so privileged were
summarised as under :—

“(z) matters relating to conduct of judges or coming to the knowledge
of judges, etc. in their judicial capacity (section 121) 5
(2) communications which are made to a spouse during marriage
(section 122} ;
(3) State secrets (sections 123-124) 5
(4) communications between a legal adviser and a client (sections 126
and 129) 3
(5) certain title decds (sections 129, 131) ; and
(6) certain incriminating matters (section 132).”

Journalistic privilege is not recognised in Indian Law. Although there
do not appear to be any reported Indian decisions on the subject, this is a
fairly well established position, and is borne out by at Icast two incidents
that took place in India in the past, where journalists preferred to court
punishment rather than disclose their correspondents or contributors.4 In
one case, Kaliprasanna Kavyabisharad, editor of the Hitabadi, declined to
say who was the writer of a poem published in his paper for which he had
been charged with libel. The manuscript was produced in court, but with
the portion in which the name appeared torn off. He was sent to jail for
nine months.*

In the other case, Repin Chandra Pall was sentenced to six months?
imprisonment, because he refused to depose who was the author of an
article for which Aurobindo Ghose was being tried for scdition. Aurobindo
Ghose was subsequently acquitted. Pall was sent to jail for six months?
for refusal to depose as to the above fact.

3.2. In the Report® of the Law Commission on the Evidence Act, the
rationale underlying the various evidentiary privileges was thus stated :-—
“The privileges recognised by the law of evidence differ in their content,
but a certain binding thread seems to connect them. To the explanation

Article 20(3), Constitution of India.

Sections 121-132, Indian Evidence Act, 1872.

Law Commission of India, 69th Report (Indian Evidence Act), page 630, para 62.13.
Note. “Journalistic privilege” (1963) Vol. 1, No. 9, Supreme Court Appeals,
Editorial, “Journalists and their sources” (318 March, 1980) Vol. 84, C.W.N. 85-87.
Law Commission of India, 69th Report (Indian Evidence Act, 1872), page 628.
para 62.5.

कफ मे 9 ०:०

6



. 7

given above-public welfare--may be added another element, namely, that
most, if not all, of the privileges recognised by the law are needed for the
proper functioning of the particular relationship. This relationship may be
of various types. It may be domestic—as of husband and wife or profes-
sional—attorney and  client—or may be wider—e.g. the Government’s
retention of certain infcrmation, or it may consist in a particular character
occupied by the person concerned, e.g. the judge privileged under section 121.
The law assumes that the proper performance of the function in question,
or the proper maintenance of the relationship in question, justifies the grant
of an evidentiary privilege in respect of certain matters which are consi-
dered essential for that function or relationship. It is on this assumption
that the privileges are founded.”

3.3. In order to indicate more clearly the common thread underlying
the various privileges, reference was made in_ the above-mentioned Report!
of the Law Commission to the California Evidence Code, section gto of
which makes the privileges applicable to “all proceedings”.* That section
of the California Evidence Act has the following Explanatory note which
may be helpful for understanding the rationale of evidentiary privileges.
The note was mainly intended to justify the broad application of the privi-
leges (i.e. their application to administrative tribunals also), but the observa-
tions are of interest for our purposes also, and may be quoted from the

above Report :-—

“Most rules of evidence are designed for use in courts. Generally their
purpose is to keep unreliable or pre-judicial evidence from being presented
to the trier of fact. Privileges are granted, however, for reasons of policy
unrelated to the reliability of the information involved. A privilege is
granted because it is considered more important to keep certain information
confidential than it is to require disclosure of all the information relevant

to the issue in a pending proceeding.”

“Thus, for example, to protect the attorney-client relationship, it is
necessary to prevent disclosure of confidential communications made in the
course of that relationship. If confidentiality is to be protected effectively by
a privilege, the privilege must be recognised in proceedings other than judi-
cial proceedings. The protection aflorded by a privilege would be in-
sufficient if a court were the only place where the privilege could be
invoked.”

3.4. The above material has been quoted from the Report of the Law
Commission on the Evidence Act as it touches the heart of the matter
under consideration and addresses itself directly to the core of the rationale
of evidentiary privilege. In this sense, it is not only very relevant to the
specific question to be considered now, but may even be described as almost

invoked.”

3.5. As would have been evident from the position as to privilege
under the Indian Law stated above,t the Indian Evidence Act does not
recognise any privilege on the part of a journalist to refuse to disclose the
source of information obtained by him in confidence.

1. Law Commission of India, 69th Report (Indian Evidence Act), page 628, para 62.6.

2. Section 910, California Evidence Code.
3. Section 910, California Evidence Code, Explanatory notes, quoted in Law Commission
of India, 69th Report (Indian Evidence Act, 1872), page 628, para 62.1

Paragraph 3.1, supra.

The rationale
as dealt

with in. 7
the California
Evidence Code,

Core of the
privilage of
Journalists.

No privilege
in India for
journalists.



Provision in
the Press
Council Act,
1978.

8

3.6. However, mention must be made of the provision made by the
Press Council Act in relation to inquiries held by the Press Council under
that Act. While section 150) of that Act, in line with the general approach
of the law, imposes a legal obligation to give evidence before the Press
Council, sub-section (2) of that section gives a protection to journalists, in
these terms."

Section 15(2) of the Press Council Act.

“15(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to compel
any newspaper, news agency, editor or journalist to disclose the source
of any news or information published by that newspaper or received or
reported by that news agency, editor or journalist.”

We shall now refer briefly to the position elsewhere on the point at
issue.

1. Section 15(2), Press Council Act, 1978, (37 of 1978).



CHAPTER 4
ENGLISH LAW
1. The Common Law Rule

4-1. English academic and professional literature keeps ethics and law
distinct. A cardinal rule of journalistic ethics in England js that a journalist
does not divulge the sources of his information. Many informants, it is
stated, would “dry up” if they are not confident that their identity would
be kept secret.'

4.2. But the common law rules of evidence did not give journalists
a privilege (i.c. a right to refuse to answer certain questions in evidence). As
Lord Denning observed, the professional rule cannat be clevated into a legal
rule? This was clearly laid down in one of the English cases decided in
1963. It was held that there was no such privilege. In that case, two
journalists were imprisoned for refusing to identify their sources before the
tribunal inquiring into the Vassall Spy Affairs In another case of the same
year, a third journalist was sentenced for similarly refusing to disclose the
source, but escaped his sentence when the source that had supplied informa-
tion to him, came forward.*

In 1975, Gordon Airs of the Daily Record was fined 500 pounds for
refusing to identify a source when called as a witness in a “Tartan Army”
trial.5

4.3. A journalist may be required to identify his sources before courts,
tribunals of inquiry or a Committee of cither House of Parliament. In the
Allighan Affair, the Evening News Editor was held to be in contempt for
refusing to tell the Committce of Privileges which M.P. had been writing
a political column in his newspaper.’ No action, however, was taken against
him, nor against Mr. Gordon Greig of the Daily Mail when he withheld
a source from the Committec.

4.4. Some Courts in England used to adopt an authoritarian approach
on the subject. For example, Lord Emsile said in the case relating to
Gordon Airs (Daily Telegraph) :

“Any witness, including any journalist witness, who declines to
answer any competent and relevant question in court, must realise that
he will be in contempt and liable to incur severe punishment.”

In one of the English cases decided in 1963,* Lord Parker told the
journalist : “There must be emergencies in the interests of the State where
private interests, rofessional interests and all interests must be subordinated.
Your informant Vlinselt is under a duty to come forward and assist the

1. Anthony Richards, Law for Journalists (1977), page 82,
Attorney General v. Mutholland & Foster, (1963), 1 All E.R, 767.
3, Attorney General v, Mulholland & Foster, (1963) 1 All, E. R, 767.
|. Attorney General v. Clough, (1963) 1 All E.R. 420.
5. Anthony Richards Law for Journalists (1977), page 82. Sce also paragraph 4.4. infra.
infra.
6, Anthony Richards, Law for Journalists (1977), page 82.

7. Anthony Richards, Law for Journalists (1977), pase 82, See also Robin Calendar
Smith Press Law (1978), page 127.

8. Attorney General v, Clough 9 (1963) 1, All E.R, 420.

9

Journalistic
ethics and_
Tegal position.

The common
law rule.

Power to
demand
disclosure
of sources.

Judicial
attitudes.



Official
Secrets Act,
1920.

Professional
relationships
and its

protection.

Dicta in cases
decided in 1963---
The element of
discretion,

1G

interests of the State. How can you say that there is any dishonour on you
if you do what is your duty as a citizen to put the interests of the State
above everything ?”.

4-5. There are in force, in England, statutory provisions — speci-
fically requiring the disclosure of certain information. One of them is the
Official Secrets Act, 1920, which provides as under :--

“Tt shall be the duty of every person to give on demand to a Chief
officer of police or to a superintendent or other officer of police not
below the rank of Inspector appointed by a Chief officer for the
purpose............ any information in his power relating to an offence
or a suspected offence under the [Official Secrets Act, 1911] ......... and
if any person fails to give such information............ he shall be guilty
of an offence.”

In 1938, Ernest Lewis, a journalist in the Daily Despatch, wrote 2
story about a wanted man. The information for this could have come only
from a police officer, whose identity the police wished to know. Lewis
refused to disclose the identity. The Magistrate convicted him under the
Official Secrets Act. Rejecting his appeal, the Lord Chief Justice observed
that the case was “too plain for argument.’*

Il. The Judicial attitude

4.6. Occasionally, in England, Judicial concern for the protection of
certain confidential professional relationships did find expression. Although
there was no legal privilege against disclosure by journalists, one docs come
across English judicial dicta laying stress on the need to balance the public
interest in the disclosure of truth, and the public interest in the maintenance
of professional confidence.

4-7. Two English cases of 1963 may again be referred to in this
context. In Att. Gen. v. Clough’ after the judge of first instance had denied
the existence of any legal privilege to a newspaper reporter in respect of the
source of his information, the judge added that “‘it still.......... would
remain open to this court to say in the special circumstances of any particular
case that public policy did demand that the journalist should be immune...... ”
Again, in tt. Gen. v. Mutholland,* in the Court of Appeal, Lord Denning,
MLR. speaking of clergymen, journalists, bankers and doctors, commented
as under :—-

“The judge will respect the confidence which each member of these
honourable professions receives in the course of it, and will not direct
him to answer unless not only it is relevant, but also it is a proper and,
indeed, necessary question in the course of justice to be put and
answered.”

Lord Justice Donovan, in the same case,*° added that, on the facts of a
particular situation, a trial judge should exercise a discretion not to compel
a journalist or a doctor to reveal information “received under the seal of
confidence”, where the judge concludes “that more harm than good would
result from compelling a disclosure or punishing a refusal to answer.”

Section 6, Official Secrets Act, 1920 (Eng.).

Lewis v. Castle, (1938), 2 K.B. 454,

Att. Gen. रे. Clough, (1963) 1 All ER. 420, 428.

Alt, Gen. v. Mulholland (1963) 1 All E.R. 767, 771, 773; (1963) 2 0.8. 477, 489, 492.
A.G. ए. Mulholland (1963) 1 All ER. 767, (1962) 2 0.8. 477.

एमी ७१:८०



It

4.8. Mr. Tustice James, when Chairman of the Tribunal investigating
the collapse of the Vehicle and General Insurance Co., declined to press a
Sunday Times journalist to reveal how the journalist knew that a Department
of Trade Inspector had been pressing for two years before the collapse of
company. The judge said, “We do not think this is a case where the
witness should be asked or pressed to go contrary to his belief as a member
of his profession.”

4.9. However, it should be noted that in a case decided? in 1977, the
House of Lords was divided on the question whether, absent a recognised
Ground of privilege, judges have the authority asserted in the dicta quoted?
above from cases of 1963.

4.10. The position was aptly put by Lord Shawcross, who later became
Chairman of the Press Council, in his evidence before the Salmon
Committee :4

“My experience is that a journalist is very rarely asked to disclose
a source unless it is absolutely necessary. If that is the view of the
judge, or of an inquiry tribunal, I think the source ought to be disclosed,
and that the public interest in knowing the source must prevail:”

4.11. In the Parliamentary furore which followed the Mulholland and
Fosser cases the Attorney General said:

“The occasions when a journalist can be required to disclose the
identity of this informant are extremely rare, and do not, in practice,
arise in the ordinary courts. They occur only when it becomes impor-
tant for a tribunal or a committee of either House of Parliament to
inquire into the truth of an allegation made by a journalist.”

He said that the number of times of journalist had been required to
divulge his source in the preceding cighty years was “about six”.

4-12. The discussion so far deals mainly with disclosure of the name
of the informant, However, less indulgence is likely to be shown where
an editor declines to name the reporter who wrote a story (as distinct from
disclosing the reporter’s source).§

Alan Hitchins, editor of the South London, when called as a witness
at the Old Bailey in 1956, was asked to identify the reporter who wrote a
story. He refused “in view of newspaper practice”. Judge Mande replied :
“Of giving away your informants : I know that. Isn’t this rather different है?!

Ultimately, Mr. Hitchins named the reporter.’

4-13 In this context, mention must be made of the Granada case,
which illustrates several facets of the position, Granada Television, (in a
iclevision interview), published confidential and secret material which dealt,
inter alia, with relations between the Management of the British

‘Anthony Richard, Law for the Journalists (1977), pages 82-83.
D.v.NSP. SC. (1977) 2 WLR. 201 : (1977) 1 AIL ER, 587

Paragraph 4.7, supra.

Lord Shaweross, Evidence before the Salmon Committee: Anthony Richards, Law for
Journalists (1972), pages 80-83.

Fyne

5. Para. 4.2, supra.
6. Anthony Richards, Law for Journalists (1977), page 83.
7, Manchester Guardian, 22nd September, 1956.

Ruling by
Mr. Justice
James.

House of
Lords
Case of 1977.

Shawcross's
view.

Attorney
General's
statement.

Disclosure of
reporter's

Fname.

Grannda
Case-Discovery—
Confidential
Information.


Summary of
the position
asto
journalists
in England

(Common law).

iuglish Act
of 1981.

12

Steel Corporation and the Government. The information and docu-
ments emanated from a very highly placed source within the British Stecl
management. British Steel issued a writ claiming an injunction and seeking
delivery of the documents ; in due course, the documents were delivered,
but somcone had tampered with the documents to ensure that the identity
of the source remained protected. The Vice Chancellor ordered Granada
Television to serve, on the British Steel Corporation, an affidavit setting
out the name of the person responsible for supplying the information. Granada
Television appealed. It was held that there was clear authority that the
Court should balance the private right to confidentiality against the public
good of press investigation of possible wrong-doing. In a proper case, the
court would protect the press from any compulsion to name a source, but
such immunity depended upon the publisher acting with a due sense of
responsibility. In the present case, Granada Television had not acted with
such responsibility and had abused their power. They had behaved so
badly as to forefeit their right to immunity.'

4.14. By way of a broad summary of the position in England at
common law,? it may be stated that while a journalist does not possess a
legal right, as such, to refuse to disclose his source of information, this does
not mean that the English courts are entirely unsympathetic to a request
by a journalist for being permitted not to disclose the source. In the first
place, in an action for libel, at the pre-trial stage, disclosure of the source
is not generally ordered in proceedings for discovery.’ In the second place,
in regard to the summoning of a journalist to give oral evidence and compel-
ling him to answer questions that would involve the disclosure of his source
of information, English judges usually do not insist on compelling him to
do 30, unless they regard the answer to the particular question as material.
Thirdly, during recent times, judicial suggestions for reform of the law
has also started pouring in, one example being the suggestion made by
Lord Justice Soarman (as he then was) in a case reported in 1975.*

IIL. English statutory provision of 1981

4.15. The position at common law has been summarised above. It
should now be mentioned that in England, by a statutory provision enacted
in 1981, sources of information contained in publications are protected to
a limited extent, Section 10 of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1981,° reads
as under :—

“ro. No court may require a person to disclose, nor is any person
guilty of contempt of court for refusing to disclose, the source of infor-
mation contained in a publication for which he is responsible, unless
it be established to the satisfaction of the court that disclosure is
necessary in the interests of justice or national security or for the preven-
tion of disorder or crime.”

Section 2(1) of the same Act defines the expression “publication”, as
under :—

“2(1)...... “publication” includes any speech, writing, ‘broadcast
or other communication in whatever form, which is addressed to the
public at large or any section of the public.”

British Steel Corp. v- Granada Television (1980), 3 W.L.R. 774 (HL)
For statutory modification of the Common Law role, see paragraph 4.15, infra.
0. 82, R. 6, RSC. Eng).

Senior v. Holdsworth, (1975), 2 All E.R. 1009.

Section 10, read with section 200, Contempt of Court Act, 198, (C, 49),

veep


13
By section 19 of the same Act, “court” is defined as including any
person or body exercising the judicial power of the State.

It may be of interest to note that in the Contempt of Courts Bill,
section 10 (quoted above) was not contained in the original Bill. Nor had
any such provision been recommended by the Phillimore Committee which
had reported (1974) on the law of Contempt of Court. The section came
into the Bill at the Commons Committee stage.!

IV. Obligation of disclosure—extent of

4.16. The above discussion shows that there is, in England now a
limited legal obligation to disclose the source, if the competent authority
considers such disclosure necessary. This limited obligation is governed by
section 10 of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1981. At the same time, it
should be remembered that there is no general duty of disclosure on all
occasions, Except when required by a competent authority, a journalist can-
not he required to disclose the source? of his information. Thus, in 1963,
the Finance Committee of the Brierely Hill Urban District Committee
demanded to know the names of a newspaper’s reporter and his informant
responsible for a story which gave advance information about a proposed
increase in the local rate. The editor of the paper said that he had “not
the slightest intention” of disclosing them.”

In 1938, the dominant Labour group on the Glassgow Corporation
were minded to take some action (unspecified) against a city journalist, who
had published details contained in a confidential document about proposed
increase in council house rents. The group also desired to take action
against his informant. They were, however, powerless to do anything about
the former, and unable to ascertain the latter.?

V. Disclosure in Libel Actions

4.17. Even before the passing of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1981,’
it was settled that, in England, in interlocutory proceedings (i.e. proceedings
preparatory to the hearing of a civil action), an interrogatory could not
generally be served requiring a newspaper, when sued for libel, to reveal
the source of information. Thus, it has been held‘ that in an action for
libel, a newspaper could not be required to reveal its source where fair
comment was pleaded as a defence. Again, the Court of Appeal would not
allow a sports writer to be required to reveal his source, where “justification”
was pleaded in an action for damage for libel 5-6

4.18. These judicial decisions on interrogatories in libel actions are
now embodied in the Rules of the Supreme Court, the revelant rule reading

as under’ :

“Tn an action for libel or slander where the defendant _ pleads
that the words or matters complained of are fair comment on a matter

Standing Committee A-7 sittings commencing 21 April 1981: Vol. 6, (Sec. Annota-
tion in Current Statutes).

Anthony Richards, Law for Journalists (1977), page 83.

Paragraph 4.13, supra.

Lyon v. Daily Telegraph, (1943) 1 K.B. 476 ; (1943) 2 All BR. 316 (८.0).

Lowson v. Oihama Press Ltd., (1949) 1 K.B. 129; (1943) 2 All E.R. 316, 717 (C.A,).
For extensive references, see Catley, Libel and Slander (1981), pata, 1216,

| 5. 82 R. 6, RSC. Eng).

3—443 LAD/ND/83

जम छमे

No general
duty in
England.

Libel
actions,

Supren |
Court

rule as

to dis-_
vovery in
lipel actions,



Infringement
of copy right.

The Press

Coune'l (U.K.).

Physician ind
p tint

14

of public interest or were published on a privileged occasion, no inter-
10; gatories as to the defendant’s sources of information or grounds of
belief sha'l be allowed.”

4.19. It may also be mentioned that in 1976, a judge refused to order
a newspaper to reveal its source of information to a former Government
Minister. The Minister was suing the newspaper publishers for alleged
infringement of copyright and misuse of confidential information."

VI. The Press Council of U.K.—Comments on disclosure of sources

4.20. Occasionally, the Press Council of U.K. has had to make
comments relating to the disclosure of sources by journalists. In 1959, the
Nottingham Branch of the National Union of Journalists complained to the
Press Council about visits to the Nottintham Evening Post by C.I.D.
officers who demanded to know the identities of the writers of certain nom
de pluse letters to the editor. The Press Council adjudicated as under :—

“The police must be at liberty to make inquiries in newspapers
offices as elsewhere, but it was improper for a request to be made to
a journalist to become a source of supply for information, on security
matters ”

VII. Medical records

4.21. It would be of interest to refer to some cases concerning medi-
cal records which have been decided in England. In general*, the common
law does not recognise any privilege of non-disclosure in regard to infor-
mation imparted by a patient to his physician in confidence. Although
suggestions for reform of the law on the subject have occasionally been
made, no? such legislation has so far been passed in England. Some com-
monwealth jurisdictions are, however, understood to have enacted laws on
the subject’.

4.22. The common law approach is represented by the dictum of
Jessel M. R., who pointed out that protection (in the law of evidence) is
confined to communications which a man must necessarily make in order
to obtain legal advice, when needed for the protection of his life fortune.
There are, he observed, many communications which, though absolutely
sary because, without them, the ordinary business of life cannot be
don, still are not privileged. *“The protection is of very limited
ter and in this country is restricted to the obtaining of the assistance
of lawyers as regards the conduct of the litigation or the right to property”.

nece!

VIII. Contemptuous matter

4.23. There is one matter in which judicial practice in England dis-
allows disclosure. Where a contemptuous article has been published, the
court will not compel the editor to disclose the source or to name the
author.®

1. Anthony Richards, Law for Journalists (1977), page 83.

2. Hunter ४ Mann, 2 All E.R. 414, 2, Cross Evidence (1979), pages 296-297.

3. Dv NS. P.C.C, (1978) A.C. 171, 245; (1976) 2 All E.R. 993 (Lord Edmunds
Davies)

4. Para 5.4, infra.

5. Wheeler v. La Merchant, (1881) 17 Ch. D. 675 (Jessel M.R.).

6. Re Bahama Islands Reference, (1893) A.C. 138-140 (P.C.).



15
IX. Theft of documents

4.24. Thero is an interesting case of “theit” of document by a journalist
in Engiand, David May, a journaust, ODtuucu pudcoysapas Of a Spauisn
banker atter the banker s Kldoap in Faris in 1y/4.  4ne pnotograpus, to
Prove their authenticity were accompanicd by tue banker's Paris resdence
permit. May retused to tell the pouce the sourse of the pnotograpns and the
permit. He was charged with nandling “stoien property” (tne permut),
but was acquitted. ‘1ne prosecution admitted that May' would not have
been charged it he had disciosed his source. They maintained that tne
journausts’ code of conduct was overridden, because the banker’s life was at
stake. The juage said that the journalists’ code ot silence was “not intiexibie”,
and “there may be circumstances in which .....५०००००० it is more honourable
to preserve lite than a confidence.”

In 1973, the Sunday Times and the Railway Gazette published stories
about projected cuts in rail services, based on a confidential document
which (the officials alleged) had been “removed” from Ministry offices,
Police raided the offices ot the Raitway Gazette, saying that they were investi-
gating an alleged thett of the documents. However, they failed to find the
source through which it nad been 1eaked. The Attorney-General later felt
that there was “insufiicient information” on which to charge any one with
“stealing” a photocopy of the document,?

1... R. 7. May, (1975) as summarised by Anthony Richards, Law for Journalists (1977),
pages 84-85.
2. Anthony Richards, Law for Journalists (1977), page 85,

Englsir
vases uf
प्म छा
documents.



Australia.

Ruling in
New South
Wales.

Ruling in
New South
Wales and
Australian
Capital
Territory.

Position in
Australia as
to clergyman
and physician.

CHAPTER 5
COMMONWEALTH COUNTRIES

कर, The position in a few Commonwealth countries on the subject under
consideration may now be mentioned in brief. Australia follows the general
rule of the common law that, in the absence of a statutory provision,
journalists have no right to refuse to disclose, in proceedings betore the
Court, the source of their information.! The following observations of
Starke J.,? made in regard to proceedings before a Royal Commission of
Inquiry that had been set up to determine the truth of allegations made
हवा by the journalist himself, are applicable to proceedings betore courts
also -—

_ “Next it was submitted that the source of the appellant's informa-
tion upon which the newspaper articles were based was privileged and
that he could not be compelled to disclose it. No such privilege exists
according to law. Apart trom statutory provisions, the 11655, in courts
of law, has no greater and no less privilege than every subject of the
king.”

In the above case, the articles published by the editor had alleged that
certain members of the Victorian Parliament (not named) had accepted
bribes in connection with two Bills introduced into Parliament. The Royal
Commission put him a qeustion as to the source of his information, which
he declined to answer. He was convicted of an oftence under the Evidence
Act 1928 and fined £15. He appealed to the High Court of Australia,
which held that he had been righttully convicted.

5.2. The view taken by the High Court of Australia in the above
case has been followed in a Full Court ruling in New South Wales. ‘the
Full Court held that a discretion to decline to order that a journalist should
answer a question as to his source existed only to the extent that the question
was irrelevant or improper.*

5-3. Ina later case decided in 1976, the Supreme Court of the Australian
Capital Territory took the same view.> This was an action for defamation
alleged to haye been commitied by the defendant corporation in publisaing
an article in its newspaper. The jurnalist who wrote the articles was asked.
during cross examination the names of the informants who had suppiied the
information alleged to be defamatory. The journalist refused to answer the
question, saying that he was bound by his honour not to do so, The judge
held that the journalist enjoyed no relevant privilege, following the decision
of the N.S.W. Full Court which we have mentioned earlier.°

5.4. The above is the position in Australia as to journalists in the
absence of a statutory modification, Two Australian States (Victoria and

Tasmania) have thought fit to enact legislation creating two additional fit to enact legislation creating two additional

1. Mr. Justice David Hunt, “Why No First Amendment? The Role of the Press in
relation to Justice” (1980) 54 A.LJ, 456-462.

2. McGuinnes v, Attorney General of Victoria, (1946) 63 C.L.R. 73, 91 (High Court of
Australia).

3. Pt. Buchang, (1964-1965) N.S.W.R. 1379, 1381.

4, Facts taken from Law Reform Commitiee of West Australia, Working Paper
(Privilege for Journalists), pages 3—5, para 2.4 to 2.9 (10 June, 1977).

5, Hewitt v. West Australian Newspaper Lid. (17 Nov. 1976) (Supreme Court of A.C.T.).
Facts taken from Law Reform Committee of West Australia Working Paper, Privilege
for Journalists, pages 5-6, para 2.10 (10 June, 1977).

6. Re. Duchman, (1964-65) N.S.W.R. 1379 (See para 5.2, supra).
46



17

privileges, besides those generally recognised in common law jurisdictions.
Tn these states, a clergyman cannot divulge, without the consent of the
patient, the contents of any confession made to him in his professional
capacity.! Also, a physician or surgeon cannot, in these States, divulge in
proceedings (unless the sanity or testamentary capacity of the patient 1s
in dispute), any infor on which ke acquired in attending the patient
and which was necessary to enable him to prescribe or act for him.*

5.5. A discussion of the Can:
stating the general rule previ ling in Commonwealth jurisdictions’ to the
effect that the protection given by law for confidential communications is
of a very limited character and is restricted to the obtaining of the assistance
of lawyers as regards the conduct of Ltigation or the rights to property.
On this basis, it can be stated aalists in Canada Fave no privilege
against the disclosure of information imparted to them in confidence during
the exercise of their profession. There is one ruling of the British Columbia
Court of Appeal to the same effect, regarding journalists.

on the subject may start by

5.6 However, it should, at the same time, be mentioned that in one
case (not relating to journalists) decided by the Supreme Court of Canada,
there are obiter dicta which suggest that even outside the relationship of
lawyer and client, the doctrine of privilege to protect confidential relation-
ship may receive some encouragement from the judiciary. In that case, a
University Professor in Alberta claimed privilege for certain assertions about
a college, these were assertions which he had set out in a confidential
document sent to the Department Chairman as a part of the proceedings
of the university for the consideration of tenure. After quoting the well-
known “four fundamental conditions” given by Wigmore for the recognition
of evidentiary privilege, the Supreme Court of Canada held that assuming
the applieabilit of evidentiary privilege in the litigation, “the confidential
document should have been ruled inadmissible .. . under the doctrine
of privilege as so able considered in Wigmore . >>)! However, the
court held that the particular facts at bar did not invoke the law of evidence.‘

5.7. It should be mentioned that the Court of Appeal for Ontario has
concluded “that there is no recognised discretion to exclude relevant end
admissible evidence based cn confidentiality alone.”

5.8. It is proper to mention, however, that in the narrow context of
pre-trial discovery proceedings, where the action is for defamation against
newspaper proprietors or reporters and arises from published articles, the

uestion may arise how far the English practice,’ of refusing to compel
defendants in such cases to disclose the names of informants in response to
the demand of the plaintiff, is to be followed in Canada. Opinion in this

1, Evidence Act, 1958, section 28(1) (Vict.); Evidence Act, 1910, section 96(1) (Tas). The
Tasmanian provision does not apply to a communication made for a criminal
purpose.

2. Evidence Act, 1958, section 28(2) and (3) (Vic.); Evidence Act, 1910, section 96(2) and
(3) (fas). The Tasmanian provision does not apply to a communication made for a
criminal purpose.

3. For the English practice, sce paragraph 4.20, supra.

4, Wheeler v. Merchant, (1881) 17 Ch.D. 675, 681, 682 (CA).

5. McConephy v. Times Publishers Lid, (1964) 49 D.L.R, (Second) 249 (British Colutti-
bia Court of Appeal), cited by Stanley Schiff, Evidence in the Litigation Process (1973),
Vol. 2, page 1011.

6, Slavuiych v. Boker, (1976) 1 S.C.R. 254, 260, 261 (Supreme Court of Canada),

7. Reference to Legislative Privilege, (1978) 19 Ontario reports (2nd) $29, 541, 39 Canadian
Criminal Cases (2nd) 226, 222, cited by Stanley Schiff, Evidence in the Litigation Pro-
cess (1978), Vol. 2, page 1011,

8. For the English practice, sce Order 82, Rule 6, RS.C, (Eng.) and Chapter 4, supra,

Position in
Canada.

Obit er dicta
in Supreme
Court case
(Canada).

Ontario
view.

Actions for
defamation
in Canada.



Proposed

Evidence

Code
(Canada).

18
respect scems to be differing in Canada. Ontario judges have consistently
followed the English practice since the turn of this century! However,
the Court of Appeal for British Columbia has emphatically refused to follow

the English practice.2 1६ would therefore appear that the position in this
regard in Canada should be considered as fluid.*

5.9. Finally, it may be added that the proposed Evidence Code for
Canada would make drastic changes in the existing doctrine. Section 41
of that Code reads as under® :—

“41. A person who has consulted a person exercising a profession
for the purpose of obtaining professional services, or who has been
rendered such services by a professional person, has a privilege against
disclosure of any confidential communication reasonably made in the
course of the rel fationship if, in the circumstances, the public interest in
the privacy of the relationship outweighs the public interest in the
administration of justice.”

1, Reid v. Telegram Publishing Co., (1961) Ontario Reports 418 (Ontario High Court of
justice), referred to by Stanley Schiff, Evidence in the Litigation Process (1978), Vol. 2,
page 1012.

2. McConephy v. Times Publishers Ltd. (1964) 49 D.L.R. (2nd) 349 (British Columbia).

3. McLauchlin, “Confidential Communication and the Law of Privilege” (1977) 11 Univ.
of British Columbia Law Rev. 266.

4 Stanley Schiff, Evidence in the Litigation Process (1978), Vol. 3 pages 1011-1012.
Section 41, Evidence Code for Canada (proposed), quoted by Stanley Schiff, Evidence
in the Litigation Process (1978), Vol. 2, page 1011-1012.


CHAPTER 6
POSITION IN THE UNITED STATES

I. First Amendment

6.1. Developments in the U.S.A. with reference to journalistic privilege Introduct: ry
have been very extensive. The subject cven assumed constitutional impor-
tance in 1972.! In this Chapter, only a few salient aspects of these deve-
lopments will be touched.

6.2. Although it was generally agreed that the common law afforded The First
no privilege to journalists, the question arose whether the Constitution of Amendment
the United States did so. The First Amendment provides that “Congress judgment in
shall make no Jaw......... a bridging the freedom ......... of the press”. BranzD-r

In 1972, the United States Supreme Court reviewed three cases in
which grand juries, investigating the activities and ideas of certain political
and social groups; had attempted to compel journalists to disclose conkdential
information and the identities of their informants. The cases, which were
heard together, were (i) Branzburg v. Haves, (ii) In Re Pappas and
(iii) U.S. v. Caldwell (the cases being collectively known as the Branzburg
case)? The Supreme Court held, by a majority, that the First Amendment
afforded no protection to journalists in these circumstances.”

II. State Laws (Shield laws in U.S.A.)

6.3. However, the fact that the First Amendment does not confer an Position

immunity, as such, on journalists from the disclosure of the source of a under
confidential information does not conclude the matter since, by legislation in U.S.A.
३ number of States in the U.S.A., have provided that confidential relation-
ships between a journalist and his source should be protected. This has
been achieved bv the passage of “shield laws”. These laws provide the
newsman with immunity from forced disclosure of the identity of his source.
Details of the legislation vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.’ The first
State in the U.S.A. to enact such a law was Maryland (1896), followed by
New Jersey (1938), Alabama and California (1935) and other States. In
1970, such a law was passed by New York’, while Pennsylvania had already
enacted it in 1937." The most well-known is the provision in California,
first enacted in 1935 and appearing as section 1070 of the California
Evidence Code?

As of 1980, 26 States in U.S.A. had shield laws, the latest to pass such

a law being Tennesse (1973).'°

Paragraph 6.2, infra.

Branzbure v. Haves, s-rstt 33 L. Ed. 2d. 628.

Generally, seo Alfred Hill, “Testimonial Privilege and Fair Trial” (Oct. 1980) 80 Col.

L. Rev. 1170-1176.

As to libel actions, see para 6.13, infra.

Para 6.4, infra.

Section 1970, California Evidence Code.

Section 79-h. New York Civil Rights Law.

Pennsylvania Statutes, Title 28, Section 330.

Section 1070, Califorvia Evidence Code.

10. Sobel, Media Controversies (Facts on File 1981) pages 153-173; O'Brien, Public's Right
to know (1980) App. C, pages 183-185 (State Shield Laws).

19

भा

9 जम फड



20

The subject has been dealt with at length in two studies,!*

State Laws 6.4. The statutes passed by the State legisiatures in the U.S.A. vary in
ao their content from State to State. These variations are regarding (a) the
classes of publications covered by the statutes, (b) the classes of persons on

whom the privilege is conferred by the statutes, (c) the matter protected by

the statutes, (d) the presence or absence of the requirement of confidentiality

in the statutes and (e) the quality or statas of the privilege accorded by the

statutes. at
cues or 6.5. First, as regard the classes of publications covered by the “Shield
fr tecied laws” in force in various States in the U.S.A. there are three broad
a USA. categories :— है
(i) Statutes conferring the protection on newspapers and radio and
television stations (for examle, Alabama) :
Gi) Statutes which cover e!so magezines, news arencies, press associa-
tions and wire services (for New York) ;
(iii) Statutes which cover any “‘inedinm ef communication to the
public” (for example, Oregon and New Mexico).
Classes of 6.6. Secondly, as regards the classes of persons protected, there are
protected *hree broad categories in the U.S.A. under the State “shield laws” :
in U.S.A.

(i) Statutes covering only professional reporters and news-casters (¢.g.
New York) ;
(ii) Statutes extending the privilege to editors/writers and publishers
also (for example, Arkansas) ; and
(iii) Statutes granting the privilege to anyone connected with the relo-
yant medium in a capacity involving the gathering of or processing
of informaticas (e.g. Minnesota and Nebraska).
Maner proveeice 6.7. Thirdly, the matter protected by such Shield Laws may be—
है (i) only the sources of information obtained by a journalist profes-
sionally (e.g. Ohio and Kentucky) : or
(ii) all unpublished information (e.g. Nebraska and Oregon)

Requirement 6.8. Fourthly, as recards the recuirement of confidentiality, under the

of confilzntiality oeneral pattern or the Shield laws in U.S.A... there is no express requirement

in USA. that the source should have given the information on the nnderstanding that
his identity would remain secret (for example, the statutes of Alabama,
Minnesota and New York).

६ uality or 6.9. Finally, as to the quality or status of the privileges : some statutes

Se rea in U.S.A. provide an abeolute neivilese. eo, those of Alshama and New

1 USA. York. Others provide only a quelified privileve. An example of this latter

category is that of Minnesota, whose statute provides that the privilege does
not apply “in any defamatien action where the rerson seeking disclosure
can demonstrate that the identity of the source wil] lerd to relevant evidence
on the issue of actual malice”? or when th formation is relevant to a
serious offence and “there is a comping and overriding. interest requiring
the disclosure of the info on where the disclosure is necessary to prevent
injustice.” provided that the information cannot be obtained by other means.
The statute of New Mexico requires disclosure when “it is essential to prevent

injustice”.

mmunications and the Press (1979), (Westport)

1. Mauries Van Gerpen, Privileged ©
Connecticut Green Wood Press.

2. Vincent Blasi, “The Newsmen’s *rivilege. An Pimps
Rev. 229.
3. See further, para 6.13, infra (libel actions).

1 Study” (1971) Mich. Law



21

6.10. It would be of interest to ascértain whether the absence or presence
of protection has affected the flow of news. It appears that there is no
substantial difference as to the flow of news in these States which have
‘shield’ laws and those which do not.' This may be because a number of
these laws give only a qualified privilege.

III. Some decided cases in U.S.A.

6.11. Mention may be usefully made of a few cases decided in the
United States on the question of newsmen’s privilege. Judge Irving Kufman,
writing for a unanimous three-judge panel of the Second Circuit, held in an
anti-blockbusting suit that a writer for the Saturday Evening Post did not
have to reveal his source, even though that source had direct knowledge of
facts central to the issues of the anti-blockbusting suit before the court.
Neither the writer nor the publication was a party to the litigation.

The Ninth Circuit has held that two staff members of a Black Panther
party newspaper did not have to disclose the identities of persons associated
with the publication to a federal grand-jury which was investigating threats
of presidential assassination and other possible criminal conduct by members of
the Black Panther Party.°

6.12. In another case,$ decided on First Amendment grounds, sub-
poenas directed to members of the press, including Washington Post reporter
Bob Woodward and Carl Bernatein, were quashed. The Court concluded
that the plaintiff had not made the requisite “positive showing of the materia-
lity of the documents and other materials sought by the sub-poenas”.
Similarly, in yet another case,’ the court refused to order a medical news-
letter to disclose its confidential sources, even though those sources possessed
information relevant to the plaintifi’s allegations of adverse drug effects.
The court reasoned that “the information sought here is relevant, but not
essential to the resolution of the judicial controversy.”

6.13. It ap pears that on October 31, 1977, the Supreme Court of
United States declined to review a decision pronounced by the Supreme
Court of Idaho that a reporter, when called as a witness in a civil suit, could
not withhold the identity of a confidental source.

6.14. On the question whether there was a constitutional link between

the right to publish news and the right to gather news, there was a compre-
hensive discussion in an issue of the Bulletin of the American Society.? The

issue reports a unanimous verdict that “while our right to publish stands
secure, our right to gather does not”.

1. Note “Reporter’s Privilege—Guardian of the People’s Right to Know” (1976) 11 New
England Law Review 405.

2. Para 6, 9, supra. .

3. Rakor v, F. & F. Investment, 110 F. 2d 778 (2d Cir. 1972) Cert, denied, (1973) 411
US. 996.

4, Howard Simons and Joseph A. California Jr. Ed, The Media and the Law (1976),
pages 15-16,

5. Bursay v. U. B. cited by Howard Simins and Joseph A. California, Jr. (Ed), The
Media and Law (1976), pages 15-16.

6. Democratic Nation:! Committee v. Mc. Cord, 356, F. Supp. 1394, 1398 (D.D.C. 1973)
cited by Howard Simons and Joseph A. California, Jr, (Ed), The Media and the Taw
(1976), pages 15-16. +

7. See Howard Simons and Joseph A Falifani, It. (Ed), The Media and the Law (1976),
pages 15-16.

8. Tribune Publishing Co. v. Callerok, G1 Octaber, 19.7) cited by Sobel (ed), Media
Controversy (Facts on File, 1931), page 10.

9, See December-Jannary, 1978 issue of the Bulletin of the American Society, Gist of
the discussions summarised in Sobel (Fd.), Media Controversy (Facts on File, 1981),
page 12,

4443 LAD/ND/83

Effect on
flow of news.

Case law
in U.S.A.

Want of
m«teriality
(First
Amendment)
applied.

Case of 1977,

Discussion in
Bulletin of
American
Society.



Libel

actions

(First Amend-
me t in applied.)

Recent
developments—
Cal fornia.

22
IV. Libel Actions

6.15. In libel suits, courts in U.S.A. have also refused (on First Amend-
ment grounds) to order the disclosure of a defendant’s confidential news
sources, except in the unusual circumstances in which (a) the plaintiff has
demonstrated a substantial likelihood that disclosure will lead to persuasive
evidences on the issue of liability, and (9) alternative sources have been
exhausted.

The Eighth Circuit? for example, has held that a Life Magazine reporter
did not have to reveal the confidential source of allegedly libellous statements
about the organized crime connections of a Mavor. In the above case, the
Mayor was suing Life Magazine for libel. The Supreme Court declined to

review this case and the decision of the Eighth Circuit was allowed to
stand va

6.16. Only one federa! appellate court in U.S.A. has ordered a libel
defendant to disclose the identity of a confidential news source. That case
arose out of a Jack Anderson column reporting on the United Mine Workers
and its general counsel, Edward Carey.5 The court emphasized that it was
not establishing a general rule applicable to all libel defendants, but rather
was limiting its decision to order disclosure to the extraordinary circum-
stances before it. The conrt ordered disclosure hecause the statement alleged
to be libellous was based entirely on confidential sources and the plaintiff
had no way of proving cither falsity or recklessness without a knowledge
of the identity of those sources. The court stressed its agreement with the
rule applied by the Eighth Circuit in the Cervantes case,® that a libel
defendant may not be constitutionally required to disclose the identity of
confidential news sources, except when the information obtained from the
sources is the sole basis for the allegedly libellous statements. The Supreme
Court never had to consider this case, because the source released Anderson
side Brit Hume from his pledge of confidentiality.

V. Recent Developments in U.S.A.

6.17. There have been some noteworthy recent developments in the
United States relevant to the topic under consideration. A law permitting
reporters to withhold their sources, adopted by California voters in 1930,
was declared unconstitutional (January 18, 1932) by a Superior Court Judge,
on the ground that it created an unsupportable conflict with the constitutional
right to a fair trial. The issue concerned “out takes”, or unused films,
from an interview conducted for the CBS News Program “60 Minutes” by
Mike Wallace. The subject of the interview was Barry Braescke, now
25 years old, who had been convicted of first-degree murder. Judge Stanley
Colde held that the “Shield Law” was a First Amendment privilege that
must give way to the Sixth Amendment guarantee of fair trial for the
accused.7”*

1. See also para 6.9, supra.

2. Corvantes v. Time, Inc. 464 F. 2nd 986 (8th Circuit) 1972 cert. denied, (1973), 409,
US. 1125.

3. Howard Simons and Joseph A. Califani, Jr. (Ed). The Media and the Law (1976),
page 16.

4. For other developments: see, “Source Protection in Libel Suits” after Herbert v.
Tanda. (Marca, 1981), 81 Colombia Law Rev., pages 338-365

5. Carex v. Hume, 492 मै, Ind 631 (DC. Cir, 1974), eert,

6. Convauroe ए. Time, Tre. 464 F, ed. 956 (8th Cir. 1972). C
1125 (para 615, supra).

7. Renort, “California's Closure Law upheld Shield Law over-ruled” (23 January 1982)
Editor ‘and Publisher, page 16.

8, Information as to later developments by way of appeal was not available,

issed. 417 US. 933 (1°74).
wt. denied. (1973) 409 U.S.



23

6.18. Another recent development worth noting relates to the well Farbar Case—
known Farbee case, which arose in New Jersey in 1978. The case related Beech ment
to the murder trial of “Dr. X”. In the trial, a surgeon had been accused (New Jersey)
of murdering five hospital patients by injecting them with curare. A
journalist M.A. Farber had to undergo criminal penalties after the newspaper
New York Times and its reporter refused to turn over the reporter’s notes
during the trial. Farber had to spend 4० days in jail ‘and the New York
Times paid a total of 2,85,000 dollars in fines for defying a court order
that Farber should provide the defence with all his notes for his story and
reyeal his confidential sources.

6.19. On 190 January, 1982, the Governor of New Jersey Brendan Pardon by
Byrne, on his last day in office, returned the criminal penaltics and issued IP conor.
pardon. The Governor noted the changes made in 1980 in the Shield
Law of New Jersey, which required a hearing before the reporter is compel-
led to reveal his sources. “Farber and the New York Times were attempting
to uphold a principle they believed in. They should not be burdened by
a record of criminal contempt any longer”. This is what Governor Byrne
stated,!

VI. Model Contract in U.S.A.

6.20. It is of interest to note one peculiar feature regarding the United Model
States, It appears that the model contract evolved by the Newspaper Guild! RUS, हर
in U.S.A. contains a clause relating to “privilege against disclosure and
authentication”. This privilege seems to have been introduced in 1970, and
represents a definite policy as to the protection by the employer of reporters
and their sources from source disclosure. It appears that the primary object
of this clause is to give the employee full financial and legal support from
the employer. The provisions of the model contract clause have been
analysed as comprising the following propositions.* :—

P-r. An employee may refuse, without penalty or prejudice, to
give up custody of or disclose any knowledge, information, notes, records,
documents, films, photographs, or tapes or the source thereof, which
relates to news commentary, advertising, or the establishment and
maintenance of his sources in connection with his employment.

P-2. An employee may also refuse, without penalty or prejudice,
to authenticate any material.

P-3, The employer shall not give up custody of or disclose any of
the above without consent of the employee.

P.4. The employer shall notify the employee concerned, and the
Guild, of any demand on the employer for such surrender or disclosure
or authentication. .

P-s. If the employee is proceeded against under law on account of
his-refusal to surrender or disclose or authenticate, the employed shall
move to join as a party to such proceedings ;

P-6. (the Employer) shall meet all expenses incurred by the
employee, including fees and expenses of legal counsel retained by the
employee 5

1. (23 January, 1982), Editor & Publisher, page 6.

Guild, “U.S. Mode] Contract” December 1, 1975, quoted in Gail L.
Foe Neyer Ss rvilege be Bargained?” (Summer 1980), Journalism Quarterly 205, 206,
207.


Directive
by Justice
Department,

Opinion poll
of 1979.

a4

२-7. and (the Employer) shali indemnify such employee.against any
Monetary loss, including but not limited to fines, damages or loss of
pay.

P-8. In no case shali an employee sufier loss of wages, employee
status or benefits under this contract as a result of hus retusal to surrender
or disclose or authenticate.

VI. Directive of Justice Department

6.21. It should also be mentioned that in 1971 the Justice Department,'
under Attorney General John Mitchell, issued guidelines which, it followed,
sharply restrict the power of U.S. attorneys to subpoena reporters, whether
or not confidential sources are invoived. Under tese guidelines, no U.S.
attorney may subpoena a reporter unless he has exnausted all other possible
sources of the testimony he seeks, Even in such circumstances, the U.S.
attorney must first obtain the explicit permission of the Attorney General
before he subpoenas the reporter. Experience with these guidelines has been
mixed. It is stated that as recently as late 1974, some government attorneys
were not even aware of the guidelines, Nevertheless, unese guidelines do
stand as a formal Justice Department statement of principle and policy.?

VII. Opinion Survey

6.22. In 1979, a survey was conducted amongst a national cross-section
of 12,000 aduits in the United States, who were interviewed by telephone
trom April 0, to April g that year under the ABC News-Harris Survey?
The majority of the respondents considered it more important to protect
the privacy of a reporter's unpublished notes and sources, rather than to
allow the courts to force disclosure of such iniormation if it is felt necessary
to eusure a fair trial. “1'wo cases, substantialiy based on reported decisions,
were put to the respondents. It will be of interest to quote the first case
that was put before tae respondents : “A newspaper reporter who is testi-
fying at a trial refuses to naine a person who gave nim information, ‘The
reporter says he promised that person (that) he would never reveal his naine,
and if he broke that promise, other sources might not give important
information to other reporters in the future, and tien the American people
would be cheated of their nght to know that information. In addition, the
reporter says, his constitutional right to freedom of the press is being violated.
T. he attorney who asked for the name says the trial wiil not be fair without
the testimony of the man who gave iniormation to the reporter, because
his story (is) important and no one else has all the information the reporter's
source has. Now you are the judge, © Would you order the reporter to
name his source or not ?”

By a decisive 70-21°%, most Americans would not order the reporter
to name his source. That was the opinion as ascertained by the survey
mentioned above.

1, 28 CER. 50.10 (1974).
3 Howard and Joseph A, Califani, Jr. (Ed). ‘the Media and the Law (1976)

page 1.17.
3, See summary of the survey of opinion in (2ist April, 1979) Editor & Reporter,

page 13,



CHAPTER 7
THE ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION

y.1. Assuming that the law on the subject under consideration is to be
changed by suitable legislation, there arise for examination a number of
questions of detail and difficulty. These questions concern the quality and
range of the protection to be conferred, as regards (a) the classes of persons
to be protected, under the head of journalistic privilege, (b) the classes of
publications to be so protected, (c) the classes of matter to which the
protection should extend, (d) the types of proceedings to be covered by the
proposed protection, and (९) whether the protection should be in the shape
of a privilege of a class of persons, or whether it should leave some discretion
to the Court. .The issues for consideration were set out in the Working
Paper that had been circulated by the Commission on the subject.*

The first question that arises is as regards the classes of persons to be
entitled to the proposed protection. Should the proposed protection cover
only professional journalists, or should it also extend to part-time contri-
butors and other persons connected with the publication, when acting in the
process of gathering or processing of information ? There are, thus, two
alternatives. The first alternative would be the narrower of the two. The
narrower course, which would confine tne protection to the professional
journalist, has, no doubt, this argument in its favour, that the professions

jody of the journalists and the Press Council could help enforce the requisite
standards. However, the framing of the protection in such narrow terms
would have the effect of precluding persons who engage themselves in
journalism occasionally and not as a matter of their regular vocation. As
was observed by the Supreme Court of the United States, “the lonely
pamphleteer who uses carbon paper or a mimeo; graph may as much have
a right to protecion as a larger metropolitan publis! ers”.? Further, it can be
argued that if the protection is to be effective, it might have to cover the
editor and other senior management personnel to whom the information is
conveyed, and should also cover persons who accompany the newsmen, such
as the cameraman.

7.2. Secondly, regarding the classes of publications that should be
entitled to the proposed protection, the question that arises is whether the
protection should :—

(9) cover only newspapers, or

(ii) cover newspapers as well as periodicals,

(iii) also cover radio and television stations, or

(iv) be framed in the broadest terms, so as to cover any medium of

पु communication to the public.

Of the four alternatives put forth above, the first alternative is the
hatrowest one, while the last alternative is the widest one.

7.3. Thirdly, regarding the matter to be protected, the question that
arises is whether the protection :—

(i) should be limited to the source of information obtained by the

journalist ; or

1. Working Paper dated 19, February, 1983.
2. Brenzburg v. Hayes, (1972) 408 U.S, 665; S.Ct. 2646; 33 Law Ed, 2 d 625.

25

Matters of
devail
requiring
consideration —
classes of
persons to be
protected.

Classes of
publications
to be consi-
dored for
protection.

Classes of
maiter to
be protected.



“Types of
proczedings

to be covered.

Privilege
or discretion.

Waiver of
the privilege.

Opinions
invited.

26

(ii) should cover all information obtained by the journalist in
confidence ?

As regards the first alternative, it can be argued in support thereof that
aim of any protection is to increase the flow of information. Any proposed
legislation need not concern itself with unpublished information. But an
extended protection, as per the second alternative, may be sought to be
justified on the ground that there is need to obtain background intormation
which, though not intended itself for publication, is necessary for verifying
the accuracy of the information to be published.

7-4. Fourthly, the types of proceedings in regard to which the privilege
under discussion should be allowed, the question is—Should the proposed
privilege—

() be confined to civil proceedings, or

(ii) extend to all proceedings in the course of which evidence is, or
may be, legally taken on oath ; or

(iii) be excluded in regard to certain special types of proceedings, such
as defamation actions against the publishers, criminal procecdings
or proceedings before Commissions of Inquiry.

7-5. As regards the status of the privilege (if any) to be conferred, a
number of alternatives fall to be considered—
(i) Should the privilege (if allowed) be absolute, or

(ii) Should the Court (or other body) before which privilege is claimed
have a discretion to uphold or reject the request ?

Gii) If such a discretion were to be given, what criteria should guide
its exercise ?

Alternative (i) wouid be simple, but may lack in elasticity. In regard
to alternative (ii) it can be stated that where a discretion is given to allow
or disallow the privilege on a case by case basis, the court can balance the
need to protect the confidentiality of the source against the interests of
justice and the effective achievement of the object of inquiry.

7-6. Finally, the question arises whether the privilege should be allowed
to be waived. In detail, the queries that may arise in this regard are as
follows :—

(a) Should the privilege be capable of being waived.?
(b) 165०, who should be competent to waive it—

(i) the journalist, or

(1) the employer of the journalist, or

(iii) the informant ?

7-7. The important issues relevant to the subject of this privilege were
set out in the Working Paper which, after stating the alternatives, wound
up the discussion as under :—-

“The broad question is—in what circumstances, if any, should
journalists be given the right to refuse to disclose in court and other



ay aene

27 -

judicial proceedings the source of their information ? As elaborated
above, so many points of detail arise out of this question. Briefly, these
are as under: —

I.

Who should be included in the term “journalist” for the purpose

of privilege?

2.
3.

6.

What media should come within the scope of the privilege ??

(a) In order that the source be privileged, should the information
be published, or should it be privileged even if the matter was
never printed, broadcast or telecast ?

(b) Should the privilege relate only to the identity of the person
who supplied the information, or should it extend to the
information upon which published matter is based ??

Should the privilege apply to all court proceedings, civil or criminal,
and if not, to which proceedings should it be confined ?4

Should the privilege, if allowed, be absolute or should the courts
(or other appropriate bodies) have a discretion to uphold or reject
claims of privilege हैं

If a privilege were to be enacted, who should be competent to
waive it :

‘See puragraph 7.1, supra for the detailcd queries on this point.
Fer detailed queries, see para 7.2, supra.

For detailed queries, see para 7.3, supra.

For detailed queries, see para 7.4, supra,

For detuiied queries, see para 7.5, supra.

For detailed queries, see para 7.6, supre-



Comments on
the Working
Paper :

General
description
and views
oa first
questi, n.

CHAPTER 8
COMMENTS RECEIVED ON THE WORKING PAPER

8.1. The Working Paper prepared on the subject under considera-
tion was circulated by the Commission in February, 1983 to interested
persons and bodies, including the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting,
everal organisations connected with the Press : The Press Council of India
and its members, State Governments, High Courts and Bar Associations.
A request was made to forward comments by the 15th April, 1983.
All comments received upto 4th September, 1983 have been taken into
account before finalising the Commission’s views.

Tt may also be mentioned that very valuable views dealing with almost
each question raised in the Working Paper have been expressed in an article by
Shri 5. Sahai of the Statesman who, incidentally, has also given in the article
a gist of the important queries contained in the Working Paper. The
Commission would like to express its appreciation of the interest shown by
Shri Sahai in the matter! and also its gratitude to those who have sent
comments on the Working Paper.

As regards the comments as such that have been received on the
Working Paper, replies have been received from :

(a) Six High Courts?

(b) Registrar of one High Court who has. it appears communicated
his personal views.>

(c) One Member of Partiament* and

(d) One Bar Association.*

However, with reference to the replies received from High Courts (six
in all) mentioned above, it should be made clear that only one High Court
has expressed its views.®

Three High Courts have sent negative replies, namely, that the High
have no views to offer? or that the Judges of the High Court have no desire
to offer views.®

Again, in two other High Courts, only six Judges of each High Court
have given their reaction and the reaction is that those six judges have
“no remark to offer’? or that they have no views to offer'® (the rest of the
Judges of these two High Courts have not expressed views or their reaction).

Shri Sahai’s article in the Statesman dated 7th April, 1983.

Law Commission File No. F, 2(2)/83 L.C. S. No. 11, 13, 14, 18 and 20,

Lave Commission File No. F. 2/20/83 L.C. ५. No, 18.

D/S3-L.C, & S.No. 10, (Mr. Eduardo Faleira 4624

की >> No

Law Commission File No.
M.P. Goa).

5. Bar Association, Manipur, Imphal. Law Commission F. No. 2(2)/83 LO S. No. 17.
6, Law Carmission File No. 2(2)/83-LC 5. No. 14.

7. Law Commission File No. 2(2)/83-1.C 5. No. 11 and 20.

8.

9.

Law Commission File No, 2(2)/83-LC S. No. 18 ard 20.
. Law Commission File No. के, 2:2)/83 LC 5. No. 13.
10. Law Commission File No. F. 2(2)/83-LC 5. No. 16.

28



29

_ Coming to the views expressed questionwise, the first question
raised in the Working Paper was whether the proposed privilege in respect
of disclosure by journalists should be confined to professional journalists only
or whether it should cover others as well. In putting the query in this
form, the Commission did not have in mind the categories of distinction
between “working” and “non-working” journalists as such, or any demarca-
tion between editorial and non-editorial staff. The Commission wished to
elicit views as to whether there was need to keep distinct a person who has
taken up journalism as a profession and, (on the other hand), the “lonely
pamphleteer” who uses the carbon paper or a mimeograph.

According to the views expressed by Shri Sahai of the Statesman on
this question,' “the short answer is that since the privilege is claimed 6n the
ground of serving the public interest the people’s right to know-it cannot be
confined to journalists alone ; ‘but must extend to others as well”.

The reply of one Registrar of a High Court (personal view), is that
the protection should be given not only to the professional journalists, but
also to the part-time contributor and others connected with the publication
when acting in the process of gathering or processing of information.? He
would include, within the scope of the protection. the editor and other
senior management personnel to whom the information is conveyed and the
persons who accompany the newsman, such as the cameramen.

8.2. The second question put forth in the Working Paper concerns
the categories of media to be covered. Should the proposed protection be
confined to daily newspapers, or should it be broad enough to cover periodicals
or should it be still broader so as to include the media as a whole ?

According to the view expressed by Shri Sahai in his article, “once
again, the provision must be couched in the broadcast possible terms, bringing
in its sweep any medium of communication—newspapers, periodicals and
the electronic media, although the last being State-owned is hardly likely

to publish anything embarrassing to anybody”?

According to the view expressed by one Registrar of a High Court
(personal view), the protection should be framed in the broadest terms, so
as to cover any medium of communication to the public namely, newspapers,
periodicals, Radio and Television stations etc.4

8.3. The third question put forth in the Working Paper concerns the
matter to be protected. Should the protection be limited to what has actually
been published, or sould it extend to all information, published or
unpublished ?

A High Court has expressed the view that a journalist should not be
asked ‘to disclose the sources of his information.

h Court (personal view), is that

© The view of one Registrar of a Hig! ;
the protection should cover all information (not only the source of informa-

tion) obtained by the Journalist in confidence.®
Shri Sahai’s article in the Statesman (7th April, he Sowanen Vth Api 193)—~—~<CS*‘“‘=S:*

1

2. Law Commission File No. F. 2(2)/83-LC, S. No, 12.
3. Shr) Sahai, the Statesman (Ith April, 1983).
4.
5.

Law Commission File No. F. 2(2)/83-LC, S. No. 12.
Law Commission File No. F. 2(2)/83-LC, S. No. 14.
6. Law Commission File No. F. 2(2)/83-LC, 5. No. 12.

Comments
received on
the second
question.

Comments
received on
the third
question.



Comments
received on
the fourth
question.

Com m>nts
received of
the fifth
question,

30

The Manipur Bar Association has expressed the view that a qualified
privilege should be granted to Journalists who should not be required to
disclose the source identity (of informant) or other confidential communi-
cations unless disclosure is necessary in the interest of ‘justice and public
good”,

8.4. The fourth question put forth in the Working Paper elicited views
as to whether the proposed protection should apply to all court proceedings
(civil and criminal), and if not, to what proceedings it should be confined.
Shri Sahai’s article makes certain points after mentioning the “Fourth
Question”, but the points made really pertain to the fifth question and will
be dealt with thereunder.

In the view of one Registrar of a High Court (personal view), the
privilege “should be extended to proceedings in course of which evidence
is or may be legally taken on oath except defamation actions against the
publishers and proceedings before Commissions of Inquiry.”

8.5. The fifth Question in the Working Paper solicited views on the
very important issue whether there should be a privilege as such which would
be absolute, or whether the judge should have a discretion in the matter.
In his article in the Statesman, Shri Sahai (in the opening portion of his
general observations), has stated as under :-—

“It may straight-away be conceded that no right is, or can be
absolute and that between two conflicting rights, society must decide
which one must prevail, unless the two can be harmonized.’?

Somewhat towards the end of the article, when dealing with the
specific question whether the privilege should be absolute or whether the
Judge should have a discretion, Shri Sahai has expressed the following
further views :—

“The point has already been made that no right is absolute and
the journalists’ right to confidentiality need not be absolute either. In
such cases in which the interests of society overwhelm the rights of
journalists, a court may compel disclosure. However, this must be
done in camera and only the High Courts and the Supreme Court
should have the right to compel disclosure. Some journalists still may
want to withhold information, but if their conviction be so strong they
must be prepared to take the consequences.?

Mr. Eduardo Faleiro, M.P., Goa does not favour absolute immunity.
“Whilst the principle of confidentiality of sources of information may be
recognised there must be an exception to this principle involving the consi-
derations of public interest and promotion and advancement of justice.’

It is the view of one Registrar of a High Court (personal view) that
the court should have the discretion to allow or reject the request.

“No Court may require a journalist to disclose the source of informa-
tion contained in the publication unless it is established to the satisfaction
of the Court that disclosure is necessary in the interest of justice or national
security or for the prevention of disorder or crime.”*

1, Law Commission File No. F. 2(2)/83-LC, S. No. 17.
2. Law Commission File No. F. 2(2)/83-LC, S. No. 12.
3. Shri Sahai, The Statesman (7th April, 1983).

4, Law Commission File No. F. 2(21/83-LC, 5. No. 10.

5. Law Commission File No. F. 2(2)/83-LC, 8. No. 12.



31

The views of the Manipur Bar Association, District and Sessions Court
Compound, Imphal have been thus communicated! : —

“Just as the legal professionals are given the statutory privilege of not
disclosing what their clients have entrusted with them confidentially, the
Journalists as a professional class should be given some qualified privilege
by suitable enactment. The Journalists should not be compelled to disclose
the source of his information or the identity of their conformant as well
as confidential communication, unless the disclosure is necessary in the
interests of justice and public good.”

8.6. The Sixth and the last question put forth in the Working Paper
was, whether the privilege should be allowed to be waived, and if so, by
whom the journalist, the employer or the informant ? The view expres-
sed by Shri Sahai in his article is that “without the informant’s consent,
no body should have the right (to waive). If he (the informant) has waived
his right, the editor or publisher may use his discretion.”

In the reply of one Registrar of a High Court (personal view) it is
stated that the privilege should be capable of being waived by the
journalist.>

1. Law Commission File No. F. 2(2)/83-LC, 5. No. 17.
2. Shri Sahai’s Article in the Statesman (7th April, 1983).
3. Law Commission File No. F. 2(2)/83-LC, S. No. 12.

Comments
received on
the sixth
qustion.



Persons to be
covered.

Publications
to be
covered,

Matter to be
protected.

CHAPTER 9
RECOMMENDATIONS

9-1. On the basis of the materials contained in the preceding chapters,
we now proceed to make our own recommendations on the subject under
consideration. At the outset, we would state that in our view, information
obtained on an understanding that the source will not be revealed, deserves
to be treated on a special footing so to justify special provisions conferring
appropriate protection. The lines on which the statutory amendinents should
run will be presently indicated in greater detail, with reference to the
various issues that have been considered by us.!

First, as regards the persons to be covered by the proposed amendment,
we are inclined to include, within its scope, not merciy the “professional
journalist”, but also the occasional or casual journalist, even “the lonely
pamphleteer” of whom the Supreme Court of the United States was speaking.’
It is also not our intention to exclude, from the protection, editors and
other senior management personnel to whom the information is conveyed
in professional confidence, or the technical personnel who accompany the
newsman, such as the cameraman, who may be involved in the gathering
of information imparted expressly or impliedly in confidence. In fact, as
will be seen from the next paragraph (where we deal with the publications
that should be entitled to the benefit of the proposed reform of the law),
we are going to frame it in fairly wide terms so as to cover all mass media.

9.2. Secondly, regarding the publications that should be entitled to the
Proposed protection, the question to be considered is whether the protection
should—

(i) cover only newspapers, or
(ii) cover newspapers as well as periodicals, or
(iii) also cover radio and television stations, or

(iv) be framed in the widest terms, so as to cover any medium of
communication to the public.

After giving considerable thought to the matter, we have come to the
conclusion that every medium of communication to the public necds to be
covered. We note that section 15(2) of the Press Council Act concentrates
on “newspaper, news agency, editor or journalist”, but presumably that was
because that Act was concerned primarily with the press. On principle, we
see no reason for treating other media on a separate footing. How this
object of framing the reform in the widest terms so as to cover all media
can be achieved is a matter of drafting, to which we shall address ourselves
when coming to the precise recommendations to be made for statutory
amendment.*

9-3५ The third question relates to the matter to be protected. We
have found this to be a difficult issue. We note that section 15(2) of the
Press Council Act* confers protection only against disclosure of “the source

I. Chapter 7, supra,
2. Pratsburg v. Hayes, (1972) 408 U.S. 605, 92 S.G. 3616, 32 Law Ed. 2d 626.

3. Para 9.7, infra.
4. Para 3.6, supra.

32



33
of any news or information” published by a newspaper or received of

reported by a news agency, cdlitor or journalist. This would not cover
unpublished information, other than the source.

In England, section 10 of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1931, gives im-
munity to a person “for refusing to disclose the source of information con-
tained in publication for which he is responsible, unless it be established to
the satisfaction of the court that disclosure is necessary in the interest of justice
or national security or for the prevention of disroder or crime”, This is also
somewhat narrowly drawn. We appreciate that in principle, there is something
to be said for conferring protection on such unpublished information. The
journalist, for example, may consider it necessary to obtain background infor-
mation which (though not itself intended for publication) may be required
for verifying the accuracy of the information that is proposed to be published.
Nevertheless, one cannot overlook the consideration that a protection for such
unpublished information may occasionally create unforseen anomalies. We
would, therefore, prefer to confine the protection to the source only.

9-4. The fourth issue to be considered concerns the types of proceedings
to be covered by the proposed protection. In our opinion, all proceedings
in the course of which evidence is, or may be, legally taken on oath
should be covered. Whether any exception should be made requiring
disclosure in defamation actions is a matter of some difficulty. We would
not, however, like to make any special provision on the subject to govern
all defamation actions. The court, when dealing with the matter, will be
expected to bear in mind the consideration of justice—an aspect which is
dealt with in the next paragraph, where we discuss the status of the protec-
tion to be conferred. : \

9.5. This brings us to the most important question concerned with
the status of the proposed protection. A number of alternatives fall to be

considered in this respect, namely :-—
(i) an absolute privilege against disclosure may be conferred ; or

(ii) the court (or other body adjudicating the controversy) before
which protection is claimed may be given a discretion to uphold
or reject the request for protection (the decision to be arrived at
in each individual case) 5

(iii) while giving such a discretion, as is mentioned in (ii) above,
some criteria may be laid down to guide the exercise of the
discretion. .

After devoting some thought to the matter, we have come to the
conclusion that the matter should be left elastic, by vesting in the court
a discretion in the matter, but without going to the length of conferring
a privilege as such on any particular class of persons for any class of
publications. With a discretion so to be vested in the court, the court can;
in each case, balance the need to protect confidentiality of the source of
the information (or the information itself, if so decided) against :—

(i) the interest of justice—a general consideration ; and

(9). the demands of national security, prevention of disorder and
crime,—considerations which may be relevant in special

situations. _

Types of
Proceedings,

Status of the
Protection,



34

To confer an absolute privilege would be a very simple solution, but
having regard to the varicty of considerations involved and the complexity
of the subject matter, we do not think that a reform of the law on the
issue under consideration should be shaped ७ a “privilege”. The dis-
advantage of conferring an absolute privilege is that it introduces an element
of rigidity into the law, which might occasionally cause very serious
anomalics, On the other hand, a discretion given to the court on the lines
indicated above will leave the matter clastic.

Waiver 9-6. Since we are not recommending the conforment of a privilege

ierelevant, as such,' the question wiiether the privilege should be allowed to be waived,
and if so, by whom, becomes academic, and we need not therefore pause
.to discuss it.

9-7. In the result, our recommendation is to insert a provision in the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 at the appropriate place (say, as section 132A),
iP Prop! Pp 2४
somewhat on the following lines :

“132A. No court shall require a person to disclose the source
of information contained in a publication for which he is responsible,

+ where such information has been obtained by him on the express
agreement or implied understanding that the source will be kept
confidential”.

Explanation —In this section-—

(a) ‘publication’ means any speech, writing, broadcast or other
communication in whatever form, which is addressed to the

public at large or any section of the public.

(b) “source” means the person from whom, or the means
through which, the information was obtained”.

Recosumendation 9.8. Having regard to the importance of a court order on the subject,
to anend the © we reccommend that a provision for appeal against an order directing or
का ces oF refusing to direct disclosure under proposed section 132A, Evidence Aci?
provide for. should be inserted in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and in the Code

ape aks of Criminal Procedure, 1978 at the appropriate place.

pro| ‘ion
132A, Evidence
Act.

1, Paragraph 9.5, supra.
2. Paragraph 9.7, supra.



35

(6. K. MATHEW)
CHAIRMAN

(NASIRULLAH BEG)
MEMBER

(J. P. CHATURVEDI)
MEMBER

(P. M. BAKSHI)
PART-TIME MEMBER

(VEPA P. SARATHI)
PART-TIME MEMBER

(A. K. SRINIVASAMURTHY)
MEMBER-SECRETARY

Dated : September 9, 1983.

GIPN—S2c, 4—443 LAD (ND)/83—22-12-84 625