LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
NINETY-FOURTH REPORT
ON

EVIDENCE OBTAINED ILLEGALLY OR IMPROPERLY :
PROPOSED SECTION 163A, INDIAN EVIDENCE
ACT, 1872


JUSTICE K. K. MATHEW
| +. No. F. 2(7)/83-L.C,
Shastri Bhavan

« New Delhi
October 28, 1983.

\e My dear Minister,

I am forwarding herewith the Ninety-fourth Report of the Law Com-
mission on “Evidence obtained illegally or improperly : Proposed Section
166A, Indian Evidence Act, 1872”.

2. The subject was taken up by the Law Commission on its own. The
need for taking up the subject is explained in para 1.3 of the Report. .

3. The Commission is indebted to Shri P. M. Bakshi, Part-time Mem-
ber and Shri A. K. Srinivasamurthy, Member-Secretary, for their valuable
| हि assistance in the preparation of the Report.

With regards,

- . Yours sincerely,

i
Ie है (K. K. Mathew)

+

5 i
a
h bri
. Shri Jagannath Kaushal, .
. Minister of Law, Justice & Company Affairs, , i

New Delhi

“ Enclo : 940 Report.

J-rdd2. LAD/ND/83



i
i
'
‘
'

wie

CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER

Appendix

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

10
ll

CONTENTS,

INTRODUCTORY . . . . . पु . न .
THE DIFFERING APPROACHES , . . न .

THE INDIAN LAW . . . . न . . .

ENGLISH AND SCOTTISH LAW. न . . . .
POSITION IN AUSTRALIA . . . . . . .
POSITION INCANADA . . . . . न . .
POSITION IN U.S.A. . . . न . न . .
A CASE FROM JAMAICA . . न . . . .
COMMENTS RECEIVED ON THE WORKING PAPER... .
ARGUMENTS PRO AND CON. . . . * . .

ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION AND RECOMMENDATIONS

APPENDIX

Some illustrative situations of evidence obtained illegally or
iniproperly . . . . . . . . . .

Pace

35

|



te em

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTORY

1.1. This Report proposes to deal with a specialised area of the law Scope.
of evidence, namely, how far should there be a discretion with the court in
a criminal case to exclude evidence that has been obtained illegally or im-
Properly ? The question that has been broadly formulated in the preceding
sentence has not, in judicial decisions in India, received the intensive attention
that it has received in some other countries. However, for reasons to be
mentioned later, the question needs to be examind in detail.! .

3.2. Generally speaking, the traditional approach of the Indian courts The
has been to the effect that, absent a specific statutory or constitutional provi- traditional
sion which provides for excluding particular types of evidence, the fact that approach:
evidence was obtained illegally remains of no consequence in regard to its
admission at the criminal trial. Lord Scarman? noted in the English case
of Sang that “judges are not responsible for the bringing or abandonment
of prosecutions” and that “save in the very rare situation, which is not this
case, of an abuse of process of the court............the judge is concerned only
with the conduct of the trial.”* This has been the approach adopted in India

also.

+ 1.3. The traditional Indian view (as outlined above) represents a strictly Need for study.
legalistic approach. There appears, however, need for some fresh thinking
on the subject.

The subject has been taken up for consideration by the Law Commis-
sion of its own, having regard to the importance that this and similar contro-
versies have assumed, or are likely to assume, in the light of the increasing
stress laid on human rights in recent times. In the Indian context, in parti-
cular, the expanding scope of article 21 of the Constitution (as currently
interpreted) is likely to render such an enquiry of considerable practical im-
portance in the not distant future. ‘This is not to say that the present enquiry
is necessarily aimed at suggesting any radical change in the law. The object
of the enquiry is mainly to stimulate discussion on the subject, to disentangle
the various issues involved to define with some concrete the contours of the
controversy and generally to test the present position in India, in the light of
the doctrine and developments mentioned above, If, as a result of such en-
quiry, there emerges a need for reform in the law, suggestions for appropriate
reform will, of course, be made. .

1.4. In view of the constitutional overtones of the controversy and the Methodology
importance of the subject from the point of view of human rights, it may be of Study and
desirable for the purpose of the present inquiries to examine several theoretical Srthe sonclu«
and practical aspects. Developments in other countries, past as well as re- sions to be reached
cent, are of interest. At the same time, it should be remembered that the

position on the subject under discussion in certain other countries seems to

1. Paragraph 1-3, infra.

2. Chapter 3, infra.

3. R. v. Sanz, (1979) 3 W.L.R. 263, 288. Cf. R. v. Sang, (1979) 2 W.LR. 439, 458
(CA).


Working Paper
circulated by the
Commission.

2

be in a fluid condition,! and any assessment that one might make of the law
in those countries should be regarded as very tentative, and may not neces-
sarily be reflective of the up-to-date position in all its minuteness. In fact,
since the subject itself is integrally connected with human values, even the
conclusions that may be ultimately arrived at in the present inquiry should
be regarded as possessing a validity only for a limited space of time, and as
not ruling out a fresh examination of the subject after a reasonable interval.

1.5. It may be mentioned here that in order to elicit informed opinion
on the subject, the Commission circulated a Working Paper which set out
most of the material incorporated in succeeding Chapters of this Report?
Towards its end, the Working Paper posed certain issues for consideration.
We are setting out those issue,>_ in a later Chapter of this Report. The
Working Paper was sent to the Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry
of Law, State Governments, High Courts, Bar Associations and other inter-
ested persons and bodies. Comments received on the Working Paper will be
summarised in a later Chapter of this Report.4

न
1. See Meng Heong Yeo, “Discretion to exclude illegally and improperly obtained
evidence (1981) Melbourne Univ. Law Rev. 31.

Working Paper circulated in April, 1983,
Chapter 11, infra.
Chapter 9, infra.

हे ७



+ ee See

d

CHAPTER 2
THE DIFFERING APPROACHES

2.1. Broadly speaking, the common law world may be said to present Differing

four varying models’ as to the legal approach adopted on the question whether

approaches
as to evidence

evidence that has been gathered illegally or improperly should, nevertheless, illegally or

continue to be available for use at the trial for the offence, in the investiga- im
tion whereof the evidence so gathered. The different approaches adopted
by the various models reflect the varying degree of intensity of the law’s con-
cern for the observance of legal restrictions as to the methods to be employed
for the gathering of evidence and for compliance with certain norms of pro-
priety in the gathering of evidence.

Incidentally, the use, in the present discussion, of two separate xp res.
sions “illegal” and “imprope er” (and their adverbial counterparts) need not
be taken as implying that the . two situations represented by these two expres-
sions always stand in water-tight compartments. Nor does the use of these
expressions imply that every country which adopts a certain approach towards
evidence obtained illegally necessarily maintains the same approach towards
evidence obtained improperly, and vice versa. The two expressions have
been employed in the discussion merely for the sake of convenience. If one
were to go into minute details, one would find that the courts, in dealing
with the problem, do not always articulate their thoughts on whether the
decision in a particular case was influenced by the factor of illegality or by
the factor of impropriety, or by both the factors.

properly

obtained.

2.2. Another preliminary clarification also appears to be in order. Constitutional
Where a rule regulating the conduct of public officers has, in a particular dimensions,

country, attained the status of a constitutional mandate, the controversy may
assume new dimensions and may present itself in a more complex form.
Where, therefore, the position in the ensuing discussion is stated as the posi-
tion under ordinary law, the statement may have to be taken as subject to
qualification where the illegality or impropriety complained of has a consti-
tutional dimension that was not raised specifically in the case law cited on

_the particular point.

2.3. As stated above, the differing approaches prevalent in various Categories of

countries as to evidence obtained illegally or improperly seem to comprise countries—The*

four broad categories. In the first Place, the strictest approach is adopted **
Plosed in countries (India included),? where the illegality or impropriety em-
in the collection of evidence does not (in absence of a specific
statutory or constitutional provision on the subject), render the evidence so
obtained legally inadmissible, though such illegal ity or impropriety might
sibly affect its weight. The statement made in the preceding sentence

हैं out the Indian position should, of course, be taken as subject to the quali-

fication that the expanding scope of article 21 of the constitution, and the
everwidening interpretation placed on the words “procedure established by

1. Parograph 2.3, infra.
2. Chapter 3, infra, discusses the Indian Law.

t category.



The second
category.

‘The third
category.

The fourth
category.

Geographical
summary.

4

law” as occurring in that article might possibly alter the position in this |
pect; so far as could be ascertained, courts in India have not yet directly and
squarely dealt with the question whether, in any particular circumstances, the
use of illegal or improper methods in collecting evidence would constitute, a
breach of the requirement of “procedure established by law” laid down in
article 21. है

2.4. For the present purpose, the second category mentioned above! is
represented by. countries? where the use of illegal or improper methods in
collecting evidence is regarded as relevant to this extent, namely, that at the
stage.of trial, the court, in its discretion, may regard itself as justified in

rejecting such evidence.

2.5. The third category mentioned above is represented by. situations
wherein the law, by a specific statutory provision, excludes a particular type
of evidence where it has been obtained in violation of some substantive norm
of conduct prescribed for public officials in a separate (but connected) rule.

2.6. To the fourth category mentioned above belong those countries
where a constitutional guarantee, or the judicial construction of a constitu-
tional -guarantee, exclu és certain evidence from use at the trial, where the
evidence has been obtained in violation of such constitutional guarantee.
The most familiar example of this category is the United States.* The case
law of that country on the Fourth Amendment (protection against unreason-
able search and services) and the Fourteenth Amendment (the Due Process
clause) in particular provides instances of situations falling in the category

under discussion.

2.7. By way of a very brief statement of the position in selected areas,
it may be stated that in the United States, in order to deter illegal activity in
the securing of evidence in criminal proceedings, evidence is inadmissible if
law enforcement officers have acquired it illegally or if illegal-acts have led
to the discovery of the evidence. In Canada, on the other hand, the courts
have been ‘more reluctant to subordinate the inquiry into truth to extrinsic ;
polic considerations. In Scotland and Australia, a discretion is recognised
and Frequently exercised. The position in England is fluid in this regard.

In India, the legal relevance of the evidence to the facts in issue is, under |
the present law, the only pertinent consideration. The way in which the |
evidence was obtained is treated as a collateral issue, having no bearing on |
the admissibility of evidence in India, although the court can consider the |

matter as having some effect on the credibility of the party who produces it 1

Paragraph 2.3, supra.
For example the Law in Scotland and Australia, Chapter 4.5, infra.

Eg. section 24, Indian Evidence Act, 1872,
Chapfer 6, infra.
Sec, further Chapter 3, infra.

ही ४:



CHAPTER 3 ao . aoa
THE INDIAN LAW i

_ 3-1. According to the general approach of the Indian legal system, ille- General
- gality or impropriety in the gathering or procuring of evidence does not, in approach.
itself, render the evidence so procured inadmissible, though it may affect its
weight in some cases. Courts in India have, in general, treated such viola-
tions of the law as having no relevance to the admissibility of the evidence.

3.2. This approach might have been due, to some extent, to the fact
that the Indian Law of evidence is almost entirely codified, with an elaborate
classification of facts into relevant and irrelevant, and specific categorisation
of admissible and inadmissible evidence, and similar other differentia laid
down by sta:ute. The Indian Evidence Act was perhaps the first compre- i
hensive code of evidence enacted in the entire commonwealth (1872). By \
the time developments regarding the discretion of the court to exclude. evi-
dence on grounds of public policy took shape elsewhere, the Act had already
become firmly embedded in the training and upbringing of the Indian Judi-

1 ¢iary. The super-imposition of common law doctrines upon the codified हे
framework of the law of evidence did not find a very hospitable soil in the - i
Indian Legal system. Courts, in deciding questions of the admissibility or
otherwise of evidence, had recourse only to the scheme and text of the Evi-
dence Act, and were not inclined to go outside the four corners of the Act

~ for determining questions of admissibility.

3.3. There is also another feature of the legal system of India, rele- Codifcation.
i vant to the matter under discussion. It has so happened that by the time
the Evidence Act came to be enacted, the substantive criminal law and the law . i
of criminal procedure in India had also come to be in a codified form. --- In । 1 j
its totality, this situation seems to have led to the implicit assumption that one io. |
must, in this sphere, have recourse to the statute law only. This approach | ध
was fortified by the well-known pronouncement of the Privy Council to the हि
} effect that the “essence of a Code is to be exhaustive in respect of all matters 7 4
i dealt with by the Code.” This statement of the Privy Council on the inter- i
a: pretation of Codes in general became a classical test, which came to be cited
| almost on every occasion when an attempt was made in the courts sto persuade i
| | the judge to travel outside the code on a particular subject for seeking guid- ! .
ance in evolving the law. The same approach prevailed as for the interpreta- हि Jf
tion of the Evidence Act.! In short, the law of evidence ceased to draw its {
juices front any other roots except what had been enacted in a codified form.

| 3.4. Besides this, we may mention yet another feature of the Indian Contéssions. i
i legal ‘system that might be appropriately referred to in the present context. |
: The topic of admissibility of confessions in criminal cases has in other coun- |
| ‘ tries provided a fertile ground for the exercise of judicial discretion to. exclude |

- evidence obtained unfairly. But, in India, the subject has been treated elabo- i
| in a chain of sections in the Evidence Act,? thereby removing this parti- |
from the area of discretion and narrowing down the judicial creati- |
in India, the question whether a particular confession can, or i |

-rately
cular topic
A vity. Hence,

1. Cf. Lekhraj v. Mahipal, (1878) LL.R. 5 Cal. 744, 754 (P.C.). है
2. Sections 24-30, Indian Evidance Act, 1872.

2-442 LAD/ND/83
had
it



Illegal searches,

.7, Sunder Sigh v. The State, AIR. 1956 S.C. 411, 415.

6

cannot, be admitted on the record falls to be determined almost exclusively
by the statutory law and interpretation thereof, rather than by drawing any
principles originating in uncodified law. “Justice, equity and good con-
science” has been almost barren in this area of the law.

This is not the place for setting out the gist of the sections of the Evi-
dence Act relating to confessions.!| ~The Law Commission has had cccasion
in the past to analyse, as well as consider, these provisions in detail, in its
comprehensive Report on the Evidence Act? The point that is now being
made is that matters which, if there had been no codificd law of evidence,
would probably have been dealt with in a more elastic manner by the exercise
of the discretion of the court to. exclude certain evidence have in India, been
pre-empted by statutory provisions enacted on specific topics, of which confes-
sions are one important example.

3.5. It is also probable that once this “statute-oriented” approach
established itself in the sphere of confessions where there are specific statutory
provisions as to the admissibility of confessions recorded in varying circum-
stances, it later became a matter of habit for the courts to adopt the same
approach on other topics as well. As a result, in regard to other spzcies of
evidence also, even though there were no specific statutory provisions as to
admitting or not admitting a particular species of evidence obtained in viola-
tion of the law, the same stance came to be adopted by the courts. The most
familiar example of this is furnished by the vudicial approach in. India in res-

Pec: of evidence procured by search. The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
lays down elaborate provisions as to the mode of search to be carried out by
the police for the purposes of investigation into an offence.? These provi-
sions incorporate a number of safeguards required to be observed by the
police in carrying out such searches. When questions arose as to the admis-
sibility in evidence of materials gathered in a search that had been conducted
in violation of the relevant statutory requirements (particularly, the statutory
requirement that the search must have been conducted in the presence of
two independent witnesses),* the courts, in general, started adopting a legalis-
tic approach. According to the trend of authority, evidence so obtained is
not per se, inadmissible.> Nor is there recognised any discretion on the part:
of the trial judge to exclude evidence obtained through a search not conductéd
in accordance with law. 7

Non compliance with the statutory safeguards may call for strictures
against the pol fice and may, also, affect weight® of the evidence. But the
legality of a conviction based on such evidence remains unaffected by the

defect in the search.’

"1. Sections 24 to 30. Indian Evidence Act, 1872.

2. Law Commission of India, 69th Report (Indian Evidence Act, 1872) ferwarded In
May, 1977,

3. Section 100, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

. Section 100(4), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

5. (a) Benamali’v. Emp. 1LR (1939) 1 Cal. 210.
(0) Valayudhan v. The State, AIR 1961 Ker. 8 (FB).
(० Kau Sain v. The State of Punjab, AIR 1974 SC 329, para 9. _
(d) Govindan, AIR 1959 Mad. 544, 548. °

6. (a) Malal Khan v. Emp. A..R. 1946 P.C. 16, 19.
(b) Legal Remembrancer v. Mamtazuddin, 1.L.R. (1947) 1 Cal. 439.



7

3.6. A Supreme Court decision of 19737 is sometimes regarded as re-
cognising a discretion in the courts in India to exclude evidence obtained ille-
gally. But in fact the Supreme Court in that case held the evidence to be
admissible and did not accept the contention that illegality in gathering the
evidence affected its admissibility. The point related to the admission, in
evidence, of a tape record of a conversation that took place in the telephone.
The charge was one of bribery, the accused being the Coroner of Bombay
who had demanded a bribe of Rs. 20,000 from a Bombay Doctor. The
bribe was demanded as the Coroner’s price for not declaring the doctor guilty
of aegligence. The conversation that took place was between the doctor and
the accused, The conversation was recorded by the anti-corruption police, 7
who had been called in by the doctor for the purpose. A tape recorder was
attached to the telephone at the doctor's end and the conversation
that took placo between the doctor and the accused was recorded
on the tape recorder attached to the telephone. —_ Rejecting the argument
that it was illegal so to tamper with a telephone communication, the Supreme ©
Court held that even if there was any illegality, admission of the evidence in
question did not thereby become impermissible. A feeble attempt was made
to challenge the evidence on the score of article 21 of the Constitution, but
that challange also did not succeed.

In its discussion of the legal position relating to evidence obtained ille-
gally and in support of the view that admissibility was not affected by the
illegality, the Supreme Court referred, inter alia, to the English law on the
subject. It was in this context that it referred to the judgment of Lord
Goddard in the well known Privy Council case of Kuruma, Lord Goddard
had, in that case squarely, held that the adoption of illegal means in collect-
ing evidence did not affect its admissibility. Lord Goddard had ended this
exposition of law with certain dicta about the existence of a judicial discre-
tion to exclude evidence obtained illegally, if its admission was likely to ope-
rate unfairly against the party against whom it is sought to be tendered. .. The
‘Supreme Court of India, when dealing with English law, naturally referred

. to Lord Goddard’s judgment, and it was in this context that the Supreme
Court made a brief mention of the above dootrine contained in the dicta
towards the end of Lord Goddard’s exposition of the law.. But the Supreme
‘Court had no occasion to consider at length the question whether courts in

"India possess any such discretion. In fact, the case before the Supreme Court
was not decided.on the basis of the existence. or absence of any such discre-
tion. The evidence was admitted notwithstanding the supposed illegality.

if the Supreme Court judgment is to be construed as indi-
in India have such a discretion, then our recommenda-
h a discretion in our statute law should be welcome,

v

In any case,
cating that the courts?
5 tion to incorporate suc!

1 RLM. Malkani v. State of Maharashira, ALR. 1973, 5.0. 57.

2. Chapter 11, Infra.

Supreme Court



Privy Council

case of Kuruma
Discretion re-
garding evidence

obt .ined illeg tly.

Decision in
RB. y. Sang.

“said :

. CHAPTER 4
ENGLISH AND SCOTTISH LAW
1. ENGLAND

4.1. The classical statement of English law on the subject of. evidence
obtained illegally represented by the dicta to be found in the leading case of
Kuruma.' The actual decision in that case was in favour of admission of
the evidence, and the case itself did not arise in England, but was decided by
the Privy Council. But the observations of the Judicial Committee of the,
Privy Council in that case are of great interest, .and are generally taken as
the starting point of any inquiry on the subject that does not support to go.
too deeply into the history of the subject.

The Privy Council in that case held that evidence of the. accused’s un-
lawful possession of ammunition, discovered in consequence of an illegal
search of his person, was admissible: The Privy Council acted on the princi-
ple, recognised in some earlier English decisions, that, provided rea] evidence
is relevant, it is legally admissible, however improperly, it had been obtained.
The person against whom such evidence is tendered may. have a civil remedy
against the person who obtained it and the latter may be liable to disciplinary,
or even criminal, proceedings. But the law is that : “It matters not how you
et it; if you steal it even, it would be admissible in evidence.’?

However, in delivering the opinion of the Board, Lord Goddard, L.CJ.,”

“No doubt, in a criminal case the judge always has a discretion to dis-
allow evidence if the strict rules of admissibility would operate wrfairly
against an accused......... If, for instance, ......... some piece of evi-

> dence ......... had been obtained from a defendant by a trick, no doubt,
the judge might properly rule it out.”?

4-2. It should be mentioned that in the comparative recent English ~

1 decision of R. V. Sang,‘ the statement about the discretion of the Court ap-

pears in terms somewhat different from earlier cases. The general question:
certified in that case ‘by the Court of Appeal as fit for consideration by the | |
House of Lords was : “does a trial judge have a discretion to refuse to allew~

evidence—being evidence other than evidence of admissions—to be given-in’’
any circumstances in whith such evidence is relevant and of more than mip
mal probative value ?” To this question, the following answer was given -
by four out of the five members’ of the House of Lords :— हूँ. ०

“(1) A trial judge at a criminal trial has always a discretion १0 refwse -
to admit evidence if in his opinion its prejudicial effect outweighs *
its probative. है

1. Kuruma v. R. (1955) 1 All E.R. 236 (०.0).
2. R. v. Leathem, (1861) 8 Cox C.C. 408, 501 (Per Crompton, J.). .

3. For the Canadian Law, see Clayton Hutchins, “Discretion of a trial Judge to exclude
otherwise admissible evidence” (May 1981) Vol, 6, No. 3, Dalhousie LJ. 690, 699. *

R. ५. Sang, (1979) 3 W.L.R, 263, 288 (H.L.) Seen analysis ‘Rosemary Pattenden, “The
Exelusion of Unfairly obtained” evidence in England (1980) 29 ICL, 666-686. .

8 : मु

ween ee |



9

(2) Save with regard to admissions and confessions and generally with
regard to evidence obtained from the accused after his commission
of the offence, he (the trial judge) has no discretion to refuse to
admit relevant admissible evidence on the ground that it was ob-
tained by improper or unfair means. The court is not concerned
with how it was obtained.”

हज

हे

The formulation of the law by Bord Salmon (in the above case of R.
V.. Sang was in terms different from that of the other law Lords, But Lord
Salmon did not disagree with the rest of the House.

*

13; R. V. Sang, referred to above, is a recent case and it is not possible
to make any comment as to how far, if at all, it has modified the earlier
understanding of the position in England as to evidence illegally obtained.
It should however, be mentioned that! copies improperly obtained may be
excluded to prevent documents brought into court for a limited purpose from
being stolen.

4.4. There is another area where discretion is exercised in England in

. Fegard to evidence. Evidence may generally not be given of a party’s mis-
conduct on prior occasions, if its only purpose 15:10 show that’ he is a person

likely to have misconducted himself on the occasion-in quéstion. But.such

evidence is admissible if it is relevant for some other reason. Yet, the evi-

dence so relevant for some other purpose may relate to something which

oceurred a long time ago,? or it may im of a tenuous nature °. 05 Cross

states, “In all such cases, the judge ought to consider whether the ¢vidence‘

which it is proposed to adduce is sufficiently substantial, having regard: to-the

purpose to which it is professedly directed, to make it *iesinabe in the inter-

ests of justice that it should be admitted. If, so far as the purpose is

‘concerned, it can in the circumstances of the case have only trifling weight,
the judge will be right to exclude it. To say this is not to confuse weight

with ac Feasibility. The distinction is plain, but.cases. must occur in which

it would be: unjust to admit evidence of a character gravely: prejudicial to. the

accused even though there may be some -tenuous ground for holding

it technically admissible. “The decision must then be left to the discretion

«and sense of fairness of the judge.’ :

'", 46. The classical example in this field is Noar Mohamed V. R° The
acqused had been convicted of murdering A, the woman with whom he
had -been living. He was a goldsmith, lgwfully possessed of cyanide for
« the; purposes of his business, and A certainly met her death through cyanide
. pooning: although there was no evidence that the poison had been ad-
inistered by the accused. The accused was on bad terms with her and
i, there was a suggestion that she had committed suicide. The Judicial Com-:
ay _thittee ruled that the conviction should be quashed because the judge had
- wrongly admitted evidence in support of an inference that Noor Mohamed,
(the accused) had previously caused the death of his wife, Gooriah, with
‘Whom. also he had been on bad terms, by tricking her into taking cyanide
ea éure for toothache. Lord Du Parq, delivering the judgment of the Privy |
“Gouincil, said of this evidence in its application to’ the facts of the case before

im: .

7 ताप rm ren gaye ee RR ताजा,
५, q

a

ng पाए

LIC. Films v. Video Exchange (1982) 2 All B.R. 241,.247. . a
>क २. Cole (1941) 165 L.T. 125. :

R. v: Doughty, (1965) 1 All E.R. 540; (1965) 1. W.LR. 331. .

Cross, Evidence (1973), page 90. : :
Noor Mohammed v. R. (1949) A.C. 182, 192; (1949) 1 All E.R, 365,370, See also
Hams v. Director of Public Prosecution (1952) A.C. 684, 9. 707, (1952) 1 All & 1२, 1044,
1046 (per Lord Simon). .

Noor Mohamed v. R. (1949) A.C. 182; (1949) 1 All E.R. 365 (PC).

weep

6.

Discretion as to
evidence of
similar facts.

Discretion #8 10
confession.



Confessions.

Discretion in
England in the
realm of evidence
and enumeration.

10

“Jf an examination of it shows that it is impressive just because
it appears to demonstrate, in the words of Lord Herschell in Makin’s caso
‘that the accused is a person likely from his criminal conduct or character to
have committed the offence for which he is being tried’ and if it is otherwise
of no real substance, then it was certainly wrongly admitted.”

4-7. Confessions coastitute the third category of cases in which discri-
tion is exercised. The judge's discfttion in England to exclude legally ad-
missible confessions is of a different type.? Few items of evidence can be
more probative than a confession, provided it was not made in circumstances
giving rise to a reasonable doubt concerning its reliability. The proviso
mentioned in the preceding sentence lies at the root of the exclusionary rule
of English law, which 198 been succinctly formulated in the following
terms :— °

“Tt is a fundamental condition of the admissibility in evidence
against any person, equally of any oral answer given by that person to

a question put by police officer and of any statement made by that per-

son, that it shall have been voluntary, in the sense that it has. not been

obtained from him by fear of prejudice or hope of advantage, exercised
or held out by a person in authority, or by oppression.*

This is one of the principles to which the Judges’ Rules of 1964 are
exp! ressly stated to be subject.* The Rules themselves are no more than
guides to police officers in relation to the taking of statements providing for
the administration of a caution at different stages of an interrogation.
The introduction concludes with the remark that non-conformity , with
the Rules may render answers and statements liable to be excluded from evi-
dence in subsequent criminal proceedings. The judge thus has a discretion
to exclude 4 confession obtained in breach of the Rules, although it is legally
admissible. In fact, the concluding remark of the introduction simply re-
cognises the existence of a discretion to exclude confessions which are “volun-
tary” within the above definition which had existed before the Rules’ were
first formulated’ in 1921. हि

4.8. It is not necessary to burden this Report with an exhaustive discre-
tion of all the situations in which courts in England are supposed to possess
a discretion to exclude relevant evidence on a particular ground. A fairly
recent study® enumerates these situations of discretion as under? :-—

(a) Illegally obtained evidence.
(b) Improperly obtained evidence.
(c) Evidence of similar facts.

(d) Cross-examination of the accused as to character, ह
(०) Confessions. है

(0 Admissions by accused persons.
७) Evidence calculated to prejudice he uns oe Evidence calculated to prejudice the course of the trial.* .

Makin v. A.G. for New ‘South Wales (1894) A.C. 67 (PC.). oe
32. See note confession—Recent Developmnt in ‘Beplaid

1.
2. Cross Evidence (1979), page
(1980) vol. LC.L.Q. 3: 7, 345.
3. Cross, Evidence (1979) page 32. _
4, The Rules are set out in (1964) 1 An E.R. 237. See now Home Office circular No.
89/Judges Rules and ‘Administrative Directions is the Police 1978 page’ 6. -
Cross Evidence 1979, page 32. -
M.S. Weinberg, “Judicial discretion to exclude relevant
Law Journal 1, 11 to 13.
Footnotes ‘appearing in the study are omitted for brevity. .
Cn this, see the Australian case of Wilson v. R. (1970) 44 ALJ
English case of R. ५. List (1965) 3 All E.R. 710, 711,

evidence” (1975) 21 Me. Gill

em ay



i

11
Il. SCOTLAND

4-9. The law of Scotland on the subject of evidence obtained illegally
has taken a different approach from that followed in England. The trial
judge is not only granted a discretion to exclude evidence obtained illegally,
but it would appear that the court initially acts upon the principle that the
discretion is not to exclude, but to include, jrregularly obtained evidence.
While there is no absolute rule rendering evidence inadmissible because of
irregularity, yet when such evidence is presented, which presumption the
police may rebut by pointing to circumstances which excuse the irregularity
and justify the admission of the evidence.' In reaching a conclusion as to
the exercise of the above discretion, the judge is to bear in mind the state-
ment of Lord Justice General Cooper? that :

“The law must strive to reconcile two highly important interests

which are liable to come into conflict—(a) the interest of the citizen

1 to be protected from illegal or irregular invasions of his liberties by the

authorities, and (b) the interest of the State to secure that evidence bear-

ing upon the commission of crime and necessary to enable justice to be

done shall not be withheld from courts of law on any therely formal or
technical ground”.

In the case from which the above mentioned quotation is taken, a shop-
keeper had been convicted of using, contrary to the Milk Order, milk bottles
which had not belonged to her. The crucial evidence in the case was given
by Inspectors of a milk-bottles collecting organisation, who found the bottles
as a result of an unauthorised search of her premises. She appealed against
the conviction on the ground, inter alia, that the evidence was inadmissible
as having been obtained by an illegal search. The court held that while an
irregularity in the obtaining of evidence will not necessarily render the evi-
dence inadmissible, yet in this case the conviction must be quashed, because
the Inspectors ought to have known that they were exceeding the limits of
their authority.

4-10. Scottish law in the area is founded upon the principle that “an
irregularity in the manner of obtaining evidence is not necessarily fatal to its
admissibility (but) irregularities of this kind always require to be ‘excused’ or
condoned. whetlier by the existence of urgency, the relative triviality
of the irregularity or other circumstances.’4

4-11. Examples of exercise of the discretion in Scotland are available
in plenty. Evidence gained by scraping the fingernails of a suspect without
his having been arrested and without his consent having first been obtained
was excluded,* as the conduct of the police was technically an assault. Docu-
ments obtained by illegal search were excluded-in another case. Lord
Guthrie wrote that their admission would “tend to nullify the protection
afforded to a citizen by the requirements of a magistrate’s warrant and would
offer a positive inducement to the authorities to proceed by irregular
methods."

1. . J. B. Dawson, “Exclusion of unlawfully obtained evidence” (July 1982) Vol. 31 ICLQ
page 513, 537. *

2. Lawrie v. Muir, (1950) Scotish Law Times 39, 40.

3. McGovern v. H. M. Advocate, (1950) S.L.T. 133, 135.

4. J.B. Dawson “Exclusion of unlawfully obtained evidence” (July 1982) Vol. 31, I.C.1..Q.
513, 537, 538.

5. McGovern v. H. M. Advocate, (1950) S.L.T. 133, 145,

6. क्र, कह. Advocate v. Turnbull, (1951) S.L.T. 409, 411.

The Scottish
approach.

Prin: igle under-
lying” Scottish
hw.

Examples of
exercise of
discretion.



12

Guiding factor. 412, The Scottish judges thus exercise a broad and subjective discre-
tionary jurisdiction to include imp roperly obtained evidence. Since the
19508, however, a number of informal criteria guiding its exercise have
evolved.

(i) An irregularity may be more readily excused where the misconduct
was not deliberate. The evidence was admitted in Fuirly’s case!
(for example), because the inspectors “acted in good faith, in a
mistaken belief as to their powers and in an endeavour in the public
interest to vindicate the law”.

(ii) Evidence will be admitted if found by chance in the course of an
otherwise legal search for another purpose.”

(iii) Evidence is less likely to be admitted if improperly obtained by
private individuals rather than by public officials who may be held
accountable to their superiors.?

(iv) Evidence may be excluded where there are no circumstances of
urgency.‘

(v) Where a specific procedure has been prescribed by statute® failure
to comply with it may result in exclusion. .
' (vi) Where the police could casily have complied with legal require-

ments, exclusion may be the result.

. पर (vii) Where the illegality is a serious one, such as assault,” the evidence
may be excluded. :

On the other hand, exclusion of evidence is less likely in Scotland where
the accused is charged with a serious offence, or where the crime is of a kind
which is very hard to detect and prosecute by regular means,* such as in
liquor offences or blackmail, है

The major advantage of the Scottish approach is that it necessitates a |

continuing judicial scrutiny of police practices and shifts the burden of justi",
fying improper action to where it belongs, namely, on the-police themselves.

Fairley v. Fishmongers of London, (1951) S.L:
H. M, Advocate v. Hepper, (1958) J.C. 39.
Lawne v. Muir, (1950) SLT. 37.

Hay v. H.M. Advocate, (1968) S.L.T. 334.
Lawrie v. Muir (1950) S.L-T. 37.

McGovern v. H. M. Advocate, (1950) S.L-T. 133.
H. M. Advocate v. Turnbull (1951) S.L.T. 409.
Hopes v. H.M. Advocate, (1960) 1.0. 104.

i



CHAPTER 5

POSITION IN AUSTRALIA AND
NEW - ZEALAND

5.15 Broadly speaking, in Australia, it is accepted that the judge has
the power, in the public interest, to exclude evidence which has been impro-

perly obtained.'?
It appears that this is also the position in New Zealand?

2. An interesting case arose recently in Australia,* in which a sample
-of the breath of the accused for the purpose of measuring its alcoholic con-
tent had been unlawfully obtained. The illegality consisted in failure by
the. police to require the accused to submit to a preliminary roadside test—as
prescribed by statute. Initially, the stipendiary magistrate who heard _ the
case held the evidence to be inadmissible on the ground that it had been
* obtained unlawfully® and consequentiagly dismissed the charge of driving
under the influence of alcohol. However, following an order to review the
, decision the magistrate reheard the case. While recognising that illegality
alone did not render the evidence inadmissible, he again excluded it, this time
in the exercise of his discretion on the ground that the evidence had been
unfairly. obtained. The. prosecution once again sought an order reviewing
the decision, and the case ultimately reached the High Court of Australia.

. The High Court of Australia held that a judge at a criminal trial
dition to the discretion to exclude evidence which is more prejudicial
than probative, a discretion to exclude admissible evidence obtained impre-
perly. However, unlike Lord Diplock in R. V. Sang,5.the High Court did
fot this discretion on unfairness to the accused or on the need to disci-
B's the police: No doubt, concern was expressed that by admitting illegal-

ly obtained evidence, the courts may appear | to condone, .and even
But the emphasis which the High Court put
the words of Stephen

5:3
has, in ad

to encourage, such conduct. p
was on the need to protect the right of a citizen.” In

and Aicken, JJ :—

“Tt is not fair play that is called in question............+.. but rather
society’s right to insist that those who enforce the law themselves respect
it, so that a citizen’s precious right to immunity from arbitrary and un-
lawful intrusion into the daily affairs of private life may remain unim-

paired.”

1. Gifford and Gifford, Our Legal System (1981), page 80.
For cases upto 1950 see Elliot Johnston. The Exclusionai
the abuse of public power (1950)-54 Aust. LJ. 466.

3. R. v. Lee (1978) 1 N.Z.L.R. 481, 486, 487. .
(Supreme Court of N.Z. per Chilwell J.) cited by Gifford and Gifford, Our Legal System
(1981), page 80. . .

4, Bunning v. Cross (1978) 19 ALR. 641. 7

5, R. ए- Ireland (1970) 44 ALL. 263, 268.

6. R. v. Sang (3०० Chapter 4, supra).

ry Rule and controls over

7. Compare Ashworth, “Excluding evidence as protecting rights” (1977) Criminal Law
Review 723. ‘ . पं
13
3०442 LAD/ND/83

General rule in
Australia and
New Zealand.

Australian
Case as to
breath test.

Discretion as
formulated by the
High Court of
Australia,

जा... -++



)

Analyses,

Queensland
Report.

* Confessions.

14

5-4. In this decision,' public policy, rather than fairness to the accused,
was held to be the basis of the discretion of the court to exclude evidence ob-
tained illegally. The factors considered relevant (or not relevant) are as
under* :—~

(i) whether the law was deliberately or recklessly disregarded by those
whose duty it is to enforce it;

(ii) whether the nature of the illegality affected the cogency of the evi-
dence is not generally a factor to be considered, where the illegality
deliberate or the result of recklessness;

(iii) case of compliance with the law;

(iv) the nature of the offence charged;

(v) whether there was a violation of statutory procedures;

(vi) the urgency of protecting perishable evidence;

(vii) the availability of alternative, equally cogent, evidence.
5-5. It may also be stated that in Queensland the Committee of Inquiry

into the Enforcement of Law, has given a Report surveying the entire field of
enforcement of criminal law and the fair and efficient administration of justice.

The Report has particular reference to the preventing or inhibiting the.

fabrication of evidence by police officers or other persons, the protection of
individuals from undue pressure with reference to investigation and interroga-
tion by police officers and the question whether police powers of in-
vestigation, interrogation, search, seizure, and arrest are adequate to meet the
needs of the community in present day circumstances. Besides recommenda-
tions for the tape recording of statements made to police officers which impli-
cate the maker of the statement in ‘the commission of an indictable offence
and besides making certain other recommendations as to law enforcement,
the Report of the Committee had made certain recommendations as to illegal
evidence, which have been thus summarised? :—

“That the law concerning the judicial discretion to-exclude evidence ob
tained by unlawful and unfair means should be recast and every appellate
court should itself have an unfettered discretion to consider afresh the admis-
sion of evidence said to have been unlawfully or unfairly obtained and, if
necessary, to substitute its opinion on the subject for the opinion of the court
of first instance. Also the burden of satisfying the court that any illegally
or unfairly obtained evidence should be admitted should rest with the party
seeking to have the evidence admitted. The factors relevant to the exercise
of the discretion when the prosecution is seeking to tender evidence (obtain-
ed by unlawful or unfair means) include— :

(a) the seriousness of any crime being investigated, the urgency or
difficulty of detecting of it and the urgency of attempting to pre-
serve real evidence of it,

(b) the accidental or trivial quality of the contravention, and,

(c) the extent to which the contested evidence could have been law-
fully or fairly obtained by means of an available common law or
statutory procedure.”

5.6. Besides evidence obtained unlawfully, some other situations may
bring into play judicial discretion in Australia, but we do not pause to discuss
them.‘ :

Bunning ४. Cross (1978) 19 A.L.R. 641, 658.

Binning ४. Cross (1978) 19 ALR: 641, 663. tin

(1981 April) Vol 7, No 2, Commonwealth Legal Bulletin, pages 623, 625.

As to confessions, see Note “Confession”. Recent elopments in England, etc. (1980)
Vol. 29 No. 3 LC.LQ, 327-345. an

Beye



—~—— अर्मुकान्कन--

CHAPTER 6
POSITION IN CANADA

6.1. In general, as a matter of ordinary law, it was presumed before
1971 that Canadian law would recognise a discretion in a criminal court to
exclude evidence illegally obtained, on the same lines as was the position in
England as understood! before 1978.

6.2, However, in 1971 there came an important Pronouncement of the
Supreme Court of Canada which seems to limit the discretion very narrowly,
while not abolishing it altogether.

In the Canadian case of 1971, the aceused had been acquitted upon a
verdict of murder by the trial judge (in a trial held with jury). The appeal
against acquittal filed by the Crown to the Court of Appeal for Ontario had
also been dismissed.? This dismissal was challenged by the Crown in its
appeal before the Supreme Court of Canada. The main question involved
was as to the validity of the principle stated in the reason of the Court of Ap-
peal of Ontario, that a trial judge in a criminal case has a discretion to reject
evidence, even of substantial weight, if the trial judge considered that the ad-
mission of the evidence would be unjust or unfair to the accused. Bya
majorityy’ the Supreme Court of Canada allowed the appeal of the Crown.
The alleged illegal evidence in this case was a confession of the accused which
had led to the discovery of incriminating facts (the finding of the rifle with
which the murder was committed). After a review of English and Canadian
decisions, Mr. Justice Martland, speaking for’ the majority of the Supreme
Court of Canada, held that the recognition of a discretion to exclude admissi-
ble evidence, beyond the limited scope recog! nised in a Privy Council case of
1949,” was not warranted by authority and would be undesirable. He ex-
pressly disagreed with the observations of Lord Goddard, Lord Chief Justice,*
in the English case of 1955, to the effect that “the judge had always a dis-
cretion to disallow evidence if the strict rules of evidence would operate un-

fairly against the accused.” He pointed out that the English decisions pro-,

nounced after 1955 had all relied on the dictum of Lord Goddard, which
itselé was (in his view) not warranted by authority.

6.3. Is evidence rendered inadmissible merely by reason of the fact
that it has been procured in contravention af the provisions of the Canadian
Bill of Rights ?_ The Supreme Court of Canada, in a ruling of 1975, consi-
dered® the admissibility of a certificate concerning a breathal fact test admini-
stered by officers who had refused the prior request of the accused to con-
sult counsel. It was argued on behalf of the accused that refusal of an
opportunity to consult the counsel was a violation of the Canadian Bill of
Rights, that the breathalizer test and sample was illegally obtained and there-
fore the certificate concerning it ought not to be admitted as evidence. The
Supreme Court by majority held that even if the evidence had been illegally

1. Chapter 4, supra.
2: Queen v. Wrav, (1971) S.C.R. 272,

(Canada).
3. Noor Mohammed v. The King, (1949) A.C. 181 (1949) 1 All E.R. 510 (P.C).
4, Kuruma y. The Queen, (1955) A.C. 197 (PC).
5. Hogan v. The Queen, (1975) 2 S.C.R. 574 (Canada).

15

General
approach
upto 1971.

Canadian case
of

Constitutional
case in Canada.



Constitutional
and legal
position.

16

or improperly obtained, there was no ground for excluding it at common law
and that, in view of other evidence of intoxication, one could not characte-
rise as unfair the acceptance of the evidence as proof of the exact quantity
of alcohol absorbed into the blood stream. Speaking for the majority,
Ritchie, J. said, “I cannot agree that, wherever there has been a breach of
one of the provisions of that Bill, (the Canadian Bill of Rights) it justifies
the adoption of the rule of absolute exclusion on the American model which
isin derogation of the common law rule long accepted in this country.” The
evidence had been obtained in violation of section 2(c)(ii) of the Canadian
Bill of Rights which (so far as is material) provides that—

2......००-०००० no law of Canada shall be construed or applied so as to
(c) deprive a person who has been arrested or detained
(ii) -of the right to retain and instruct counsel without delay

Speaking for the majority of the court, and dismissing the appeal of the
accused person from a judgment of the Nova Scotia Supreme Court (Appeal
Division) which had affirmed the conviction of the accused on a criminal
charge, Ritchie, J. made the following observations which clinched
the matter :

“The case of R. Vs. Drybones' is authority for the proposition that any
law of Canada which abrogates, abridges or infringes any of the rights gua-
ranteed by the Canadian Bill of Rights should be declared inoperative and
to this extent is accorded a degree of paramountcy to the provisions of that
statute, but whatever view may be taken of the constitutional impact of the
Canadian Bill of Rights, and with all respect for those who may have a
different opinion, I cannot agree that, wherever there has been a breach of
one of the provisions of that Bill, it justifies the adoption of the rule of ‘abso-
ute exclusion’ on the American model which is in rogation of the common.
law rule long accepted in this country.”

6.4. So far as could be ascertained, the position in Canada is’ still sub-
stantially what it was stated or held to be in the above paragraphs, In other
words, (a) as a matter of ordinary law, (i.e. apart from constitutional issues),
the discretion of Canadian courts to exclude evidence obtained illegally is
very limited;? (b) even in matters falling within the sphere of constitutional *
Jaw, that is to say, where a specific provision of the Canadian Bill of Rights
has been violated, there does not appear to be any more strict or different

approval in this regard. दि

Some writers on Canadian law even think that the majority judgment
of the Supreme Court of Canada in the Queen Vs. Wray‘ has substantially

closed the doors in Canada on judicial discretion to exclude evidence where

the discretion is based on the method of obtaining the evidence.

R. Vv. Drybones, (1970) SCR, 282, 9 DLR, SR 12 9 DLR. Gd 473, Supreme Court of Canada), 473, (Supreme Court of Canada),

1

2, Paragraph 6.2, supra,
3. Paragraph 6.3, supra.
4. Paragraph 6.3, supra.
5.

Shroff and 5. Clarke, Admissibility of illegally obtained, evidence (1981) 31,
है दी on Ps Shanks, Comment, (February 1983) 57 Tulane Law Rev. ३४४६ ,


a

gg a पहन ना
4

17

6.5. It may be of interest to refer here to certain moves for reform in
Canada. The Ontario Law Reform Commission has recommended legisla-
fion to reconcile the interest in avoiding illegality and the interest in admitting
probative evidence. The proposed provision would read this way :—

“In a proceeding where it is shown that anything tendered in evi-
dence was obtained by illegal means, the court, after considering the
nature of the illegality and all the circumstances under which the thing
tendered was obtained, may refuse to admit it in evidence if the court
is of the opinion that because of the nature of the illegal means by which
it was obtained its admission would be unfair to the party against whom
it is tendered.”!

6.6. Section 15 of the proposed Evidence Code, (Canada), while not
addressed directly to the precise problem here, attempts a more difficult com-
promise encompassing illegally obtained evidence.?

“15. (7) Evidence shall be excluded if it was obtained under such
circumstances that its use in the proceedings would tend to bring the
administration of justice into disrepute.

“(2) In determining whether evidence should be excluded under
this section, all the circumstances surrounding the proceedings and the
manner in which the evidence was obtained shall be considered, includ-
ing the extent to which human dignity and social values were breached
in obtaining the evidence, the seriousness of the case, the importance
of the evidence, whether any harm to an accused or others was inflicted
wilfully or not, and whether there were circumstances justifying the
action, such as a situation of urgency requiring action to prevent the des-

~  truction or loss of evidence.”

6.7. This proposal does not seem to have yet been enacted into law. It
appe ars that the ¥ pical Canadian remedy is civil action against the offending
official for tort damages.?

6.8, As to the interception of communications the Canadian Criminal
Code has an elaborate provision in Section 178.16 of the Criminal Code to
which we shall advert later when discussing the position in U.S.A. “*

Stanley Schiff, Evidence in the Litigation Process (1978), Vol. 2, page 961.
Stanley Schiff, Evidence in the Litigation Process (1978), Vol. 2, page 961 : Law Reform
Commission of Canada, Report from Evidence (1975), 9. 22.
Barry F, Sharks, Comment (Fab, 1983) Tulane Law Rev. 648-665.
Paragraph 7.12, infra.
For the English position, see 0. B. Walker. Police Survelliance by Technically Devices
(1980) Public Law 184, 191-198. हे

pe

wae

Ontario Law
Commission.

Proposed Evi-
dence Code
(Canada).

Civil action for
ges.

Interception of
communications. :



‘Search and
seizure

(Fourth Amend-
ment).

Constitutional
rights—effect

of violation on
the law of
evidence.

Exception in
regard to
illegal search.

Y

legal search
and seizure.

CHAPTER 7
POSITION IN U.S.A.

7-1. The American law illustrates a position at the extreme, in view of
one of the constitutional puarantees as judicially interpreted in that country.
Examples of this approach can be drawn from the Fourth Amendment in a
large number. A fairly uptodate American work on Evidence gives a neat
and concise statement of the law as to search and seizure in that country in
these terms :—'

“Evidence obtained as a not-too-remote or not-too attenuated result
of violation of the federal Constitutional prohibition against illegal gov-
ernment-sponsored searches and seizures. (matter in parenthesis
omitted in this quotation) cannot be admitted as substantive evidence in }
a criminal case in any court in the land (matter in parenthesis omitted 74
in this quotation) as against the person whose rights were invaded.” *

Matter appearing in the first parenthesis (in the above statement of the
position) relates to the federal constitutional prohibition. It states that the
federal Constitutional prohibition against illegal searches and seizurcs in the
Fourth Amendment “1s applicable against agents of the States by virtue of
the Fourteenth Amendment—the two provisions being probably co-terminous
as interpreted in the present respect”. Matter appearing in the second
parenthesis in the above statement states that the bar against admission as . i |
substantive evidence in a criminal caso arises “‘again by virtue of the Fourth 15
and Fourteenth Amendments which are again probably co-terminous for these {

purposes.”
7.2. Thus, for violations of constisutional rights, there are available in ”

U.S.A. not only ordinary civil, criminal and equitable sanctions, but also a
privilege to exclude evidence? obtained in breach of such rights.

7-3. There is an exception to the privilege for use of the evidence for
impeachment? “(impeaching the credit)”, where the accused, who has been
the victim of the illegal: search or seizure, takes his stand and (in either direct °
examination or cross-examination) denies possession of the materials seized
from him as a result of the illegal search or seizure.‘

7.4. What constitutes illegal search and seizure is more a matter of
Constitutional Law than of the law of evidence in U.S.A. However, some
Of the that have relevance to the present discussion may be stated :°

A search or seizure will be illegal if it is unreasonable as to

(i): the grounds of suspicion stimulating it (even व the search there-
after uncovers sufficient grounds), or

(ii) the manner of execution, or

1. Rothstein, Evidence in a Nutshell (May 1981) page 465.
2. Rothstein, Evidence in a Nutshell (May 1981) page 463.
3. Rothstein, Evidence in a Nutshell (May 1981) pages 465-466.
4. (a) U.S. v. Havens, (1980) 446 U.S. 620.
(b) Walder v. U.S., (1954) 347 U.S. 62.
5. Rothstein, Evidence in a Nutshell (May 1981) pages 466-467.

18



19

(iii) the range of the search, or
(iv) the items seized,

7.5. Arrest is a “seizure” of the person, so that it must comply with Arrest.
these requirements in order to be constitutional, and in order that the evidence ~
€ requ
obtained in consequence may be regarded as legal.

7.6. If these things are complied with, a warrant (of arrest or search) Warrant when
is not necessarily required. However, a warrant is required (in addition to "44
these other requirements) in cial areas which the courts deem to be high
in privacy expectations (provided getting a warrant would not entail substan-
tial law enforcement problems), such as the defendant’s home,' assuming
there are no special exigent circumstances.”

7.7. Some jurisdictions in U.S.A. extend a similar privilege to civil Civil cases.
cases, However, this approach is not favoured by the Supreme Court.’

7.8. The approach adopted by the Supreme Court of U.S.A. in rela- titicism.
tion to evidence procured by illegal search has provoked conflicting responses
from those concerned with the administration and from academic writers.

Speaking to the American Bar Association’s* 1981 annual meeting in
New Orleans, Vice President Bush decried the “lawyer who gets a brutal
murderer acquitted by a deft use of exclusionary rule” and endorsed the call
of the Attorney-General’s Task Force on Violent Crime for a modification
of the rule. A few weeks later, in New Orleans, President Reagan also back-
ed the Task Force’s recommendation and said that the rule was based on an
“absurd proposition”. As far back as 1971, Chief Justice Burger declared
(in a dissent) that the rule results in the release of “countless
guilty criminals”.

7.9. In contrast, a spokesman for the American Bar Association, urging
the task force to support retention of the rule, recently asserted that the exclu- : i
sionary rule (which forbids the use of - illegally seized evidence against a
criminal defendant), “has contributed to substantial law reform. wd
creased the professionalism of federal’ law enforcement officers..
vastly enhanced the integrity of the federal judicial process.”*

j ii i Recent comment
7.10. A recent comment on the subject, after summing up the rival Reeent comment

views, expresses itself thus :* nary rule based
. on the Fourth
“What clearly emerges from these prominent and frequently echoed Amendment. 2५
statements is that those who debate the merits of the Fourth Amend-
ment exclusionary rule—judges included—have not been timid in mak-
ing assertions of the facts about the operation and effect of the rule.

“But is there empirical support for these assertions ? If not, do
we have the capacity to test them empirically ? These questions be-
come increasingly important as judicial and political campaigns to

US. v. Chadurak, (1977) 433 U.S. 1.

2, Rothstein, Evidence in a Nutshell (May 1981), pages 466, 467.

3. U.S. v. Janis, (1976) 428 U.S. 433. .

4, William A. Gelner, “Is the Evidence in for the Exclusionary Rule” (May 1981) 67
ABAJ 1642.

5. William A. Gelner, “Is the Evidence in for the Exclusionary Rule?” (May 1981) 67
ABAJ 1642.

6, William A, Gelner, “Is the Evidence in for Exclusionary Rule?” (6 May 1981.
67 ABAJ 1642, ‘he न ¥ »



Interception of
communications
in USA.

Canadian law—
section 178.61—
Canadian Crimi-
nal Code.

The established
trend in U.S.A.

20

modify or abandon the exclusionary rule pick up momentum (bills are
now pending in the Senate to modify or eliminate the rule) and bar
groups and others invest considerable resources in its defense. We may
be on the brink of a major policy decision without benefit of sufficient
empirical materials to inform.” हे

7.11. Apart from search proper, the scope of the Fourth Amendment
ment has been extended in the United States! by excluding evidence of an
accused person’s conversation over a telephone in a telephone booth, where
the evidence was obtained by an electronic listening and recording device
attached outside the telephone booth.

7.12. With this, one may contrast the statutory provision in Canada.
Section 178.16 inserted in 1977 in the Criminal Code (so far as is material) |
reads as under? :-—

“178.16 (1) A private communication that has been intercepted
is inadmissible as evidence against the originator of the communication
or the person intended by the originator to receive it unless है

(a) the interception was lawfully made; or

(b) the originator thereof or the person intended by the orig ina |

tor to receive it has expressly consented to the admission there-
of; but evidence obtained directly or indirectly as.a result of
information acquired by interception of a private communi |
‘cation is not inadmissib! ie by reason only that the private com;
munication is itself inadmissible as evidence.

(2) Notwithstanding sub-section (1), the Judge or magis istrate .
presiding at any proceedings may refuse to admit evidence obtained:
directly or indirec dy as a result of information acquired by interception
or a private communication that is itself inadmissible as evidence where,
he is of the opinion that the admission thereof would bring the admini-

stration of justice into disrepute.

(3) Where the judge or magistrate presiding at any proceedings
is of the opinion that a private communication that, by virtue of s
section (1), is inadmissitle as evidence in the proceedings i

(a) is relevant to a matter at issue in the proceedings, and |
(b) is inadmissible as evidence therein by reason only ofa a delet
of form or an irregularity in Procedure, not being a substas-/

tive defect or irregularity, in
of the authorisation under which such private communica

was intercepted,

he may, notwithstanding sub-section (1), admit such private communication,
as evidence in the proceedings.”

13. The invocation of the constitutional कक of civil liberties:
by the United States Supreme Cougt has proceeded on lines it
Canada and even though there has been a retreat in recent years, it is ४!
thatthe tends established in the 50s and fos WA DS the trends established in the 50s and 60s would be totally reversed, The

]. Katz v. U.S. (1967) 389 U.S. 347.

. Section 178.16, Canadian
2. Section gore (1978) Vol 2,

al Code, cited in Stanley Schiff, Evidence in the litiga-)
page है

८ application for or the Bing ed



2

preme Court of the United States in this matter has

general attitude of the Su
tained in violation of a specific constitutional prohi-

been to exclude evidence ol

4 bition. The principle was very dramatically stated in a well known case
a decided in 1952,! which holds that evidence obtained as a result of violation i
| of a due process right of the accused (right to be free from abusive treatment

at the hands of the State authorities) would, if introduced against him a
: criminal case, itself be a violation of his right to due process. There the
\ accused was made to vomit up incriminating evidence that he had swallowed.
je Had testimonial statements rather than physical evidence been coerced out
poo. of the defendant, this principle would overlap those for coerced confessions
and the privilege against self-incrimination, The case has not yet been appli-

ed where the abuse was not perpetrated by or for or with the complicity of

1 the government, or to civil cases,

f 1964? Evolution of the

7.14. This principle was developed in other well-known case 0 Evo

in which the accused had been refused by the police his request to consult
his lawyer during interrogation and had not been informed of his right to
remain silent. An inculpatory statement made by the accused person while
he was being interrogated in police custody and before he had been charged
was, by reason of the above menitioned refusal of the police held to be not
admissible at the subsequent trial. The ruling was ed on the Sixth
Amendment to the Constitution of United States, which, so far as is material,
reads :— |
“Tn all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the . ‘
right........+++ to have the assistance of counsel for his defence.”
Cases of 1961

further, in 1966, the rules as to lice interrogation of

7.15. Going
doctrine (to quote from

criminal suspects were examined in detail. The new
the court’s own words) was thus stated :—

» “The prosecution may not use statements, whether exculpatory
or inculpatory, stemming from custodial interrogation of the defendant unless
it demonstrates the use of procedural safeguards effective to secure’ the privi-
lege against self-incrimination” (The Fifth Amendment guarantees that “no
person shall. be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness,

against himself.

|

Equally relevant is the earlier decision of 1961.4 The Fourth Amend-
. ment guarantees “the right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses,
against unreasonable searches and seizures”. Imple-

7 . pers and effects,
menting this constitutional guarantee, the Supreme Court held that any real

object seized by the police is barred from evidence in all federal and state
criminal proceedings.
. .16. Until Wolf Vs. Colorado,’ the Supreme Court did not consider State Courts.

whether the exclusionary rule applied in state courts. In that case, the
Fourth Amendment was held to be binding on the States, but, six members
of the Court voted not to embody the exclusionary rule in the Fourteenth

Amendment. Mr. Justice Frankfurther, after a survey of the practice on

Rochin v. California, (1952) 342 US. 165.

Escobedo v. Illinois, (1964) 378 US. 473. a
Miranda V. Arizona, (1966) 384 U.S. 436. धर |
Mapp ५. Chio, (1961) 367 US. 643. . ol

See para 7.17, infra.
4. Wolf v. Colorado (1949) 338 U.S. 25 (reviews comparative practice in other countries
also), (overruled in Mapp. Vv. Ohio (1961) 367 U.S. 463).

4442, LAD/ND/83

#



Case taw in
United States.

22

this point, concluded that “most of the English-speaking world does not |
gard as vital. .the exclusion of evidence thus (illegally) obtained”.
Accordingly, the Court, he said, “‘must hesitate to treat this remedy as an
essential ingredient of the right.” If evidence secured by illegal invasion. of
privacy was nonetheless used in court, the sanctions suggested by Frankfurther
J. were—‘the remedies of private action and such protection as the
internal discipline of the police, under the eyes of an alert public opinion, may
afford,”

7-17. In Mapp Vs. Chio' the Court by a five to three vote, overruled
Wolf Vs. Colorado. Police officers, suspecting that a law violator was hiding
in a certain house, broke in the door, manhandled a woman resident, search-
ed the entire premises, and discovered some obscene materials in a trunk.
The woman was convicted of possession of these materials, The State Court,

inting out that the objects have not been taken from the defendant’s person
fy brutal or offensive physical force (as in Rochin),? permitted their use in
svidence on the basis of Wolf. But the Supreme Court disposed of Wolf Vs.
Colorado, Justice Clark saying : दि

“The ignoble short-cut to conviction left open to the State (by Wolf)
tends to destroy the entire system of constitutional restraints on which the
liberties of the people rest. Having once recognised that the right to privacy

embodied in the Fourth Amendment is enforceable against the States, and ,

that the right to be protected against rude invasions of privacy by State offi-
cers is, therefore, coristitutional in origin, we can no longer permit that right
again to remain as an empty promise”.

7.18. Before 1914 illegally obtained evidence was always admissible
in United States courts.? The law has changed since then, through judicial
construction of the Fourth, Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to the Consti-
tution. The American courts have held that the Fourth Amendment right
to be secure from unreasonable searches and seizures can only be enforced
by the sanction of excluding eviderice obtained in breach of it both in state
and federal courts.* The rule extends to the “fruit of the poisonous tree”,
i.e. evidence obtained by using the information gained from the illegal search
and seizure.> It extends to oral evidence as wel ff as real, e.g. statements over-

heard through a microphone driven into the wall of a house,® or statements: .

made to police during an unlawful search.’ A more spectacular recent exten-
sion is the holding that wire tapping and eavesdropping fall within “scarthes

and seizures”.*

But the American rule has limits, some quite old, others more recent.

An accused cannot.invoke the rule if the evidence was obtained in breach
of another's rights? The rule does not apply to breaches by a private

Mapp V. Ohio (1961) 367 U.S. Sv ome usp 7 US ब्छे | | एज हक]

Rochin v. California (1952) 342 U.S. 165.

Boyd रु. United States (1896) 116 U.S. Adams v. New York (1904) 192 U.S. 585,
Weeks Vv. United States (1914) 232 U.S. 383; Wolf v. Colorodo (1949) 338 US. 25;
Mapp v. Ohio (1961) 367 U.S. 643.

Silverthorne Lumber Co. v. United States (1926) 251 U.S. 385.

Silverman v. United States (1961) 365 US. 505.

Wong Sun v. United States (1963) 371 U.S. 471. हे
Katz v. United States (1967) 389 US. 347; United States v. White, (1971) 301 U.S.
745.

SNAn जज:

2

Alderman v. United States (1969) 394 U.S, 165; ¢f. People v. Mortin (1955) 290 p. 24
855. हु

|
|
|

“*

&



93

itidividual rather than a state official. It does not apply to evidence put to 4

- federal grand jury.? It does not apply to evidence admitted only on some issue
collateral to guilt, such as the accused’s credibility as a witness. ‘The require-
ments of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments that the federal or a state
governnient shall not “deprive any person of life, liberty or property, with-
out due process of law” may lead to the exclusion of evidence obtained by
methods which “do more than offend some fastidious squeamishness or pri-
vate sentimentalism about combating crime too energetically”, that
is, methods which “shock the conscience”, e.g., the forcible stomach pump ing
of the accused to reveal his having swallowed drugs.* Normally evidence
obtained through breaches of the law which do not infringe constitutional
rights is admissible.5 ~

7-19. The exclusionary rule has continued to be controversial in U.S.A.
The general public undoubtedly sees it as one of the “technicalities” of the
law which handcuffs police and lets criminals go free. But scholars and
judges also join in the criticism. In a major article, Dallin H. Oaks con-
cluded that the rule did not deter police misconduct and that it had the nega-
tive effects of fostering false testimony by law enforcement officers, seriously
delaying and overloading criminal proceedings and diverting attention from
the search for truth on the guilt or innocence of the defendant. But, in spite
of these weaknesses and disadvantages, Oaks would not abolish the rule “un-
til there is something to take its place............ It would be intolerable if
the guarantee against unreasonable search and seizure could be violated with
out practical consequence.”*

7.20. Oaks would replace’ the cxdlusionary tule “‘by an effective tort
remedy against the offending officer or his employer............ A tort re-
medy, could break free of the narrow compass of the exclusionary rule, and
provide a viable retnedy with direct deterrent effect upon the police whether
the imjured party was prosecuted or not.”

7.21. In Bivens Vs. Six Unknown Name Agents* Burger C.J. (dissent-
ing) took the same position. Although he opposed the exclusionary rule, he
likewise agreed that it would not be abandoned until some meaningful alter-
native can be developed”. He recommended that “Congress should develop
an administrative or quasi-judicial remedy against the government itself to
afford compensation and restitution for persons whose Fourth Amendment
rights have been violated.”

9:22. Some of the key issues and considerations in the growing debate
about the exclusionary rule, in the context of search and seizure, have been;

1, Burdeau v. McDowell (1921) 256 U.S. 465, This seems to be an anomalous survival
for private persons of the “silver platter” dootrins rejected in Elkins v. United States
(1960) 364 U.S. 206, by which evidence illegally obtained by state officials could be
used in federal courts.

United States v. Calandra (1974) 414 U.S, 338,

Walder v. United States (1954) 347 U.S. 62.

Rochin v. California (1952) 342 U.S, 165, at p. 172 per Frankfurther J.

Muller v. United States (1958) 357 U.S. 301.

Dallin H. Oaks, “Studying the Exclusionary Rule in Search and Seizure” (1970) 37
University of Chicago Law Review 665, 566 Pritchett, The American Constitution
(1977), page 438.

Dallin H. Oaks, “Studying the Exclusionary Rule in Search and Seizure” (1970) 37 Univ.
of Chicago LR. 665, . (1970) 37 Uni
& Bivens ¥. Six Unknown Names Agents, (1971) 403 U.S, 388.

9 छ मे छह

Criticism in
U.S.A.

A sécent dis-
cussion about
the U.S.A.



24

examined in a recent article in the Anglo-American Law Review.! The article
concludes that the U.S. Supreme Court would be unwise to abolish the exclu-

sionary rule. It is pointed out that even if the exclusionary rule does not -

protect the integrity of the judiciary in the eyes of the public, it does suppo rt
the credibility of the court and the law in the mind of police officers. More-
over, according to the article, there is good reason to believe, that the
exclusionary rule does not allow criminals to go free as much as would
be the case if direct sanctions were applied. At the same time, the article
demonstrates that the exclusion of evidence obtained in violation of the
Constitution acts as a reasonable deterrent to illegal police searches. While
scholars have expressed doubts about the propriety of the rule, accordin;
to the article, the police would not understand, or respect, a court whicl
would reverse itself on a matter which appears to be so fundamental.
American constitutional tradition is such that the police would have difficulty
in believing that any civilized Government would like to profit by a violation
of the law.

1. Loewenthal, “Evaluating the exclusionaty rule in search and seizure” (1980) Vol. 9, No. 3,

Anglo-American Law Rev. pages 238-256.

ee

K


| कहती,

न pe ee

CHAPTER 8
A CASE FROM JAMAICA

8.1. There is an interesting Privy Council decision on ap peal froria
Jamaica, which represents one approach concerning the effect of a constitu-
tional provision on evidence obtained illegally or improperly. The Privy
Council! considered the subject of illegally obtained evidence generally and
the effect of the search and seizure provision in the Jamaican Constitution.
Many of the relevant cases in Scotland and England were discussed.

8.2. The evidence in question had been obtained by an illegal search
of the accused. The Privy Council discussed in this context the following
statement of Lord Parker concerning judicial discretion to exclude illegally
or improperly obtained evidence : “Tt would certainly be exercised by ex-
cluding the evidence if there was any suggestion of it having been obtained
oppressively, by false representations, by a trick, by threats, by ribes, anything
of. that sort.”

The Privy Council, however, qualified this statement by concluding that
unfairness to the accused in this context is not suscep tible of close definition
and must be judged in the light of all the ma ial facts and findings and
of the surrounding circumstances. This, with respect, is a very welcome
exposition of the concept of unfairness, if that is to be taken as criterion for
excluding evidence obtained illegally or improperly.

8.3. However, the particular relevance of the above ruling of the
Privy Council to constitutional issues is the disposition of the argument that,
where the illegally obtained evidence was obtained in violation of the accused’s
constitutional right, it ought to have been excluded under the Jamaican
Constitution. Lord Hodson disposed of this argument concisely :

“This constitutional right may or may not be enshrined in a
written constitution, but it seems to the Lordships that it matters not
whether it depends on such enshrinement or simply upon the common
law as it would do in this country. In either event the discretion of
the court must be exercised and has not been taken away by the declara-
tion of the right in written form”.

1, King v. The Queen (1978) 2 All E.R. 610 (९.0).
2. Calis v. Gunn, (1964) 1 0.8. 495, 502.

25

Privy Council
case from
Jamaica:

Unfairness to be
judged from al
the surrount
circumstances.

Constitutional
aspect ofthe Privy
Council ruling.

|
|
i



CHAPTER 9
COMMENTS RECEIVED GN THE WORKING PAPER

Comments rece 9.1. Having dealt with the legal position in India and elsewhere, we
description, now turn to the opinion on the subject. A Working Paper prepared on the

subject by the Commission was circulated in February 1983 for comments
to interested persons and bodies, including the Secretary, Legislative Depart-
ment, Ministry of Law, all High Courts, all State Governments and Bar Asso-
ciations. A request was made to forward comments by the 15th April, 1983.
The Commission has before finalisin; g is views, taken into account all com-
ments received upto the 1501 September, 1983.

Replies have been received from ithree High Courts, four State Govern-
ments, two Registrars of High Courts (personal views), one Additional Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate and one lady advocate. We are grateful to all of
them for having responded to the Questionnaire. We shall presently deal :
with some of the important points made in the comments. ‘ 4

High Courts. P 9.2. Three High Courts have sent replies in response to the Working a
aper— : |

(i) The Judges of the one High Court have no views to offer in ।
the matter.! i हि
(ii) Another High Court? regards the present law as just and fair }
and not needing reform. ~

(iii) As regards the third High Court, nine of its judges have no
views to offer. ‘The rest have not expressed their reaction.

State Govern- 9.3. Four State Governments have sent comments on the Worki
ments. Paper.* 01 these four, two favour the proposal for amendment (put foi
in the Working Paper) so as to confer a discretion on the court. The third
State Government is of the view that even now such a discretion exists and
no amendment is needed. The fourth is opposed to any amendmenit, giving
the reason that it may lead to collateral inquiries, which is not desirable.

Other comments. .4. The Registrar of one High Court, mably expressing his per-
9-4. Registrar of one urt, presumably expressing his per:
sonal view, agrees that a Satutory amendment, as s proposed in the Working

Paper conferring a discretion on the court, is needed.

The Registrar (Appellate side) of another High Court, again expressing
his personal view, is oprpsed to an amendment, thinking that vesting a disere-
tion even in the judiciary may “degenerate into caprice.” However, in the
very next paragraph of his reply, he has stated that violations of human rights
can be more effectively checked by: “judicial vigilance” rather than by the
suggested changes in the law.* In this context, it should be pointed out that

Law Commision File No. F. 2(7)/83-L.C. s. No. 4.

Law Commssion File No. F. 2(7)/83-L.C. 5. No. 8.

Law Commission File No. F. 2(7)/83-L.C. 8, No. 10.

Law Commission File No. F. 2(7)/83-L.C. s. No. 11, 13, 14 and 15.
Law Commission File No. F. 2(7)/83-L.C s. No. 9.

Law Commission File No. F. 2(7)/83-L.C, s. No. 2.

26

Seappe



°

27

judicial vigilance is precisely what is contemplated in the recommendations
that are going to be made in this Report.’

The comments of the Registrar (Ap pellate side) of the High Court
express the apprehension that a judicial discration to exclude such evidence
will help criminals? But we are happy to note that the other side of the
picture has been correctly put by an Additional Chief Metropolitan Magis-
trate, who has stated in his comment as under? :—

“Tf the courts overlook the collection of evidence by illegal or im-
proper means, the respect for the purity of the judicial process is under-
mined in the public eye............ If the rule of wholesale admission
of evidence il ally or improperly obtained were to be applied, then
there is a live danger that the conduct of the police in securing such
type of evidence will be seldom scrutinized in the courts of law. The
cross-examining counsel will become resigned to the position and may
Not question the police about their questionable methods.”

He has wholeheartedly favoured the conferment of a discretion on the judge
to exclude evidence obtained illegally or improperly, where the illegality is of.
a shocking nature. Besides wholly agreeing with proposed section 166A, he
has also made the suggestion that confessions obtained by fraud, deception or
trick should be made inadmissible and that section 29, Evidence Act should

be amended for the purpose.‘

9.5. We must now turn to a point raised by Mrs. Phiroza Anklesaria, Confining the
Proposal to cri-

an Advocate of the Bombay High Court and a Solicitor of the Supreme Court final cases.

of England.’ She has raised the question whether confining the proposed
provision to criminal cases will not mean that in civil cases the law tolerates

the illegality.

In this context, we would like to point out that what the proposal
amounts to is creating one more sanction in respect of illegality. It does not
mean that the illegality as such is condoned. en. now, for 11० pal conduct
which amounts to a crime or a tort, the 1४ propriate remedy can Be pursued,
and that remedy remains unaffected. ¢ proposal merely adds to that
remedy one more sanction.

One can rationally suggest a special provision in this regard for criminal
cases, where life and liberty are involved much more frequently than in civil
cases. Experience also shows that occasions for committing serious illegali-
ties or improprieties that shock the judicial conscience arise more often in
the pre-trial processes concerned with criminal investigation than in prepara-
tory steps for civil cases. The need for a provision on the subject is there-
fore much stronger in criminal cases than in civil cases.

the

9.6. Some of the comments received on the Working Paper seem to some point made

assume that discretion to exclude evidence illegally procured is already vested #5t0 existing
in the court under the existing law.6 This does not, however, appear to be

Chapter 11, infra.

Law Commission File No. F. 2(7)/83-L.C. s. No. 2.

Law Commission File No. F. 2(7)/83-LC. s, No. 2 (Two comments were received with
8. No. 2)

Law Commission File No. F. 2(7)/83-LC, s. Ne. 2.

Law Commission File No. F. 2(7)/83-LC, s. No. 1.

Law Commission of India File No. F. 2(7)/83-LC. s. No. 1 (Mrs, Phiroza Anklesftia

Advocate),

repr

Dae

Bip oanins

at



Megality
irregularity.

and

28

quite a correct assumption. We have discussed in an earlier Chapter the
present law and pointed out that! no Indian decision—not even a Supreme
Court decision of 1973, sometimes relied on for such an assumption—regards
illegality as a ground for rejecting evidence gathered illegally.

9.7. A few comments on the Working Paper have argued that Indian
law already makes a distinction between illegality and irregularity, even in
the matter of admission of evidence. They assume that where an illegality
goes to the root of the investigation of the wrong or the offence, the evidence
1s liable to be excluded in the trial of the matter. This assumption, however,
does not harmonise with the judicial approach as reflected in numerous deci-
sions. In fact, the Supreme Court has clearly held? that illegality in obtain-
ing evidence does not lead to its exclusion, Probably some confusion has
been created because procedural illegality in a trial of a criminal case may be
a ground for quashing the conviction, while, in contrast, mere irregularities
do not lead to such a position. This does not mean that illegality in the
gathering of evidence leads to its exclusion from use at the trial.

Questions of procedure are mostly decided on consideration like the
mandatory or directory character of a procedural safeguard. What the pre-
sent ing [पाए is concerned with is a different aspect : is the misconduct of a
law enforcement officer such that the court ought not to lend its aid to it
and should discourage it by excluding the evidence from admission ? Some
considerations may overlap in concrete cases, but the philosophy that needs
consideration, and may supply justification for exclusion of evidence in
situations contemplated by the present Report, is quite distinct from an exer-
cise focussed on the mandatory or non-mandatory character of a statutory
provision.

1, Paragraph 3.6, supra.
2. (a) R. M. Malkani v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1973 S.C. 153,
(0) Magraj.v. R. K. Birla, ALR. 1971 S.C. 1295.

soy deca ery



vty CHAPTER 10
ARGUMENTS PRO AND CON

xo.1. In order that a proper decision may be taken as to whether there Various **
is need for amendment of the law of India on the subject under consideration, ments ¢womri-
= it will be convenient to mention here the arguments in favour of, or against, “~* है
such an amendment, The major policy arguments in support of the adop- i
tion of a rule empowering the court to exclude illegally obtained evidence
are connected with the element of deterrence, the ethical argument, the argu-
x ment of unfairness to the accused, the argument connected with the integrity .
of the judicial process, and the argument as to symmetry and development of
the law.

| 10.2. ‘Those who put forward the argument of deterrence as justifying Doterreace.
|
i

v a rule of exclusion lay cruphasis on the need to have, in the law, an effective
deterrent against illegal conduct in law enforcement. It is stated that in
order that such conduct may not be resorted to in law enforcement, the only
effective sanction within the apparatus of the law is a rule which excludes

> evidence obtained illegally. The strict exclusionary rule adopted in
thé U.S.A. rests on this assumption, though, no doubt, its adoption in that
country has been buttcressed by the fact that what is in issue is an infringe-
ment of a constitutional provision.

10.3. Students of criminology are aware that it is difficult to assess Diffioulty of
with reasonable accu:racy the deterrent effect of any legal sanction. How far Getorminiag the
any legal prescription adequately deters illegal conduct in a particular area . .
of human activity regulated by law is mostly a matter of opinion. Because
~ of this general position (which applies to evidence gathered illegally also),
the question whether the introduction of a rule or discretion of exclusion of :
evidence adequately deters illegal conduct in the collection of evidence will :
always remain a matter of opinion. Material enabling the formation of an
} - objective conclusion on the point is not always available. At the same time,
. the adoption of a rule or discretion of exclusion might, prima facie, remove |
the incentive to break the law for the purpose of obtaining evidence. Deter- : हि
rence has been the principal basis of criminal sanctions, and there should be. * ” दि : :
a presumption in favour. of the effectiyeness of judicially enforceable sanctions
against attempts to procure evidence ‘illegally obtained. It appears that the
studies! conducted in the U.S.A. for the purpose of testing the deterrent effect
of the exclusionary rule have remained. inconclusive, and are likely to be so.
~ “The issues are not susceptible of quantitative solution,” according . प्‌
4 < - to Mr. Justice Frankfurter? This, in fact, may be true of many otlter laws . j
imposing, criminal sanctions. Were the proponents of every such law re-
! wired to: demonstrate a specific deterrent effect, one suspects that a great deal
: of our law might have to be striken from the books.?

There is another aspect of the matter that needs to be mentioned. The
operation of a rule excluding evidence obtained illegally may obstruct the

1. J. 8. Dawson, “Exclusion of Unlawfully obtained Evidence” (July 1982) 31 LCL. 513, - j
_ | 520, $21, 522... ।
2. Holf v. Colorado, (1949) 338 U.S. 26, 28. j
3. 1. 8. Dawson, “Exclusion of Unlawfully obtained Evidence” (July 1982) 31 LC.L.Q.

513, 520, 522. |

29

5442 LAD/ND/83

गण खली
~



Alternative
remedies.

‘The ethical axgu-
ments § the
doctuine of
“clean hands,”.

30

process of secking the truth. In individual cases, the guilty may even go free.
The question is, whether such cases will be no large in number as to prevent
any move for a change in the law, if the change is otherwise required in
the interests of justice.

10.4. An assessment of the validity and force of the argument of detex-
rence naturally involves a consideration of the alternative remedies that are
available under the general law against illegal conduct. Such alternative
remedies are at present, principally the following :—

(a) Criminal sanctions for the conduct in question, where such sanc-
tions are applicable in law;

(b) Tort remedies, where recognised in law for such conduct; and

(c) Departmental action against the enforcement agencies.

Theoretically, the sanctions mentioned above may be available, but there
are certain practical difficulties which should not be overlooked. For ex-
ample, as regards criminal sanctions, it is not easy for a victim of me
search to pursue such sanctions effectively, since, with his ‘own resourc
may not be able to muster sufficient evidence for the purpose. Again there age
certain legal pre-requisites, such as the need for a prior sanction for proseou-
tion, which also must be fulfilled. In practice, it is not easy to cross these legal .
hurdles.

Civil actions as a remedy for unlawful search and seizure present equally .
notorious practical difficulties. In a well known English case,
Lord Denning, M. R.! wrote that when entering a house by stealth or force,
the “police risk an action for tresspass. It is not much risk.” हु

Then, as regards disciplinary action, that also is a tardy process for
‘reasons which need not be gone into for the present purpose. ‘hus, there
are many counter-balancing considerations which render the alternative reme-
dies of little practical consequence. One might then be confronted with ‘the’ .
limits of current legat remedies and their inability to maintain the standards, ©
of legality.

r0.5. So much as regards the element of deterrence. Then, there ig
what may be called the “ethical” argument. These who would favour some - 1
type of exclusionary rule argue in support that justice requires that the wrong:
doer must be denied the benefit of-his wrongful act. One can call it the-dec- ° |
trine of “clean hands”. Exclusion of evidence acquired illegally, it is bdliew-
ed, works as a sanction against the deriving of such benefit by a person whe
obtained the evidence illegally. No doubt, in a modern State, where the | |
enforcement of law is a complete mechanism, this argument, in a fe ia;
which it concentrates on personal conduct, cannot be applied literally. ec |
particular enforcement officer who might have been personally gui
alleged wrong doing is merely a cog in the whole administrative wheel; naaro-
over, that particular officer may have been transferred to another place and
succeeded by another officer before the prosecution commences and before.
the evidence alleged to‘have been obtained illegally is tendered. The sesult / | .
is, that though the wrong is committed by ‘A’, the benefit of the evidence ©
gathered illegally may go to ‘B’, and the application of a doctrine of “glean
hands” based on personal fault would be meanness oe based on personal fault would be meaningless in such ciroumstances:

1. Chani v. Janes, (1970) 1 QB. 693, 705. ¢
Cf. Sunderland, “Exclusionary Rules : A requirement of Constitutional Prin¢ipl’”
(1978) 69 Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, 141. ea



ey ee

31

However, it is possible to apply the doctrine of “clean hands” in an imper-
sonnal manner, by viewing the machinery of law-enforcement as one under-
taken by the State as an ci and by applying the argument of clean hands
against the State as an organisation, rather than against individuals personally.

. 10.6. One more argument to support on exclusionary rule is the argu- Unfairness.
ment of unfairness. The admission of evidence obtained illegally, it is stated,
would be unfair or unjust to the accused. This was the traditional basis of
(5 the English rule on the subject.’

10.7. An argument which has gained popularity in modern times, and Purity of the
which seems to catry considerable force behind it, addresses itself to the purity 7udlcial
and integrity of the judicial process, rather than to the conduct of individual
litigants or to the element of deterrence. According to this argument, what :
is at stake is not merely the regulation of illegal conduct and the need to de-
prive a wrong doer of the benefit of his wrong doing, but the need to en-
sure that the stream of justice is not polluted by material originally obtained
by the commission of an illegality. Exclusion of such evidence is considered
proper in order to protect the integrity of the court by requiring or permitting
the court to refuse to countenance unlawful actions.

70.8. The argument has a greatly persuasive force. No doubt, Wig- Wigmore'’s view
more, the eminent American writer on evidence took the view that even if “ticised. | i 4
the court admits illegally obtained evidence, the court does not thereby con- eas
done the illegality, but merely ignores it? Any view expressed by this emi- !
> nent jurist must command very great respect. But-it appears to us that this पु कै
is not an entirely satisfactory way of disposing of the matter. Even if it be : nf

assumed that the court, by admitting“illegally obtained evidence, merely

a the illegality, the court, by doing so, indirctly implicates itself in the
~y illegality. To this extent, the court becomes a party to a procedure which

can breed disrespect for the law and for the judicial process. The law has है 4.
so many rules based on the public policy (in the wider sense), whereby certain | i
conduct is refused to be countenanced by the court on the principle that the |
law would not Iend its aid to some serious illegality unworthy of a civilised
society. The adoption of some rule of an exclusionary character would be '
in symmetry with legal rules of this category. An argument that secks to 4
keep the stream of justice unpolluted cannot be dismissed summarily. है |

G

"७४७ RT ee

हू

then, be a live issue is criminal trials, there will be no stage at which police
officers inay be cross-examined with regard to the propriety of their actions
‘nd there will be no incentive for defense counsel even to raise such issues. ”
“The law of search and seizure will continue to develop only haphazardly (if
at all), through rare civil actions for trespass brought against police officers,
vor in the rather inappropriate context of prosecutions that may be brought
for the “obstruction” of a constable acting in the execution of his duty ~ In
contrast a rule or discretion of exclusion may help the symmetry of the law

| , and its proper development.

1. Callis v. Gunn, (1963) 2 All E.R. 677.
+ °2. Wigmore, Evidence (McNaughten Revision 1961), Vol. 8, Article 2176,

i 7. ३0.9. In justification of a rule or discretion for excluding illegally ob- Symmetery sna
3 * . tained evidence, there is also an argument resting on what may be called the development «
mmetry and development of the law. The argument can be put thus, in ° io
brief. If the judge does not even have the option of excluding evidence i
| obtained by illegal search and seizure it means that such conduct will seldom |
e ‘be scrutinised in the courts. The legality of the ‘police conduct will not, |
:



32

Fresnel zo.10. Against the introduction of an exclusionary rule, it is argued”
that where evidence is logically relevant to the facts in issue, it should be
admitted despite the fact that it was illegally obtained because :

(i) the predominant concern of the tribunal of fact is the search for
truth, and the fact of the illegal acquisition of evidence does not
effect the logical relevance of that evidence and the court shoul:t
not undertake a collateral inquiry;

(1) other sanctions and remedies exist against the prepetrator of illegal
acts that are better suited to deter wrongdoers than an evidentiary
tule of exclusion; and,

(iii) it would be a grave injustice to a party to be denied the use of
illegally obtained evidence where he was not involved in the ille-
gality.

Collateral 10.11. The most important argument! against the introduction of an
inquiry. exclusionary rule in any form, is the objection to a collateral inquiry. It is
argued that the application of such a rule involves, in a criminal trial, a colla-
teral inquiry which may delay the trial and distract the court. To put the
same argument in a diffcrent form, the method by which the evidence is ob-
tained is stated to be a collateral issue, and not the central 15502 of inquiry
before the court. A court is concerned with a resolution of the facts in issue
and should therefore refuse to hear arguments that might draw it into regions
far removed from tke cegtral issues under inquiry. The argument was lucid-
ly put in an American ruling, pronounced at a time when the exclusionary
rule had not yet established itself in that country. “‘We think such testimony
(illegally obtained) is admissible. It is not the policy of the courts, nor is
it practicable; to pause in the trial of a cause, and open wp @ collateral in-
quiry upon the question of whether a wrong has been committed in obtaining
the information which a witness possesses”?

Yindication of 10.12. Against this, it is stated that though an exclusionary rule en-
rights | of the tails a collateral inquiry in a criminal trial, it does vindicate the accused’s
हैं rights immediately, without the need for him to start expensive new proceed-
ings. The accused may have alternative remedies, but such alternative reme-
diers are not always adequate.’ Criminal proceedings against a wrong-doer
have to overcome several obstacles, such as the burden of proof and the pos- ,
sible sympathy of the court for the policeman. Moreover, the victim, of the
illegality is unlikely to know how to initiate criminal proceedings or to be
able to do so, particularly if he is poor, uneducated, or in prison precisely
because of the admission against him of the illegally obtained evidence. The
State may be unlikely to undertake criminal proceedings against police offi-
cers. In the words of an American Judge, “self-scrutiny is a lofty ideal, but
its exaltation reaches new heights if we expect a District Attorney to prosecute
himself or his associates for well meaning violations of the search and seizure
clause during a raid the District Attorney or his associates. have ordered”.

Hence, even though, from the technical point of view, an inquiry isf®
illegality may be collateral one, it is required in the interests of justice.

‘The fundamental 10.13. In passing, it may be observed that this part of the controv
question. - touches the fundamental question that recurs again and again in any consi-
deration of the law of evidence in general, namely, what should be the limits

Paragraph 10.10(i), supra. है

Cluett v. Bosenthal, (1894) 100 Mich. 193 53 N.W. 1009, 1010.

Para 104, supra.
Wolf v. Colorado (1949) 338 U.S. 26, 42 per Murphy, J. (dissenting).

Peer



33

of the expense of the factual inquiry in a judicial trial, and where should the
line be drawn to demarcate between matters of direct relevance and matters
not of direct relevance ?

10.14. The second possible objection’ to a rule of exclusion of evidence
obtained illegally is based on the reasoning that there are available alternative
remedies for redress against such illegal action. These alternative remedies
at present are criminal sanctions, tort remedies and disciplinary action. This
aspect has been already dealt with.”

30.15. Finally, there is the argument that it will be grave injustice to
deny the use of evidence to a party not involved in the alleged illegality. ** This
argument naturally has some force, but the objection becomes irrelevant when
one views the State as an enttity or organisation engaged at various stages in
law enforcement.) The functionaries through whom the process is carried
on may be different at various stages and may change from time to time, but
the organisation remains the same. The ju cal sanotion of refusal to admit
evidence illegally obtained would thus be applied not against an individual
as such, but against an organisation viewed as a whole.

10.16. The arguments for and against the exclusion of evidence illegally
obtained, that have been summarised above, do not, of course, take into
account the constitutional aspects. In a particular country, where rights
guaranteed by the Constitution are in issue, the controversy may acquire a
different colour. The law then, has to concern itself also with values whose
importance is heightened by the Constitution. Introducing an exclusionary
rule can, in such countries, be argued for with greater force. This, in fact,
happened in the United States, where the Fourth Amendment of the Ame-
rican Constitution, protecting the citizen inter alia against unreasonable search
and seizure, ultimately came to be invoked as the foundation for a rule ex-
cluding evidence acquired as the consequence of an illegal search or seizure.
It is on this basis that Courts in the United States have held that the States
are required to exclude, from State criminal trials, evidence illegally seized
by State Officers.* The Supreme Court of the United States has said the
same thing in different words by observing that “the primary purpose of the
exclusionary rule is to deter future unlawful ‘police conduct and thereby
effectuate the guarantees of the Fourth Amendment against unreasonable
search and seizure.”*

10.17. How far the adoption of a rule or discretion excluding the ad-
mission of illegal evidence becomes a constitutional imperative or desideratum
in India is a question which cannot, in the present state of the law, be ans-
wered with certainty, there being no direct authority on the subject. We do
not have a provision in the Indian Constitution strictly corresponding to the
Fourth Amendment of the U.S.A. As regards the concept of “procedure
established by law” laid down in article 21 of the Indian Constitution, that
concept still remains to be spelt out in its application to the law of evidence.
While a number of judicial pronouncemients on this article have added
a richness and lent a new dimension to our constitutional jurisprudence, the
particular question now in issue has not yet arisen in the courts, except® once.

1. Paragraph 10.10 (ii), supra.
2. Para 10.4, supra.

2a. Para 10.10, (iii) supra.

3. Compare para 10.5, supra.

4. Mapp v. Ohio (1961) 367 U.S. 643.

US. v. Calendra (1974) 414 U.S. 338, 347, Powell, J., speaking for the Court).

6. R.M. Malkani’s case, AIR 1973 SC 153. ,

Alternative
remedies.

The argument
of injustice.

The constitutiona’
aspect.

Position under
the Indian
Constitution.

1
|

Steen



Need for an elas-
tic approach.

34

There is no doubt that this question will arise in the courts some day. When
it arises, the courts will be called upon to make a difficult choice, but they
will have a number of models available for concrete study.

10.18. On an examination of the pros and cons of the matter under
discussion it would appear that in this area there are no absolutes. On the
one hand, if evidence obtained illegally is not admitted at the trial, grave,
injustice might be caused in some cases and the respect for the courts as
courts of justice would be lowered. On the other hand, there are cases
where the illegal conduct is so shocking that the count would consider it un-
just to admit the evidence, There are many degrees of illegality, and it
would appear that, for this reason, an element of elasticity in the law may,
in the majority of cases, better serve the interests of justice than a blind adher-
ence to a rigid rule of exclusion. At the same time, the question that must
be considered is whether the present position in India is consistent with justice.

Tt is in the light of these considerations that we approach the matter.
Our own views will be indicated more concretely on each issue in due course.!

1, (Chapter 11, infra.)



uv

i 7

CHAPTER 11

ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION AND RECOMMENDATIONS

11.1, It may be convenient to formulate now the important issues that
call for consideration, in the light of the discussion contained in the preceding
Chapters. In broad terms, these appear to be as under :—

(1) Is the present Jaw in India as to the admissibility, in a criminal
case, of evidence that has been obtained illegally or improperly just
and fair ? Or, does it stand in need of reform ?

(2) Ifa reform in the present law is to be effected, should the reform
take the shape of a statutory amendment giving to the court (in
a criminal case) a discretion’ to exclude evidence obtained illegally
or improperly ? Or should it be a more radical one ?

(3) If such a discretion as it prostulated. above is to be conferred on the
criminal court, what should be the considerations to be laid down
in the statutory provision in the behalf ?

(a) Should the statutory provision lay down that the discretion
to be conferred -is to be exercised having regard to the need
to exclude evidence procured in circumstances that would tend
to bring the administration of justice into disrepute? or

(b) Should the statutory amendment provide that the discretion
to be conferred should be exercised, havin, regard to the need
to avoid unfairness to the party against whom the evidence is
sought to be used ?

~ (4) Should the proposed statutory amendment: (0.2-3 above) further
enumerate the circumstances to be taken into account in exercising
the discretion?

11.2, On a careful consideration of the various issues, the Commission
has come to the conclusion that there is need for conferring on the court a
discretion to exclude evidence obtained illegally or improperly if, in the cir-
cumstances of the case, the admission of such evidence would bring the ad-
ministration of justice into disrepute. The discretion, of course, will be guid-
ed by certain factors, which we shall set out in detail when suggesting the
precise legislative amendment. In order to enable us to state in greater detail
the reasons for our main conclusion, we find it convenient .to take up the
issues that fall to be considered,

11.3. With reference to the first issue,! which raises the basic question
of the need for law reform, we are of the opinion that the present position
in India,* under which the legal “relevance” of the evidence of the facts in
issue in the particular proceedings is the principal consideration, cannot be
regarded as totally satisfactory. From time to time, there must arise cases
where the illegality or impropriety is so shocking and outrageous that the
judiciary would wish that it had a power to exclude the evidence. But the
present Indian law has no specific provision recognising such a power. The

1, (Paragraph 11.1), supra.
2 Paragraph 2.3 and 2.7 and Chapter 3, supra.

35

Issues.

Conclusic n
as to need
for reform

The first issué—
need for reform.



Second _issue—
Discretion to be
given.

Third issue—
the governing
consideration.

36

general understanding of the legal position in India puts the court within very
narrow confines. The matter is viewed primarily as one of interpretation
of a specific statutory provision—if and where a statutory provision regulating
the gathering of evidence of the typé at issue in a particular case is $| own to
be in existence. If, on a proper consideration of the particular rovision that
comes uj 1 for construction, the court cannot regard admission o} the evidence
as barred by that ‘provision, then there is no residuary power in the court to
reject the evidence, howsoever gross may be the illegality perpetrated in col-
lecting it and whatever may be the extent to which those concerned with law
enforcement may have invaded hutman dignity. This position, which re-
presents the narrowest approach of all the four models! prevalent amongst
the major legal systems, must cause injustice’ on many occasions.
‘The major deficiency in the present Indian pesition is that it reflects
a legalistic and statute-oriented approach, which completely shuts out any
consideration of deeper human values. We think that there ought to be
recognised a power in the court to take into account all these important as-
pects, which are of basic relevance to the functioning of an agency charged
with the administration of justice.

11.4. The need for reform in the law is therefore manifest. At the
same time, we recognise that a provision mandatorily shutting out a piece of
evidence merely because some Hegality has been perpetrated in collecting it
would not be advisable. Such a provision would be an extreme one and
fail to take note of the infinite variety of situations that can arise in life. This
is precisely the consideration that the present position also fails to take notice
of, thus constituting another extreme. Both the extremes ought to be avoid-
ed. We would therefore, prefer the conferment of a discretion on the court,
rather than a mandatory statutory provision. This answers the second ques-
tion posed above?

11.5. This logically takes us to the third question posed by us.? What
ought to be the governing consideration that should weigh with the court in
exercising the proposed discretion ? Should the governing consideration
be — .

(i) the fact that the circumstances in which the evidence was procured
were such that admitting the evidence would be bringing the ad-
ministration of justi¢e into disrepute.

(ii) the need to avoid unfairness to the party against whom the evi-
dence is sought to be used ?

What have beeh put as items (i) and (ii) above are to be considered as.
alternatives. In fact, they were so put in our Working Paper. After care-
ful consideration, we have cone ‘to ‘the conclusion that the first one should
be the governing consideration, The second one,-based on the test of unfair~
ness, while there is something to be said in its favour, may occasionally turn
out to be vague. As regards the first one, it is undeniably a reasonably con~
crete test. Moreover, since, in exercising its discretion, the court is expected
to take into account various circumstances (see the recommendation in ‘the
next paragraph), the court will have some assistance in arriving at a decision.
I /भप।।णा
1. Paragraphs 2.3 to 2.6, supra.

2. Paragraph 11.1, supra.
3. Paragraph 11.1, supra.



the admi

37

11.6. We now come to the fourth and the last issue that remains to
be considered, before formulating the legislation to be recommended.
Should the law enumerate the circumstances to be taken into account by the
céurt in exercising the discretion to exclude evidence obtained illegally or im-
properly ? We think that there should be such an enumeration. . We are
aware that such enumerations can never be exhaustive, and that their utility
may therefore be limited. Still, we think that an indication of the important
guidelities may be helpful in concrete cases. The guidelines that we have
in mind will be apparent from the draft of the legis lative provision that we
are giving towards the end of this Chapter? In that draft, we have put
human dignity and social values in the forefront. These two considerations
constitute, in a sense, the ethical justification for a statutory provision giving
the proposed discretion to the court.’ This composite concept will, of course,
be applied with reference to the context of each case. That context is sought
to be spelt out in three concrete factors? mentioned in our draft, which are
intended to cover the seriousness of the case, the importance of the evidence
and the magnitude of the wilful harm, if any.

The demands of law enforcement—which may possibly balance the fac-
tors so far enumerated—have also been given due weight in the last clause
of our formulation,’ which expects the court to consider whether there were
any circumstances justifying the action complained of as illegal or improper.

है 1.7. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that in the Recommendation.
Indian

Evidence Act, 1872, a new Chapter containing new section 166A
should be inserted on the following lines :—

“CHAPTER 1०8.
EVIDENCE OBTAINED ILLEGALLY OR IMPROPERLY

166A. (1) In a criminal proceeding, where it is shown that anything
in evidence was obtained by illegal or improper means, the court, after consi-
dering the nature of the illegality or impropriety and all the circumstances
under which the thing tendered was obtained, may refuse to admit it in evi-
dence, if the court is of the opinion that because of the nature of the illegal
or improper means by which it was obtained its admission would tend to bring *
stration of justice into disrepute.

(2) In determining whether evidence should be excluded under this
section, the court shall consider all the circumstances surrounding the proceed-
ings and the manner in which the evidence was obtained, including —

(a) the extent to which human dignity and social values were violated

in obtaining the evidence;

(b) the seriousness of the case;

(०) the importance of the evidence; _ =

(9) the question whether any harm to an accused or others was inflict-

ed wilfully or not, and

(०) the question whether there were circumstances justifying the action,

such as a situation of urgency requiring action to prevent
the destruction or loss of evidence.”

Paragraph 11.1, supra.

Paragraph 11.7, infra [Section 166A, Evidence Act, as recommended).
Section 166A(2\{a), as recommended.

Section 166A(2)(b) to (d), as recommended.

Section 166AQ)(€), as recommended.

yrepr

Fourth, Issue
—factors
to be considered.



38

(K. K. MATHEW)
CHAIRMAN
(NASIRULLAH BEG)
MEMBER

(J. P. CHATURVEDI)
MEMBER

(DR. M. ४. RAO)
MEMBER

(P. M. BAKSHI)
PART-TIME MEMBER

(VEPA P. SARATHI)
PART-TIME MEMBER)

(A. K. SRINIVASAMURTHY)
MEMBER-SECRETARY

Dated : October 28, 1983.



APPENDIX

SOME ILLUSTRATIVE SITUATIONS OF EVIDENCE OBTAINED
ILLEGALLY OR IMPROPERLY

In order to make the discussion concrete, there is given below an illus-
trative list of certain situations in which evidence can be said, prima facie, to
have been obtained illegally or improperly. The listing of any situation here
does not, of course, necessarily imply that in that particular situation the dis-
cretion should be exercised for excluding the evidence in question.

The cases cited in the corresponding footnote against a listed situation
are mentioned here for the facts involved. The court did not, in each such
case, exclude the evidence.

1. Arrest
(a) unlawful arrest;
(b) unlawful removal from custody.
2. Physical examination
(a) illegal search of the person of the accused;!
(0) illegal blood tests;?
(c) illegal breath test;?
(व) unwarranted medical examination ;4

(०) medical examination of the accused to obtain evidence of drunken-
ness, when all that the accused was told was that the examination
was necessary to see if he was ill ;>

(£) medical examination of the accused to obtain evidence of drunken-
ness, where it was undertaken merely after telling the accused
that it would be advantageous to him ;6

(g) taking the finger prints of the accused without telling him that he
might refuse to give them;7

(h) compulsory breath test which is permitted by law only for using
them on certain minor charges, where it is employed for more
serious cases,

3. Search of property

PAAR ०. Ne

Illegal search of property;

Kuruma v. R., (1955) AC. 197 (PC). *

Attorney General of Quebec v. Begin, (1955) 5 D.L.R. 394 (Supreme Court of
Canada).

Merchant v. R., (1971) 45 ALI.R. 310 (High Court of Australia).

R. v. Ireland (No. 1), (1970) 126 C.L.R. 321 (High Court of Australia).
R. v. Payne, (1963) 1 All E.R. 848.

R. v. Nowell, (1948) 1 All E.R. 794.

Callis v. Gunn, (1964) 1 0.8. 495.

Mac Farlane v. Sharp, (1972) N.Z.L.R. 64,

39



40

4. Breach of privacy (including interception of communications),
(3) illegal telephone tapping;!

(b) photographs illegally taken by telling the accused wrongly that it

was compulsory;*

(0 eavesdropping; a5

(d) overhearing a conversation between blackmailers and the victim :$

०0) incriminating letter written by the accused in Jail, which the jailor
r हि en by 1
promised to post, but which was handed over to the prosecutor.”

5. Denial of legal advice

(a) Confession obtained after its maker had been refused the advice of
a solicitor ;®

6. Tricks played by the law enforcement agency
(a) Evidence obtained by reason of a policeman describing himself as
a magistrate?

(b) Fvidence of drunkenness obtained from medical examination which,
the accused was told, was just to see if he was ill!

“Mt

Entrapment

“The use of agent provocateurs wae

R. v. Mathews, (1972) V.R. 3 (Supreme Court of Victoria).
Rv. Irdland (No. 1), (1970) 126 CLR, 321.

Rv. Bucan, (1964) 1 WI.R. 365.

Rv. Magsud Ali, (1965) 2 All E.R, 464.

R. v. Stewart, (1970) 1 W.LR. 907.

° 6... Hopes v. H.M. Advocate, (1960) J.C. 104. (Scotland).

7. R. ¥. Derrington, (1826) 172 E.R. 188.
See, however, Rumping v- D.P.P. (1964) AC. 814.

8. R.v. Alien, (1977) Crim. LR. 163.
9. R.v. Pettipiece, (1972) 7 C.C.C. (2d) 133 (Canada).
10. R.v. Payne, (1963) 1 All E.R. 848.

11. R. v. Ameer, (1977) Crim. L.R. 104, 105.
12. For the position in US., see Note, “Entrapment as a due process defence” : develop-
ments afler Hempton V. U.S., 96 $. Ct. 1646; (1982) Winter, 57 Indiana Law J. 89,

130.

हम जि

MGIPN—S3—442 LAD/ND/83—14-8-84625.