LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

NINETY FIFTH REPORT

ON

CONSTITUTIONAL DIVISION WITHIN THE
SUPREME COURT - A PROPOSAL FOR

MARCH 1984


10.0, No. F, 2(4)/84-L.C.

JUSTICE K.K. MATH! a CHAIRMAN
Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi-110 oat

March 1, 1984.

My dear Minister,

1 am forwarding herewith the Ninety-fifth Report of the Law Commris-
sion on “Constitutional Division within the Supreme Court—A proposal
for.”

The subject was taken up by the Law Commission on its own. The
need for taking up the subject is explained in Chapter I of the Report.

The Commission is indebted to Shri 9, M. Bakshi, Part-time Member
and Shri A. K. Srinivasamurthy, Member-Secretary, for their valuable
assistance in the preparation of the Report,

With regards,

Yours sincerely,

(66, K. MATHEW)

Shri Jagannath Kaushal,
Minister of Law, Justic & Company Affairs,
New Delhi.

Encl. : g5th Report.

(i)


CHAPTER
CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER

Appendix

CONTENTS,

INTRODUCTORY, - . - पु .

THE QUESTIONNAIRE ISSUED BY THE LAW COMMISSION
AND THE REI'LIES RECEIVED THERETO पु पु . .

CONSTITUTIONAL ADJUDICATION AND THE NEED FOR
SPECIAL DIVISION . . पु . .

AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION WHETHER NEEDED.
CONSTITUTLONAL COURTS ON THE CONTINENT,
RECOMMENDATIONS, . + + . पु पु . -

APPENDIX

Que itionn ire tsaued ever by tke Law Commission of India.

79
22
29


CHAPTER |
INTRODUCTORY

1.1. The subject with which this Report is concerned is one of funda- Scope and genesis.

mental importance in the judicial system of the country and of direct
relevance to the determination of constitutional controversies. Shortly stated,
the question that is proposed ta be considered is, whether there is need for
creating, within the Supreme Court of India, a Constitutional Division thar
shall be dealing exclusively with matters of public law or, more narrowly.
matters of Constitutional Law. The subject has been taken up by the Law
Commission of India of its own, having regard to its importance.

1.2. Detailed reasons for embarking upon an inquiry of this nature Constitutional ad-
will be set out in due course.' At this stage, it will be sufficient to siate मिल and us
that the topic has been taken ap for consideration in view af the growing
importance that constitutional adjudication has assumed in the country.
Any perceptive student of the pattern of litigation that has come up before
the Supreme Court in the last decade, and of the nature of questions that
fall for consideration in such controversies, would agree that in point of
hoth quality and quantity, constitutional adjudication has come to acquire
a status of its own. It is not that this development was not anticipated ov
the framers of the Constitution. They did ensure that a question relating
to interpretation of the Constitution must be allowed to find its way to
the Supreme Court, whatever be the nature of the controversy or the branch
of litigation in which the question might have arisen. They did ensure that
in the Supreme Court, the minimum number of Judges who shall sit together
for hearing and deciding such questions shall be five. They did sez to it that
that part of the Constitution which deals with the distribution of sovereignty
between the Centre and the States, must receive an authoritative interpreta-
tion from the Supreme Court, and that if such a.controvesy happens to arise
between the Centre and the States or States inter se, the dispute should be
settled only by the Supreme Court, if there be a justiciable dispute. They
further did take care to provide that so much of the Constitution as confers
fundamental rights on the citizens and (in certain cases) even on a non-
citizen, should be capable of being enforced by appropriate proceedings
before the Supreme Court. In short, the Constitution makers did manifest
an anxiety that 2 constitutional controversy should, in some form or other,
come up before the Supreme Court, and should, in that forum, receive
consideration at the hands of a minimum number of judges.

3,3. This concern of the constitution makers for a proper machinery Parliamemary

for the determination of constitutional questions was not overlooked by SPProach.
our Parliament. Very soon after the commencement of the Constitution,
Parliament showed its awareness of the importance of constitutional adjudi-
cation by amending the twe procedural codes to provide that such questions,
if they arose in Courts subordinate to the High Court, must b: brought
before the High Court for determination irrespective of the nature of the
litigation in the course of which such a question arises.

1.4. Underlying this concern shown by the Constitutional makers, and The — underlying
by our Parliament with reference to constitutional controversies, is the 25sumption,

1. Chapter 3, infra,


Need for further
examination.

Issues.

Prior stages of

the — inquiry-the
questionnaire.

2

implicit assumption that the forum and machinery for adjudicating on such
controversies merits special attention. As every student of legislation comes
to realise sooner or later and as every judicial functionary who has had
anything to do with the interpretation of statutes or constitutional provisions
feels in his very flesh and bones — such assumptions are never spelt out in
so many words. They are not elaborated in lengthy sentences. They, in
fact, do not need to be claborated. These unspoken postulates are as vibrant
as the spoken word.

1.5. These implicit assumptions, always to be regarded as speakin; fe
need to be adverted to for considering whether the developments, of whic
we have spoken above,! necessitate any further provisions in the realm of
the forum and machinery of constitutional adjudication. hat is precisely
the broad objective of this Report.

1.0. It is hardly necessary, in this introductory chapter, to set out the
issues that need to be considered in the present inquiry, undertaken with
the broud objective referred to in the preceding paragraph. These issues
have been dealt with in the succeeding chapters of this Report followed by
recommendations in the last chapter. We would, however, like to make
it clear that it is not the object of the present inquiry to make suggestions
towards re-structuring of the judiciary fon the sake of re-structuring. Nor
is it its object to suggest any other changes for the sake of change. The
inquiry is ivtended to examine how for the implict assumptions with refe-
tence to the importance of constitutional adjudication, when approached
in the light of the growing importance of such adjudication and the needs
of society, render it desirable to devise further means for improving the
‘cfhiciency of the process of such adjudication.

4.7. Asa matter of record, it may be stated that prior to the prepara-
tion of this Report, the Law Commission had issued a questionnaire? with
the object of eliciting views on a number of questions concerning the func-
Woning of the Supreme Court and certain other aspects of the higher
judiciary. We take this opportunity of thanking all those who have
responded to the Questionnaire. We should particularly cxpress our
gtatitude to Shri M. N. Seervai who has taken very elaborate pains to express
his views at length on almost every question.

We may also mention here that we had the benefit of ascertaining the
views of Dr. Edward McWhinney, the eminent constitutional lawyer, on the
questionnaire. We took this opportunity since Dr. McWhinney had recently
come to India and could find time to meet the Member-Secretary of the
Commission, and to forward to the Commission his very valuable views on
various questions contained in the questionnaire. As is well known, Dr.
McWhinney has made a special study of constitutional adjudication and
constitutional courts in the comparative perspective. We are grateful for
the trouble he took.

Tt was alse our good fortune to have with us Mr. Justice Alexander
Fera of the Constitutional Court of Yugoslavia, who had recently come to
New Delhi. Mr. Justice Fera was good enough to spend some time with
the Members of the Commission and give them an idea of the composition
and pattern of working of the Constitutional Court of Yugoslavia. Although,
for want of time, it was not possible to request him to answer the queries

1. Paragraph 1.2, supra.
2. Chapter 6, infra
3. Questionnaire issued by the Law Commission of India—See Appendix.


3

contained in our questionnaire, we were happy to find that he evinced keen
interest in some of the problems that have been sought to be deale with in
the questionnaire.

Of the questions raised in that Questionnaire, some were concerned with
the machinery for constitutional adjudication, and the present Report has
been prepared after keeping in yiew the replics received on the akove quis
tionnaire. Some of the important points made in the replies to the ques-
tionnaire will, in fact, be adverted to later,! at the appropriate place. The other
issues raised in that questionnaire are outside the scope of this Report, which
35 confined to the question of creation of a Constitutional Division within
the Supreme Court.

8. Iris needless to say that the present Report docs not purport to Limited scope,
deal with the totality of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, or with all
the aspects of its procedure and mode of working. Its scope is a narrow
ane, as already explained?

tg. We may fnally mention that in | subsequent Chapter, we are Comparative
dealing, in brief, with the comparative position regarding constitutional ™erial-
adjudication in a few selected countries.’

1. Chapters 2 und 4, infra,
2 Pura 1.2 10 17, snpra.
3, Chapter 5, infra.


CHAPTER 2
‘THE QUESTIONNAIRE AND REPLIES ‘THERETO

The Questionnaire. 2.1. The Questionnaire that had been issued by the Law Commission!
clicited views, ivfer alia, on the question whether there should be created a
Constitutional Court to decide constitutional questions. The replies to the
questionnaire — the majority of them —-do not favour the creation of a
Constitutional Court, However, a large number of them have favoured the
creation of a Constitutional Division within the Supreme Court, or have
made suggestions which substantially run on analogous lines. Replies to
any questionnaire naturally do not spell out the details of the points made
in the replies. But a shade of opinion does lend its broad support to the
creation of a division to be entrusted exclusively with the determination
of constiutional controversies, that reach the Supreme Court.*

Having regard to the opposition expressed strongly in certain quarters
to the idea of creating a separate Court for dealing with constitutional issues,
that idea has not been pursued in this Report. Also, the Commission is aware
that any such proposal would involve structural changes of a more extensive
and complex character than those that would be necessitated by a proposal
for creating, within the Supreme Court as structured at present, separate
divisions for dealing with Constitutional and non-Constitutional matters.

In fact that a noticeable shade of opinion received in response to the
questionnaire favours the idea of having such divisions is a consideration
that weighed with the Commission in cxploring the feasibility of creating
such divisions (instead of creating a separate Court), and of examining the
pros and cons of the matter.

Replies favour in 2.2, As already state,’ the idea of having a constitutional division

creation, 1 hens within the Supreme Court has found favour with several persons and bodies
of the Supreme that have responded to the questionnaire or with persons who have (though

Court, not in the form of a formal communication to the Law Commission) expres-
sed their views in the matter. They favour the creation of a ‘constitutional
division” a constitutional “wing” or “branch”, These include—

(४) one retired Supreme Court Judge,*

(b) two sitting Chief Justices of High Courts,°
(०) two siting High Courts Judges;®

(d) one retired High Court Judge,’

(०) Law Department of one State,’

(one MLL.A.,°

Para 1.7, supra.

Fer i gist ‘af those who have favoured the creation of such u division, sez paragraph
2.2, infra, हि

Paragraph 2.1, supra.
Law Commission Collection, pages 1/2 and 1/3, (fhe Hindu. 8th February, 1982).
Law Commission Collection, pages 1/88 and 1/143.

Law Comntission Collection, pages 1/153 & 1/154. (Onc of them suggests a constitn-
tional bench of seven Judges).

Law Commission Collection, page 1/4. (The Hindu, &th February, 1982).
Law Commission Collection, page 11102,
Law Commission Collection, page 1/93.

4

Rie न

ye bos


(g) a distinguished economist;!

(b) one academic lawyer?

(he would confine the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to consti-
tutional matters and public interest litigation, with a permanent
bench for each);

(i) one lawyers’ association® (it suggests the formation of a regular
constitution Bench comprising the five seniormost judges, includ-
ing the Chief Justice); है

() one Secretary of a Chamber of Commerce and Industry‘ (he suggests
a Constitution Bench of not less than seven judges);

(k) a few Advocates;§
Q) one subordinate judicial officer;*

(m) some other persons.’
Some clarifications

2-3. Some of the replies to the questionnaire have expressed an anxiety Som ae
that the Supreme Court of India® should continue to remain at the apex. of to points arising
the administration of justice in India and that nothing should be done to question git”
affect the unity and integrity of the Supreme Court. We highly appreciate ‘onnaire-
this concern, and would like to make it clear that the idea put forth in this
Report is not intended to lower the status of the Supreme Court in any
manner. Rather, the solé object of the present inquiry is to suggest measures
needed to maintain a high quality of disposal of judicial business, As will
be seen from the detailed issues set out later,’ there is no question of making
alterations in the Qualifications and modality of appointment of Supreme
Court Judges, except such as are absolutely consequential on the creation of
a separate division within the Supreme Court for constitutional matters."
2.4. We may also mention that the questionnaire issued by the commis- The question of
sion, covering as it did a very wide field,"' evoked, from a very eminent
member of the एच, the comment that the Law Commission ought not to go
into the question of establishing a Constitutional Court in an inquiry relating
to speedying up of legal proceedings.
The questionnaire further evoked the comment that since ordinary reme-
dies are available for remedying the evils of delay, far-reaching amendments
of our constitution ought not to be gone into. We value very highly this
approach and appreciate the point of view that constitutional amendments
ought not to be embarked upon lightly.
Object of the

2.5. We should like to record at this stage that the principal object af Obie
the inguiry into the possible need for creating a constitutional division is not pauity.
to suggese measures for reducing arrears. OF course, we do anticipate the
creation of a constitutional division would, to some extent, help in reducing

1, Law Commission Collection, paga 1/10,
2. Law Commission Collection, page 1/137.,

3. Law Commission Collis page 1/139,

4. Law Commission Collection, page 1/152.

5. Law Commission Collection, pages 1/6 to 1/8, 1/98 to 1/100, 1/121 and 1/132,
6. Law-Commission Collection, page 1/153.

7, Law Commission Collection, pages 1/9, 1/11, and 1/90,

8, Law Commission Collection, page 1/18 (A sitting Chief Justice),

9. Chapter 6, infra.

10. Paragraph 6.8, infra.

11. Chapter 1, supra.

Law Commission. Collection, page 1/156 (Shri मं, M. Seedvai),

2-116 LAD/ND/84



‘Constitutiona 1
Councilif feasible
in India.

Example drawn

6

arrears in the Supreme Court. However, the idea of a separate division
in the Supreme Court has not been put forth with that end in view. The
idea is, in essence, a response to the realisation! that constitutional adjudica-
tions possess certain special features, which the judicial process mnst reflect
in its structure and approach.

As regards constitutional amendment, while we are anxious that it
should not be recommended as a matter of course, such an amendment seems
unavoidable if the proposal for creating a constitutional division is to be
implemented?

2.6. In reply to our Questionnaire, there has been a suggestion for the
creation of a Constitutional Council, as in France. A retired Judge of the
Calcutta High Court has made this suggestion’, However, on a
careful consideration, this does not appear tobe an idea that can
be appropriately included in the Indian Constitution. ‘The composition
and functions of the French Constitutional Council,‘ as envisaged in the
French Constitution, and its manner of operation, would hardly harmonics
with the total constitutional pattern in India. France had to create this
Council because the French Constitution does not contemplate the determina-
tion of constitutional questions either by the Hierarchy of ordinary courts
culminating in the cour de Cassation, or by the hierarchy of administrative
courts culminating in the Conseil de Etat. The position in India is not
analogous in this regard. Moreover, the range, depth and variety of constitu-
tional matters® that have arisen so far in India, — and may be expected
to arise in future — under the Constitution, would be far beyond the type
of body represented by the French Constitutional Council.

a7. By way of example of the nature of controversies which might arise

from Section 9. under the Indian Constitution and which may not be quite appropriately
Hindu, Mariage dealt with by a body constituted on the lines of the French Constitutional

Act, 1955,

Council, we may refer to the question that has very recently arisen regarding
the constitutional validity of a statutory provision — such as, Section 9, Hindu
Marriage Act, 1955 —~ providing for the restitution of conjugal rights
through a decree of the Court. Two High Courts— Andhra Pradesh and
Delhi—have had to deal with the question so far, though they have arrived
at different conclusions. We are not, in this Report, concerned with the
merits of the controversy. The point to make is that such constitutional
questions having a legal background (besides their social significance) may
not be appropriate for a Constitutional Council of the type that functions

in France.

Chapter 3, infra.
See Chapter 4, infra.

Law Commission Collection, page 1/107.
See paragraphs 5.3 to 5.6 and 6.2, infra.
See paragraph 2.7, infra.

PRS


CHAPTER 3
CONSTITUTIONAL ADJUDICATION
1. General observations : Important aspects of Constitutional adjudication

3.1. For the purpose of the present inquiry, it appears to be desirable to
emphasise certain aspects of constitutional adpudication which might show
the need for measures facilitating the evolution of a specialised approach, and
for allowing adequate time for study and reflection.

3.2. By way of a general observation, it should be emphasised that the
adjudication of constitutional controversies by the highest court of the country
occupies a place not enjoyed by the determination of other types of contro-
versies. Woodrow Wilson’s description of such a court as a “Constituent
assembly continuously in session” deserves to be kept in mind, familiar as
it is to students of constitutional law. Each generation, it has been said,
writes its own constitutional principles (but far from always), through the
decisions of the Supreme Court.!

Mr. Justice Frankfurter’s appellation—“a ws special kind of court”?
applies almost to every court entrusted with the function of deciding consti-

tutional questions.

3.3. Since, in constitutional adjudication, the Court is confronted with
new and unprecedented controversies, the fashioning of rules to suit the
new situations is obviously a difficult task. Holmes drew attention to this,
by pointing out that the words of a constituent Act “have called into life a
being the development of which could not have been foreseen completely by
the most gifted of its begetters’’. Of the U.S, Supreme Court, it has been
said that “the Court may be purseless and swordless, but its ability impor-
tantly to influence the way the nation functions has proved great, and seems
to be growing all the time.’

3-4. In the light of these general obscrvations, it may now be convenient
to deal with certain special features which are either not found in non-
constitutional adjudication, or, if found, are found only in a much lesser
degree in nonconstitutional adjudication. Because of these pecularities,
some considerations become of special relevance to constitutional adjudica-
tion. Of these, we may mention, by way of illustration, four, namely,—

(i) Specialisation;

Gi) consistency;

(ii) evolution of constitutional jurisprudence as a body of doctrine,
self-contained and coherent;

{iv} availability of adequate time.

Of course, the considerations enumerated above do not necessarily
constitute independent or isolated categories. They dovetail into each other,
and the reasons that support the several considerations may also dovetail into
each other. However, it may be proper to examine them in some detail,

1. AS, Miller, Supreme Court : Myth and Reality, page 6.
Frankfurter, “The Supreme Court in the Mirror of Justice’, (1957) 105, UPa Law,
Rev. 781, quoted by A.'S. Millar, Supreme Court: Myth and Reality, page 24.

Missouri v. Holland, (1920) 252 U.S. 416, 435.
4. Jobn Hart Ely, Democracy and Distrust : A Theory of Judicial Review (1980), page 45.

7

»

Aspects of consti»
tutional adjudica-
tion.

Importance of
constitutional ad-
judication.

Role of Court
in development of
constitutional
jurisprudence.

Special features
of constitutional
adjudication.



8
IL. Specialisation

Special approach 3.5- Taking up the first consideration mentioned above', namely,
specialisation, it is necessary to state that the most important aspect is the
need for special approach. Here, we would like to quote what was said by
the famous economist Keynes, whose interests far transcended the realm of
economics, Describing the role of the judge deciding a constitutional issue,
Keynes said +

“He must contemplate the particular in terms of the abstract and (the)
concrete in the same Aight of thought. He must study the present in
the light of the past, for the purposes of the future. No part of man’s
nature or his institutions must lie entirely outside his regard. He must
be purposeful and disinterested in a simultancous mood: as aloof and
incorruptible as an artist, yet sometimes as near the earth as a
politician.”?
Special Sooeme 3.6. In the discharge of the onerous tasks of constitutional adjudication
Court of U.S.A. a8 outlined above, specialisation may help. Again, we bave the example of
the U.S. Supreme Court. The very fact of exercising judicial review for a
period of more than a century and @ half has given the U.S, Supreme Court
2 cestain political confidence and political saveir jaire, and a certain contine-
ing orat tradition of specialist judicial experience in the “constitutional
handling and legal moderation” of great political causes celebres, _patti-
cularly when these political causes celebres threaten to involve the judiciary
in adverse relationships or power struggle with counter-prevailing executive
or legislative authority?

Views expressed 2. In USA. two Supreme Court justices have urged the develop
z ciate vi ment of specialised courts asa way to deal with rising case, loads.‘

Noting that Texas and Oklahoma divide civil and criminal appeals
in their highest courts and that a number of states separate intermediate
appellate courts, Chief Justice Warren Burger said, “It is clear, therefore,
that the concept of separate appellate jurisdiction is not an alien or
subversive idea,

“Any move towards more use of specialised courts must be carefully
thought-out. But it must be thought about”, he told those attending the
Arthur T. Wanderbilr dinner in New York in November. He said that
European countries had been using such courts. “widely and effectively” for
centuries. Burger noted that. in the United States, most medical clinics and
law firms assign patients or clients to doctors or lawyers with specialised,
experience”, If the advocates must be specialist”, he asked, “can we wholly
ignore the need for some specialisation in the judicial systems?’*

A already stated*, Justice Sandra Day O'Connor of the Supreme Court
of USA, (herself a former State Appellate Judge} would encourage
specialisation. Speaking to the Council of Chief Justices of Courts of
Appeal in Chicago, she said that she had found that the fields of crimi.
nal law, probate, tax, domestic relations and administrative law were

3... Paragraph 3.4{i), supra.

2. 5, M. Keynes, “Memorials of Alfred Marshall”, reproduced in Fankfuter and Landis,
The Business of the Supreme Court, page 318.

3. McWhinney, “Federal Supreme Courts and Constitutional Review” (1967) 45 Cau. Bar
Rev, $78, 592, 593.

4. Report “Speciality Courts” in Ganuary 1983) 69 ABA, 23.


>

particularly well suited for specialisation. When a judge has a particular
expertise in an area or field of law, the judge, she said, can prepare for
hearings with less time and can resolve issues more quickly, and anes
better. At the same time, she added, “Most judges, ind [00179 myself, prefer
to maintain a diversity of subject matter jurisdiction”.

TIE. Constitutional divisions in the Commonwealth and elsewhere

3.8. In Commonwealth jurisdiction, a Constitutional Division in the
apex Court has not been created so far. Specialised divisions dealing with
matters such as family law and administrative law have come to be establish-
ed in several jurisdictions but not constitutional divisions.

3-9. Specialisation with reference to constitutional adjudication has
been stressed elsewhere also. In regard to Canada, a writer pleading for
the establishment of a Constitutional Court, wrote some time ago as under :!

“All the arguments in favour of specialisation in these fields
become even stronger when the interpretation of such a basic document
as the Constitution is involved. It may be argued that this type of
specialisation belongs to Continental Europe and is foreign to common
law countries; but my point is that we should improve our Constitu-
tion by adopting the Continental system. As a matter of fact, the
Supreme Court of the United States has specialised itself in practice by
concentrating alnrost exclusively on public law cases............05 ”

3-40. The reason why Constitutional Courts or divisions have not been
seriously considered, could be the fact that public law, of which constitutional
Jaw and administrative law are the two most important branches, itself
reccived recognition rather late in the day. No doubt, the State is a vary
old institution, Disputes between the State and its citizens, disputes concern-
ing the powers of the sovereign and the working of Governmental machi-
nery, disputes concerning the antes piay of Government agencies—all matters
that form the core of constitutional law and administrative law—must have
arisen in ancient times as well. The unmatched original thinking of Plato
about the State, the vast and comp xehensive study made by Aristotle about
“Constitutions”, and the grand kaleidoscope of statecraft and the science of
government to be found in Kautilya, propably had their counterparts in
some great legal battles as well. But public law having a personality of its
own is regarded more a product of the last ten decades or so, than a heritage
of the past. This comparatively late emergence of public law accounts for
the late emergence of tribunals specialising in that division of law. Tho
tules did exist, and have existed for centurics, But they did not carry a
label of their own, they did not have their individual appellations. Rules
defining ‘the liberties of citizens vis-a-vis the State were inter-mixed with
ordinary rights and leberties of the citizen--a point lucidly expounded by
Dicey. These rules rubbed shoulders with the prosaic rules of ordinary law,
and could not be identified in a crowd.

This being the nature and content of rules of constitutional law, no
urge was born to create a tribunal specialising in those rules.

Creation of constitutional divisions in the apex courts have not, there-
fore, been seriously thought of in Commonwealth jurisdictions. Until
recently, guarantees of fundamental rights were also almost non-existent in

1, Jacqnis-Yuan Morin, 43 Can. Bar Rev. 545, 549,

Constitutional
divisions in the
Commonwealth.

Suggestions made

in Canada.
Late emergence
of — public Jaw,


No logical
reason for present
state of affairs.

Position in India.

MeWhinacy’s
view.

10

major Commonwealth jurisdictions. No practical need, therefore, arose to
think of a specialised division concerned with the violations of such
guarantees,

3.11. But there is no logical reason why this state ef affairs should
continue. Many Commonwealth Constitutions, particularly in the “new
commonwealth,” now entrench fundamental rights. Even carlier, questions
of constitutional law, mostly arising from the division of powers between
the federation and the Units, have been familiar topics of littgation in many
commonwealth countries. In India also, the Federal Court created under
the Government of India Act, 1935, was pre-eminently concerned with
constitutional issues. In course of time, no doubt, its jurisdiction came to
be expanded because of political necessities, but it never lost its role as a
constitutional tribunal in the federal sphere. The need for specialisation in
regard to Constitutional adjudication is the greater now, in view of the diffe-
rent and intricate questions that arise out of the provisions that elaborately
entrench several fundamental rights. :

3.12. The Supreme Court of India, for historical reasons, came to be
vested with a variety of jurisdictions. In the initial few years, attention was
not focussed upon the importance of its role of constitutional adjudication.
No doubt, there were many constitutional landmarks, a few causes celebres
and some pronouncements that laid the foundations of important doctrines
of constitutional law. But these came and went as meteors in the sky. ‘They
did not mark out the role of the Supreme Court as a constitutional tribunal.
Constitutional controversies, floating on the stream of judicial business along
with other disputes, did not stand out in the public eye or in the thinkin
of the profession; they were regarded as merely one species of the manifold
jurisdiction of the Court.

The picture is different now. Constitutional jurisprudence is being
built up gradually. Now that constitutional adjudication has taken firm
roots in India (according to some persons, it even overshadows ordinary
litigation), it is appropriate to take stock of the situation and to spare some
time for considering its special demands.

3.13. A. distinguished writer! on public law has this to say about the
machinery of judicial review of unconstitutional acts as adopted in the newly
independent and self-governing countries of South East Asia and Africa :—

“The main constitutional stereotypes for judicial review have, upto date,
been derived from the English-speaking countries whose public law systems,—
whether involving a presidential—cxecutive and formal separation of powers
on the American model, or else a parliamentary—executive, on the English
and general Commonwealth model—have all rested on an essentially
common law legal base involving, at least the common Jaw derived
notions of precedents, case law, and judicial reasoning. We have
tended, in the Commonwealth countries at least, to ignore the
advantage of judicial expertise, in terms either of specialist Supreme
Courts or else of specialist hence within Supreme Courts whose jurisdiction
is limited by subject-matter—forgetting that, for all practical purposes since
the reforms effected by the judiciary Act of 1925, the United States Supreme
Court has become a specialist public law or constitutional tribunal.”

In regard to the United States, Mr. Justice Frankfurter acknowledged
this fact when he said,? “Issues of public law, then, constitute the stuff of

1, MeWhinney, Judicial Review (£969), page 235.
2. Frankfurter in (1928) 42 Hary, Law Rev. 18.


Hi

Supreme Court litigation”. “We have", Chief Justice Warren Burger! said
“a great cqure system in the United States, but itis not perfect, The Com-
mission should look at the Court system of every other large highly industria.
lised country to see whether we could learn something from them”.

Chief Justice Warren Burger went on further, to add :
“Franoz, for onc, hus a nine-member Constitutional Council that
resolves only constitutional questions, Another French court is the
court of last resort for all administrative matters, and there's another
court for everything else. In effect, they have three Supreme Courts.
and that is a fairly common pattern throughout Europe, from Sweden
on the north down to Italy”.

3-14. At this stage, it would be appropriate to mention that Chick
Justice Warren Burger, while suggesting the creation of a Commission to
fook into the problem of case load in the Supreme Court, has further
Suge ested that the Commission (if and when constituted in that country)
could also take note of the fact that most European countries have, in effect,
two or three courts of last resort, rather than only one such court.!?

3-15. The aspect of specialisation js also iustrated by the Constitutional
Courts created in several Continental countries? A striking example of a
specialised court is the West German Constitutional Court, which is pre-
eminently concerned with constitutional law and certain types of disputes
involving issues of administrative law.* Other disputes are dealt with by
separate specialised agencies, there being separate Supreme Courts for
Administrative Law, Labour Law, Social matters and Taxation Law.

IV. The issues in constitutional adjudication

3.16. A few words now about the nature of issues in constitutional
adjudication, Morris Cohen has described these issues :—

“We cannot pretend that the Supreme Court is simply a court of law.
Actually the issues before it generally depend on the determination
of all sorts of facts and their consequences, and the, values we are
attaching to these consequences, These ate questions of economics,
polities and social policies which legal training cannot solve. unless
law includes all the social knowledge.”

Speaking of the U.S, Supreme Court, Robert H. Jackson said, “nor
can it (the Supreme Court of America) be regarded merely as another law
court, The court’s place in the constitution was determined by principles
drawn from philosophy broader than mere law’.

Jackson also quoted the observations of Cardozo to the following
eflect: “It (the New York Court of Appeals) is a great common law court:
its problems are lawyer's problems. Hut the Supreme Court is occupied

“Quality of Justice’ (record of an interview) (October 1983) SPAN pages 35-38.

A to jis question whether a Constitutional amendment would be necessary, see para
3, in

Chapter 5, infra.

Aisle 23, Constitution of the Federal Republic of Germany. See paragraphs 5.7 to

Mortis Cohan, Reason and Law (1950), pages 73-74.
Jackson, The Supreme Court in tho American System of Government (1955), page 2.

ay RY Pe

Chief Justice
Warren Burger's
suggestion

The German Con-
stiiutional court

Wide scope ०६
questions — views
of Cohen, Jackson
and Frankfurter.


12

chiefly with statutory construction—-Which no man can make interesting —
and with politics, but Jackson added “of course, he (Cardoza) used politics
in no sense of partisanship but in the sense of policy-making”.

Justice Frankfurter has also said—“‘Let us face the fact that five Justices
of the Supreme Court are moulders of policy, rather than impersonal vehicles
of revealed truth.”

“People have been taught to believe that when the Supreme Court
speaks, it is noc they who speak but the Constitution, whereas, of course, in
so many vital cases, it is they who speak and not the Constitution, And T
verily balieve that is what the country seeds most to understand,”*

V. The Element of Choice

(मना of 3.17. The burden of the constitutional judge is thus a heavy one, One
important circumstance accounting for this heavy burden of the judge is
that constitutional cases usually involve a choice. This itself is primarily due
to two reasons. In the first place, some provisions of the Constitution arc
(by sheer necessity) stated in wide or ambiguous terms. To decide what
they mean in the circumstances of the particular cases involves a choice
between competing values. Secondly, some of the critical phrases occurring
in the Constitution cannot be intelligently understood or given shape without
a substantial injection of content from some source beyond the language and
the discoverable intention of those who wrote it. 1n constitutional adjudi-
cation, the choice is not between partics as such, but between goals,

As has been observed ; “There is no objectivity in constitutional law,
because there are no absolutes”. Every constitutional question involves a wei-
ghing of competing values. Some of these values are held by virtually every-
one, others by fewer people. Supreme Court justices likewise hold values, “The
more widely held are the va fics in society, the more likely the Supreme
Court will held them, the more controversial the values, the Supreme Court
is divided over them,”

MeCloskey's views 3.48. Robert G. McCloskey has stated about the U.S, Supreme Court
as under: —

“For more than half a century scholars and judges have heen
repudiating the mythology that the court is merely the impersonal
yoice of indisputable constitutional varieties and have been emphasiz-
ing that the judicial process involves an element of choice based on
policy judgements.’”*

Nature of the 3-19. In the present context, the nature of the cases that reach the
aes that reach Supreme Court should also be emphasised. Cases which reach the Supreme
2... Supreme “no Jaw" 5 “ हम

Court. Court are “no law” cases—pathological or “trouble” cases. Generally
speaking, a matter reaches the highest court precisely because no readily
available rule of law disposes of the issue satisfactorily. Frequently, there is
no pre-existing law waiting to be covered. The court must then make its own
law by balancing the competing interests,

1. Jackson, The Strugele for Judicial Supremacy (1955), page 54.

2.0 OM: Freedman (cd), Roosevelt & Frankforter : Their Correspondence 1928-1945 (1967),
page a

3. Leonard W. Levy (dj, Judicial Review and the Supreme Court: Selected Essays,
Page 357.

4. Robert G. McCloskey, The Modern Supreme Court, page 298.


13

3.20. It is also admitted that constitutional adjudication imposes a
difficult task upon the judge, He must examine the present issue, assimilate
the past experience and transcend both the past and the present, in order to
project himself into the future.

It is ebvious that the magnitude and variety of tasks described above
demands proper mental equipment, Learned Hand’s description of the
mental equipment demanded of a Judge cannot be bettered:-——

“T venture to believe that it is as important to a Judge called upon
to pass on a question of constitutional law to have at least a bowing
acquaintance with Acton and Maitland, with ‘Thucydides, Gibbon and
Carlyle, with Homer, Dante, Shakespeare and Milton, with Machia-
velli Montaigne, and Rabalais, with Plato, Bacon, Hume and Kant, as
with the books which have been specifically written on the subject.
For, in such matters, everything turns upon the spirit in which he
approaches the questions before him. The words he must construe
are empty vessels into which he can pour nearly anything he will.
Men do not gather figs of thistles, nor supply institutions from judges
whose outlook is limited by parish or class. They (the judges) must be
aware that there are before them more than. verbal problems; more
than final solutions cast in generalizations of universal applicability.
They must be aware of the changing special tensions in every society
which make it an “organism”, which demand new schemata of
adaptation; which will disrupt it if rigidly confined”!

3.21. Incidentally, it may be proper to mention that the need for a
broad outlook in constitutional matters was emphasised by Lord Haldane
also in the Privy Council? He pointed our that in selecting the judges of
the Judicial Committee attention had been paid to certain factors, in which
he included the need for “training calculated to give what is called the
statesmanlike outlook to the Judge.”

V. Consistency

3.22. The second aspect of constitutional adjudication that needs
emphasis is consistency. Desirable in every species of adjudication, this is
particularly so in the case of constitutional adjudication. It is not necessary
to repeat all that has been said in the preceding paragraph about the
importance and impact of constitutional adjudication. Consistency in such
matters: is of particular importance, because the judgment once pronounced
will regulate the working of the State and its numerous agencies and affect
the rights and duties of citizens, for years fo come.

3.23. Tt should, of course, be made clear that when one speaks of
“consistency” in such a context, one docs not imply that there should be a
blind and dogmatic adherence to precedent.> It is not necessary to discuss
for this purpose, the desirability or otherwise of recognising, in any court,
a power to overrule its precedents. “Consistency” here means that a decision
rendered in the past, and the approach underlying the past decision, should
be pondered over by the court when deciding ‘a case wherein that approach
may have some relevance. Whether to follow it or not, will be a matter to
be decided in each individual case, but the court must be at least conscious
of the past decision. This task of the court can be more adequately dis.
charged when there is functioning a specialised division, devoted exclusively
to constitutional questions.

i. Learned Hand, The Spirit of liberty. page 63.
2. Lord Haldane in 1 Cambridge Law Journal, 148.
3. See also paragraph 3.29, infra,
3116 LAD/ND/34 मु .

The task of
the judge, and
the requisite
mental equipment,

Lord Haldane’s
observations as to
adjudication in the
Privy = Council

Consistency
adjudication.

Meaing of
“Consistency.


Role
court.

The

of the

ultimate

“spokesman”.

Expounding

of

14

3.24. In such controversies, the role of the Court is that of articulating
a broad norm which fits the facts of the dispute before it and also transcends
that particular dispute. In this process, the Court is acting as a national
conscience for the people of India, and not merely as an arbiter of insigni-
ficant disputes. A standard comes to be erected towards which men and
governments can aspire. To the extent to which controversies reach the
court, it could help articulate, in broad principle, the goals of Indian society.
Viewed from this angle, the effects of a given decision, in constitutional
law assume great importance. It is for this reason that judges should have
adequate materials placed before them, adequate time available to them and,
of course, adequate resources at their disposal. More than all this, it is
important that they are enabled to develop the broad approach demanded
in constitutional adjudication.

3.25. In constitutional cases, the Supreme Court possesses a broad
freedom to do as it wishes. But in exercising that freedom it must not

create too much confusio!

The Supreme Court is the ultimate spokesman in the judicial hierarchy,
and the lesser spokesman must pay heed. If the Supreme Court pursues
policies which lesser spokesmen using the same techniques which the
Supreme Court uses, can twist into opposites, the Supreme Court vitiates its
own influence. This may very well be the most effective limitation on the
Supreme Court’s power, Every word of the Court must be set down with
an eye to its meaning in the future in similar situations, in analogous situa-

tions, even in irrelevant situations.

3.26. Sam Ervin Jr. emphasised the role of the Court as expounding

vague generalities. the “vague generalities” of the constitution, in these words :—

Discre!
discipli

tion
ined by

system,

Shapiro’s view

on

consistency.

“Hundreds, thousands of cases are required to give the phrase a grow-
ing content, but the constitution sets the tone. If it were to be specific,
it could not be a Constitution nor hope to maintain a theory and frame-
work of government with general powers and limitations.”

3.27. No one has expressed the limitations of the judicial role more
beautifully than Justice Cardozo who, after acknowledging that “the great
tides and currents which engulf the rest of men, do not turn aside in their
course, and pass the judges idly by, ” wisely explained that x judge

“is not to innovate at pleasure. He is not a knight-errant, roaming
at will in pursuit of his own ideal of beauty or of goodness, He is to
draw his inspiration from consecrated principles. He is not to yield
to spasmodic sentiment, to vague and unregulated benevolence. He is
to exercise a discretion informed by tradition, methodized by analogy
disciplined by system, and subordinated to ‘the primordial necessity of

2

order in the social life’.

3.28. Professor Shapiro has dealt with another aspect of consistency
in these words,? while describing the role of the judge:

“In other words, his chicf concern should not be whether or not a
given decision will for tha next twenty years facilitate or hinder the
tise of the Negro to a position of equality; it should be whether the

1, Robert A. Dahl, “Decision-making in a Democracy” in Levy (Ed.), Judicial Revi
and the Supreme Court 179.

2. Sam J. Ervin ir, Role of the Supreme Court: Policy Maker or Adjudicator? page 24.
3, Martin Shapiro, Law and Politices in the Supreme Court, page 18,


15

standard of equality he enunciates today will, in the “next twenty
years support him in the path of logic and consistency or lead him
into the temptation of irrationality. Is the standard he enunciates today
sufficiently generat and rational to be applicable to the cases that wil
come before him tomorrow?”.

3.29. The emphasis placed above on the aspect of consistency’ does
not mean that there should be no new developments in constitutional adjudi-
cation. However, it is important to note the precept that “the court is to
decide not by what is good, or just or wise, but according to law, according
to a continuity of principle found in the words of the constitution, judicial

3

precedents, traditional understanding and like sources of law’.

It would, thus, seem that the Court has to maintain a balance between
stability and change,— an aspect frequently emphasised. This aspect
assumes importance because, to quote Wiliam Hurst,’ “when you are
talking about constitutional law, you are talking about the balance of power
in the community and the question of how you find meaning boils down
completely here to who finds the meaning’’.*

Two opposites have to be reconciled by the judicial process — stability
and certainty. This may be true of other fields of life also. As Whitehead*
has observed: “There are two principles inherent in the very nature of
things recurring in some particular embodiments, whatever field we
explore — the spirit of change and the spirit of conservation. There can
be nothing real without both. Mere change without conservation is a passage
from nothing to nothing. Its final integration yields mere transient, non-
entity. Mere conservation without change cannot conserve, For after all,
there is a flux of circumstances and the freshness of being evaporates under
mere repetition,”

3.30. In ensuring consistency. the above aspect will naturally be
borne in mind. As has been said: “Surely decision should not go in a
specific case, nor should special constitutional preference be given to the rich
man, or the white man, or the protestant man, or the poor maa, or the
insurance company, or the labour union, or the black man, or the Quaker
or the witness — unless one can fairly say that the Constitution granted such

a preference”?

VII. Evolution of constitutional jurisprudence

3.31. The third consideration to which attention may be usefully
drawn is the need for systematic evolution of constitutional jurisprudence.
Tr is desirable that such jurisprudence should be allowed to evolve as a self-
contained and coherent body of doctrine, emerging from judicial decisions
rendered with that deep knowledge of, and familiarity with, constitutional
law that could more easily come from constant contact with work of a
specialised character.

1, See paragraph 2.23, supra.

Archibald Cox, The Warran Court—Constitutional Decision as an Instrument of Re-
form, page 21.

3. William Hurst, quoted by Raoul Berger. Government by Judiciary : The transforma-
tion of the Fourteenth Amendment (ie? 7), page 369,

4. A. W. Whitehead. Science and the Modern World (1925), page 281 .

Louis Henkin, “Some Reflections om Current Constitutional C * (19604
109 Univ, Pona, Law Rev, 637, 653, , ontroversy” (20050

Stability and
change.

Importance of
consistency.

Constitutional
jurisprudence.


Differences from -

ordinary = law.

Time

Complexity of

thg issues.

Analysis requires
time.

Collective
judgments.

16

3.32. Constitutional law does not have the simplicity of ordinary law—
a point that has been already made while stressing the need for specialisation.'
At the same time, its very tendency towards complexity renders it desirable
that there should be an awareness of the need to evolve a coherent body of
doctrine.

VIII. Time

3.33. The fourth and last consideration of special interest to constitu-
tional adjudication is that of time. It is exiomatic thar anything whicn
requires serious reflection, require time. One benefit that would result from
creating a special division of the Supreme Court relates to this aspect.

Time is of great importance, having regard to several factors :

(1) the gravity and complexity of the issues involved;

(2) the impact that an adjudication of a constitutional issue in a parti-
cular direction may possibly have on the future course of public
law; and

(3) the nature and volume of materials that may be needed by the
Court, for arriving at a proper conclusion, on constitutional issues.

3.34. As society becomes:complex, the issues that come up for consti-
tutional adjudication will also tend to become complex, The Court may
become immersed in the “travail of society” —a phrase aptly used by
Pekelis2 This means that much more will be demanded of the law, because
the public expects much more of it.

Judges should therefore have adequate time and ease of mind for
research, reflection and consideration. In reaching judgements, they need
time for critical review when draft judgements are prepared: and they need
further time for clarification and revision in the light of all that has. gone
before. In one of his discenting judgements, Mr. Justice Frankfurter
said, “The far-reaching and delicate problems that call for the ultimate
judgement of the nation’s highest tribunal require vigour of thought and
high effa:t and their conservation, even for the ablest of Judges.”?

३-35... Time is required not only for the primary task of analysing in
detail the materials on which the Court relies. It is equally y required for
adequate reflection upon the meaning of those materials and their bearing
on the issues now before the Court. Reflection is a slow process; wisdom.
like good wine, requires maturing.

3.36. Moreover, the judgements of the highest Court are collective
judgements. They are neither solo performances, not debates between two
sides, each of which has its mind quickly made up and then closed. The
judgments pre-suppose full consideration and re-consideration by all, of the
rcasoned views of each. “Without adequate study there cannot be adequate
reflection; without adequate reflection there cannot be adequate discussions;
without adequate discussion, there cannot be that fruitful interchange of
minds which is indispensable to thoughtful, unhurried decision and its for-
mulation in learned and impressive opinions.”*

1. Paragraphs 3.5 to 3.7, supra.

2, Alexander Pekelis, “The case for a jurisprudence of welfare” in Konvits (Ed), Law
and Social Action 1, 40, cited by AS. Miller, Supremo Court : Myth and Reality,
page '

3. Dick v है, ¥., Life Ins, Co., (1959) U.S. 437, 3 LPd. 2nd 935, 942, (Frankfurter J.
discenting).

4. Dick v. N.Y. Life Ins, Co., (1959) 3 L.Ed. 2d 935, 949, See also Schubert, Constitu-
tional Policies, pages 149-150.


7

3.37. Alexander Bickel has pointed out that judges have, or should
have, the leisure, the training, and the inclination to fo flow the ways of the

anything: it can only connect premises to conclusions, To mean anything,
therefore, the reference has to be somewhat richer, to involve the invocation
of premises along with the way one reasons from them. The basic idea
thus seems to be that moral philosophy is what constitutional law is properly
about; that there exists a correct way utilising such philosophy: and that
judges are better than others at identifying and engaging in it.

Griswold! has also stressed the need for leizure in these words :--

“I have never written an opinion for a court; but 1 have tried
my hand at writing articles and briefs, as well as examination questions,
and I know something about the way legal thought develops in one’s
mind and the problems and difficulties, the grouping and trustration,
the striving for clarity and exactitude, and finally, the sheer labour of
English composition involved in written legal work”.

The need for the availability of adequate time for a court of last resort
has been lucidly stressed by Sr. Edward McWhinney who was good enough
to give us the benefit of his views on our questionnaire? This is what he

says while addressing himself to question 3:—

“A final appellate tribunal can only function effectively when it
bas enough time properly to consider, research and decide those cases
that do come to it, Some form of discretionary control by a court over
the size of its work-load and the number of cases coming to it seems
an indispensable and necessary part of the final appellate tribunal
function. ‘The implication is that such final tribunal must have an
adequate advance screening procedure as to its cases, and thereby have
full discretionary power to accept, or to decline to take, matters accord-
ing to a preliminary conclusion as to their relative public importance.
A final appellate tribunal must itself be judged, in the end, not by the
sheer quantity of cases it decides, but by their  constitutional-legal
weight and significance,”

VUIL. The benefits sammed up

3.38. It is well-known that between a particular event and a person
to whom the event happens, the nature and intensity of the reaction depends
not merely on the event, but also on what the person experiencing
the event puts into it. This is, of course, eminently true of an emotional
experience; but, in a large degree, it is also true of most intellectual activity.

Necd for
lcisure-— Yews
of Bickel and

scholar in pursuing the ends of Government, Reason alone cannot tell you Griswold,

The

experience

of an evant,

In order that the judge mey be able to give his best, he should have enough ©
is

time. He should have benefits resulting from specialisation, He
should have an eye for consistency , and yet a desire to avoid rigidity. The
pressures of the overall volume of judicial work may not permit a measura-
ble increase in these respects for individual judges. “But it may be desirable
to ensure, at Icast, that the institution as a whole is best organised.

3.39. As has been said, greatness in the law is not a standardised
quality: nor are the elements, that combine to attain it, ,..... greatness may
manifest itself through the power of penetrating analysis exerted by a tren-
chant mind, as in the case of Bradley; it may be due to persistence in a

1. Erwin W, Griswold, “Supreme Coust—-979 Team: Forwadd” (196041) 94 Haran
Law Review at pages 83-84. |) jarvard

2. See paragraph 1.7, supra.

Factors accounting

for
the

greatness in
Naw.


18

point of view forcefully expressed over a long judicial stretch, as shown by
Field; it may derive from a coherent judicial philosophy, expressed wit
pungency and brilliances, reinforced by the Zeitgeist, which, in good part,
was itself a reflection of that philosophy, as was true of Holmes; it may be
achieved by the “resourceful Seployment of vast experience and wn originat-
ing mind, as illustrated by Brandeis, it may result from the influence of a
singularly endearing personality in the service of sweet reason, as cardozo
proves; it may come through the kind of vigour that exerts moral authority
over others, as embodied in Hughes.”?

Creating 8 3.40. No reforms in structure can bring into existence these qualities,
climate. where they do not exist. But they can help in the creation of a climate
which will make them blossom, where they exist in the seed.

Demands of the 3.41. Our emphasis on certain aspects of constitutional adjudication

judiclal process in

vegard toordinary should not be understood RS, i any manner, attributing a lesser importance

law. to the adjudication of questions of ordinary Jaw. Nor is the preceding
discussion to be taken as implying that the aspects detailed above do not
have their importance in the determination of ordiary legal issues. Specia-
lisation may become desirable even in some branches of non-constitutional
law. Consistency in adjudication and the evolution of a coherent body of
doctrine fave their importance in several fields of non-constitutional law
(eg. commercial law). Again, social wisdom and an ability to project
oneself into the future are qualities highly to be prized in any atea where
the law is not yet codified (c.g. the law of torts) or where the law,
though codified, must Jeave a wide discretion to the judge (e.g.
the grant of appropriate relief in matrimonial causes, or sentencing in crimi-
nal Jaw.) It 15 also not to be overlooked that the clement of choice, to
which we have made a reference above while discussing the salient features
of constitutional law, may be a crucial factor in many cases of first impression,
including cases involving the interpretation of a statutory provision, The
literature of the law is replete with landmark decisions where the question
being of the first impression, the decision could have gone onc way or the
other without violating the traditional norms of judicial law-making. The
judges, it has been said, are gatekeepers of the status quo. Outside the
gates, a host of horses are galloping on the outskirts. But each must first
win its spurs. It is, then, the judge who decides which horse won its spurs.
This is true of judicial law-making in the sphere of ordinary Jaw, as it is of
constitutional adjudication. We are not unaware of this reality, and have
no intention of under-rating the importance of the questions of non-constitu-
tional law. But, at the same time, as we have pointed out, the decision of
2 constitutional question may have far-reaching repercussions, both in point
_ of time and in point of p ace, Besides this, an expounding of the Constitu-
tion is an expounding of the basic document of society, of a law which is
fundamental, of principles which are paramount to those of ordinary law.
This “higher law” status of constitutional law renders it desirable that the
aspects 0 है ecialisation, consistency, evolution of a coherent doctrine and
time for reflection and mature collective judgment, should he given special
attention in constitutional adjudication, because, in such adjudication, they
are more ciminently needed than everywhere else,

4 Walter का. Murphy aod C. Harman Pritchstt, Courts, Judges, Policies (207 ed}, pages


CHAPTER 4
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION

4.1. We should mention at this stage that if ultimately, the proposal
for the creation of a Constitutional Division within the Supreme Court is
favoured, it may need amendment of the Constitution in certain respects.
It will be convenient to set out very briefly the constitutional position in
this regard. Under article 246(1) “of the Constitution, Parliament has
exclusive power to make laws with respect to the matters enumerated in the
Union List. Entry 77 of the Union List reads as under: —

“77. Constitution, organisation, jurisdiction and powers of the
Supreme Court {including contempt of such Court), and the fees
taken therein, persons entitled to practice before the Supreme
Court.”

4-2. The proposal for a Constitutional Division of the Supreme Court,
really consists of two parts. In the first place, it contemplates the creation
of a permanent division dealing exclusively with constitutional questions,
and another permanent division dealing with non-constitutional — matters.
Secondly, judges appointed to the Supreme Court would, from the very
beginning, be appointed to a particular division.

The first part of the proposal may be said primarily to regulate the
“constitution and organisation of the Supreme Court”, “a subject falling
within Union List entry 77 and can be implemented by ordinary legislation
enacted under that entry.!

Legislation creating a Constitutional Division within the Supreme Court
would, prima facie, be supplementing article 124(1} of the Constitution,
dealing with the establishment and constitution of the Supreme Court, but
would not conflict with any of its express provisions, Again, article 145(3)
of the Constitution (minimum number of Judges for deciding constitutional
questions to be fixed) can still continue to be compiled with, under the new
scheme,

43. We must, however, note that in respect of a proposal that is
being mooted in the United States for (inter alia) bifurcating the Supreme
Court of that country, Chief Justice Warren Burger seems to have expressed
the view that an amendment of the Constitution, may be required. A

jucstion and answer session with the Chief Justice has been recorded, and
ih e record reproduced, in the Span magazine? ‘The sugecstion that was
under discussion was that a Commission be created to took into the problem
of the quality of justice in the Supreme Court, havin; regard to its heavily
increasing workload, A point put forth by the Chief Justice was that even
without waiting for a commission report, congress should set up a special
temporary panel made up of about 26 judges, drawn from the circuit judges
and seven member panels of those 26 should take some of the cases that
would be otherwise heard by the Supreme Court. The panels should
at least hear cases involving conflicting rulings by circuit courts, The rulings
of the panel could be reviewed by the Supreme Court, The Chief Justice
had also drawn attention to the fact that some countries had different apex

1. For the text of entry 77, see para 4.1, supre,
2. “The Quality of Justice" (record of an interview Oct, 1983), Span, 35, 36.
3. See also para 3.14, supra.

19

Constitutions!
Division—Need
for Constitutional
amendment.

Proposal in two
parts: Cunstitu-
tional aspect of
the first Parl

View of Chicf
Justice Burger of
the — Amerjean
Supreme Court.


20

courts for different types af cases. The question whether these proposals
may involve constitutional amendment was then raised and the flldwing
is an extract of the questions and answers 'relevant to this point: —

«Q,

Ans.

Ans.

Would a constitutional amendment be needed 10 make drastic
changes in our appellate procedure ?

Creation of a new intermediate court under the Supreme Court
would not require such an amendment nor would this temporary
panel.

What about setting up two or three Supreme Courts?

A great many judges, lawyers and legal scholars wouid be sure
to think (that) it required a constitutional amendment, because
there is a widely accepted view that Article III of the constitu.
tion, which says there shall be “‘one Supreme Court’, means
that the Supreme Court cannot sit in divisions or panels. Creat
ing several Supreme Courts would be a drastic solution, but the
Commission should consider all the options.”

The point had, earlier, been dealt with also by Earl Warren in the
context of the proposal for creating a National Court of Appeals. Here. is
the relevant passage from an article’ in the Journal of American Bar
Association. “To restate the problem more precisely the question is
whether the Article वा mandate that there be bur “one Supreme Court”
is violated by the proposed division between the National Courts of Appeals
and the Supreme Court of the exercise of the certiorari jurisdiction that has
been vested only ‘in the Supreme Court. When the jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court is exercised by two courts have we not created two Supreme
Courts in contravention of this Constitutional limitation?”

4.4. The second part of the proposal for creating a constitutional divi-
sion, contemplates that from the very beginning judges shall be appointed

second parts of the to a particular division. This would involve an amendment of the Consti-

tution, This is for the reason that the scheme claborated in this Report
contemplates that the appointment shall be made dy the President (and not
merely an assignment by the Chief Justice of India): Obviously, this cannot
be managed by rules made within the framework of article 145(2) of the
Constitution, which reads as under; —

“(2) Subject to the provisions of .................. clause (3), rules made

under this article may fix the minimum number of judges who are to

sit for any purpose, and may provide for the powers of single judges

and Division Courts.”

Thus, an amendment of the Constitution would become necessary, for
achieving the purpose mentioned above. Ordinary legislation or statutory
rales would not be adequate for the purpose.

4.5. Further, since article 124 of the Constitution is at issue and since
by that article occurs in Chapter 4 of Part V of the Constitution (Union Judici-
ary), it follows that besides complying with the procedure prescribed in
article 368(2), main paragraph (approval by a majority of the total member-
ship of each House and a majority of not léss than two-thirds of the members
of each House present and voting), there will also have to be compliance
with the proviso to article 368(2) (ratification by the Legislatures of not less
than one half of the States). "That proviso applies to Chapter 4 of Part V
(Union Judiciary).

1 (1973) ABAJ, 721-730, at 729.


21

4.6. Finally, there is the question whether a proj posal for creating a Busic feature it
constitutional division would affect a basic feature of the Constitution. “feted.
Judicial review is generally regarded as a basic feature of the constitution
and an attempt to take it away or to restrict it would be futile. But an
organisational change of the nature under consideration does not substantially
cut down judicial review, and may not therefore affect any basic feature of
the Constitution,

4.7. While amending the Constitution for the purpose mentioned Somnecied and
above,' it may also be necessary, in such an amendment, to provide for provisions.
several connected matters. The amendment should provide, or empower
Parliament to make a law which will provide, for several consequentiai
matters, including a provision empowering Parliament to regulate, by
ordinary Jegislation, matters of detail arising out of the creation of two
divisions of the Supreme Court. Besides the above, certain matters of detail
pertaining to the proposed Constitutional Division will also have to be dealt
with. “These are discussed in a later Chapter of this Report?

1. Paragraphs 4.4 to 4.6, supra.
See also paragraph 6.7, infra.
2, Chapter 6, infra.


CHAPTER 5
CONSTITUTIONAL COURTS ON THE CONTIN!

Constitutional 5.1. The idea of a Constitutivnal Court is not something new. Some
of the continental countries have these courts and as such it was in the con-
text of these examples the Questionnaire was issued. The continental ex-
perience provides enough justification for embarking on this study for which
the Questionnaire was issued.

Before we proceed to make our recommendations, it may be of interest
to have a look at the Courts functioning on the Continent, under the title
of “Constitutional Courts”. Of course, even outside the continent, constitu-
tional adjudication is a familiar phenomenon. The Supreme Court of U.S.A.
which is pre-cminently a constitutional tribunal, is an outstanding example.
However, for the present purpose, courts titled as ‘Constitutional Courts”
are of special interest.

Ausuria. 5.2. Constitutional Courts exist in a number of countries on the Con-
tinent. Alphabetically. one can begin with Austria!” The Constitutional
Court of Austria has a very wide jurisdiction. It not only decides constitu-
tional issues, which are set out in detail in Austrian Constitution, but has,
in addition, une interesting species of jurisdiction. The Constitution ot
Austria provides (in article 145) as under +--
“145. The Constitutional Court (of Austria) shall pronounce judgment
upon viclations of International Law in accordance with the provisions
of ५ special Federal Law".

The Consticational Court in Austria consists of a President, a Vice
President, twelve other members and six “substitute” members.*

France the French 5.3. France has a Constitutional Council, but not a Constitutional

Constitutional ~~ Court. How far this Council is akin to traditional courts as known to the

Council. common law world is highly debatable, In a sense. the French Constitutional
Council stands in a category by itself?

The French Constitution has authorised the Constitutional Council te
pronounce on the conformity of a statute with the Constitution. The material
portion of the relevant article of the French Constitution reads as under* :—

“61, Organic laws, before their promulgation, and regulations of the

Pariiamentary Assemblies. before they come into operation, must be

submitted to the Constitutional Council, which shall rule on their

constitationality ”

Nu doubt, the jurisdiction of the Constitutional Council was enlarged later*
But even so, the French Constitutional Council is hardly an analogous of
the Supreme Court af India or of the Supreme Court of U.S.A.

The Cour de 5.4. The highest couct in the French legal system in the judicial order
Fassatten mis the Cone de Cassation, The court dates back to the revolution, being
. established by the Law of November 27, 1790. Its organisation was fixed

hy the Law of 1890, The court sits in Chambers and in 1963, on the

‘Articles 137-148, Constitution of Austria.

1.

2. Article 14701, Constitution of Austria.

3. Edward McWhinney, Book Review in Summer (1981) Vol, 29 No, 3 AJ.C.L. 535, 536,
4. Article 61, French Constitution.

5. See pata 5.5, infra.

22


23

occasion of the latest re-organisation of the court, a “mixed chamber” was
created. Article 3 of the latest Law (so far as is material) reads as under :-—

“Decisions of the Court of Cassation are rendered by one of its
chambers, or by a mixed chamber or by its plenary assembly”.

Article 14 of the latest law provides for occasions when a mixed
chamber may be called into being—as where the case raises a question of
principle or the question normally falls within the jurisdiction of several
chambers, or the solution of the question might be the cause of inconsistency
of judgments, Hearing before a mixed chamber is mandatory in several
situations, for example, when the procurour general requests such hearing or
the First President of the Counseil d’ Etat orders it. A hearing of the mixed
chamber is presided over by the First President, and the Board normally
includes the Presidents and a senior judge and two other judges of several
chambers. When the court sits as a mixed chamber, the procurour general
must address it.!

5:5. In its composition and membership, the French Constitutional
Council, is not a judicial or even a strictly legal body. It has nine members,
a third of whom are nominated by the President of the Republic, a third by
the Speaker of the Lower House of Parliament and a third by the Presiding
Officer of the Senate.’ Its jurisdiction was enlarged in 1974, so as to permit
any group of 60 members of the Lower House of Parliament or 60 Senators
to seize the Council of a constitutional question, there is, therefore, an emer-
ging tendency? for the French Constitutional Council to proceed to the
contro! of execution policy-making by passing on the compatibility or other-
wise of projects of legislation with more general constitutional questions.

In this category fall—

(a) the ruling of the Constitutional Council on the legalising of
abortions, rendered in 1975 at the instance of members of the
Government majority in the Lower House of the French
Parliament;

(b) the ruling of the Constitutional Council on the amendments to
the general statute on the status of civil servants rendered in
1976}

(c) the ruling of the Constitutional Council on police powers of search
and seizers rendered in 1977; and

(d) perhaps the ruling of the constitutional Council on the application
of the constitutional principle of self determination (article 53) to
the proposed secession of one of the territories rendered
in 1975.

5.6. The above material has been presented in order to aive 4. picture
of the functions of the French Constitutional Council. We have already
expressed our view’ that it is not possible to have any such institution in
India, having regard to the essential features of our Constitution.

5.7. We now come to West Germany. The basic law for the Federal
Republic of Germany lays down the structure of the Federal Republic, her

1, Manfred Simon, “Enforcement of EEC Law in France-Il” (1976) 92 L.Q.R. 85, 86.

. Acticle 56, Constitution of France.

3. Edward McWhinney, Book Review in (Summer 1981). Vol. 29, No, 3, AICL $35,
536,

4. Paragraph 2.6, supra.

French Constitu-
tional Councti:
jurisdiction and
‘composition.

Constitutional
Council not feasi-
ble in India.

The Constitutional
framework in
West Germany.



24

wgans and their functions. It includes the basic rules according to which
all national life in the Federation and the Federal Laender is to run. its
course, anid above all, it lists the basic rights and liberties to which the
individual citizen is entitled. It regards the distribution of the functions of
power as an indispensable guarantee of the democratic and constitutional
order, The originators of the Basic Law have accorded the Third Power
a particularly strong status. They have established a constitutional jurisdic-
tion that is to guarantee that regard is paid to the Constitution (the Basic
Law) by all State organs. In many foreign countries, this function is taken
care of at the same time hy the Supreme Court of Justice-—e.g., in the United
States, by the United States Supreme Court, which is well-known merely
because of its constitutional administration of justice, or in Switzerland, by
the Federal Court. On the other hand, in the Federal Republic of West
Germany—a Constitutional Court made institutionally independent has been
created ior this purpose, viz. the Federal Constitutional Court, which was
inaugurated in 1951, Like the Federal Court of Justice, it sits in Karlaruhe,

The Court in the 5-8. Although still a relative by Young Institution—the Wese German

eyes ofthe public. (Fi C i oy t a iy .
onstitutional Court came into being in 1951-न soon established itself as
an institution in the eyes of the public, chiefly because of its jurisdiction in
fundamental human rights!

Competence. -g. The legal bases for the activity of the Federal Constitutional Court

5-9 : yo

are Articles y2-94, gg and 100 of the Basic Law as well as the Law on the
Federal Constitutional Court of March 12, 1951 (which has however, since
been amended several times). The competencies of the Federal Constitu-
tional Court® can be divided into the following four groups :

(a) Norm-checking procedure; (Article y3(1) para 1).
(b) Dispute procedure of Constitutional organs, between the Federa-
tion and individual Laender, and between Laender: (Article 93(1)

para 2, 3, 4).
(cy Complaint of unconstitutionality: (Article g3(1) para 4a, 4b).
Gl) Other procedures (Article y3, para 5).

Jurisdiction in 5.10. The (West) German Constitution has the following provision
West Germany, that defines the jurisdiction of the Constitutional Court of the Federal

Republic of Germany’ as under :—

“g3. (1) The Federal Constitutional Court (of West Germany) shall
decide :

1. On the interpretation of this Basic Law in the event of dis-
putes concerning the extent of the sights and duties of a
highest federal organ or of other parties concerned who have
been endowed with rights of their own by this Basic Law or
by rules of proccdure of a highest federal organ:

2, In case of differences of opinion or doubts on the formal and
material compatibility of federal law or land law with this
Basic Law, or on the compatibility of Land law with other
federal law, at the request of the Federal Government, of a
Land Government, or of one-third of the Bundestag members:

1, Gilbert Brinkmann, “The West German Constitutional Court (pring 1981), Public
Law, 8

2. Paragraph 5.10, हि,

3. Article 93, Constitution of (Wesy Garmany.


25

3. In case of differences of opinion on the rights and duties of
the Federation and the Laender, particularly in the execution
of federal law by the Laender and in the exercise of federal
supervision. हु

4 On other disputes involving pudlic law, between the Federa-
tion and the Laender, between different Laender or within
a Land, unless recourse to another court exists.

On complaints of unconstitutionality, which may be entered
by any person who claims that one of his basic rights or one
of the mghts under paragraph (4) of Article 2u, under Article
23, 38, 101. 10३ or 104 has been violated by public authority,

4b. On complaints of unconstitutionality, entered by communes
or associations of communes on the ground that their right
to self-government under Article 28 bas been violated by a
law other than a T.and Law open to complaint to the respec-
tive Land Constitutional Court.

5. In the other cases provided for in the Basic Law.

{2) The Fedcral Constitutional Court shall also act in such cases as
are otherwise assigned to it by federal legislation.”

Of particular interest is the provision in article 93, paragraph 4
(supra) of the West German Cunstitution, entrusting the Constitutional
Court with adjudication of disputes involving public law between the
Federation and the Units, between the Units or within a Unit. This would
obviously cover points of administrative law also. [Other disputes where
they involve points of administrative law goto the Federal Administrative
Court].

5.1, “Public Law” in German juristic thought embraces all legal
connections directed towards the State or other authorities vested with
sovereign ania These are, above all, the spheres in which the State is
active on behalf of the public weal. Public law embraces, among other
things, constitutional law, administrative law, penal Law, the rules on court
procedure, international Jaw, cunonical law, the law on judges, the law on
civil servants, police regulations, the law on education. social Jaw, the law
on taxation and the Jaw on industrial administration.'

5.12. The German Federal Constitutional Court, like the Federal
Court of Justice, sits in Karlsrune? The Court takes its place independent
and autonomous, beside the other constitutional organs (the Legislature, the
Federal President and the Federal Government). It has its own budget
within the Federal Budget and has no connection with any particular
Federal Ministry.

5.13. The Judges of the Federal Constitutional Court of West Germany
must he at least 4o years of age, be eligible for election to the Bundestag
and possess the general qualifications for the judiciary. Half of the mem-
bers are elected by the Bundestag and half by the Bundesrat. The Bundes-
rat undertakes the election in the plenary session by a two-third majority. The
Bundestag first sets up a constituent Committee composed of twelve deputies
on the lines of proportional representation. This committee then elects

1. Cf, Wolfgang Heyde, Administration of fusticc in the Federal Republic of Germany
(1971, page 38.

2, Wolfgang Heyde. The Administration of Justice in the Federal Republic of Germany
(1971}, pages 86-87.

Concept of Pubjic

law.

Headquarter and
administrative
matter.

Judges.


Panels in west
Germany.

Traly ३ the jurisdic-
tion of ६
Constitutional
Court.

जान : declaration
of un-Constite-
tionality.

Norway.

26

the judges, a two-thirds majority also being needed. The election of the
judges * political organs is regarded as justified because the Federal Cons-
titutionaf Court is not only a cowt of justice but also a constitutional organ,
and because its jurisdiction extends into the political area. The requirement
of a qualified majority in the election of judges ensures that no specific
political majority brings a one-sided influence to bear on the composition
of the Federal Constitutional Court.!

5.14. From a recent article,* it appears that the court consists of two
panels (Senates) independent of each other, and each now consisting of
cight Judges. Three judges of each panel are elected from the benches of
other Superior federal courts [the Federal High Court, Federal Administra-
tive Court, Federal Labour Court, Federal Social Court and Federal Tax
Court].

§.15. Italy also has a Constitutional Court. The jurisdiction of the
Constitutional Court is thus defined by the Constitution of Italy?

“124, The Constitutional Court decides : on controversies concerning
the constitutional legitimacy of laws and acts having the force of law,
emanating from central and regional government; on controversies
arising over constitutional assia nment of powers within the State, between
the State and the Regions, and between Regions: on impeachments of the
President of the Republic and Ministers, according to the nornis of the
Constitution.”
5.16. The Italian Constitution has an interesting provision as to the
date from which a judicial pronouncement of unconstitutionality by the
Constitutional Courts takes effect. It says* :—

“The decision of the Court is published and is communicated to
Parliament and the interested Regional Councils in order that provi-
sions may be made in constitutional form where considered necessary".

5.77. Norway also has a constitutional court, but the jurisdiction of
that Court seems to he limited to proceedings for implicating holders of
high offices. Here is an extract of the material provision,’ of the Narwe-
gian Constitution.

“86. (First paragraph)

The Constitutional Court of the Realm (Riksrett) shall pronounce
judgment in the first and [ast instance in such actions as are brought
by the Odalsting against members of the Council of State, or against
members of the Supreme Court of Justice (Hoyesterett), or against
members of the Storting for criminal offences which they may have

committed in that capacity.
ऑफ जज iE

(Third paragraph)

“The ordinary members of the Lagting and the permanent members
of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be judges of the Constitutional
Court of the Realm. The provisions contained in section 87 shall
apply to the constitution of the Constitutional Court of the Realm in
each particular case. In the Constitutional Court of the Realm the
President of the Lagting takes the Chair’.

1, Wolfgang Heyde, Administration of Justice in Federal Republic of Germany (1971),

page 89.
Gilbert Brinkmann, “West German Constitutional Court” (Spring 1981), Public Law, 90.

Article 134, Constitution of Italy.
Article 136, Constitution of Italy.
Article 86, Ist and 3rd patagtaphs, Constitution of Norway.

yan


27

5.18. The Constitutional Court of Yugoslavia, apart from. deciding Yugoslavia: ह
question of “conformity” of Jaw and inter-state or jurisdictional disputes, een the
“is alsa required to decide on” the protection of the rights of selfgovernment Court.
and other basic freedoms and rights established by the Constitution, if
these freedoms and rights have been violated by an individual decision or

action of the federal organs'.”

. . c a wees 4. Power to tender
5.19. Further, article 242 of the Constitution (Yugaslavia) has the opinion to Bedera}

following very interesting provision : Assembly.

“The Constitutional Court of Yugoslavia saul keep ttsetf informed

ubout manifestations of interest for the attainment of constitudenality

and legality, and on these grounds shall offer to the Federal Assembly

its opinions and proposals to pass Jaws and to undertake other measures

to secure constitutionality and legality and to protect the rights of self-

government and the other freedoms and rights of the citizens and

organisations.”

5.20. Another interesting provision in the Yugoslavian Constitution Duty of Federal

: F Assembl 7
relates to the duty imposed on the Federal Assembly. Article 245 reads*— Yogosioraa to

“ जे जाई, ८ ५ त॒ bring Jaw into
'245. Whenever the Constitutional Court of Yugoslavia determines conformity with

that a federal law does not conform to the Constitution, the Federa] Jedicial pronown-
Assembly shall bring the law inte conformity with the Constitution cement.

not later than six months from the date of publication of the decision

ot the Constitutional Court.

If, the assembly does not bring the law into confermity with the
Constitution within this period, the law or those of its provisions that
do not conform to the Constitution shall cease to be valid, and the
Constitutional Court of Yugoslavia shall declare them invalid by its

decision.”
: . wee . +: Locus standi in
5.21. The most interesting provision in the Yugoslavian Constitution the Constitutional

is about focus standi, Article 249 reads-— Court in Yugoslavia

“249, A point of constitutionality and legality may he raised before
the Constitutional Court of Yugoslavia by :

(1) The Federal Assembly and the republican assemblies;

(2) The Federal Fxccutive Council and the republican executive
councils, except when the cunstitutionality of laws passed by
their assemblies is heing judged;

(3) The Supreme Court of Yugoslavia and the other Supreme
Courts of the Federation, as well as the republican supreme
courts, if the point of constitutionality aad legality ensures in
court proceedings;

(4) The Federal public prosecutor, if the point of constitutioinality
and legality ensures in the work of the public prosecution;

(5) Yhe republican constitutional courts:

(6) The assembly of ७ social-political community, or a working
or other autonomous organisation, if any of their rights
established by the Constitution of Yugoslavia have been
violated.

1, Article 241, Constitution of Yugoslavia,
2. Article 245, Constitution of Yugoslavia.
3. Asticle 249, Constitution of Yugoslavia,


28

A point of constitutionality and legality may be raised by the
Constitutional Court of Yugoslavia of its own initiative.

“The conditions under which other state organs, organisations and
citizens may institute proceedings or move the institution of proceed-
ings raising a point of constitutionality and legality before the Cons-
titutional Court of Yugoslavia shall he determined by federal law.”

नगर 5.22. In the United States also, the creation of divisions or fanels in
the apex court has been one of the measures discussed, in the context of
specialisation."

Significance of 5.23. The provisions relating to various constitutional Courts on the

provisions “ 10 Continent, whose gist is stated above, may, no doubt, look heterogenous in

Coane t character. But, an deeper reflection, they will be found to yield one common
postulate. They are all based on the postulate that constitutional adjudica-
tion stands in a class by itself, and can be appropriately assigned a separate
status. Such adjudication should not necessarily follaw the same pattern
as ordinary litigation, but can be legitimately regarded as occupying a place
of its own, And, consequently, it would be appropriate to make, for such
adjudication, special provisions not otherwise made for ordinary litigation.
This is in recognition of its special character,

eo 57» »» 5
1, Paragraph 3.7, supra,


CHAPTER 6
RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1. The matters discussed in the preceding Chapters enable us to
formulate the principal issues that need consideration and to make our re-
commendations thereon.

The first issue, of course, is whether there is need for creating a
Constitutional Division within the Supreme Court. {t appears to us, on a
consideration of the nature of constitutional adjudication and its importance
in the Indian context, that if constitutional adjudication is to maintain a
certain level of quality, consistency and coherence, the creation of such a
division is a desideratum. The peculiar characteristics of such adjudication
have been dealt with by us at length in an earlier Chapter,’ and we need
not repeat all that has been stated in that chapter. On giving due weight
to the reasons set out in that Chapter, it appears to be desirable to create,
within the highest court in the country, a machinery of a specialised
character for constitutional adjudication—which is what a constitutional
Division envisages,

It may be mentioned that Dr. Edward McWhinney, ; the eminent
constitutional jurist, who was good enough to give us* the benefit of his
views, has, addressing himself to Q. 1(a) of our questionnaire, expressed
himself thus :—

“Two dominant trends in democratic constitutionalism since
1945, as the record of comparative constitutional law experience amply
demonstrates,. are the institutionalisation of judicially-based — control
of constitutionality. ५ as part of the general constitutional syscm of checks
and balances; and the implementation of that judicial control of cons-
titutionality (judicial review) through creation of a specialised constitu-
tional tribunal having both primary and also appellate review juris-
diction over issues of constitutional law. The question whether or not
to opt for creation of a Special Constitutional Court cannot, however,
be answered in the abstract, for it is a political—legal decision that must
be made in the particular historical context of each national legal
system and on a cost-benefit analysis of the legal pains and gains
thereby involved. In the case of a national legal system that is already
joing concern and fully operational, a disproportionate amount of

a
political and Segal energy may have to be expended and the quest for a

The first issue:
need for creating
special division
of the Supreme
Court.

Special Constitutional Court, and it may be better to opt, instead, -

for the lesser benefis of incremental changes grafted on to the existing
court system and simply augmenting its constitutional review competence
and capacity.”

6.2. We have already indicated our view? that the adoption of the
French System of Constitutional Council is not feasible for Indian condi-
tions. Nor it is necessary to create any other new institution. What is
required is a utilisation of the existing institution, with the above modifi-
cations.

1. Chapter 3, supra.
2. Paragraph 1.7, supra,
3. Paragraph 2.6, supra.

No new institution
to be created:



Recommendation
fer twa Divisions

Court.

The nd issue:
jurisdiction of the
Proposed division,

30

6.3. Accordingly. it is our recommendation that the Supreme Court
in the Supreme Of India should consist of two Divisions, namely —

(a)

(b) Legal Division.

Constitutional Division, and

We are suggesting the name “Legal Division’ as per (b) above, as a
convenient appellation for the Division that will be concerned with all non-
constitutional matters. If any other and more appropriate name can be
devised, there should be no objection to it.

6.4.
to be assigned a part of the business of the Supreme Court within its juris-

If the proposed constitutional division is to be created, it will have

recommendation.’ diction as at present provided. The second issue that falls to be considered
is, what matters should be assigned to that division, In this connection,
there are two principal alternatives to be considered as per (a) and (०)
below -—

{a)

(b)

This division may be entrusted with the adjudication of all public
law cases within the Supreme Court’s jurisdiction. If this alter-
native is accepted, its jurisdiction would comprise—

(i) every case involving a substantial question of law as to the
interpretation of the Constitution,' or an order or rule issued
ander the Constitution;

(ii) every case involvin; 8५ question of constitutional law, not
falling within (i) above;

(iii) every appeal against the decision of a High Court, rendered
under article 226 of the Constitution;

(iv) every appeal against the decision of a tribunal under article
136 of the Constitution (whether such tribunal is created by
« law passed by virtue of article 323A or article 323B of
the Constitution or otherwise), where a question of adminis-
trative law is involved.

In the alternative, only matters of Constitutional law may be

assigned to the proposed Constitutional Division. If this alter-

native is accepted, its jurisdiction would comprise only the items

at (i) and (i!) mentioned in (a) above. The jurisdiction would

then cover only the following :

G) every case involving a substantial question of law as to the
interpretation of the Constitution? or an order or rule issued
under the Constitution, and

(ii) every case involving a question of constitutional law, not
falling within (i) above.

Qur preference is for alternative (b) above. It is easier to define pre-

cisely and locate such matters, confined to constitutional law proper. We
‘appreciate that questions of constitutional and administrative aw often
dovetail into each other, particularly in proccedings under article 226 of
the Constitution (which may reach the Supreme Court on appeal). But,

ion, it would be desirable to make the jurisdiction of the pro-

posed division narrow and compact, at least for the present.

Compare axticle 132 of tha Constitution.

ltem Gi) would be needed for covering, for example, enactments supplementing the
Constitution,

Compare atticle 132 of the Constitution.


31

Accordingly, we recommend that the roposed Constitutional Division
of the Supreme Court should be entrusted” with the cases of the nature
mentioned in alternative (b) above. It follows that other matters coming
to the Supreme Court will be assigned to its Legal Division.

6.5. OF course, the creation of two divisions in the abstract does not
end the matter. For practical implementation of the proposed scheme, it
will be necessary to deal with at least two concrete matters, namely, (1) when
tan a constitutional issue be said to be “involved” and (ii) what will be
the machinery for allocating cases as between the. two divisions,

As to the first matter, which relates to the criterion to be adopted, we
should make it clear that a case should be regarded as “involving a” cons-
titutional issue only when the decision of that issue is absolutely necessary
for the disposal of the controversy. The mere fact that a party, has raised
a constitutional issue is not enough. Although it may not always be possible
to determine, at the outset (at the time of allocation of the case), whether
the case “involves” a constitutional issue in the above sense, it may still be
useful to bear this aspect in mind.

6.6. We may mention that in the United States there have come to
be recognised a number of propositions 8 arding the circumstances in
which the Courts will embark upon a consideration of constitutional ques-
tions. These have becn conveniently collected in the judgment of Brandois
J. in one of the decisions of the U.S. Supreme Court.! One of the proposi-
tions Jaid down is—

It is not the habit of the court ta decide questions of a constitu--

tional nature, unless absolutely necessary to a decision of the case”.

6.7. The above point concerns the criteria to be adopted. It will
also be necessary to create a machinery for allocating cases to the division
concerned, on the criterion mentioned in the preceding paragraphs, The
matter, we think, can be dealt with by a suitable provision in consequential
legislation of the nature already indicated by us, or (if not so dealt with),
by rules to be made by the Supreme Court.

Allocation of cases to the two divisions of the Su preme Court would
not admit of any precise mathematical formula, While clear-cut cases
may not present much difficulty in the matter of allocation, border-line
cases are likely to pose a problem. ‘That apart, there must be safeguard
provided to check the ingenuity of Counsel who might endeavour to invoke
(even if it be too tenuous or artificial an attempt), one or other constitu-
tional provision so as to bring before the Constitutional division a case
which does not properly belong to it. To avoid any such attempt, we
would suggest that in the proposed machinery, a provision should be made
which would require counsel appearing for a party to certify that a prior
decision of constitutional issue is absolutely necessary for the disposal of that
particular case.

In addition, we contemplate the appointment in the Supreme Court
of a Senior District Judge as Additional Registrar, who would, from his
experience and expertise, verify the certificate so issued by counsel. This

lL Ashwander ¥. TVA, (936) 297 U.S. 288, 347; 80 L.Ed. 688, जा.
2. बचाए १. 0.5., 196 U.S. 283, 293; 49 LEd. 482, 485.
3. Paragraphs 4.4 to 4.7, supra.

Criterionta

be

adopted for deter-

mining

When

constitutional
issue involved

Criteria

laid

down in USA.

Machinery
allocation
business,

for
of


32

-would be an additional safeguard and would go a long way in preventing
the Constitutional Division From being cluttered with other cases. In our
opinion, it will be appropriate to, give to the Chief Justice a power to create
such a machinery and to regulate the details of such allocation.

We would, in this context make the following concrete U8 gestions
for settling controversies that may arise as to the division whi should
properly deal with a particular case :—

{i) If, after initial scrutiny of the case by the officer of the Supreme
‘Court, suggested by us above, the case is allocated to the Cons
titutional Division in the Su ipreme Court and if the Constitutional
Division is of the opinion ‘that it is not a fit case to be decided
by it, it may cither dismiss the matter or put up the matter for
orders of the Chief Justice for transferring the same to the Legal
Division to be dealt with by it.

(ii) The same procedure may be followed in the converse case where
# case ig allotted to the legal Division which is of the view that the
matter should be beard by the Constitutional Division.

‘These suggestions are made so that in case of any condlict between
the Constitutional Division and any éther Division in the Supreme Court
as to which Division should deal with the particular case, the matter has
to be placed before Hon’ble Chief Justice of India. for his ultimate decision.

t
Legality of dispo- 6.8. We also consider it necessary that there should be inserted, at the
Salstioned. be appropriate place, a provision which will, in cffect, censure, by employing
suitable legislative language, that the validity of the disposal by a division
of the Supreme Court of a case assigned to it shall not be questioned merely
on the ground that—

(a) the case disposed of by the Constitutional Division did not in-
volve a question. of constitutional law, or

(0) the case disposed of by the Legal Division involved a question
of constitutional law. .

Such situations will be very rare, particularly if the procedure suggested by
us is adopted? Nevertheless, it is proper to have such a provision, in order
to avoid possible challenges.

The third issue that arises concerns the composition of the pro-

The third issue: 69.
regard arc

Composition of pased Constitutional Division. Our recommendations in this
the Constitutionat
Division. as under :-—

(a) The Constitutional Division should consist of not less than seven

Judges, subject to what is stated in (b) below.

(b) (In matters requiring more than seven Judges or similar situations,
the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court should have the power to
assip n temporarily Judges to this division from the other division,
If there is a temporary increase in the work of the other division,
the Chief Justice should have a power to assign temporarily a
Judge from the Constitutional Division to the other Division.

1. This is not a draft of the provision contemplated.

2. Paragraph 6.7, supra.


33

{c): The Judges belonging to and functioning in, the Constitutional
Division should sit en banc for hearing all cases assigned to
that Division.

~ i i ions Hf The fourth issue:
6.10 The fourth issue relates to the qualifications to be required of ae fea A fsee

the judges to be posted to the Constitutional division, We covisag. ९ that judges.
the judges to be so appointed should, besides satisfying the qualifications है
Jaid down in article 124 (3) of the Constitution for appointment as a

judge of the Supreme Court, have special knowledge of, or experience in
constitutional law. We do not, however, recommend the insertion in the
Constitution (or in related ies islation) of any pravisions as such on the

above point. It is expected that when appointing judges to that division,

the above consideration will be borne in mind.

6.11. The fifth issue concerns the posting of judges to each division. The fifth issue:
posting of judges

In this regard two alternatives are open as mentioned in (a) and (b), below: {0 each Division,

(a) A judge may, from the date of his very app ointment, be appoint-
ed to a particular Division for his entire judicial tenure (subject to
such adjustments as may be necessary for temporary periods to meet
temporary situations).

(b) In the alternative, the appointment may be only to the court and
not to a particular division, and the judges may he transferable
inter se.

We prefer the first alternative.

In our view the appointment of prospective judges to a particular
Division should, from the very beginning, be made to that Division. of
course temporary adjustments as aTready recommended,! will be possible.
The procedure for appointment to the Supreme Court as provided in the
Constitution will, of course, continue to apply. subject to what is stated
above.

6.12 Sixthly, as regards the Chief Justice, he should be entitled to sit Chief Justice to
in either division of the Supreme Court, whatever be the division to which be jpmtitled to
he may have been assigned on his initial appointment to the Supreme हर है

Court.

6.13. Apart from the above substantive provisions, transitional provi- Transitional
sions will obviously be required in relation to several matters, including, in Provisions.
particular (and without purporting to be exhanstive)—

(a) the posting to each division of the judges already in office at the
time when the new scheme comes into force; and

(b) saving or other provisions regarding pending cases.

1, Paragraph 6.9, supra.


34

of 6.14. The recommendations that we have set out in this Chapter are

Constitutic + ; : . i"
atial subject to, and are to be read along with, certain recommendations made

and consequential

in an earlier Chapter when discussing the need for constitutional amend-
-ment and consequential provisions.'

(K. K. MATHEW)
Chairman

(. ९. CHATURVEDI)
Member

(DR. M. B. RAO)
Meméer

(P. M. BAKSHI
Part-time Member

(VEPA P. SARATHI)
Part-time Member

(A. K. SRINIVASAMURTHY)
Member-Secretary

Dated 1-3-1984.

i. Pamgaphs 44047, upa


APPENDIX,
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
QUESTIONNAIRE
The background notes appea:ing below each of the questioas do not represent the views
of the Commission and have been appended ५0 as to raise issues and promote discussion. Replies
to be sent ta V. ५, Vaz2, Member Secretary, Law Commission, 730A’ Wing, Shastii Bhavan, New
Delhi-110 001 by Ist June, 1983.

1. (a) Should the Supreme Court be replaced by a constitutional
court dealing exclusively with constitutional matters?

(by Should such a court invariably sit en banc (as against in
benches as is the present practice)?

{c) What should be the qualifications and modalities of appoint-
ment as a Judge of that court?

A federal constitutional court was established in West Germany
in 1951 which has the power to declare statutes unconstitutional
as well as to outlaw political parties which seek to impair or
abolish a free democratic basic order or which endanger the
existence of West Germany. The Court consists of cight Judges
in two panels, six out of them being clected by two-thirds majo-
tity. The Court has been criticised as being subservient to the
Government of the day and if no party enjoys two-third majority,
the selection procedure is reduced to a matter of haggling between
the political parties : ‘If you accept our SPD candidate we
accept your CDU candidate’ (West German Federai Constitu-
tional Court: Political Control Through Judges, Gisbert Brink-
man (1981) Public Law 83 at page 84). The criticism that a single
judge of the Supreme Court can carry some of his colleagues
to his way of thinking and the verdict in a case depends upon
the composition of a bench would to sume extent be ailuted if
the court sits on bench in each and every case, Even in U.S.A.
leading advocates find it difficult to predict the range of first
amendment in view of the change in the personnel of the Court.
(Floyd Abrams quoted in Hindustan Times dt. 23-12-1981

page 12).

2. Are you in favour of the establishment of a Court of appeal as

the final arbitrator of disputes of law (other than constitutional law}

leaving the Supreme Court to concentrate on only constitutional issues?
Views have been expressed that questions of law (other than
constitutional law) and facts should terminate at an intermediate
court of appeal so that the Supreme Court is able to devote its
uninterrupted attention to issues of constitutional law affecting
the various segments of the variegated populace of this sub-
continent.

3. Shoutd the Supreme Court only take up that much work which
it can dispose of within three months ?

The United States Supreme Court receives about 5,000 cases per
year and selects only 200 out of the total filing as being fit for
heating. At least 4 out of 9 justices must vote to hear a case.

35


4

5.
tions

chamber?

36

In England during 1970s the average number of appeals heard
annually by the House of Lords has been only 23 so that the
Judges could devote greater time to matters of public importance.

Do you fee] that the Supreme Court is acting as a third

The judiciary appears to have been divided into two classes: the
activists who believe that if the legislative text is too bold to
be self acting the Judges must make the provisions viable by
evohition of supplementary principles even if it may appear to
possess the flavour of law making (Rajendra Prasad v. State of
U.P. ALR. 1979 SC 916, 924), The other school of strict
constructionalists does not countenance reading into a statute
conditions which are not to be found therein by process of
construction. [Gurbaksh Singh Sibba vy. State of Punjab (1980)
2 SCR 565]. The latter school abhors the theory of judicial
legislation even though on facts of a particular case the court
is satisfied that the existing law requires an urgent reappraisal.
[Techno Impex v. Gebr. Van Weelde. (1981) 2 W.L.R. 821,
at page 842]. Some legal writers feel that the court speculates
and pontificates about society and economics. mostly from non-
evidence, without staff investigation, opinions of experts on law
enforcements, industry and in general without the tools neccssary
for legislative work,

Have the judgments of the Supreme Court tegarding compensa-
payable upon the abolition of feudal rights brought to nought

the process of social reform 7

6.

One of the Judgs of the Supreme Court expressed his view that
the legislation relating to abolition of the zamindari system met
its waterloo at the hands of the judiciary and the benefits of
independence have not percolated to the masses. Even in New
Zealand, views ate being expressed that the decision of the
House of Lords in R. v. Sang (1979) 2 All E.R. 1222 concerning
judicial discretion to exclude evidence on the ground that it was
illegally or unfairly obtained has been criticised as being not
pased on the social conditions prevailing in New Zealand. Justice
Black of the U.S. Supreme Court disfavoured courts assuming
roles such as running school systems and making decisions
about racial proportion of faculty members for which they are
not trained. Justice Stuart was also of the view that courts
should not be in the business of creating new rights, Justice
Black accused his colleagues of allowing the court to turn pro-
fessional criminal Joose to prey upon society with impunity and
a theory is gaming ground that the court has no business ferc-
ing its views on the State because it lacks accountability and is
not the voice and conscience of contemporary society.

Are courts grasping at jurisdiction in matters which le squarely

within the competence of the executive branch of Government?

At the instance of a Congresswoman Elizabeth Holtzman 2 Dis-
trict Court in New York had issued an injunction 10 July, 1973
halting the bombing of Cambodia but the injunction was vacated
immediately 90 that not a single bombing schedule was upset.
(The Brethren Inside the Supreme Court—Bob Woodward and


7.

37

Scott Armstrong—for short “Br ताजा p, 277-278). Opinions
have been expressed that if the Supreme Court had not entertain-
ed the challenge to the Bearer Bond Scheme, Governmient could
have raised resources to the tune of Rs. 1.000/- crores. In New
Zealand fast track legislation Jike the National Development
Act, 1979, limits judicial challenges to works of national im-
portance. The judgment of the Supreme Court stalling the
attempt of the Maharashtra Government te clear up footpaths
in the city, of unauthorised dwellers has eveked a comment
from a former Judge: “Under what law are the trespassers
titled to alternative accommodation? What Judges will do if
trespassers Set up shanties in the specious Jawns of the Court or
their houses?”

Should appointees to judgeships of Supreme Court and High

Courts have a politicul background’?

8.

Earl Warren was a former crusading prosecutor, three-term
Governor of California and Republican Vice-Presidential
nominee with the result that when he was appointed as Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States of America.
some felt that he had a greater impact on the country than even
some Presidents. In Ttaly a constitutional court which has come
into existence in 1955 consists of 15 members. one-third of
whom are nominated [or 12 years term by the Head of the State,
one-third by the legisjature and one-third by the judiciary.

{s the criticism that persons ot humble origin or tow economic

status are not likely to be appointed as High Court Judges in India
justified?

9

The English judiciary is criticised as being inevitably out at
sympathy with modern sacial tendencies and has tong failed to
have any understanding of the working conditions, attitudes and
aspirations of the mass of the population, Most of the English
Judges of High Court and Appeal Court had received public
school education followed by legal studies at Oxbridge and then
called to the Bar. [K. Eddey’s English Legal System (200 Ed.
1977]. In India the Chief Justices ace criticised for recom-
mending lawyers belonging to u particular caste or group for
judgeship.

Will it be correct to say that the Judges of the Supreme Court

nd the High Courts ute not commanding that prestige which they used
to command in the past only because their salaries ate very much
tower than the earnings of leading advocates?

From time to time successive Law Ministers have tuefully

lamented about the unwillingness of the leading advocates to

accept judgeships because of the poor financial benefits. Even
in the United States of America the salaries of Supreme Court
Judges are very miuch lower than the emoluments of leading
lawyers and Justice Fortes had to suffer 90 per cemt cut in his
emoluments when he was appointed 1s Judge of the Supreme
Court. [The Brethren—page 20]. The Chief Justice of the
United States gets a salary of $92,400 while the Associated
Judges got $ 88,700. per annum. Sometimes the Chiet Justices
of the State Supreme Courts were getting salaries more than


38

that of the Chief Justice of the United States. Some bright boys
fresh out of a law school were starting at $ 40.000 a year while
law firm partners in the age group 49-31 were making $ 194.600
on the basis of 90th percentile. Even amongst the federal
Judges who get a salary of about $ 57.500, 7 had resigned in
the 1950s while the number of resignation has risen to 24 during
the past decade. Because of the poor economic compensation
56 of the Federal Judges are continuing to work full time
even though they became entitled to retire as long back as in
June. 1960.

10. Is much of the delay in the courts occasioned by lawyers secking
adjournments on flimsy grounds? .

One of the Judges of the Supreme Court felt that certain bar
associations behave like trade unions and resent refusal of
adjournments to counsel resulting in unnecessary delay. Chief
Justice of a High Court alzo referred to accommodation sought
by leading lawyers disturbing the court calendar.

ft. Should the Supreme Court evolve its own procedure in criminal

cases?
Commenting on the unusual procedure followed by the Supreme
Court in putting court questions to an accused in a murder case.
a legal journal observed that a court or tribunal should not
evolve its own proccdure in cach case according to its opinion
about the circumstances of the case and lay down a precedent
which is not warranted by the Code of Criminal Procedure,
(1980-81) 85 C.W.N. (Editorial Notes) 85.

12. Is not much of the time of the Supreme Court and High Courts
taken up by constitutional writs which ultimately are dismissed?

On an average not mose thaa 5 per cent of the writ petitions
filed in Indian courts ultimately succeed while in West German
constitutional courts the percentage is as low as 1.18,

13. Presently the judicial system is based on the Anglo-Saxan
jurisprudence. Should it be repliced by an Indian system of Adminis-
tration of Justice?

The present judicial system has sometimes been characterized
as a legacy of British Raj and the prized values of British
jurispcudence such as equality before the luw, independence of
the judiciary and judicial review have been disfavoured. Some
have gone hammer and tongs at the contents of the recent
lectures delivered by the American Lawyer Abrams and the
English Judge Lord Templeman labelling it as irrelevant to the
country and branding the invitation to these fectures as
“fratecnising by a handful of judges. advocates and journalists
thwarting the emergence of an indigenous Third World Icgal
system”. (Hindustan Times 29th December, 1981, page 9).
Ever so, no concrete suggstions have hern offered spelling cut
as to what exactly is meant by ‘Indianising of the judicial
system’,



14.

हि

Do you feel that the High Courts grasp at jurisdictions in

matters where the petitioner has not exhausted an equally efficacious
remedy provided by the relevant statute?

15.

16.

The principle that a petitioner must exhaust all the equally
efficacious statutory alternative remedies not being unduly oner-
ous before coming to 4 coutt is well settled. (Than Singit v. Collec-
tor of Customs, ALR. 1964 5.0. 1419; British T
Jasjit Singh, ALR. 1964 S.C. 1451. K. K. Sriva:
Jain, ALR. 1977 $.C, 1703), However, the ambit of the expres-
sion ‘equally efficacious’ has given rise to difficulties of interpre-
tation, [Malwa Vanaspati & Chemical Co. Ltd., Indore ४.
Union of India, 1980 M.P. LJ. 84. Meteor Satellite Ltd. v.
11.0. Companies Circle-IT. Ahmedabad (1980) 121 LTR.
311 (Guj. Tapan Kumar Jana v. The General Manager, Cal-
cutta Telephones. 1980 Lub. LC. 508; Bavaji and Motibbai v.
Inspector of Central Excise. 83 C.W.N. 689: Rabindra Natit
Mukherjee v. 5. R. Das. 1979 Lab. LC, 1287; Ashok Indus-
tries v. Slate of Bihar, A.LR. 1979 Patna 217; Dharam Singh
vy. Bank of India. [979 Lah. 1.C. 1079; K. 5. Siddalingaiah v.
State of Karnataka, AJ-R. 1979 Kar. 190). Justice Frank-
furter felt that it is imperative that the docket be kept down
so that its yolume dovs not preclude wide adjudication. In Ei
Jand the House of Lords has been hearing about 33 appeafs per
annum: while looking at the pendency in our higher court, a
criticism is being levelled that they ‘assume role of a knight
errant’ grasping at jurisdiction by entertaining any cuse.

Can the judicial process be scientized?

Recent trends in computer technology and work af robots has
given sise to the question : “If we can Jund on the moon, can
we not solve our disputes by technology?” There are attempts
to computer-predict appellate decisions by temote psycho-
analysis of the panel of judges ie. by reading the tea leaves in
their prior opinions. (Needed > A judicial welcome for tech-
nology—Star Warts or State decisions. by Hon. Howard एप.
Harkey, 79 Federal Rules Decisions 1979, page 209).

Do you feel that some leading advocates take up most of the

court's working time atguing for interim relief in cases having no
merits and thus upset the day’s regular fixtures?

17.

In April 1981, Chief Justice of India sharply pulled up four
Senior Advocates fur taking aver two hours of the working time
of a five Judge Bench on a mere application for interim stay
which was ultimately refused.

Has the practice of ‘Bench lixation’ by lawyers, taken rovis in

the Supreme Court and the High Courts?

Two of the Judges of the Supreme Court have brought into
focus a current practice among the lawyers to ensure that cer-
tain cases are listed before a particular Bench and that in collu-
sion with the Registry officials non-urgent matters are given
precedence.


18.

40

Are certain advocates being related to sitting Judges carning by

way of ‘negative practice” inasmuch as they are engaged only to ensure
that the matter gets transferred from the court of a particular Judge?

19.

Rule 6 of Chapter 11 of the Bar Council of India Rules states
that an advocate shall not cater appearance or practise before
a court if the Judge is relaicd to him as father, grandfather. son.
grandson. uncle. brother, nephew. first cousin. husband, wife.
mother, daughter, sister, aunt, nicce, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law. brother-in-law, daughter-in-law or sister-in-law.
It is alleged that clients whe do not wish their case to be heard
by 8 particular bench engage one of the listed relatives prac-
tising in that court to file a vakalatnama on their behalf and
secure a transfer of the cuse.

Are over-zealous Government departments responsible for in-

creasing the court's calendar?

20.

21.

When the Inland Revenue pursucd an appeal agitating the
question whether a teacher who was being paid £ 13 as mileage
allowance for driving to meetings outside her hours of duty is
liable to pay tax on that allowance. Mr. Justice Walton gave vent
to the uncomfortable feeling that the Crown spends so much
time and effort persceuting minnows that it is smali wonder
there is no energy ली. to pursuc the real sharks.

Should the Supreme Court encourage public interest litigation?

Dinosaur cases of Bombay pavement dwellers. conditions in
women’s re-settlement homes in Delhi and Agra flesh trade
hhaye evoked mixed reaction, Some have dubbed those cases
as political stuats and an attempt by journalists to run the
country; while others have commended the Court for taking
issues affecting millions of people.

Will it facilitate disposal of a greater number of cases if oral

arguments are restricted to half an hour cach side?

22.

As against the practice in our Higher Courts where counsel
address the court for months together, the United States Supreme
Court permits oral arguments for half an hour on cither side.
An exception was made in desegregation cases where twice the
normal time was allowed.
(The Brethern pp. 2, 41).

Will a procedural requirement making | obligatory on counsel

to file written briefs to cut down the oral arguments?

Fixation of half an hour time for arguments in the American
courts is rendered possible because of their practice of insisting
upon briefs {called Brandeis brief). Preparation of briefs will
lend to exactitude and narrowing dowa of matters in controversy
as well as afford opportunities far young lawyers to do rescarch.
As the briefs would be cventually printed by some law journals
counsel would necessarily have to devole more time at the desk
and the practice of reading law reports in court in extense

would disappear.


23.

41

Should some appeals be disposed of without hearing ora!

arguments?

24.

In the Supreme Court of Lowa, 66 cases were submitted to the
court in 1973 without oral arguments which total increased to
128 in 1974, Even where oral arguments were permitted law-
yers were allowed 10 to 15 minutes for arguing 2ach side and
an additional five minutes for appellant's rebuttal. (Appellate
Congestion in Iowa : Dimensions and Remedies Hon'ble Mark
Me Cormick 25 Drake Law Review 1975-76 9. 133)

Will it not make for better interpretation of statutes if the rule

putting an embargo against citing of debates in Parliament as a legiti-
mate aid to construction is abrogated?

25.

The time honoured practice of the English rules of interpreta~
tion of statutes that Hansard can never be relied by the court
in construing a statute or for any other purpose is being chal-
tenged in England. Lord Denning thought of a way of over~
coming the obstacie by referring to the debates queted in the
works of jurists [Regina ४. Local Commissioner, Ex-parte
Brandford Council (1979) } 0.8. 387]. But this device of look-
ing into a text book containing the quotation from Hansard
has been criticised by a writer as ‘not edifying’ [Statutory
Reform : The Draftsman and the Judge—{1981) 30 LC. [.. 0.
141 at 163], The Indian Law closely followed the English
Law {Administrator General of Benga) v. Premlal Mullick,
ILR 22 Calcutta 788 (PC) pp. 799, 800]. But pleas have been
made for whittling down the rule (State of Mysore v. R. V.
Bidap A.LR, 1973 S.C. 2555 Fagu Shaw y. State of West Bengal
ALR. 1974 S.C. 613 at 629). But sometimes even speeches
of Ministers while piloting a Bill are not looked into [Satpal &
Co. v. Lt. Governor of Delhi (1979) 4 §.C.C, 232 at 245). Lord
Devlin has cited an instance [Stafford v. D.P.P. (1974) A.C. 878]
where had their Lordships looked back at the parliamentary
debates in which some of them had themselves participated in
their legislative capacity they would have seen that Parliament
had not the slightest intention of making a great change in the
law [lecture delivered at All Souls College. Oxford on 2nd May,
1978 quoted in Devlin : The Judge (1979) pp. 148.

Should the present practice of plurality and separate judgments

be substituted by one of writing—

(a) Per curiam opinion:
(9) a single judgment representing the highest common deno-
minator of the bench;

(c} one majority and one minority opinion?

The separate opinions delivered by the Supreme Court in Delhi
Laws Act case (ALR. 1951 S.C, 332) covering 370 pages of
reports had created confusion about the ratio decidendi in the
casc and even Chief Justice Pataniali Sastri felt that no particular
principles were laid down (Kathi Raning Rawat V. Saurashtra,
ALR. 1952 $.0. 123), It was given to Bose J. to analyse the
several situations and indicate how the judges split on each
situation (Rajnarain Singh y. Chairman, Patna Administration


26.

42

Committee. ALR. 1954 S.C. 569), The plurality decision re-
garding death penalty case guve rise to considerable difficulties
in the United States of America [George v, Georgia, 428 U.S.
153 ; Furman v. Georgia, 408 U.S. 238) as well as in cur
Supreme Court (Rajendra Prasad vy. State of U.P, ALR. 1979
S.C. 916), In the area of obscenity confusion prevails in the
U.S.A. as ta whether the “prurient interest” test has been re-
placed by “Redeeming social valuc” test (Roth v, United States,
354 U.S. 476: Fanny ५. Hill, 383 US. 413. United States ४.
Marks. decision of Court of Appeals far Sixth Circuit. quoted
in Columbia Law Review; May 1980 at page 777). Lord
Denning was also not permitted by the other Law Lords in the
Privy Council to publish his dissenting opinion [In Re : ‘Parlia-
mentary Privilege Act, 1770. 1958 AC. 331, Lord Denning:
The Family Story (1981). pages 192-194],

Will it not make for certainty in Law if the higher courts write

shorter judgments?

27,

As against 243 pages of Judgment in a death penalty case by
the United States Supreme Count, our Supreme Court has
written a 782 pages judgment in Keshvananda Bharti v. Statc
of Kerala (1973) 4 SCC 225. But in a later case of death penalty
(Gregg v. Georgia 428 US 153) when the United States Supreme
Court chose 10 write per curiam opinion it covered hardly two
pages of the Law reports, Lord Kilbrandon has observed that
Jack of economy in judgment writing is a notoriously discte-
ditable feature of the English jurisprudence, [Cassell & Co. v.
Broome (1972) 1 All E.R. 80) H.L.].

Should an appellate court necessarily write a reasoned judg-

ment—

28.

29.

(a) in every case irrespective of its outcome?

(b) only when it reverses the verdict nf the lower court?
The practice of dismissing criminal appeals in limine with one
word “dismissed” has been frowned upon by the Supreme Court
{K. K. Jain ५. State of Maharashtra (ALR. 1972 S.C. 243),
Sakharam v. State of Maharashtra (1969) 3S.C.R. 730, Shaikh
Mohd. Ali v. State of Maharashtra (A.LR. 1973 S.C. 43),
Shankar v. Gangubai (ALR. 1976 S.C. 2506). The
practice in the United States Supreme Court of passing a four
word order “the judgment is affirmed” has been criticised by
Professor Gerald Guather as being ‘irresponsible’ anc ‘lawless’.
(Doc ¥. Commonwealth's Attorney, The Brothren page 425),

Should not the statute provide for only one appeal?

Considering the congestion in courts views have been expressed
that if faflibifity is the raison detre providing for two appeals. a
litigant would not be satisfied even if the statute cenfers upon
bim the right to file multiple appeals.

Should matters iavolying a point of law of general public

importance leap-frog directly to the Supreme Court?

Under the (U.K.} Administration of Justice Act, 1969, appeals
leap-frog direct to the House of Lords under certain circums-


44

32. Should the statute provide for a compuisory attempl to arrive
at a compromise at the appellate stage’?

In U.S.A. a central funded scheme called the “Civil Appeal
Management Plan (CAMP)” was launched in December. 1973
to ascertain whether the appellate work load could be reduced
by attempts to compromise made by an independent agency. The
judges agreed that the CAMP did cause a reduction in the
average time taken for the disposal of appeals because the dis-
cussion which the staff counse) had with the opposing parties
improved the quality of counsel preparation and narrowing down
of the matters in controversy, [Jerry Goldman, Asstt. Professor
of the Political Science, Northwestern University, Columbia
Law Review (1978) Vol. 78, page 1209].

33. The above questions mainly cover the problems of fresh institu.
tions. As regards the disposal of arrears, can you suggest any method
other than appointment of retired judges’?

The proceeding questians focus on reducing fresh admissions
and quicker disposal of pending matters. As regards the huge
backlog of cases, a more or Jess uniform opinion has heen ex-
pressed that unless sufficient number of judges are appointed.
the arrears canmot be cleared.

34. Aay other matter?

It would be appreciated that it is well-nigh impossible to compress ard encompassin 8
questionnaire of this type all the prodlems relating tothe judicial system and hence your
comments on any facet of the matter would he highly appreciated. Chief Justice of India has
welcomed an objective analysis of the functioning of the judicial institutions in the country if a
constructive chang? wis dzitved in! outlook. (Presidential Address : Ceatenary Celebrations
of the Natarn Marathi Vidyalaya, Pune : 1-1-1982).

GIPN—S2—~i16 LAD (ND)/34—4-3.35 625,


30.

43

tances. Antcrican Cyanamid Co, ६. Upjohn Co.. (1970) 3 All
E.R. 785}. a case concerning 1 petition for revocation of a patent
was the first Seap-frog’ appeal heard by the House of Lords
Lord Denning in a recent of A.C.T. Construction Ltd. ५.
Customs & Excise Commissioners [(1981) | W.L.R. 49 at 54]
was dismayed at the prospect of different tribunals in U.K.
giving different culings as to whether under-pinning work which
involved construction of additional foundation fell within the
ordinary und natural meaning of the word ‘maintenance’ and
wondered what Customs and Excise authorities should do when
they are faced with conflicting decisions of various tribunals.

a

Should judicial review. revision or appeal against interlocutory

order be abolished?

31.

Recently, the House of Lords observed that matters reaching
them for preliminary decisions do not serve the cause of justice
[Alten v. Gulf Gil Ltd., (1981) 2 W.L.R. 188 (H.L.) at page 190].
In the United States of America, the “final judgment rule” has
‘been evolved to maximise available judicial resources and to avoid
piecemeal litigation (U.S. v. Nixon. 418 U.S. 682 at 690
(1974)]. The question as to what is an interlocutory order and
whether an appeal lies has also given rise to difficulties (Amar
Nath v. State of Haryana, ATR. 197 S.C. 2185 at 2190:
Mohan Lal y. Prem Chand. ALR. 1980 HP, 36 at 38: Pranab
Kumar ७, Yusuf Ali, 1979 Cr. L.J. 95 at 98; Inayatullah Rizvi
y. Rahimatullah, 1981 Cr, LA. 1398).

To what extent is the criticism that the Supreme Court is rever-

sing the High Courts in matters falling withm latter's discretion
justified?

A judge of the Supteme Court expressed displeasure over the
manner in which the Supreme Court interferes in small matters
and thus arrogates to itself the jurisdiction of all subordinate
courts and try to do evervthng itself, In U.K. the Privy Council
in a 34 page judgment dismissed an appeal in a murder case after
refusing the connsul to make a new point [Ragho Prasad v. The
Queen. (1981) | W.L.R. 469] though in another murder case
when an injustice of substantial character was brought to their
notice, the Privy Council permitted a new point to be canvassed
{Ajodha v. The State. (1981) 2 All E.R. 193 at 292]. While
interfering with a conviction in a Magistrate's court for पम्म
driving offence the High Court in England observed that it
was the first case in which the sentence by the Crawa Court
had been challenged on the ground that it was harsh and oppres-
sive. (R. v. Crown Court at St. Albans 1981 1 Al) ER. 802
at 804). American Law Professors are dismayed at the ten-
deacy of the Appellate courts in allowing appeals and quote
the admonition of a famous judge ‘Never unnecessarily make a
tonkey out of a trial judge. Remember. he may be as good as
a lawyer 98 you are’. (Appellate Review of Trial Court Dis-
cretion 79 Federal Rules Decisions. p. 173 at 174). Sometimes
strictures have been passed on the trial judge by the House of
Lords describing his decision as ‘astonishing’ [B. v. W. (1979)
3 All ER. 83].


ERRATA

Page (i) Inline 1. for ‘“MATHEU” read “MATHEW”.
Page 1 — In para [.2, in line 18, for ‘controvesy' read ‘controversy’.
Page 2 — In para 1.6. in line 9, for ‘for’ read ‘far’.
Page 2 — In para !.7, in line 7, for ‘M. N. Seervai’ read “H. M. Seervai’.
Page 4 — In para 2.2, (i inline |, for ‘state’ read ‘stated’.
(i) inline 9, for ‘siting High Courts’ read ‘sitting High Court’.
Page 5 — In para2.5, inline 3, for ‘anticipate the’ read ‘anticipate that the’.
Page 10 — In pata 3.13, inline 13 for ‘hence’ read ‘bancs®.
Page 12 — In para 3.17, in line (7. for held? read ‘hold’,
Page 15 — In footnote | for 2, 23' read ‘3.23".
Page 16 -- In para 3.33, (i) in line 2, for ‘exiomatic' read ‘axiomatic’.
Gi) in line 3, for ‘require’ read ‘requires’.
Page 16 — In para 3.34, in line 10, for ‘discenting’ read ‘dissenting’.
Page 16 — In para3.36, inline 2, for nut’ read ‘nor’.
Page 16 — In footuote 3, (i) for (1959) U. S. 437" read (1959) 359 ए. 5. 437",
(ii) for ‘discenting’ read ‘dissonting’.
Page 16 — In footnote 4, for ‘Policies’ read ‘Politics’.
Page 17 — In para 3.37, (i) inline 14, for ‘grouping® read ‘groping’.
(ii) in Fine 18, for ‘Sr’. read १01. ,
Page i8 — In para 3.39, inline 3. for ‘brilliances’ read ‘brilliance’.
Page 18 — In para 3.41, inline 5, for ‘ordiary’ read ‘ordinary’.
Page 23 — In para 5.4, in lines 10 and 14, for ‘procurour’ read ‘procureur’.
Page 23 -- In para 5.5., inline 9, for ‘execution’ read ‘executive’.
Page 27 — in para 5.21, inlines 11 and 14, for ‘ensures’ read ‘ensues’.
Page 29 — In para 6.1, in line 34, for ‘expended and the’ read ‘expended on the’.
Page 32 — In para 6.8, in Jine 2, for ‘censure’ read ‘ensure’.
Page 35 — 196 4 from top, for 1983’ read 1982".
Page 35 — In para 1, in line 23, for ‘on bench’ read ‘en bane’.
Page 35 — In para 2, inline है, for ‘arbitrator’ cad ‘arbiter’.
Page 36 — in para 3, inline 2, for ‘23’ read +33’.
Page 36 — In para 4, in line 12, for +2 SCR S65" vead 2 SCC 565°.
Page 37 — In paca 6, inline 12, for ‘specious’ read ‘spacious’.
Page 37 — In para 9, (i) in line 13, for ‘Associated’ read ‘Associate’.
(ii) in line 14, for ‘gov’ read get’.
Page 40 — {n para 22, in line 6, for ‘lend' read ‘lead’.
Page 42 -- In para 25, in line 3, for ‘George’ read *Grege’.
Page 42 — In para 27, (i) in line 7. fer “AVR 1972 807 read ‘AIR 1973 SC

(i) in tine 8, / (1969) 3 SCR 730° read (1969) 3 SCC 730°
(iii) in dine L4, for *Brothren’ read ‘Brethren’.

Page 44 — In pata 33, in line 4, for ‘proceeding’ read ‘preceding’.
GIPN—S2—116 LAD/ND/§4—29.8-85-625,