LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
NINETY-SIXTH. REPORT
| ON
REPEAL OF CERTAIN —
OBSOLETE CENTRAL ACTS.

‘MARCH1984


JUSTICE K. K. MATHEW. 1.0. No. 2(11)/83-L.C.

New Delhi,
Dated, the 19th March, 1984.

My dear Minister,

lam forwarding herewith the Ninety-Sixth Repor: of the Law Commission
on “Repeal of Certain. Obsolete Central Acts”.

The subject was taken up by the Law Commission suo motu. The need for
taking up the subiect is explained in para 1.3 cf the Report

The Commission is indebted to Shri P. M. Bakshi, Part-time Member, and
Shri A. K. Srinivasamurthy, Member-Secretary. for their valuable assistance
im the preparation of the Report.

With regards.
Yours sincerely.
(Sd.)
(K. K, MATHEW)

Shri Jagannaih Kaushat.
Minister of Law. Justice & Company Affairs.
New Delhi.

Encl: 96th Report



CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

3

CONTENTS

INPRODUCLORY . .

N RECOMMENDING

OWE!
MENTS

PRINCIPLES FOL
REPEAL OF ENA

SPECHTIG CENTRAL ACTS CONSIDERED
COMMENTS RECEIVED ON THE WORKING PAPER

GONCLUSION AND SUMMARY OF BECOMMEN-
DATIONS.

Page


CHAPTER |
INTRODUCTORY
REPEAL CE CER ALS OBSOLETE CENTRAL ACTS

1.1. 1015 Report is concerned with the need for the repeal of certain Scope
‘Central Acis which have become obsoleic in view of subsequent legislation,
or which have become anomaious in view of changed conditions, and which
therefore need to be repeaicd,z Tite Law Commission has taken up the sub-
ject on 18 own. The reasons tor iaking up the matter for consideration will
be apparent trom what follows,

1.2. Every legislaiure is expected to undertake what may be called the Periodical
periodical spring-cleaning of lie corpus of its statute law, in order that dead and repeal
wood may be removed and citizens may be spared the inconvenience of taking of statute
notice of laws which have ceased to bear any relevance to current conditions, law.
‘This process, which is important in itsclf, assumes — still greater importance
in modern times when statute law is growing in bulk and magnitude. The statutes
that are not obsolete are formidable enough in size and number. In order
that the statute book may not grow out of all proportion, it is desizable that
statutes that are obsoleie should be removed from the statute book. .

1
1.3, At this stage, it may be usetul to mention that a legisiative enact- Need for

ment cannot be rendered ineffective by mere non-use or obsolescence. The Tepealing

Jong desuetude of a law does not amount to its repeal.' This itself is a Obsolete

consideration for undertaking irom time to time measures for expressly re- हे

pealing enactments that might have become obsolete or spent. Moreover, the

continuance of such enaciments ciuiiers the statute book and tends to create

confusion in the minds of those who have an occasion to consult statute law.

It is for this reason that mosi countries, as slated above,’ effect a periodic

sevision of their laws, so ‘that the statute book is cleared of laws which are

obsolete, unconstitutional or spent.*

1.4. By tradition, such action, intended to revise the statute book, has Function
come to be described as “statute law revision”.,,The classical exposition of the of siatute
function of Statute law revision iat of Lord Westbury, Lord Chancellor, law _
In 1863, speaking in the debate on the Statute Law Revision Pill, Lord Westbury TV'S!"
thus outlined the principles upon which statute law revision should be based:'

“The Statute Book shoud be revised and expurgated--weeding away
all those enactments that are no longer in force and arranging and classifying
what is left under proper heads, bringing the dispersed Statutes together, elimima-
ting jarring and discordant provisions, and thus getting a harmonious whoie
instead of a chaos of inconsistent and contradictory enactments.”

1.5. Students of statute law are well acquainted with Repealing and Repealing
Amending Acts.’ In England. the first statute Law Revision Act was passed Acts in
in 1856. It repealed 120 obsolete statutes.’ Curiously, one of the Acts re- Engiand.
pealed by that Act was an Act of 1388 (12 Richard 2, ९. 13), “for the punishment
of them which caused corruption near a city or great town, to corrupt the air.’

1 Perrin v. United States, (1914) 58 Lawyers Ed. 691.

2 Paragraph 1.2, supra. .

3 Note in (1930) 44 Harward Law Review 1309.

4 Lord Westbury, Parliamentary Debates, 3rd Series, Vol. 1 71, Col. 775, quoted by
Lord Simon of Glaisdaie and Webb, “Constitution and Statute Law Revision” (1975)
Public Law 285, 291.

5 Halsbury’s Laws of England, 3rd Edition, Vol. 36, pages 461, 476.

6 Statute Law Revision Act. 1865 (19 & 20) Vict ०, 6. .

7 Lord Simon of Glaisdale and Webb, “Consolidation and Statute Law Revision” (1975)

Public Law 285, 291.



2

Repealin2
Acts in
India.

Need for
repealing
various
Acts dealt
with in the
Report.

Working
Paper
issued by
the Law

Commission.

{Act

4.6. Similar process has been undertaken from ime to time in almost
all countries. The introduction and initiation of repealing Acts ai intervals is
a process guite familiar to legislative draftsmen in most countries, In India,
the first two such Acis were passed’ in 1866 and 1870. The last such Act
seems to have been passed in 1978.?-".

1.7. However, notwithstanding the fact that this process has been under-
taken periodically, there—still survive on the Indian Statute Book certain Central
Acts which need to be looked into from the point of view of the removal of dead
wood from the statute book. The present study is an attempt to examine Central
Acts from the above angle. Such an examination accords with one of the tasks
of the Law Commission, namely, to revise Central Acts of general importance
so as to simplify them, to remove anomalies. ambiguities and irregularities and

to bring them up-to-date.

1.8. Before concluding this introductory chapter, it may be mentioned
that in order to invite informed opinion on the subject, the Law Commission
had prepared a Working Paper inviting State Governments, High Courts,
Bar Associations and other interested persons and bodies. including the Legis-
lative Department of the Government of India in the Ministry of Law,’ to send
their comments on the Working Paper. The Commission is glad to note
that the views received on the Working Paper favour the repeal of the various
Acts whose repeal is being recommended in this Repori. A gist of the com-
ments received will be found in a later chapter of this Report.» The Commis-
sion is grateful to all those who have taken the trouble of sending their views.

1 Repealing Act (11 of 1866) and Repealing Act (14 of 1870).

2 Repealing and Amending Act (23 of 1978).

3 Last 3 repealing Acts prior to 1978 were Acts 58 of 1960, 52 of 1964 and 56 of 1974.

+ Law Commission of India, Working Paper on the Repeal of certain obsolete Central
Acts, dated 30th September. 1983.

> Chaper 4 infra.


CHAPTER 2

PRINCIPLES FOLLOWED IN RECOMMENDING REPEAL OF
ENACTME)

2.1. In dealing with the question whether a particular Act should he
repealed or should be allowed to continue on the statute book, we have kept
before us certain considerations. which it would be useful to set cut.

Tn the first place, statutes which are no longer needed, should be repealed.

Secondly, statutes which have practically been superseded or covered by
subsequent legislation should be repealed.

In the third place, statutes which, though not clearly conflicting with
Fundamental Rights, are opposed to the Directive Principles of State Policy.
should be carefully considered, and the question whether there are any weishty
reasons for continuing them should be investigated.

2.2. The principles to be followed in the setection of enactments for in-
clusion in Statute Law Revision Acts afford an interesting tonic for discussion.
In England, these principles used to be set out in a memorandum that was
prefixed to Statute Law Revision Bills.’ The memorandum was in the following

* (or substantially similar) terms:?

“The first schedule is intended to comprise (as the preamble to the Bill
states). besides superfluous words of enactment, enactments which have ceased
to be in force otherwise than by express specific repeal, or have by lapse of
time or otherwise become unnecessary, and also such parts of titles, preambles.
recitals, and enacting words as are intended he omitted in future editions of
the statutes under the authority of the Bill.

“J, For the purpose of the schedule, six different classes of enactments
are considered as having ceased to be in force, although not expressly and
specifically repealed: namely. such enactments as ate:—

1. Expired—that is. enactments which having been originally limited
to endure only for a specified period by a distinct provision, have
not been cither perpetuated or kept in force by continuance, or
which have merely had for their object the continuance of pre-
vious temporary enactments for periods now gone by cMluxion of time:

2. Spent—that is, enactments snent or exhausted in operation by the
accomplishment of the purooses for which they were passed, either
at the moment of their first taking effect or on the happening of
some event or one the doing of some act authorised or required:

3. Repealed in genera’ terms—that is. repealed by the operation of an
enactment expressed only in general terms. as distinguished from
an enactment specifving the Acts on which it is to overate:

. Virtually repealed--Where an carlier enactment is inconsistent with.

B

or is rendered nugatory by, a later one:

5. Superseded- Where a later enactment effects the same purposes as
an earlier one by repetition of its terms or otherwise:

6. Obsolete--where the state of things contemplated by the enactment
has ceased to exist. or the enactment is of such a nature as to be
no longer capable of being put in force. regard being had to the alteration
of political or social circumstances.

1 See, for example. Statute Law Revision Acts, 1908, 1927, 1948. 1950 and 1953 (Eng).
2 Craises. Statute Law (1963). pages 356. 557.
3

Considera-
tions borne
in mind.

Prisiciples
for Statute
daw revision
व Ud



Proposals
confined to
matters in
Union or

/ Concurrent
List.

Hindu Widows
Remaiiiage
Act, 1856.

Converts"
Marriage
Dissoiution
Act, 1866.

“IL. For the purpose of the schedules, enactments are considered unneces-
sary where the provisions are of such a nature as pot to require at the present
day statutory authority.

“Where any enactment is comprised in the schedules on any ground not
above explained, the ground of repeal su from the expression
used in the third column of the schedule to the tich is. however, not a
matter for consideration by the courts.”

2.3. Reveriing to India, we may slate here that in preparing the list
of enactments to be repealed, we have excluded enaciments whose subject matter
clearly falls within the Constitution, Seventh Schedule, State List. Even as
tegards enactments relating to matiers falling wihin the Union List or the
Concurrent List. some of them have been excluded from consideration because
of certain special reasons, which will be indicated at the appropriate place.

2.4. Special observations are necessary as regards one of. the Central
Acts, namely, the Hindu Widow’s Remarriage Act, 1856. This is an enactment
on which the Law Commission has already forwarded a repori.'. The Com-
mission, after a detailed consideration of various relevant Central Acts, recom-
mended repeal of the Act of 1857 in its Report on the subject. The Report
has now been implemented. Hence. the Act*need not be discussed.

2.5. Special mention is also required of the Converts’ Marriage Dissolu-
tion Act, 1866. On this Act also, the law Commission forwarded long ago
a Report to the Government, containing detailed recommendations for replacing
his Act by a fresh legislative measure? This Report awaits implementation.
The reasons for the recommendation are set out in detail in the Report. We
have considered it unnecessary to mention that Act while enumerating the
various Acts that need to be considered for repeal.’

1 Law Commission of India, 8151 Report (Hindu Widows’ Remarriage Act. 1856).
2 Law Commission of India. 18th Report (Converts’ Marriage Dissolution Act. 1866),
3 Chapter 3. infra


CHAPTER 3

SPECIFIC CENTRAL ACTS CONSIDE

It is now time to indicate the results of our exemination ef specific Central

Acts. In the ensuing few paragraphs. we shall discuss not only the Central Acts
that appear to require repeal as a result of our cxemination. bu’ also certain
- other Central Acts which, at the first sight. may appear to be appropriate
for repeal, but in respect of which repeal may creaie certain difficulties. Taking
note of these difficulties, their repeal could noi be recommended. Nevertheless
It seemed to us desirable to record the conclusion (though negative) with regard
to such Acts, alongwith the reasons for no! recommending their repeal. Accord-
ingly, the subsequent paragraphs of this Chapter cover not only Central Acts
which are recommended for repeal. but also a few other Central Acts not recom-
mended to be repealed. but examined for the purpose of the nresent Renort.’

1. Abolition of Privy Council Jurisdiction Act, 1949

The Act provides for the abolition of the appellate jurisdiction of the
Privy Council and for connected matters. It was passed as Constititent Assem-
bly Act 5 of 1949, Prima facie. it would appear that the Act. having no
practical utility now, should be repealed. Article 395 of the Constitution
while repealing the Indian Independence Act, 1947 and the Government of
India Act, 1947 and the Government of India Act. 1935 as well as enactments
supplementing these enactments, expressly excludes from its scone the Abolition of
Privy Council Jurisdiction Act. 1949. Probably, this was done at that time since
appeals filed before the Privy Council before the commencement of the Constitution
might (which were in some cases allowed to continue in the Privy Council
by Section 4 of the Act) he pending before the Privy Council. and it was not
considered proper to repeal the Act until disposal of the pending appeals.
This is not the position now. The Act may be regarded as spent.

The subject matter of the Act falls within the Concurrent List. Entry 110
(Administration of Justice) and the residuary entry.

Reasons for recommending reneal.—As the Act is no longer required.
it may be repealed. subject to what is siated in the next two sentences.

Before repealing the Act it should be ensured that its repeal does ‘not
revive the jurisdiction conferred on the Privy Council by any Act of the U.K.
Parliament which itself might not yet have been formally repealed after indenen-
dence. In this context, it will be particularly necessary to consider (a) enact-
ments relatine to the judicial Committee. passed by the U.K. Parliament between
1830 and 1850,2 and (b) to consider and examine whether these enactments
have not already been revealed by the Central Act of 1907 that ‘vas enacted

to repeal certain U.K. Acts.‘

2. Continuance of Legal Proceedings Act, 1948 (38 of 1948)

This Act authorises the continuance of certain proceedings against the
(newly created) Dominion of Indian or (newly created) Provinces.

Paragraph 12(3) of the Indian Independence (Rights, Property and Liabi-
lities) Order, 1947, made a vrevision for the con‘immance of legal proceedings
against the Government after the “anoointed dav” (15th August, 1947), but
only in resnect of any liability of undivided India or 9 nert thereof. The
paragraph did not cover proceedings in respect of any right of undivided
Hindia. Ordinance 12 of 1948 was promulgated to remove this defect. This Act
‘replaces this Ordinance.

1 The Acts are dealt with in the alphabetical order.
2 See the Law Commission of India. Sth Report (British Statutes Applicable to India).

3 The British Statutes (Application to India) Act, 1960 (58 of 1960),
+ Repeal to be considered subject to verification of the aspects mentioned in the para-
graph in the text.

5

2-1 M of LJ & CAND At


It is enough to quote section 3 of the Act, which provides as follows:-

“3. Any legal proceedings which immediately before the appointed day.—-

(a) were pending by or agains: the Secretary of State in any Court
within the te’ritories which as from the appointed day became the territories
of India by virtue of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Indian Independence
Act, 1947 (10 and 11 Ceo. Vi. ७. 30). and “(b) were in respect of any right of
India or any part of India. shall

(i) If the right in question was that of the Governor-General-in-Council
be continued by or against the Dominion of India :

(ii) if the right in question was that of the former province of Bengal or
the Punjab, be continued by or against the Province of West Benga!
or East Punjab, as the case may be: and

(iii) if the right in question was that of any Governor's Province other
than Bengal, the Punjab, the North West Frontier Province. or Sind.
be continued by or against that Province.”

The subject falls within Concurrem List Entry 13 (Civil Procedure).

Reasons for recommending repeal.—The proceedings to which section 3
of the Act (the operative part) applies must, by now, have been disposed of.
Subject to verification of the faciual position in this regard.’ the Act should be
repealed as spent.

3. Exchange of Prisoners Act, 1948 (58 of 1948)

The Exchange of Prisoners Act, 1948, provides for the fransfer of pri-
soners from and to Pakistan to and from India, in pursuance of any agreement
with Pakistan? The Act was passed to deal with the situation arising from
partition.

The heart of the Act is contained in section 3, and in the definition of
the expression ‘transferable prisoner” to be found in section 2(d). The defini-
tion reads as under:—-

“2.(d) ‘transferable prisoner’ means—

(i) in Province of East Punjab, any prisoner who, being a Muslim, is
willing to be transferred to Pakistan under the provisions of this
Act, and

(ii) in any other part of India, any prisoner of such category as the Central
Government may specify by notification in the official Gazette whe.
being a Muslim, is willing to be transferred to Pakistan under the
provisions of this Act.”

Section 3 empowers the State Governmeni to issue warranis for the
transfer of transferable prisoners. Sections 4 to 7 make provisions connected
with such a warrant. Section 8 prohibits the return to India of a transferred
prisoner, except with the permission in writing of the Central Government.
‘Section 9 provides for the reception in India of prisoners transferred from
Pakistan.”

1 Subject to verification.
% See the tong title and preamble.
3 See statement of Obiect and Reasons Gazette of India, Part V 4th September, 1948,


oF 1984]

The subject matter of the Act falls within Union List. entry 10 (foreign
affairs) and Union List. entry 14 (entering inio and implemeniation of treaties
with foreign countries).

Reasons for recommending repeal—A!taough the Act is widely worded
so us 10 Operate beyond the period of partition, presumabiy that was not the
intention of the legislature. Having regard to the fact that the Act was passed
‘only to deal with the situation that arose immediately on partition, the Ac:
may now be repealed. subject to examination of the question if it is really
needed at the present day.’

4, Federal Court Act, 1937 (25 of 1937)
The Act deals with ceriain matters concerning the erstwhile Federal
Court.
The entire Act reads as under:
“An Act to empower the Federal Court to make ruies tor regulating

the service of processes issued by the Court.

“Whereas it is expedient to conler upon the Federal Court a supple-
mental power which is necessary for the purpose of enabling the Court more
effectively to exercise the jurisdiction conferred upon it by or under the Gov-
ernment of India Act, 1935; it is hereby enacied as follows:

“J. This Act may be called the Federal Court Act, 1937. Short

“2. The Federal Court may make rules for regulating the service of pro- Power of
cesses issued by the Court, including rules requiring a High Cou:t from which Federal

an appeal has been preferred to the Federal Court to serve any process issued Court to
by the Federal Court in connection with that appeal.” rules,

The subject matter of the Act falls within Union List, entry 11A, “Admi-
nistration of Justice” and Union List, entry 97 (residuary).

Reasons for recommending repeal.—The Federal Court ceased to exist
iong ago. The Act should therefore be repealed now as totally spen:. It may
be noted that the Federal Court Act, 1941 (21 of 1941), which empowered
the Federal Court to make rules, has been repealed by Act 48 of 1952. The
Federal Court Supplemental Act, 1942 (26 of 1942), which authorised delegation
ot certain powers of the Federal Court to the Registrar, was also repealed
by Act 48 of 1952.

5. Federal Court (Enlargement of Appellate Jurisdiction) Act, 1947 (1 of 1948)

The Act enlarges the appellate jurisdiction of the Federal Court to the
fullest extent permissible under section 206 of the Government of India Act,
1935.

Section 3 of the Act reads thus—
“3. As from the appointed day,—
{a) an appeal shall lie to the Federal Court from any judgement to. which

this Act applies—

(i) without the special leave of the Federal Court, if an appeal could
have been brought to His Majesty in Council without special leave
under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, or any
other law in force immediately before the appointed day, and

(ii) with the special leave of the Federal Couit in any other case ;

1 Subject to checking.


(0) in any such appeal as aioresaid it shall be competent for the Federal
Court to consider any question of the nature mentioned in sub-section (1) of
section 205 of the Government of Tidia Act, 1935: and

(०0 no direct appeal shall lie to His Majesty in Council, either with or
without special leave. from any such judgement.”

The subject matter of the Act falls within Concurrent List, entry 1185,
“Administration of Justice” and Union Lisi, entry 97 (residuary entry).

Reasons for recommending repeal—The Federal Court ceased to exist
tong ago. Pending appeals were transferred to the Supreme Court, and, by
now, must have ail been exhausted. The Act should, therefore, be repealed,
as spent.

6. Goa, Daman and Diu (Opinion Poli) Act, 1966 (38 of 1966)

This Act makes provision for asceriaining the views of the electors
in the territory of Goa, Daman and Diu on the future status of the territory,

The subject matter of the Act falls within the Union List, entry 97 (residuary-

entry).

The opinion of the electors was duly ascertained by the Central Govern-
ment and further action taken regarding the constitutional status of the terri-
tory.

Reasons for recommending repeal.—The object sought to be achieved
by the Aci has been already achieved and formal continuance of the Act on the
statute book serves no useful purpose now. I can therefore be safely repealed.

7. General Insurance (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1971 (17 of 1971)
The Act makes provision for the immediate taking over of general insu-
rance business, pending its nationalisation.

The Act is still in force though section 14 was omitted by the General
Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1952 (57 of 1972).

The subject matter of this Act falls within the Union List, entry 47,
“Insurance”.

Rea: ier recommending repeal.—Gencral insurance business has now
been nationalised and the Act under discussion seems to have outlived its utility.
It should be repealed, subject to verification of the position as to continued need
for the Act.

8. Indian Independence Pakisian Courts (Pending proceedings) Act, 1952 (9 of
1952).
This Act was passed to make certain legal provisions, in view of the parti-
tion of India and Pakistan.

The Act is still in force though section 5 was repealed by the Repealing
and Amending Act, 1957 (36 of 1957).

Section 2 of the Act reads as under:

. Definition. In this Act, the expression ‘decree to which this Act
upplies’ means any such judgment ,decree or order as is referred to in—
(i) clause (3) of article 4 of the Indian Independence (Legal Proceedings)
Order, 1947, or (ii) Paragraph (5) or paragraph (6) of article 13 of the
High Courts (Bengal) Order, 1947, or (iii) paragraph (4) or paragraph
(6) of the High Courts (Punjab) Order, 1947.

which has been or may hereafter be passed by a court in Pakistan and which
imposes any liability or obligation on a Government of India.”

Section 3 reads as under:

4 Subject to verification.



oF 1984]

“3. Certain Pakistan decrecs not io be given efject to in India—-Notwith-
standing anything contained in any of the :Irders referred to in section 2, no decree
to which this Act applies shall be given effect 10 by any court or authority in India
in so far as such decree imposes any liability or obligation on any Government
of Indi

By section 4 of the Act, two modifications have bi
applicable to the proceedings in question, namely: -

(i) the law of limitation: and

en made in the law otherwise

(ii) the law regulaiing forum.

As to the point of limitation, section 4 allows a period of one year from
the date of commencement of the Act or date of decree, whichever js later.

As to the question of forum, the section provides that the suit permitted
by the Act can, notwithstanding section 20, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, be
instituted in a court (otherwise competent to iry it), within whose jurisdiction the
person instituting it voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works
for gain.

The subject matter of the Act seems to fall within the Concurrent List,
entry 13 (Civil procedure... Limitation) and Unio. List, entry 97 (residuary).

Action to be taken.—At the first sight, it may appear that after 30 years of
independence, the need for the Act under discussion shouid no longer exist.
However, it is not possible to say with absolute certainty that no such suit as is
governed by the Aci can be filed at the present day. Disability, traud or other
special factors may extend the period of limitation tor filing the proceedings
in question. It does not, therefore. appear advisable to repeal the Aci.

9. Indian Law Reports Act, 1875 (18 of 1875)

The Act, in effect, provides that courts are not bound to hear ciféd any
unauthorised series of law reports. The Act is the first legislative measure restrict-
ing the citacion of unofficial reports. The Act (so far as is material) provides that
no court shall be bound to hear cited, or shall receive or treat as an authority
binding on it, the report of any case other than a report published under the
authority of the government. The enactment of this Act, which can be describ-
ed' as an attempt at creating a partial monopoly in favour of official reports,
was strongly opposed, Sir George Combell, the then Lt. Governor of Bengal,
expressed his opposition in these words:

“if you put into the hands of any one authority the power of deciding
which of these to be rejected and snuffed out, you give that authority an
enormous power over the superior courts of the country.” -

Section 3 of the Act reads as follows:-—

“3. No court shall be bound to hear cited or shall receive or treat as
authority binding on it the report of any cases decided by any High
Court... ....other than a report published under the autho-
rity of any State Government.” .

Section 4 of the Act provides that nothing in the Act shall be construed to
give any judicial decision any other authority than it would have had if the Act
had not been passed.

The Act, if taken literally, could create certain anomaligs. If a single judge,
relying on section 3, refuses’ to look at an unofficial ruling of a division bench,
then the position would be unsatisfactory. There would be a division bench
tuling disregarded by a single judge. Of course, in practice, the single judge will
consult the decision of the division bench, an reported in the unofficial series or—
though this is rare—the original judgement from the records of the Court. This
itself shows that the Act has to be often disregarded if serious anomalies are to
be avoided.

i Law Commission of India, 14th Report, Reforms of Judicial Administration, Vol,
1, page 631, para 19.
2 Compare discussion in Vinayak v, Moveshwar, AIR 1944, Nag. 44.


The subject matter of the Act seems to fall within the Concurrent List, En-
try LIA, “Adminstration of justice”. Concurrent List, entry 39, “Newspapers,
Books and Printing Press” may not cover it- Nor would current list “recogni-
tion of laws. public acts and records and judicial proceedings” cover it.

Reasons for recommending repeal.—lt is well known that notwithstanding
the passage of the Act, unofficial law reports published in India have. for many
years, been cited before the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, the High
Courts and the Supreme Court and have beea referred to and selied on in their
judgments. The Act has indeed been a dead letter.

The Law Commission, in its Report on the Reform of Judicial Administra-
tion, observed with regard to this Act as follows: - -

“42. In view of the recommendations made by us the Indian’ Law Re-
ports Act (XVIII of 1875) will have to be repealed. As pointed out above,
by reason perhaps of the delays in the publication of the Indian Law Re-
ports series the provision of section 3 have not been observed by the
courts. Indeed, the judgments of all courts, including those of the Judi-
cial Committee of the Privy Council and the Supreme Court. have réfer-
red to decisions published in private series as authoritative and binding.
Further our recommendations involve the cessation of the publication of
the Indian Law Report series itself.”

It has been held by one High Court’ that all that the Indian Law Reports
Act, 1875, ensures is that the Judges who have no access to the decisious them-
selves shall be provided with their accurate copics. Mere reporting of a ruling
does not give any greater sanctity than it had before a court. A cectiiied copy
establishes its authenticity and correctness. On such a copy being produced, the
lower courts are bound to treat the certified copy in the same way as reported
judgments. Section 3 provides merely that the court should not_look into’ unau-
thorised reports. What is binding is the decision of the High Court, and not a
report.

Incidentally, it may be mentioned that the Law Reports Act does not apply
to the decisions of the Privy Council, the Federal Court or the Supreme Court.
though section 84, second paragraph, Evidence Act, applies to them (as it ap-
plies to other judicial decisions of superior courts)

Because of these anomalies also, the Act should be repealed. Parliament has
legislative competence to do so.*

10. Indian Rifles Act, 1920 (23 of 1920)

The Act provides for the better discipline of local police officers enrolled
in Military Police or Rifle Battalions. The Act subjects those officers to the dis-
cipline and penalties prescribed under the local Act applicable to the area of
service, 1.0., the area in which they serve.

The subject matter of the Act falls within Union List, entry |, relating to
armed forces. Union List, entry 2A, quoted below may also be of interest:

2A. Deployment of any armed force of the Union or any other force

subject to control of Union.....

Reasons ior recommending repeal.—tIt is not the the practice now to enlist

the local police in Military Police or in Rifle Batallions. The Act has therefore
become obsolete, and should be repealed

11. Industrial Disputes (Banking Companies) Decision Act, 1955 (41 of 1955)

The Act modifies the award of the labour Appellate Tribunal relating to
employees of banking companies and (subject to that modification) makes pro-
visions for enforcing the award.

1 Law Commission of India, 14th Report (Reform of Judicial Administration), Vol,

1, page 645, para 42.

2 Tarok Prasad vy. Shanti Lata, (1975) 2 ALR 501 (as summarised in the Yearly Di-
gest 1976, column 1509).

3 Concurrent List, Entry 11A, “Administration of Justice.”

{act


or 1984]

The subject matter of the Act tails within Union List, entry 45, “Banking”
and Concurrent List. entry 22. Trade Unions—Industrial and Labour Disputes’

Action to be taken—The award was initially in force till 31-3-1959. How-
ever. it was extended to a later date. Hence, the Act cannot be repealed.

12. Kazis Act, 1880 (12 of 1880).

The Act appoints Kazis for certaia areas, 1.0... areas where Kazis are, by
custom. required io perform marriage ceremonies and other rites between Mus-
lims.

Section 2 of the Act provides that where a considerable number of Moham-
medans reside in an area and desire the appointment of Kazis, the Government.
after prior consultation with the residents, can appoint one or more Kazis for
such area. The Government can also appoint Naib Kazis for whole or part of
that area, The Government is further empowered by the Act to remove any
such Kazis for his insolvency. misconduct or absence from the area for more

than six months.

Section 4 prevides that these Kazis have no judicial or administrative powers.
and their presence in every marriage ceremony is not essential. The local Kazis
(who are not so appointed) are allowed to function.

There seems to have been an impression prevailing at some time that the
presence of a Government appointed officer was necessary at a Musitm marriage.
It has. however, been pointed out’ by a distinguished writer that this is not cor-
rect.

“The Kazi is ordinarily present. The Kazi in India is the mere keeper of a
marriage register. His function is purely evidentiary. It is a mistake to suppose that
he joins the couple in marriage: the marriage takes effect by operation of law on
the contract being completed between the parties.”

According to Tayabji. there can be no monopoly in any person to officiate
at marriages, since the law of Muslims does not require that function (officiating
at marriages) tc be performed by any special officer: “custom proved in such
cases giving en exclusive right to “Cadies” to write and register marriage con-
tracts is really meaningless..........00... .in view of the fact that the

marriage need not be written down or registered and no official is recogniséd as
having exclusive privilege of performing this function.”

The subject matter of the Act seems to fall within the Concurrent List, Entry
“Marriage and Divorce. all matters in respect of which par-
ties in judicial proceedings were, immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution. subject to their persons] law”. Mention may also be made of Con-
current List, Entry 12. “Evidence and Oaths............ recognition of laws, public
acts and records”.

वा one case* from Karnataka, it was held that the previous approval of the
State Government was not necessary for the appointment or removal of a Naib
Kazi .

Action to be taken.—From the number of reported cases जा the Act, ‘-° some
of which are fairly recent, it would appear that not infrequent use has been made
of the Act. Int the circumstances. it is not possible to recommend its repeal.

Outlines of Mohammedan Law (1974), page 92

y uslim Law (1968) page 40. paragraph 15.

३ Wahab Siddiqui v. The Government of Karnataka A.1.R. 1975 Karnataka 133.

4 (1972) 2 Andhra Weekly Reports 327. summarised in (1971-75) Quinquennial Digest,
Vol. 4, Col. 543.

3 Wahab Siddiqui v. The Government of Karnataka A.LR, 1975 Karnataka 133.

6 Khazi Mohammed vy. Andhra Pradesh Wagf Board, AIR. 199 A.P. 116 (object of,
the Act discussed in detail)

11


13. Life Insurance (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1956 (9 of 1956)

The Act vests the maragement of insurance companies in a nominee of the
Central Government. till the nationalisation of life insurance is completed.

The subject matter of the Act falls within the Union List, entry 47, “insur-
ance”, The Act is still in force, though section 18 was repealed by the Repealing
and Amending Act, 1963 (58 of 1963).

Reasons fur recommending repeal—Life insurance business is now nationa-

lised the process having been completed long ago. The Act is not necded at the
present day. Jt should be repealed. subject to checking of the position whether the
Act is needed at the present day.'

14. Oriental Gas Company Act. 1857 (5 of 1857)

The Act creates a joint stock company with limited liability for certain gas
undertakings. limit of rupees fifty did not previously apply, thus establishing uni-
formity for all provinces in the matter.

The Act of 1949 amends and validates provisions of the Act of 1941.

Action to be taken —The Act of 1941 has since been repealed. The question
then arises whether the Act of 1949 should continue.

Now, it may be stated that while section 2 of the Act.of 1949 merely amends
the Schedule io the Act of 1941, it is section 3 which is more important for the
present purpose. That section validates the imposition of tax on professions be-
fore the comm meat of the Act and further provides that no court shall enter-
tain any n for the refund of any portion of the tax now validated. In essence,
it is a validating provision,

Validating Acts—Legislative Practice—In this context, it may be noted that
the legislative practice in India in general has been not to repeal validating Acts.
Some examples of validating Acts which are still in force are given below:-—

(1) The Marriages Validation Act. 1892 (2 of 1892).
(2) The Arya Marriage Validation Act. 1937 (19 of 1937).
(3) The Part B States Marriage Validation Act. 1952.

(4) The Sales Tax Laws Validation Act, 1956 (7 of 1956).

* (5) The Hindu Marriages (Validation of Proceedings) Act. 1960 (19 of
1960).

(6) The Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly (Constitution an@ Pyo-
ceedings) Validation Act. 1958 (56 of 1958).

The subject matter of the Act does not fall within the State List, Entry 60.
“Tax on Professions”. but within Union List, Entry 97, (residuary entry), since
the Act is intended to give protection against the supposed violation of an erst-
while prohibition of a constitutional character.

The subject matter of the Act falls within the Union List, Entry 43, “Incor-
poration, regulation and winding up of trading corporations.
It may be stated that State List, Entry 25, “gas and gas works” would not be
appropriate for this particular legislation, in which the focus is on the aspect of
incorporation.

Reasons for recommending repeal.—Government may consider if this Act,
and also the analogous later Act of 1867, are needed at all. After verification of
the factual position, further action may be taken”

1 Subject to factual checking.
2 This is subject to verification of the factual position.

[acr


1984]

15, Oriental Gas Company Act, 1867 (11 of 1867)

By this Act, the Central Government is empowered to allow the Oriental Gas
Company to extend its area of operation beyond Calcutta.

Reasons for recommending repeal.—See above under the “Oriental Gas Com-
pany Act, 1857”.

16. Payment of Taxes (Transfer of Property) Act, 1949 (22 of 1949)

The Act prohibits certain transactions by way of transfer without ment
of taxes. Section 2(i) of the Act is limited to transactions entered into during a
particular post partition period. But section 261), taken literally, is not so confined,
though perhaps that was the intention of the Legislature. Section 2(ii) leaves the
decision (as to persons to whom the Act applies) to the Income Tax authority.
the Custodian of Evacuce Property or other specified authority.

The subject matter of the Act mainly falls within Concurrent List, Entry 6,
“Transfer of Property other than agricultural land: registration of deeds ‘and
documents”.

Action to be taken.—Government may consider whether the Act is needed,
at the present day, in view of the presumably limited scope of the Act, as indi-
cated by section 2. a

17. Professions Tax Limitation (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1949 (1 of
1949).

By section 142(1) of the Government of India Act, 1935, certain Provincial
laws providing for the imposition of tax on professions etc., were saved, but it was
provided that after 31st March, 1939 the tax payable in respect of any one person
under any law (imposing such a tax) should not exceed rupees fifty per annum.
At the same time, by section 142(2) and ‘proviso, pre-existing taxes were to con-
tinue to be lawfully levied even on a higher rate than rupees fifty, unless a Pro-
vision to the contrary was made by the federal legislature.

There was a widespread demand in the erstwhile Madras Presidency that the
professions tax, levied by municipalities and local boards under Provincial legis-
lation and based solely on income, should be subject to the maximum of rupees
fifty per annum. The Professions Tax Limitation Act, 1941 (120 of 1941) gave
effect to that demand, and extended the limit laid down in sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 142 of the Government of India Act, 1935 to those provinces in which, owing
to the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 142, applied. If today such an Act were
to be passed to save past violations of the Government of India Act, 1935, the pro-
per legislative entry would be the Union List, Entry 97 ( ‘residuary).

Action to be taken.—In view of the legislative practice of retaining validating

Acts on the statute book studied above, the Act will have to be allowed to con- ’

tinue.

18. Public Employment (Recruitment as to Residence) Act, 1957 (44 of 1957)

The operative provisions of the Act may be thus summarised: Section 2 re-
peals earlier laws imposing a requirement of residence in an area as a condition
of employment in Government. Section 3 gives temporary protection to legislation
imposing a requirement as to residence in a particular area as a condition of eligi-
bility for public employment.? The protection was limited to a period of 15 years.
That period has now expired. But section 2 of the Act is still of importance, since
it repeals earlier laws.

1 Compare article 276, Constitution of India.

2 For case law on section 3, see . .
(a) Rao v. State of Andhra Pradesh, A.I.R. 1970 S.C, 422.
(b) Government of A.P. v. Reddy. AJR. 1973 S.C. 827.

3-1 M of LJ & CAINDI84


____ The subject matter of the Act falls within the exclusive competence of Par-
liament. by virtue of article 35(a) (i) read with article 16(3) of the Constitution.
Article 16(3) of the Constitution provides that nothing in that article shall prevent
Parliament from making any law prescribing in regard to a class or classes of
employment or appointment to an office under the Government or any local or
other authority within a State or Union Territory, any requirement as to residence
within that State or Union Territory prior to such employment or appointment.
Under article 35(a) (i) of the Constitution (so far as is material)-—“Notwithstanding
anything in this Constitution, as—

(8) Parliament shall have and the Legislature of a State shall not not have.
power to make laws—-
(i) with respect to any of the matters which under clause (3) of article
16—may be provided for by law made by Parliament.”

The Supreme Court’ has held that the Constitution in article 16(4), speak
of a whole State as the venue for residential qualification and it is impossible to
think that the Constituent Assembly was think ‘ing of residence in Districts, Ta-
luks, Cities. Towns or Villages. ...Section 3 of the Public Em-
ployment (Requirement as to Residence) Act, 1957, in so far as it relates to
Telengana and certain Rules made under the Act, was, therefore, held ultra vires
the Constitution.

Action to be taken—Since section 2 of the Act is still of importance (as
stated above), it is not possible to recommend repeal of the Act.

19. Public Suits Validation Act, 1932 (4 of 1932)

By section 2 of the Public Suits Validation Act, 1932, it is provided that
where a suit relating to any of the public matters specified in sections 91 and 92
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (these sections relate to suits regarding public
nuisances and public trusts) is pending at the commencement of this Act, the
institution of such a suit shall not be deemed to be invalidated on the ground
that the previous sanction of the State Government in respect of such suit has not
been obtained as required by section 93 of that Code.

The subject matter of the Act falls within Concurrent List, catty 13, civil
procedure, including all matters included in the Code of Civil Pi lure at the
commencement of this Constitution. ” हु

Action to be taken.—Most suits of the nature to which the Act “PI plies, i.c.,
Suits pending in 1932 (when the Act was enacted) would have been disposed of
by now. However, one cannot assert with positive certainty that all such suits
must have been disposed of by now. Hence the Act may continue on the statute
book for the present.

20. The Public Wakis (Extension of Limitation) Act, 1959 (29 of 1959)

This Act extends the period of limitation in regard to suits to recover pos-
session of immovable property forming part of public wakfs, where the dispos-
session took place between 14th day of August, 1949 and 7th day of May, 1954.
The period of limitation was originally extended upto 15th August, 1967, but
the date has been successively extended. It ‘may also be pointed out that there
could, in effect, be further extension of the period of limitation by reason of 015:
abilities or other special factors which have the effect of extending limitati
under the gencral law of limitation. .

The subject matter of the Act falls within Concurrent List, entry 10, “Trust
and Trustees” and entry 13, “Civil Procedure sHimitation......
_ Action to be taken.—It is possible that suits to which the Act applies can
still be filed, or are pending. If so, its repeal may create avoidable controversies.
Moreover, many States have (by local amendment) extended the period to a later
date. In the circumstances, it is not advisable to repeal the Act. _ हे

21. Special Tribunals (Supplementary Provisions) Act, 1946 (26 of 1946)

This Act provides that where a special court established under the Criminal
Law Amendment Ordinance, 1943 ceases to exist, it shall be deemed to be the
Court of Session. Apparently, this technical provision was considered necessary
to deal with appeal, execution return of property, etc, and other incidental
matters in respect of proceedings of the special courts in question.

Rao v. State of Andhra Pradesh, ALR. 1970 S.C, 422,

[acr


or 1984]

‘The subject matter of the Act seems to fall within Constitution, Concurrent
List, entry 5, “Criminal Law and Procedure” and Concurrent List, entry 11A,
“Administration of Justice”.
Reasons for recommending ‘The Criminal! Law Amendment Ordi-
nance 1943 (with which the Act is linked) has been repealed’. Morzover, matters
arising out of decisions of special tribunals constituted under that Ordinance
must, by now, have been practically exhausted. The Act now can be repealed,
subject to verification of what has been stated just now.’

22. Transfer of Evacuee Deposits Act, 1954 (15 of 1954)

Consequent on the setting up of the Dominions of India and Pakistan, there
was large scale migration of population between the two countries. The Gov-
ernments of India and Pakistan entered into an agreement with each country
regarding the manner of transfer of deposits belonging to displaced persons or
evacuees. In pursuance of the aforesaid agreement, the Parliament enacted the
legislation to provide for such transfer of deposits to Pakistan and reception of
such deposits in India. The Act is still in force though section 18 was repealed
by the Repealing and Amending Act (58 of 1963).

‘The term “deposit” has been defined in the Act as—

(i) any_movable property in the custody or under the control of any civil
or Revenue Court in respect of any proceedings:

(ii) any movable property under the superintendence or in the custody of
a Court of Wards:

(iti) any movable property in the custody or control of a manager;

and it includes any securitics, insurance policies and negotiable instruments;
“securities” covers shares, scripts, stocks, bonds, debentures, debentive stocks
and like marketable securities. “Displaced person” is a person who has migrated
from Pakistan to India on or after 1-3-47 and “evacuee” is one who has migrated
from India to Pakistan on or after 1-3-47.

By the Act, the Central Government has taken power to appoint a Custo-
dian of Deposits and also as many Assistant Custodians as required. The Custo-
dian has power to transfer the deposits to an officer in Pakistan as the Central
Government may specify by general or special order in this behalf. The Custo-
dian has also power to transfer the records of the deposit to the officer in Pakis-
tan so specified. If the transfer of the ‘deposit’ is prohibited under any other
law, it is lawful for the Custodian to convert the deposit into money bet fore the
transter.

The Act has also laid down the procedure for the converse situation, name-
ly, the receipt of deposits from Pakistan, and the procedure to be subsequently
followed by the Custodian in making payment of such deposits to the claimants.
If there are more than one claimant and alf of them do not agree for the method
of payment or distribution, the Custodian has been empowered (i) to refer the
matter to the principal Civil Court at Original Jurisdiction within whose -jurisdic-
tion the claimants, or at least the majority of them, reside and (ii) to transfer the
deposits to such Court for disposal. ड़

The subject matter of the Act falls within Concurrent list, entry 41, “Cus.
tody, management and disposal of property declared by law Wo be evacuee pro-
perty”, Union List, entry 1 oS “Foreign Affairs” all matters wi bring the Union
into relation with any foreign country”, and Union List, entry 14 (Entering into
and implementation of treaties).

Reasons for recommending repeal—tit is presumed that by now, deposits
governed by the Act would all have been transferred or otherwise finally dealt
with. The Act may therefore be repealed, subject to factual checking,’ as to whe-
ther any such deposits still remain undisposed of.

1 Repealing and Amending Act, 1957 (36 of 1957).
2 Subject to verification.
3 Subject to factual checking.

15


Comments
favouring the
proposals.

Unconstitu-
tional laws

Goggestion
of

Government
of Punjab).

Kazis Act of
4880 (Material

CHAPTER 4
COMMENTS RECEIVED ON THE WORKING PAPER

4.1, As already stated in the first chapter of this Report! Law Commission
had circulated a Working Paper on the subject matter of this Report for inviting
informed comments as to the repeal of the Acts dealt with in this Report. The
last date for forwarding the comments to the Commission was 30th November,
1983. The replies received upto the date of signing this Report are nine in num-
ber. Two are from High Courts, while the remaining seven are from Law Depart-
ments of State Governments.

Ot the High Courts, one agrees with the need for repeal of all the Central
Acts under consideration, while the other states that it has no comments to make’.
The comments received from the State Governments all agree with the proposal
for repeal of these Acts’. Of these comments received from the State Governments,
two have made certain additional suggestions or supplied additional information.
which will be referred to presently.’

4.2. In its reply sent to the Working Paper of the Law Commission, the Gov-
ernment of Punjab’ has suggested that those statutory provisions which have been
declared by the Courts as unconstitutional should also be regarded as fit for ré-
peal. The Commission is aware of this consideration and has taken it into ac-
count while preparing its list of enactments to be repealed. It may also be useful
to mention that whenever the Commission takes up individual enactments for
consideration, the constitutional aspect is also kept in mind, with a view to re-
commending the repeal or suitable amendment of statutory provisions that are
found to be in conflict with the Constitution.

4.3. The cove ment of Maharashtra, in its comment on the Working Paper
of the Law Commiion,’ has supplied useful material as to the Kazis Act, 1880 as
in force in the State of Maharashtra. It may be mentioned that the Commission is
not recommending repeal of this Act.’ The material forwarded by the State Gov-
ernment also shows that the Act cannot, in the present state of legislation, be re-
pealed.

1 Paragraph 1.8, supra.

2 Law Commission File No. 2(11)/83-LC, Serial No. 7 and Serial No. 3 respectively.
3 Law Commission File No. F. 2(11)/83-LC, Serial No. 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10 and 11.
4 Paragraphs 4.2 and 4.3 infra.

5 Law Commission File No, F. 2(11)/83+LC, Serial No. 5.

6 Law Commission File No. 2(11)/83-LC, Serial No. 8.

7 Chapter 3, item 18, supra (Kazis Act, 1880).

7


CHAPTER 5
CONCLUSION AND SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS

4.1, On the basis of the discussion contained in the preceding Chapters, re- Acts to be हि
peal of the Acts that we have identified as suitable for repeal appears to be desir- examined an
able,’ subject of course, to verification of certain aspects which have been men- gction
tioned in the discussion relating to each Act, wherever applicable. For convenience, su; gested
we give below a list of the Acts examined, and the gist of our recommendation to
on each Act. taken ren

List of Aets’ examined and gist of proposal made with reference to each Act?

. The Abolition of Privy Council Act 1949 (Constituent Assembly Act 5
of 1949). Repeal of the Act is recommended, provided if it could be
ensured that its repeal does not create any legal complications (such as
revival of the jurisdiction conferred on the Privy Council by any Act
of the U.K. Parliament ctc.). पु
Continuance of Legal Proceedings Act, 1948 (38 of 1948). Repeal of
the Act is recommended subject to verification of the factual position. '
3. Exchange of Prisoners Act, 1948 (58 of 1948). Repeal of the Act is
recommended, subject to examination of the question whether the Act
is needed at the present day.
4, Federal Court Act, 1937 (25 of 1937). Repeal of the Act is recommend-
ed.

5. Federal Court (Enlargement of Appellate Jurisdiction) Act, 1947 (1 of
1948). Repeal of the Act is recommended.

6. Goa. Daman and Diu (Opinion Poll) Act. 1966 (38 of 1966). Repeal
of the Act is recommended.

7. General Insurance (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1971 (17 of 1971).
Repeal of the Act is recommended, subject to verification of the posi-
tion as to whether there is continued need for the Act.

8. Indian Independence Pakistan Courts (Pending Proceedings) Act. 1952
(9 of 1952). Repeal of the Act is not recommended.

9. Indian Law Reports Act. 1875 (18 of 1875). Repeal of the Act is re-
commended.

10. Indian Rifles Act, 1920 (23 of 1920). Repeal of the Act is recommended.

1. Industrial Disputes (Banking Companies) Decision Act, 1955 (41 of
1955). Repeal of the Act is not recommended.

12. Kazis Act, 1880 (12 of 1880). Repeal of the Act is not recommended.

ife urance (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1956 (9 of 1956).
8 Reveal of the “act is recommended subject to verification of the posi-
tion as to whether there is continued need for the Act.

Gi ider of

iental Gas Company 1857 (5 of 1857), Government may const ft

hs Ac and the analogus later Act of 1867 relating to the same come
ny (ee below), are needed now. After verification of the fact pos

fon. further action may be taken.

15. Oriental Gas Compaen 1867
1 Gas Compa! व
ता 1949 (22 of 1949).

erty) Act,
Transtt मम the Ace is needed at the present

N

14,

(11 of 1867). See above under “Ori-

yment of Taxes (
‘6. Pevernment may consi

day. _ _

ter 3 supra. हु
ene anged alphabetically.

Acts are art
2 howe of these Acts was repealed up!

done in office.

0 1Sth February. 1984 according to checking

19


20

17. Professions Tax Limitation (Amendment and Validation) Act. 1949
(61 of 1949).

The Act may continue on the statute book, having regard to the legisla+
tive practice adopted in the past, as regard validating Acts. (In. the past
validating Acts have been allowed to continue on the statute book).

18. Public Employment (Requirement as to Residence) Act, 1957 (44 of
1957). .
The Act may continue on the statute book. as its repeal may create com-
plications.

19. Public Suits Validation Act, 1932 (11 of 1932). The Act may, for the
present, continue on the Statute book.

20. Public Wakfs (Extension of Limitation) Act, 1959 (29 of 1959). It is
not advisable to repeal the Act.
21. Special Tribunals (Supplementary Provisions) Act, 1946 (29 of 1946).

The Act may be repealed, subject to verification of certain facts stated
in the discussion about the Act.

22. Transfer of Evacuee Deposits Act, 1954.
The Act may be repealed, subject to factual checking.

(k. K. MATHEW).
Chairman.

(J. P. CHATURVEDI),
Member. .

(DR. M. B. RAO).
Member.

(P. M. BAKSHD,

Part-time Member.

(VEPA P. SARATHI).

Part-Time Member.

(A. K. SRINIVASAMURTHY),
Member-Secretary.

DATED:

1. . MGWoRg4s%1 M1 of LJ & CA/ND/84—19-11-84—625

facr