LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
NINETY-SEVENTH REPORT

SECTION 28, INDIAN CONTRACT
ACT, 1872

- PRESCRIPTIVE CLAUSES IN CONTRACTS,

[March, 1984]

?

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Ministry of Law Justice and Company Affairs


}

1
\
\

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

Justice K. K. MATHEW
D.O. No. F. 2(10)/83-L.C.
New DELHI

DATED, THE 31sT Marcu, 1984.

My dear Minister,

I am forwarding herewith the Ninety-Seventh Report of the
Law Commission on “Section 28, Indian Contract Act, 1872: Pres-
criptive Clauses in Contracts”.

The subject was taken up by the Law Commission suo motu.
The need for taking up the subject is explained in para 1.1 of the
Report.

The Commission is indebted to Shri P. M. Bakshi, Part-time
Member, and Shri A. K. Srinivasamurthy, Member-Secretary for their
valuable assistance in the preparation of the Report.

With regards,

Yours sincerely.

. Sd/-
(K. K. MATHEW)

Shri Jagannath Kaushal,
Minister of Law, Justice & Company Affairs,
New DELHI

Encl : 97th Report.


~~
न

nt en
al
५

७.

CHAPTER

CHaPTeR

CHAPTER

(CHAPTER

(CHAPTER

1—INTRODUTORY

2—THE EXISTING LAW

3—DEMERITS OF EXISTING LAW

4—COMMENTS RECEIVED ON THE WORKING PAPER

5—RECOMMENDATION,

CONTENTS

(iii)

Pages

1-38

8-9

poe,

a


+ eee पा

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTORY

1.1. This Report addresses itself to one
under the present Indian Jaw in regard to pres iptive clauses in contracts (claus:
extinguishing rights under a contract on the expiry of a specified period), For rea
sons to be indicated in duc course in subsequent Paragraphs, the matter seems
to tall for urgent reform. The point primarily relates to section 28 of the Indian
Contract Act. 1872.' The subject is of great importance from the point of view
of economic justice. avoidance of hardship to consumers and certainty and symme-
try of the law. The Law Commission has taken up the subject for consideration
on its own, having regard to its many-sided importance and relevance to present
day thinking.

1.2. Under section 28 of the Indian Contract Act. 1872—to state the point

anomalous situation that prevails Genesis

nd scope.

Point for

in brief—an agrewerent which limits the time within which a party to an agrec- consideration, ४

ment may enforce his rights under any contract by proceedings in a court of law
is void to that extent. But the section does not invalidate an agreement in the
nature of prescription, that is to say. an agreement which provides that, at the
end of a specified period. if the rights thereunder are not enforced, the rights shall
९०४५९ to exist. As will be explained in greater detail in later Chapters of this Re-
port,’ this position creates serious anomaljes and hardship, apart from leading
to unnecessary litigation Prima facie. it appeared to che Commission that the
section stood in need of reform on this point. The arguments for and against
amendment of the section will be set out later. For the present, it is sufficient to
state that the problem is one of considerable practical importance as such stipu-
lations are frequently found in agreements entered into in the course of business.

1.3. At this stage. it may be mentioned that on the subject-matter of this Working

Report, the Commission had, after a study of the question at issue, prepared a
Working Paper for cliciting the views of interested persons and bodies.! The
Working Paper was circulated to High Courts, State Governments, Chambers of
Commerce and similar associations of businessmen, and other interested persons
and bodies including the Legislative Department of the Government of India in
the Ministry of Law. The Commission is grateful to all those who have res-
ponded by sending their views on the Working Paper. A gist of the comments
received will be given in a later Chapter of this Report.’ At this Stage, it is enough
to state that almost all the comments received on the Working Paper have agreed
with the need for amendment of the law on the lines envisaged in the Report.

CHAPTER 2
THE EXISTING LAW

Paper.

2.1. The problem with which this Report is concerned arises out of scction The
28 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872. We propose to examine in this Chapter the P’eblem.

section and its implications.

2.2. Sei
as under:—-

. . Act
“Every agreement by which any party thereto is restricted absolutely from

enforcing his rights under or in respect of any contract by the usual legal
proceedings in the ordinary tribunals or which limits the time within which
he may thus enforce his rights is void to that extent.”

(Exceptions to ihe section, not being material, not quoted).

There are wwo exceptions to the section, which are not material for the pre-
sent purpose. They deal with agreements to refer disputes to arbitration.

*Paragraph 1.2, infra and Chapter 2 infra.

*For detailed discussion, see Chapters 2 and 3. infra.

‘Chapters 2-2. infra.

‘Working Paper on Section 28, Indian Contract Act 1872: Prescriptive clauses in Con-
, dated 14th September. 1983.

Chapter 4, intra.

॥ 28, Indian Contract Act, 1872, in its main paragraph, provides Section 28,
Contract



2 Law Commission of India (Chapter 2

Effect of _2,3. The effect of section 28 of the Contract Act’ (so far as relates to the
Section 28. subject matter of this Report) may, on the basis of the case law’, on the subject
be stated in the form of two propositions, to begin with:-—

(a) The parties to an agreement are not allowed to substitute their own
periods of limitation in place of the period laid in the general law
of limitation.

(b) But the parties to an agreement are allowed to substitute their own
periods of prescription, that is to say. they are free to provide that if a
party does not sue within a specified period, then thee rights accruing
under the contract shall be forfeited, or extinguished or that a party
shall be discharged from all liability under the contract. (The precise
words used may differ from agreement to agreement, but tn substance
their object is usually to forfeit or extinguish the rights). In other words,
a clause limiting the time for enforcing a remedy is prohibited, but a
clause limiting the duration upto which the rights remain alive, and
extinguishing those rights at the end of such period, is permissible.

We are concerned with the latter proposition and our object will be to exa-
mine whether it is sound in justice and logic and beneficial in practice. .
Illustrative 2.4, We may, in the first place, refer to a few cases illustrating the operation
cases of the present position. In a case which went up to the Supreme Court,’ a clause -

in an insurance policy provided that all benefits under the insurance policy shall

be forfeited if a suit was not brought within a specified period. The clause was हि
held to be valid. The judgement expressly approves High Court decisions which हे
shad taken a similar view, including the oft cited Bombay case on the subject.

ater

There are decisions of many High Courts taking a similar view."-"

These cases hold that it is only when a period of limitation is curtailed that
section 28 of the Contract Act comes into operation. As was observed in a
Bombay case “Jt [section 28] does not come into operation when the (contractual) .
term spells out an extinction of the right of the plaintiff to sue or spells out the
discharge of the defendants from all liability in respect of the claim."”

x
Reasoning. 2.5. The reasoning underlying these decisions is that section 28 is aimed at t
prohibiting agreements which could operate only so long as the rights were in i
existence.” The section is aimed only at-— i
(a) covenants not to sue at any time: and :
(b) covenants not to sue after a limited time. j

A condition in a contract providing for a forfeiture of all benefits unless an
action is brought within a specified period does not therefore violate the section.
As per the contract itself, the rights that might have accrued to the party cease
to exist on the expiry of the period provided in the contract, What is hit by sec-
tion 28 is an agreement relinquishing the remedy only. by providing that if a suit;
is to be filed, then it should be filed within the specified time limit (the time limit {
being shorter than the period of limitation provided by the Limitation Act). # oe.
Under such a clause, though the rights accrued continue even beyond the time
limit and are not extinguished, yet there is a limiting of the time to sue as pres-
cribed by the Limitation Act. It is such a clause that is regarded as void by rea- a

*Paragraph 2.2, supra. है
2566 case law discussed in paragraph 2.4, infra and paragraphs 3.4 and 3.5 infra.
2Vulcan Insurance Co. v. Maharaj Singh, AIR 1976 S.C., pages 287-294,

- ‘Baroda Spinning and Weaving Co. v. Satyanarayan Marine Ins, Co. AIR 1914 Bom.

223, followed in Shakvor v. Hind & Co., AIR 1932 Bomb. 330.

SGirdharilal v. Eagle Star Ins. Co, (1923) 27 CWN 955, AIR 1924 Cal. 186.

*New India Ins. Co. v. R. M. Khandelwal, AIR 1974 Bom, 228.

1Ghose v. Reliance Ins. Co. P. Lid., LR 11 Rang, 475.

§NDMC v. Tirath Ram, AIR 1980 Delhi 185, 187, para 7.

*Ruby General Ins. Co. v. Bharat Bank AIR 1950 E.P. 852.

7566 further paragraphs 3.4 and 3.5, infra.

NRanjit Karamji v. Unique Motor Ins. Co. AIR 1951 Bom. 347, 352.

"Baroda Spinning Mills v. Satvanaravan Marine Ins. Co. AIR 1914 Bom, 22500), fol-

lowed in Shakoor v. Hind & Co., AIR 1932 Bom, 330.



Law Commission of India

son of section 28. But if the rights themselves are (under the contractual clause
as widely worded) extinguished, then there is no violation of limitation law.
Hew far this distinction is supportable or workable is a matter to which we shall
presently address ourselves.

2.6. The hardship and injustice resulting from the present position will be Discussion
dealt with in ine next Chapter. Before proceeding to the next Chapter, it would in Report
be proper to mention that the question now under consideration—namely, the ९0 Contra

hardship and injustice caused by the present position did not fall for considera-
tion when the Law Commission had occasion to deal with the Contract Act.
At that time, while dealing with section 28 of the Act, the Commission examined
only a very narrow issue, namely, conflict of decisions on a particular point, con-
fined to time ijmit clauses in insurance policies. The Commission had no oppor-
tunity of surveying the reported cases on section 28 to decide if, from the point
of view of economic justice, any change of substance was needed in section 28.
Here is the relevant passage, extracted from the Commission’s Report on the
Contract Act.’

“57. Decided cases reveal a divergence of opinion in relation 10 certain
clauses of insurance policies with reference to the applicability of this
section. On examination, it would appear that these cases do not really
turn on the interpretation of the section, but hinge on the construction
of the insurance policies in question. The principle itself is well recog-
nised that an agreement providing for the relinquishment of rights and
remedies is valid, but an agreement for relinquishment of remedies only
falls within the mischief of section 28. Thus, in our opinion, no change
is called for by season of the aforesaid conflict of judicial authority,”

2.7. The present discussion is not concerned: with special Acts containing Supreme
elaborate provisions declaring the liability of certain persons or regulating the Fer ont
institution of legal proceedings against them. One such special Act is “the Carriers relating

Act, 1865 which, in section 10, provides as follows:— to

Carriers
“10. No suit shall be instituted against a common carrier for the loss of, or Act:
injury lo, goods entrusted to him for carriage, unless notice in writing 1865.

of the loss or injury has been given to him before the institution of the
suit and within six months of the time when the loss or injury first
came to the knowledge of the plaintiff.”

Recently." the Supreme Court was called upon to decide the question whether
4 contractual ciause in a Way Bill, seeking to by-pass the provisicns of section
10, Carriers Act (quoted above), could be regarded as valid.

The condition in the Way Bill was as under:—

“15. No suit shall lie against the firm in respect of any consignment with-
out a claim made in writing in that behalf and preferred within thirty
days from the date of booking, or from the date of arrival at the desti-
nation by the party concerned”.

It was held that the above condition was intended to defeat section 10 of
the Carriers Act, 1865, and was therefore void, under section 23, Contract Act.
According to the Supreme Court, the effect of permitting such a condition would
be that even in a case where written notice of the loss or injury has been
given prior to instituting the suit and within six months of the loss or injury coming
to the plaintiff's knowledge (thereby satisfying section 10, Carriers Act), the con-
tractual condition would still remain unfulfilled and the suit would, therefore,
become barred. Thus, section 10 would be defeated. The Court, for the purpose
of so construing section 10, emphasised that the Carriers Act had been enacted to
declare the liability of the Carriers (and not merely to limit their liability). A
bargain that would defeat the liability of the Carriers as enacted by law should,
in the Court’s view, be treated as defeating the provisions of the law. The Court
further emphasised the fact that the condition in the contract stipulated the giv-
ing of notice either from the date of arrival of the goods at the destination or from

‘Law Commission of India, 13th Report (Indian Contract Act, 1872), page 27, para 57
(September, 1958). ), Page para

*Section 10, Carriers Act, 1865.

°M.G. Brothers Lorry Service v. Prasad Textiles (Civil Appeal Nos. 954-959 of 1978,
decided on 28 April, 1983. Supreme Coury) D. P. Madon and Sabyasachi Mukharii, JJ.)
&



Section 28,
Contract Act,
not in issue
before the
Supreme
Court.

Anomaly and
hardship

Position.

Prescriptive
clause and

the freedom
of contract,

Law Commission of India

the date of booking. The first event (arrival of goods) was. more often than not,
unknown to the owners of the goods—an aspect which. according to the Supreme
Court was relevant in construing the true object of section 10, Carriers Act. In
this context, the Court referred to Lord Macnaghten’s dictum in a Privy Council
appeal from Canada,’ where it had been stated that while a time-limit clause in an
insurance policy, computing the period from the date of loss, would be reasonable
(because the insured would always know when the loss occurred), such a clause.
carelessly included in a re-insurance policy, must be regarded as ina, pplicable.
since the person reinsured would have no direct contact with the 1055

As to computing the period from the date of booking—which was the second
alternative event mentioned in the contractual condition the court pointed out
that that was uscless as no liability could arise unless loss or damage occurred.

2.8. The above judgment of the Supreme Court, let it be added, did not hold
the contractual condition to be violative of section 28, Contract Act. The trial Court
and the First appeal Court had held that the condition was not violative of sec-
tion 28, and that view was not challenged before the High Court and not “seri-
ously challenged” before the Supreme Court. Further, the Supreme Court obser-
ved as under, on this point: —

“It also appears to us that neither there is restriction absolutely from enfor-
cing rights by the usual legal proceedings nor limitation of the time within
which suwh tights might be enforced in the instant ९85०, but condition 15
way only intended (0 defeat or by-pass the provisions of section 10 of the
Carriers Act.

CHAPTER 3
DEMERITS OF THE EXISTING LAW

3.1. The very brief summary of the existing legal position given in the pre-
ceding paragraphs shows that a distinction is assumed to exist between “remedy”
and “right” and that distinction is the basis of the present position under which
a clause barring a remedy is void, but a clause extinguishing the rights is valid.
Now, this approach may be sound in theory. In practice, however, it causes
serious hardship and might even be abused, so as to defeat the cause of econo-
mic justice. Such contractual clauses are usually inserted where the parties are
not in an cqual bargaining position. By giving a clause in an agreement that
shape and character of a provision extinguishing the right (and not merety affect-
ing the remedy), a party standing in a superior bargaining position can achieve
something which could not have been achieved by merely barring the remedy.
In other words, under the present law, a more radical and serious consequence
the abrogation of rights—becomes permissible, while a less serious device—the
extinction of the mere remedy—becomes impermissible. Prima facie, such a
position appears to be highly anomalous. By providing for the extinction of a
right. the parties are actually creating a law of prescription of their own, which
is a far more important matter than merely creating a law of limitation of their
own.

If the law does not allow the latter consequence to be imposed by agree-
ment. a fortiori, the law should not allow the former consequence also to be im-
posed by agreement.

3.2. In support of the present position, it might be argued that substantive
rights, which themselves flow from a contract, can be left to be dealt with by
the contract itself. But we are not impressed by this argument. The barring of
remedy affects only the adjective part of the legal system, while extinction of the
right may cause scrious hardship and injustice. It 1s difficult to understand why
the parties should be allowed to invent their own rules of prescription, when
they are not allowed to invent something lesser—their own rules of limitation.
This position is prima facie illogical, and we have not been able to think of
any countervaiiing or overriding consideration that may justify the illogicality.

The present misconceived approach has taken root because it is overlooked
that limitation and prescription are both the result of one identical circumstance
—the running of time. In fact, the Limitation Act is not confined to limitation
only. It provides for prescription also, in certain circumstances.

tHome Insurance Co. vy. Victoria Montreal Fire Insurance Co. (1907) A.C. 59, 64 (P.C.)
2This case will again be referred to paragraph 3.10 infra.

[Chapters 2—3

np *८


Chapte~ 3] Law Commission of India

1 3.3. Further, the matter should really be considered ता a broader plane, Freedom of
रह namely, how much freedom of contract should be allowed to the parties. If a contract
contractual clause causes serious hardship and injustice, such freedom has to be fimits.
curtailed in the interests of socicty. There is, of course, nothing new in this ap-
proach. The question is only one of applying it to the subject now under consi-

deration.

3.4. The hardship and injustice referred to above do not reside in the realm Keraia case
of mere conjecture. A Kerala case’ affords an actual illustration of such herdship. है Instance
In that case, a clause in a Bank guarantee provided that a suit or action to en- hardship.
foree the claims under the guarantee was to be filed within six months from the
date of expiry of the guarantee given by the Bank. The question arose whether
the clause was valid with reference to section 28, Contract Act. It was held that
it was valid. It was held that rhe liability of the bank was to remain alive only
ie for a period of six months after the expiry of the period of duration of guarantee,
| and that the rights of the person in whose favour the ‘guarantee was executed

were extinguished on the expiry of that period. In other words, there was an
i extinction of the right of the plaintiff under the contract and a discharge of the
defendants from liability, (The bank and its manager, the executant of the gua-
rantee on behalf of the bank were the defendants). Hence, it was held, the time
limit imposed by the contractual clause was not hit by section 28 of the Con-
tract Act. The conclusion so reached is, of course, in harmony with earlier deci-
sions. But such a short period allowed to the other party—under a clause which
forfeits the rights at the end of that period—must cause hardship.

! 3.5. We may also refer to a Bombay case which relates to the incorporation Bombay case

XV of policy conditions (Machine risk-insurahce policy). It was a condition of for-

feiture in case of a fraudulent claim or failure to bring an action within the sti- ,

! pulated time on repudiation of the. claim. There was no reference made to this

‘ condition in the receipt of first premium, nor was it brought to the notice of the

| insured before accepting the first premium. Nevertheless, it was held that the

की condition formed a normal term of the class of policies in question and was
binding on the insured. Furthef, it was held that the condition did not violate

| 5 section 28 of the Contract Act.*

|

3.6. No doubt, the view adopted in such cases is in accord with the general Need for

understanding of the legal position and there are numerous other decisions adop- the inter.
ting the same approach which need not be enumerated. However, having regard est of

to the broader points made in the earlier paragraphs of this Chapter, it would economic
[ appear that there is need to alter the law on the subject. in the interests of econo. justice.
mic and social justice. |

| The present position works serious hardship. The major sufferers under the

| present position are consumers who have occasions to deal with big business. Be-

H cause of the unequal position of the parties, a consumer may have to ‘agree’
to a clause extinguishing the rights, but such a situation cannot be regarded as
satisfactory from the point of view of justice.

3.7. A revision of the law, by invalidating even prescriptive contractual Uncertainty
7 clauses, is not only required on the merits (for the reasons mentioned above), but resulting
will also make the law simpler. At present, in every case, a subtle distinction has present
to be applied as to whether a clause merely bars a remedy or extinguishes the position.
right. The decision hangs on a fine distinction that is not easy of application,
creating uncertainty in the minds of parties for a conflict of approach in actual
cases in courts. For example, it has been held that a condition in a life insurance
1 policy that no suit shall be brought on the policy after one year from the death
| of the insured is void.’ But a condition in a fire insurance policy that the com-
pany shall not be liable for loss or damage after the expiry of twelve months
| from the happening of the loss or damage, unless the claim was the subject of a
| pending aciion or arbitration, does not contravene section 28.-

‘Kerala Electrical and Allied Engineering Co, Ltd. v. Canara Bank, AIR 1980 Ker.
151.

a4 *New India Ass. Co. v. R. M. Khandelwal, AIR 1974 Bom 228.
36, Rainey ५. Burma Eiro & Marine Ins, Co., AIR 1926 Rang.
: ‘A. N. Ghose v. Reliance Ins. Co., AIR 1924 Rang. 15, 16, 17, ILR 11 Rang. 475.
‘ ae yer cases cited in Pearl Ins. Co, y, Atma Ram, AIR 1960 Punj. 236, 240, 244
(F.B.).

ow


6

Assumed
justifica-
tion for
present

position.

Possible
arguments
मा support
of the
Present
Position

considered.

Privy
Council
case,

Analogy
of English
Taw not
applicable.

Taw Commission of India

3.8. We have been at pains to consider whether there are any strong rea-
sons justifying the present position. We must, in this context, note the reasons
sometimes given in reported cases in support of the present appros Ina
Punjab case in which the validity of a prescriptive clause in contract was upheld,
the High Court set out certain grounds in support of its conclusion.’ They may
be summarised as under:—

(1) The primary duty of a court of law is to enforce a promise and to up-
hold the sanctity of contracts not opposed to public policy or law.

(2) The objects and exigencies of insurance are such that promptitude in
asserting or enforcing a claim, and in its settlement, is of the essence.
The Insurance Companies would thus be justified in putting a time
limit within which the claim must be enforced, failing which all rights
under the policy would come to an end.

(3) A prescriptive clause docs not provide a limitation period different
from the statutory period. The insured can still maintain an action
within the statutory period, if the company waives the clause.

(4) A contract may contain within itself the elements of its own discharge
(express or implied), for its determination in certain circumstances.

(5) As the clause does not limit the time within which the insured could
enforce his rights and only limits the time during which the contract
will remain alive, it is not hit by section 28 of the Contract Act.

3.9. The question at issue now is not whether such clauses are valid under
section 28, but rather, whether the present position requires reform in the inte-
rests of justice. We shall deal with the above propositions, in so far as they could
be relied upon as supporting the justice of the present position. Now, the first
proposition in the Punjab judgement summarised above’ is a general statement
which, of course, is sound. A court must enforce a promise which is not rendered
void by a specific legal provision. The question, however, still remains whether
such clauses are beneficial or harmful. In this context, let us scrutinise proposi-
ion (2). At the first sight, a cogent reason is given in that proposition, based as
it is on considerations of business convenience, (the exigencies of insurance). But
the problem here is, that if the prompt settlement of claims «under insurance
policies is to be treated as on overriding consideration where the rights are ex-
tinguished under the clause, then why is it that clauses (including clauses in in-
surance policies) which limit the time for filing a suit are treated as objection-
able? What applies to a limitation clause must apply to an extinction clause also
(and vice versa). The exigencies of insurance business require that the remedy
should also be allowed to be barred after a time limit. But this is not the law.

Proposition (3) above' is, if we may say so with respect. a bit technical one:
waiver of the time limit is hardly met with in practice.

As to propositions (4) and (5) above.’ the freedom of parties to set a limit
for the duration of tights so created by contracts may (for the sake of argument)
be accepted as the basis of the present position. But it would be a weak argu-
ment when one has regard to the other aspects of economic justice and uncqual
bargaining power. set out earlier in this Chapter.

3.10. A Privy Council case’ sometimes cited in this connection may be
noted. In that case, a time limit clause usually inserted in insurance policies was,
by careless drafting, incorporated in re-insurance policy. The Privy Council helds
that a clause prol ing legal proceedings after a limited period may be a rea-
sonable provision in a protection against direct loss to specific property, but can
hardly be applicable to a re-insurance policy.

3.11. In this connection, it is also relevant to point out that in England, a
clause imposing limitation of the period within which an action can be brought

after loss appears to be is valid. Apparently, English law has no rule similar to
section 28, Contract Act’ which might invalidate contractual time limits cutting

‘Pearl Ins. Co, vy. Atma Ram, AIR 1960 Punj. 237, 240, para ० (FB) (per A. N. Grover

2Paragraph 3.8, supra.
‘Paragraph 3.8 supra.

‘Paragraph 3.8 supra.

*Paragraph 3.8 supra.

“Home Ins. Co. of New York ५. Victoria Montreal Fire Ins. Co. (1907) AC 59
(P.C.), relied on in Pearl Ins. Co. ४. Atma Ram, AIR 1960 Punj. 236 (F.B.).

See discussion in Pearl Ins. Co. v. Atma Ram, AIR 1960 Punj. 236, 239, para 8.

[Chapter 3]



है
।

ce OR ee पजौ--ज>---

acetal
rie

{ 3-2 Mof LJ&CA/e4

Law Commission of India

down the period for suing. It has been said' that (in regard to insurance cases),
theie is a great deal of sense in the English approach, particularly in the case of
fire insurance or insurance against accident where the liability as to the extent
of the damage caused when the matters are fresh can be measured with a certain
amount of accuracy. If, however, this is a good reason for recognising the vali-
dity of contractual clauses extinguishing rights, it should also apply to limitation
clauses. If the assumption that in the former case (extinction clauses) lapse of
time results in all kinds claims which cannot be determined with exactitude,
then identical is the position for limitation clauses.

3.12. It has been stated that in U.S.A., condition in a policy against the American

maintenance of an action unless commenced within 12 months after the loss isLaw.

valid. The the theory is that statutes of limitation prescribe what is supposed
to be a reasonabie period, so as to ensure promptness in the prosecution of reme-
dies, but “there is nothing in their language or object which inhibits parties from
stipulating for a shorter period within which to assert their respective claims”?

We would, however. like to observe that the analogy of American Law—
assuming that the position there is as has been putforth in this paragraph--is of
no use. If a legal system permits time limit clauses (in contracts) which bar the
remedy, there is nothing illogical if it also permits ime limit clauses (in con racts)
which extinguish the substantive rights. No anomaly would arise in that case, since,
whatever be the form of the contractual stipulation, it would be recognised as
valid. The position in India (under the present law) is different. A party is not
allowed to provide for the period of limitation by a contractual stipulation but
he can provide for the period of prescription. This is obviously anomalous.
Moreover, such a distinclion encourag*s ‘he parties o the contract to putforih
arguments to the effect that the particular clause in contract is one which extin-
guishes the right, or that it is one which merely affec’s the remedy. A party inte-
rested in affirming the validity of the clause would argue for the former while a
party interes ed in denying its validi‘y would argue for the latter. The confus‘on,
hardship and dispucs arise because the law is illogical and irrational by permitting
a contractual stipulation that makes a bigger inroad on the general law, , while
not permitting a contractual stipulation that makes a lesser inroad on the general
law.

3.13. For reasons earlier stated, the proper approach, so far as India is Proper,
concerned, shou!d be one that ensures that one party to a contract is not left at approach.

the mercy of the other on the matter, under consideration, which is basic to the
very survival of contractual rights. In fact, a commentary on the Indian Con-
tract Act published in 1915. before the cluster of case law on the section arose,
Teflects the true approach. Dealing in the Introduction, with section 28 (Agree-
meit in restraint of legal proceedings) the commentary says:

“Another class of void agreements consists of these by which a man is res-

tricted from enforcing his rights by recourse to the ordinary legal tribunals. °

Such agreements have been discountenanced by the English Courts on the
ground that the law will rot allow a man to shut himself absolutely off from
the benefits of its protection, and lay himself practically at the mercy of the
person with whom he has coritracted.”

CHAPTER 4
COMMENTS RECEIVED ON THE WORKING PAPER

4.1. We shall make our concrete recommendations for the umendment of Comments
the law at the appropriate place. Before we do so, it will be convenient to set out, favouring
in brief, a gist of the comments received by us on the subiect. As has been amendment,

mentioned in the introductory chapter,‘ we had circulated a Working Paper on
the subject to interested persons and bodies, inviting their comments as to the
need for amendment of section 28 of the Contract Act on the point under con-
sideration. With one exception (to be noticed presently), all the comments re-
ceived on the Working Paper agree that there is need to amend section 28 on
the lines envisaged in this report. It may be mentioned that while circulating
the Working Paper, the Commission had made a request that the comments

1Ruby Gen Ins. Co. v. Bharat Bank, AIR 1950 H.P. 350, 753.

°Cf. Ridglesharger v. Hertford Fire Ins. Co., (1872) 19 Law Ed. 257, cited in Pearl
tn Co ७. Atma Ram, AIR 1960 Punj. 236.

3Cunningham and Shepherd, Contract Act (1915) page xvii, para 40, (Introduction).
‘Para 1.3 supra.



Analysis of
comments.

Comments
received
from the
High Courts.

‘Comments
Teceived
from State
Governments.

Insurance law.
and law of
‘Common
Carriers
(Suggestion

of Government
of West Bengal).

Adhesion
Contracts
(Suggestion of
the Govern-
ment of Madhya
Pradesh).

Provisions
हि शत
legal proceedings
other than
suits.

Need for
reform of
the law.

Law Comnission of India

might be sent by 31st October, 1983. However, all the comments received upto
the date of signing this report have been taken into consideration by the Com-
mission.

_ 4.2. The Commission has received fourteen replies in response to the Work-
ing Paper. Of these, five are from High Courts; six are from State Governments:
and three are [vom associations of businessmen.

4.3. Of the five High Courts that have sent replies in response to the Work-
ing Paper, two nave steted that they have no comments to make. The remaining
three have expressed the view that the section needs amendment as envisaged
in this repori.' One of them regards such an amendment as very wholesome and
fuliy jusii:ed in order to achieve the ends of public justice,’ while another re-
gards it as desirable and legally justified“

4.4. Of the six replies received from the Law Departments of State Govern-
mer ail agree that section 28 needs amendment on the lines envisaged in this

Report.

Some of the replies received from State Governments have made a few ad-
ditional points.

We deal with these additional points in the next few paragraphs.

4.5. There is, in the first place, the point made by the Government of West
Bengal’ sugges:ing that not only section 28 of the Contract Act but also the rele-
vant laws of insurance and common carriers so as to promote economic justice.
We have taken note of this suggestion.

4.6. A suggestion hes been made by the Government of Madhya Pradesh
(Law and Legislative Affairs Department)’ that not only the question of time
but also many other questions relating to adhesion contracts may be examined in
detai] and the law may be suitably amended for the protection of the rights of

poor litigants.

In this context, we may mention that the subject of unfair terms in contracts
has already been taken up by the Law Commission, and a Working Paper on
the subject circulated for comments.”

4.7. Vinally, it may be mentioned that the Government of Punjab (Legal
and Legislative Affairs Department), while expressing agreement with the need
for invalidatin: contractual clauses which extinguish a (substantive) right on the
failure of a party to institute a “suit” has further suggested* that the same should
be the position where there is failure to institute a legal proceeding other than a
suit. We have found the suggestion acceptable and have incorporated it in the
amendment recommended by us’ in section 28.

CHAPTER 5
RECOMMENDATION

5.1. We now come to the changes that are needed in the present law. In
our opinion, the present legal position as to Prescriptive clauses in contracts
cannot be: defended as a matter of justice, logic, commonsense or convenience.
Whea accepting sucb clauses, consumers either do not realise the possible ad-
verse impact of such clauses, or are forced to agree because big corporations are
not prepared to enter into contracts except on these onerous terms. “Take it or
leave it all”, is their general attitude, and because of their superior bargaining

Law Commission File No. के, 2/10)/83-LC. serial no. 1, 6. 7, 9 and 12.
Law Commission File No, F. 2(10)/83-LC, Serial No. 1.

21 aw Commission File No. F. 2(10)/83-LC, Serial No. 6.

‘Law Commission File No. F. 2(10)/83-LC, Serial No. 3, 4. 5. 8, 11 and 14.
3Law Commission File No. F, 2(10)/83-LC, Serial No, 3,

‘Law Commission File No. F. 2(10)/83-LC, Serial No. 5,

7Law Commission of India Working Paper on Unfair Terms in Contracts.
8Law Commission File No. F, 2(10)/83-LC, Serial No, 11,

°Paragraph 5.3 infra, section 28(c) as recommended.



ee

[Chapter 5] Law Commission of India 9

power, they naturally have the upper hand. We are not, at present, dealing with
the much wider field of “standard form contracts” or “standard” terms. But
confining ourselves to the narrow issue under discussion, it would appear that
the present lega! position is open to serious objection from the common man’s

(~ हक point of view. Further, such clauses introduce an element of uncertainty in tran-
sactions which are entered into daily by hundreds of persons.

5.2. It is hardly necessary to repeat all that we have said in the preceding Demerits of
Chapters about the demerits of the present law. Briefly, one can say that the the present
present law, which regards prescriptive clauses as valid while invalidating time !2w.
limit clauses which merely bar the remedy, suffers from the following principal
defects: —

(a) It causes serious hardship to those who are economically disadvantaged
and is violative of economic justice.

(b) In particular, it harms the interests of the consumer, dealing with big
corporations.

(c) It is illogical, being based on a distinction which treats the more severe
flaw as valid, while invalidating a lesser one.

(d) It rests on a distinction too subtle and refined 10 admit of easy appli-
cation in practice. It thus, throws a cloud on the rights of parties, who
do not know with certainty where they stand, ultimately leading to
avoidable litigation.

5.3. On a consideration of all aspects of the matter, we recommend that i
section 28 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, should be suitably amended so as amen
to render invalid contractual clauses which purport to extinguish, on the expiry section 28,
of a specified term, rights accruing from the contract. Here is a suggestion for Comtract Act.
re-drafting the main paragraph of section 28.

Revised Section 28, main paragraph, Contract Act as recommended
28. Every agreement—

(a) by which any party thereto is restricted absolutely from enforcing his
rights under or in respect of any contract by the usual legal proceed-
ings in the ordinary tribunals, or

(b) which limits the time within which he may thus enforce his tights, or

(c) which extinguishes the rights of any party thereto under or in respect
of any contract on the expiry of a specified period or on failure to
make a claim or to institute a suit or other legal proceeding within a
specified period, or

(d) which discharges any party thereto from any liability under or in res-
pect of any contract in the circumstances specified in clause (c), is void
| to that extent,

(K. K. MATHEW),
. Chairman.

+ G. P. CHATURVEDI),
4 Member.
(DR. M. B. RAO),
Member. *
(P.M. BAKSHI)
Part-Time Member.
(VEPA P. SARATHI
ऊ Part-Time Member.

(A.K. SRINIVASAMURTHY)
Member-Secretary.

DATED:
MGIPCBE~S2—=_2 M of LJ & CA/84—11-!-85—525

wr

oh