LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

NINETY-EIGHTH REPORT

ON

SECTIONS 24 TO 26, HINDU MARRIAGE ACT, 1955 : ORDERS FOR INTERIM
MAINTENANCE AND ORDERS FOR THE MAINTENANCE OF CHILDREN IN
" MATRIMONIAL PROCEEDINGS

April, 1984


* Pact
Guarren i introductory ©. + 2, + + woke i
Cuarmm 2 Sections 24 to 26, Hindy Marriage Act,1965 . . - ee 8
Cuarrm 3. Maintonsnce for Childros without a Tormal application © -. 6-45 =
“Cuapran 4 Interim msintonanoe: The effectivedste =. 5 ee 6
Cuarrmn 5 Appeal, Revision and Baforesment =. sw 9

Cuarrms 6 Comments received on the wotking Paper) ss} eB
Gaarres 7 Recommendations 9. - 7) ee te oe + 213



CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTORY

“4.1, Certain questions concerned with orders for interim maintenance under Seopé.
the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and with orders for the maintenance of children
under the Act are the subject matter of this Report. On several points arising
out of the relevant statutory provisions,’ a conflict of decisions has arisen and it
seems appropriate that the conflict should be settled by legislative amendment.
On some other points, a discussion has taken place in the writings on the Act or
in case law. These discussions need to be taken note of. The Commission has
had occasion to deal with the Hindu Marriage Act more than once in the past.’
But the points that are the subject matter of the present study had not arisen
at ‘the time when the Commission undertook, in its earlier Reports, a survey of
various provisions of the Act.

1.2. The questions that are proposed to be discussed in the succeeding The questions.to be
Chapters are mainly of a procedural nature. -But they occur. almgst daily in considered—sature
practice in most matrimonial proceedings under the Hindu Marriage Act. Further, of.
relating as they do to the maintenance of spouses and children, they possess a
practical importance of their own. It is therefore desirable that the law on the
subject should be settled, made uniform throughout the country and incorporated
in the Act. It is for these reasons that the Commission has considered it necessary
to deal with the relevant sections of the Hindu Marriage Act in this Report.

1.3. It may be mentioned at this stage that on the subject of this Report, wor Pay

the Commission had prepared and. circulated a Working Paper,’ setting out the i the Com-
issues arising out of the relevant statutory provisions and the possible solution, mission.
The comments that have been-received will be dealt with in detail at the appro-
priate place, in thts Report.' At this stage, it is enough to state that almost all
the comments received on the Working Paper agree with the need for amending
the Act on the lines envisaged in this Report, The Commission is grateful to all
those who have responded by sending their views on the Working Paper.

1 Sections 24 to 26, Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.

2 Law Commission of India, 59th Report (Hindu Marriage Act 1955 and Special Marriage Act,
1954) and 71st Report (Hindu Marriage Act, 1955—-Irretrievable breakdown of marriage as a ground of
divorce). :

3 Working Paper on Sections 24 to 26, Hindu Marriage Act, 1956 ; Orders for interim mainte-
nance and orders for the maintenance of children inmatrimonial proceedings ; dated 16th
November, 1983.

« Chapter 6, infra.


Section 24, Hindu

Marriage Act.

Section 25, Hindu

Marriage Act.

Section 26, Hindu
Marriage Act,

CHAPTER 2
SECTIONS 24 TO 26, HINDU MARRIAGE ACT, 1955

2.1, Before dealing with the questions proper, it would be desirable to set

out the relevant provisions of the Hindu. Marriage Act, 1955. Maintenance
pondente lite and expenses of proceedings for the spouse are dealt with in section
24 of the Act, quoted below:—

“24. Where in any proceeding under this Act it appears to the court that
either the wife or the husband, as the case may be, has no independent
income sufficient for her or his support and the necessary expenses on the
proceeding, it may, on the application of the wife or the husband, order the
tespondent to pay to the petitioner the expenses of the proceeding, and
monthly during the proceeding such sum as, having regard to the petitioner's
own income and the income of the respondent, it may seem to the court
to be reasonable”.

It may be noted that this section is confined to maintenance (pendent lite)

of a spouse. It does not deal with children. It does require that there should be
a formal application. ५

1 आग 4

2.2. Permanent alimony and maintenance for spouses are dealt with in sec-

tion 25 of the Act, reading as under:—

“25. (1) Any court exercising jurisdiction under this. Act, may at the
time of passing any decree or at any time subsequent thereto, on application
made to it for the purpose by either the wife or the husband, as the case
may be, order that the respondent shall, while the applicant remains un-
married, pay to the applicant for her ot his maintenance and support such
gross sum or such monthly or periodical sum, for a term not exceeding the
life of the applicant as, having regard to the respondent’s own income and
other property, if any, the income and other property of the applicant and
the conduct of the parties, it may seem to the court to be just, and any
such payment may be secured, if necessary, by a charge on the immovable
property of the respondent.

(2) If the court is satisfied that there is a change in the circumstances of
either party at any time after it has made an order under sub-section (1),
it may, at the instance of either party, vary, modify or rescind any such
order in such manner as the court may deem just.

(3) If the court is satisfied that the party in whose favour an order has been
made under this section has remarried or, if such party is the wife, that
she has not remained chaste, or if such party is the husband, that he has
had sexual intercourse with any woman outside wedlock, it shall rescind the
order.”

This section is also confined to spouses and requires a formal application.

It is confined to permanent maintenance, while section 24 is confined to interim
maintenance. ,

2.3. Regarding children both interim order and orders to be passed on

conclusion of the proceeding are dealt with in section 26 of the Hindu Marriage
Act, quoted below:— हु ¢

“26. In any proceeding under this Act, the court may from time to time,

pass such interim orders and make such provisions in the decree as it may

deem just and proper with respect to the custody, maintenance and education

of minor children, consistently with their wishes, wherever possible, and may,

after the decree, upon application by petition for the purpose, make from
. (2)


3

time to time, all such orders and provisions with respect to the custody,
maintenance and education of such children as might have been made by
such decree or interim orders in case the proceeding for obtaining such
decree were still pending, and the court may also from time to time revoke,
suspend or vary any such orders and provisions previously made.”

The first portion of this section, dealing with interim ma‘ntenance does not
require an application. The second portion concerned with maintenance orders
for children on conclusion of proceedings does require an application. 7
2.4. It will be noticed that-— Separate sections

wy os + + + . + हि for Spouses and
(i) interim maintenance of a spouse and interim maintenance of children (काका

are dealt with in two separate sections (sections 24 and 26, respecti-
vely) of the Act ;

(ii) one of these two sections (section 24) envisages an “application”, but
the other (section 26) does aot (in the portion relating to interim
orders) require an application.

This apparently minor matter is mentioned here, because it is relevant to

one of the questions going to be discussed in the succeeding, Chapter,


CHAPTER 3
MAINTENANCE FOR CHILDREN WITHOUT A FORMAL APPLICATION

Interim mainte- 7२५ 3.1. The first question that has arisen with reference to the provisions of the

nance for children. Hindu Marriage Act quoted above! is this—Can interim maintenance be granicd
for children under section 24 of that Act,? where there is no separate application
under section 26 in respect thereof?*

Conflict of view® 3.2. There is a conflict of judicial decisions on the point. The following
on a sections 24High Courts take the view that even where there is no separate application for
and 26. the grant of maintenance to children under section 26, the court should, in 4
proceeding initiated by the wife under sect-on 24, exercise its discretion and
award maintenance to the children:—
(i) Andhra Pradesh’;
». Gi) Delhi*;
(iii) Karnataka®;
(iv) Kerala’; z
(v) Punjab & Haryana’; and
(vi) Rajasthan’.
3.3 The contrary view, denying the court such a power without a formal
° application under section 26 has been taken by the following High Courts: —
(i) Jammu & Kashmir’; - ra
(ii) Orissa”; and
(ii) Patna”.
3.4. The extensive case law on the subject has been reviewed in some of
\f पु ट
Reviow of ease law the rulings, of which an Andhra Pradesh” one is very useful. Incidentally, the

Kerala judgement" taking the wider view attracted a number of favourable as
well as unfavourable comments in articles published in a Law Journal’.

Another question 3.5. The above case law relates to orders for interim maintenance of children
application undet unler the Hindu Marriage Act. A somewhat similar question, which also seems
_ Section 26 if neces-+q rave led to some judicial controversy, has arisen in connection wth orders

sery for permanent * aes
maintenance af chit fOr permanent maintenance of children. The precise question is as follow:

aren. Can maintenance be granted to a child (section 26, Hindu Marriage Act)
on an application by the wife under section 25, Hind Marriage Act, even
though no specific mention of section 26 is made in the application of the
wife?

1 Chapter 2, supra.

2 Paragraph 2-2, supra.

3 Paragraph 2-3, supra.

५ Narendra Kumar v. Suraj Mehta, ALR. 1982. A.P. 100.

5 Damodar v. Bimla, (1974) P.L.R. (Del.) 33.

* D_Thimmappa x. Nagavené, A.ILR. 1976 Karn, 215; Subhashini v. Umakanth, A..R. 1081

Karn.
7. Radha Kumari v. K.M.K. Nair, (1989) K.L-T. 417 (Sukumaran, J.).

® Balbir Kaur v. Raghubir, A.1.R. 1974 P & H 225.
* Baboo Lal v. Prem Lata, A.1.R. 1974 Raj. 93.
1 Puran Chand v. Kamla Devi, ALR. 1981 7 & K 5.
मे Akasam Chinna Babu v. Akasam Parvati, A.I.R. 1967 Orissa 163.
12 Bankim Chandra v. Anjali, A.LR. 1972 Pat. 80.
18 Narendra Kumar v. Suraj Mehta, A.1.R. 1982 AP. 100.
34 Radha Kumari, v. K.M.K. Nair, (1982) K.L.P, 417 (Sukumaran, J.).
: 3७ Soe articles by Shri P.V. Shri ae .
Feat व पक (1088) KLE: लाता) pages 63,7, 89 and Bo Mathew and Shei WK,

4)



5

According to the Madras High Court’, this can be done. According to the
Bombay* and Gujarat® High Courts, this cannot be done.

Se :
ideri ‘ i I ‘Amendment needed
3.6. On considering the tw questions that have created ‘trouble % above, eae, tan

it would appear that there is need to settle the legal position on “both of them yiarSeve ‘Act.

which are of a recurring nature, As to the tenor of the amendment required,
the better course would be to give a wide scope to the power of the Court,
under section 26 of the Hindu Marriage Act,’ so as to make it clear that the
power there-under can be exercised with or without an application..

The object could be achieved by inserting, in section 26 of the Hindu Marri-
age Act,’ after the words “from time to time”, the words “and whether or not an
application for the purpose is made on behalf of the minor children”. Such an
amendment should suffice to make it clear that (i) interim orders regarding ch‘l-
dren, (ii) as well as permanent orders regarding them, can be made without a
formal application, Of course, the court will pass such orders only where the exis‘-
ence of children and the need to pass orders regarding their custedy, education
and maintenance are known to exist. That need not be specifically emphasised
while amending the section. In any case, what tle section envisages is a power,
and not a duty. Incidentally, the present structure of section 26 imposes some
strain on the reader. Opportunity should, therefore, also be taken of breaking up
the section into clauses so as to facilitate reading.

3 Munuswamy Rajoo v. Hansa Rani, A.LR. 1975 Mad. 15,

2 Dalli Ram Jain, v. Paravati, A.1.R. 1982 Bom. 15.

3 Dharamshi Premji v. Bai Sakar Kanji, A.1.R. 1968 Guj. 150.
* Paragraphs 3-1 and 3-5, supra,
® Paragraphs 2-2, supra,

5 Paragraphs 2-6, supra.



fe,

CHAPTER 4°
INTERIM MAINTENANCE : THE EFFECTIVE DATE
"The effective date. 4.1. Arising out of sections 24 and 26 of the Hindu Marriage Act is another

question relating to the date from which interim maintenance can be granted by
the court. Can such maintenance be granted from the, date of the service of summons
on the main petition ? Or, can it be granted only from the date of the application

‘ for interim relief (where such an application is made)? Or, should it be operative

only from the date of the order for interim relief. Sections 24 and 26 of the
Hindu Marriage Act are silent in. this regard and do not bind down the court
to a specific date. However, there is some uncertainty in this respect as will be
evident from the case law summarised in the paragraphs that follow,
Ono view “service of 4.2. According to some High Courts, the order for interim maintenance can
fhe tive. date, 0८ made effective from the date of service of summons on the main petition.
The High Courts taking this view are :—
. (i) Calcutta;? .
(ii) Delhi?
(iii) Kerala;*
, (iv) Mysore; and
. (v) Punjab and Haryana.*
Second view—dateof . 4.3. The second view is that the order can relate back to some date later
issues the effective than the date of the main petition. Thus, one of the Jammu & Kashmir rulings®
date. holds that maintenance is payable only from the date on which issues are framed
(in the main petition). .
FY :
Third view—date of 4.4. According to the Andhra Pradesh High Court,’ maintenance is payable

application, for inte- from the date of the application for interim relief(by the spouse) under section

tive date. 24. In holding so, it points out that otherwise the respondent may frustrate the

application by avoiding service of the main summons. +
Maintenance in 4.5. Similar controversy has arisen in regard to award of maintenance at
appeal, the stage of appeal.’ In an Allahabad case, alimony pendente lite was claimed in

appeal, and was allowed retrospectively from the date of filing of the appeal.’
But, accorditg to a ruling of the Andhra Pradesh High Court,” the order for
interim maintenance cannot be made effective from the date earlier than service
of the notice of appeal. .

Need for amend- 4.6. In this position, it is desirable to make the law specific and certain by
ment by inserting

scotion 264, 1४ 75018 -in the. Hindu Marriage Act a provision—say, as section 26A—making

the Hindu Marriageit clear that an order for interim maintenance under section 24 (spouse) or under
Act. section 26 (children) may be given effect— .

(a) from such date, not earlier than the date of the application upder that

section, as the court considers just and. proper in the ‘circumstances,

- (b) or where no application has been made under section 26, then from such

date, not earlier than the date of service of the notice issued on the

petition by. which the main proceeding was instituted, as the court
considers just and proper in the circumstances,

1 (a) Samir Banerjee v. Sujata Banerjee, (1966) 70 C.W.N. 642.

(0) Sobhana v. Amar Kanta, A.L.R. 1959 Cal. 455,
3 Gajna Devi v. Purshotam, ALR. 1977 Delhi 178.
* Radha Kumari v. K.M.K. Nair, (1982) K.L-T. 417, 424, pare 26. °
4 N. Subramanyam v. M.@. Saraswath, 4.1. छे, 1964 Mys. 38, para 7.
8 Sarita Mehta v. Aravind Kumar Mehta, (1978) 8 P.L.R. 213.

«५ Puran Chand v: Kamla, AIR. 1981 व & K 6. (Decision on corresponding provision of the
State Act.). +

7 Narendra Kumar v. Suraj Mehta, ALR. 1982 A.P. 100, 106, para 18 (March).

3 As tothe appellate stage, seo Harlochan Singh v. Mohinder Kaur, A.I.R. 1963 Punj. 240,250
© Mahabir Prasad ए. Puahpamala, (1970)'All L.J. 1406, .
10 Subba Rao v. Anasuyamma, 4.1, 9. 1957 A.P. 170,

के ©)

«

on



CHAPTER 5
APPEAL, REVISION AND ENFORCEMENT

5.1. Questions have, we find, been raised as to the competence of revision Appeal and revision
against orders for interim maintenance passed under the Hindu Marriage Act. (interim orders).
We have given some thought to the matter and have come to the conclusion,
that after the amendment of section 28 of the Act, there should be no difficulty
or obscurity in this regard. Briefly stated, the position as clarified by amended
section 28, is that an order for interim maintenance is not appealable. Revision
is therefore permissible in law against such an order, but only if the High Court,
in iis discretion, regards the case as fit for interference by way of revision in the
circumstances of the particular case. No amendment can better or alter this
position, and none is therefore proposed. : .

5.2. Questions have also been raised as to the mode of enforcement of Enforcement under
orders for interim maintenance. Under section 28A as inserted in the Hindu section 28a, Hindu
नि ् . : jarriage Act and
Marriage Act, all decrecs and orders made by the Court in any proceeding under other modes of enfor-
the Act shall be enforced in like manner as the decrees and orders of the court cement.
made in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction for the time being are en-
forced, For all practical purposes this should suffice,

5.3. This does not, of course, mean that other modes of enforcement are Other modes of
necessarily barred. These other modes could include, for example, (a) stay of pro- enforeement.
ceedings, where the party in default in paying the interim maintenance is the
petitioner in the main proceedings;* (b) striking off the defence under section
151, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, where the party in default in paying the
interim maintenance is the respondent in the main petition; (c) punishment for
contempt,

5.4. In this position, it does not appear to be necessary to make any amend- Amendment _ not
ment on the question of the mode of enforcement of orders for interim mainten- eeded as toenforce-
ance. , ment.

5.5. While on the subject of maintenance orders and their enforcement we Earlier Report of
may mention that some years ago, 5 the Law Commission made a recommendation the Law Commi:

- for imposing, in certain circumstances, criminal liability for failure to pay main- सन °° Tunin®
tenance or permanent alimony granted to the wife by the court under certain °
enactments or rules of law. The Report awaits implementation. पु

1 Articles published in the Kerala Law Times : see footnotes to para 3-4, supra.
3 Narendra Kumar v. Suraj Mehta, A.1.R. 1982, A.P. 100.
3 (a) Malkan Rani, v. Krishna Kumar, A.1.R. 1961 Punj. 42.
(b) Anita v. Birendra, A.ILR. 1962 Cal. 88, .
(०) Bhuneshwar v. Dronta Bai, A.1.R. 1963 M.P. 259. . -
(a) Jai Singh, v. Khimi Bhiklu, ALR. 1978 H.P. 45, 49, 50, para 20,
(b) Ram Swaroop v. Janak, A.LR. 1973 Punj. 40. है
(० Anuradha v. Santosh Nath, A.ILR. 1976 Del. 246.
« Ram Swaroop v. Janak, A.LR. 1973 Punj, 40. न

5 Law Commission of India 73rd Report (Criminal Liability for failure to pay maintenance or
Permanent alimony granted to the wife by the Court under certain enactments or rules of law).

to)


CHAPTER 6

COMMENTS RECEIVED ON THE WORKING PAPER

Comments on the 6.1. As stated in the Introductory Chapter, we had circulated to interested
Working Paper. persons and bodies a Working Paper on the subject of this Report, inviting their
views in the matter. A request was made to send views to the Commission by the
. 3Ist January, 1984, All replies received upto the date of signing this Report have

been taken into account before finalising this Report.

Replies repsived. 6.2. In all, ten replies have been received on the Working Paper. Of these,
two replies are from High Courts,* four are from State Government,* one reply
is from a State Law Commission,' one reply is from an Advocate,’ one reply has
been received from a social organ‘sation,’ and one is from a gentleman from
‘Madras.’ Almost all of them have agreed with the need for amending the Hindu
Marriage Act, on the lines envisaged in this Report.

Whether  amend- 6.3. One comment received from the office of a State Law Commission,*

ment necessary. raises a query that an amendment of section 28 is not required. The comment,
however, (it has been stated) is subject to approval of the State Law Commission,
We may mention in this context that we are not recommending’ any amendment
of section 28. The amendments that we are going to recommend" concern the
matters dealt with in section 24 and 26 of the Hindu Marriage Act and are
necessary in view of the case law discussed (and other points made) in the
relevant Chapters of this Report.”

Some of the comments’ received on the Working Paper while agreeing that!
there is need for amending the Act, also make certain additional suggestions,
We shall deal with these in later paragraphs of this Report.”

High Cougte. 6.4. Of the two High Courts that have sent in their replies to the Working
Paper issued by the Commission, one has no comments to offer, while the other
agrees that there is need to amend the Act on the points dealt with in. this
Report. . \

State Government. 6.5. As regards the four State Governments* that have sent in their replies
+ to the Working' Paper, all agree with the need for amendment. One of them has
made certain additional suggestions, which we shall mention in due course.”

Additional pointe 6.6. Coming to the additional suggestions made in a few of -the replies,
tenance decrees, We may first mention that two of the replies have expressed concern about the
delay and difficulties experienced in the execution of decrees and orders passed
for maintenance. Of these one is from an Advocate in Madhya Pradesh,” who

व Paragraph 1-3, supra. .

3 Law Commission File No. 2(14)/83-L.C. 8. No. 5 and 10.
File No. 2(14)/83-

ion File ¥ 8. No. 6,7, 8 and 11.
ion File No. 2(14)/83-.L.C. 8. No. 9.

ion Pile No. 2(14)/83-L.C. 8. No.
* Law Commission File No. 2(14)/83-L.C. 8. No. 3.

7 Law Commission File No, 2(14)/83-L.C. 8. No. 12.

® Law Commission File No. 2(14)/83-L.C. 8. No. 9 (Madhya Pradesh Law Commission).

® Seo Chapter 5, supra.

3० Chapter 7, infra.

1 Chapter 2.4, supra.

412 Paragraph 6 -6, et. arg. infra.
18 Law Commission File No. 2(14)/83-L.C. 8-No. 6.

24 Law Commission File No. 2(14)/83-L.C. 8. No. 10.

38 Law Commission File No. F., 2(14)/83L. 0. 8. No. 6, 2, 8 and 11.
3 Paragraphs 6-10 to 6-14, infra.
¥ Law Commission File No, F. 2(14)/83-.L.C, 8. No. 4 (An Adyocate from Madhya Pradesh.)

(8)


9

states that owing to poor economic condition, women are unable to represent

their case properly in court. This is a point outside the scope of this report, though

certainly deserving of attentions by appropriate authorities and organisations. The

other—and more elaborate—suggestion is from the Joint Women’s Programme

(Christian Institute for the Study of Religion and Society), New Delhi’. The

suggestions made by it are’of a detailed character and ure dealt with in the .
succeeding few paragraphs.”

Attachment of

6.7. In the reply received from the Joint Women’s Programme (Christian 0 i
Institu‘e for the Study of Religion and Socicty), New Delhi, mentioned above. (Speedin ernst
it has been stressed thai maintenance granted under various personal laws and Women’s Programme
* under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, does not sufficiently provide for the ©-L.R.S.).
protection of the deserted wife. It has. been suggested that to protect the deserted

wife and the children and to make the wifc’s remedy more eifective, provision

should be made to deduct the amount of maintenance from the husband’s salary,

if the husbands employed in Government or in public or private sector. If the

husband is self-employed or not traceable, provision should (it is suggested} be

made for maintenance, with the State as a party, for the protection of the desert-

‘ed family.

We appreciate the concern and anxiety felt by such organisations in regard
to the nced for the proper enforcement of decrees and orders for maintenance.
Some of the points raised—for example, the State taking over the burden for
protecting the deserted family in specified cases—touch matters transcending the
specific areas of the Hindu Marriage Act or any other particular matr:monial
enactment. But we would like to point out that so far the attachment of salary
or other earnings of the defaulter is concerned, the Code of Civil Procedue. 1908
make sufficient provisions. All disposable property of the judgment debtor who
is in default can under the Code, be attached in execution of a decree or order
for maintenance.! This includes salary or other periodical earnings of the de-
faulter. The only qualification is that the case of salary, the Code renders exempt
from attachment a specified portion.’ Under the present law, the exempt pottion
is one-third of the salary in case of a decree for maintenance. Ii may further be
mentioned that the Code® contains specific provisions as to the procedure to be
followed by the Courts for the attachment of (i) the salary of Government
Servants as well as other employees, and (ii) the noh-salary income of self-
employed and other persons. We hope that with increased legal literacy, these
provisions will become more widely known. .

*

6.8. The same organisations’ (Joint Women’s Programme, New Delhi) has pecteration of assets ,
stated that men employed overseas enter into dubious and deception marriages before marriage,
with women in India. Such men, it is stated, disclaim the wife after marriage and where husband resi.
the deserted wife is left without any provision for her livelihood or maintenance 4ing outside India,
The suggestion is that in order to overcome this deficiengy, the husband should
make a declaration of assets and provide, at the tinte of marriage, for the wife’s
maintenance. While we appreciate the neéd for protecting women in such . ”
circumstances, we must note that the suggestion, even if it be regarded as a
feasible one, falls outside the scope of this report. पर

6.9. A suggestion regarding the custody of minor children, made by the custody of minor
same organisation,® similarly falls outside the scope of this Report. The suggestion children.
is that custody in divorce cases be awarded to the spouse who is best suited in
the child’s interests, and that it may be borne in mind that for the congenial and
happy growth of a child, the mother is of primary importance, unless she is
mentally deranged.

4 Law Commission. File No. F. 2(14)/83-L.C. 8. No. 3 (Joint Women’s Programme, CISRS, New
Delhi). . हि
+ Paragraphs 6-7 to 6-9, infra.

2 Paragraph 6-6, supra.

4 Section 60(1), Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. .

5 Section 60(1), Proviso (i) and (ia), Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

® Order 21, rules 46 and 48, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

7 Law Commission File No. 2(14)/83-L.C. 8. No. 3.

6 Law Commission File No. F. 2 (14)/83-L.C. 8, No. 3 paragraph 2,

# As to handicapped children, sce paragraph 6-14, infra,

s

शत पु


10

Oy aol 6.10. A number of additional points have been made by the Government
Ponte wider section Of West Bengal (in the Legislative Department) in its comments on the Working
26 for order at the Paper.’ The points made show an earnest desire for effecting improvements in
conclusion of ‘the the Jaw, though they touch matters beyond the scope of the Report—indeed, come
Proceedings. of them go beyond the province of the matters that may be litigated in matrimonial
(Suggestion of proceedings. Emphasising the fact that a broken conjugal home and an alienat-
West Bengal). ed couple spell great disaster to children, the suggestion makes a number of
points, which we shall mention in brief. The first point made by the Government
of Wes: Bengal is that there -should be no insistence on an application, even
under section 26, latter part, Hindu Marriage Act, (orders for maintenance to
be passed at the conclusion of the hearing) and that the requirement of applica-
tion may be dispensed with. We have given some thought to this matter. However,
in the absence of any serious difficulties actually felt in practice, we are not in-
clined to recommend its delection. The matter is one relating to permanent
+ Maintenance, and if it is dealt with on the basis of some material which is on

record, there is some convenience in practice.

Disclosure in plea- 6.11. The second point made in the suggestion’ of the Government of West
dings about child Bengal is that in every matrimonial proceedings, the pleadings must disclose
ene whe.her the couple has any children, with details regarding the number, sex,
age, custody, maintenance and edycation of children. The object is making this
suggestion is to ensure that relief for children, if they are the victims of cruel
indifference, may attract urgent judicial attention, the expectation being that
on receipt of pleadings, the court may: have this aspect of the matter taken up

first with the urgency that it deserves.

The suggestion is, no doubt, worthy of serious consideration. We do not
deal with it in this Report, as the suggestion transeends the somewhat narrow
topics 16 which this Report is addressed. But the suggestion can be taken up if
and when the question of reformation the law relating to the welfare of children
is taken up on a broader level’.

Orders whether to be 6.12. Commenting on the proposal put forth in the Working Paper of : the
made effective fromlaw Commission as to the date from which an order for interim maintenance may
a ante Priot tobe made effective, the Government of West Bengal' has suggested that liability
‘ceedings. n ४ ए० 10 pay should arise precisely from the date when the duty to pay maintenance was
Suggestion of Gov- violated, and that the date of omission or neglect to maintain a spouse or
ernment of WeetChild in distress should, therefore, be the criterion in this regard. We are, how-
Bengal). ever, afraid that the suggested change would not quite fit in with the prdvisions
‘under consideration in this Report, or even with the Hindu Marriage Act taken

as a whole. The question of orders for maintenance in the context of that Act

arises because matrimonial relief provided for the Act. Since the subsistence of

the marriage is in issue in these proceedings, it becomes necessary for the law

to look into matters consequential on the break-up of the conjugal life of the

spouses. It is only to that extent that orders for maintenance are provided for in

the Act. Maintenance for the period to the petition seeking relief under the Act

would not be a matter ancillary to the filing of the petition for matrimonial redief

and may not appropriately fall within the Act. A matrimonial proceeding does not

appear to be an appropriate proceeding wherein to litigate what are, for all

practical purposes, claims for the recovery of arrears of past maintenance. As a

matter of substantive law, liability to pay maintenance may arise as soon as there!

is neglect. but the machinery for enforcine the liability may not necessarily find

- a place in matrimonial legislation. It is for these reasons that we are unable

to accept the suggestion. Lest this should appear to be too technical an approach,

we should hasten to add that we do not underrate, the importance of speedy

disposal of claims for maintenance. Suitable machinery in that regard is provided

in the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956, or (where the Act does not

_ spoly) in the general law. हि

Financial and psy- 6.13. It is true that sometimes, because of non-availability of resources
chological constrai-to file a proceeding and because of other constraints (including a psychological
nts on the woman.

1 Law Commission File No. F .2(14)/83-L.C. 8. No. 6.
2 Law Commission File No. F. 2(14)/83-L.C. 8. No. 3.
3 Matter for future consideration.

¢ Law Commission File No. F. 2(14)/83-L.C. 8. No. 6,


1

reluctance felt by the woman to bring matters to the Court), a woman miay
not be able to take proceedings immediately, and because of such delay,
some maintenance may fall in arrears. But this does not seem to be an adequate
.teason for disturbing the scheme of the Act.

6.14, The Government of West Bengal has also suggested that provision’
should be made in the Hindu Marriage Act regarding the maintenance of handi-
capped children. This point also raises issues of the general law of maintenance
and cannot be appropriately dealt with in this Report, which is concerned with
the machinery for the award of maintenance as a step consequential on matri-
monial relief’. .

1 Law Commission File No. F. 2(14)/83-L.C., 8. No. 6.
2 See paragraph 6-12 supra.

Handicapped
children.


CHAPTER 7
RECOMMENDATIONS

Reommendations 7.1. In the light of what we have stated in the preceding Chapters, and
having regard to the problems that have arisen with regard to (i) the question
whether a formal application for interim maintenance under section 26, Hindu
Marriage Act, 1955 is needed, and (ii) the date from whjch an order for interim
maintenance (for spouses or for children) can take effect under the Act, we_are
of the opinion that it is necessary to amend the Act on both the points ‘mentioned
above. We have come to the conclusion that the most just and convenient course
would be— : 1

(a) to amend section 26 of the Act’, so as to expressly dispense with the
need for a formal application for interim maintenance for the purposes
of the section, at the same time also splitting up the section so’ as
to improve its. readability; and .

(b) to insert in the Act a new section (say, section 26A), so as to make
a specific provision as to the date from which the order for maintenance
interim can take effect’.

Revised. section 26 7.2. Here is a concrete suggestion for revising section 26, if the above
Hindu Marriage Act recommendation finds favour :—

Revised section 26 Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (as recommended).
“26, In any ‘proceeding under this Act—

(a) the court may, from time to time, and whether or not an applica-
tion for the purpose is made on behalf of the minor children, pass
such interim orders and make’ such provisions in the decree as
it may deem just and proper with respect to the custody, main-
tenance and education of minor children, consistently with their
wishes, wherever possible, and

(b) the court may, after the decree, upon application by petition for
the purpose, make from time to time, all such orders and provisions
with respect to the custody, maintenance and education of such
children as might have been made, by such decree or interim
orders in case the proceeding for obtaining such decree were still
pending, and पु

(०) the! court may also, from time to time, revoke, suspend or vary
any such orders and provisions previously made”.

We recommend amendment as above of section 26 of the Hindu Marriage
Act. . हु ' t Bo

New section 26A, 7.3. We further recommend that a new section 26A should be inserted in
Hindu Marriage the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 on the following lines:— हु

Act, 1955. (reco- .
mmended). “26A. An order for interim maintenance under section 24 or section: 26
may be given effect—

(a) from such date, not earlier than the date of the application under
that section, as the court considers just and proper in the circum-
stances,

(b).‘or, where no application has been made under section 26, then
from such date, not earlier than the date of service of the notice

Oe पभपपफफफस्‍फऊफश्--_-_+++_+

3 Paregraph 3-6, eupra.
3 Paragraph 4-6, eupra,
a2)


: 13

| +.. -issued on the petition by which the main Proceeding was institut-
ed, as the court considers just and proper in the circumstances of
the case.”

(K.K. MATHEW)
r Chairman '
(J.P. CHATURVEDI) .
Member
(Dr. M.B. RAO)
Member
(P.M. BAKSHI)
hoy Part-time Member

n
| (VEPA P. SARATHI)
Part-time Member

1 . (AK, SRINIVASAMURTHY)
! Member-Secretary

Dated:

?

84-L/S114MofLI&CA—625—16-3-85—GIPS