LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

99TH REPORT
ON

ORAL AND WRITTEN ARGUMENTS IN THE
HIGHER COURTS

APRIL, 1984


Justice K. K. MATHEW _ D.O! No, F. 2(5)/84-LC

SHASTRI BHAVAN
NEW DELHI-110001

Dated. the 26th April, 1984

My dear Minister,

I am forwarding herewith the Ninety-ninth Report of the Law Commission
on “Oral and Written Arguments in the Higher Courts”.

As has been explained in Chapter [ of the Report, the subject was taken
up for consideration as a part of the exercise undertaken by the Commission on
the functioning of the Supreme Court and certain other aspects of the Higher
Judiciary in respect of which the Commission had already forwarded earlier its
95th Report, which mainly dealt with the creation of a Consiitutional Division in
the Supreme Court. The present Report is in continuation thereof dealing with
some of the other aspects arising out of the Questionnaire issued by the
Commission in 1982.

The Commission is indebted to Shri P.M. Bakshi, Part-time Member and
Shri A. K. Srinivasamurthy, Member-Secretary, for their valuable assistance jn
the preparation of the Report.

With regards.
Yours sincerely,

Sd/-
(K. K. MATHEW)
Shri Jagannath Kaushal,
Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs,
New Delhi.

Encl. : 99th Report.

84-L/SIISMofLI&CA—1


CONTENTS

Pace

Carrer 1 Introductory 6 eee eee + -+- : 1-2
Cuarren 2 Limiting Oral Arguments. 6 weet aT
Cuarren 3. Written Briofs in Partial Substitution of Oral Arguments = ++ 8--12
Carrer 4... Elimination of Oral Argumente in Special Cases. 13-15
Cuarrer 6 Summary of Recommendations =... 16-17
18—27

APPENDIX Written Briofs in the United States . . .


Genesis.

The questions for
consideration—
Questions 21
and 23 of the Ques-
tionnaire

2

Objectives of in-
quiry

Common theme.

Views received on
the Questionnaire.

CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTORY

1.1. Some time ago, the Law Commission of India issued a detailed question-
naire seeking the opinion of interested persons and bodies on certain important
matters concerning the organisation and functioning of the higher judiciary.’ The
questions put forth in that Questionnaire related to a variety of matters, which
it is not aecessary to enumerate at this stage. It is sufficient to mention that three
of the questions related to oral and written arguments in the higher courts. This
Report seeks to express the Commission’s recommendations on the — subject,
formulated on a consideration of the views reccived on the questionnaire and

other relevant material.
1.2. The questions for consideration were formulated as under, in the
Questionnaire referred to in the preceding paragraph:—

“Q-21. Will it facilitate disposal of a greater number of cases if oral
arguments are restricted to half an hour on each side ?

“Q-22. Will a procedural requirement making it obligatory on counsel
to file written briefs cut down oral arguments ?

“Q-23. Should some appeals be disposed of without hearing oral argu-
ments ?”

1.3. We shall give in bricf at the appropriate place a gist of the views
expressed on these questions’. At this stage, it may be mentioned that the princi-
pal object in eliciting views on the above questions was to enable the Commis-
sion to consider if the time taken in oral argumen; could be reduced, so as to
make it possible for the higher courts to hear a larger number of cases on each
working day. This reduction was not to be an end in itself. It was intended to
secure greater disposal, speaking numerically, But, apart from the numerical
aspect—the aspect of quantity—the Commission, in putting these questions, had
also in mind another—and equally important—aspect. The Commission wished
to have informed public opinion on the question whether the quality of presenta-
tion could also be improved by introducing a system of written arguments which
might put forth a party’s case in brief yet precise terms, supported by relevant—
and only the relevant,—authorities and materials.

1.4. The three questions’ from the Questionnaire issued by the Commission,
though addressed to different parts of the problem, shared a common theme,
namely, improvement in the mode of presentation of the case before the higher
judiciary and evolving the best method of presentation, which would ensure speedy
and yet effective justice, and which would enable the higher courts to discharge
their adjudicatory functions effectively, at the same time inspiring and maintain-
ing, in the litigants and their counsel, the confidence that justice had been ‘done

to their cause.

1.5, That the, objective set out above is not one easy to accomplish, is not
to be doubted. And the Commission did not expect that the views that might be
expressed on the questionnaire would take only one line of approach, or that the
views might all support or reject any far-reaching changes. in the present system.
The opinion has been divided—and divided in more directions than one‘. But the
Commission is grateful to all those who have responded to its Questionnaire by
sparing their valuable time and taking the trouble of reflecting on the issues and
putting their views in writing for the benefit of the Commission.

3, Questlonnalre issued in 1981.

३, Chapter 2, 8 बताते 4, infra.

3, Paragraph 1, 2, supra.

4. See for example, paragraph 2-3, infra,

कि


2

1.6. Before concluding this introductory Chapter, it seems proper to mention Other questions of
that on a few other questions included in the Questionnaire or arising there- ‘B¢ Questionnaire.

from’, reports by the Commission have been separately prepared.

3. E.G. Litigation by, and against, the Governments See also Report on Proposal to ereate
Gonstitutional Division in the Supreme Court. ‘posal डे


‘Phe common theme
of the questions.

Views on 0.21.

Sharp differences
of Views expressed
on Q. 21.

Difference of views
cutting across clas.
aes of persons,

. CHAPTER 2
LIMITING ORAL ARGUMENTS

2.1. The three questions with which Report is concerned, the text where
of Has been already quoted’, briefly relate to reduction of the time taken on
oral arguments (Q. 21), total elimination of oral arguments in some cases (Q. 22)
and the replacement of oral arguments by written arguments (Q. 23), respectively.
As already stated,’ their common theme is improvement of the mode of presenta-
tion of cases before the higher courts. With this prefatory remark, we proceed to
indicate in brief the gist of the views expressed on the questions at issue.

2.2. We deal first with Q. 21, seeking opinion on the question whether it
would facilitate disposal of a greater number of cases if oral arguments are
restricted to half an hour on each side.

2.3. Let it be said at the very outset that replies received on the question
of limiting oral arguments to half an hour on either side show an extremely sharp
difference of views. Broadly speaking, there seem to exist three views on the
question. There are, in the first place, those who are in favour of some such time
limit (some of these replies, however, stipulate that written arguments should
be allowed). Secondly, there are those who are strongly opposed to any change
in this regard; they would not place any time limit on oral arguments as such.
Thirdly, many of the replies take a middle view. They do recognise that there
is need to place some limit on oral arguments. But they do not favour any hard
and fast mathematical limit in this regard. They would leave the matter to the
judge, having regard to the fact that the time that may be considered reasonable
in each case must be assessed on a consideration of a variety of factors, such as
the complexity of the case, the nature of the issues, the volume and character of
evidence, the calibre of counsel and the judge and so on,

It is not our intention to give a precise numerical count of the replies that
fall in each category mentioned above. However, we may state here, as a matter
of information, that broadly speaking, the replies in the first and second cate-
gories almost equal each other in number. A small but sizeable number of
replies fall in the third category, representing the middle view. हर

2.4. The difference of views, as mentioned above, seems to cut across pro-
fessional and other boundaries. For example, of the retired Supreme Court
Judges whose views on the question are available, one* has commented on the
situation of arguments going on with orality unlimited, while another is opposed
to the fixation of suggested time limit on oral arguments. According to him, the
length of time necessary for oral arguments depends on the nature of a parti-
cular case and no hard and fast rule can be laid down in this regard. He does
not favour the “rationing of time in court proceedings.”

Coming, again, to the retired and sitting Judges of the High Courts, while
these are some who favour a time limit,’ (though subject to relaxation in a parti-
cular case), there are others who regard it as highly impracticable.’ Again, coming
to members of the bar, while Shri H. M. Seervai is very strongly opposed to
the idea put forth in the question,’ there are a few members of the bar who think
that some restrictions on the length of arguments might benefit the judicial system,
though one may not be mathematical about it.*

. Paragraph
. Paragraph 1-4, supra.
. Law Commission Collection No. 21/1.
| Law Commission Collection No. 21/19: Law Commission File, 8. No. 124.
E.G. Law Commission Collection Nos. 21/4; Law Commission File S. No. 50.
. E.G. Law Commission Collection No. 21/5.
See Paragraph 2-7, infra.
Lew Commission Collection 21/13, Law Commission File No, 107.
3

2, supra.



Similarly, the United Lawyers’ Association, New Delhi, agrees that oral
arguments may be limited, if they supplement written arguments. However the

Association is not certain if our Judges will be able to find time to carefully read,
and digest the written arguments, Still, it considers the limiting of oral argu-
ments (provided written arguments are allowed) as worth trying.’ In contrast,
the Bar Council of Gujarat is of the view that while restricting oral arguments
would lead to greater disposal of cases. it will cause injustice.’ Also, it appears
that strong disapproval of the idea of limiting the time taken in oral arguments
was expressed at a National Convention organised by the Bar Council of India
Trust at Madras. The suggestion was regarded as misconceived and was likely to
miscarriage of justice.®

Some points made 2.5. We need not multiply examples and, of course, it is not our intention

in the replies.

Replies opposed to
limiting oral argu-
ments.

Shri Seervai’s reply,

to catalogue all the replies. However, it may be of interest to mention here the
important points made in some of the replies. The case for limiting the time for
oral arguments has been forcefully put by a High Court Judge thus :—'*

“The pronosal contained in 0. 21 is most opportune and it is high time that
it is strictly enforced. Reascnable time of arguments for either side should
be fixed for various stages; only in an exceptional case of great intricacy or
length the Judge may exercise the discretion to allow some more time, This
will have two-fold advantage. This will lead to economy of time and also
impress upon the members of the Bar the desirability of concentrating only
on the essentials during the limited time available to them.”

2.6, Of the replies that are opposed to limiting the time for oral argument,

the most pithy is that of another High Court Judge,’ which we quote in full :— °
“A Judge hears a case so long as he does not understand the point sought
to be made by the learned counsel, As soon as the’ point is understood, the
Judges do indicate to the learned counsel to proceed to the next point, It is
not understood how it would facilitate disposal if the hearing is closed with-
out the Judge having understood the point involved. I am against placing any
limits. A case is a case. It has to be heard and then decided, and not to be
merely disposed of”.

2.7. Much more elaborate is the reply of Shri H. M Seervai. Limitations of
space do not permit us to quote it in full, But the most important points made
by him are, we believe, reflected in the following portions, which we have
extracted’ verbatim from his reply. (For convenience, we have put the rlevant
passzges in lettered paragraphs):—

(a) In the Court, for a large number of years, oral arguments took place.
Judges made their own notes and written arguments were not permitted
No doubt, the filing of a statement of the case for the Appellant and
the Respondent was the rule in those days, and it apprised the Court
of the case of the parties, This procedure secured close attention on
the part of Judges for, in making their notes, they had to record the
submission and their own reaction to it. In last few years. a practice has
grown up of dispensing with the statement of the case in most cases,
accompanied by a suggestion that notes of argument on either side may
be put in, The statement of the case was abrogated because it was said
that counsel did not know how to draw such statement, and that with rare
exceptions, the statements of the case were useless. I-find it difficult to
believe that counsel who are unable to draw a statement of the case—
which cansists of a concise statement of facts. the grounds for the
decision in the court or courts below, and submissions of law or fact
to show why the decision is wrong,—would he capable of submitting a
written argument which involves greater skill and labour than the
statement of the case. पा

. Law Commission Collection Ne, 21/13 Law Commission File No. 107.
. Law Commission Collection 21/24 (top). Law Commission File 8. No. 137.

Law Comrnission Collection No. 21'24, bottom ; Law Commission File 8. No. 109.

Law Commission Collection No, 21'4; Taw Commission File 8. No, 1/14.

Law Commission Collection No, 21'84 ; Law Commission File 8. No. 140.

Taw Commission Collection No. 21/29 fo 21/33 ; Law Commission. File 8, No. 146 (Shri Seervai).



cE IN

ini दब यु
ui By Ei il
He vis nue jhe is
u ait ay at a
diced epi HE,
Pers int AP bli
ee ib
Hal ie HEL Uy
nin [Gt aie Eh

taking the
position.

ie he | a + नी हि

| : ul i हे Hn
fis: मे ही didi
हा 4 at dali
ig li i yal
a in ad a
a i it Hi iv eat
1171 Gy aud
511 Wh all
Tea A arte

\


Professor
MeWhinney s views:

‘The pros and cons
considered.

Recommendation
as to time limit for
oral arguments.

6

U.S. Supreme Court). They must be asked to take oath of secrecy and
must be appointed purely on the basis of merit. Ido not agree that any
appeal should be disposed of without bearing oral arguments”,

2.9. It may be of interest to mention that at the request of the Member
Secretary of the Commission, Dr. Edward McWhinney, the cmunent constitutional
jurist," was good enough to forward to the Corsmission his views of the Question-
naire. This is what he says in regard 10 Q. 21 (which sought views as to whether
there should be imposed a time Jimit on oral arguments).

Q. 21. Certainly. the permit
hours or days—-is an historicaliy—derived
patterned tribunals and inereusingly unset
Supreme Courts”.

oral ften lastin
ation of “An on”, British
and irrelevant to busy modern

We should. of course, men
Dr. McWhinney. while stating t
counsel's argumentation and of the
following rider:—

“Of course, limitations on the लाएगी of written briefs may also be useful,

to encourage succinctness and reduce unnecessary padding of briefs.”

m lis reply on ©. 22 (written briefs)
tren briefs would umprove the quality of
nal court ¢ ion making. has added the

2.10. On a careful consideration of the views expressed on the question
of limiting the time for oral arguments. we find that the re-action on the subject
has been a mixed one. The reduction te tims in oral arguments would—it is
obvicus-—facilitate greater disposal. ided the par have placed before the
Court their submissions in clear a ~and net too prolix-manner. This,
of course, presupposes that the ley arguments are. on the one hand, not
slip-shod or skimpy and, on the r hand, nop long-winded or rambling, It
further pre-supposes—and this 2 } more important consideration—that the
Judges are given sufficient time to go through the written arguments, and (if
they so desire) some research assistance in the shape of editing and checking the
written arguments is made available. If these pre-requisites can be created and
maintained, the case for limiting the time teken in oral arguments appears to be
a fairly plausible one.

. At the same time, we find that there is considerable opposition to such a
proposal, from many quarters. There is an understandable fecling that- something
of the clement of directness and immediacy that one finds in oral arguments would
be lost, if time limits are imposed. It also appears from the replies received that
many knowledgeable persons are of the opinion that to cut down the time for
oral argument would lead to serious injustice.

We appreciate that any system that can be suggested regarding the mode of
presentation of cases in court would be difficult to work effectively, if those called
upon to participate in its working are not mentally attuned to it and have serious
misgivings about its soundness on the merits.

2.11. Having considered all these aspects of the problem, we are not inclined
to suggest any rigid or mathematically precise time limits for oral arguments. It
may be difficult to lay down any hard and fast rule for determining the minimum
time for oral arguments in all cases. However. it should still be possible for the
court to obtain, from counsel appearing on both the sides, an estimate of the
time thar may be reasonably required for oral arguments and to request counsel
to adhere to that time. Such a course, coupled with an insistance by the Court
on provisions contained in the rules as to the filing of a proper statement of case?
shall go a long way towards improving the rate of disposal. without seriously
impairing the cause of justice. In this manner, the matter may be left to the good
sense of the Judge who can. after consulting counsel, fix the time beforehand,
keeping in mind the nature of the case and the issues to be argued. In fixing the
time, the Judge can also bear in mind the fact that where the written arguments are
well drawn, the time taken in oral arguments should not he very Jong. in the laree
run of cases. To suggest that half an hour is the usual limit would be going too

3, Letter from Dr. Edward MeWhinn
Fraser University, Burnaby, B.

. Q.C, Professor of International Law and Relitions. Simon
| Canada (18 dannary, 1081)

2, See also paragraph 3: 34, infra.


7

far. But the dominant consideration should be to keep oral arguments within
reasonable limits, We do not cavisauge any formal amendment of the law, but we
recommend that such a praciice should be evolved and constantly followed in the
Supreme Court and in the High Courts.

2.12. Connected with the above recommendation, and with the idea of having Law Clerks.
well-drawn written arguments, is the quastion of appointing law clerks, to which
we have made a reference above.' his system has been regarded as successful
in the United States, on the whole. Every institution has its critics, and this
particular institution has not escaped its share of criticism in the United States.
Still, our impression on a study of the writings that exist on the subject is that
it has proved its utility, We think that the system has not been given a full and fair
trial India. It should be given such a trial, A beginning could be made by
providing law-clerks to such of the Judges of the Supreme Court as may like to
have them. The law clerks should be aitached to particular Judges, and not merely
to the Court as such. Each Judge has his own style of working, his own preference
for source materials, and his own leani to the manner of reading earlier
cases. All these elements, subjective as they may be. need not be disregarded when
providing research assistanc: to the Judges. We do net think that there is any
need for us to set out in detail what would be the qualifications of the ideal law
clerks, what would be their proper remuncration, for what time they should be
appointed, and so on, These and other allied matters of wn administrative char-
acter can be best left to be taken care of by the Supreme Court,

Tt is needless to say that the institution of law clerks could prove to be
useful for High Courts also, in cases of complexity

2.13. There is available an interesting account of the manner in which Judge Law Clerks use by
Wyzanski in the United States untilised his Law Clerks? Judge Wyzanski.

It is said that when he faced an especially complex anti-trust suit he hired,
as his law clerk Gare Kaysen. then a bright young economist at Harvard who,
later became Director of the Institute for Advanced Studies at Princeton.
Wyzanski use of Care Kaysen was undoubtedly a stroke of genius for this parti-
cular case. But if the next dispute on the docket involved (for instance) a ques-
tion of “good moral character”—as did Repouille ५, United States—then Kaysans’
economic expertise would have been of no help.

ph 2-8, sepra.
1७ edition), page 353.

1, Paragraph 2.9, supra: Compare suggestion in p:
2, Murphy and Pritchott, Courts, Judges and Politics



rn

CHAPTER 3
WRITTEN BRIEFS IN PARTIAL SUBSTITUTION OF ORAL ARGUMENTS:

.. 3.1. We now come to the topic of written arguments. In the U.S.A. these are
known as “briefs”, and:‘that is a convenient expression which we shall use fre-
quently, hoping that the lay reader will not make a confusion between :—

(i) a “brief” in the sense of a set-of instructions given by the client to his

. counsel (usually, through a soliciter)

(ii) a “brief” in the sense of a s‘atement in writ ting, (usually pre

_ @laborate form, Of the legal wi couneel seeks to rely,

to the- court. .

3.2. Orestion 22 in our Questionnaire sought views on the issue whether
tequirement : making it obligatory on co to file written briefs,

would cut down oral Although expressed in so many words, what
in this question was a system whereunder written arguments

would or be supplemented by,’ oral arguments. In” other
written briefs in partial substitution of arguments were con'empiated by. the
question. Written arguments as totally replacing

gt

were
lated by question,—though Question 23 did contemplate such a
ibility’, concerned. with the question how
possibility’ At | moment, therefore; we are od. ec
counsel would find a place in written submitted to the, Court in advance,

arguments
to be followed’ (at the hearing’ oral arguments which would then be limited
to the micimam Py

|]
Ly
4
4
ql

गा Dolnts of view expressed in the replies to Question 21
constitutes the background against which we shall proceed to deal with
the ‘views expressed on Q. 22. © - ne 7 :

4, Law Commission Colleotion No. 28/18, Law Commission's File No. 187.
5, Taw Commission Collection No. 23/3, Lew Commission File 8, No. 55,

‘ 48) ह 7 .


3.5. A retired High Court Judge states वा bis reply’ ‘hat many times, the law
(referred to in the written brief) stands changed by judgments pronounced in the
intervening time. He meniions the rules relating to “statement of case” and says,
“Unless the time between the filing of tie cuse amu the hearing is less than a
year, it will not substantiaily help curtas: ume of hearing’.

ng that the filing
very important

Court, while statir
5. adds the foliow

3.6. The sitting Chicf Justice of a fiz
of written briefs should cut down oral areumen:
qualifications to that assumption :

(i) It-would depend on the iabour put in the briets.

(ii) It would definitely increase labour of the Judges.

(iii) If a departure as to be aliowed from wriiten briefs, the purpose would
be lost:

(iv) On the introduction of written bricts litigation may become a little
costlier, as course] might demand higher fees or extra fees for the
written briefs.

He winds up his reply on this question by siating that the proposal is worth

trying “with some safeguards”.

3.7. The Advocate from Madras

suggests that written arguments, if at all
they are to be provided for, must be aj zuments, Otherwise (he says)
they may become diffused, since थी points, cluding minor ones, and including
points which may ultimately be considered tireleven:, may have to be covered.
“Judges often tend to approach cases with pie-d'spositions and, in view of
their heavy work loads, they may skip over niost of what is given, in writing.”

3.8. The Advocate General of one State has forcefully expressed his view
in these words‘ :—

gestion of maki ory 10 counsel filing written
ha view to cut down oral argumenis, because once oral arguments
had to be allowed, the filing of written briefs, as a matter of experience, has
in no way led to the cutti uments in the Supreme Court of
India. 1 would suggest the ng up of the practice of fil written briefs,
on the basis of oral arguments which,
if controlled properly, can be confined to reasonable iimits, not affecting
satisfactory disposal of cases.

3.9. A High Court Sidge* has said that written briefs should cut down the
oral arguments provided the Judge reads the bricf before the start of oral argu-
ments.

3.10. Another High Court Judge’ has suggested that the best way is to
dispense with oral hearing at the stage of admission. Admission matters will
(he says) be disposed of by one or two for more) Judges in Chambers. This will
expedite disposal, as well as control admission. “Any appeal which on the face of
it does not appear to be sustainable has of course to be respected, in limine,”

“This is easier and faster to do in the absence of oral hearing. After all, the
appellant has had his say in the courts below, and he does not deserve to be
heard again unless the alleged error is glaring cnough to be ‘sighted without an
oral hearing”. He refers to the U.S. practice where there is no oral hearing at the
admission stage.

3.11. A point of view has been put forth by the Chief Justice of a High
Court that lawyers and the Bar in India, by and large. are not trained«in filing
written briefs, though some . of them are. However, (he adds), if the Judges
take pains to go through the briefs before the start of the case, it would help
considerably in curtailing the oral arguments and disposal of cases’.

7, Law Commission Collection No. 2!
3, Law*Commission Collection
*, Law Commis: Collection No.
$, Law Commission Collection
5, Law Commission Collection

. bottom,

22/7.

22/15. Law Commission File 8. No. 128.
28/29.

22/30.

21/20 : Law Commission File, 81. No. 138,

5, Law Commission Collection No.
2, Law Commission Collection Nc

Effect of long inter-
val.

Other difficulties.

Written arguments
whether to. follow
oral arguments.

Views of an Advo-
cate General.

The Judge's Work.

Oral argumente at
admission stage.

Lawyers how far
trained.


Views of Professor
MeWhinney.

Limitetions — desi-
rable on length vi
briefs also.

Conchisian as to
written briefs.

Statement of case-
recommendation as
to.

Recommendation
as to constitutional
cases (Factual briefs).

109

The view of Shri H. M. Scervai has been already referred to, while discussing
question 217.

/ of Professor McWhinney,’ the

3.12. We have also referred fo the y
eminent constitutional lawyer, still, we would like to repeat his comment, since
it indicates pithily the advantages, as well as the limitations, of written arguments.
Answering question 22, he says as i

“Yes, and certainiy, on all the cmpuical experience of comparative constitu-

tional law. improve the quality cf counsel’s argumentation and of the final

court decision-making. Of course limitations on the length of written briefs
may also be useful, to encourage succinctness and reduce unnecessary padding
of briefs.”

3.13. On a consideration of ali aspects of the matter, we have come to the
conclusion that since there is a strony feeling that a requirement to file written
briefs containing detailed arguments 0199 defeat its purpose by reason of various
difficulties and deficiencies, the stage has not come for insisting on filing such
briefs. We must note that there has been a strong opposition to the idea, and
as will appear from the views cxpre.sed at length opposition to the idea, and
practical problems might arise by a mandatory requirement introducing a system
of written arguments. In the first place. while a note of arguments for the appellant
may be easy to prepare, the argument! gets modified, qualified or enlarged in the
course of oral hearing, either as a result of the questions from the Bench or,
in some cases, as a result of objections from the other side. Secondly, according
to Shri Seervai, the Judges have generally no time to read noies as thgy are
handed in, so that the object of submitting written arguments in advance is
frustrated. Thirdly, as has been emphasised by Shri Seervai, a total or substantial
reliance on written argument (as in the United States) postulates that Judges
should sit only for four days in the week for a fortnight for hearing arguments (as
in the United States, where for the next fortnight, they do not sit in the court.)
Fourthly, as Shri Seervai has pointed out, written briefs in the United States
are filed by big Law Corporations, with immense research facilities, including
computerised facilities, available to them. Such facilities may not be available
in India.

3.14. Having regard to all these difliculties, we are not inclined, at least
at present, to recommend the introduction of a compulsory requirement of filing
written arguments in all cases. Ai the same time, we think that the device of
filing a “statement of case”. if properiy implemented, should go a long way
towards reducing oral arguments in point of time, or at least in canalising oral
arguments into proper directions and in focussing attention upon the central
issues of direct relevance, which itself will lead tc a saving of time. Our first
recommendation, therefore, is that the statement of case/appeal,? properly pre-
pared by counsel and filed in cot should be insisted upon. If counsel consider
it necessary, they may be permitted to file written briefs, which naturally would
be more elaborate than the statement of case/appeal.

It is proper to emphasise that written briefs, when filed, must be of reasonable
length, as otherwise the process of reading of the briefs by the judges will be
time-consuming. This recommendation is intended to apply to the Supreme Court.
It can also apply to High Courts in regard to :—

(a) first appeals,

(b) capital cases and

(०) other complex cases

er न

3.15. Our second recommendation is of special relevance to cases involving
constitutional questions. In regard to such cases, the practice of filing briefs
containing written factual material should be encouraged, where factual material
forms the backgréund of the case. "What have come to be known in the United
States as “Brandeis Briefs” arc very useful in constitutional adjudication, and we

3, Paragraph 2:7, supra.

2 Paragraph 2-9, supra.

2, Law Commission Collection No. 21/28 to 21/32, See Paragraph 207 supra.
4, See also paragraph 2-11. supra.


11

recommend that in cases involving constitutional questions, where factual material
is of importance for the determination of the controversy, the filing of such briefs
should be encouraged. Such bricfs should contain facts relevant for constitutional
adjudication (in addition to thy ailidavits filed on behalf of the parties) and should
include extracts from published reports of committees and commissions, wherever
appropriate

This practice can be adupted in the Supreme Court and also in the High
Courts.

3.16. The most clebraivd breakthrough involving use of this approach was
the brief prepared by Louis D. Brandeis and presented to the Supreme Court in
Muller v, Oregon (1908), m which Brandeis was defending the constitutionality
of a state law setting ten hours as the maximum working day for women. This
brief, the usefulness of which the Court specifically acknowledged in its opinion,
gathered an enormous amount of information on foreign and American laws
limiting hours for women and on governmental reports stressing the dangers to
women from long hours of labou

As has further been pointed out, there 1s a difference between litigation in-
volving disputes about individual action and cases dealing with entire classes or
groups, where the subject of controversy is the application or validity of social
or economic legislation aimed at establishing governmental cortrol over conduct
or where public policies are attacked in court as violating consti.utional standards.
In such cases, the “facts” often concern attitudes or opinion or social practices
or economic conditions. When courts must find facts of such breadth, the usual
practice of relying on testimony from the mouths of eye witnesses or participants
becomes both inadequate and inappropriate. Different kinds of evidentiary— in-
deed, different kinds of evidence—must be available, if judges are to decide such
issues intelligently.

3.17. In recent years, the irish Supreme Court has shown 1cadiness to accept
sociological evidence. In 1905, for instance, the Court examined numerous scientific
reports and reviewed the testimony of medical experts to sustain the constitu-
tionality of a national statute requiring localities to fluoridate public drinking water
The Chief Justice candidly admitted the difficulties that judges face when
confronted by expanding—and changing—content of scientific knowledge.* This
is what he stated, “These are not matters which are presumed to be within the
knowledge of the Court, and, accordingly, the unconstitutionality of the Act, if
it be unconstitutional, cannot be determined except by reference to the particular
evidence which is furnished in the case. Since evidence may differ from case to

“case and as scientific knowledge may increase and the views of scientists alter,
the Court’s determination cannot amount to more than a decision that on the
evidence produced the plaintiff has, or has not, discharged the onus of demon-
Strating that the Act is unconstitutional.”

3.18. Our third recommentiaiion is that in constitutional cases, wherever
practicable, an agreed statement of facts should be filed, so as to reduce the time
taken at the hearing. It is obviously desirable that the higher courts should, as
far as possible, deal with general issues, and their time sbould not be wasted over
factual controversies, This practice can be adopted in the Supreme Court as also
in High Courts.

3.19. Our fourth recommendation is that in the Supreme Court, to the extent
possible, a day may be set apart for the holding of conferences between judges, as
in the United States. This should help in evolving coherent doctrines, in resolving
differences and in removing overlaping in judgements to a large extent. Such a
practice will facilitate maximum consultation and co-ordination among the judges,
and help them in trying to produce one common majority judgement. Surely,
such conferences will, at least in some cases, build an intellectual bridge between
judges, and reduce the occasions for the appearance of separate and parallel

1, Murphy and Pritehett, Courts, Judges and Polities (2nd ed.), page 350.
2. Murphy and Pritchett. Courte, Judges and Politics (2nd ed.). page 348.
3, Muephy and Pritchett, Courts, Judges and Politics (2nd ed.), paye 352.

Brandeis brief.

Irish practice.

Constitutional cases
agreed atatement
of facts.

Conferences recom-
mended.


A compromise bet-
ween English and
American models.

Position in South
Africa.

Law Clerks

12

judgement—a situation not very conducive to the evolution of coherent doctrine.
This recommendation is intendi:d io apply to the Supreme Court. It can apply
also to the High Courts in regard to cases heard by Full Benches.

3.20. We hope that the recommendations made in this Chapter will, to some
extent, help in effecting a saving of judicial time. In this connection, we are inte-
rested to note a suggestion made in a study of the House of Lords' published
some time ago. Here is the relevant passage from the book, which we reproduce
here as a matter of information, It describes the present English position and also
makes a suggestion for improvement:

“Under the present system the appellant and the respondent in a House of

Lords appeal are obliged to lodge a document called the case which contains

a brief outline of the arguments which will be relied upon by the two parties,

and a selection of documents, including the writ and transcripts’ (or reports)

of the judgements delivered in the lower courts, However, unlike the U.S.

Supreme Court where the elaborate printed ‘briefs’ form the basis of the

proceedings before the court and oral arguments restricted by a time-limit

are regarded merely as a supplement to the brief, the procedure of the House
of Lords is geared wholly to ora! zrgument. The ‘case is merely regarded as

a useful liminary stafement of the issues involved. Indeed it sometimes

appears that their Lordships have not even read it.”

3.21, The same study deals with the position in South Africa, “Ag things
stand at present, too little use is made of the Case, Our proposal is to adopt the
procedure of South African courts wherchy counsel are bound, within four days?
of the hearing, to submit head of arsument which contain a full precis of propo-
sition and authorities to be relied upon. In oral arguments there would still be
no time-limit, but counsel would be expected to confine themselves 10 supplemen-
ting the material contained in the ‘heads of argument’ and not permitted to pro-
duce additional argumenis without the leave (sparingly granted) of the court.
Such a practice would obviate, the need to raise a new point for the first time
at the hearing of the appeal.” It may be mentioned that in South Africa,’ the
procedure for argument in appcais before the Appellate Division of the Supreme
Court seems to be compromise between the English sys'em and that adopted by
the U.S. Supreme Court. days before the hearing of an appeal by the
Appellate Division, counsel must submit “heads of argument” which contain a
full precis of propositions and authoritics to be relied upon. There is no time-
limit to oral arguments but counsel are expected to confine themselves to sup-
plementing the material in the “heads of argument’. and are not permitied to
produce additional arguments without the leave of the Court,

3.22. This brings us to the end of this Chapter. We need not reiterate in this
Chapter the recommendation that we have made in our earlier Chapter’ for pro-
viding Law Clerks to those Judges who wish to have such #sistance.

५ Lonis Bloom-Cooper and Gavin Drowry, Final Appeal (1972
| This means fonr days before the hearin

| Louis Bloom-Coper and Cavin Drewey, Final Appeal (19
Louis Bloom-Cooper andGavin Drowey, Final Appeal (197:

५ Paragraph 2° 12, supra.



CHAPTER 4
TOTAL ELIMINATION OF OR

ARG

4.1, Question 23 था our questionnaire put the query whether some appeals
should be disposed of without hearing oral arguments. In the notes accompanying
the questionnaire, a practice followed in the Supreme Court of Towa had been
referred to.’ In the Supreme Cour! of Tewa, in 1973, 66 cases were submitted
to the court without oral argument; in 1974. the tetel number of such cases in-
creased to 128 en where oral ४५ Were permitted. counsel were allowed
only fifteen minutes on each ४0९, and an additione! five minutes tor the appellant's
rebuttal, ‘This fact was mentioned in the notes, and opinion was solicited as
to whether some sich practice could be adopted in India , in appropriate
cases.

4

non the questionnaire issued by

The replies received in the Commi

Views expressed on,

९. 23.

Replies to the ques-

it do not favour any proposal to eliminate oral arguments totally. This reluctance tlenneire.

to dispense with oral arguments totally is, if we may say so, in line with the trend
of opinion expressed on the allied question whether oral arguments could be
limited in point of time and replaced fn par? by written arguments.* We have taken
due note of this state of opinion and are net recommending the total climination
of oral arguments as such, However, before stating our precise recommendation
en the subject, it is desirable to dea f with one or two aspec‘s of the matter
that need express mention,

4.3. At the outset. let us state, that at least hypothetically, it is possible
to conceive of some s in which properly prepared briefs (or even statements
of cases) should be enough for setging out precisely the contours of the contro-
versy, There are many controversies whose compass. is very limited, and whose

7 constituent points might have been thrashed out exhaustively in the decisions of
High Courts, so tha: the main function of the Supreme Court would be only to
settle the law on the point by making a definitive pronouncement. Such definitive
pronouncements (in cases of the above nature) would be possible without oral
arguments, As we have said, where the contours of the controversies are very
well defined, oral arguments may not be necdéd at all, One example that comes
to mind (though not in the field of constitutional law) is the narrow question
whether, for the purpose of civil liability for defamation, Indian law at all recog-
nises any distinction between libel and slander. The question happens to have arisen
because of the state of the English law on the subject. The vast majority of rulings
in India holds that there is no such distinction, but a very small segment of judicial
opinion recognises the distinction, If this question is ever taken to the Supreme
Court, written briefs setting out the relevant authorities and socio-legal arguments
in support of either view should be enough to enable the Supreme Court to render
a definitive pronouncement without the necd for oral arguments. Some High Court
decisions on the subject have thrashed out the matter at length. In the example
given by us about libel and slander, the judgemenis of many High Courts (on
‘he supposed distinction between bel and slander} have dealt with almost all the
conceivably relevant !egai aspects of the matter, Besides this, there is also avail-
able enough academic [iterature, setting out the pros and cons of the matter.
This literature deals with the social aspects of the matter also. In this position,
it would not be difficult for the highest Court in the country to make'a definitive
pronouncement on the basis of material of the nature mentioned above, which can
be conveniently presented through the medium of a written brief,

Appetly

1, Hon'ble Mare MeCuemick, wa: Dimensions aud Remedic
(1975-76), Vol. 25 tewa Law, Rev. 1
3, Chapters 2-3, supra, parfienlarly parqeraph 2-10 and 2-11

84-1. SLISMosbJ&CA.--2 हु ६13)

Conceivable cases
for disposal with.
out oral arguments.


View of Dr.
MeWhinney.

No change generally
‘as to final hearing.

Admission stage an
oral arguments; |
commendation.

| Practice in USA,
1." England and Cane:
da.

Viewof Mr, Justice

Brandeis.

4.4, We may also note that Dr. McWhinney, in his reply to Question 23,
has regarded such disposal (disposal without oral arguments) as practicable where
10 really consequential or new constitutional points are involved."

4.5. However, in view of the very strong opposition as shown" in the vast
ajority of replies, we are not inclined to recommend any change in the present
ls so far as the disposal ef appeals for the perpose of final hearing is
oncerned.

4.6. At the same time. it appears to us that at the stage of admission, a
different approach can be adopied’ without much culy. The principal task of
a court at the stage of admission is to decide whether there is, in the material
placed before it, a prima facie case that seems to jus! invocation of the juris-
diction of the court. For coming to a decision on that issue, written arguments,
presented proper'y in the form of a statement of case/appeal on the lines en-
visaged in this Report, should, in the vast majority of cases, be sufficient. It
would be for the Judges who are called upon to rule;on the question of admission.
of the matter to decide whether they should cali upon the party concerned to
present oral arguments, or whether the question of adm‘iting the case or appeal
could be decided’ on the basis of written arguments elone. No doubt, by deciding
against admitting the case or appeal. the Judges (where the matter is raised
before the Supreme Court). wou'd be practically putting an end to the life of
the litigation, once and for all. (The very exceptional remedy of review of judge-
ment may be disregarded, for the present purpose). But it seems to us that if
a serious effort is to be made, to bring the arrears in the Supreme Court under
control, some such change is almost inescapable. No doubt, dismissal of the peti-
tion or appeal at" the admission stage without oral arguments may cause dis-
satisfaction to the litigant and to the members of the bar in many cases, This
probable consequence notwithstanding, we recommend that at the stage of admis-
sion of a case or appeal in the Supreme Court, inclading these in which consti-
tutional matters are raised, the Court may dispense with oral hearing unless
it consid*rs such a hearing to be necessary in special cases in the interests of
justice. Such a chaage will, no doubt. requ’re, for its proper implementation,
the constitution of suitable machinery, suck as an-Admissions Committee or
Committees. to decide whether the matter should be admitted or rejected with or
without oral arguments.

4.7. In the context of the ahove recommendation, it may be mentioned that
the Supreme Court of U.S.A. and the House of Lords in U.K. have been keeping
their dockets clear by rigorous control on the admission of cases by the Judges.
Mr. Justice Jackson of the U.S. Supreme Court.has observed, “The only way
found practicable or acceptcble in this country (U.S.A.) for keeping the volume
of cases within the capacity of a court of last resort is to allow the intermediate
courts of appeal finally to settle all cases that are of consequence only to parties.
This reserves to the court of last resort only questions on which lower courts are
in conflict or those of general importance to the law.”

The Supreme Court cf Canada has also been empowered by statute to choose
and decide only those cases which it regards as constituting matters of national
importance or involving important, issues of law.‘

4.8. The opinion of Mr. Justice Brandeis of the Supreme Court of U.S.A.
in the matter is also worth referring to Paul A Freund has lucidly put it, “Mr.
Justice Prandeis was a firm believer in limiting the jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court on every front and he would not be reduced by the quixotic temptation .
to right every fancied wrong which was paraded before him, The time was always
out of joint, but he was not born alone to see it right. Grievances set out in
petitions for certiorari were examined with great despatch and if the petitions

५ Dr. Edward MeWhinney’s reply dited 18-1-1984, sent to the Member-Seeretary, Law Commise
sion of India.

. Paragraph 42 supra.

Robert H. Jackson: The Sipreme Court i+ the .Suerican System of Government (1955), page
2

21.

. Gerald Gall, Canadian Legal System, page 70.


15

did not carry on their face compelling reasons for granting them, they were prom-
ptly marked for denial. Husbanding his time and energies as if the next day were
to be his last, he stecled himself, like a scientist in the service of man, against
the enervating distraction of the countless tragedies he was not meant to relieve.
His concern for jurisdictional procedural mits reflected on the technical level,
an essentially Stoic philosophy. For, like Epictetus. he recognised “the impropriety
of being emotionally affected by what is not under cne’s control.”

4.9. We would also like to quote the following comment: offered by Shri
H., M. Seervai in his reply to the questionnaire issued by us. Dealing with criminal
appeals, he says that article 136 of the Constitution vests in the Supreme Court
the power formerly vested in the Privy Council when it was the final court of
appeal from all courts in the British Emp’re. It was i residuary power, exercised
by the Privy Council, to see that grave failure of jus.ice was remedied. Stressing
the point that a distinction must be made between Specal Leave applications in
criminal matters and other matters, he says “In crminul mu ters, the Privy
Council rarely interfered when there was a concurrent finding of fact and the
law had nor been clearly misinterpreted. The Privy Council dd not consider
itself to be an additional court of appeal, It interfered with findings of law and/or
fact, if they were perverse or so unreasonable that to allow the judgement under
appeal to stand would be a miscarriage of justice, that is, it would shake the
foundations of justice, [15 jurisdiction is now vested in the Surreme Court and
both reason and expediency indicate that by and large, the vew taken by the
Privy Council should be adopted. This power is not to be exercised merely be-
cause a judge fecls that some injustice has been done; for, the injustice in an
individual case must be balanced against the much greater injustice which would
be done to a large class of litigants if decision of their matters were indefinitely
delayed. It seems to me that in admitting criminal appeais, specially where
there are concurrent findings of fact, the Supreme Court imposes upon itself
needless burdens, and inflicts a serious injury upon itself for being unable to
dispose of matters with reasonable despatch. If the principle followed by he Privy
Council in criminal matters is substantially adhered to by all the judges, there
would be a two-fold benefit. It would discourage applications under Article 136
in criminal matters, and thus lessen the burden on the court on. Mondays and
Fridays, Secondly, the number of final hearings matters would be greatly reduced
and the disposals speeded up. On certain occasions matters are admitted’ merely
because the sentence is considered to be unduly severe. In such cases. the correct
course is to grant leave only to appeal against the sentence or, if the question
can be disposed of at the admission stage, to reduce the sentence after briefly

hearing the parties.

3, Pant A. Freand.: On Understuidins the Sapreme Court (1950), page
2, Shri HLM. Scervai’s reply to the Law Commission's quest ionize,

Shri Seervai's views

on

peale,

criminal

ap-


CHAPTER 5
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
We give below a summary of the recommendations made in this Report.

(1) No rigid or mathematically precise time limits for orai arguments is recom-
mended. It may be difficult to lay down any hard and fast rule for determining
the Ininimum time for oral arguments. However, it should still be possible for
the court to obtain, from counsel appearing on both the sides, an estimate of
the time that may be reasonably dred for oral argumenis and to request counsel
to adhere to that time. Such a course. coupled with an insistence by the ‘Court
on provisions contained in the rules as to the filing of a proper statement of case,
should go a long way towards improving the rate of disposal, without seriously
impairing the cause of justice. In this manner, the matier may be left to the good
sense of the Judge who can, after consulting counsel, fix the time beforehand,
keeping in mind the nature of the case and the issues to be argued. In fixing the
time, the Judge can also bear in mind the fact that where the written arguments
are well drawn, the time taken in oral arguments should not be very long, in
the large run of cases. To suggest that half an hour is the usual limit would
be going too far. But the dominant consideration should be to keep oral argu-
ments within reasonable limits. No formal amendment of the law, is envisaged,
but it is recommended that such a pracice should be evolved and constantly
followed,’ in the Supreme Court and in the High Courts.

(2) The system of providing law clerks should be given full trial. A beginning
could be made by providing law-clerks to such of the Judges of the Supreme
Court as may like to have them. The law clerks should be attached to particular
Judges, und not merely to the Court as such,

Matters such as the qualifications of law clerks, their proper remuneration,
for what time they should be appointed and other allied matters of an adminis-
trative character can be best left to be taken care of by the Supreme Court.

The institution of aw clerks could prove to be useful for High Courts also,
in cases of complexity.’

(3) No recommendation is made to introduce a compulsory requirement of filing
written arguments in all cases, at least for the present. But the device of filing
a “statement of case”, if properly implemen.cd, should go a Jong way towards
reducing oral arguments in point of time, or at least in canalising oral arguments
into proper directions and in focussing upon the central issues of direct relevance,
which itself will lead to a saving of ume. The recommendation, therefore, is that
the statement of case/appeal, properly prepared by counsel and filed in court,
should be insisted upon. If counsel consider it necessary, they may be permitted
to file written briefs, which naturally would be more elaborate than the statement
of case/appeal.

Written briefs, when filed, must he of reasonable length, as otherwise the
process of reading of the briefs by the judges will be time-consuming.®

This recommendation is intended to apply—

(a) to the Supreme Court, and

(b) to the High Courts in relation to first appeals capital cases and other
complex cases coming before the High Courts.

(4) In regard to cases involving constitutional questions, the practice of filing
briefs containing written factual material should be encouraged, whete factual
material forms the background of the case. What have come to be known in

1, Paragraph 2-11, supra.
2, Paragraph 2-12, supra.
* Parageaph 3°14, supra.


17

the United States as “Brandcis Briefs” are very useful in constitutional adjudica-
tion. Such briefs should contain facts relevant for constitutional adjudication (in
addition to the affidavits filed on behalf of the parties), and should include extracts
from published reports of committees and commissions, wherever appropriate
This practice can be adopted in the Supreme Court, as also in the High Courts.

(5) In constitutional cases, wherever possible, an agreed statement of facts should
be filed, so us to reduce the time ‘aken at the hearing, This practice can be adopt-
ed in the Supreme Court, as weil as.in the High Courts.*

(6) To the extent possibic, in the Supreme Court a day may be set apart for
holding conferences between Judges, as in the United States. The same practice
can be held in High Courts in regard to cases heard by Full Benches.’

(7) In the Supreme Court, at the stage cf admission of a case or appeal, (in-
cluding those in which constitutional matters are raised), the Court may dispense
witli oral he: it considers such a hearing to be necessary in special
cases in the inte! ce, This will require the substitution of a suitable
machinery (say, का Admissions Committee or Committees) to decide whether
the matter should be admitted or rejected with or without oral arguments.*

(K. K. MATHEW)
Chairman है

(3. P. CHATURVEDD
Member

(DR. M. B. RAO)
Member

(P. M. BAKSHI)
Part-time Member

(VEPA P. SARATHI)
Part-time Member

(A. K. SRINIVASAMURTHY )
Member-Secretary

2, Paragraph 3
3, Paragraph 318, supra.
3, Paragraph 3 19, supra,
4. Pacageaph 4: 6, supra.


APPENDIX
WRITTEN BRIEFS-IN THE UNITED STATES
It is: ed, this. ndix, to, deal with 96 caer in the
- United aes 10 written Fe if thi topic, it’ *
will be convenient to. provide a concise statement of the court stractéze in that
country.
© Court structure in U.S.A.
ages complexity af. the court struct of the USA. stone का Some is: .
wwultiplicity ore Or less. gutonopaouy, 3 juris owhicl ८
. stem: Although pees legal

that
| most. clearly in the’ :
‘Supreme Court and in-a-wholly difictent approach 5

. ) ‘ape jarisdictions are concerned, only eighteen of the es 2 मय! states:
have two de, Georg Mino मु
Georgia,

है nia,
‘Missouri, New. jersey?

: Beals only), Pennsylvania, “Tenties:

mentioned contain than: 70:
Survey ‘data, (available ‘for ‘only eleven ori
five ‘upped! 10 the: second-tier: ap

- as of right, and im two. other
‘Jeave while, in four states’ appeal,
‘cases.

only of appeals roan federal
which involve @

Ay t ८
का tig of
do Te 2४६


APPELLATE BRIEFS iN USA

Filing of appeals in USA

The “Bricf” is an exceedingly important document in the United States in
the appeal process, It contains the legal argumenis ich a party based his
contention that the lower ceurt’s decision shoul 2 reversed or upheld.
Some appeals are decided on the basis cf the contents of the brief, since oral
arguments may be dispensed with, either et the request of the parties or by, the
Court on its own motion. The pane’ axsig ide a case on appeal may
consist of three, five, seven or nine jud, depending upon the court and the
case. In the federal court of appeals, of three are common. In unusual
situations, a court may sit en bane which means that a panel consisting of all
the judges of that court will hear the case.’

Muliple copies of the
so that each judge will reccive
statement of the questions to be di
wishes the court to take, and—mes
position. That rationale generally incl
as the precedent of pricr court decis
in the attorney’s legal research, firdin:
position is vital.

i contains each attorney’s
| > Gut on review, the action he
impertantly—the reasons to support his
i uthoritative sources, such
statutes, and Icgal treatises, Therefore,
rclovant authoritative support for his

wt be served on the appellee, who is given
ile copi's of his own brief with the clerk of
ए another brief in reply

Copies of the eppellant’s brie
thirty days in which to, prepare and
the court of appeals. An appellant bh « the «
to that of the appellee.

discstrous to his cause. If the
the appellee may move for dis-
brief, he cannot take part in the
1 permission.

Failure of cithor party fo file
appellant fails to file within the tims provi
missal of the appeal. If the appellee fails to f
oral argument before the court except by sp:

Contents of briefs
The required contents of brief include:—
1. A statement of the Ieeal issues to be presented to the court for review.
2. A brief hi y of the case: the facts, the proceedings and disposition by
the trial court.
3... Appellant’s argument, con‘entions as well as supporting rationale.
4, A Statement of the relicf sought in appeal’

Specimen
The following specimens of briefs are given in an American book‘

FORM 11-4, Appellant's Brief,

. INTHE SUPREME COURT OF GREAT STATE
STATE OF OSTA
कुछ VBRIEF FOR APPELLANT

Table of Contents

r, Appell

Table of Cases,

QUESTIONS PRESENTED FOR REVIEW

1. Where appellant, following warrantless arrest, was taken to police head-
quarters at 8.20 p.m. and where, after the administrative chores of booking were
completed, appellant was interrogated by police until a confession had been
obtained, resulting in delay of the initial appearance of appellant before a magis-

ws} System (1978),

1 Kolasa and Meyer, 1
3, Kolasa and Meyer, Loval System (1978)
3, Kolasa and Meyer, Legal System (1978), p
4 Kolasa and Meyer, Lezal System (1978), pages



trate until 10.00 p.m., is the delay be:ween the time of the appellam s airest and his
initial appearance “unnecessary * and unreasonable within the meaning of the Great
State Rules of Criminal Procedure § 118, thereby rendering appcetlant’s confession
and the evidence flowing from it inadmissible at trial?

2. When appellant has been interrogated by police without the presence of
legal counsel and where appellant was in a state sron atier having
been physically “roughed up at the time ef arrest and nevher understood nor ap-
preciated the legal implications of statemen!s made io th. dice in such circum-

. does the appellant's confession iack the voluntsiness recuired by
na, 384 U.S. 436(1966). thus making it swell as any’ evidence
nadmissible against appellant °

3. When the trial court, in denying defense
evidence, refers to defense counsel's statements
by the court of such remarks prejudice 1
fundamental requirements of an पाए!
denying defendant » fair and impartial

counsel's motiens to suppress

rvelous, does the interjection
se ind offend against the
juiced tribunal, thereby
constifutiog reversible error ?

and oun
| and thus

HISTORY

This is a direct appeal from the imposition of sen’
a maximum of three years made by Order of the Crim’n:
Great Sate, at No. 1246 of -LOXX,

2 to imprisonment for
Cour of Local County,

A. Circumstances of the criminal Conviction

Appellant was indicted in the Criminal Court of Local County at No. 1246
of 19XX on a bill containing counts of burglary and theft.

Motions to suppress evidences gathered following the arrest of appellant
and search of his home were fifed on July 10, 19XX. After a hearing before
Judge Homer Grant, appellant’s motions to suppress were denied on July 15,
19XX. While being represented by Henry law, Esquire. appellant pleaded not
guilty to all counts. On August 28, 19XX, a trial commenced before Judge Wolfe
and a jury of twelve. Bob Barrister, Esquire, was the prosecuting attorney, On
August 29, 19XX, the jury found the appellant guilty of burglary and theft.

On October 3, 19XX, appellant was sentenced to undergo imprisonment for
a maximum of three years at the Little Town Correction Center.

The facts of the instant appeal can be briefly and accurately summarized as
follows:

On May 20, 19XX, appellant was arrested by Big City police at 7.30 p.-m.,

B. Post-Trial Motions

On August 29, 19XX, the honorable trial court granted appellant leave to
file a motion for new trial and in arrest of judgment which appellant filed on
September 4, 19XX. After a hearing, en banc, before the Honorable Homer Grant,
Richard Roe, and Shirley Wolfe, appellant's motion for new trial and in arrest
of judgment was denied on September 16, 19XX. On October 3, 19XX, appel-
Jant was sentenced to imprisonmen: for a ‘erm of not more than three years, An
appeal to your honorable court was filed on behalf of appellant on October 13,
19XX.

ARGUMENT

1. Under the circumstances of the case, delay between the arrest and initial
appearance of appellant was unaccessary and unreasonable within the meaning of

Great State Rules of Criminal Procedure
fession and the evidence flowing from

118, thus rendering appellant’s con-
nadmissible ai trial,

The mandate of Great State R. Crim. P. § 118 is clear: “when a defendant
has been arrested without a warrant, he shall be taken «without unnecessary delay
before the proper judicial authority where a complaint shall be filed against him.”
In connection therewith, your honorable court hag held: “All evidence obtained



21

ance in madmiss:ble
10 the delay whatso-

y between arrest ang inal
ble relat oas

ring unnecessary ६
» that evidence wh'ch has no 17050:
ever.”

(Here, relevant cases are cited).

In che ins: he in’ jal appearence uf | cilant before a magis'rate
fier completion of the adnyn’stra: “९५४५ 1 associated with
rnd booki Tivs delay, of approxim: ely ons hou as not caused by

bility of avisivate. Instead. the time was used for interrogation of
aby the police without the pre: of counsel and while <ppellant was
वर of appcehe ion after havine be'ne physcally “roughed up” by police
st, and concluded with appellant's inculpa’ory s atement,

Delsey for the purpese ef ob'a‘ning incyim‘nating ste‘emen’s from an arrestee
uly ‘mnerm’ssib'e under Rule 118 as cons rt in Great State v. Futch
where at 447 CS. 392 your honourable court quoted from Adams v, United
States, 399 F, 2d 574, 579 (D.C, Cir, 1968) (concusrine opinion) as to what
constitutes permissible delyy between arrest and initial appearance :

Ne

ary delay can reasonably relate to adminis:ratively process am accused
and other steps and sometimes even *o make
y into his connection with the

. especialy WHEN IT IS DIRECTED TO
STED (Em>has’s AddesJ)

The one-hundred minute detention and delay before the in‘tal appearance
in "he ins‘ant case was not consumed solely in “edmin’stratively processing the
accused”, nor was any of 1६ “directed to 905४0 ¢xculpation of the one arrested.”
stead, a delay of one hour was used to secure inculnatory statements. Such
éelay cannot be szid to be either necescary or reasonable én terms of Rule 118.
Thus ‘t renresea’s a clear Wolaion of the rewirements of that rule, and any
evidence obtained as a result of the delay must be excluded,

me (sic) limited p!

CONCLUSION

For the reasons s‘a’ed above. aovellant submi's that the verdict and judgment
} ibe hever court must be reversed.

Respectfully submitted

, Main Street
. Great State

fb MECHANICS OF PREPARATION OF JUDGMENTS IN U.S.A,

as, in the U.K., the Law Lords produce hight
wii ae circulated among the'r bro‘her judges, she py
US = हलाए Cour’ involves formal i Ic
judgements, At these conferences. tentative conclusion ure reached on the most
ceent cases and the task of wri‘ing the judement of ‘le court is assigned to a
articular Associate Justice, or even to the Chief Justice himself; judgmen: already
aficd pnd circulated will te formally approved for publication. Although a
Snele indement is prenared (be Justice concerned work'ng in close collaboration
with those of the brethren Juders who share the majority opinion) it is ताला to
judee. or groups of judges to prepare separate assenting or dissenting opinions
tran'mous op'n’ons are reacked in only about 25 per cent of the cases
merits by the Cour’.?

Wh

ind vidual’sed opinions
a opted by the

4
rensidered on the:

3, Blnom Conner ant Drewry, Final Court of Appeal (1972), page 81

B4LISEESMOfLISCA~ 625-—16-3 85--GIPS