 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2026/ Phalguna, 1947 (SAKA) 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
171 
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
ON 
 
“WORKING OF ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES 
(AIIMS), NEW DELHI AND PROBLEMS FACED BY PATIENTS IN 
AVAILING HEALTHCARE AND TREATMENT” 
 
PERTAINING TO  
 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18th March 2026) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 18th March 2026) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website :http://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail :rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
  

DEPARTMENT
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH 
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY 
“WORKING OF ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES 
(AIIMS), NEW DELHI AND PROBLEMS FACED BY P
AVAILING HEALTHCARE AND TREATMENT”
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2026/ Phalguna, 1947 (SAKA) 
 
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY FIRST REPORT
 
ON 
 
“WORKING OF ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES 
(AIIMS), NEW DELHI AND PROBLEMS FACED BY PATIENTS IN 
AVAILING HEALTHCARE AND TREATMENT”
 
PERTAINING TO  
 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18th March 2026
Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 18th March 2026
 
Y STANDING 
AND FAMILY WELFARE 
FIRST REPORT 
“WORKING OF ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES 
ATIENTS IN 
AVAILING HEALTHCARE AND TREATMENT” 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
March 2026) 
March 2026) 

 
 
CONTENTS 
     
  Page Nos. 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE i-ii 
2.  PREFACE  iii-iv 
3.  ACRONYMS v– vi 
4. REPORT – 
 1.0 INTRODUCTION – HISTORICAL BACKGROUND – 
VISION AND OBJECTIVES 
1-5 
 2.0 BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 5-6 
 3.0 INFRASTRUCTURE AND EXPANSION PLANS OF 
AIIMS, NEW DELHI – MASTER PLAN 
6-17 
 4.0 ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE : GOOD 
GOVERNANCE 
17-21 
 5.0 CORE FUNCTIONS : MEDICAL EDUCATION 21-29 
 6.0 CORE FUNCTIONS : RESEARCH ECOSYSTEM 29-39 
 7.0 CORE FUNCTIONS : PATIENT CARE 40-62 
 8.0 HUMAN RESOURCE 62-73 
 9.0 SWOT ANALYSIS OF AIIMS, NEW DELHI 73-75 
 10.0 AIIMS VIS-À-VIS GLOBAL INSTITUTIONS 75-78 
 11.0 GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 78-83  
 12.0 GLOBAL STANDING 83-83 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 84-121 
  6. MINUTES* 
 
– 
 
 
 
 
 
*to be appended at later stage 
 

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sanjeev Arora 
3. Shri Rajib Bhattacharjee  
4. Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade  
5. Dr. Sikander Kumar  
6. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel  
7. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy  
8. Shri Ashok Singh  
9. Shri Rameswar Teli 
10. Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai 
 
LOK SABHA  
11. Shri Ramvir Singh Bidhuri  
12. Dr. Vinod Kumar Bind  
13. Ms Iqra Choudhary  
14. Shri Mukeshkumar Chandrakaant Dalal  
15. Shri Sanjay Uttamrao Deshmukh  
16. Dr. Bachhav Shobha Dinesh  
17. Dr. Dharamvira Gandhi  
18. Dr. Kadiyam Kavya  
19. Dr. Prabha Mallikarjun  
20. Dr. C. N. Manjunath  
21. Shri Balya Mama Suresh Gopinath Mhatre 
22. Dr. Rajesh Mishra 
23. Shrimati Aparajita Sarangi  
24. Dr. Sharmila Sarkar  
25. Dr. Hemant Vishnu Savara  
26. Dr. Byreddy Shabari  
27. Dr. Mahesh Sharma  
28. Dr. Rani Srikumar  
29. Shri  Parimal Suklabaidya  
30. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman  
31. Mrs. Ruchi Vira  
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. K.S. Somasekhar   Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar           Director 
4. Smt. Renu Sreekanth    Under Secretary 
 
  

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  -  Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Rajib Bhattacharjee  
3. Shri Niranjan Bishi 
4. Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai 
5. Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade  
6. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel  
7. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy  
8. Shri Ashok Singh  
9. Shri Harbhajan Singh 
10. Shri Rameswar Teli 
LOK SABHA  
11. Shri Ramvir Singh Bidhuri  
12. Dr. Vinod Kumar Bind  
13. Ms Iqra Choudhary  
14. Shri Mukeshkumar Chandrakaant Dalal  
15. Shri Sanjay Uttamrao Deshmukh  
16. Dr. Bachhav Shobha Dinesh  
17. Dr. Dharamvira Gandhi  
18. Dr. Kadiyam Kavya  
19. Dr. Prabha Mallikarjun  
20. Dr. C. N. Manjunath  
21. Shri Balya Mama Suresh Gopinath Mhatre 
22. Dr. Rajesh Mishra 
23. Shrimati Aparajita Sarangi  
24. Dr. Sharmila Sarkar  
25. Dr. Hemant Vishnu Savara  
26. Dr. Byreddy Shabari  
27. Dr. Mahesh Sharma  
28. Dr. Rani Srikumar  
29. Shri  Parimal Suklabaidya  
30. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman  
31. Mrs. Ruchi Vira 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. K.S. Somasekhar   Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Rakesh Naithani   Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar           Director 
4. Shri Vivek Chandra   Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Renu Sreekanth    Under Secretary 
     
 
 

iii 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, present this One-Hundred Seventy First Report on the subject “Working of All India 
Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi and Problems Faced by Patients in availing 
healthcare and treatment”. 
 
2. In exercise of its constitutional mandate, the Committee, in its meeting held on 18th 
November, 2024 identified the subject "Working of All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
(AIIMS), New Delhi and Problems faced by patients in availing healthcare and treatment" and 
decided to undertake a detailed study on the Subject. The primary objective behind identifying 
the subject Committee is to examine the organizational structure of the Institute alongwith its 
governing structure, foundational mandate for delivery of top tier medical education, ground 
breaking research, patient care besides ongoing infrastructure projects, faculty, staff position vis 
a vis sanctioned strength alongwith overall human resource management, issue of overcrowding 
and managerial steps taken to overcome the said problem comparative SWOT analysis of the 
institute vis a vis leading global healthcare institute, etc.  Through this study, the Committee 
intends to identify areas of structural or procedural bottlenecks and recommend reforms that 
would enhance both the quality and inclusiveness of care. 
 
3. The Committee in its meeting held on 13th May, 2025 heard the representative of 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and top management of AIIMS, New Delhi to take into 
account the routine functioning of AIIMS, New Delhi, medical education both graduate and 
under graduate, medical services and healthcare treatment facilities available, status of allied 
professionals and nursing, implementation of master plan, key concern areas alongwith steps, 
policy intervention, organisational development, innovation and changes required to address the 
issues, etc. 
 
4. The Committee undertook a visit to AIIMS, New Delhi on 13th June, 2025 to take stock 
of ground realities on the actual working of the AIIMS, New Delhi and problems faced by 
patients in availing healthcare and treatment. During the course of the visit, the Committee 
interacted with the representatives of various associations that inter-alia included Faculty 
Association, Nurses Association, SC/ST Association, Karamchari Union, Officers Association 
and Resident Doctors Association and gathered detailed information pertaining to Master Plan, 
Basic Infrastructure & On-going and future projects, Various departments imparting UG and PG 
Courses alongwith faculty and non-faculty Staff in-position against the sanctioned position, Beds 
occupancy rate, Functional OTs, Governing Structures, Health Research Ecosystem, undertaken 
Research Projects alongwith its key areas, Human Resource Management, Strategic steps taken 
to extend Patient Care and Comforts, including Grievance Redressal Mechanism, global standing 
of AIIMS, New Delhi vis-a-vis leading healthcare institutes of developed countries. The 

iv 
 
Committee also interacted with the representative of AIIMS Administration & Management and 
sought details of steps taken to combat the challenges being faced by the Administration as well 
as the patients seeking treatment in the Institute.   
 
5. During the finalization of its Report, the Committee relied upon the following 
documents/ papers:- 
(i) Background Note on “Working of All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), 
New Delhi and Problems faced by patients in availing healthcare and treatment" as 
received from the Department of Health and Family Welfare; 
(ii) Action Taken Notes on Committee’s 87th Report on “The Functioning of All India 
Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) presented/laid on 11th August, 2015; 
(iii) Annual Report (2025-26) of the Department of Health & Family Welfare; 
(iv) Research Publications (2016-24) Centre for Integrative Medicine and Research 
(CIMR), AIIMS, New Delhi; 
(v) Oral Evidences tendered by Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare; 
(vi) Oral evidences tendered by stakeholders and their written submissions; 
(vii) Written submissions of various Organizations/Associations of AIIMS; 
(viii) Response of the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the issues raised in 
memoranda received by the Committee; 
(ix) Replies to the questionnaires received from the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare; and 
(x) Other relevant documents pertaining to the subject. 
 
6. The Committee, in its meeting held on 18th March, 2026, considered the draft Report and 
adopted the same. 
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report and also reproduced at the 
end of the Report at ‘Observations/Recommendations -at a Glance’ . 
8. On behalf of the Committee and on my own behalf, I extend special thanks to (i) 
Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare and officers concerned with the subject 
matter (ii) Director of AIIMS, New Delhi.  I also acknowledge the contribution of the 
stakeholders for their deep insight and valuable suggestions during the course of interactions. I 
further extend special appreciation to the officers of the Committee Secretariat for their valuable 
efforts in assimilating all relevant information and enabling the Committee in producing such 
quality Report. 
 
NEW DELHI  
18th March, 2026 
Phalgun, 1947 (Saka)                                              
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav                                                                                     
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare 

v 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
AIIMS All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
AB-PMJAY Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan ArogyaYojana  
AMRIT Affordable Medicines and Reliable Implants for Treatment 
APARs Annual Performance and Appraisal Reports 
APS Assessment Promotion Scheme 
AVN Ayur Vigyan Nagar  
CPWD Central Public Works Department 
CN Centre Cardiothoracic and Neurosciences Centre 
CEU Clinical Epidemiology Unit  
CMET  Centre for Medical Education and Training  
CCRF Centralized Core Research Facility  
CRU Clinical Research Unit  
CMIE  Centre for Medical Innovation and Entrepreneurship 
CGHS  Central Government Health Scheme  
CHCs Community Health Centres  
CAPFIMS Central Armed Police Forces Institute of Medical Sciences 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility  
CRE Common Recruitment Examination  
CMIE Centre for Medical Innovation and Entrepreneurship  
DHR Department of Health Research 
DPR Detailed Project Report  
DoPT Department of Personnel and Training 
DPCs Departmental Promotion Committees 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
EIA Environmental Impact Assessment 
e-HRMS Electronic Human Resource Management System 
EMRs Electronic Medical Records 
ERT Enzyme Replacement Therapy 
GB Governing Body  
HMDG Health Minister's Discretionary Grant  
IB Institute Body  
ICMR Indian Council of Medical Research 
ICUs Intensive Care Units 
INI Institute of National Importance 
JPNATC Jai Praksah Narayan Apex Trauma Centre 
JSSK Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram  
KPIs Key Performance Indicators 
LDCEs Limited Departmental Competitive Examinations 
LSD Lysosomal Storage Disorder 
MCH Mother and Child Block 

vi 
 
MBO Management By Objectives  
MBA Management By Activities 
MBBS Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery 
MD Doctor of Medicine 
MSWO Medical Social Welfare Officers 
NORCET Nursing Officers Recruitment Common Entrance Test 
NCI National Cancer Institute 
NCR National Capital Region 
NCAHP National Commission for Allied and Healthcare Profession 
NDDTC National Drug Dependence Treatment Centre 
NMC National Medical Commission  
NABH National Accreditation Board for Hospitals 
NICU Neonatal Intensive Care Unit  
NCI National Cancer Institute 
NCSC National Commission for Scheduled Castes 
NIRF National Institutional Ranking Framework 
NSC Neuro-Sciences Centre  
OPD Outpatient Department 
ORS Online Registration System  
OTs Operation Theatres 
PG Postgraduate 
PM-ABHIM Pradhan Mantri Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission   
PMSSY Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana 
PHCs Primary Health Centres 
PR Public Relations 
PCC Patient Care Coordinator 
PPP Public–Private Partnership 
RAN Rashtriya Arogya Nidhi 
SAHAS System for AIIMS Human Resources and Accounting Services 
SET Simulation Education and Training 
SFC Standing Finance Committee 
SSB Super Specialty Blocks  
UG Undergraduate 
WAN West Ansari Nagar 
 
  

 
1 
 
REPORT 
INTRODUCTION 
1.0 AIIMS, New Delhi, created in 1956 as an autonomous Institute through an Act of 
Parliament is an Institute of National Importance (INI) and globally known to deliver top-tier 
medical education, ground breaking research, exceptional patient care and good governance 
for innovative implementation of healthcare national policies and programmes besides 
serving as a nucleus for nurturing excellence in all aspects of healthcare. 
 
1.1 Over the decades, AIIMS, New Delhi has expanded in scale, capacity, complexity and 
has attained reputation and status, however, despite its outstanding contributions in academic 
and clinical domains, there remain persistent challenges in service delivery that directly affect 
patient comforts and access to care. Long waiting times, overcrowded outpatient departments, 
pressure on emergency services, shortage of beds and limited infrastructure for attendants and 
patients continue to impede the full realization of the institution’s potential. There is also an 
evident need to assess systemic issues related to patient grievance redressal, appointment 
scheduling, interdepartmental referrals, diagnostics bottlenecks and cost barriers. 
 
1.1.1 The Parliamentary Committee, through its mandate, plays a critical role in ensuring 
institutional accountability, transparency in public service delivery and aligning the 
performance of institutions like AIIMS with national health priorities and citizen 
expectations.  The Committee through detailed study of “Working of All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences (AIIMS)” intends to understand the following issues pertaining to the 
institutes:– 
(i) Problems faced by patients in availing healthcare and treatment; 
(ii) Problems being faced in the routine functioning of the AIIMS, Delhi; 
(iii) Medical services and other facilities available in the institutes; 
(iv) Availability of opportunity for medical education at both under-graduate and post-
graduate levels; 
(v) Status of skilled development of Allied Professionals; 
(vi) Standard and clinical exposure to Nursing personnel; 
(vii) Progress of ongoing infrastructural projects; 
(viii) Implementation status of Master Plan; 
(ix) Availability of faculty and non-faculty against the sanctioned strength; 
(x) Key Areas of Concerns including SWOT analysis of the institute; 
(xi) Comparative study of the institute with leading hospitals of the world; 
(xii) Strategy required to overcome the overload of patients and consideration of 
overall suggestions for improvement in the working of the Institute; 
(xiii) Problems faced by patients while availing healthcare and treatment at AIIMS, 
Delhi; 
(xiv) The steps, policy interventions, design and organizational changes that being 
carried out to address the complex issues; 
(xv) Exploring the possibility of the setting up of another AIIMS like institution in 
NCR to overcome the problems of work overload in AIIMS, New Delhi. 
 

 
2 
 
1.1.2 The Committee believes that a close scrutiny of AIIMS, New Delhi, thus, is crucial to 
strengthen governance, equity and outcomes not only within the institution but across the 
national tertiary healthcare system.  
 
1.1.3 The erstwhile Committee on Health and Family Welfare had earlier presented/laid its 
87th Report on “The Functioning of All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS)” to both 
Houses of Parliament on 11th August, 2015 and the same was forwarded to the Ministry for 
furnishing Action Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in that Report. The 
Ministry, in response to that furnished the Action Taken Notes, thereon, however the 
Committee could not present Action Taken Report on the 87th Report due to paucity of time.  
 
1.1.4 The previous Committee in its meeting held on 13th May, 2025 heard the 
representative of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and top management of AIIMS, 
New Delhi. The Committee undertook a study visit to AIIMS, New Delhi on 13th June, 2025 
to take stock of ground realities on the actual working of the AIIMS, New Delhi and 
problems faced by patients in availing healthcare and treatment. During the course of the 
visit, the Committee interacted with the representatives of various associations that inter-alia 
included Faculty Association, Nurses Association, SC/ST Association, Karamchari Union, 
Officers Association and Resident Doctors Association and gathered detailed information 
pertaining to Master Plan, Basic Infrastructure & On-going and future projects, Various 
departments imparting UG and PG Courses alongwith faculty and non-faculty Staff in-
position against the sanctioned position, Beds occupancy rate, Functional OTs, Governing 
Structures, Health Research Ecosystem, undertaken Research Projects alongwith its key 
areas, Human Resource Management, Strategic steps taken to extend Patient Care and 
Comforts, including Grievance Redressal Mechanism, global standing of AIIMS, New Delhi 
vis-a-vis leading healthcare institutes of developed countries. The Committee also interacted 
with the representative of AIIMS Administration & Management and sought details of steps 
taken to combat the challenges being faced by the Administration as well as the patients 
seeking treatment in the Institute.   
 
1.2 HISTORICAL BACKGROUND  
 
1.2.1 The All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) was originally conceived by the 
Advisory Committee on Professional Education, established to implement the 
recommendations of the Bhore Committee (1943), which laid the groundwork for modern 
India's health policy and infrastructure. Chaired by Dr. A. L. Mudaliar and including eminent 
members such as Dr. B. C. Roy, the Committee proposed the creation of a premier medical 
institute that would serve as a hub for training medical educators, provide state-of-the-art 
hospital facilities for medical education and promote comprehensive research essential for 
effective teaching and training. 
 
1.2.2 The vision of the Advisory Committee was translated to reality through the dedication 
and leadership of Ms. Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, the first Health Minister of the country, who 
introduced the AIIMS Bill in Parliament on 18th February 1956, which was eventually passed 
as the AIIMS Act, 1956. She not only secured the necessary funding and selected the 

 
3 
 
founding faculty but also became the first President of the Institute in 1957. Her aim was to 
establish an institution that would allow Indian students to pursue world-class postgraduate 
medical education within the country.  
 
1.3 VISION AND SPECIAL CHARACTERS  
 
1.3.1 The All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi is an Institute of 
National Importance (INI) which functions under a trinity of mission - medical education, 
research and patient care and later on added the fourth vision of Good Governance- each 
reinforcing and strengthening the other. The vision of AIIMS, New Delhi is rooted in its 
foundational mandate to function not merely as a medical college or hospital, but as an 
Institution of National Importance empowered with the status and responsibilities of a 
University. 
 
1.3.2 During the course of the interaction the Committee was apprised of the four pillars of 
vision of AIIMS, New Delhi as enumerated below:- 
 
Medical Education Research Patient Care Good Governance 
NIRF Rankings 2024: 
 
 
 
Top Medical College in 
India 
 
First Rank-Consecutive 
SEVEN Years – 2018-
2019-2020-2021-2022-
2023-2024 
Health Research 
Excellence Summit 
2024 :  
 
Best Extramural 
Research Institute 
Newsweek International, 
The WEEK & many more: 
 
Best Hospital 
Good Governance:  
 
 
 
Art of Implementation 
(Health) 
 
1.3.3 Such unique vision enables AIIMS to bring about revolutionary changes in medical 
education through innovative curricula and modern modes of teaching that break away from 
traditional patterns. By integrating academic excellence with practical clinical exposure, the 
Institute envisions to set new benchmarks in the training of healthcare professionals.  
1.4 Aims and Objectives of AIIMS 
1.4.1 As informed by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the following are the aims 
and objectives of AIIMS:- 
 
(i) To develop pattern of teaching in under-graduate and post-graduate medical 
education in all its branches so as to demonstrate a high standard of medical 
education to all medical colleges and other allied institutions in India. 
(ii) To bring together in one place educational facilities of the highest order for the 
training of personnel in all branches of health activities. 
(iii) To attain self-sufficiency in post-graduate medical education. 
 
1.4.2 Responding to the Committee’s query regarding the larger vision of AIIMS Delhi that 
got transformed over the years with the scientific and technological advancement upto now-a-

 
4 
 
days along with the paradigm shift in vision alongwith modification and administrative and 
governing landscape to cover the activities to change in mission and objectives of the  
AIIMS, the AIIMS management informed the Committee, in its written submission that the 
historical and original vision of AIIMS in the field of education envisage to trained top tier 
medical professionals through rigorous undergraduate and postgraduate programmes while in 
the field of research the mission indicates advance medical science through pioneering 
research in clinical and basic sciences and healthcare facilities intends to serve as a referral 
centre for complex medical cases. The paradigm shifts over the decades envisage shift 
towards patient care due to absence of a robust national referral system that led to AIIMS 
becoming the first point of contact for millions of patients. The resultant is overwhelming 
footfall diverting focus from academic and research priorities to managing daily clinical 
loads. 
  
1.4.3 Although faculty and resident doctors spend disproportionate time on clinical duties 
and research output and teaching quality, thereby face challenges due to time constraints and 
administrative overload but the administrative and governance structure moved towards 
autonomy of AIIMS operating under the AIIMS Act and now AIIMS Delhi mentor newer 
AIIMS institutions across India and digital governance adopted e-Hospital systems, bio-
metric attendance and centralized procurements. Despite the Shift in focus, AIIMS has 
maintained a delicate balance between clinical excellence and public trust, besides remarkable 
resilience during health crisis during Covid-19. The Challenges faced inter-alia include 
infrastructural strength and long waiting time, besides dilution of academic and research 
focus, therefore there is rising demand for tertiary care, need for equitable access and 
decentralization, integration of AI genomics, and digital health. 
 
1.4.4 The Committee understands that in order to realize the vision set out for the 
Institute, AIIMS, New Delhi has been granted a high degree of academic, administrative 
and financial autonomy allowing it to chart its own path in pursuit of excellence. The 
Committee believes that strict adherence to level of autonomy granted to the Institute 
will certainly ensure that AIIMS, New Delhi will remain dynamic, responsive and 
forward-thinking in addressing the ever-evolving healthcare needs of the nation. The 
Committee recommends that the Government will remain committed to providing the 
necessary financial support to maintain and advance its operations, ensuring that 
AIIMS continues to serve as a world-class hub for patient care, medical education, 
cutting-edge research and Good Governance. 
 
1.4.5 The Committee believes that since the vision of AIIMS, New Delhi originates 
from its foundational mandate to function as a medical college or hospital as well as an 
institution of national importance empowered with the status and responsibility of 
university, therefore, all activities/efforts at each level of structural arrangement 
entrusted with specific functional behaviour must be made on the principle of 
Management By Objectives (MBO) rather than mere Management By Activities (MBA) 
so that the enshrined objectives/goals are achieved within the stipulated time-frame. In 
this regard, the Committee also recommends that the AIIMS, New Delhi must continue 
to serve as the apex referral center all over the country, a think-tank for national policy 
formation and a nerve center for healthcare innovation and reforms.  

  1.4.6 The Committee further recommends AIIMS, New Delhi to be equitable technology driven and patient Centric healthcare. The AIIMS, New Delhi must strengthen referral system nationwide, expand outreach by a telefoster innovation to translational research.  2.0 Budgetary allocation to AIIMS            2.1 The Committee has been apprised of the budgetary allocation to AIIMS New Delhi during last three financial year i.e. since 2024 
 2.1.2 In its written Submission, the Department of Healtaddition to the funds allocated in the budget estimate, additional allocation of fund allocation is made to the institute at RE stage on the basis of demand projected as per actual need. The Director AIIMS assured the committee that AIIMS does not send back any allocated fund and optimally utilize the budget for the intended purpose. 2.1.3 The Committee notes with appreciation the satisfactory utilization of budgetary funds by AIIMS, New Delhi, and acknowledges the graduEstimate (BE) to ₹5500.92 crore for FY 2026
0100020003000400050006000Projected demandBudget Estimates2024Total (Budget)50504523
Allocation and Utilisation of Budget (Rs. 
5 
The Committee further recommends AIIMS, New Delhi to be a global leader in equitable technology driven and patient Centric healthcare. The AIIMS, New Delhi must strengthen referral system nationwide, expand outreach by a tele-medicine and foster innovation to translational research.  o AIIMS  The Committee has been apprised of the budgetary allocation to AIIMS New Delhi during last three financial year i.e. since 2024-25 till 2026-27 which is enumerated below:
In its written Submission, the Department of Health and Family welfare stated that in addition to the funds allocated in the budget estimate, additional allocation of fund allocation is made to the institute at RE stage on the basis of demand projected as per actual need. The mmittee that AIIMS does not send back any allocated fund and optimally utilize the budget for the intended purpose. The Committee notes with appreciation the satisfactory utilization of budgetary funds by AIIMS, New Delhi, and acknowledges the gradual increase in the Budget ₹5500.92 crore for FY 2026-27. However, the Committee observes that 
Budget EstimatesRevised EstimatesexpenditureProjected demandBudget EstimatesRevised EstimatesExpenditure upto Jan, 2026Projected demand2024-25 2025-26202645234909. 4880. 5636 5200 5238 4953.5758
Allocation and Utilisation of Budget (Rs. in crore)a global leader in equitable technology driven and patient Centric healthcare. The AIIMS, New Delhi medicine and The Committee has been apprised of the budgetary allocation to AIIMS New Delhi 27 which is enumerated below:- 
 h and Family welfare stated that in addition to the funds allocated in the budget estimate, additional allocation of fund allocation is made to the institute at RE stage on the basis of demand projected as per actual need. The mmittee that AIIMS does not send back any allocated fund and The Committee notes with appreciation the satisfactory utilization of budgetary al increase in the Budget 27. However, the Committee observes that 
Projected demaBudget Estimates2026-2757585500.
Allocation and Utilisation of Budget (Rs. 

 
6 
 
this allocation falls short of the Institute's projected requirement of ₹5758 crore. The 
Committee believes that fully funding the Institute is non-negotiable, especially as 
AIIMS is executing a complex, 190-acre integrated Master Plan while simultaneously 
maintaining unhindered patient care services. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Department proactively review and enhance the allocation at the Revised 
Estimate (RE) stage to bridge this ₹257 crore deficit. Ensuring adequate liquidity is 
critical to support not only the ongoing phased redevelopment but also the smooth 
initiation of upcoming mega-projects, such as establishment of a CBRNE facility and 
expansion of JPNATC and Centre of Excellence in Child Health at Jhajjar. The 
Committee also recommends that the utilisation of the budget should be assessed on 
verifiable outcome and accountability basis as AIIMS Delhi has been getting substantial 
resources in comparison to other regional AIIMS. 
 
3.0 INFRASTRUCTURE AND EXPANSION PLANS OF AIIMS, NEW DELHI 
3.1 Since, the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi, is a premier 
institution in India that serves as a national centre of excellence in patient care, education and 
research, therefore, its extensive infrastructure comprises a wide network of specialized 
centres and departments that provide comprehensive healthcare across disciplines. 
 
3.2 CENTRES/DEPARTMENTS  
3.2.1 AIIMS, New Delhi has more than a total of 46 Departments located at various places 
which inter-alia include, mainly, as under:– 
 
Anatomy Forensic Medicine Nuclear Magnetic 
Resonance 
Radio-Diagnosis & 
Interventional 
Radiology 
Anesthesiology Gastroentereology & 
H.N. U. 
Obstetrics & 
Gynaecology 
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar 
Institute Rotary 
Cancer Hospital 
Biochemistry Transplant 
Immunology & 
Immunogenetics 
Orthopaedics Reproductive Bilogy 
Biostatistics Transfusion 
Medicine 
Otorhinolaryngolog 
(ENT) 
Physical Medicine & 
Rehabilitation 
Biotechnology Hospital 
Administration 
Pathology Surgical Disciplines 
Biophsics Laboratory Medicine Dr. R.P Centre for 
Ophthelmic Sciences 
(RPC) 
Stem Cell 
Cardio-Thoracic 
Centre 
Medicine  Physiology Jai Praksah Narayan 
Apex Trauma Centre 
(JPNATC) 
Community 
Medicine 
Geriatric Medicine Pharmacology National Cancer 
Institute Jhajjhar 
Centre for Dental Microbiology Psychiatry Surgical Block 

 
7 
 
Education and 
Research (CDER) 
Dermatology & 
Venereology 
Neuro-Sciences 
Centre (NSC) 
National Drug 
Dependence 
Treatment Centre 
(NDDTC) 
National Centre for 
Ageing 
Endocrinology & 
Metabolism 
 Paediatrics Mother & Child 
Block 
Emergency 
Medicine 
Nuclear Medicine Plastic, Burns & 
Reconstructive 
Surgery 
– 
 
3.2.2 At the core of AIIMS, New Delhi is the Main Hospital which forms the backbone of 
the Institute’s medical services, supported by highly specialized centres catering to specific 
needs. The Burns and Plastic Surgery Block and the Surgical Block are equipped to handle 
both routine and highly complex surgical interventions, while the Mother and Child Block 
provides focused services in obstetrics, gynaecology and paediatrics. The recently established 
National Centre for Ageing addresses the growing healthcare needs of the elderly population, 
reflecting the Institute’s commitment to inclusive care. 
 
3.2.3 The Institute also houses several advanced specialty centres such as the Cardio-
Thoracic Sciences Centre, which is dedicated to cardiac and thoracic care and the NSC 
Centre, which caters to neurological sciences. The Dr. R. P. Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences 
stands as a national referral centre for eye-related diseases, offering both clinical and surgical 
excellence. Similarly, the Dr. BRA Institute Rotary Cancer Hospital is a leading facility for 
oncology, providing state-of-the-art cancer diagnosis and treatment. 
 
3.2.4 In addition to these, the Jai Prakash Narayan Apex Trauma Center has emerged as one 
of the foremost centres for emergency and trauma care, handling critical cases with round-
the-clock facilities. The Centre for Dental Education and Research extends comprehensive 
oral healthcare services and also serves as a hub for advanced dental training and research. 
 
3.2.5 AIIMS, New Delhi also expanded its reach through specialized facilities beyond the 
main campus. The National Drug Dependence Treatment Centre (NDDTC) at Ghaziabad 
provides de-addiction and rehabilitation services, while the Comprehensive Rural Health 
Services Project at Ballabgarh integrates primary and community health into the Institute’s 
mandate, ensuring outreach to rural populations. The National Cancer Institute at Jhajjar is 
one of the largest expansions of AIIMS and equipped with advanced infrastructure for cancer 
care, research and training, significantly augmenting the Institute’s capacity in oncology.  
 
3.2.6 The Committee takes into account a total of 46 departments located at the main 
hospital, the backbone of the institutes medical services, and at other places that spells 
out the outreach of AIIMS, New Delhi highlighting highly specialised medical centres 
facilitating specific needs of the healthcare and treatment of diseases of lethal profile. 
The Committee, keeping in view, the ongoing expansion projects of the institute to 
decongest the OPD, recommends that the Ministry should undertake time-bound 

 
8 
 
concrete steps for ensuring shifting of the super-specialities centres viz. Cardiology, 
Cardiac Surgery, Neurology or Neurosurgery, and Ophthalmology, Cardiothoracic 
Centre, IRCH in order to create adequate OPD space for patient to sit thus facilitating 
atleast aging patients comforts during treatment. The Committee further desires that 
separate counters must be arranged for cardiology, nephrology, neurosurgery and 
gastroenterology. Furthermore, the Committee recommends that each department of 
AIIMS, New Delhi to have lot of SOPs, in regard to, duties and responsibilities of 
doctors, nurses and staff and use of medical medicines in similar treatment viz. 
antibiotic etc. to evolve common and uniform standard of treatment and protocol.      
 
3.2.7 The Committee further recommends that Centre for Dental Education and 
Research of AIIMS, New Delhi must provide updated and global standard dental 
treatment with the latest technology at par with the services provided in the best dental 
colleges and hospitals in the country and aborad. The Committee also recommends for 
an indepth study of the practices adopted by the Dental Department of Maulana Azad 
Medical College Delhi so as to upgrade its treatment and infrastructure to set up a 
quality benchmark. 
 
3.3 HOSPITAL BEDS AND OPERATION THEATRES (OTs) 
 
3.3.1 AIIMS, New Delhi has a total capacity of 4,178 hospital beds, enabling it to cater to 
an exceptionally high patient load across inpatient and emergency care. All Intensive Care 
Units (ICUs) are adequately equipped with state-of-the-art medical equipment and machines, 
with a bed occupancy rate ranging from 80 percent to 100 percent. The Institute currently has 
433 ICU beds along with 112 Major Operation Theatres (OTs) and 44 Minor OTs of which 
26 Major OTs and 81 ICU beds are currently non-functional. The details of beds and OTs are 
provided in the table below:    
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Of Centre/ 
Department 
Total  No. of Beds O.T.S 
Available Functional Major Minor 
1.  Main Hospital  1163  835  18  20  
2.  B&PS  Block  102  102  06  02  
3.  Surgical  Block  203  203  12  02  
4.  MCH  Block  486  360  18  02  
5.  NCA  Block  206  109  04  01  
   Total  2160  1609  58  27  
6.  C.T.C  Centre  259  259  08  05  
7.  N.S.C  Centre  201  201  07  00  
8.  Dr .RPC  Centre  310  310  18  04  
9.  Dr. BRAIRCH  189  189  03  03  
10.  JPNAT  Centre  259  259  06  02  
11.  C.D.E.R  20  20  02  00  
12.  NDDTC (Ghaziabad)  50  50  00  00  
13.  CRHSP (Ballabgarh)  50  50  01  01  

 
9 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Of Centre/ 
Department 
Total  No. of Beds O.T.S 
Available Functional Major Minor 
   Total  3498  2947  103  42  
14.  NCI (Jhajjar)  680  388  09  02  
 Grand Total  4178  3335  112  44  
 
3.3.2 The Committee has been apprised of the details of availability of ICU beds and status 
of functional beds in various centres and departments of AIIMS as enumerated below:- 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Centre/ 
Department 
ICU Beds 
Available Functional 
1. Main Hospital 70 44 
2. B&PS  Block 30 30 
3. Surgical  Block 22 22 
4. MCH  Block 84 57 
5. NCA Block 18 10 
  Total  224 163 
6. C.T.C  Centre 62 62 
7. N.S.C  Centre 31 31 
8. Dr.Rpc  Centre 0 0 
9. Dr. Brairch 6 6 
10. JPNAT  Centre 60 60 
11. C.D.E.R 0 0 
12. NDDTC (Ghaziabad) 0 0 
13. CRHS (Ballabgarh) 0 0 
  Total 383 322 
14. NCI (Jhajjar) 50 30 
  Grand Total 433 352 
 
3.3.3 Upon enquiring about the reason for non-functionality of beds, the Committee was 
informed that 520 posts for the Mother and Child Block and 720 posts for the National 
Cancer Institute (NCI), Jhajjar, have recently been sanctioned by the Department of 
Expenditure. The process of recruitment for these sanctioned posts is presently underway and 
it is expected that upon joining of the new faculty and staff, all the currently non-functional 
beds will be made operational. Additionally, 328 beds in the Main Hospital remain non-
functional owing to the ongoing renovation of a dilapidated building—one of the oldest 
structures in the Institute, constructed over half a century ago—which had to be vacated in the 
interest of patient safety. 
 
3.3.4 The Committee was further informed that the operationalization of beds in the newly 
commissioned blocks and centres would be significantly enhanced upon completion of the 
ongoing recruitment drive and approval of additional manpower proposals. Renovation work 
is actively underway in various areas of the Main Hospital, including AB1, AB5, C3 and D7 
blocks. The Institute has taken steps to rationally redistribute patients to functional wards to 

 
10 
 
ensure continuity of care and frequent coordination meetings are held between clinical 
departments, engineering divisions and manpower units to expedite restoration of full 
functionality. 
 
3.3.5 With regard to the non-functional status of operation theatres, the Committee was 
apprised that the primary cause is the shortage of faculty in the Department of Anesthesiology 
and associated support staff. Similarly, the shortfall in functional ICU beds has been 
attributed to inadequate availability of qualified faculty and support personnel. However, the 
Committee was assured that with the recent sanctioning of approximately 1,400 posts across 
various cadres, the Institute is actively engaged in recruitment efforts to operationalize all 
non-functional ICU beds and OTs at the earliest possible time. 
 
3.3.6 The Committee expresses concern that despite having 112 Major OTs, 44 Minor 
OTs and 433 ICU beds, a significant portion of infrastructure remains underutilized, 
with 26 Major OTs and 81 ICU beds non-functional and 843 hospital beds lying 
unutilized. This is an alarming situation and sheer apathy in view of the fact that 
thousands of patients look up to AIIMS for healthcare needs. The AIIMS management 
should overcome its lethargy and address the contradiction wherein on one hand 
patients are made to wait for long periods for surgical interventions whereas on the 
other hand the OTs are lying non-functional. Such non-functionality not only 
undermines patient care but also reflects gaps in maintenance, resource utilization and 
management failure to ensure timely operationalization of critical facilities. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Institute to take immediate corrective measures 
to operationalize the non-functional OTs and hospital beds.  The Committee is of the 
considered view that there is urgent need to enhance the number of beds in cardiology, 
neurology and trauma departments as cardiac disorders and brain strokes account for 
large number of death (almost 30%) in India, therefore, time is a crucial factor in the 
treatment of heart attacks, brain strokes and road accidents, therefore, optimal 
treatment in time within the golden hour is required to save the life. The Committee is 
of the view that department of cardiology must fulfil the sanctioned strength vis-à-vis in-
position strength (teaching and non-teaching) so as to capacitate the department to 
handle current patient load keeping in view the rising cases of heart diseases across the 
country. The Committee is of the considered view that the department of cardiology 
must strengthen in terms of manpower, research and infrastructure to be fully equipped 
to tackle the increasing incidence of heart attack. The Committee strongly recommends 
for an indepth analysis as to why experienced cardiologists leave AIIMS or are not 
allowed to function independently. 
 
3.3.7 The Committee also recommends for a time-bound action plan for repair, up-
gradation and staffing, along with periodic monitoring mechanisms to ensure 
sustainability of operations. The Committee further recommends that AIIMS should 
strengthen its maintenance and infrastructure planning mechanisms to minimize service 
disruption and ensure that all sanctioned beds and operation theatres are made fully 
functional at the earliest. 
 

 
11 
 
3.3.8 The Committee notes that a significant number of ICU beds and operation 
theatres at AIIMS, New Delhi, remain non-functional primarily due to shortage of 
faculty and support staff, as well as ongoing renovation of old hospital blocks. The 
Committee, in this regard, recommends that AIIMS, New Delhi, should accord the 
highest priority to expediting the recruitment process to fill up the sanctioned faculty 
and technical positions within a defined timeframe. The Committee also recommends 
that the Institute, in consultation with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 
prepare a comprehensive manpower deployment plan to ensure optimal utilization of 
available infrastructure and prevent recurrence of such functional shortfalls. The 
Committee recommends that wherever feasible the manpower gaps be filled by 
appointing Resident Doctors on a large scale.  
 
3.4 Status of ongoing and proposed expansion plans, present and proposed 
infrastructure for patients and faculty/officials of the hospital. 
  
3.4.1 AIIMS New Delhi currently has over 3300 operational beds and provides advanced 
medical care to over 12000 patients daily. To overcome the shortage of beds for 
emergency/in-patients and those waiting for procedures and surgeries, continuous expansion 
of various facilities is underway. The ongoing and proposed expansion plans for AIIMS-
Delhi are as under:- 
  
(A) AIIMS MASTER PLAN 
3.4.2 The Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 28th February, 2019 accorded in-principle 
approval for the implementation of a Master Plan to transform AIIMS, New Delhi into a 
world-class Medical University. The integrated Master Plan, covering nearly 190 acres across 
five land parcels with phased development over seven years at an estimated cost of 
₹15,558.37 crore.  The Committee was informed that AIIMS had submitted the Expenditure 
Finance Committee (EFC) memorandum with the Detailed Project Report (DPR) to the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) on 23rd March, 2022 and subsequently 
provided responses to queries from the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change and NITI Aayog on 27th February 2023. On 23rd October 2024, 
the MoHFW advised AIIMS to submit a revised EFC/PIB memorandum, de-linking the two 
projects, viz. construction of the new OPD Block at Masjid Moth (₹484.51 crore) and hostel 
accommodation at the Trauma Centre Extension (₹876 crore) as independent proposals. 
Given the time elapsed since the original costing, the DPR is being updated based on current 
Plinth Area Rates and the revised EFC memorandum for the Master Plan was to be submitted 
to MoHFW. 
 
3.4.3 The Officers Association of AIIMS, in its submission to the Committee, highlighted 
that although the Institute has invested considerable effort and resources in preparing this 
comprehensive Master Plan, funding constraints have prevented timely execution. The 
Association emphasized that full implementation would substantially enhance infrastructure, 
expand institutional capacity and strengthen AIIMS’s academic, research and clinical outputs, 
ultimately improving patient care. 
 

 
12 
 
3.4.4 The Committee, while appreciating the vision of transforming AIIMS Delhi into 
a world-class Medical University through its integrated Master Plan, expresses concern 
over the slow pace of implementation despite the Cabinet’s in-principle approval being 
granted as early as 2019. The Committee is of the view that further delays are 
unwarranted and risk enshrined thereto, thus undermining the objectives of this 
ambitious initiative. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare, in coordination with all concerned agencies, to expedite the 
implementation of the Master Plan through strict adherence to timelines, robust 
monitoring mechanisms and prioritization of critical infrastructure. The Committee 
also recommends the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to extend adequate 
financial and administrative support and also provide financial and administrative 
flexibility to AIIMS to address evolving functional requirements during the seven-year 
implementation period, thereby ensuring that the vision of establishing AIIMS as a 
world-class Medical University is realized as per stipulated time-frame. 
 
3.4.5 The Committee also recommends that the Master Plan should adopt a holistic 
approach by ensuring the comprehensive development of hospital, research, academic 
and residential zones. In addition, the Plan should provide for the establishment of 
integrated 24×7 operational zones that will facilitate uninterrupted patient care, foster 
advanced research and enable continuous academic collaboration.  
 
(B)     Vertical Expansion of Service Block, Masjid Moth Campus 
 
3.4.6 The Service Block at Masjid Moth, designed to support vital facilities such as laundry, 
kitchen, IT and other services for the new blocks in the campus, is a critical backbone project. 
Despite significant progress of nearly 70 percent completion, the project has been marred by 
repeated delays due to prolonged approval processes with civic bodies, environmental 
clearances and recurring construction bans by Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC). 
 
3.4.7 The Committee has been given to understand that as part of the redevelopment 
of AIIMS, various independent blocks proposed in the Masjid Moth area like Mother & 
Child block, Surgical Block, OPD block and National Centre for Ageing are under 
different stages of completion. Although, the OPD block is already completed and 
functional, however, to cater to the services of all these blocks like laundry, kitchen, IT 
etc., a separate Service Block having three basements and ten storeys (3B+G+9F) is 
under construction. The project, executed by M/s HSCC at a total cost of Rs. 97.69 
crores, more than 70 percent of the work has been completed. The Committee 
recommends that the remaining part of the project must be completed without time and 
cost overruns.  
 
(C)    Establishment of 150 Bedded Critical Care Block at JPNATC, AIIMS 
 
3.4.8 The project for a 150-bedded Critical Care Block at JPNATC, with a proposed built-
up area of 28,377.30 sq.m and an estimated cost of ₹215 crore, was recommended by the 
Standing Finance Committee on 9th April 2022. Of this, ₹120 crore is to be provided under 
the Pradhan Mantri Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission (PM-ABHIM) Scheme 

 
13 
 
and ₹95 crore from the AIIMS budget. A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has been 
signed between AIIMS and Central Public Works Department (CPWD) for execution of the 
project, with a completion timeline of 20 months following local body approvals. An initial 
amount of ₹36 crore released under PM-ABHIM has already been provided to CPWD. 
 
3.4.9 The project has been delayed due to the non-issuance of tree-cutting approval by the 
Forest Department, in light of the Hon’ble Delhi High Court’s interim order restraining 
permissions for tree felling. The matter is under consideration of the High Court in relation to 
AIIMS’s request, with the latest hearing held on 8th April 2025 and judgement awaited. 
Further, the process of securing environmental clearance has also faced setbacks. The Expert 
Appraisal Committee directed AIIMS to reapply under Section 8(b) of the Environmental 
Impact Assessment (EIA) Notification, 2006, covering the entire campus as part of the 
Institute’s Master Plan. Accordingly, the Engineering Department of AIIMS is compiling 
certified compliance reports of previous clearances and related documentation to enable to 
proceed with the revised application. 
 
(D)    Super Specialty OPD Block, Masjid Moth 
 
3.4.10 The proposal for construction of a Super Specialty OPD Block at the Masjid Moth 
campus of AIIMS, New Delhi, was recommended by the Standing Finance Committee in its 
meeting held on 2nd December 2022 and ratified by the Governing Body in its meeting on 6th 
December, 2022. The project seeks to decongest the main AIIMS campus by relocating OPD 
services, expand the outpatient capacity of the Cardiothoracic and Neurosciences Centre (CN 
Centre) Centre, Dr. BRAIRCH and Dr. RP Centre and triple the imaging and diagnostics 
capacity. It will also enable the CN Centre to establish a Heart Command Centre and Stroke 
Unit, while easing the difficulties faced by patients requiring cross-consultations. The new 
block, with a built-up area of 78,210 sqm, will be part of the integrated Masjid Moth 
complex, connecting with surrounding facilities through three basement levels. The Ministry 
approved the proposal in July 2024, and M/s HSCC has been appointed as the executing 
agency. Tendering for the works has commenced. 
 
(E) Expansion of National Drug Dependence Treatment Centre (NDDTC), Ghaziabad 
3.4.11 The expansion of NDDTC to include women and adolescent treatment facilities and a 
private ward represents a vital step in addressing the growing public health challenge of 
substance abuse. Substance abuse including alcohol and drugs is undoubtedly a major public 
health problem in India. The National Drug Dependence Treatment Centre (NDDTC), AIIMS 
has been established as the apex Centre for treatment of drugs and substance abuse disorders 
in the country. The NDDTC is situated on 10-acre campus near CGO Complex at Ghaziabad, 
Delhi-NCR. It is presently having 50 bedded treatment facilities with two general wards of 25 
beds each. Clinical care is provided through outpatient, inpatient settings and community 
clinics. NDDTC runs an outpatient clinic for women and other adolescent substance users.  
To expand services to provide inpatient care for women and adolescent substance users, a 
project for construction of additional 50-bedded facility has been undertaken for which MoU 
between CPWD and AIIMS has been signed on 18.03.2024. The project, budgeted at ₹43.67 
crore, is at in the tendering stage subsequent to signing of the MoU process with CPWD and 
is.  

 
14 
 
 
 
(F) Community Health Centre, Fatehpur Billoch, Faridabad 
 
3.4.12 The Community Health Centre at Fatehpur Billoch is a significant step in extending 
AIIMS’ healthcare outreach. The approved project cost is Rs. 18.53 crores and date of start of 
the work is 4th July, 2024 while the scheduled date of completion was 3rd July, 2025 to be 
constructed by M/s. Naresh Kumar Aggarwal on a total plot area of  25,000 sq.m and built up 
area of 1600 sq.m at ground floor only. With 60 percent work completed, the project 
envisions a modern OPD, 21-bed ward, Minor Operation Theatre (OT) and supporting 
services. However, the construction has faced substantial delays due to environmental 
clearance issues, restrictions by the Haryana State Pollution Control Board and civic authority 
bottlenecks. 
 
(G) New Ward Block, CRHSP Ballabgarh, Faridabad 
 
3.4.13 The ward block in CRHSP Ballabgarh is more than 70 years old and is in a 
dilapidated condition. Accordingly, a New Ward Block at Ballabhgarh, replacing the old 
structure, is a much-needed intervention to provide modern inpatient and critical care services 
with 56 beds, OT, ICU and labour rooms. The approved project cost is Rs. 19.85 crore and 
the date of start of work is 8th August, 2024 and the date of completion was 7th August, 2025. 
Till date, only 5 percent work has been completed. Delays have arisen due to environmental 
clearances, relocation of services from the old block and complex approval processes with the 
Archaeological Department of Haryana owing to the proximity of a heritage monument. 
However, now the construction is expected to be completed by 31st March 2026. 
 
3.4.14 The Committee, while recognizing the importance of the ongoing and proposed 
projects, expresses its strong displeasure at the slow pace of implementation of ongoing 
infrastructure projects under the Master plan and observes that the overall progress of 
the projects have been unsatisfactory and falls short of stipulated date of completion of 
projects. The Committee, therefore, recommends AIIMS management to establish a 
robust centralized monitoring mechanism to track both physical and financial progress 
of projects. The Committee further stresses the need for institutionalized coordination 
among AIIMS, CPWD, HSCC and other civic and regulatory authorities through 
periodic high-level review meetings to ensure timely resolution of bottlenecks.  
 
3.4.15 The Committee also recommends that proactive steps be taken in securing time-
bound approvals from civic bodies, pollution control boards and environmental 
authorities so that construction activities are not repeatedly stalled all undertaken 
expansion projects are completed without time and cost overruns. In addition, the 
Committee emphasizes that AIIMS and the executing agencies must strictly adhere to 
the already committed timelines. The Committee further recommends AIIMS to 
actively pursue matters with regard to project delayed due to external factors such as 
litigation or regulatory clearances with the competent authorities and submit a status 
report to the Committee.  
 

 
15 
 
(H) RESIDENTIAL AND HOSTEL ACCOMMODATIONS 
  
Redevelopment of Residential Colonies at AIIMS, New Delhi 
3.4.16 The Cabinet had approved the redevelopment of residential colonies at West Ansari 
Nagar (WAN) and Ayur Vigyan Nagar (AVN) Campuses of AIIMS, New Delhi, at a cost of 
₹4,441 crore to construct 3928 residential quarters along with social and commercial 
infrastructure, on a self-financing basis and with no cost to the exchequer. NBCC (India) 
Limited was appointed as the Project Management Consultant. The project suffered initial 
delays due to prolonged statutory approvals, including restrictions on tree felling imposed by 
the Hon’ble Delhi High Court, as well as the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Financing 
challenges also emerged, as the sale of commercial spaces at WAN was disallowed by the 
DDA on account of land use restrictions, reducing the anticipated revenue. Consequently, 
AIIMS sought revised Cabinet approval for monetization through the sale of residential 
apartments at AVN, which was not agreed to by the Empowered Committee. Meanwhile, 
NBCC proceeded with the sale of commercial space at AVN as per the original Cabinet 
decision, generating ₹236.03 crore from the e-auction of a local shopping complex. These 
funds are now being utilized for the construction of three towers (117 Type-IV S) at the 
WAN campus, marking visible progress in the project. 
 
3.4.17 The Committee received submissions from various associations of AIIMS, New 
Delhi, highlighting the acute housing crisis across different cadres. The Faculty Association 
(FAIMS) pointed out that out of more than 850 faculty members, only around 250 are 
provided on-campus housing. This shortage not only affects faculty well-being but also 
undermines the Gurukul Model of immersive learning, hampers UG and PG training and 
weakens preparedness for night-time emergency care. The AIIMS Nurses Union submitted 
that less than 4 percent of the nursing cadre have access to housing, a factor contributing to 
attrition and migration abroad. Similarly, the Karamchari Union and Officers Association 
reported that less than 10 percent of employees are accommodated in government quarters.  
 
3.4.18 The Committee is disappointed over the inordinate delays in the redevelopment 
of residential colonies at West Ansari Nagar and Ayur Vigyan Nagar campuses which 
were expected to provide modern housing and supporting facilities for AIIMS staff. The 
inability to monetize commercial space at WAN due to land-use restrictions and the 
prolonged procedural hurdles has slowed the pace of implementation, leaving a large 
gap between the original financing model and current progress. The Committee 
emphasizes that such slow pace of progress has created a situation where the acute 
shortage of accommodation for faculty, students, nurses and other employees has 
become unsustainable.  
 
3.4.19 The Committee understands that such shortage of housing accommodation not 
only affects well being but also undermines the Gurukul Model of immersive learning, 
hampers UG and PG training and weakens preparedness for night-time emergency 
care. The Committee expresses concern that out of more than 850 faculty members only 
around 250 faculty members, less than 4 per cent of nursing cadres and less than 10% of 
employees of AIIMS, New Delhi have been provided campus accommodation. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, in 

 
16 
 
coordination with DDA and NBCC, urgently devise a viable financing mechanism that 
ensures project continuity without further reliance on piecemeal monetization. The 
Committee further stresses the need for time-bound resolution of statutory clearances, 
so that the housing requirements of AIIMS employees are met at the earliest. 
 
3.4.20 The Committee further recommends that the redevelopment should be designed 
and executed with a clear prioritization of residential allocation to faculty, students, 
nurses and staff in a fair and proportionate manner so that the housing deficit across all 
categories is effectively addressed. The Committee is of the view that the successful and 
timely completion of residential project is not merely a matter of infrastructure 
development but an essential requirement for sustaining AIIMS’s national stature as a 
centre of excellence in patient care, education and research. 
 
Hostel Accommodation of Resident Doctors 
3.4.21 AIIMS, New Delhi, in their written submission, informed the Committee that it 
currently has 20 hostels for students and resident doctors, accommodating around 2,700 
individuals across married, single and shared units. To address growing demand, construction 
of new hostels with 2,277 units, at an estimated cost of ₹876.17 crore, has been approved by 
the Standing Finance Committee in its meeting held on 16th April 2024 and ratified by the 
Governing Body, with the appraisal and approval process currently underway. 
 
3.4.22 The Resident Doctors Association, in their written submission to the Committee, 
highlighted the inadequacy of hostel facilities in light of the Central Residency Scheme, 1992, 
which mandates provision of adequate accommodation and amenities for resident doctors. 
With the expansion of specialty departments and increased postgraduate intake, demand has 
far outstripped supply. The situation is particularly acute for female residents and those 
requiring married accommodation, many of whom face long waiting periods. The conversion 
of a postgraduate hostel into one for undergraduates has further strained capacity. The 
Association emphasized the urgent need for expanded hostel infrastructure, with a focus on 
safety, convenience and proximity to duty areas, to ensure doctors remain efficient, well-
rested and able to provide high-quality patient care. 
 
3.4.23 The Committee expresses deep concern over the acute shortage of hostel 
accommodation for resident doctors, students and trainees at AIIMS, New Delhi, which 
has resulted in prolonged waiting periods, especially for female and married residents. 
Such ugly situation undermines the intent of the Central Residency Scheme, 1992 and 
directly impacts the efficiency, preparedness and well-being of resident doctors who are 
required to perform round-the-clock duties. 
 
3.4.24 The Committee also notes that approval has already been granted for the 
construction of new hostels with 2,277 units at estimated cost of Rs. 876.17 crore on 16th 
April, 2024. The Committee strongly recommends that the housing accommodation of 
residential doctors project be expedited on priority so as to bridge the current gap 
between demand and availability. The Committee further recommends that the 
allocation of new hostel facilities must give due consideration to the requirements of 
female residents and those in need of married accommodation, with appropriate focus 

 
17 
 
on safety, convenience and proximity to duty area to ensure that doctors remain 
efficient, well rested thereby able to provide best quality patient care. The Committee is 
of the view that timely implementation of Hostel Accommodation for doctors will not 
only ease the pressure on existing infrastructure but will also ensure a conducive 
environment for medical education, research and patient care, thereby upholding the 
standards of excellence for which AIIMS is renowned. 
 
3.4.25 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends for construction of quarters on 
fast track mode for doctors, allied services and other staff and allotment of 
accommodation as per entitlement to enable them to lead hassle-free life so that they can 
devote their time for treatment of patients with peaceful state of mind and careful 
attention. In this regard, AIIMS, New Delhi management may seek all sorts of 
assistance and guidance including financial assistance. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry must have track of implementation of projects on 
construction of residential accommodation.  
 
4.0 ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE: GOOD GOVERNANCE 
 
4.1 The Institute is being administered under the provisions of: 
(i) The AIIMS Act, 1956; 
(ii) The AIIMS Rules, 1958; and 
(iii) The AIIMS Regulations, 1999 
 
4.1.1 AIIMS, New Delhi operates through a structured management hierarchy designed to 
balance autonomy with accountability. This framework comprises several statutory and 
standing bodies, each entrusted with defined roles in governance, academics, finance, 
infrastructure and hospital services. Together, they ensure that AIIMS functions not only as a 
premier healthcare institution but also as a leader in medical education and research. The 
organizational structure of AIIMS is show in the chart below: 
 
 
 
4.2 The AIIMS governance structure is multi-tiered and consists of the following entities:- 
 
Institute Body
Governing Body
Academic Committee
Standing Finance Committee
Standing Selection Committee
Estimate Committee
Hospital Affairs Committee

 
18 
 
Institute Body (IB) 
 
4.2.1 The Institute Body is the apex decision-making authority of AIIMS and functions as 
the highest governing organ under the AIIMS Act, 1956. The IB is chaired by the Union 
Minister of Health and Family Welfare and includes representatives from Parliament, eminent 
scientists, medical experts, and senior officials from the Government of India. It provides the 
broad vision and direction for the Institute. The IB formulates policies, approves long-term 
development plans, ratifies major initiatives and ensures that the Institute adheres to statutory 
and regulatory obligations. Its decisions form the foundation for the governance and growth 
of AIIMS. 
 
Governing Body (GB) 
 
4.2.2 The Governing Body is the executive arm of the Institute Body and is chaired by the 
Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare. It consists of senior officials from the Ministry 
of Health & Family Welfare, Ministry of Human Resource Development, the Director of 
AIIMS as Member-Secretary, faculty representatives and other nominated members. It 
translates the broad policies of the Institute Body into actionable measures. The GB oversees 
implementation of institutional policies, allocates resources, monitors academic and hospital 
development, and approves key administrative and academic appointments. It acts as the 
principal supervisory authority for day-to-day governance, bridging vision with execution. 
 
Standing Finance Committee (SFC) 
 
4.2.3 The Standing Finance Committee ensures the financial integrity of AIIMS. It 
scrutinizes annual budgets, expenditure plans, audit reports and funding proposals before they 
are placed before the Governing Body or Institute Body. The SFC also recommends financial 
allocations for new projects, ensures adherence to fiscal discipline and monitors utilization of 
grants. By maintaining financial prudence, the SFC safeguards the economic sustainability of 
AIIMS. 
 
Standing Academic Committee 
 
4.2.4 The Academic Committee regulates the entire academic and research ecosystem of the 
Institute. Chaired by the Director and comprising senior Deans and faculty, it reviews and 
updates curricula, introduces new courses, frames policies for teaching and training and 
promotes faculty development. It also ensures that academic programs align with the evolving 
needs of healthcare and global standards of medical education. The Academic Committee 
plays a critical role in sustaining AIIMS’ reputation as a centre of academic excellence. 
 
 
 
Standing Estate Committee 
 
4.2.5 The Estate Committee oversees the planning, development and maintenance of 
AIIMS’ physical infrastructure spread across its multiple campuses. Its responsibilities 
include managing land use, accommodation policies for staff and students, upkeep of 

 
19 
 
buildings and development of new facilities. By ensuring efficient use of land and 
infrastructure, the Estate Committee supports the Institute’s growing academic and healthcare 
needs. 
 
Standing Hospital Affairs Committee 
 
4.2.6 The Standing Hospital Affairs Committee supervises and guides hospital operations at 
AIIMS. It addresses patient care services, formulates hospital policies, monitors quality 
standards and manages regulatory compliance in clinical operations. This committee plays a 
vital role in ensuring that the hospital side of AIIMS meets its mandate of delivering 
affordable and high-quality healthcare to patients from across the country. 
 
Standing Selection Committee 
 
4.2.7 The Selection Committee is entrusted with the recruitment, appointment and 
promotion of faculty and academic staff. It ensures merit-based and transparent processes, 
maintaining the highest standards in faculty selection. Through this role, the Committee 
upholds the quality of human resources, which directly impacts the teaching, research, and 
clinical services provided by AIIMS. 
 
4.3 The Committee wanted to know the role and responsibility of each level of 
governance and the problems being faced at each level in terms of administrative and 
financial efficiency.  The Committee also desired to know the stakes that have been taken/that 
can be further taken to overcome the stumbling block and for ensuring smooth overall 
working equilibrium of AIIMS, New Delhi.  In response to that the Ministry informed the 
Committee that Governance Structure, Functions & Responsibilities of AIIMS, New Delhi 
are as per the AIIMS Act, Rules and Regulations, however the major problems pertain to 
escalating patient load, Overburdened legacy infrastructure & facilities, fragmented 
administrative process and limited digital integration.  
 
4.3.1 The Committee was further informed that the steps taken to overcome stumbling 
block inter-alia include as under:– 
(i) Digital Governance Platforms: Implementation of e-office, e-HRMS, SAHAS 
and SANTUSHT, and dashboard systems for real-time tracking. 
(ii) Decentralization: Empowering Centres/Departments for reducing turn-around 
times and faster decision making. 
(iii) Capacity Building: Training programs for administrative and clinical staff on 
Governance protocols. 
(iv) Inter-AIIMS Coordination: Facilitating knowledge exchange and 
harmonization of practices across campuses. 
 
4.3.2 Replying to the Committee’s query as regards the financial power delegated to 
Director, AIIMS, New Delhi and whether the lack of decentralization and delegation of 
administrative and financial powers hindered the execution of work and day-to-day 
administration in view of patient care and efficient functioning of the institution.  The 
Committee also wanted to know the areas where further delegation of administrative and 

 
20 
 
financial powers are required to enhance the functioning of the institution.  In response to 
that, the Ministry submitted in writing that the Director, AIIMS, New Delhi, exercises 
administrative and financial powers as delegated under the AIIMS Act and Regulations, and 
as further delegated by the Institute Body, Governing Body, and Standing Finance Committee 
of the Institute.  The present financial powers of the Director, AIIMS, for various 
expenditures were notified vide memorandum dated 02.02.2018. These powers enable him to 
sanction administrative expenditures and ensure smooth operational functioning within the 
approved limits. 
 
4.4 The Committee takes into account the organizational structure of AIIMS, New 
Delhi alongwith functional behavior of specific units. The Committee is of the view that 
the various Committees of AIIMS, New Delhi must transact its mandated functions and 
responsibilities with professional pursuit in time in order to generate continuance of 
efficient and effective working equilibrium of the institute at par excellence. The 
Committee suggests that various committees of AIIMS must meet at frequent intervals 
for taking quick decision making in regard to infrastructure expansion, adequate 
investment, adoption of advanced modules/curriculum of medical education and 
innovative research studies to combat the challenges of prevailing diseases and adequate 
preventive measures for epidemic outbreak. The Committee believes that the Annual 
Action Plan of AIIMS should reflect the itinerary at the beginning of the year itself for 
conducting meetings of various bodies/committees, including the assurance on the part 
of the AIIMS management for adhering to the said itinerary. 
 
4.5 The Committee is of the view that AIIMS management should revisit the exiting 
model of governance and make the decision making process more participatory so as to 
serve as a model for other AIIMS like institutions in the country. The Committee, in this 
regard, recommends for equitable representation in the governing body of AIIMS and 
other committees in order to ensure good governance in the light of day to day 
experience of the participants in performing the mandate and responsibilities of 
governing body and various committees.  
 
4.6 The Committee is also of the view that the organizational structure and the 
functional pattern of AIIMS, New Delhi must remain intact to ensure the autonomy of 
the institute, therefore, the Committee desires that the entire scheme and its procedure 
of recruitment/appointment must be Revisited, Reviewed, Reformed and codified for 
strict adherence ensuring that the positions like Deen, Sub-Deen, Prof. In-charge, Head 
of the Departments are recruited/appointed keeping in view the functional requirement 
of the Institute. The Committee is of the firm view that the composition of the Institute 
body and Governing bodies must have the necessary mandate and independence to 
enforce the accountability and enhance the efficiency of AIIMS, New Delhi. 
 
4.7 The Committee is of the considered view that organogram of AIIMS, New Delhi 
must be equipped with appropriate levels within the organizational structure alongwith 
professional and efficient functioning equilibrium at each level of organogram.  
Adequate Administrative and Financial powers should be vested with the Directors for 

 
21 
 
assured efficient functioning of the Institute.  The Committee, in this regards 
recommends for the some degree decentralization and delegation of powers to take 
quick decision, otherwise, a lot of paperwork goes on and on and little comes out of 
efforts so made.  The Committee understand that the delegated powers facilitate timely 
decision-making in Key Areas of work such as procurement, maintenance, human 
resources, and other operational matters, thereby supporting uninterrupted patient care 
as well as the Institute’s academic and research objectives.  Overall, the existing 
delegation of administrative and financial powers provides a balanced framework that 
enables efficient day-to-day administration while ensuring transparency and adherence 
to governance norms. 
 
CORE FUNCTIONS OF AIIMS, NEW DELHI 
5.0 MEDICAL EDUCATION 
5.1 The All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi stands at the 
forefront of medical education in India, offering a comprehensive and evolving academic 
ecosystem that nurtures excellence in healthcare training, research and innovation. With a 
distinguished faculty, diverse programs ranging from undergraduate to super-specialty and 
paramedical courses and a strong emphasis on competency-based learning, the institute 
equips students with the skills and knowledge required to meet modern healthcare challenges. 
By blending rigorous academic training with hands-on clinical exposure and cutting-edge 
research opportunities, AIIMS continues to shape the next generation of highly skilled 
healthcare professionals and leaders. 
5.2 Training of Healthcare Professionals 
 
5.2.1 AIIMS, New Delhi stands as a premier institution in India, dedicated not only to 
excellence in healthcare but also to pioneering and evolving medical education. Since 1987, 
the institute has trained over 17,000 students, contributing significantly to the country’s 
skilled healthcare workforce. With distinguished faculty strength of 825 and a robust 
academic ecosystem comprising 56 teaching departments and centers, AIIMS currently hosts 
2,491 academic students, residents and scholars, along with 1,756 non-academic residents, 
making it a vibrant hub of medical education and research. 
 
5.3 Academic Programs and Courses Offered 
 
5.3.1 The institute offers an extensive array of academic programs designed to cater to the 
diverse needs of modern healthcare. These include undergraduate and postgraduate courses 
such as MBBS, MD, MS, DM, M.Ch, specialized fellowships and PhD programs. In addition, 
the institute offers Bachelor of Science programs in Nursing and Post-Basic Nursing, Master 
of Science degrees and several paramedical courses. The academic framework also embraces 
a significant cohort of research scholars, reflecting the emphasis of the institute on innovation 
and evidence-based learning. 
 
5.4 Curriculum Evolution and Competency-Based Learning 
 
5.4.1 Central to the educational mission of the Institute is the commitment to maintaining a 
curriculum that evolves with the dynamic landscape of Global Healthcare Standard. The 

 
22 
 
MBBS program is overseen by a dedicated Curriculum Upgradation Committee, which 
operates independently to review and revise the curriculum periodically. The Committee is 
task with the responsibilities to introduce competency-based modules, aligning educational 
content with national and international medical standards and ensuring responsiveness to 
educational trends and public health priorities.  
 
5.4.2 The postgraduate programs, including MD, MS, MDS, DM, M.Ch and fellowship 
courses, are regularly reviewed to keep them aligned with contemporary medical practices 
and emerging health priorities. The Academic Section plays a pivotal role in this process by 
periodically inviting departments to suggest updates or amendments to the curriculum. Once 
received, these proposals are carefully evaluated by the departments, drawing upon the latest 
research evidence, clinical advancements and national health needs. Each recommendation 
then undergoes rigorous peer review and academic scrutiny, ensuring that only the most 
relevant and evidence-based changes are adopted.  
 
5.5 Introduction of Specialized Courses 
 
5.5.1 The academic innovations introduced between 2015 and 2025 underscore the 
commitment of the Institute to pioneering specialized medical education. New DM courses 
introduced during this period include Critical Care Medicine, Cardiac Radiology and 
Endovascular Interventions, Infectious Disease, Therapeutic Nuclear Medicine, Onco-
Anesthesiology, Addiction Psychiatry, Pediatric Cardiology, Reproductive Medicine, Medical 
Genetics, Pediatric Nephrology and Pediatric Oncology. These courses are tailored to address 
contemporary healthcare challenges.  
 
5.5.2 The Committee sought to know the reasons for substantial number of vacancies of 
Seats at Senior resident/ junior resident/ Senior resident (DM/MCh)/ Junior 
resident(MD/MS/MDS) that remained unfilled during the last three years which must have 
affected the quality adversely affected the quality of service delivery to patients. Responding 
to that the AIIMS Management submitted in writing that Admission of academic residents 
(Junior Residents as well as Senior Residents) are done every 6 months. After admission 
process is over in any session (i.e. on 28th Feb/31 Aug for January & July sessions) any seats 
which remain vacant or any vacancies which arise because of resignation are filled in next 
session. It implies that vacancies which arise after 28th Feb/31 Aug (for January/July session 
respectively) are filled in next session i.e. within 6 months. When somebody has joined in a 
specialty at AIIMS which is not his/her first choice and he or she gets selected at some other 
place in the subject of his/her choice, then these residents resign to join at the new places. 
Junior Resident (Academic) and Senior Resident (DM/M.Ch) admission in various courses 
done twice a year.  Some of the residents join residency courses (MD/MS/MDS) in some 
non-clinical branches and prepare for PF entrance resign from MD/MS courses in non-
clinical branches to sit and prepare for entrance examination.  
 
5.5.3 For Senior Resident (DM/M.Ch) admission in various courses is done twice a year.  
Which is a position of 3 years duration and this position is joined by doctors after completing 
MD/MS/MDS in the respective specialty. In this position doctors get teaching and clinical 

 
23 
 
experience before they join as specialists/faculty in other/same institutions. While pursuing 
Senior Residency some of these residents keep on applying for faculty/consultants position 
and leave residency when they get a suitable position. Some Senior Residents leave to start 
their own practice or go abroad. Recruitment for Senior Resident are done every year twice 
by regular selection and special recruitment drives. Junior Resident is a tenure post for 6 
months. The fresh MBBS are eligible for these positions, MBBS doctors join these positions 
to learn clinical medicine in the subject of their choice before they are able to qualify in 
entrance examination and join PG course. Therefore, some of them who happen to get 
selected in PG courses resign and leave in between. Some of them resign in between to sit at 
home and prepare for entrance examination  
 
5.5.4 Counseling/ Selection Process for all seats/posts which will be falling vacant due to 
completion of course/tenure or resignation etc. during January & July session are done 
accordingly.  In order to fill vacancies special recruitment drives and walk-in-Interviews are 
also held as and when required from time to time. 
 
5.5.5 The Committee observes that AIIMS, New Delhi has established itself as a 
premier institution of national importance, excelling in both healthcare delivery and 
medical education. The Committee appreciates the wide range of academic programs of 
UG and PG courses viz. MBBS, MD, MS, DM, M.Ch and periodic curriculum 
upgradation which aligns with global standards. The Committee recommends that 
dedicated curriculum Upgradation Committee would independently review and revise 
the curriculum periodically to evolve dynamic landscape of global healthcare standard 
by taking into account the latest research evidence, clinical advancement and national 
health needs. The Committee understands that evaluation of curriculum vis-à-vis Global 
Education Study Modules and modification in the curriculum of syllabus of MBBS, MD, 
MS, DM and M.Ch would ensure evidence based changes and alignment with 
competency based modules entailing responsiveness to educational trends and public 
health priorities.  
 
5.5.6 The Committee has been given to understand that the introduction of several 
new specialized medical education courses viz. Critical Care Medicine, Cardiac 
Radiology, Infection Disease, Therapeutic Nuclear Medicine, Pediatric Cardiology, 
Medical Genetics etc. have been introduced during the period between 2015-25 to 
address contemporary healthcare challenges and to nurture a cadre of highly skilled 
specialist in critical and emerging domains. The Committee strongly believes that these 
courses are vital and, therefore, would go a long way in strengthening the country’s 
specialist workforce and addressing the evolving healthcare challenges.  
 
5.5.7 The Committee is of the firm view that AIIMS will continue to shape the next 
generation of highly skilled healthcare professional and global standard healthcare 
leaders by imbibing rigorous skilled academic training with adequate clinical exposure 
and availing the cutting edge research opportunities. 
 
5.5.8 Notwithstanding the fact that AIIMS, New Delhi has its in depth potential with 
administrative skill and working experience par excellence, however, the Committee has 

 
24 
 
come across that regional AIIMS are copying AIIMS, New Delhi in introducing courses 
and programme without corresponding infrastructure, faculty and availability of allied 
services which leads to compromise of healthcare facilities having adverse impact on the 
patients.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that regional AIIMS should first 
create basic infrastructure required for introducing of specialised courses to have 
quality control on medical education 
 
5.6 Ideal working hours of junior and senior residents 
 
5.6.1 Pertaining to the Committee’s query regarding the ideal vis-à-vis the actual status of 
the working hours and training programmes of the junior residents, senior residents and 
faculty of the Institute and the quantum of workload on the senior residents in the Institute, 
the Department inform the Committee that AIIMS, New Delhi strictly adhered to the 
Government of India Residency Scheme which is as under:– 
 
a. Working hours for Junior Resident: 
As per residency scheme, continuous active duty for resident doctors will not 
normally exceed 12 hours per day.  Subject to exigencies of work the resident 
doctors will be allowed on weekly holiday on call duty not exceeding 12 hours at a 
time.  The Junior Residents should ordinarily work for 48 hours per week and not 
more than 12 hours at a stretch subject to the condition that the working hours will 
be flexible as may decided by the Medical Superintendant concerned keeping in 
view of the workload and availability of doctors for clinical work. 
 
b. Working hours for Senior Resident: 
As per residency scheme, continuous active duty for resident doctors will not 
normally exceed 12 hours, Subject to exigencies of work, the resident doctors will 
be allowed on weekly holiday by rotation.  The resident doctors will also be 
required to be on call duty not exceeding 12 hours at a time. 
The Department informed the Committee that quantum of workload varies from 
department to department. 
 
5.6.2 The Committee understands heavy workload on the Senior Residents and the 
Junior Residents due to overall workload on AIIMS, New Delhi.  The Committee is 
please to note that normally the quantum of workload varies from department to 
department and is as per Government of India Residency Scheme.  Nevertheless, the 
Committee is of the considered view that the working hours for senior residence/junior 
residence should not exceed beyond 12 hours at a stretch to avoid fatigue syndrome 
among the senior/junior residence so that they can treat the patients with careful and 
cautious state of mind. 
 
5.6.3 The Committee is of the considered view that the patient should be treated in the 
first instance by the Sr. Residents supported by auxiliary staff to ensure the treatment in 
right direction.  
 
5.7 Establishment of School for Allied and Healthcare Academics 

 
25 
 
 
5.7.1 During interaction with the Committee, the Officers Association of AIIMS drew 
attention to the pressing need for establishing a School for Allied and Healthcare Academics 
at AIIMS, New Delhi. The Officer Association highlighted that despite the enactment of the 
National Commission for Allied and Healthcare Profession (NCAHP) Act, 2021 and the 
growing demand for trained allied health professionals, the proposal for such a school has yet 
to be approved. This delay stands in contrast to the progress made by newer AIIMS institutes, 
many of which have already implemented similar structures. The Association emphasized 
that timely establishment of this school is essential to ensure high-quality patient care and to 
strengthen workforce development in the healthcare sector. 
 
5.7.2 The Committee expresses deep concern over the fact that despite the enactment 
of the National Commission for Allied and Healthcare Profession (NCAHP) Act, 2021 
the proposal for establishment of school for allied and healthcare academics has not 
been yet approved in AIIMS, New Delhi while many of newer AIIMS like institutes have 
set up the school for allied and healthcare academics. The Committee recommends that 
the proposal for establishing a School for Allied and Healthcare Academics at AIIMS, 
New Delhi be expedited in view of the urgent national demand for trained allied health 
professionals. Given that several newer AIIMS have already implemented similar 
structures following the enactment of the NCAHP Act, 2021, the Committee is of the 
view that AIIMS, New Delhi should not lag behind. Establishing this school at the 
country’s premier medical institute will not only enhance the quality of patient care but 
also significantly contribute to workforce development and capacity-building in critical 
areas of healthcare delivery. 
 
5.8 Admissions to Residency and DM/M.Ch Programs 
 
5.8.1 The Committee was informed that AIIMS, New Delhi conducts recruitments and 
admissions for Senior Residents, Junior Residents and DM/M.Ch programmes twice a year, 
for the academic sessions in the July and January. It was further apprised that the unfilled 
positions in an academic session are carried forward to the subsequent session. The year-wise 
data of the number of seats advertised and filled is during the last three years is provided 
below: 
I. Senior Resident 
Year Advertised Filled 
2022 776 453 
2023 941 504 
2024 887 440 
Jan – 2025 419 185 
 
II. Junior Resident (MD/MS/MDS/M. Ch & DM – 6 Year) 
Year Advertised (Open + FN/Spons.) Filled (Open + FN/Spons.) 
2022 377  + 94 318 + 17 
2023 423 + 91 405 + 24 

 
26 
 
2024 440 + 90 428 + 17 
Jan – 2025 227 + 44 223 + 11 
 
III. Senior Resident (DM/M.Ch) 
Year Advertised (Open + Spons.) Filled (Open + FN/Spons.) 
2022 185 + 128 161 + 17 
2023 186 + 120 170 + 16 
2024 262 + 174 222 + 28 
Jan – 2025 87 + 66 73 + 7 
IV. Junior Resident  
Year Advertised Filled 
2022 430 413 
2023 438 395 
2024 460 407 
Jan – 2025 241 189 
 
5.8.2 The Committee expresses serious concerns over a consistent inability on part of 
AIIMS, New Delhi to fill up the advertised seats in the past three years, particularly in 
the category of Senior Residents. For Senior Residents, the gap between the number of 
seats advertised and those actually filled has remained significant. In 2022, out of 776 
seats advertised, only 453 were filled; in 2023, 941 seats were advertised but only 504 
could be filled; and in 2024, against 887 advertised posts, merely 440 were filled. The 
situation has worsened in January 2025, where only 185 candidates joined against 419 
advertised seats, reflecting less than half the required intake. This is a serious State of 
Affairs and matter of concern to the Committee. 
 
5.8.3 The Junior Resident programmes under MD/MS/MDS/M.Ch & DM (6 years) 
have shown relatively better fill rates, though gaps still, remains, particularly in the 
Foreign National and Sponsored categories. For instance, in 2022, a total of 94 Foreign 
National/Sponsored seats were offered but only 17 seates were filled up. This pattern 
continued through 2023 and 2024, with a recurring inability to fill up a large proportion 
of FN/Sponsored seats. In the January 2025 session, out of 227 open seats, 223 were 
filled up, but only 11 out of 44 FN/Sponsored seats were taken up.  
 
5.8.4 The Committee observes, in the case of Senior Resident DM/M.Ch seats, that 
while the open category witnessed comparatively higher fill rates, the Sponsored 
category has remained chronically under-filled. For example, in 2022, 185 open seats 
were advertised with 161 filled, but only 17 of the 128 Sponsored seats were taken. The 
trend continued in 2023 and 2024, with significant gaps in Sponsored intake. By 
January 2025, out of 87 open seats had 73 filled, whereas only 7 candidates joined out of 
66 Sponsored seats.  
 
5.8.5 The Junior Resident category also reflects a steady shortfall. Out of 430 seats 
advertised in 2022, only 413 were filled up; in 2023, 438 were advertised but 395 were 

 
27 
 
filled up; in 2024, 460 were advertised and 407 filled up; and in January 2025, only 189 
candidates joined against 241 advertised. 
 
5.8.6 The Committee wishes to highlight the persistent inability of AIIMS, New Delhi 
to fill up the advertised seats for Senior Residents, Junior Residents and DM/M.Ch 
programmes despite conducting recruitments twice a year that indicates a growing 
challenge in attracting and retaining candidates, which directly impacts the availability 
of trained specialists. The Committee observes that a substantial number of posts, 
especially in the Senior Resident category and the Sponsored/Foreign National quotas, 
remain consistently vacant. Undoubtedly such shortfall adversely must have affecting 
both patient care and academic training, given the critical role residents doctors play in 
the Institute’s daily functioning. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that 
AIIMS, in consultation with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, undertake a 
comprehensive review of the Sponsored and Foreign National categories that remain 
consistently unfilled and consider reallocation of unfilled seats to the open category to 
ensure full utilization of capacity.  
 
5.8.7 The Committee further recommends that outreach efforts be expanded to attract 
more candidates in under-filled specialties through collaboration with State medical 
colleges, health institutions and international partners. The Committee is of the view 
that incentives such as financial benefits, structured career progression and enhanced 
research opportunities should be introduced to make Senior Residency more attractive.  
 
5.8.8 Pertaining to recruitment/admission policies the Committee understand that 
administration must focus on aligning with the nation’s healthcare needs by identifying 
and prioritizing high-demand specialties. The existing practice of carrying forward 
unfilled seats to the next session should be made time-bound with provisions for re-
advertisement or reallocation to avoid prolonged vacancy. The Committee desires that a 
monitoring mechanism be institutionalized to review recruitment/admission outcomes 
session by session, identify the reasons for unfilled seats and take corrective measures 
promptly. The Committee believes that steps so undertaken will strengthen the 
Institute’s capacity to deliver both high-quality medical care and advanced training, 
thereby ensuring that its critical role in the national healthcare system is better 
delivered in time. 
 
 
 
 
5.9 TRAINING AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
5.9.1 AIIMS, New Delhi places strong emphasis on hands-on training, skill development 
and continuous learning through its advanced educational infrastructure. The Simulation 
Education and Training (SET) Facility acts as a central hub for competency-based learning 
using dry labs, wet labs and simulation tools, while also integrating e-learning and 
telemedicine to foster national and international academic collaboration. This initiative aligns 

 
28 
 
with the Institute’s vision of developing a Centre of Excellence for immersive, multimodal 
medical training. 
 
5.9.2 The Clinical Epidemiology Unit (CEU) and the Centre for Medical Education and 
Training (CMETi) play key roles in promoting lifelong learning and enhancing teaching 
quality. CEU offers workshops, certification programs and short-term courses to strengthen 
clinical and technical competencies, while CMETi focuses on improving pedagogical skills 
through faculty development, academic workshops and leadership training. Together, these 
centers ensure that both students and educators are equipped with the tools needed to advance 
medical education and practice. 
 
5.9.3 The Committee observes that AIIMS has made commendable strides in 
strengthening medical education through hands-on training, skill development and 
lifelong learning. The Committee hopes that the various training centers and the 
activities undertaken must align with the Institute’s vision of establishing an immersive 
and multimodal training thereby enhancing teaching quality and professional 
development & skill upto global standard and practices. The Committee believes that 
such initiatives would certainly demonstrate AIIMS’s commitment to advancing clinical 
competencies, pedagogical standards and academic collaboration at both national and 
international levels for betterment in healthcare delivery.  
 
5.10 Dedicated Training Facility for Nurses 
 
5.10.1 The Committee was informed by the Nurses Union about the pressing need to 
strengthen nursing education and professional development at AIIMS, New Delhi. The Union 
highlighted that while nursing service forms the backbone of patient care, opportunities for 
skill enhancement and structured professional training remain inadequate. The Union 
proposed the establishment of dedicated clinical nursing practical training laboratories to 
provide hands-on experience, the creation of modern conference halls to support academic 
and professional engagements and the introduction of certification courses in specialized 
clinical nursing branches tailored to the diverse centers and blocks of AIIMS. These 
measures, they stressed, would not only improve clinical competencies but also foster 
continuous professional growth among nursing staff. 
 
5.10.2 The Committee concurs with the submissions of the Nurses Union for the 
establishment of dedicated clinical nursing training laboratories, modern conference 
halls and specialized certificate courses should be prioritized to build a robust 
framework for nursing education. The Committee is of the firm view that the 
introduction of certification courses in specialized branches of clinical nursing, tailored 
to the diverse centers and blocks of AIIMS, would ensure that the nursing workforce 
remains highly skilled, updated and aligned with contemporary healthcare demands. 
The Committee recognizes that measures so envisaged are essential not only for 
enhancing nursing competencies but also foster continuous professional growth amongst 
nursing staff for directly improving the quality of patient care, which remains central to 
the mission of the Institute. 
 

 
29 
 
6.0 RESEARCH ECOSYSTEM  
 
6.1 AIIMS, New Delhi has cultivated a dynamic and multidisciplinary research ecosystem 
that integrates basic science, clinical practice and translational innovation to address pressing 
healthcare challenges such as infectious disease cancer, neurological disorders, reproductive 
health and public health issues. With its strong academic foundation, state-of-the-art 
infrastructure and a culture of collaboration across departments and specialties, the institute 
provides an enabling environment for groundbreaking discoveries. Supported by national and 
international funding agencies, the Institute fosters a vibrant community of researchers, 
clinicians and scholars working together to generate evidence-based knowledge, advance 
medical technology and translate research outcomes into improved patient care and public 
health impact. 
 
6.2 Key research areas and Projects 
 
Non-communicable diseases 
such as Diabetes, stroke, 
Heart disease  
Epidemiological studies Genetics research 
Psychiatry & Mental health Infectious Diseases and Virology Ayurvedic, and Yoga 
Gastrointestinal disease HIV/AIDS Research Emergency Medicine 
Fatty liver diseases Blindness Neurological  
Reproductive health Tuberculosis Obstetrics and Gynecology 
Cancer- such as modules of 
CAR-T cell 
Neonatal and Pediatric Health Burns & plastic surgery 
Aging and Elderly care 
(patient care, awareness) 
Artificial intelligence, machine 
learning and digital Health 
anemia 
Clinical practice guidelines Assistive Technologies & devices 
and Disability Rehabilitation 
Virus-Covid-19, Zika, Mpox, 
etc 
 
6.3 Research Infrastructure and Facilities 
 
6.3.1 The Institute has significantly strengthened its research infrastructure through the 
establishment of specialized facilities. The Centralized Core Research Facility (CCRF) 
provides high-end instrumentation accessible to all AIIMS researchers that inter alia include 
genomics, Bioinformatics, Bioanalytics, flow cytometry, Microscopy, Proteomics and general 
facility. While the Clinical Research Unit (CRU) offers technical expertise in the design, 
planning and analysis of clinical research. It is a state of art and research facility faculty and 
students in designing their clinical research protocol and conducting capacity building 
workshops for enhancement of research Capabilities of AIIMS researcher The Centre for 
Medical Innovation and Entrepreneurship (CMIE)/BioNEST nurtures innovation by 
supporting start-ups, encouraging prototype development and promoting AI/ML integration 
in healthcare diagnostics. Additionally, the Intellectual Property Rights and Technology 
Transfer Division facilitate patent filing and technology transfer. Together, these facilities 
reinforce AIIMS’s role as a Centre of Excellence in Healthcare AI and translational research. 
 
6.4 Intramural Research  
 

 
30 
 
6.4.1 To foster a culture of research across different levels, AIIMS, New Delhi has launched 
multiple intramural initiatives. The Early Career Intramural Research Grant provides 
₹5,00,000 to Assistant and Associate Professors, while the Interdisciplinary Collaborative 
Research Grant offers ₹5,00,000 to faculty members of all levels. Undergraduate students are 
encouraged through the UG Mentorship Scheme for Research Skills, which allocates ₹50,000 
per student under faculty guidance. Further, the Nursing Intramural Research Scheme 
provides ₹5,00,000 to nursing faculty to promote research in patient care. Between October 
and December 2024 alone, 396 intramural projects were approved with cumulative funding of 
₹20 crores. 
 
6.5 Extramural Research  
 
6.5.1 AIIMS, New Delhi has emerged as a leading hub for extramural research, securing 
funding of over Rs. 300 crore in 2023–24 alone. During this period, the institute successfully 
undertook 855 funded research projects supported by prestigious national agencies such as 
ICMR, DBT, SERB, DHR, DST, BIRAC and Ayush, along with several international 
organizations. This strong research portfolio not only reflects the Institute’s commitment to 
advancing medical science and innovation but also underscores its pivotal role in addressing 
national and global health priorities through cutting-edge research collaborations. 
 
6.5.2 The total intramural and extramural projects approved between January 2024 and 
December 2025 and cumulative funding is an under: 
 
New Project approved between Jan, 2024 to December, 2025 
 Jan, 2024 to Dec, 2024 Jan, 2025 to Dec, 2025 
Extramural 343 303 
Intramural 200 216 
 
Cumulative Funding 
 Jan, 2024 to Dec, 2024 Jan, 2025 to Dec, 2025 
Extramural 199.51 (for 1219 projects) 411.80 (for 1020 projects) 
Intramural 20.00 (for Send Back 396 projects) 6.80 (for 412 projects) 
 
6.6 National and International Collaborations 
 
6.6.1 AIIMS has forged robust collaborations with premier institutions both in India and 
abroad. Within India, partnerships include IIT Delhi, IIT Kharagpur, CSIR, ICMR, AFMS, 
THSTI and other AIIMS campuses, fostering interdisciplinary and translational research. 
International collaborations extend to globally reputed institutions such as Harvard 
University, Stanford University, University of Michigan, Monash University, Erasmus 
University Rotterdam and Klinikum der Universität München, Germany. These 
collaborations expand AIIMS’s global footprint and bring international expertise into Indian 
medical research. 
 
6.7 Policy Contributions and Global Recognition 
 

 
31 
 
6.7.1 Research at AIIMS has had direct and transformative impact on national health 
programs and policies. Notable contributions include shaping the National TB Elimination 
Program, Universal Salt Iodization, Hepatitis Vaccination Policy, the National Program for 
Health Care of the Elderly, trauma care policy development and the introduction of unleaded 
petrol in India. Faculties at AIIMS play a critical role in national policy advisory bodies, 
ensuring evidence-based policy formulation. On the global stage, AIIMS’s excellence is 
reflected in the recognition of 57 faculty members among the Stanford global top 2 percent 
list of scientists, underscoring its contribution to global medical research. 
 
6.8 Major Ongoing Medical Research Projects 
 
6.8.1 AIIMS has established itself as a Centre of Excellence in Healthcare AI, driving 
projects in early disease detection through advanced AI/ML models. Significant strides are 
being made in cancer research, including therapies for leukaemia, breast, prostate, head and 
neck cancers, alongside risk stratification using AI-based tools. 
 
6.8.2 In neurology, research spans predictive factors and management of stroke, 
Parkinson’s disease, multiple sclerosis, traumatic brain injury and the development of 
assistive neurosurgical devices. Endocrinology studies cover diabetes, gestational diabetes, 
growth hormone deficiencies and Cushing’s syndrome. In cardiology, AIIMS is optimizing 
care for heart attacks, rheumatic heart disease, arrhythmias and coronary artery conditions. 
 
6.8.3 The Obstetrics & Gynaecology department is advancing diagnostics for HPV-related 
cancers, infertility and IVF success biomarkers. Ophthalmology research addresses corneal 
disorders, retinoblastoma, glaucoma and the ocular effects of pollution. Haematology focuses 
on genetic aspects of aplastic anaemia, thalassemia, sickle cell anaemia and blood cancers. 
 
6.8.4 Paediatric research explores genetic associations and therapies for neurodevelopment 
disorders, sepsis, nephrotic syndrome, muscular dystrophies and cystic fibrosis. 
Gastroenterology studies emphasize early detection and management of Crohn’s disease, 
colorectal cancer, Hepatitis B, celiac disease and pancreatitis. Finally, microbiology research 
investigates epidemiology and clinical features of major viral outbreaks including COVID-19, 
Zika, Mpox as well as antimicrobial resistance. 
 
6.9 Research Achievements and Impact of AIIMS New Delhi  
 
6.9.1 Over the five-year period from 2020 to 2025, AIIMS New Delhi has made substantial 
contributions to medical research and public health, emerging as one of the foremost centres 
for innovation in diagnostics, therapeutics and healthcare systems research. Supported by a 
wide range of national and international extramural grants, the Institute’s work has advanced 
critical areas including oncology, neurology, infectious diseases and digital health 
technologies. A major part of this period was defined by the COVID-19 pandemic, during 
which AIIMS played a central role in shaping India’s national response. Experts from the 
Institute were integral to government advisory bodies such as the National Task Force, where 
they contributed to the formulation of treatment protocols, testing strategies, clinical 
management guidelines and telemedicine policies. AIIMS also guided oxygen allocation 

 
32 
 
during the national crisis and participated in vaccine trials while contributing significantly to 
vaccine safety datasets. The Institute operated major vaccination centres that inoculated over 
five lakh beneficiaries, including healthcare workers and the general public. Through 
initiatives such as the AIIMS COVID Portal, dedicated helplines, media engagements and 
community outreach, the Institute undertook extensive public communication efforts aimed at 
addressing misinformation, providing mental health support and enhancing public awareness. 
 
6.9.2 Between 2022 and 2025, AIIMS researchers achieved several notable breakthroughs 
across clinical and translational research. Collaborative projects with Wadhwani AI led to the 
development of artificial intelligence–based screening tools for diabetic retinopathy, 
pulmonary tuberculosis and skin cancers. These Smartphone-enabled applications achieved 
diagnostic accuracies exceeding 90 percent, offering scalable, cost-effective solutions for 
early detection, particularly in low-resource environments. In 2024, researchers developed a 
blood-based biomarker test for early detection of Alzheimer’s disease, providing a 
significantly more affordable alternative to high-cost imaging techniques. In the same period, 
a new CAR-T cell therapy targeting the BCMA antigen was developed for the treatment of 
multiple myeloma, demonstrating promising preclinical outcomes in reducing tumour burden. 
Most recently, in 2025, the Institute introduced a diagnostic platform using transmission 
electron microscopy for rare genetic disorders such as Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia, enabling 
more precise identification of ultra-structural ciliary defects and improving timely clinical 
intervention. 
 
6.9.3 The Committee notes the research contributions made by AIIMS New Delhi 
between 2020 and 2025, particularly in the areas of diagnostics, oncology, neurology, 
artificial intelligence and infectious disease management. While these achievements have 
strengthened India’s healthcare capacity, the Committee observes that sustained 
advancement in such high-impact research will require dedicated institutional support, 
enhanced infrastructure and structured collaborations. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends that AIIMS New Delhi institutionalize a minimum of 20 percent protected 
time for faculty engaged in research, ensuring that clinical responsibilities do not 
impede scientific productivity. The Committee further recommends the establishment of 
Institute-wide innovation and incubation centres to promote translational research, 
foster start-ups and accelerate the development of technologies with public health 
relevance. 
 
6.9.4 The Committee observes that AIIMS, New Delhi has established a vibrant 
research ecosystem supported by substantial extramural and intramural funding, 
advanced facilities and strong national and international collaborations. The Committee 
recommends that the Institute’s research wing must make notable contributions to 
national health programs and policies. The Committee is of the considered view that 
AIIMS research, in addition to pure research must become part and parcel of doing the 
research having implications for the policy and advocacy of national healthcare 
priorities and plans.  
 
6.9.5 AIIMS has also made important contributions through the creation of standardised 
best-practice guidelines for research across diverse domains. Technical resource centres 

 
33 
 
established at the Institute have developed evidence-based frameworks to enhance 
methodological rigour, ethical compliance and reproducibility in basic science, as well as to 
support structured, high-quality clinical research. These research achievements have had a 
far-reaching impact on the Indian healthcare landscape. Advances in diagnostics have reduced 
dependence on expensive imaging modalities and significantly shortened diagnostic timelines 
for conditions such as Alzheimer’s disease and Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia, enabling wider 
access and timely care. Innovations in cancer treatment, particularly affordable CAR-T 
therapy, have expanded access to advanced care for low-income patients and improved 
survival outcomes in multiple myeloma. AI-driven diagnostic tools have substantially 
increased screening coverage in a country managing approximately 1.4 million new cancer 
cases annually. In the realm of infectious diseases, AIIMS’ contributions during the COVID-
19 pandemic accelerated vaccine deployment, strengthened variant surveillance and informed 
national policies that helped reduce mortality among high-risk populations. 
 
6.9.6 The Committee observes that the creation of standardised best practices 
guidelines for medical research across diverse domain in AIIMS have generated 
broader systemic benefits. The Committee believes that AI-led healthcare solutions 
would contribute to more efficient diagnostics nationwide, expanded telemedicine 
adoption and reduced disparities between urban and rural health system through 
proliferation of research outcome at peripheral ground level. Moreover, the growth of 
medical technology innovation linked to the modern and scientific advanced initiatives 
would produce additional economic and employment benefits in the healthcare sector. 
The Committee recommends for an outcome based analysis of the research outcomes by 
AIIMS. The Committee also recommends that AIIMS should actively collaborate with 
other Scientific Institutions like CSIR, DBT, IITs, ICMR etc to develop an integrated 
approach along with optimal utilisation of common facilities. 
 
6.9.7 Looking ahead, the Committee, however, recommends for further augment 
academic and research activities at AIIMS New Delhi that inter-alia include instituting 
protected research time, establishing innovation incubators across the Institute and 
expanding partnerships with private-sector and industry stakeholders through 
performance-linked research grants. The Committee understands that there is urgent 
need for further strengthening of research infrastructure, including the creation of AI-
enabled laboratories and recruitment of additional research-focused faculty. 
Additionally, deeper international collaborations through joint PhD programmes, long-
term research fellowships, student and faculty exchange initiatives are expected to 
enhance the Institute’s global engagement and research output. 
 
6.9.8 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that AIIMS strengthen its 
research infrastructure by setting up new laboratories equipped with artificial 
intelligence–enabled systems and by undertaking targeted recruitment of research-
focused faculty and technical personnel. The Committee is of the view that expanding 
international partnerships through joint doctoral programmes and exchange 
fellowships will enhance the Institute’s global engagement and contribute to capacity 
building. 
 

 
34 
 
6.10 Key Concern Areas and Opportunities of Research Wing 
 
6.10.1 The Research Wing at AIIMS New Delhi serves as the central coordinating body for 
fostering and managing biomedical research across all departments of the Institute. Its 
responsibilities span a wide range of functions that are essential for maintaining scientific 
quality and supporting the advancement of medical knowledge.  
 
6.10.2 Another major area of attention is the development of infrastructure and capacity 
building. This includes upgrading laboratory facilities, expanding the use of digital research 
platforms such as REDCap and strengthening training resources for faculty, residents and 
research staff. The Research Wing also prioritizes collaboration and networking, working to 
strengthen institutional ties with national and international research organizations to promote 
joint academic and scientific initiatives. 
 
6.10.3 Maintaining high standards of research quality and integrity is an overarching priority. 
The Wing actively promotes principles of reproducibility, methodological transparency and 
adherence to ethical standards in both basic and clinical research. Alongside this, improving 
digital data management, meta-analysis capabilities and systematic review methodologies has 
emerged as a critical need to support evidence-based practice and robust scientific output. The 
Wing also seeks to enhance the visibility of AIIMS research through increased publication in 
high-impact journals and strengthened dissemination mechanisms. 
6.10.4  To further strengthen the Research Wing and enhance the Institute’s overall 
research output, several measures have been identified. Encouraging multidisciplinary and 
cross-institutional research collaborations can broaden scientific perspectives and accelerate 
innovation. Leveraging artificial intelligence and big data analytics will support advances in 
predictive modelling, diagnostics, and personalized medicine. Regular training workshops in 
research methodology, ethics and publication strategies can improve the competence and 
confidence of early-career researchers. Streamlining grant application and approval processes 
through centralized digital platforms will reduce administrative burden and improve 
efficiency. 
 
6.10.5 In addition, promoting open access to global scientific literature, particularly through 
national initiatives such as One Nation One Subscription, can democratize knowledge and 
improve the quality of research. Strengthening partnerships with biotechnology and 
pharmaceutical industries will facilitate translational research and foster innovation in 
therapeutics and diagnostics.  
 
6.10.6 The Committee notes the wide-ranging responsibilities of the Research Wing at 
AIIMS New Delhi and the critical role it plays in managing research funding, ensuring 
regulatory compliance, maintaining research quality and supporting collaborative 
scientific work. While the Institute has made commendable progress, the Committee is 
of the view that further strengthening of the Research Wing is essential to enhance 
research productivity and promote innovation at par with global standards. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that AIIMS New Delhi expand and institutionalize 
multidisciplinary and cross-institutional research programmes, particularly in emerging 
areas such as artificial intelligence, big data analytics and personalized medicine. The 

 
35 
 
Committee further recommends the Research Wing of AIIMS for improving digital 
data management, meta-analysis capabilities and systematic review methodologies that 
have emerged as a critical need to support evidence-based practice and robust scientific 
output. The Committee strongly recommends that AIIMS should generate atleast 10% 
of its budgetary requirement through research and industry collaboration on lines with 
the best global institutions.  
 
6.10.7 The Committee observes that the Ministry may further undertake following 
strategic steps to combat the Key Concern Areas of research wing of AIIMS:- 
(i) Funding and Grant Management: Ensuring timely access to intramural and 
extramural research grants and optimizing utilization 
(ii) Regulatory Compliance: Navigating ethical approvals, data protection, and 
clinical trial regulation 
(iii) Infrastructure and Capacity Building: Upgrading labs, digital tools (e.g., 
REDCap), and training facilities 
(iv) Research Quality and Integrity: Promoting reproducibility, transparency, and 
ethical standards in research 
(v) Data Management and Analysis: Enhancing digital data handling, meta-
analysis capabilities, and review methodology 
(vi) Publication and Dissemination: Encouraging high-impact publications and 
visibility in global journals 
(vii) Establishment of Section VIII company (CMIE) and implementation of 
Entrepreneurship Policy 
 
6.11 SWOT Analysis of Research Activities at AIIMS New Delhi 
 
6.11.1 Responding to the Committee’s query regarding SWOT Analysis of the Research 
Activities of AIIMS, New Delhi, the Committee was apprised as under:- 
Strength  Weaknesses 
 Premier medical research institution in 
India 
 Strong faculty and student base 
 Access to diverse patient data 
 Intramural and extramural funding 
support 
 Advanced labs and digital tools 
 Procedural delays in approvals 
 Limited interdisciplinary collaboration  
 Underutilization of digital platforms 
 Inconsistent publication quality across 
departments 
Opportunities Threats 
 Global collaborations and fellowships 
 AI and genomics integration 
 Increased government funding 
 Expansion into public health and policy 
research 
 Ethical and regulatory bodies 
 Brain drain of top researchers  
 Competition from private research 
institutions  
 Risk of commercialization over 
academic rigour 
 

 
36 
 
6.11.2 The Committee underscores the need for further encouraging multidisciplinary 
and cross-institutional research collaborations that can broaden scientific perspectives 
and accelerate innovation. The Committee is of the firm view that leveraging artificial 
intelligence and big data analytics will support advances in predictive modelling, 
diagnostics, and personalized medicine. Regular training workshops in research 
methodology, ethics and publication strategies can improve the competence and 
confidence of early-career researchers. 
 
6.11.3 The Committee further recommends that the Institute establish a centralised 
digital platform for grant management to streamline application, approval and 
monitoring processes, thereby reducing administrative delays. The Committee 
understands that one of the major primary concerns of research wing is inadequate 
fund for wide ranging research sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
AIIMS in tandum with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the Ministry of 
Finance must ensure efficient funding and grant management by facilitating timely 
access to both intramural and extramural research grants and optimizing their 
utilisation. The Committee further recommends that the Research Wing of AIIMS, New 
Delhi must play the crucial role in navigating the complex regulatory landscape 
governing biomedical research, including ethical approvals, data protection mandates 
and compliance with clinical trial regulations. 
 
6.11.4 The Committee also recommends that AIIMS augment its research training 
ecosystem through regular capacity-building programmes on research methodology, 
ethics, data management and publication practices. To support greater access to 
scientific literature and improve research quality, the Committee encourages the 
Institute to fully leverage national initiatives such as One Nation One Subscription.  
 
6.11.5 Recognising the importance of translational research, the Committee 
recommends that AIIMS strengthen its partnerships with the biotechnology and 
pharmaceutical sectors and accelerate the operationalisation of the Centre for Medical 
Innovation and Entrepreneurship (CMIE) under the Section 8 company framework, 
alongside the implementation of a comprehensive Entrepreneurship Policy. The 
Committee understands that the establishment of a Section 8 company, the Centre for 
Medical Innovation and Entrepreneurship (CMIE), alongside the implementation of an 
institutional Entrepreneurship Policy, is expected to further support innovation, start-
up incubation and commercialization of research outcomes, thus positioning AIIMS as a 
leading hub for medical research and technology development. The Committee 
reiterates its earlier recommendation that AIIMS should generate atleast 10% of its 
budgetary requirement through partnerships with biotechnology and pharmaceutical 
sectors. 
 
6.12 Outcome and Conclusions of Health Research Project 
 
6.12.1 The Committee has been apprised of the outcome and conclusions of the heath 
research project which are enumerated below:– 

 
37 
 
i. Enhanced diagnostics for multidrug-resistant tuberculosis and Salmonella, leading to 
faster detection and resistance tracking, improving treatment efficacy. 
ii. Progress toward HIV cure strategies through latency reactivation and immune 
modulation insights, potentially informing global ART protocols. 
iii. Reduction in corneal blindness via increased pledges and transplants, contributing to 
national elimination targets. 
iv. Newborn health databases informing policy, with multisite studies yielding evidence 
on key interventions. 
v. AI/ML applications improving cancer prognosis and diagnostics, with predictive 
models for sepsis and antimicrobial resistance. 
vi. Assistive tech innovations, such as devices for disability rehabilitation, validated for 
commercialization, addressing access barriers in underserved areas. 
vii. Overall, research has led to several publications in high impact journals with AIIMS, 
New Delhi ranking highest in 
viii. Many patents are filed in areas like MedTech innovations, clinical and biomedical 
research by the AIIMS faculty. 
 
6.12.2 The Committee appreciates the outcomes and the conclusions drawn from health 
research project undertaken by AIIMS, New Delhi, although the outcomes vary by 
project to project, however, the findings/conclusions show arrived are of remarkable 
magnitude for healthcare and treatment.  The Committee notes the measurable 
outcomes of health research project has translated into Enhanced diagnostics for 
multidrug-resistant, scientific advancement toward HIV cure strategies, formulating 
global ART protocols, reduction in cornea blindness, validation and commercialization 
of assistive tech innovations, filling of application for patents like Med tech innovations 
having immense bearing on maintaining healthcare and treatment of even lethal 
diseases.  The Committee is hopeful about the measurable outcome of ongoing health 
research projects and projects to be undertaken during 2026-27. 
 
6.13 Dissemination to Other Healthcare Institutions 
 
6.13.1 The Committee has been apprised about the mechanism as to how AIIMS, New Delhi 
employs multifaceted strategies for knowledge transfer, ensuring wide reach across India: 
i. Publications and Repositories: Approx. 3000 annual publications in indexed 
national and international journals.  Research findings are share globally for 
academic and clinical use. 
ii. Conferences and Events: Departments at AIIMS organize workshops and 
conferences for knowledge dissemination. AIMS Research Section organizes 
“Annual Research Day” that showcases research work through posters and 
platforms by AIIMS student researchers. Several research awards are given to 
AIIMS faculty for their outstanding research publications and achievements.  
AIIMS also organize public educational events for public awareness about 
diabetes, mental health, stroke, heart diseases, eye disease, women’s health 
etc. for dissemination of evidence-based knowledge. 
iii. Collaborations and Training workshops: Partnerships with institutions like 
Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi; University College London” 

 
38 
 
Translational Health Science and Technology Institute; Centre for Cellular and 
Molecular Biology; and Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology; 
facilitate joint workshops, staff exchanges, and research development.  
Further, training programs are regularly organized by the Centralized Core 
Research Facility Innovation and Entrepreneurship not only for AIIMS 
faculty, scientists, and students but also for other AIIMS in the country. 
 
6.13.2 The Committee notes with appreciation that multifaceted strategies viz. 3000 
annual publication in indexed national and international journals, organising Annual 
Research Day and workshops & conferences for knowledge dissemination, and 
collaboration and training workshops under partnership with repute health research 
institutions ensure knowledge transfer with wide outreach across the country.  The 
expects that findings of health research should not only enhance the knowledge of 
AIIMS faculty, scientists and students but should be disseminated across all other 
regional AIIMS and tertiary care hospitals.  Researchers at AIIMS must contribute 
significantly by developing best practice guidelines that serve as standardized references 
for both fundamental research and clinical research.  Technical resource centres have 
been established for making evidence-based guidelines for several health conditions.  
 
6.13.3 The breakthroughs in health research have transformed India’s healthcare by 
enhancing accessibility, equity, and outcomes: 
 
i. Improved Diagnostics and Early Intervention : The Alzheimer’s blood test of 
Transmission Electron Microscopy for Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia reduce 
reliance on costly imaging (e.g., PET scans costing Rs. 20,000+), enabling rural 
outreach and cutting diagnostic delays by 50-70%, potentially lowering dementia-
related costs (projected at Rs. 1.3 lakh crore by 2030) and PCD morbidity. 
ii. Advancements in Cancer Care: CAR-T therapy democratizes advanced treatment, 
previously limited to high-cost imports (Rs. 3-4 crore), making it viable for low-
income patients and boosting survival rates in multiple myeloma from 50% to 
80% in trials, while AI tools screen 10x more cases annually, addressing India’s 
1.4 million new cancers yearly. 
iii. Pandemic Response and Preparedness: COVID research accelerated vaccine 
rollout (covering 2 billion doses) and variant surveillance, reducing mortality by 
30-40% in high-risk groups and shaping ICMR policies for TB-COVID co-
management, averting 5-10% excess deaths. 
iv. Broader Systemic Gains: AI integrations have scaled to 30% more efficient 
diagnostics nationwide, promoting telemedicine adoption and reducing urban-
rural disparities, with economic riplies effects like job creation in MedTech. 
v. Introducing mandatory 25% protected time for research and AIIMS-wide 
innovation incubators for start-ups.  Public enhancing private partnerships in 
research, with performance-bases grants. 
vi. Enhancing research Infrastructure and Capacity by setting up new research labs 
with AI-enabled facilities and faculty recruitment. 
vii. Expanding ties with international bodies through joint PhD programs and 
exchange fellowships. 

 
39 
 
 
6.13.4 The Committee is of the considered view the positive impact of health research 
outcome must have bearing on the overall healthcare landscape and hopes that each 
breakthroughs in health research must aim at transforming the India’s healthcare by 
enhancing accessibility, equity and outcome and reducing out-of-pocket expenditure.  
The Committee recommends that the AIIMS management should strive in this direction 
in the better interest of the patients. 
 
6.14 Submission by Associations on Research 
 
6.14.1 The Officers Association of AIIMS, New Delhi informed the Committee about the 
need to strengthen institutional framework by creating Centers of Excellence that seamlessly 
integrate diagnostics, clinical care and research. Such hubs, they noted, would not only 
enhance patient care but also accelerate translational research and innovation. The 
Association highlighted the importance of establishing robust central laboratories, 
pharmacovigilance systems and incubator programs to support cutting-edge investigations 
and foster start-ups in healthcare. They further underlined the need for a strong digital 
backbone, encompassing Electronic Medical records (EMRs), intellectual property protection 
mechanisms and centralized academic and clinical registries to ensure data-driven decision-
making, efficiency and innovation. The Nurses Union also stressed the role of nurses in 
research and practice advancement, recommending the establishment of a dedicated Clinical 
Nursing Research Wing in every block and center. Such steps is essential for promoting 
evidence-based nursing, advancing practice standards and addressing the current shortage of 
space for clinical, academic and research activities. 
 
6.14.2 Underscoring the need to strengthen institutional framework the Committee 
recommends that AIIMS should establish Centres of Excellence integrating clinical 
care, diagnostics and research to strengthen translational outcomes. The Committee is 
of the firm view that expansion of research infrastructure with central laboratories, 
pharmacovigilance systems and incubator facilities is also required to support 
innovation and healthcare start-ups. In addition, priority should be given to developing 
a robust digital backbone with EMRs, academic and clinical registries and IPR 
protection systems to ensure data-driven research and decision-making. Concurring 
with the submission of the Nurses Union the Committee strongly recommends for the 
creation of dedicated Clinical Nursing Research Wings in every block and Centre, with 
adequate space and facilities to advance nursing research, professional standards and 
patient care outcomes. 
 
 
7.0 PATIENT CARE 
 
7.1 The Institute has defined how public hospitals can perform under pressure. A typical 
day at AIIMS, New Delhi reflects the scale, complexity and critical importance of its 
operations in India's healthcare system. With over 14,000 out-patient consultations conducted 
daily, the institute remains a beacon of hope for patients from across the country, many of 
whom travel long distances seeking specialized treatment. More than 800 patients are 

 
40 
 
attended to in the emergency department every day, often presenting with critical and life-
threatening conditions that require immediate and expert care. The hospital admits over 1,000 
patients each day, carefully managing its limited inpatient capacity to address the most urgent 
medical needs.  
 
7.1.1 On an average, more than 1,000 surgical procedures are performed daily, ranging 
from routine interventions to highly complex operations across various specialties. In 
addition, the Radiology Department carries out over 3,000 diagnostic imaging procedures 
every day, playing a pivotal role in accurate and timely diagnosis. Complementing this is the 
laboratory services wing, which handles over 2 lakh laboratory tests daily, supporting both in-
patient and out-patient diagnostics with remarkable efficiency.  
 
7.1.2 The Committee has been informed about the problems faced by the patients and steps 
taken by AIIMS Management, New Delhi to address those problems and enhance patients’ 
care and comforts while seeking treatment in the Institute:- 
 
S.No. Problems faced by 
Patients 
Steps Taken to enhance patients’ care and comforts 
1. Overcrowding and long 
waiting time 
(i) Implementated online appointments through the ORS portal and 
a token system based on a first-come, first-served basis to manage 
patient flow for walk-ins.:- 
o 50% slots for online appointments 
o 30% slosts for walk-ins 
o 20% slots for cross-referrals 
(ii) Commissioning of new speciality blocks (Burns & Plastic 
Surgery Block, Surgical Block, New RAK OPD Block, Mother & 
Child Block,  National Centre for Ageing and vertical  expansion 
of JAI Prakash Narain Advanced Neuro and Trauma Centre to 
alleviate overcrowding and increase in OPD and IPD capacity.  
(iii) In order to decongest  the OPD, the New RAK OPD has been 
opened up. Along the same lines, an expansion OPD – New Super 
Specialty OPD Block – has been conceptualized to decongest the 
OPDs of the Cancer Centre, Cardio Neuro Centre and Eye Centres.  
(iv) Improved accessibility for disabled patients by optimized use of 
ramps and excalators and adhering to Universal Design Features at 
newly commissioned block of RAK OPD.  
(v) ASHRAY- A facility managed at AIIMS by retired CRPF 
personnel: 
 Patients waiting outside the gate after 9 PM are escorted to 
ASHRAY. 
 Provided amentities like food, shelter, hygienic toilets, 
drinking water. 
 Next day they are sent to OPD as per their pecking order 
for walk-in slots. 
2. Availability of Beds  (i) In order to cater to increasing patient load, AIIMS Delhi has added 
1000 beds to its inpatient bed strength, and plans to add new super-
speciality OPD Blocks and another 150 beds of Critical Care 
Centre. Further, with the operationalization of AIIMS-CAPFIMS 
Campus, the total bed strength will be nearly 5000 beds.   
3. Difficulty in Navigating 
the Campus 
(i) Installed multilingual signage across the campus. 
(ii) Commissioned accessible e-shuttle services with multiple pick-

 
41 
 
up/drop-off points around the campus periphery.  
(iii) Deployed trained staff (Patient Care Coodinators) and sensitized 
guards in assisting the patients in navigating the campus 
effectively.  
(iv) An intra-hospital navigation system is also being implemented to 
ensure easy access to varioius patient care areas.  
4. Shortage of 
Doctors/supporting staff 
(i) Created additional posts for doctors and staff to handle increased 
patient load efficiently.  
(ii) Incorporated telemedicine facilities for preliminary and remote 
consultations. 
(iii) The NORCET (Nursing Officers Recruitment Common Entrance 
Test) is being conducted twice a year to fill up  vacancies in the 
nursing cadre. 
(iv) The process for filling up vacant Faculty posts has already been 
starated and advertisement for vacant faculty posts is currently live.  
5. Insufficient 
accommodation for 
Patients 
(i) Expanded shelter waiting areas especially in close proximity to the 
Masjid Moth Campus for patients and their attendants.  
(ii) Strategically developed covered waiting halls for patients and their 
attendants. 
(iii) Provided affordable dormitory accommodations such as Vishram 
Sadans. 
(iv)  CRPF Ashray has been established where patients are being 
offered free lodging and boarding with priority for walk-in 
appointments. 
6. Delayed access to 
Diagnostics and Labs 
(i) In order to get laboratory test done and to make reports available to 
patients in time, the core lab with a capacity of >2,00,000/day has 
been established and digitized through NIC to provide test reports 
through the ORS software in the mobile of the patients as a text 
message.  
(ii) Moreover, charges of all investigations and interventions less than 
Rs. 300 have been abolished.  
7. MRI Tests (i) Due to high load of patients requiring MRI, the service timings of 
the existing 3 MRIs have been increased to 24*7 while another 
machine is being replaced and a new one installed in the National 
Cenre for Ageing. 
(ii) Moreover, to offset the load of patients, the possibility of 
outsourcing MRI for OPD patients is being explored.   
8. Lack of awareness about 
procedure 
Set up information desk managed by Patient Care Coordinator at 
multiple points. 
9. High out of pocket 
expenses for medicines 
(i) Strengthened the availability of generic drugs through in-house 
pharmacies dispensed through easily accessible AMRIT Pharmacy 
counters as well as Jan Aushadhi Counter. 
(ii) All admitted patients holding a valid BPL card or certified as needy 
by the treating doctor are provided all necessary medicines even if 
they are not included in the Hospital Medicine supply list.  
10. Availablity of drugs (i) Free generic pharmacies where generic drugs are distributed free of 
cost to patients. 
(ii) 6 outlets of HLL and 1 of Jan Aushudhi are available at different 
places in AIIMS.  
(iii) For inpatients, the list of essential drugs to be provided free of cost 
is under evaluation.  
(iv) Patients covered under schemes and BPL patients are provided all 
drugs free of cost. 
11. Difficulty in accessing 
Emergency care 
(i) Implemented effective triaging of patients arriving at  the 
emergency areas.  

 
42 
 
(ii) Established  the JPNATC (dedicated center) which si strategically 
loacted at the Ring-Road for immediate  care of trauma and road 
accident patients.  
(iii) Dynamic monitoring and optimization of deployment of staff to 
manage spikes in demand in emergency and other critical care 
areas. 
12. Inadequate parking 
facilities 
(i) Developed multi-level basement parking facilities across newly 
constructed blocks at Masjid Moth Campus to accommodate more 
vehicles seamlessly. 
(ii) Encouraged the use of public transportation and e-shuttle services 
by improving connectivity to nearby  transit hubs (Metro stations 
and Bus stops). 
13. Cleanliness in waiting 
areas and washrooms 
(i) Continuous  endeavor towards improved cleanliness acorss the 
campus, including washrooms and other public areas. 
(ii) Implemented regular audits and feedback mechanisms using simple 
SOPs to maintain hygiene standards. 
14. Lack of real-time data on 
bed availability 
(i) Increase transparency by commissioning a live/regularly updated 
dashboard displaying key performance indicators on availability of 
various resources of the institute, in real-time, at info.aiims.edu, as 
under:- 
(A) Main Hospital Emergency Dashboard – Total no. of 
Emergency beds; occupied beds; emergency beds 
available; and patients in emergency awaiting admission. 
(B) JPNATC Emergency Dashboard – Total no. of 
Emergency beds; occupied beds; emergency beds 
available; and patients in emergency awaiting admission. 
(C) Vishram Sadan, AIIMS Dashboard – Rajgarhia Vishram 
Sadan (Bed Vacant, Bed Occupied); Shri Sai Vishram 
Sadan (Bed Vacant, Bed Occupied); 
(D) e- Hospital Dashboard, AIIMS – OPD; IPD (admission); 
IPD (discharge); registration-emergency; sample 
collection laboratory; tests done laboratory; radiology 
billing. 
(E) e- Hospital dashboard, AIIMS – OPD Visit; IPD 
Admission; Discharge; emergency; samle collected; and 
radiology. 
 
7.2 The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, has informed the Committee that the 
Government of India has initiated various policy measures for ensuring easy accessibility of 
healthcare services at Central Government Institutions including AIIMS, New Delhi, that are 
notably useful for patient care and comforts seeking treatment in the institute:- 
(i) Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (AB-PMJAY) extends benefits 
to individuals above 70 years of age, offering free treatment for eligible families. The 
scheme ensures cashless healthcare services in empanelled hospitals, covering 
secondary and tertiary care. With a focus on financial protection for vulnerable 
populations, it provides an annual coverage of Rs 5 lakh per eligible beneficiary family 
per year for inpatient care i.e. hospitalisation. Recent enhancements emphasize senior 
citizens' healthcare, promoting equitable access to quality medical services. The AB 
PMJAY counters at AIIMS New Delhi, managed by the Medical Social Welfare 
Officers (MSWO), facilitate access to the Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan 
Arogya Yojana. These dedicated counters assist eligible patients in availing cashless 

 
43 
 
treatment under the scheme, ensuring seamless registration, verification, and claim 
processing. MSWOs provide critical guidance and support to patients, particularly those 
from economically weaker sections, enabling them to benefit from comprehensive 
healthcare services under AB-PMJAY. 
(ii) The generic pharmacy at AIIMS New Delhi (Jan Aushadhi Kendra) offers affordable, 
high-quality medications to patients, ensuring access to essential drugs at significantly 
reduced prices. Such Kendras provides a wide range of generic medicines, catering to 
various medical needs and supports the institution's commitment to inclusive 
healthcare. By reducing the financial burden of treatment, the pharmacy enhances 
accessibility for economically weaker sections, aligning with AIIMS mission to deliver 
equitable medical services. 
(iii) The AMRIT (Affordable Medicines and Reliable Implants for Treatment) pharmacy at 
AIIMS New Delhi provides life-saving medicines, surgical disposables and implants at 
highly subsidized rates. Established to reduce out-of-pocket expenses for patients, the 
AMRIT Pharmacies offers significant discounts on essential drugs and medical devices. 
The pharmacy caters to a wide spectrum of healthcare needs, promoting affordability 
and accessibility while supporting the government's efforts to make quality healthcare 
affordable for all. 
(iv) Various Patient Assistance Schemes: AIIMS New Delhi offers various schemes such as 
the Rashtriya Arogya Nidhi (RAN) aimed at providing financial assistance to patients 
from economically weaker sections for life-threatening diseases. Other initiatives 
include the Health Minister's Discretionary Grant (HMDG) involving financial 
assistance upto a maximum amount of Rs.1.25 lakh to poor indigent patients to defray 
part of expenditure on hospitals/treatment in for life-threatening diseases covered under 
RAN. 
(v) The Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram (JSSK) at AIIMS New Delhi ensures free and 
cashless maternity services for pregnant women and sick newborns. Under this scheme, 
patients receive free medical care, including diagnostics, medications, hospital stays 
and transport services. Designed to reduce maternal and infant mortality, JSSK 
addresses the financial and logistical challenges faced by vulnerable families, 
promoting safe childbirth and comprehensive neonatal care. 
(vi) The Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) at AIIMS New Delhi provides 
comprehensive healthcare services to central government employees, pensioners, and 
their dependents. Beneficiaries can access outpatient and inpatient care, diagnostic 
services and specialist consultations. AIIMS as a CGHS-empanelled institution ensures 
quality and affordable medical treatment, catering to a wide range of healthcare needs. 
The scheme plays a vital role in delivering reliable and accessible healthcare to 
government employees and their families. 
(vii) AIIMS New Delhi offers waivers on diagnostic test rates (Rs.300 and below) for 
economically weaker patients, ensuring affordability and access to essential healthcare 
services. This includes significant concessions or complete waivers on tests such as 
blood investigations, imaging and other diagnostics for eligible individuals. These 
initiatives aim to reduce financial barriers, enabling underprivileged patients to receive 
timely and accurate medical care without added financial strain. 

 
44 
 
(viii)  Various initiatives at AIIMS, New Delhi like same day USG and X-Ray for in-patients, 
24 hour operational MRI & CT and same day blood sample collection and reporting 
have been undertaken.  
(ix) Referral of patients from AIIMS New Delhi to other healthcare institutions is crucial for 
optimizing healthcare delivery and ensuring efficient use of resources. Given AIIMS' 
role as a premier tertiary care center, referrals allow it to focus on complex and 
specialized cases, while patients with less critical conditions can receive timely and 
quality care at secondary or regional hospitals. Such coordinated system enhances 
accessibility, reduces patient overload and ensures that all individuals receive 
appropriate care at the right level of the healthcare hierarchy. 
(x) To facilitate patients from economically weaker sections and out station patients who 
struggle with the high costs of lodging during prolonged treatments, AIIMS has facility 
of Vishram Sadans with over 1500 beds at various locations within the premises of the 
Institute to provide affordable, hygienic and accessible accommodations. AIIMS is also 
expanding its waiting rooms for patients and their attendants with facilities for clean 
drinking water, mobile charging stations, cafeteria etc.  
7.2.1 The Committee appreciates the launching of AIIMS portal, info.aiims.edu and 
various dashboards for combating overcrowding and reducing the patients loads in 
AIIMS, New Delhi besides real time access to facilities related information. The 
Committee desires that the AIIMS portal may be modified to make it more user friendly 
and if possible can be made more mobile friendly with centralized medical record 
system, where all the details of patients records and undertaken treatment so far may be 
uploaded for a ready reckoning and further reference.  The Committee also desires for 
replication of such mobile friendly interface with all departments of AIIMS in the better 
interest and benefits of the patients. The Committee strongly recommends for a better 
protocol for addressing the problem of overcrowding so as to minimise Patient 
discomfort. 
7.3 VOLUME OF PATIENTS FROM OTHER STATES  
 
7.3.1 AIIMS, New Delhi continues to function as the country’s foremost centre for 
advanced healthcare, handling an exceptionally high patient load on a daily basis. The 
Committee was informed that more than 60 per cent of the OPD patient in AIIMS, New Delhi 
hailed from outside of Delhi. The detailed State-wise break up of OPD patients in AIIMS, 
New Delhi from January to December, 2024 is provided below:  
State % of Patients 
Delhi 39.72 
Uttar Pradesh 23.45 
Haryana 13.29 
Bihar 12.64 
Uttrakhand 03.5 
Rajasthan 01.66 
Madhya Pradesh 01.61 
Others 04.13 
 

 
45 
 
7.3.2 The Committee was informed that 22 new AIIMS have been set up under the Pradhan 
Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojna in various States and are in different stages of operation, 
which will considerably help in easing the patient load in AIIMS, New Delhi. 
 
7.3.3 The Committee notes with concern the disproportionately high patient load at 
the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi leading to 
congestion/long waiting time for patients not just inside the hospital but wobbling 
queues outside too. The OPD data for the period January to December 2024 reveals that 
a significant proportion of patients hailed from neighbouring and distant States viz. 
Delhi (39.72%), UP (23.45%), Haryana (13.29%), Bihar (12.64%), Uttrakhand (3.45%) 
and remaining from other States.  The Committee observes that such overwhelming 
reliance on AIIMS, New Delhi indicates not only the pre-eminent status of the Institute 
but also the lack of comparable facilities in other parts of the country. Such excessive 
concentration of patients in one institution has led to overburdened facilities, longer 
waiting times and strains on both infrastructure and manpower, ultimately 
compromising the quality of patient care and academic training. 
 
7.3.4 Under the Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY), 22 new 
AIIMS, established in various States across the country are at different stages of 
operationalisation. The Committee understands that these institutions were envisioned 
precisely to reduce the patient load at AIIMS Delhi by providing high-quality tertiary 
care closer to the population in their respective regions. The Committee, in this 
connection, recommends that urgent steps be taken to strengthen the infrastructure, 
faculty, diagnostic facilities and overall patient care standards in all 22 new AIIMS so 
that the AIIMS like other Institutes  may emerge as credible and reliable alternatives to 
AIIMS, New Delhi. Additionally, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should 
ensure time-bound recruitment of faculty and non-faculty staff, expedite the 
commissioning of super-specialty departments and provide adequate budgetary support 
for state-of-the-art diagnostic and treatment facilities in such institutes. The Committee 
desires that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should furnish the details of 
updated status of the operations of these 22 AIIMS to enable the Committee to obtain a 
real picture and to assess the time by when the problem of overcrowding in AIIMS, 
Delhi will be resolved.  The Committee also recommends for setting up of AIIMS like 
institution in each state, including Karnataka, as patients from all over the country 
cannot make access for treatment of diseases from far flung areas.  The Committee 
further recommends for strengthening of all AIIMS like institutions in the states, like 
Telangana and Andhra Pradesh to be strengthened, as well equipped and manpowered 
as AIIMS, New Delhi to seek treatment of diseases at par to reduce the dependency of 
patients on AIIMS, New Delhi and thus reducing the overcrowding. 
 
7.3.5 The Committee further recommends that effective referral mechanisms be 
developed in coordination with other AIIMS like institutions in various States, so that 
patients requiring tertiary care can be guided towards the nearest functional AIIMS 
rather than converging disproportionately on AIIMS, New Delhi. Public awareness 
campaigns should also be undertaken to build confidence in the quality of services being 
provided at these new AIIMS in various States.  

 
46 
 
 
7.4 STEPS TO ADDRESS OVERCROWDING AND LONG WAITING TIME  
 
7.4.1 Upon enquiring about the measures taken to address overcrowding and long waiting 
time, the Committee was informed that the appointment system at AIIMS, New Delhi permits 
patients to book appointments with a maximum waiting period of one month for new cases 
and three months for follow-up consultations. It was further stated that, in order to reduce 
waiting time, the Institute has expanded its facilities through the commissioning of new 
specialty centres and blocks such as the National Cancer Institute, the Surgical Block, the 
New RAK OPD Block, the Mother & Child Block and the National Centre for Ageing. These 
additions, inter alia, had contributed to a substantial increase in the number of OPD 
consultations. 
 
7.4.2 The Committee took into consideration the action taken by AIIMS, New Delhi to 
reduce overcrowding and long waiting times through the new specialty centres, the 
Online Registration System (ORS) and token-based walk-ins. The Committee 
appreciates the introduction of online appointments through the Online Registration 
System (ORS) portal, along with a token system designed to regulate walk-in patients on 
a first-come, first-served basis. The distribution of OPD slots as 50 per cent allocated for 
online appointments, 30 per cent reserved for walk-ins and the remaining 20 per cent 
earmarked for cross-referrals is a rational approach. However, the Committee is of the 
view that despite these measures, the demand for services at AIIMS continues to exceed 
its capacity. The Committee therefore recommends that AIIMS, New Delhi further 
strengthen its digital appointment management system by making it mobile-friendly, 
multilingual and integrated with centralized electronic medical records, real-time 
updates, automated reminders and referral linkages with other AIIMS and regional 
institutions. These measures, along with physical patient-support mechanisms, would 
streamline patient flow, reduce unnecessary congestion from routine follow-ups and 
ensure equitable access. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare replicate the ORS and token-based model across all AIIMS 
and major central hospitals for greater efficiency and transparency nationwide. 
 
7.4.3 The Committee also recommends that a structured two-way referral system be 
established between AIIMS institutions and other medical colleges in order to ensure 
effective distribution of patients across healthcare facilities. The Committee is of the 
considered view that the adoption of a hub-and-spoke model, linking Primary Health 
Centres (PHCs), Community Health Centres (CHCs), district hospitals, medical colleges 
and AIIMS institutions, would facilitate seamless integration of services across different 
levels of care. The Committee also strongly recommends that the Government should 
seriously consider setting up the ‘Hub and Spoke’ model to address the problem of 
overcrowding in the hospitals in metropolitan cities. Such a system would enable 
patients to be directed to the most appropriate facility based on the nature and severity 
of their medical needs, thereby enhancing efficiency, reducing overcrowding at apex 
centres and improving outcomes.  
 

 
47 
 
7.4.4 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, in consultation with AIIMS, explore the possibility of establishment of satellite 
centres of AIIMS around Delhi for all time given treatment and emergency, particularly 
in four part of Delhi viz. East Delhi, West Delhi, North Delhi and South Delhi and other 
suitable locations in the National Capital Region with just 100 to 150 bedded centres 
with estimated cost of Rs. 150 crore to Rs. 200 crore and search centres may be called as 
AIIMS Satellite Centre.   The Committee thinks once these satellite centres are tagged 
with AIIMS, there would be a lot of public acceptability.  Since in Delhi, the travel 
radius is almost 50-60 KM there is also the need to have cardiology, neurology and 
trauma centres of AIIMS, New Delhi in different parts of Delhi/NCR viz. Gurugram, 
Sonipat, Baghpat, Faridabad, Ghaziabad/Noida or at other suitable location because 
time is a crucial factor in the treatment of the heart attack, brain stroke and road 
accidents where the medical treatment is to be given within the golden hour.  Resident 
doctors may be posted on rotation basis in these centres, functioning as extensions of 
AIIMS, New Delhi, could provide outpatient consultations, diagnostics and follow-up 
care, thereby decongesting the main campus and ensuring easier access to patients 
residing in surrounding regions. Such decentralisation would not only improve patient 
convenience & timely treatment but also allow AIIMS, New Delhi to focus its core 
capacity on complex tertiary care, research and advanced training. 
 
7.5 EXPANSION OF TELEMEDICINE SERVICES 
 
7.5.1 Responding to the Committee’s query about the approach of the Institute with regard 
to the adoption/expansion of telemedicine to address the issue of overcrowding and whether 
the telemedicine be seen as a viable alternative to in person consultation in the long run while 
providing the same level of care and quality provided to in-person consultation, AIIMS New 
Delhi management in their written submission, stated that Telemedicine can not be taken as 
the same level of care and quality as in-person consultation in any way. However, as far as 
AIIMS-like tertiary hospitals are concerned, this facility should be provided for doctor-to-
doctor consultation for very complex cases, keeping in mind the telemedicine prescription 
guidelines by the National Medical Commission (NMC). In addition, AIIMS, trying to set up 
a system for chronic disease cases where the patient requires long-term follow-up from the 
same doctor/unit for specific diseases. However, during the course of the presentation on the 
subject, the Director, AIIMS stated that the Institute is utilizing telemedicine facilities as the 
institute wants that all the patient should not visit the institute, therefore, if the patient can 
have tele-consultation and skip the physical visit to the AIIMS. The AIIMS management 
encourages such patients who seek telemedicine services.  
 
7.5.2  The Committee also wanted to know whether there is a panel of protocol 
officers dedicated to handling visits and need of MPs, Committee Members and other 
dignitaries and if so, the mechanism of working of such panel and the manner of making the 
same more effective and its role more reflective. Responding to the Committee’s query the 
Ministry apprised the Committee as under:- 
 
“Protocol Division, AIIMS, New Delhi is functioning under the supervision of Professor-In-
Charge. The Division is having strength of (05 regular) official and outsourcing employees 

 
48 
 
who are dedicatedly working for facilitation of Hon’ble Ministers, MPs, Hon’ble Judges, and 
other Dignitaries. Protocol Division facilitates them for their medical consultation and 
during official visit in AIIMS. The patients who require medical consultation recommended 
by Hon’ble MPs and Other Dignitaries through Official’s letter, email etc. are facilitated for 
OPD registration regularly subject to the availability of slots in different departments. The 
protocol division is digitalize and creating online system of appointment for more effective 
and reflective service.” 
 
7.5.3 The Committee recommends that references from public representatives be 
given priority keeping in view that the public representatives are duly elected by a large 
population of their respective constituencies and the patients come to them with great 
expectations from far off corners of the country. 
 
7.5.4 The Committee is of the firm view that AIIMS management should focus more 
on the uses of telemedicine and make efforts to maximize the usage of telemedicine so 
that the problem of overcrowding is resolved to some extent. By utilizing telemedicine 
facilities the patient need not come from far distance, especially when patients have to 
just undergo little bit of treatment or small consultation online. The Committee, in this 
regard, recommends that the Institute must expand telemedicine services to extend its 
expertise to underserved regions of the country like rural, semi-urban, hilly and tribal 
areas.  
 
7.6 SETTING UP OF ANOTHER AIIMS IN NCR 
 
7.6.1 Pertaining to the Committee’s query about the response of the Ministry to the 
suggestion of setting up of another AIIMS like institute in Delhi/NCR with separate 
administrative structure in view of ever increasing patient load and the estimated expenditure 
for the purpose.  The Ministry apprised the Committee in written submission that at present, 
several facilities of AIIMS Delhi are operational in and around Delhi that inter-alia 
includes:– 
(i) National Cancer Institute (NCI) at Jhajjar campus for specialized oncology 
treatments; 
(ii) National Drug Dependence Treatment Centre (NDDTC) for treatment of dungs 
and substance abuse disorders at Ghaziabad and 
(iii) Comprehensive Rural Health Services Project at Ballabhgarh. 
 
7.6.2 The Committee has been informed that a Memorandum of Association was signed 
between Central Armed Police Forces Institute of Medical Sciences (CAPFIMS) and AIIMS 
to run CAPFIMS as a campus of AIIMS New Delhi. CAPFIMS is a 970-bedded hospital with 
a Medical College, a Nursing College and School of Paramedics with 100, 60 and 300 seats 
respectively. Further, a Super Specialty OPD Block and Critical Care Block have been 
approved for AIIMS Delhi to cater to the increasing number of patients. 
 
7.6.3 Moreover, the Government has granted approval to establish 22 new AIIMS in 
different States under Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY).  In addition, 
under another component of PMSSY, 75 Government Medical Colleges have been upgraded 

 
49 
 
by way of construction of Super Speciality Blocks (SSB), Trauma Centres, etc. on Center-
State cost sharing basis. 
 
7.6.4 The Committee, in its 163rd Report on Demands for Grants (2025-26) in para 3.18.9 
made observation/recommendation on addressing the overcrowding and the need for 
exploring the possibilities of construction of another AIIMS in NCR region as under:– 
 
“The Committee notes the AIIMS, New Delhi's efforts to address patient 
overcrowding and improve services which include providing temporary shelter 
("Ashray"), enhancing patient convenience through various facilities, 
streamlining appointments via online systems, expanding infrastructure with new 
specialty blocks, and offering accommodation through "Vishram Sadans." 
Additionally, the Committee desires the AIIMS, Delhi to expand the "Ashray" 
initiative by providing more permanent, weather-protected waiting areas with 
adequate seating, clean washrooms, and access to affordable food options. This 
will significantly reduce the hardship faced by patients and their attendants 
awaiting appointments. However, significant challenges remain, particularly with 
long wait times for walk-in OPD appointments and substantial staff vacancies 
across all cadres. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Institute 
implements a robust, real-time digital queue management system for walk-in OPD 
appointments. This system should provide patients with estimated wait times via 
SMS or a mobile app, allowing them to wait in designated, comfortable areas 
rather than overnight outside. Keeping in view the fact of long waiting time for 
urgent treatment of even critical patients, the Committee desires that Department 
should explore the possibilities of construction of another AIIMS in NCR region 
close to New Delhi”. 
 
7.6.5 On the Committee’s observations and recommendations regarding long wait times, the 
“Ashray” initiative and the need for an improved queue management system, the ongoing 
efforts are as under: - 
(i) The “Ashray” initiative, which began in late December 2024, has significantly 
increased its capacity to address the needs of patients and their attendants. 
Originally designed to accommodate 80 patients, the initiative now serves 
approximately 225 patients daily. This corresponds to around 500 individuals, 
including patients, attendants and relatives, who are provided with a weather- 
protected waiting area, free food distribution and access to washroom facilities. 
(ii) The Institute is actively working on expanding the “Ashray” initiative further. 
Plans are underway to establish additional weather-protected waiting areas in key 
locations such as near Gate No. 2, Masjid Moth Campus, the Mother& Child 
Block, and other areas of AIIMS, New Delhi. These new areas will provide 
adequate seating, clean washrooms, and aﬀordable food options, helping to reduce 
the hardship faced by patients and their attendants. 
(iii) The Institute has expanded sheltered waiting areas especially in close proximity to 
the Masjid Moth Campus for patients and their attendants and developed covered 
waiting halls for patients and their attendants. 

 
50 
 
(iv) To assist patients and their attendants, AIIMS has Vishram Sadans at various 
locations within the premises of the Institute with provision of over 1150 beds 
(including at Jhajjar campus), facilities for clean drinking water, mobile charging 
stations, cafeteria and restroom etc. 
(v) AIIMS, New Delhi has implemented a digital queue management system for 
scheduled appointments, which has significantly improved the flow of patients. 
AIIMS has also implemented online appointments through the ORS portal and a 
token system based on a first-come, first-served basis to manage patient flow for 
walk-ins. 
(vi) AIIMS is exploring various options for better communicating real-time estimated 
wait times for walk-in appointments, particularly through digital platforms such as 
SMS or mobile apps. This will allow patients to wait in designated, comfortable 
areas rather than outside overnight, thus improving their experience. 
(vii) New specialty blocks like Burns & Plastic Surgery Block, Surgical Block, New 
RAK OPD Block, Mother & Child Block, National Centre for Ageing and vertical 
expansion of JPNATC have been commissioned to alleviate overcrowding and 
increase OPD and IPD capacity. As such, in order to cater to increasing patient 
load, AIIMS Delhi has added 1000 beds to its inpatient bed strength, and plans to 
add another 150 beds of the Critical Care Centre. In order to decongest the OPD, 
the New RAK OPD has been opened. Similarly, to decongest the main AIIMS 
campus by relocating all OPD services to the Masjid Moth Campus and to augment 
the OPD capacity for CN Centre, Dr. BRAIRCH and Dr. RP Centre, new Super 
Specialty Block is under process for appraisal. 
(viii) The Institute has improved accessibility for disabled patients by optimized use of 
ramps and escalators and adhering to Universal Design Features at newly 
commissioned blocks of New RAK OPD, installed multilingual signage across the 
campus and commissioned accessible e-shuttle services with multiple pick-up/drop 
off points around the campus periphery. 
(ix) The Institute has deployed trained staﬀ (Patient Care Coordinators) and sensitized 
guards in assisting the patients in navigating the campus eﬀectively.  An intra-
hospital navigation system is also being implemented to ensure easy access to 
various patient care areas. 
(x) The Institute has incorporated telemedicine facilities for preliminary and remote 
consultations. 
(xi) For manpower, additional posts for doctors and staﬀ have been created to handle 
increased patient loads efficiently. The process for filling up vacant Faculty posts 
has already been started and advertisement for vacant faculty posts is currently live. 
The NORCET (Nursing Officers Recruitment Common Entrance Test) is being 
conducted twice a year to fill up vacancies in the nursing cadre. 
(xii) In order to get laboratory tests done and to make reports available to patients in 
time the core lab with a capacity of>2,00,000/day has been established and 
digitized through NIC to provide test reports through the ORS software in the 
mobile of the patient as a text message.  Due to the high load of patients requiring 

 
51 
 
MRI, the service timings of the existing MRIs have been increased to 24*7 and 
another machine is being replaced and a new one installed in the National Centre 
for Ageing. 
(xiii) Information desks manned by Patient Care Coordinators at multiple points have 
been set up. 
(xiv) The Institute has strengthened the availability of generic drugs through in- house 
pharmacies dispensed through easily accessible AMRIT Pharmacy counters as well 
as Jan Aushadhi Counter. 6 outlets of HLL and 1 of Jan Aushadhi are available at 
different places in AllMS. 
(xv) Implementedeffectivetriagingofpatientsarrivingattheemergencyarea. 
(xvi) Established the JPNATC (dedicated center) which is strategically located at the 
Ring-Road for immediate care of trauma and road accident patients. Dynamic 
monitoring and optimization of deployment of staﬀ to manage spikes in demand in 
emergency and other critical care areas. 
(xvii) Developed multi-level basement parking facilities across newly constructed blocks 
at Masjid Moth Campus to accommodate more vehicles seamlessly. 
(xviii) Encouraged the use of public transportation and e-shuttle services by improving 
connectivity to nearby transit hubs (Metro stations and Bus stops). 
(xix) Continuous endeavour towards improved cleanliness across the campus, including 
washrooms and other public areas. 
(xx) Implemented regular audits and feedback mechanisms using simple SOPs to 
maintain hygiene standards. Increased transparency by commissioning a 
live/regularly updated dashboard displaying key performance indicators on 
availability of various resources of the Institute, in real-time at info.aiims.edu, that 
inter-alia include Main Hospital Emergency Dashboard, JPNATC Emergency 
Dashboard, Vishram Sadan, AIIMS Dashboard, e-Hospital Dashboard, AIIMS, e-
Hospital Dashboard, AIIMS(today). 
7.6.6 The Committee understands that AIIMS, New Delhi remains committed to 
addressing the challenges of patient overcrowding and wait times.  It is true that the 
expansion of the “Ashray” initiative and vishram sadans and various steps/measures are 
critical steps in ensuring the convenience and comfort of patients.  At the same time, the 
Committee also takes notes of the submission of the Ministry, as mentioned in the 
background note, that despite expansion of hospitals services, the demand for services at 
the AIIMS, New Delhi is always more than the capacity, therefore, the Committee is of 
the firm view that the Ministry should take a considered view to the recommendation of 
the Committee for setting up of another AIIMS like institution in NCR with separate 
administration and governing structure to overcome the problems of work overload in 
AIIMS, New Delhi.  The Committee considers that even if the facilities in AIIMS, New 
Delhi is expanded, under master plan with estimated expenditure of Rs. 15,558.37 crore 
the floor area would remain the same because expansion of facilities would grow 
vertically only, therefore, the problem of congestion would continue to a worrying 
challenge due to limited floor area.  The Committee, therefore, thinks it very essential 

 
52 
 
and imperative to have one another AIIMS in other location in Delhi or NCR, therefore, 
recommends the Government to take a call its observations with all seriousness.  The 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should take a policy decision, plan and prepare 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) and pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance for 
budget allocation for the purpose. 
 
7.7 MECHANISM TO ADDRESS THE MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT 
REFERENCES 
 
7.7.1 AIIMS, New Delhi, notwithstanding the fact that the institute being pioneer in the 
healthcare delivery in the country, issues related to problems faced by the public while 
assessing and availing treatment in the institute, have cropped up time and again before the 
Chairman, and Members of the Committee on Health and Family Welfare during its 
meetings. As a whole not only the general public but even Hon’ble Members of Parliament 
usually have to face a lot of problems including long waiting time and other hurdles while 
willing to seek treatment at AIIMS. During the Committee’s meeting held on 13th May, 2025 
several members shared inconvenience faced by them while seeking one’s treatment or 
treatment of kith and kin or persons on their reference. The sorry state of the fact is that some 
members of the Committee pin-pointed that there are no takers of their calls and references 
and that too are neglected with a casual remarks that such type of references are used to come, 
therefore, there is need for improvement in the matter.  
 
7.7.2 The Committee is of the view that the AIIMS, New Delhi management should set 
up concrete mechanism to address the references of the Member of Parliament. The 
officers of Public Relations (PR), say, Patient Care Coordinator (PCC) should be 
trained and sensitized to respond the calls and references of Members of Parliament 
with all care and caution as being the representative of their constituency, Members of 
Parliament are the last rays of their hope. Members face embarrassing situation if their 
recommendations fail to receive appropriate attention. The Committee understands that 
in the health profession, not only the doctors but the nurses who remain involved in the 
treatment or cure of the patients are required to be responsible and responsive with 
compassionate behaviour towards the patient as that will certainly stamp patient’s 
satisfaction to a great extent, ultimately leading to enhancement in AIIMS, New Delhi 
status as national pride.  
 
7.7.3 The Committee also recommends the AIIMS management to guide the staff 
deployed during night hours to take additional responsibility and care towards patient 
to ensure to access the institute in night hours and guide the patients responsibly and 
responsively to reach at appropriate healthcare centre without delay and with comfort. 
Such guidelines should be implemented in letter and spirit.    
 
7.8 ALLIED SERVICES PROVIDED TO PATIENTS 
 
7.8.1 AIIMS has undertaken several initiatives to enhance patient care and support services 
across its campus. A key example is ASHRAY, a facility managed by retired CRPF 
personnel, where patients waiting outside AIIMS, New Delhi after 9 P.M. are escorted and 

 
53 
 
provided with food, shelter, hygienic toilets and drinking water. The next morning, they are 
guided to the OPD and allotted walk-in slots as per their turn. To improve navigation within 
the large campus, AIIMS has installed multilingual signage, introduced accessible e-shuttle 
services with multiple pick-up and drop-off points and deployed trained Patient Care 
Coordinators along with sensitized security guards to assist patients. An intra-hospital 
navigation system is also being implemented to ensure easy access to care areas. Recognizing 
the challenges faced by patients and their attendants, the Institute has expanded sheltered 
waiting areas, particularly near the Masjid Moth Campus and created covered waiting halls. 
Affordable dormitory-style accommodations such as ‘Vishram Sadans’ have been developed.  
 
7.8.2 The Committee is pleased to note that as in terms of affordability of treatment, AIIMS 
has strengthened the supply of generic drugs through six AMRIT Pharmacy outlets and one 
Jan Aushadhi counter across the campus. All inpatients holding valid BPL cards, or certified 
as needy by their treating doctors, are provided with necessary medicines free of cost, even if 
these are not included in the regular hospital supply list. Patients covered under various 
Government schemes are also fully supported in this regard and the Institute is actively 
evaluating the list of essential drugs to be provided free of cost to all inpatients. 
 
7.8.3 The Committee appreciates the comprehensive patient support systems 
introduced by AIIMS, including the establishment of ASHRAY, patient-friendly 
navigation initiatives, expansion of sheltered waiting areas, provision of affordable 
accommodations and strengthening availability of affordable drug. These measures 
reflect a patient-centric approach and have significantly enhanced accessibility, comfort 
and equity in care delivery. The Committee, at the same time, underscores the need for 
further strengthening patient guidance and navigation within the campus, particularly 
for patients referred to various specialties/faculties/departments. 
 
7.8.4 The Committee understands that night shelter ashrams have been arranged for 
stay of patients during the night, however, there is urgent need to enhance the capacity 
of such night shelter as many of the patients does not get the shelter for the night stay. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommends that AIIMS, New Delhi management 
should seek the capacity of night shelter enlarged under Corporate Social Responsibility 
from all possible PSUs viz.  BEL, NTPC, SAIL, REC, GAIL etc.   
 
7.8.5 The Committee further recommends the establishment of multiple dedicated 
Help Desks strategically located across the campus. All such Help Desks should be 
manned by trained staff and linked with Patient Care Coordinators who can personally 
escort patients from one specialty or department to another, ensuring that no patient or 
attendant is left confused or disoriented in accessing critical services, especially during 
night hours.  
 
7.8.6 The Committee also recommends continuous monitoring of existing 
mechanism/systems to ensure timely assistance, integration of digital navigation tools 
with physical guidance and adequate staffing to meet the high patient volume. Such 
measures will not only enhance the overall patient experience but also reduce delays in 

 
54 
 
accessing consultations and treatments, thereby reinforcing its role as a model of 
patient-centred healthcare delivery.  
 
7.9 CSR-Corporate Social Responsibility 
 
7.9.1 The Committee recommends that AIIMS should explore CSR funding to 
supplement its efforts in creating infrastructure for patients and their attendants and 
work with NGOs to ease the burden. The Committee recommends for a dedicated CSR 
cell to be set up so that a proactive approach to attract CSR funding is developed and 
substantial resources/support can be garnered through CSR. 
 
7.10 WAITING TIME FOR TEST AND INVESTIGATIONS  
 
7.10.1 AIIMS, New Delhi manages an extraordinary diagnostic load on a daily basis, with 
more than 3,000 radiology procedures and over two lakh laboratory tests being carried out. In 
keeping with its mandate of providing affordable healthcare, all investigations and laboratory 
tests up to ₹300 are offered free of cost to patients. It was, however, informed that the sheer 
volume of demand often leads to long waiting times for tests and investigations, posing 
challenges to timely diagnosis and treatment. 
 
7.10.2 Taking into account an extraordinary investigation and laboratory loads on 
AIIMS, New Delhi on a daily basis (3000 Radiology procedure and over 2 Lakh 
laboratory tests), the Committee recommends that AIIMS, New Delhi, in collaboration 
with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, take immediate steps to reduce the 
pressure on its diagnostic services. In this regard, the feasibility and practicality of 
decentralization of laboratory and diagnostic services by strengthening such services at 
regional and district hospitals to manage routine and high-volume investigations closer 
to patients’ homes may be explored.  
 
7.10.3 The Committee further recommends that the Government should consider 
adopting a Public–Private Partnership (PPP) model by empanelling and compensating 
accredited private hospitals and diagnostic facilities at fixed standard rates. The 
Committee is of the view that such a system would allow insured patients, whether 
under public or private insurance, to access diagnostic services at private centres 
without additional financial burden.  
 
7.10.4 Keeping in view the submission of the Director AIIMS that two lakh tests are 
being done per day in AIIMS, New Delhi, the Committee would like to be apprised of 
the types of tests conducted frequently and the percentage & the frequency of tests done 
free under Rs. 300.00. The Committee would further like to know the percentage & the 
frequency of cancer markers, immunohistochemistry, flow cytometry tests being done in 
AIIMS  
 
7.11 System for generation and dissemination of laboratory reports 
 

 
55 
 
7.11.1 Upon inquiring about the system in place for generation and dissemination of 
laboratory reports, the Committee was informed that AIIMS has implemented a fully 
electronic system for the generation and dissemination of laboratory reports. Test results are 
uploaded to the ors.gov.in portal, where patients can securely access them through an OTP-
based authentication process. In addition, printed reports are made available at the respective 
OPD counters for patients who prefer to collect them during their subsequent visits. The 
Committee was also informed that the Institute, at present, does not have a pneumatic tube 
system for the rapid transport of samples and reports. The feasibility of installing such a 
system within the existing brownfield infrastructure is currently under examination, given the 
structural and operational complexities involved. 
 
7.11.2 The Committee notes the progress made by AIIMS in implementing a fully 
electronic laboratory reporting system accessible through secure digital platforms. To 
further enhance efficiency in sample transport and reduce turnaround time, the 
Committee recommends AIIMS to expedite the feasibility assessment and 
implementation of a pneumatic tube system within the existing infrastructure. The 
Committee is of the view that introducing such a system, wherever technically viable, 
will significantly improve workflow, reduce manual handling and strengthen overall 
patient service delivery. 
 
7.12 WAITING TIME OF SURGICAL PROCEDURES (OT details verbatim + 
background note) 
 
7.12.1 AIIMS, New Delhi manages one of the highest surgical and procedural workloads in 
the country and the scale of demand is reflected in the waiting times across departments. 
Emergency, life-threatening, and research-related cases are attended to without delay, but 
elective and non-urgent procedures often involve significant waiting periods. In some 
specialties, these ranges from a few weeks to several months, while in complex disciplines 
such as neurosurgery, the waiting period may extend up to five years. Burns and Plastic 
Surgery, Gastrointestinal Surgery, ENT, Ophthalmology, Paediatric Surgery and Obstetrics & 
Gynaecology, in particular, report long waiting time for routine and elective cases, 
underscoring the pressure on existing infrastructure.  
 
7.12.2 To address this challenge, AIIMS has initiated several steps. A comprehensive master 
plan is being implemented to expand bed capacity and strengthen inpatient facilities, with a 
special focus on augmenting high-dependency units required for post-operative care. 
Diagnostic services such as CT scan, MRI and laboratory investigations have been made 
functional round-the-clock to facilitate quicker pre and post-surgical assessments. The 
Institute has also increased the number of recovery rooms, while developing post-operative 
step-down units to ensure smoother patient transitions and reduce pressure on intensive care 
beds. Alongside this, greater efficiency in operation theatre utilization through pre-procedure 
planning and case selection is helping to improve patient turnover and reduce surgical 
backlogs. 
 
7.12.3 The Committee has been given to understand about the highest surgical and 
procedural workloads on AIIMS, New Delhi and the scale of demand is reflected in the 

 
56 
 
waiting time across department ranging from a few weeks to several months viz. 
Neurosurgery waiting time extends upto 5 years and Burns and Plastic Surgery, 
Gastrointestinal Surgery, ENT, Ophthalmology, Paediatric Surgery and Obstetrics & 
Gynaecology, in particular, report long waiting time for routine and elective cases, 
underscoring the pressure on existing infrastructure. The Committee is of the view that 
in order to reduce the waiting time of laboratory investigation there is urgent need for 
further strengthening the Diagnostic services by adding more MRIs and CTs under PPP 
Model.  Now a days super speciality hospitals have a lot of tele-radiology systems that 
can be replicated at least for laboratory investigations. 
 
7.12.4 The Committee is of the view that the Government should decentralize the Lab 
services into regional district hospitals and even compensating private hospitals to carry 
out test at a fixed rate by the Government and using PPP model wherein the insurance 
patients, both under public insurance as well as private insurance can use private 
diagnostic facilities at standard rates. 
 
7.12.5 The Committee also understands the need for strengthening the peripheral 
AIIMS in each states, District Hospitals and State Hospitals besides strengthening the 
infrastructure at Taluk, District, medical college level in all states for accessible and 
affordable treatment not only to combat the problem of overcrowding in AIIMS, New 
Delhi but also for providing protected time of 25% of its work activities to premiere 
institutions for genuine and high research work at the global scale. 
 
7.12.6 The Committee understands that in order to address the mounting surgical 
backlogs and prolonged waiting times at AIIMS, New Delhi a dual strategy should be 
adopted. On the one hand, AIIMS should continue to expand its own capacity through 
timely completion of the Master Plan, augmentation of high-dependency units, 
strengthening of post-operative and step-down facilities and further optimization of 
operation theatre utilization. On the other hand, a decentralization strategy should be 
pursued wherein elective and non-critical procedures are systematically forwarded or 
referred to other AIIMS, Government hospitals and regional tertiary care centres, 
thereby reducing the disproportionate load on AIIMS, New Delhi. 
 
7.12.7 The Committee further recommends exploring partnerships with accredited 
private hospitals under a Public–Private Partnership (PPP) framework, where elective 
and non-critical procedures can be carried out at standardized government-notified 
rates, with provisions for reimbursement under public health insurance schemes and 
recognition of private insurance coverage. The measures so suggested would not only 
decongest AIIMS but also bring specialized surgical care closer to patients’ homes, 
reducing travel, cost and delays. In addition, AIIMS should develop a centralized digital 
referral and scheduling system linked with other AIIMS and empanelled hospitals, 
enabling patients to be allocated slots based on urgency and availability across the 
network. Such integrated & holistic approach would ensure timely access to care, 
greater efficiency in utilization of national healthcare infrastructure, and improved 
patient satisfaction. 
 

 
57 
 
7.13 National Accreditation Board for Hospitals (NABH) Certification 
 
7.13.1 AIIMS, New Delhi has distinguished itself as the first hospital in the country to 
achieve NABH certification in a high-volume setting, reflecting its commitment to 
maintaining the highest standards of patient care and hospital management. The details of 
NABH Accreditation status for AIIMS New Delhi are provided in the table below:- 
Sl. 
No. Area NABH Accreditation/Certification Status 
1. JPNA Trauma Centre  Completed 
2. BPS Block Completed 
3. NCI Jhajjar Completed 
4. CDER Completed 
5. Surgery Block Completed 
6. MCH Block Completed 
7. NCA  Completed 
8. Blood Bank Completed 
9. Dr. BRAIRCH On Going  
10. RPCOS On Going  
11. Main Hospital On Going 
12. NDDTC On Going 
7.13.2 The Committee commends AIIMS, New Delhi for being the first high-volume 
hospital in the country to achieve NABH certification in several of its major blocks and 
centers. The Committee expresses deep concern that full accreditation across the 
Institute is still pending. The Committee strongly recommends that AIIMS, being a 
quality driven institution, must expedite the process of securing NABH accreditation for 
all remaining blocks and centers at the earliest. The Committee underscores that NABH 
accreditation is not merely a certification, but a transformative framework that ensures 
quality, safety and accountability in service delivery, therefore, NABH accreditation is a 
must.  The Committee, in this connection, recommends that for appointment for NABH 
coordinators under hospital administration, doctors cannot spend time on NABH 
accreditation, therefore, specifically appointed NABH coordinators should be entrusted 
with the responsibility of acquiring NABH accreditations.  The Committee is also view 
that NABH accreditation brings uniformity starting from mortuary, blood bank, etc. 
and any mishap may occur with prescription or drug disposal, hence, there should be 
Antibiotic Policy.  The Committee, therefore, understands that a strong Antibiotic 
Policy is the call of the day for a setup like AIIMS, New Delhi. 
 
 
7.14 NEONATAL INTENSIVE CARE FACILITIES 
 
7.14.1 AIIMS, New Delhi, presently operates a Level 3–4 Neonatal Intensive Care Unit 
(NICU) with a capacity of 30 beds. This unit is dedicated exclusively to inborn neonates and 

 
58 
 
caters to approximately 2,800 newborns annually. The NICU primarily serves neonates 
delivered to high-risk mothers referred from across the country, thereby functioning as a 
national referral centre for complex prenatal and neonatal cases. 
 
7.14.2 The NICU at AIIMS is equipped with world-class neonatal infrastructure, including 
hybrid incubators, advanced ventilator support systems such as high-frequency ventilators, 
point-of-care ultrasound facilities, therapeutic hypothermia devices and inhaled nitric oxide 
systems. Through multidisciplinary collaboration with other departments and specialties, the 
NICU provides comprehensive and specialized care to critically ill newborns, achieving 
commendable outcomes in neonatal survival and recovery. The NICU team comprises five 
faculty members, twelve DM residents, seven junior residents and seventy nursing officers. 
All deliveries are attended by resident doctors, ensuring round-the-clock specialized 
supervision. The Obstetric Perinatal Care services attached to the NICU unit include facilities 
for antenatal diagnosis, fetal monitoring and fetal intervention. Additionally, two dedicated 
follow-up clinics function under the unit, one for high-risk neonates and another for normal 
infants, to ensure continuous postnatal care and developmental monitoring. The 
multidisciplinary team providing continuum of care includes neonatologists, physiotherapists, 
clinical psychologists and audiologists, working in close collaboration with departments such 
as Pediatric Neurology, ENT, Orthopaedics and Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation. 
 
7.14.3 At present, the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) is exclusively dedicated to the 
care of inborn neonates. Due to the high risk of sepsis and cross-infection, the admission of 
outborn sick babies, those delivered outside the Institute, is not feasible within the existing 
NICU facility. Consequently, such neonates are currently managed in other hospital areas, 
including the general pediatric wards and the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, depending on the 
severity of their condition. Recognizing the significant and growing need for specialized care 
for outborn neonates, AIIMS has initiated the process of establishing a Outborn NICU which 
will be implemented in two phases. Phase I, comprising four beds, is expected to be 
operational within twelve to eighteen months, while Phase II will expand the facility to its full 
capacity of thirteen beds over the next two to four years, contingent upon the recruitment of 
additional faculty members, residents, and nursing personnel. 
 
7.14.4 The Committee appreciates that Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) at AIIMS, 
possesses world class Neonatal Infrastructure and through multidisciplinary 
collaboration with other departments and specialties, the NICU provides comprehensive 
and specialized care to critically ill newborns, achieving commendable outcomes in 
neonatal survival and recovery. The Committee, however, observes that the current 
NICU infrastructure is limited to the care of inborn neonates and out-born neonates are 
presently managed in other hospital areas, including paediatric wards and the 
Paediatric Intensive Care Unit, which are not specifically designed for neonatal 
intensive care. The Committee also takes note of the initiative undertaken by AIIMS to 
establish a separate Outborn Neonatal Intensive Care Unit in two phases to address this 
gap. The Committee has been given to understand that Phase-I, comprising four beds 
would be operational within 12 to 18 month while Phase-II, expanding the facility to its 
full capacity of 13 beds over the next two to four years.  

 
59 
 
 
7.14.5 In view of the growing demand for specialized neonatal care, the Committee 
recommends that AIIMS, New Delhi, expedite the establishment of the proposed 
Outborn Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) and ensure that both phases of 
implementation are completed within the stipulated timeframe.  The Committee 
strongly recommends for enhancement in the Neo-natal facility to at least 50 more beds 
keeping in view the vast number of patients requiring Neo-natal care. 
 
7.14.6 The Committee has come across that a lot of money is shelled out by poor on 
Neonatal Care as new born, say, of 20 days old or 60 days old are admitted in a private 
hospital and the bill for the treatment ranges to the tune of Rs. 15 lakh or even Rs. 20 
lakh, therefore, Neonatal care is as important as Cardiology, Neurology and Trauma.  
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Institute needs to strengthen the 
Neonatal Care by making adequate provision for trained manpower, infrastructure and 
infection-control measures to ensure the safe and effective functioning of the Neonatal 
Care Unit at affordable cost.   
 
7.14.7  The Committee observes that newborn health interventions in the country are 
presently implemented under the broader framework of the National Health Mission 
through facilities such as Sick Newborn Care Units (SNCUs) and Newborn Stabilization 
Units (NBSUs), and that there is no standalone national programme or dedicated 
Centres of Excellence in the field of Neonatology. Considering the increasing 
importance of specialised neonatal care in reducing infant mortality and addressing 
complications related to premature births, congenital disorders and high-risk deliveries, 
the Committee is of the considered view that focused institutional strengthening in this 
domain is the need of the hour. The Committee also notes that neonatal mortality can be 
significantly reduced by strengthening the capacity of local doctors, nurses and frontline 
health workers through targeted training in essential newborn care, neonatal 
resuscitation, early identification of complications and timely referral. Continuous skill 
development of healthcare providers, particularly at peripheral health facilities, would 
ensure prompt and effective management of neonatal conditions and improve survival 
and quality of newborn care. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the AIIMS 
should examine the feasibility of developing a more structured approach for 
strengthening neonatal care services which can be a bench mark for other regional 
AIIMS alongwith other tertiary care centres to adopt. The Committee recommends for 
a collaborative approach with institutions which have a long proven legacy of providing 
neonatal care like the KEM Hospital Parel, Mumbai so as to device a affordable 
protocol for neo natal care on a population scale. 
 
 
7.15 GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEM 
 
7.15.1 The Committee was apprised that AIIMS, New Delhi has instituted a robust and 
technology-driven grievance redressal mechanism to ensure accountability, transparency and 
patient satisfaction. A dedicated Grievance Cell is operational within the Institute, allowing 
for complaints to be submitted directly to the administration through multiple channels, 

 
60 
 
including email. The said multiple channels for registering and resolution of grievances has 
the connected network of Grievances Cell AIIMS, Email Ids of Senior Officials on website, 
SANTUSHT Portal and Direct access to Administration.  
 
7.15.2 In a major advancement, AIIMS has developed and introduced the Santusht Portal, an 
in-house IT initiative designed to empower patients with real-time grievance redressal with 
the objective to transform Patient Care by ensuring immediate reporting and action on issues, 
involving all levels of Hospital Staff, and significantly enhancing patient satisfaction and 
hospital stay experience. The distinct aspects of patients experience inter-alia include 
Culturally Appropriate Care, Care Coordination, Courtesy and Respect, Access to Care, 
Communication with Clinicians, Getting Information, Shared Decision Making and Self 
Management Support. The objective of the SANTUSHT Portal is to empower patient by 
offering them a voice, fosters transparency, trust & accountability and enhances overall 
service quality. Under this system, QR codes have been installed in key areas such as 
washrooms, enabling patients to instantly register complaints through text, audio, or video 
formats. Importantly, grievances registered on the portal remain open in the system until the 
complainant confirms that the issue has been satisfactorily resolved, thereby ensuring that 
patient feedback is central to the closure of complaints. 
 
7.15.3 The pilot implementation of the Santusht Portal at the Mother & Child Block has 
yielded positive outcomes, with the Institute now also using the system to capture patient 
satisfaction ratings. The SANTUSHT Pilot Project is QR code-based grievance redressal 
mechanism, Available 24X7 web-based service to inpatient of AIIMS, End-to-end closure of 
all grievances with real-time tracking, OTP-based login using mobile number, Two-way 
communication between patient and the AIIMS officials, automatic escalations to 2nd and 3rd 
levels. This includes feedback on waiting times, cleanliness, quality of food, communication 
by doctors, nursing services and the behaviour of support staff such as security personnel. 
The star-rating mechanism provides a structured way to measure and monitor patient 
experience, while reinforcing the Institute’s commitment to dignity and courtesy in care 
delivery. 
 
7.15.4 SANTUSHT Grievance Redressal System Workflow 
 
Grievance 
Submission 
Grievance Redressal 
Level-I Level-II Verifier 
 
Director 
Patient 
Portal 
 Add 
multime
dia files 
 A 
reference 
number 
generatio
 View 
grievance 
 Accept or 
forward 
concern 
 Temporar
y closure 
 Add 
multimedi
 View 
grievance 
 Withdraw or 
reassign 
concern 
 Send 
reminder to 
Level-I 
 Access trail 
of 
communicati
on 
 View all 
details 
 Verifies 
resolution 
 No. of grievance 
 Avg. response time 
 Avg. closure time 
 Category/month-
wise data 
 Feedback 
 Access all details 

 
61 
 
n  
 Live 
updates 
 Option 
to accept 
the 
resolutio
n or re-
open the 
grievanc
e 
 Provide 
feedback 
a files 
 
7.15.5 The implementation of the SANTUSHT at AIIMS, New Delhi aims to allowing 
patients to submit grievances during their stay, ensuring that all levels of staff were involved 
in the grievance resolution and providing real-time feedback and action on issues, leading to a 
more satisfying patient experience. 
 
Real-time Grievance Handling  Quick submit: report via QR mode 
 Monitor: Track responses and quality 
 Close: Real-time grievance resolution 
Enhanced Patient Satisfaction  Waiting time: 4.5 stars 
 Cleanliness: 5 Stars 
 Doctor Communication : 5 Stars 
 Nursing Care : 5 Stars 
 Overall Care :4.5 stars 
Increased Accountability and 
Transparency 
 Involvement: All hospital staff partake in 
resolution. 
 Transparency: Direct outcome sharing with 
patients. 
 Accountability: Frontline staff included in 
grievance process. 
Data-Driven Monitoring  Dashboard features : Track grievances, 
response times, and closure times 
 Collect patient feedback post- resolution 
 Outcome: data indicates improved resolution 
efficiency. 
Positive impact on Patient Experience  Engagement: Patients actively report and  
receive resolutions. 
 Improvements: Real-time feedback enhances 
care promptly. 
 Impact: notable rise in patient trust and 
satisfaction.  

 
62 
 
 
7.15.6 The Committee appreciates the patient-centric initiatives undertaken by AIIMS, 
New Delhi through the introduction of the Santusht Portal and QR code–based 
grievance reporting, which empower patients to raise complaints and monitor their 
resolution in real time. The Committee recommends that patient centric initiative 
should be scaled up beyond the pilot phase and extended to all blocks and centres of 
AIIMS, New Delhi and eventually replicated across other AIIMS institutions 
nationwide. 
 
7.15.7 The Committee is also of the view that while institutional mechanisms are 
necessary, feedback collection must also be supplemented by an independent system to 
ensure credibility and transparency. The Committee, therefore, recommends AIIMS to 
explore the feasibility of engaging a reputed third-party agency to conduct regular 
patient satisfaction surveys and capture unbiased feedback on key parameters such as 
cleanliness, quality of food, waiting times, communication with doctors, nursing care 
and overall patient comfort. Such approach/initiative would ensure that patients feel 
free to share their honest experiences without fear of reprisal, thereby providing the 
administration with actionable insights for service improvement. 
 
7.15.8 The Committee observes that AIIMS, New Delhi has redefined the benchmarks 
of public healthcare delivery in India, functioning under extraordinary pressure while 
sustaining high-quality care. The unparalleled volume and complexity of work handled 
by the Institute underscores its role as the foremost national centre of excellence in 
patient care, education and research and demonstrates its indispensable place in India’s 
healthcare ecosystem. The Committee, however, observes that the current 
infrastructure and manpower is under stress due to the ever increasing volume of 
patients. The Committee, therefore, recommends that urgent steps be taken to 
strengthen infrastructure, enhance manpower and expand capacity across clinical, 
diagnostic and research domains in view of the extraordinary patient load and the 
critical role of AIIMS. The measures so undertaken would ensure that the Institute 
continues to deliver high-quality, specialized care while also advancing its mandate in 
education and medical research. 
 
8.0 HUMAN RESOURCE 
 
8.1 Human Resource Policy and Management 
8.1.1 The Recruitment and Staffing policy mandates AIIMS to follow a merit bases recruit 
based system govern by the AIIMS Act, 1956. Faculty are appointed through transparent 
selection processes, involving the Standing Selection Committee. For non-Faculty position at 
AIIMS, Delhi, the recruitment and promotion processes are governed by the rules and 
guidelines laid down by the Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT), Government of 
India that inter alia include provisions related to reservation, pay scale, promotion criteria and 
service condition ensuring uniformity and transparency across Central Government 
Institutions. Under Training and Development, a regular in-service training, CME 
programmes and skilled enhancement were conducting for clinical and non- clinical staff. 

 
63 
 
AIIMS promotes academic growth through fellowships, sabbaticals (up to 2 years at a stretch 
in India or abroad), and international collaborations. For Performance Evaluation, Staff 
performance is monitored through Annual Performance and Appraisal Reports (APARs) and 
Assessment Promotion Scheme (APS). Promotions and career Progression are linked to 
academic output, clinical service, and research contributions. 
 
8.1.2 As Retention and Welfare Measures, AIIMS provides housing, healthcare, pension 
benefits, and access to institutional facilities. However, residential accommodation for faculty 
and students needs to be increased. However, attrition remains a concern, especially due to 
increased workload and attractive proposition in the private Sector. Under Digital HR system, 
implementation of Bio-metric attendance, e-office modules, SAHAS, and HR dashboard has 
improved transparency and administrative efficiency.  
 
8.1.3 The Committee takes into account Human Resource Policy and Management of 
AIIMS and opines that the AIIMS Management would undertake concerted efforts and 
measures in appointment of Faculty through a transparent Selection Process as per the 
provisions of AIIMS Act, 1956. The Committee also desires that the Recruitment and 
promotion process of non-faculty must be clearly govern by rules and Regulations as 
laid down by the DoPT keeping in view the Reservation policy, Pay Scales and service 
conditions. 
 
8.1.4 The Committee came across high rate of attrition of doctors and personnel from 
other allied services in AIIMS, New Delhi due to low salary and necessary facilities vis-
a-vis renowned hospitals thereby increasing workload on the remaining workforce. The 
Committee was impressed that the Government has imposed a cap that the salary of 
DM, Cardiologist, Nephrologist or Endocrinologist etc. would not be higher than the 
Chief Secretary, therefore, these doctors do not stay in higher institutions and leave it 
immediately after doing their super specialization to join the private sector where a new 
Cardiologist are paid to the tune of Rs. 4 to 5 lakhs whereas the Government pays 
around one lakh as per the pay structure available in the country, if so, is the fact, the 
Committee wills to point out that if the salary of the Member of Parliament is lower 
than the Chief Secretary, therefore, why not the salary of doctor can be higher than the 
Chief Secretary. The Committee is of the opinion that lot of money and time is spent to 
become a DM so for their retention in AIIMS, New Delhi it is necessary to pay them 
higher salary and better facilities available to lead a satisfied and actualised life. The 
Committee, in this regard, is of the considered view that if the Government wills to run 
super-speciality centres in AIIMS, New Delhi or all over the Country the Government 
should remove the pay barrier cap and raise the pay scale of doctors for their assured 
retention, on the one hand and to develop and standardized tertiary healthcare centres. 
The Committee strongly believes that tertiary level healthcare institutions can do more 
quality work, more research work and would be more contributory from the futuristic 
point of view once the salary of doctors in super-specialised centres is enhanced and 
made comparable to healthcare institutions in the private sector. 
 
8.1.5 The Committee is of the view that since AIIMS, Delhi envisage itself as a centre 
of excellence in Medical Education in Research and in Patient care. Its HR Policy must 

 
64 
 
be aligned with its mission and vision i.e. in consonance with meritocratic recruitment 
supported academic integrity, training programme fostering clinical and Research 
Excellence and digital HR systems aiming at enhancing the governance and 
accountability. AIIMS management should chalk out specific course of action to fill up 
gaps in such alignment viz Low Faculty to Student ratio impacts the teaching and 
research mission, Limited career progression impacts motivation and innovation, 
Overburdened staff due to high patient load affects quality of care and academic output 
and More protected time needed for research or academics.  
 
8.2 VACANCIES IN FACULTY POSITION 
 
8.2.1 The Committee enquired about the sanctioned vis-à-vis in-position strength of all 
posts under the teaching and non-teaching faculty at the institute, the recruitment process as 
well as the measures taken to expedite the filling up of the existing vacancies. The All India 
Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi, informed the Committee that there has 
been a considerable shortage of both teaching and non-teaching staff. 
 
8.2.2 The Committee was informed that the sanctioned strength of faculty is 1,306, out of 
which only 798 positions are filled up, leaving 508 vacant. Of these, 117 posts of Professor 
under direct recruitment have remained vacant since 2012 due to a court case concerning 
inter-se-seniority between direct recruits and Assessment Promotion Scheme (APS) 
appointees. The Institute further informed that the Governing Body, in its meeting held on 
13th December 2023, approved filling up of these posts through direct recruitment and the 
decision was ratified by the Institute Body (IB) on 11th March 2024. It further conveyed that 
recruitment to these posts is expected to commence shortly. 
 
8.2.3 The Institute also reported that the shortage is most pronounced at the level of 
Assistant Professor, with 383 vacancies. It added that 73 of these vacancies arose recently, 71 
due to the creation of new posts on 16th April 2025 and two, following resignations in the 
same month. The Institute informed that recruitment for Assistant Professors was delayed due 
to reforms introduced to ensure greater transparency. These reforms include conducting the 
recruitment process entirely online, introducing objective evaluation criteria and 
incorporating block chain methodology. It further informed that the Governing Body 
approved the final objective criteria in March 2024, which were formally notified on 8th July 
2024. In addition, four vacancies each for Associate Professor and Tutor in the College of 
Nursing have also been reported. 
 
8.2.4 During the interaction with Officers Association of AIIMS, the Association 
highlighted that the acute shortage of sanctioned posts across various levels in AIIMS, 
particularly at senior and middle management, has resulted in work overload, stagnation in 
career progression and a decline in service quality. The Association stressed that the 
sanctioning and timely filling up of these posts is critical for ensuring smooth operations and 
supporting the scalability of the institution. It was further noted that several departments have 
already submitted proposals for the approval of DM and Non-Academic Senior Resident 

 
65 
 
posts, but these are still pending approval, thereby exacerbating the shortage of skilled 
manpower. 
 
8.2.5 AIIMS, New Delhi informed the Committee that to address the vacancies at the level 
of Assistant Professor and in the College of Nursing, 265 posts were advertised on 7th April 
2025 and the recruitment process is underway. The Institute further informed that 53 
additional posts will be advertised after the revision of recruitment rules and nomenclature, 
while the 73 newly created post of Assistant Professor will be advertised within one month. 
 
8.2.6 In order to meet immediate requirements, the Institute informed that eight Assistant 
Professors have been engaged on a contractual basis. It also informed that, out of 167 recently 
advertised post of Assistant Professor across various disciplines, 74 candidates have already 
joined, while the remaining are in the process of joining. The Institute reiterated that 
recruitment of Professors under direct recruitment mode, delayed for long due to the court 
case, will also be undertaken soon. 
 
8.3 VACANCIES IN NON-FACULTY POSITIONS 
 
8.3.1 With regard to non-faculty staffs, AIIMS, New Delhi stated that out of 13,911 
sanctioned posts, 10,855 are currently filled, leaving 3,056 vacant. Among these, 967 posts 
were newly created for the Mother and Child Block on 15th March 2025 and for the National 
Cancer Institute, Jhajjar on 8th April 2025. Of the total vacancies, 2,008 are to be filled 
through direct recruitment and 1,048 through promotion. 
 
8.3.2 The Institute informed that in the direct recruitment category, 1,033 posts across 
Group A, B and C, including those in the nursing cadre have already been advertised. It added 
that the advertisement process for another 51 Group A posts is in an advanced stage. A 
further 441 vacancies, which arose after the last recruitment cycle, will be included in the 
upcoming Nursing Officer Recruitment Common Eligibility Test (NORCET) and Common 
Recruitment Examination (CRE) examinations. AIIMS reported that 300 posts have not been 
advertised as their services are outsourced, while 183 could not be advertised due to 
administrative reasons such as revision of recruitment rules and post conversion. 
 
8.3.3 For the 1,048 promotion posts, AIIMS stated that 122 were newly created for Mother 
and Child Block (MCH) and National Cancer Institute (NCI). While Departmental Promotion 
Committees (DPCs) and Limited Departmental Competitive Examinations (LDCEs) are being 
conducted, many posts remain vacant due to a lack of eligible candidates in feeder grades. 
 
8.3.4 The Institute highlighted that attrition is highest in the nursing cadre. To address this, 
it informed that recruitment of nursing officers is now being conducted twice a year through 
NORCET. Recruitment of paramedical and support staff, it added, has been streamlined 
through an annual cycle under the Common Recruitment Examination (CRE). 
 
8.3.5 AIIMS also informed that 625 posts of nursing officers were advertised under 
NORCET-8, with final results declared on 6th May 2025. It also stated that 379 non-faculty 
posts under Group B and C were advertised through CRE 2024, with the computer-based test 

 
66 
 
conducted from 26th to 28th February 2025; results have already been declared and 
recruitment is in progress. Additionally, 29 Group A non-faculty posts were advertised, with 
applications closed on 10th April 2025. 
 
8.3.6 The Committee is constrained to observe that the All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi, is presently functioning under severe shortage of both 
teaching and non-teaching staff. Out of a sanctioned strength of 1,306 faculty posts, as 
many as 508 remain vacant, while in the case of non-faculty staff, 3,056 out of 13,911 
sanctioned posts are unfilled. The Committee notes with concern that such manpower 
deficit might adversely affect the Institute’s capacity to discharge its dual mandate of 
providing quality medical education and delivering world-class healthcare services. 
 
8.3.7 The Committee is alarmed to note that the highest number of vacancies exists at 
the level of Assistant Professor, which directly impacts the student–teacher ratio, 
academic mentorship and research productivity. The Committee further observes that 
vacancies in the cadre of Professors have been long pending due to protracted litigation 
and administrative delays, which might adversely impact leadership in several key 
departments.  
 
8.3.8 The Committee desires that AIIMS, New Delhi must have rationalized the 
pyramidal structure in appropriate ratio of Assistant Professors, Associate Professors 
and above as the future of Institution depends on the base of pyramid and the Assistant 
Professors are the future of the Institution, therefore, concerted efforts must be made to 
fill up the post of Assistant Professors, of course, keeping it to consideration the need to 
follow the roster system as per the constitution norms.  
 
8.3.9 In respect of non-faculty staff, the Committee is deeply concerned that shortages, 
particularly in the nursing cadre will not only increase the workload of the existing 
personnel but also pose a serious risk to patient safety, service delivery and the overall 
efficiency of healthcare operations. 
 
8.3.10 The Committee is of the firm view that such prolonged vacancies have the 
potential to dilute the academic standards of AIIMS Delhi and undermine its reputation 
as a centre of excellence in medical education, research and patient care. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that AIIMS Delhi should fast-track the ongoing 
recruitment processes and ensure that appointments to both faculty and non-faculty 
positions are completed within strict timelines. The Committee is of the opinion that 
while the reforms to introduce transparency, objective evaluation criteria and 
technology-driven recruitment are commendable, these measures, however, should not 
cause undue delay in filling up urgent vacancies. The Committee further recommends 
that contractual appointments be expanded as an interim measure to bridge immediate 
gaps, especially in the high-demand specialties and in the nursing cadre. 
 
8.3.11 The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare extend all necessary support to AIIMS, New Delhi by way of expediting 
necessary approvals, removing administrative bottlenecks and providing adequate 

 
67 
 
budgetary backing to conduct timely recruitment. The Committee further recommends 
that a system of biannual recruitment for nursing officers and an annual recruitment 
cycle for faculty and paramedical staff be institutionalised across all AIIMS institutions 
so as to prevent the recurrence of such large-scale vacancies in the future. The 
Committee also recommends the Ministry to explore conducting NORCET more 
frequently than twice a year to increase the strength of nurse staff.   
 
8.3.12 The Committee strongly recommends that a joint monitoring mechanism 
between AIIMS Delhi and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare be established to 
periodically review recruitment progress, ensure accountability and project manpower 
requirements in consonance with the expansion plans of the Institute. The Committee 
emphasizes that addressing these shortages on an urgent basis is imperative to 
safeguard the academic excellence and healthcare standards of AIIMS Delhi. Any 
further delay in filling up these vacancies would, in the considered view of the 
Committee, severely compromise the ability of the Institute to retain its premier status 
and to meet the ever-growing demand for specialized medical services in the country. 
 
8.4 CADRE REVIEW & RESERVATION IN PROMOTIONS 
8.4.1 The Committee received representations from various associations of AIIMS, New 
Delhi all of which underscored pressing human resource challenges that have remained 
unaddressed for years. The Nurses Union stressed the urgent requirement of a cadre review to 
create adequate promotion posts, particularly for Senior Nursing Officers and other higher 
positions, as the lack of opportunities has resulted in stagnation and hampered career 
progression.  
 
8.4.2 Echoing similar concerns, the SC/ST Employees Association highlighted that a large 
number of Group D posts have remained vacant for prolonged periods. They further 
emphasized the need for a cadre review along with strict implementation of reservation in 
promotions as per DoPT guidelines and National Commission for Scheduled Castes (NCSC) 
directives, pointing out that eligible candidates continue to face delays in career advancement. 
They also called for the establishment of a full-fledged reservation cell, regular updating of 
department and cadre-wise rosters, external experts from SC/ST Commission to point out any 
oversight and the inclusion of SC/ST representatives in policy-making and advisory 
committees to ensure fairness and transparency in implementation.  
 
8.4.3 In parallel, the Karamchari Union and Officers Association drew attention to the fact 
that the last cadre review at AIIMS, New Delhi was conducted in 1992 and, despite 
subsequent approval of a new review by the Standing Finance Committee and Governing 
Body, the proposal continues to remain stalled at the Ministry. This prolonged inaction, they 
noted, has resulted in widespread stagnation, outdated recruitment norms and the absence of 
clear promotion pathways, which in turn undermines staff morale, weakens retention and 
adversely affects the overall efficiency of the Institute. 
 
8.4.4 The Committee, after careful consideration of the submissions by representatives 
of various associations on pressing human resource challenges, is deeply concerned 

 
68 
 
about the prolonged neglect of cadre review, last being conducted in 1992 leading to the 
acute shortage of promotion opportunities across different cadres in AIIMS. The 
Committee observes that the absence of cadre reviews at rational period of interval has 
led to stagnation, weakened staff morale and diminished efficiency, while the delay in 
filling up vacant posts, especially in Group D, continues to affect service delivery. 
Despite approval of fresh cadre review by the Standing Finance Committee and 
Governing Body, the proposal remain stalled at the Ministry level. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry take immediate steps to approve and 
implement the long-pending cadre review, ensuring the creation of adequate promotion 
posts for nurses, sanctioning of long-vacant positions and the establishment of clear and 
updated recruitment and promotion pathways for all categories of staff.  
 
8.4.5 The Committee further recommends the immediate implementation of provision 
of reservation in promotions in strict conformity with DoPT guidelines and National 
Commission for Scheduled Castes (NCSC) directives, alongside the creation of a fully 
functional reservation cell with regular monitoring of rosters and active participation of 
SC/ST representatives in advisory and policy-making committees. By addressing these 
issues in a comprehensive and time-bound manner, the Ministry will not only enhance 
staff motivation and retention but also strengthen institutional efficiency and ensure 
that AIIMS continues to function with the highest standards of excellence. 
 
8.5 IMPLEMENTATION OF ROTATORY HEADSHIP POLICY 
 
8.5.1 AIIMS, New Delhi informed that a Committee chaired by Dr. V. K. Paul, Member of 
NITI Aayog, was constituted by the President of AIIMS, New Delhi, to examine the proposal 
for introducing a system of rotation of headship in AIIMS, New Delhi, PGIMER, Chandigarh 
and other newly established AIIMS institutions. After careful examination of the report of the 
Committee, it was decided that a collegium system would be implemented as an interim 
measure, with the proposal for rotatory headship to be reconsidered after a period of one year. 
In accordance with this decision, the Institute has since adopted and operationalized the 
collegium system for the selection and functioning of departmental heads. 
 
8.5.2 The Committee was informed by the Faculty Association of AIIMS (FAIMS) about 
the urgent need for the immediate implementation of the Rotatory Headship policy at AIIMS, 
New Delhi. They informed that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare had 
communicated in 2023 its commitment to operationalize the long-standing policy by June 
2024. However, despite broad-based faculty support, the policy remains pending for 
implementation. 
 
8.5.3 The Association emphasized that the intended reform is not a mere procedural change 
but a vital step toward strengthening democratic governance within the Institute. The 
introduction of Rotatory Headship would ensure equitable distribution of leadership 
responsibilities, prevent the centralization of power and promote departmental excellence 
through diverse leadership perspectives. The Association further underlined that timely 
implementation of this policy would not only enhance faculty morale but also reinforce long-

 
69 
 
term institutional trust and integrity. They, therefore, requested that the policy be 
implemented without further delay, in alignment with the directives of the Ministry and in the 
larger interest of transparency, fairness and institutional growth of the Institute. 
 
8.5.4 The Committee concurs with the submission of the Faculty Association of AIIMS 
(FAIMS) regarding the urgent need to implement the Rotatory Headship policy at 
AIIMS, New Delhi. Recognizing the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare’s earlier 
commitment to operationalize the said policy by June 2024, the Committee observes 
with a caution that further delay would undermine both faculty morale and institutional 
trust. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Institute take immediate steps to 
implement the Rotatory Headship policy and ensure democratic governance, equitable 
distribution of leadership roles and prevention of power centralization. The proposed 
reform, long overdue, is essential to foster departmental excellence, transparency and 
fairness and to uphold the reputation of the Institution as a model of academic and 
professional integrity. 
 
8.6 ABSORPTION/REGULARISATION OF PROJECT RESEARCH STAFF 
 
8.6.1 The Project Research Staff of AIIMS, New Delhi submitted a representation before 
the Committee seeking reconsideration of the Institute’s recent order (Ref No. 14/2022-Estt 
(RCT)), which rejected their request for absorption and regularization despite over 15 years 
of continuous service in various research projects. Having dedicated some of the most crucial 
and productive years of their professional lives to AIIMS, the staff emphasized that the 
decision contradicts both the Institute’s established policy and past practices. 
 
8.6.2 The project research staff submitted that since 1992, AIIMS has had a clear policy of 
absorbing research staff with 15 years of service into regular posts, subject to their 
qualifications, experience and availability of vacancies. Historically, over 164 project staff 
has been absorbed between 1992 and 2021 under this policy, in compliance with Supreme 
Court directives, High Court judgments and decisions of the AIIMS Governing Body. 
However, despite multiple committee recommendations since 2021, the current eligible batch 
of staff continues to await absorption. 
 
8.6.3 The rejection also contradicts the recommendations of various screening and 
recruitment committees, as well as the deliberations of the Governing Body. The 160th 
Governing Body meeting held on 13th December, 2023 specifically directed the constitution 
of a committee to examine the representations for absorption of project staff completing 15 
years of service. Following this, a committee was constituted in March 2024, which after due 
examination strongly recommended absorption of eligible project research staff.  
 
8.6.4 The representation also draws attention to the legal precedents that support their case. 
In V.L. Chandra vs. AIIMS (1990), the Hon’ble Supreme Court directed the absorption of 
project employees completing 15 years of service and emphasized the creation of a core 
research cadre to strengthen the Institute’s research output. Similar directions were reiterated 
by the Supreme Court in 2003 (SLP No. 19225/02) and by the Delhi High Court in AIIMS vs. 

 
70 
 
Om Prakash (2002). These judicial pronouncements, along with AIIMS’s own precedents and 
committee recommendations, clearly establish a binding framework for absorption. 
 
8.6.5 In light of these facts, the staffs have appealed for urgent reconsideration of their 
request for absorption and regularization, arguing that their long-standing service, proven 
expertise and judicially backed rights merit regularization. They are of the contention that 
denial of absorption not only undermines institutional policy but also risks demoralizing a 
trained and experienced workforce that has significantly contributed to AIIMS’s research 
legacy over decades. 
 
8.6.6 The Committee observes with concern that the Institute’s Order (Ref. No. 14/20-
Estt.(RCT) rejecting the absorption and regularisation of the eligible research staff 
despite 15 years of continuous service in various research projects is inconsistent with 
the established policy of AIIMS, past precedents and the recommendations of multiple 
Committees, as well as the directives of the Hon’ble Supreme Court and High Court. 
The Committee takes into account that between 1992 and 2021, over 164 project staff 
were absorbed under this very framework, thereby setting a clear institutional and legal 
precedent. The Committee concurs with the representation submitted by the Project 
Research Staff and recognizes their invaluable contribution to the Institute’s research 
ecosystem. Having devoted over 15 years of continuous service in diverse projects, these 
staff members represent a highly trained and experienced human resource that has 
been instrumental in sustaining and advancing the research output of AIIMS. 
 
8.6.7 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that AIIMS urgently reconsider 
the case of absorption and regularization of all eligible Project Research Staff who have 
completed 15 years of service. Their integration into the regular workforce is not only a 
matter of justice and policy consistency but is also essential for strengthening the 
Institute’s research capacity and output by retaining skilled manpower already trained 
and specialized in the research ecosystem of the Institute. The Committee is of the 
considered view that a core research cadre be developed, in line with judicial directives, 
to ensure long-term continuity, stability and growth of the Institute’s research 
endeavours. 
 
8.7 ISSUES FACED BY NON-FACULTY EMPLOYEES 
 
8.7.1 The Committee received submissions highlighting concerns of discriminatory 
treatment faced by non-faculty employees at AIIMS. Despite their vital role in the 
functioning of the Institute, these employees have been denied benefits such as the option to 
shift from NPS to OPS, productivity-linked bonuses and parity in service conditions. Such 
disparities not only lower morale but also weaken team spirit and institutional harmony. The 
employees pointed out that this situation contradicts the AIIMS Act, and under AIIMS Rules 
16, 28 and 35, that permits the adoption of Central Government orders for welfare of staff. 
They further emphasized that repeated requests for parity in benefits, including NPS to OPS 
opt-in and productivity-linked bonuses already extended to other central institutions, continue 
to remain unaddressed. 

 
71 
 
 
8.7.2 The Committee took into consideration the submission of Non-faculty employees 
of AIIMS regarding alleged discriminatory treatment meted to non-faculty staff despite 
their vital role in the functioning of the Institute. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, in consultation with 
AIIMS, takes urgent response to address the concerns of non-faculty employees 
regarding parity in service conditions and welfare measures. Given their critical 
contribution to the functioning of the Institute, it is essential that non-faculty staffs are 
extended equal benefits that have been provided to their counterparts in other central 
institutions. The Committee is of the view that legitimate requests such as the option to 
shift from NPS to OPS, extension of productivity-linked bonuses and adoption of other 
welfare measures, which are in line with Central Government orders should be 
extended to non-faculty staff of AIIMS with due consideration. Ensuring equity in 
service conditions will not only enhance motivation and team spirit among employees 
but also strengthen institutional harmony and efficiency at AIIMS. 
 
8.8 WORKING HOURS OF RESIDENTS 
 
8.8.1 The Committee was informed that AIIMS, New Delhi follows the Government of 
India Residency Scheme in regulating the working hours of its resident doctors. For Junior 
Residents, the scheme stipulates that continuous active duty should not normally exceed 12 
hours a day, with a weekly holiday permitted and on-call duty limited to 12 hours at a time. In 
general, Junior Residents are expected to work around 48 hours a week, without exceeding 12 
hours at a stretch, though the Medical Superintendent may adjust working hours depending 
on workload and availability of doctors. Similarly, for Senior Residents, active duty is not to 
exceed 12 hours at a time, with one weekly holiday allowed by rotation and on-call duty 
capped at 12 hours. The overall quantum of workload, however, continues to vary from 
department to department based on specific clinical demands. 
 
8.8.2 The Resident Doctors Association submitted before the Committee their views on 
duty related matters. They submitted that they have to put in excessive duty hours, with 
residents reportedly working up to 36 hours at a stretch, well beyond the limits envisaged 
under the Residency Scheme. The working hours, while reflective of service exigencies, 
nevertheless to adversely affects the physical and mental health, diminish academic 
performance and potentially compromise the quality of patient care. Therefore, the 
Committee emphasizes the need for a balanced and humane duty structure. The Association 
proposed the formulation of an institutional policy to regulate and cap consecutive duty 
hours, along with the introduction of a mechanism for voluntary extra-duty shifts with 
appropriate compensation. It was further highlighted that during examination and thesis 
submission periods, residents face acute difficulties in reconciling clinical responsibilities 
with academic obligations. To mitigate this, the Association recommended granting six 
months of preparatory leave before final examinations and instituting temporary recruitment 
of resident doctors to manage the clinical workload during such intervals. 
 

 
72 
 
8.8.3 The Committee takes into account the submission of the Resident Doctors 
Association and expresses concern that Residents Doctors have to put in excessive duty 
hours, sometimes working upto 36 hours at a stretch well beyond the limits envisaged 
under the residency scheme. The Committee is of considered view that such extended 
working hours, while reflective of service exigencies, nevertheless to adversely affects 
the physical and mental health, diminish academic performance and potentially 
compromise the quality of patient care. Therefore, the Committee emphasizes the need 
for a balanced and humane duty structure. The Committee recommends that AIIMS 
management should strictly enforce the provisions of the Government of India 
Residency Scheme to ensure that the duty hour for Junior and Senior Residents do not 
exceed the prescribed limits. An institutional policy should be framed to regulate and 
cap consecutive duty hours, with provision for voluntary extra-duty shifts against 
appropriate compensation. The Committee further recommends that measures be put in 
place to balance clinical and academic responsibilities, particularly during examination 
and thesis submission periods. In this regard, the Committee recommends the Institute 
management, in consultation with resident doctors, to explore the feasibility and 
practicality of granting preparatory leave to final-year residents and arranging 
temporary recruitment of additional resident doctors to share the clinical workload.  
The Committee appreciates the role played by resident doctors in providing valuable 
fillip to the infrastructure constraints of regular doctors thus forming the backbone of 
healthcare. 
 
8.8.4 The Committee, in nutshell desires the AIIMS Management and the Department 
of Health and family welfare to take following steps for strengthening Human resources 
of AIIMS as a whole:- 
 
(i) Fast-track sanctioning and recruitment to fill vacancies and reduce workload 
imbalance; 
(ii) Expanding infrastructure and improving work life equilibrium by upgrading 
residential facilities and improving work conditions to construction of 
additional accommodation for faculty and staff ; 
(iii) Introduction of Structured career pathways linked incentives by providing 
choice in career pathways- clinical/research/academic/mixed with defined KPIs 
to ensure protect time and quality outcomes; 
(iv) Mentorship and career development by organising career development 
programmes and workshops and extending support to early career faculty and 
Scientists; 
(v) Incentivisation upon meeting for surpassing defined KPI targets that may be 
aligned with the NHA’s guidelines on utilization of ABPMJAY revenuel; 
(vi) Strategic collaborations with AIIMS for promoting interdisciplinary and 
international collaborations to expose young researchers to global standards;  
(vii) Enhance HR autonomy for responsive decision-making;  
(viii) Align HR metrics with strategic goals in education, research, and service 
delivery; and 
(ix) AIIMS, New Delhi should devise a standard protocol duty hours of junior and 
senior residents to be followed by all establishments across the country. 

 
73 
 
 
9.0 SWOT ANALYSIS AND STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT OF AIIMS NEW 
DELHI 
 
Strength 
9.1.1 AIIMS New Delhi continues to hold a distinguished position as India’s premier 
medical institution, supported by a strong global reputation and high patient trust. Its 
clinical excellence is reflected in its ability to manage more than 14,000 outpatient cases 
daily, while offering advanced super-specialty care across disciplines. The Institute 
maintains rigorous academic standards through its MBBS, MD/MS and DM/MCh 
programmes, attracting the nation’s most competitive candidates. With an annual 
research output exceeding 3,000 publications, AIIMS has established itself as a leading 
centre for clinical and biomedical research. Its autonomous governance structure, 
backed by a dedicated Act of Parliament, provides the flexibility needed to innovate in 
both academic and clinical domains. 
 
Weakness 
9.1.2 Despite these strengths, the Institute faces several internal challenges. Staff 
shortages, resulting largely from long lead times between post sanctioning and 
candidate joining; affect the balance between teaching, research and patient care. The 
absence of a structured referral system contributes to chronic overload of outpatient 
services, placing considerable strain on existing infrastructure. AIIMS also has very less 
formal collaboration with top global institutions, which limits opportunities for 
international exposure and joint research. Much of the campus infrastructure, including 
patient care and residential buildings, is over six decades old, requiring continuous 
maintenance with limited options for retrofitting. 
 
Opportunities 
9.1.3 At the same time, AIIMS is presented with significant opportunities. Digital 
transformation offers a pathway to modernize diagnostics, telemedicine and e-
governance. The Institute is well positioned to align itself with global benchmarks set by 
institutions such as Harvard, Oxford, Tokyo University Hospital and Peking Union 
Medical College, strengthening its role as a leader in medical education and research in 
the Global South. 
 
Threats 
9.1.4 Externally, the Institute faces threats such as talent attrition, with skilled 
professionals seeking better remuneration and work-life balance abroad or in the 
private sector. Technological adoption, particularly in AI, robotics and digital health, 
has progressed slowly compared to global peers. Moreover, public expectations for free, 
high-quality care continue to rise, without proportional expansion in resources or 
manpower. 
 
9.1.5 The Committee suggests the AIIMS, New Delhi management to take into account 
weaknesses and threat part of SWOT-Analysis so that AIIMS New Delhi must adopt a 

 
74 
 
series of strategic measures to address existing institutional weaknesses and mitigate 
emerging threats. The Committee, in this regard, recommends the Institute for fast-
track faculty recruitment by introducing streamlined hiring processes and offering 
competitive compensation packages, tenure-track positions, sabbaticals and research 
grants to attract and retain high-quality talent. The Committee feels that AIIMS should 
undertake reforms and operationalize a structured national referral framework to 
reduce OPD overload and ensure that the Institute primarily receives patients requiring 
advanced tertiary-level care. 
 
9.1.6 To enhance clinical efficiency and service delivery, the Committee recommends 
that AIIMS accelerate the integration of advanced technologies, including artificial 
intelligence, machine learning, data-science, robotic surgical systems and digital 
dashboards for patient flow and resource management. In order to capitalize on its 
strengths and emerging opportunities, the Committee desires that AIIMS strengthen its 
global collaborations by establishing Memoranda of Understanding with leading 
international universities for joint research, faculty exchanges and curriculum 
development.  
 
9.1.7 The Committee is of the firm opinion that adequacy of available fund at the nick 
of the time is indispensable for completion of undertaken construction and research 
projects without time and cost overruns. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
improving financial sustainability by budgetary allocation as per projected demand. 
Moreover, AIIMS should attract CSR contributions, philanthropic funding and other 
external resources to support infrastructure development and research innovation. The 
Committee desires that AIIMS establish interdisciplinary research hubs in key areas 
such as genomics, bioengineering and public health, and promote start-up incubation 
and translational innovation through the Centre for Medical Innovation and 
Entrepreneurship (CMIE). 
 
9.2 STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
9.2.1 Responding to the Committee’s query regarding the strategic management that can be 
adopted for having Always a Better Control (ABC) with requisite coordination for having 
overall professional working equilibrium and the organizational interventions required for 
achieving such cherished objectives, the Ministry responded as under:- 
(i) Implementation of a centralized dashboard for real-time tracking of patient flow, 
inventory, HR metrics, and financials. 
(ii) Use AI-driven analytics to forecast demand, optimize scheduling, and reduce 
bottlenecks. 
(iii) Linking of departmental performance to measureable outcomes : patient 
satisfaction, academic output, and operational efficiency. 
(iv) Use of digital triage tools to redirect non-tertiary cases to appropriate centres. 
(v) Training and skill development of mid-level managers and Department Heads in 
administration, strategic planning, and change management. 

 
75 
 
(vi) Regular monthly coordination meetings across departments to resolve operational 
conflicts and align priorities.  
9.2.2 The Committee is in agreement with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
in regard to the requisite steps to be taken for strategic management of AIIMS, New 
Delhi in order to have Always a Better Control (ABC). The Committee is of the 
considered view that the strategic management for a better managerial control requires 
digital command and control system, performance based accountability, referral system 
strengthening, therefore, AIIMS management must strive towards this direction. The 
Committee further recommends that certain organizational interventions viz. leadership 
development programme and professionally functioning Inter-departmental 
Coordination Committees must be evolved in order to achieve efficient working 
equilibrium.  
 
10.0 AIIMS VIS-À-VIS GLOBAL INSTITUTIONS 
 
10.1.1 The Committee was apprised of a comprehensive comparative overview of AIIMS 
New Delhi vis-à-vis four leading global medical institutions across key domains of 
institutional performance, including research output, patient care delivery and medical 
education standards. The undertaken comparison highlights the distinctive strengths and 
operational models of each institution, illustrating how AIIMS New Delhi’s high-volume 
clinical service and growing research capacity align with and differ from, the advanced 
research ecosystems, specialized patient care frameworks and structured academic programs 
of premier centers such as Harvard Medical School, Oxford Medical School, Tokyo 
University Hospital and Peking Union Medical College. The analysis offers valuable insights 
into global best practices and identifies potential areas for strategic strengthening within 
AIIMS. 
 
Parameters AIIMS New 
Delhi 
Harvard 
Medical 
School, USA 
Oxford 
Medical 
School, UK 
Tokyo 
University 
Hospital, 
Japan 
Peking Union 
Medical 
College, China 
Research 
Output 
Publications: 
~3000+/yr; 
strong 
clinical focus 
Thousands/yr; 
cutting-edge 
bio- medical & 
translational 
research 
High-impact 
global 
research; 
emphasis on in- 
ter-disciplinary 
science 
Advanced in 
robotics, re- 
generative 
medicine, and 
AI 
Strong in public 
health, infectious 
diseases, and 
genomics 
 
Patient Care Handles 
14,000+ 
OPD daily; 
high volume, 
limited 
referral 
system 
Specialized 
care; low 
patient 
volume, high 
personalization 
NHS-
integrated; 
structured 
referral and 
continuity of 
care 
Precision care 
with tech 
integration; 
lower patient 
load 
Tiered care 
system; strong 
preventive 
medicine focus 

 
76 
 
Medical 
Education 
Rigorous 
MBBS & PG 
programs; 
low faculty 
to student 
ratio (1:6 as 
com- pared 
to 1:1.5 in 
Harvard) 
Elite MD-PhD 
programs; 
global faculty 
pool 
Research-
integrated 
curriculum; 
simulation-
based learning 
Emphasis on 
clinical 
excellence and 
innovation 
Structured 
residency and 
research 
tracks; bilingual 
training 
 
10.1.2 The Committee observes that while AIIMS New Delhi is distinguished by its 
exceptionally high clinical load, strong public health role and growing research 
footprint, institutions such as Harvard Medical School, Oxford Medical School, Tokyo 
University Hospital and Peking Union Medical College represent diverse models of 
advanced biomedical research, technologically driven healthcare and structured 
academic training. Such comparative assessment highlights the unique strengths of each 
institution and provides insight into areas where AIIMS may further align with global 
best practices to enhance its academic and clinical impact. 
 
10.1.3 The Committee takes into account that AIIMS New Delhi demonstrates 
exceptional clinical service delivery and emerging research capabilities, but requires 
further strengthening in areas such as research infrastructure, faculty-to-student ratios, 
simulation-based training and adoption of advanced medical technologies. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that AIIMS New Delhi undertake targeted reforms 
to align more closely with global best practices, particularly by expanding its research 
ecosystem, enhancing interdisciplinary collaboration and increasing protected time and 
funding for investigator-led research. The Committee further recommends for 
establishment of advanced and global standard simulation and innovation centers, 
similar to those in institutions like Harvard and Oxford, to modernize clinical training 
and improve competency-based education. 
 
10.1.4 The Committee is of the considered view that AIIMS, New Delhi must explore 
international academic partnerships and faculty exchange programmes to enhance 
global exposure for students and researchers. The Committee opines that strengthening 
digital health systems, integrating AI-driven diagnostic tools and adopting structured 
referral mechanisms would go a long way in additionally improving efficiency and 
patient outcomes. 
 
10.2 Best Practices and Strategic Imperatives for Strengthening AIIMS New Delhi 
 
10.2.1 The Committee highlights that the leading global medical institutions reveals 
several best practices that AIIMS New Delhi must consider adopting to enhance its 
clinical efficiency, academic output and research excellence. One of the foremost areas is 
the development of a structured national referral system. Institutions such as the 

 
77 
 
Oxford Medical Sciences Division in the United Kingdom and Tokyo University 
Hospital in Japan function within tiered healthcare systems that regulate patient flow 
and ensure that tertiary centers receive referrals only for complex cases. For AIIMS, 
implementing a similar framework would help reduce overwhelming OPD congestion, 
streamline case load and preserve the academic and research bandwidth essential to a 
premier teaching hospital. The Committee observes that AIIMS New Delhi stands at a 
critical juncture where adopting global best practices and strengthening institutional 
mechanisms can significantly enhance its clinical efficiency, academic excellence and 
research impact. In view of the comparative assessment with leading international 
institutions, the Committee recommends that AIIMS should develop and implement a 
structured national referral framework to manage patient load effectively and preserve 
the Institute’s academic and research capacity. 
 
10.2.2 The Committee wills to pin-point another key area that relates to faculty 
development and retention. Global institutions such as Harvard Medical School and 
Peking Union Medical College offer tenure tracks, well-defined research pathways, 
competitive remuneration packages and extensive opportunities for international 
collaboration. Keeping in view, the faculty vacancies at AIIMS reportedly around 30 
percent, introducing measures such as competitive service conditions, sabbatical 
provisions and research-linked incentives would significantly strengthen faculty 
retention and professional growth. The Committee recommends that faculty 
development and retention be accorded high priority, with measures such as 
competitive compensation, sabbatical provisions, tenure-linked pathways and research 
incentives to address existing vacancies and attract high-quality talent. The Committee 
also recommends AIIMS to expand technology-driven patient care, including wider 
adoption of AI-enabled diagnostics, digital health platforms, robotics and telemedicine 
systems. 
 
10.2.3 The Committee understands that AIIMS, New Delhi would also get benefitted by 
expanding technology-driven patient care, drawing from models at Tokyo University 
Hospital and Harvard, where artificial intelligence, robotics and telemedicine are 
integral to precision healthcare. The Committee is of the considered view that scaling up 
digital health platforms such as e-Sanjeevani and integrating AI tools for diagnostics, 
triage and medical decision support would go a long way in enhancing efficiency, reduce 
waiting times and improve clinical outcomes. 
 
10.2.4 The Committee takes into account that in the domain of medical education, 
several global institutions have moved towards simulation-based learning, with Oxford 
and Harvard operating advanced simulation laboratories to train students in clinical 
skills without risk to patients. Therefore, the Committee is of the firm opinion that 
AIIMS could substantially enhance its skill-based training by investing in high-fidelity 
simulation centers and virtual reality–based learning environments. In the sphere of 
medical education, the Committee recommends that AIIMS establish advanced 
simulation and virtual reality–based training centers, similar to those in leading global 
institutions, to strengthen skill-based learning. 
 

 
78 
 
10.2.5 The Committee firmly believes that a stronger interdisciplinary research 
ecosystem is concomitant to forward looking advanced, modern and scientific pattern of 
delivering healthcare at affordable cost. Institutions like Stanford and Harvard have 
pioneered cross-disciplinary labs that integrate bioengineering, data science, and 
medicine to drive translational research. AIIMS can adopt a similar approach by 
fostering collaborations across departments and partnering with institutions such as 
IITs, IISc and other national research centers. To enable these advancements, 
administrative and financial support will be critical. The Committee advises for 
fostering interdisciplinary research ecosystems and strengthening collaborations with 
institutions such as IITs, IISc and global universities to promote innovation in-depth 
research and research collaboration. 
 
10.2.6 The Committee is of the opinion that the Governance reforms, including 
leadership development programmes for senior positions and the introduction of Key 
Performance Indicators (KPIs) for academic, clinical and research excellence, can 
promote greater accountability and strategic focus. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that the AIIMS Management should leave no stone unturned in making 
concerted efforts in this direction in order to achieve the cherished goal.  
 
10.2.7 The Committee is of the view that the infrastructure investment is required to 
expand residential accommodations, enhance simulation and research facilities and 
upgrade digital systems for telemedicine and e-governance. Sustainable funding 
mechanisms, such as establishing endowment funds, attracting CSR or private-sector 
investments and increasing budgetary allocations for research and international 
exchange programmes, will further strengthen the Institute’s capacity. The Committee 
also recommends comprehensive administrative and financial enhancements, including 
leadership development programmes, introduction of clear Key Performance Indicators 
(KPIs), expanded infrastructure for accommodation and research, upgraded digital 
systems, establishment of endowment funds and greater engagement with CSR and 
private-sector partners. 
 
11.0 General Recommendations 
 
11.1 Mission Mode for filling up vacant posts as per sanctioned strength 
 
11.1.1 On being asked about the in-position strength and vacancy of the institute during the 
course of examination of Demands for Grants (2026-27) held on 24th February, 2026, the 
Department submitted the details of faculty posts as under: 
 
 
 
 Sanctioned 
Strength 
In-position Vacancy 
1306 854 (Includes 73 Assistant Professor on 
contract basis against the sanctioned strength) 
452 

 
79 
 
  
The details of Junior Residents (JRs) and Senior Residents (SRs) as under: 
Post  Sanctioned On-roll Vacant 
Junior Residents (MD/MS/MDS) 1213 1037 176 
Junior Residents  241 197 44 
Senior Residents (DM/MCh) 724 627 97 
Senior Residents 1183 750 433 
  
 The details of Non-Faculty posts as under: 
Sanctioned  In-Position Vacant 
13911 11371 2540 
  
11.1.2  The Committee has been apprised by the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare that the following efforts have been undertaken to fill up the vacancies :– 
(i) 328 posts of Faculty have been advertised on regular basis (265 posts advertised in 
April 2025 and 63 posts advertised in September 2025) against which interviews and 
screening of applications respectively are going on. 
(ii) Efforts to fill up JR/SR positions: The posts of JRs/SRs are tenure posts. 
Recruitment/Admission to these posts are conducted twice a year i.e Jan/July Session. 
Therefore, the vacant seats are advertised in the subsequent session. 
(iii) Efforts to fill up non-faculty positions: Recruitment for filling up the vacant posts 
under the mode of Direct recruitment is being done on continuous basis through 
centralized recruitment examinations such as Common Recruitment Examination 
(CRE), Nursing Officer Recruitment Common Eligibility Test (NORCET) and 
Recruitment Examination for Group A (REGA). For filling the posts of Nursing 
Officer, NORCET exam is held twice a year. AIIMS, New Delhi has 
started conducting Common Recruitment exam (CRE) also twice a year. 
11.1.3 On a query asking details for the last 3 financial years on faculty joined vs. faculty left 
(resignation/VRS/superannuation, etc.) in AIIMS, New Delhi, the following data is provided: 
  
Financial year Faculty members 
joined during this 
period 
Faculty members 
resigned during 
this period 
Faculty member taken VRS/ 
Superannuation during this 
period 
2023-24 54 24 07 
2024-25 Nil 08 07 
2025-26 (till date) Nil 10 07 
  
11.1.4 The Committee has been apprised of the 'Application-to-Selection Time Ratio' and the 
'Offer-to-Joining Ratio', that for the last two recruitment cycles during 2025, the process of 
recruitment is presently underway. With regard to faculty recruitment advertised during 2021-
22 for which the joining process continued up to December 2023, 2325 candidates applied, 

 
80 
 
out of which 203 candidates were selected. Accordingly, offer letters were issued to 203 
candidates, against which 176 candidates joined. 
11.1.5 The Committee expresses deep anguish over the staggering 35% vacancy rate 
(452 vacancies) in faculty positions, along with Junior/Senior residents (700+ vacancies), 
and non-faculty posts (2,540 vacancies) which constrain service delivery and strain 
existing staff. Most alarmingly, the data reveals that while 32 faculty members resigned 
or superannuated in the years 2024-25 and 2025-26 (till January 2026), however, no new 
faculty members joined the institute during said period. The Committee disapproves 
such recruitment paralysis that infact severely jeopardizes the academic and clinical 
standards of AIIMS, New Delhi. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Department to calk out Strategic Action Plan with focused, time-bound recruitment 
drive with measurable targets and  milestones, viz. target filling (at least 85%) of 
sanctioned posts on fast track mission mode.  The Committee desires that the current 
328 advertised faculty positions may be finalised within the first two quarters of FY 
2026-27.  
11.1.6 Furthermore, the Committee does not approve the persistent reliance on 
contractual faculty i.e. currently 73 Assistant Professors must be phased out in favor of 
permanent appointments to ensure institutional commitment and belongingness and for 
ensuring a long-term accountability, therefore, contractual arrangements should serve 
only as temporary stop-gap management.  The Committee is of the considered view that 
long-standing contractual incumbents meeting eligibility criteria should be offered a 
regularisation/absorption pathway for better interest of both the professionals and the 
institutions.  The Committee also considers that the Department should introduce 
retention incentives tied to hard-to-fill specialties and underserved postings to improve 
the offer-to-joining ratio. 
 
11.2 Fellowship Programme in Super Speciality Courses 
 
11.2.1 The Committee has come across the findings of studies on the impact of 
workload on the lifespan of a modern day doctor whereby due to mental stress the 
lifespan has come down by 8 to 10 years. Unless, the strength of faculty is enhanced the 
workload will remain too much. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry may commence fellowship programme in super-speciality courses so that 
AIIMS, New Delhi can be in a position to have some additional faculty in Cardiology, 
Neurology, Nephrology, and Neo-natology, etc. The Committee believes that once the 
fellowship courses are started some candidates who are already post DM will join the 
course that would ultimately increase the faculty and thereby reduce the workload to 
some extent.  
 
11.3 Implementation of National Rare Disease Policy 
 
11.3.1 The Committee has come across that AIIMS, New Delhi has been recognized as 
the Centre of Excellence for treatment of Rare Disease and, therefore, it is but natural 

 
81 
 
that AIIMS, New Delhi should implement the National Rare Disease Policy in letter and 
spirit. However, it is quite surprising that out of total number of patients suffering from 
Lysosomal Storage Disorder only 36 patients got the treatment, 42 patients are deprived 
of Enzyme Replacement Therapy (ERT) and five patients died waiting for the 
treatment. The Committee desires to know the number of patients who got approval for 
ERT treatment and the reasons for pending approval for the rest of the patients in 
AIIMS, New Delhi. The Committee recommends that LSDs patients must get immediate 
treatment in AIIMS, New Delhi. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare must monitor that AIIMS, New Delhi implement the 
National Rare Disease Policy without fail and also display SOPs in this regard.  
 
11.4 Mental Stress Management Session for Doctors and Allied Healthcare 
Practitioners 
 
11.4.1  The Committee is well aware that due to overcrowding of patients visiting 
from across the country for completely reliable and accurate treatment of various 
diseases, the doctors, allied healthcare practitioners and other staff of AIIMS, New 
Delhi remain constantly under severe mental stress, therefore, the Committee is of the 
considered view that there should be mental stress management session for the serving 
doctors and allied practitioners so that they found themselves fit to devote their mental 
focus towards treatment and palliative care of patient. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that Music Therapy for relieving their mental stress and opportunities for 
Yoga and Mediation may be arranged for doctors and allied professionals to keep them 
physically fit to take on the medical practices as per their assignment. The Committee 
believes so as nowadays mental stress is one of the reasons for most of the diseases, 
therefore, the mental strain and status of doctors and allied practitioners need to be 
taken care of and they should be given opportunity to participate in seminars, yoga-
sessions, meditation to get stress free and afresh.   
 
11.5 Exploring possibility for OPD in night 
 
11.5.1 The Committee came across a proposal from within for AIIMS, New Delhi 
management for exploring the possibility of opening OPD in the night in order to reduce 
the workload or overcrowding. An arrangement may be made for rotation of duties for 
deploying of doctors and allied practitioners on each day and night and the rest period 
for them be arranged on Monday if their turns comes on Sunday and the vice-versa. A 
plea has been taken into consideration that if aeroplane can fly day and night and train 
can run each day and night, there is no reason that OPD cannot be conducted likewise. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends D/o Health and Family Welfare and the AIIMS, 
New Delhi management to explore the possibility of conducting OPD round the clock for 
reducing overcrowding and enabling the patient to access healthcare without much 
hassles.  
 
11.6 Cleanliness in the waiting areas and washrooms  
 

 
82 
 
11.6.1 The Committee understands that although patients get requisite treatment at 
AIIMS, New Delhi, however, there is urgent need to improve the quality and cleanliness 
of dress provided to patients in OT during surgery and the surgical gowns that doctors, 
nurses wear during procedure. The Committee, in this regard, recommends the 
Ministry to issue direction to the AIIMS management to ensure that surgical gowns 
must be sterilized to maintain hygiene and protection against contaminants.    
 
11.6.2 The Committee takes into account with appreciation the submission of director 
AIIMS, New Delhi that AIIMS management have been put in a lot of efforts in regard to 
cleanliness in the waiting areas and washrooms and the institute is continuing to get the 
first prize for the cleanest hospital of the country under Kayakalpa. The Committee, 
however, came across that AIIMS management is facing challenges to maintain 
cleanliness in the older building especially the main hospital. The Committee, in this 
regard, recommends the AIIMS management to make all out efforts to ensure that the 
older buildings are kept clean up to the expected level and ensure safety, quality and the 
cleanliness.    
 
11.7 Exploring possibility of reallocating of control and management over Institute of 
Human Behaviour & Allied Sciences (IHBAS) under Central Government from 
Government of NCT, Delhi. 
 
11.7.1 The Committee is of the understanding that the Institute of Human Behaviour & 
Allied Sciences (IHBAS) was established in compliance with the directives of the Hon'ble 
Supreme Court in response to a public interest litigation in 1993. The Institute is an 
autonomous body registered under the Societies Act 1860, funded jointly by Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare, Government of India and Government of NCT of Delhi. As an 
autonomous body, the institute has its Memorandum of Association and Rules and 
Regulations duly approved under the Societies Act. 
 
11.7.2 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by Government of India towards 
improving the status of mental health in the country and lots of efforts have been made 
in the Budget (2026-27)  in this direction. However, the Committee is of the view that the 
control and management of IHBAS may be reallocated to Central Government from 
Government of NCT, Delhi to enhance the infrastructure and intake capacity for better 
mental health treatment and care. Hon’ble Supreme Court of India is of the view that 
IHBAS acts as a nodal agency for Central mental health programmes, the there is need 
to support the strengthening of such institutions. The Committee is of the considered 
view that concerted efforts must be made to enhance the infrastructure and facilities of 
IHBAS to the status of AIIMS like institutions to meet the challenges pertaining to 
mental healthcare.  
  
12.0 GLOBAL STANDING  
 
12.1.1 AIIMS, New Delhi, over the years, has transformed into a global model of academic 
excellence, clinical service and public health leadership. Ranked as the number one medical 
college in the country for seven consecutive years (2018–2024) by the National Institutional 

 
83 
 
Ranking Framework (NIRF), conferred with the Best Extramural Research Institute at the 
DHR-ICMR Health Research Excellence Summit 2024 and recognized globally by 
Newsweek International as one of the top 100 hospitals in the world in 2025, AIIMS is 
widely seen as the benchmark of institutional excellence.  
 
12.1.2 The Committee recognizes AIIMS, New Delhi a leader in quality assurance, 
having received NABH and NABL certifications for multiple facilities including the 
Trauma Centre, Burns & Plastic Surgery Block, Surgical Block, and NCI Jhajjar. The 
Committee desires that the Institute’s infection control, hygiene standards and surgical 
safety protocols must serve as model for replication in AIIMS like institutions and other 
leading hospitals across the country. 
 
12.2 AIIMS, New Delhi : A legacy of Laurels, a Future of Excellence 
 
12.2.1 The Committee takes into account the pivotal role of the institute serving as a 
model for newly established AIIMS across the country necessitates regular review and 
policy-level support. The Committee recommends that AIIMS, New Delhi to optimally 
utilize opportunity to recognize and reinforce best practices, scientific, modern, 
innovative models worth scaling and ensure that the institute continues to uphold its 
foundational mandate. Lessons from AIIMS, New Delhi can guide performance 
benchmarks, patient handling frameworks, infrastructure planning, digital health 
implementation and research ecosystems for the broader AIIMS network set up under 
PMSSY.  
 
  

 
84 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE- 
AT A GLANCE 
 
INTRODUCTION 
1. The Committee understands that in order to realize the vision set out for the 
Institute, AIIMS, New Delhi has been granted a high degree of academic, administrative 
and financial autonomy allowing it to chart its own path in pursuit of excellence. The 
Committee believes that strict adherence to level of autonomy granted to the Institute 
will certainly ensure that AIIMS, New Delhi will remain dynamic, responsive and 
forward-thinking in addressing the ever-evolving healthcare needs of the nation. The 
Committee recommends that the Government will remain committed to providing the 
necessary financial support to maintain and advance its operations, ensuring that 
AIIMS continues to serve as a world-class hub for patient care, medical education, 
cutting-edge research and Good Governance. 
(Para 1.4.4) 
2. The Committee believes that since the vision of AIIMS, New Delhi originates 
from its foundational mandate to function as a medical college or hospital as well as an 
institution of national importance empowered with the status and responsibility of 
university, therefore, all activities/efforts at each level of structural arrangement 
entrusted with specific functional behaviour must be made on the principle of 
Management By Objectives (MBO) rather than mere Management By Activities (MBA) 
so that the enshrined objectives/goals are achieved within the stipulated time-frame. In 
this regard, the Committee also recommends that the AIIMS, New Delhi must continue 
to serve as the apex referral center all over the country, a think-tank for national policy 
formation and a nerve center for healthcare innovation and reforms. 
(Para 1.4.5) 
 
3. The Committee further recommends AIIMS, New Delhi to be a global leader in 
equitable technology driven and patient Centric healthcare. The AIIMS, New Delhi 
must strengthen referral system nationwide, expand outreach by a tele-medicine and 
foster innovation to translational research. 
(Para 1.4.6) 
 
Budgetary allocation to AIIMS  
           
4. The Committee notes with appreciation the satisfactory utilization of budgetary 
funds by AIIMS, New Delhi, and acknowledges the gradual increase in the Budget 
Estimate (BE) to ₹5500.92 crore for FY 2026-27. However, the Committee observes that 
this allocation falls short of the Institute's projected requirement of ₹5758 crore. The 
Committee believes that fully funding the Institute is non-negotiable, especially as 
AIIMS is executing a complex, 190-acre integrated Master Plan while simultaneously 
maintaining unhindered patient care services. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Department proactively review and enhance the allocation at the Revised 
Estimate (RE) stage to bridge this ₹257 crore deficit. Ensuring adequate liquidity is 
critical to support not only the ongoing phased redevelopment but also the smooth 
initiation of upcoming mega-projects, such as establishment of a CBRNE facility and 

 
85 
 
expansion of JPNATC and Centre of Excellence in Child Health at Jhajjar. The 
Committee also recommends that the utilisation of the budget should be assessed on 
verifiable outcome and accountability basis as AIIMS Delhi has been getting substantial 
resources in comparison to other regional AIIMS. 
(Para 2.1.3) 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND EXPANSION PLANS OF AIIMS, NEW DELHI 
 
5. The Committee takes into account a total of 46 departments located at the main 
hospital, the backbone of the institutes medical services, and at other places that spells 
out the outreach of AIIMS, New Delhi highlighting highly specialised medical centres 
facilitating specific needs of the healthcare and treatment of diseases of lethal profile. 
The Committee, keeping in view, the ongoing expansion projects of the institute to 
decongest the OPD, recommends that the Ministry should undertake time-bound 
concrete steps for ensuring shifting of the super-specialities centres viz. Cardiology, 
Cardiac Surgery, Neurology or Neurosurgery, and Ophthalmology, Cardiothoracic 
Centre, IRCH in order to create adequate OPD space for patient to sit thus facilitating 
atleast aging patients comforts during treatment. The Committee further desires that 
separate counters must be arranged for cardiology, nephrology, neurosurgery and 
gastroenterology. Furthermore, the Committee recommends that each department of 
AIIMS, New Delhi to have lot of SOPs, in regard to, duties and responsibilities of 
doctors, nurses and staff and use of medical medicines in similar treatment viz. 
antibiotic etc. to evolve common and uniform standard of treatment and protocol. 
(Para 3.2.6)    
 
6. The Committee further recommends that Centre for Dental Education and 
Research of AIIMS, New Delhi must provide updated and global standard dental 
treatment with the latest technology at par with the services provided in the best dental 
colleges and hospitals in the country and aborad. The Committee also recommends for 
an indepth study of the practices adopted by the Dental Department of Maulana Azad 
Medical College Delhi so as to upgrade its treatment and infrastructure to set up a 
quality benchmark. 
(Para 3.2.7) 
 
HOSPITAL BEDS AND OPERATION THEATRES (OTs) 
 
7. The Committee expresses concern that despite having 112 Major OTs, 44 Minor 
OTs and 433 ICU beds, a significant portion of infrastructure remains underutilized, 
with 26 Major OTs and 81 ICU beds non-functional and 843 hospital beds lying 
unutilized. This is an alarming situation and sheer apathy in view of the fact that 
thousands of patients look up to AIIMS for healthcare needs. The AIIMS management 
should overcome its lethargy and address the contradiction wherein on one hand 
patients are made to wait for long periods for surgical interventions whereas on the 
other hand the OTs are lying non-functional. Such non-functionality not only 
undermines patient care but also reflects gaps in maintenance, resource utilization and 
management failure to ensure timely operationalization of critical facilities. The 

 
86 
 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Institute to take immediate corrective measures 
to operationalize the non-functional OTs and hospital beds.  The Committee is of the 
considered view that there is urgent need to enhance the number of beds in cardiology, 
neurology and trauma departments as cardiac disorders and brain strokes account for 
large number of death (almost 30%) in India, therefore, time is a crucial factor in the 
treatment of heart attacks, brain strokes and road accidents, therefore, optimal 
treatment in time within the golden hour is required to save the life. The Committee is 
of the view that department of cardiology must fulfil the sanctioned strength vis-à-vis in-
position strength (teaching and non-teaching) so as to capacitate the department to 
handle current patient load keeping in view the rising cases of heart diseases across the 
country. The Committee is of the considered view that the department of cardiology 
must strengthen in terms of manpower, research and infrastructure to be fully equipped 
to tackle the increasing incidence of heart attack. The Committee strongly recommends 
for an indepth analysis as to why experienced cardiologists leave AIIMS or are not 
allowed to function independently. 
(Para 3.3.6) 
 
8. The Committee also recommends for a time-bound action plan for repair, up-
gradation and staffing, along with periodic monitoring mechanisms to ensure 
sustainability of operations. The Committee further recommends that AIIMS should 
strengthen its maintenance and infrastructure planning mechanisms to minimize service 
disruption and ensure that all sanctioned beds and operation theatres are made fully 
functional at the earliest. 
(Para 3.3.7) 
 
9. The Committee notes that a significant number of ICU beds and operation 
theatres at AIIMS, New Delhi, remain non-functional primarily due to shortage of 
faculty and support staff, as well as ongoing renovation of old hospital blocks. The 
Committee, in this regard, recommends that AIIMS, New Delhi, should accord the 
highest priority to expediting the recruitment process to fill up the sanctioned faculty 
and technical positions within a defined timeframe. The Committee also recommends 
that the Institute, in consultation with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 
prepare a comprehensive manpower deployment plan to ensure optimal utilization of 
available infrastructure and prevent recurrence of such functional shortfalls. The 
Committee recommends that wherever feasible the manpower gaps be filled by 
appointing Resident Doctors on a large scale. 
(Para 3.3.8) 
 
10. Status of ongoing and proposed expansion plans, present and proposed 
infrastructure for patients and faculty/officials of the hospital. 
(Para 3.4) 
  
AIIMS MASTER PLAN 
11. The Committee, while appreciating the vision of transforming AIIMS Delhi into 
a world-class Medical University through its integrated Master Plan, expresses concern 
over the slow pace of implementation despite the Cabinet’s in-principle approval being 

 
87 
 
granted as early as 2019. The Committee is of the view that further delays are 
unwarranted and risk enshrined thereto, thus undermining the objectives of this 
ambitious initiative. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare, in coordination with all concerned agencies, to expedite the 
implementation of the Master Plan through strict adherence to timelines, robust 
monitoring mechanisms and prioritization of critical infrastructure. The Committee 
also recommends the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to extend adequate 
financial and administrative support and also provide financial and administrative 
flexibility to AIIMS to address evolving functional requirements during the seven-year 
implementation period, thereby ensuring that the vision of establishing AIIMS as a 
world-class Medical University is realized as per stipulated time-frame. 
(Para 3.4.4) 
 
12. The Committee also recommends that the Master Plan should adopt a holistic 
approach by ensuring the comprehensive development of hospital, research, academic 
and residential zones. In addition, the Plan should provide for the establishment of 
integrated 24×7 operational zones that will facilitate uninterrupted patient care, foster 
advanced research and enable continuous academic collaboration. 
(Para 3.4.5) 
 
Vertical Expansion of Service Block, Masjid Moth Campus 
 
13. The Committee has been given to understand that as part of the redevelopment 
of AIIMS, various independent blocks proposed in the Masjid Moth area like Mother & 
Child block, Surgical Block, OPD block and National Centre for Ageing are under 
different stages of completion. Although, the OPD block is already completed and 
functional, however, to cater to the services of all these blocks like laundry, kitchen, IT 
etc., a separate Service Block having three basements and ten storeys (3B+G+9F) is 
under construction. The project, executed by M/s HSCC at a total cost of Rs. 97.69 
crores, more than 70 percent of the work has been completed. The Committee 
recommends that the remaining part of the project must be completed without time and 
cost overruns. 
(Para 3.4.7) 
 
Establishment of 150 Bedded Critical Care Block at JPNATC, AIIMS 
 
14. The Committee, while recognizing the importance of the ongoing and proposed 
projects, expresses its strong displeasure at the slow pace of implementation of ongoing 
infrastructure projects under the Master plan and observes that the overall progress of 
the projects have been unsatisfactory and falls short of stipulated date of completion of 
projects. The Committee, therefore, recommends AIIMS management to establish a 
robust centralized monitoring mechanism to track both physical and financial progress 
of projects. The Committee further stresses the need for institutionalized coordination 
among AIIMS, CPWD, HSCC and other civic and regulatory authorities through 
periodic high-level review meetings to ensure timely resolution of bottlenecks. 
(Para 3.4.14) 
 

 
88 
 
15. The Committee also recommends that proactive steps be taken in securing time-
bound approvals from civic bodies, pollution control boards and environmental 
authorities so that construction activities are not repeatedly stalled all undertaken 
expansion projects are completed without time and cost overruns. In addition, the 
Committee emphasizes that AIIMS and the executing agencies must strictly adhere to 
the already committed timelines. The Committee further recommends AIIMS to 
actively pursue matters with regard to project delayed due to external factors such as 
litigation or regulatory clearances with the competent authorities and submit a status 
report to the Committee. 
(Para 3.4.15) 
 
RESIDENTIAL AND HOSTEL ACCOMMODATIONS  
 
Redevelopment of Residential Colonies at AIIMS, New Delhi 
16. The Committee is disappointed over the inordinate delays in the redevelopment 
of residential colonies at West Ansari Nagar and Ayur Vigyan Nagar campuses which 
were expected to provide modern housing and supporting facilities for AIIMS staff. The 
inability to monetize commercial space at WAN due to land-use restrictions and the 
prolonged procedural hurdles has slowed the pace of implementation, leaving a large 
gap between the original financing model and current progress. The Committee 
emphasizes that such slow pace of progress has created a situation where the acute 
shortage of accommodation for faculty, students, nurses and other employees has 
become unsustainable. 
(Para 3.4.18) 
 
17. The Committee understands that such shortage of housing accommodation not 
only affects well being but also undermines the Gurukul Model of immersive learning, 
hampers UG and PG training and weakens preparedness for night-time emergency 
care. The Committee expresses concern that out of more than 850 faculty members only 
around 250 faculty members, less than 4 per cent of nursing cadres and less than 10% of 
employees of AIIMS, New Delhi have been provided campus accommodation. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, in 
coordination with DDA and NBCC, urgently devise a viable financing mechanism that 
ensures project continuity without further reliance on piecemeal monetization. The 
Committee further stresses the need for time-bound resolution of statutory clearances, 
so that the housing requirements of AIIMS employees are met at the earliest. 
(Para 3.4.19) 
 
18. The Committee further recommends that the redevelopment should be designed 
and executed with a clear prioritization of residential allocation to faculty, students, 
nurses and staff in a fair and proportionate manner so that the housing deficit across all 
categories is effectively addressed. The Committee is of the view that the successful and 
timely completion of residential project is not merely a matter of infrastructure 
development but an essential requirement for sustaining AIIMS’s national stature as a 
centre of excellence in patient care, education and research. 
(Para 3.4.20) 
 

 
89 
 
Hostel Accommodation of Resident Doctors 
19. The Committee expresses deep concern over the acute shortage of hostel 
accommodation for resident doctors, students and trainees at AIIMS, New Delhi, which 
has resulted in prolonged waiting periods, especially for female and married residents. 
Such ugly situation undermines the intent of the Central Residency Scheme, 1992 and 
directly impacts the efficiency, preparedness and well-being of resident doctors who are 
required to perform round-the-clock duties. 
(Para 3.4.23) 
 
20. The Committee also notes that approval has already been granted for the 
construction of new hostels with 2,277 units at estimated cost of Rs. 876.17 crore on 16th 
April, 2024. The Committee strongly recommends that the housing accommodation of 
residential doctors project be expedited on priority so as to bridge the current gap 
between demand and availability. The Committee further recommends that the 
allocation of new hostel facilities must give due consideration to the requirements of 
female residents and those in need of married accommodation, with appropriate focus 
on safety, convenience and proximity to duty area to ensure that doctors remain 
efficient, well rested thereby able to provide best quality patient care. The Committee is 
of the view that timely implementation of Hostel Accommodation for doctors will not 
only ease the pressure on existing infrastructure but will also ensure a conducive 
environment for medical education, research and patient care, thereby upholding the 
standards of excellence for which AIIMS is renowned. 
(Para 3.4.24) 
 
21. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends for construction of quarters on 
fast track mode for doctors, allied services and other staff and allotment of 
accommodation as per entitlement to enable them to lead hassle-free life so that they can 
devote their time for treatment of patients with peaceful state of mind and careful 
attention. In this regard, AIIMS, New Delhi management may seek all sorts of 
assistance and guidance including financial assistance. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry must have track of implementation of projects on 
construction of residential accommodation. 
(Para 3.4.25)  
 
ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE: GOOD GOVERNANCE 
 
22. The Institute Body is the apex decision-making authority of AIIMS and functions 
as the highest governing organ under the AIIMS Act, 1956. The IB is chaired by the 
Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare and includes representatives from 
Parliament, eminent scientists, medical experts, and senior officials from the 
Government of India. It provides the broad vision and direction for the Institute. The IB 
formulates policies, approves long-term development plans, ratifies major initiatives 
and ensures that the Institute adheres to statutory and regulatory obligations. Its 
decisions form the foundation for the governance and growth of AIIMS. 
(Para 4.2.1) 
 

 
90 
 
23. The Committee takes into account the organizational structure of AIIMS, New 
Delhi alongwith functional behavior of specific units. The Committee is of the view that 
the various Committees of AIIMS, New Delhi must transact its mandated functions and 
responsibilities with professional pursuit in time in order to generate continuance of 
efficient and effective working equilibrium of the institute at par excellence. The 
Committee suggests that various committees of AIIMS must meet at frequent intervals 
for taking quick decision making in regard to infrastructure expansion, adequate 
investment, adoption of advanced modules/curriculum of medical education and 
innovative research studies to combat the challenges of prevailing diseases and adequate 
preventive measures for epidemic outbreak. The Committee believes that the Annual 
Action Plan of AIIMS should reflect the itinerary at the beginning of the year itself for 
conducting meetings of various bodies/committees, including the assurance on the part 
of the AIIMS management for adhering to the said itinerary. 
(Para 4.4) 
 
24. The Committee is of the view that AIIMS management should revisit the exiting 
model of governance and make the decision making process more participatory so as to 
serve as a model for other AIIMS like institutions in the country. The Committee, in this 
regard, recommends for equitable representation in the governing body of AIIMS and 
other committees in order to ensure good governance in the light of day to day 
experience of the participants in performing the mandate and responsibilities of 
governing body and various committees. 
(Para 4.5)  
 
25. The Committee is also of the view that the organizational structure and the 
functional pattern of AIIMS, New Delhi must remain intact to ensure the autonomy of 
the institute, therefore, the Committee desires that the entire scheme and its procedure 
of recruitment/appointment must be Revisited, Reviewed, Reformed and codified for 
strict adherence ensuring that the positions like Deen, Sub-Deen, Prof. In-charge, Head 
of the Departments are recruited/appointed keeping in view the functional requirement 
of the Institute. The Committee is of the firm view that the composition of the Institute 
body and Governing bodies must have the necessary mandate and independence to 
enforce the accountability and enhance the efficiency of AIIMS, New Delhi. 
(Para 4.6) 
 
26. The Committee is of the considered view that organogram of AIIMS, New Delhi 
must be equipped with appropriate levels within the organizational structure alongwith 
professional and efficient functioning equilibrium at each level of organogram.  
Adequate Administrative and Financial powers should be vested with the Directors for 
assured efficient functioning of the Institute.  The Committee, in this regards 
recommends for the some degree decentralization and delegation of powers to take 
quick decision, otherwise, a lot of paperwork goes on and on and little comes out of 
efforts so made.  The Committee understand that the delegated powers facilitate timely 
decision-making in Key Areas of work such as procurement, maintenance, human 
resources, and other operational matters, thereby supporting uninterrupted patient care 
as well as the Institute’s academic and research objectives.  Overall, the existing 

 
91 
 
delegation of administrative and financial powers provides a balanced framework that 
enables efficient day-to-day administration while ensuring transparency and adherence 
to governance norms. 
(Para 4.7) 
 
CORE FUNCTIONS OF AIIMS, NEW DELHI 
 
27. The Committee observes that AIIMS, New Delhi has established itself as a 
premier institution of national importance, excelling in both healthcare delivery and 
medical education. The Committee appreciates the wide range of academic programs of 
UG and PG courses viz. MBBS, MD, MS, DM, M.Ch and periodic curriculum 
upgradation which aligns with global standards. The Committee recommends that 
dedicated curriculum Upgradation Committee would independently review and revise 
the curriculum periodically to evolve dynamic landscape of global healthcare standard 
by taking into account the latest research evidence, clinical advancement and national 
health needs. The Committee understands that evaluation of curriculum vis-à-vis Global 
Education Study Modules and modification in the curriculum of syllabus of MBBS, MD, 
MS, DM and M.Ch would ensure evidence based changes and alignment with 
competency based modules entailing responsiveness to educational trends and public 
health priorities. 
(Para 5.5.5) 
 
28. The Committee has been given to understand that the introduction of several 
new specialized medical education courses viz. Critical Care Medicine, Cardiac 
Radiology, Infection Disease, Therapeutic Nuclear Medicine, Pediatric Cardiology, 
Medical Genetics etc. have been introduced during the period between 2015-25 to 
address contemporary healthcare challenges and to nurture a cadre of highly skilled 
specialist in critical and emerging domains. The Committee strongly believes that these 
courses are vital and, therefore, would go a long way in strengthening the country’s 
specialist workforce and addressing the evolving healthcare challenges. 
(Para 5.5.6)  
 
29. The Committee is of the firm view that AIIMS will continue to shape the next 
generation of highly skilled healthcare professional and global standard healthcare 
leaders by imbibing rigorous skilled academic training with adequate clinical exposure 
and availing the cutting edge research opportunities. 
(Para 5.5.7) 
 
30. Notwithstanding the fact that AIIMS, New Delhi has its in depth potential with 
administrative skill and working experience par excellence, however, the Committee has 
come across that regional AIIMS are copying AIIMS, New Delhi in introducing courses 
and programme without corresponding infrastructure, faculty and availability of allied 
services which leads to compromise of healthcare facilities having adverse impact on the 
patients.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that regional AIIMS should first 
create basic infrastructure required for introducing of specialised courses to have 
quality control on medical education. 

 
92 
 
(Para 5.5.8) 
 
Ideal working hours of junior and senior residents 
 
31. The Committee understands heavy workload on the Senior Residents and the 
Junior Residents due to overall workload on AIIMS, New Delhi.  The Committee is 
please to note that normally the quantum of workload varies from department to 
department and is as per Government of India Residency Scheme.  Nevertheless, the 
Committee is of the considered view that the working hours for senior residence/junior 
residence should not exceed beyond 12 hours at a stretch to avoid fatigue syndrome 
among the senior/junior residence so that they can treat the patients with careful and 
cautious state of mind. 
(Para 5.6.2) 
 
32. The Committee is of the considered view that the patient should be treated in the 
first instance by the Sr. Residents supported by auxiliary staff to ensure the treatment in 
right direction. 
(Para 5.6.3) 
Establishment of School for Allied and Healthcare Academics 
 
33. The Committee expresses deep concern over the fact that despite the enactment 
of the National Commission for Allied and Healthcare Profession (NCAHP) Act, 2021 
the proposal for establishment of school for allied and healthcare academics has not 
been yet approved in AIIMS, New Delhi while many of newer AIIMS like institutes have 
set up the school for allied and healthcare academics. The Committee recommends that 
the proposal for establishing a School for Allied and Healthcare Academics at AIIMS, 
New Delhi be expedited in view of the urgent national demand for trained allied health 
professionals. Given that several newer AIIMS have already implemented similar 
structures following the enactment of the NCAHP Act, 2021, the Committee is of the 
view that AIIMS, New Delhi should not lag behind. Establishing this school at the 
country’s premier medical institute will not only enhance the quality of patient care but 
also significantly contribute to workforce development and capacity-building in critical 
areas of healthcare delivery. 
(Para 5.7.2) 
 
Admissions to Residency and DM/M.Ch Programs 
 
34. The Committee expresses serious concerns over a consistent inability on part of 
AIIMS, New Delhi to fill up the advertised seats in the past three years, particularly in 
the category of Senior Residents. For Senior Residents, the gap between the number of 
seats advertised and those actually filled has remained significant. In 2022, out of 776 
seats advertised, only 453 were filled; in 2023, 941 seats were advertised but only 504 
could be filled; and in 2024, against 887 advertised posts, merely 440 were filled. The 
situation has worsened in January 2025, where only 185 candidates joined against 419 
advertised seats, reflecting less than half the required intake. This is a serious State of 
Affairs and matter of concern to the Committee. 

 
93 
 
(Para 5.8.2) 
 
35. The Junior Resident programmes under MD/MS/MDS/M.Ch & DM (6 years) 
have shown relatively better fill rates, though gaps still, remains, particularly in the 
Foreign National and Sponsored categories. For instance, in 2022, a total of 94 Foreign 
National/Sponsored seats were offered but only 17 seates were filled up. This pattern 
continued through 2023 and 2024, with a recurring inability to fill up a large proportion 
of FN/Sponsored seats. In the January 2025 session, out of 227 open seats, 223 were 
filled up, but only 11 out of 44 FN/Sponsored seats were taken up. 
(Para 5.8.3) 
 
36. The Committee observes, in the case of Senior Resident DM/M.Ch seats, that 
while the open category witnessed comparatively higher fill rates, the Sponsored 
category has remained chronically under-filled. For example, in 2022, 185 open seats 
were advertised with 161 filled, but only 17 of the 128 Sponsored seats were taken. The 
trend continued in 2023 and 2024, with significant gaps in Sponsored intake. By 
January 2025, out of 87 open seats had 73 filled, whereas only 7 candidates joined out of 
66 Sponsored seats. 
(Para 5.8.4) 
 
37. The Junior Resident category also reflects a steady shortfall. Out of 430 seats 
advertised in 2022, only 413 were filled up; in 2023, 438 were advertised but 395 were 
filled up; in 2024, 460 were advertised and 407 filled up; and in January 2025, only 189 
candidates joined against 241 advertised. 
(Para 5.8.5) 
 
38. The Committee wishes to highlight the persistent inability of AIIMS, New Delhi 
to fill up the advertised seats for Senior Residents, Junior Residents and DM/M.Ch 
programmes despite conducting recruitments twice a year that indicates a growing 
challenge in attracting and retaining candidates, which directly impacts the availability 
of trained specialists. The Committee observes that a substantial number of posts, 
especially in the Senior Resident category and the Sponsored/Foreign National quotas, 
remain consistently vacant. Undoubtedly such shortfall adversely must have affecting 
both patient care and academic training, given the critical role residents doctors play in 
the Institute’s daily functioning. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that 
AIIMS, in consultation with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, undertake a 
comprehensive review of the Sponsored and Foreign National categories that remain 
consistently unfilled and consider reallocation of unfilled seats to the open category to 
ensure full utilization of capacity. 
(Para 5.8.6) 
 
39. The Committee further recommends that outreach efforts be expanded to attract 
more candidates in under-filled specialties through collaboration with State medical 
colleges, health institutions and international partners. The Committee is of the view 
that incentives such as financial benefits, structured career progression and enhanced 
research opportunities should be introduced to make Senior Residency more attractive. 

 
94 
 
(Para 5.8.7) 
 
40. Pertaining to recruitment/admission policies the Committee understand that 
administration must focus on aligning with the nation’s healthcare needs by identifying 
and prioritizing high-demand specialties. The existing practice of carrying forward 
unfilled seats to the next session should be made time-bound with provisions for re-
advertisement or reallocation to avoid prolonged vacancy. The Committee desires that a 
monitoring mechanism be institutionalized to review recruitment/admission outcomes 
session by session, identify the reasons for unfilled seats and take corrective measures 
promptly. The Committee believes that steps so undertaken will strengthen the 
Institute’s capacity to deliver both high-quality medical care and advanced training, 
thereby ensuring that its critical role in the national healthcare system is better 
delivered in time. 
(Para 5.8.8) 
 
TRAINING AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
41. The Committee observes that AIIMS has made commendable strides in 
strengthening medical education through hands-on training, skill development and 
lifelong learning. The Committee hopes that the various training centers and the 
activities undertaken must align with the Institute’s vision of establishing an immersive 
and multimodal training thereby enhancing teaching quality and professional 
development & skill upto global standard and practices. The Committee believes that 
such initiatives would certainly demonstrate AIIMS’s commitment to advancing clinical 
competencies, pedagogical standards and academic collaboration at both national and 
international levels for betterment in healthcare delivery. 
(Para 5.9.3) 
 
Dedicated Training Facility for Nurses 
 
42. The Committee concurs with the submissions of the Nurses Union for the 
establishment of dedicated clinical nursing training laboratories, modern conference 
halls and specialized certificate courses should be prioritized to build a robust 
framework for nursing education. The Committee is of the firm view that the 
introduction of certification courses in specialized branches of clinical nursing, tailored 
to the diverse centers and blocks of AIIMS, would ensure that the nursing workforce 
remains highly skilled, updated and aligned with contemporary healthcare demands. 
The Committee recognizes that measures so envisaged are essential not only for 
enhancing nursing competencies but also foster continuous professional growth amongst 
nursing staff for directly improving the quality of patient care, which remains central to 
the mission of the Institute. 
(Para 5.10.2) 
 
 
 

 
95 
 
RESEARCH ECOSYSTEM  
 
43. The Committee notes the research contributions made by AIIMS New Delhi 
between 2020 and 2025, particularly in the areas of diagnostics, oncology, neurology, 
artificial intelligence and infectious disease management. While these achievements have 
strengthened India’s healthcare capacity, the Committee observes that sustained 
advancement in such high-impact research will require dedicated institutional support, 
enhanced infrastructure and structured collaborations. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends that AIIMS New Delhi institutionalize a minimum of 20 percent protected 
time for faculty engaged in research, ensuring that clinical responsibilities do not 
impede scientific productivity. The Committee further recommends the establishment of 
Institute-wide innovation and incubation centres to promote translational research, 
foster start-ups and accelerate the development of technologies with public health 
relevance. 
(Para 6.9.3) 
 
44. The Committee observes that AIIMS, New Delhi has established a vibrant 
research ecosystem supported by substantial extramural and intramural funding, 
advanced facilities and strong national and international collaborations. The Committee 
recommends that the Institute’s research wing must make notable contributions to 
national health programs and policies. The Committee is of the considered view that 
AIIMS research, in addition to pure research must become part and parcel of doing the 
research having implications for the policy and advocacy of national healthcare 
priorities and plans. 
(Para 6.9.4) 
 
45. The Committee observes that the creation of standardised best practices 
guidelines for medical research across diverse domain in AIIMS have generated 
broader systemic benefits. The Committee believes that AI-led healthcare solutions 
would contribute to more efficient diagnostics nationwide, expanded telemedicine 
adoption and reduced disparities between urban and rural health system through 
proliferation of research outcome at peripheral ground level. Moreover, the growth of 
medical technology innovation linked to the modern and scientific advanced initiatives 
would produce additional economic and employment benefits in the healthcare sector. 
The Committee recommends  for an outcome based analysis of the research outcomes 
by AIIMS. The Committee also recommends that AIIMS should actively collaborate 
with other Scientific Institutions like CSIR, DBT, IITs, ICMR etc to develop an 
integrated approach along with optimal utilisation of common facilities. 
(Para 6.9.6) 
 
46. Looking ahead, the Committee, however, recommends for further augment 
academic and research activities at AIIMS New Delhi that inter-alia include instituting 
protected research time, establishing innovation incubators across the Institute and 
expanding partnerships with private-sector and industry stakeholders through 
performance-linked research grants. The Committee understands that there is urgent 
need for further strengthening of research infrastructure, including the creation of AI-

 
96 
 
enabled laboratories and recruitment of additional research-focused faculty. 
Additionally, deeper international collaborations through joint PhD programmes, long-
term research fellowships, student and faculty exchange initiatives are expected to 
enhance the Institute’s global engagement and research output. 
(Para 6.9.7) 
 
47. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that AIIMS strengthen its 
research infrastructure by setting up new laboratories equipped with artificial 
intelligence–enabled systems and by undertaking targeted recruitment of research-
focused faculty and technical personnel. The Committee is of the view that expanding 
international partnerships through joint doctoral programmes and exchange 
fellowships will enhance the Institute’s global engagement and contribute to capacity 
building. 
(Para 6.9.8) 
 
 
Key Concern Areas and Opportunities of Research Wing 
 
48. The Committee notes the wide-ranging responsibilities of the Research Wing at 
AIIMS New Delhi and the critical role it plays in managing research funding, ensuring 
regulatory compliance, maintaining research quality and supporting collaborative 
scientific work. While the Institute has made commendable progress, the Committee is 
of the view that further strengthening of the Research Wing is essential to enhance 
research productivity and promote innovation at par with global standards. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that AIIMS New Delhi expand and institutionalize 
multidisciplinary and cross-institutional research programmes, particularly in emerging 
areas such as artificial intelligence, big data analytics and personalized medicine. The 
Committee further recommends the Research Wing of AIIMS for improving digital 
data management, meta-analysis capabilities and systematic review methodologies that 
have emerged as a critical need to support evidence-based practice and robust scientific 
output. The Committee strongly recommends that AIIMS should generate atleast 10% 
of its budgetary requirement through research and industry collaboration on lines with 
the best global institutions. 
(Para 6.10.6) 
 
49. The Committee observes that the Ministry may further undertake following 
strategic steps to combat the Key Concern Areas of research wing of AIIMS:- 
(viii) Funding and Grant Management: Ensuring timely access to intramural and 
extramural research grants and optimizing utilization 
(ix) Regulatory Compliance: Navigating ethical approvals, data protection, and 
clinical trial regulation 
(x) Infrastructure and Capacity Building: Upgrading labs, digital tools (e.g., 
REDCap), and training facilities 
(xi) Research Quality and Integrity: Promoting reproducibility, transparency, and 
ethical standards in research 

 
97 
 
(xii) Data Management and Analysis: Enhancing digital data handling, meta-
analysis capabilities, and review methodology 
(xiii) Publication and Dissemination: Encouraging high-impact publications and 
visibility in global journals 
(xiv) Establishment of Section VIII company (CMIE) and implementation of 
Entrepreneurship Policy 
(Para 6.10.7) 
 
SWOT Analysis of Research Activities at AIIMS New Delhi 
 
50. The Committee underscores the need for further encouraging multidisciplinary 
and cross-institutional research collaborations that can broaden scientific perspectives 
and accelerate innovation. The Committee is of the firm view that leveraging artificial 
intelligence and big data analytics will support advances in predictive modelling, 
diagnostics, and personalized medicine. Regular training workshops in research 
methodology, ethics and publication strategies can improve the competence and 
confidence of early-career researchers. 
(Para 6.11.2) 
 
51. The Committee further recommends that the Institute establish a centralised 
digital platform for grant management to streamline application, approval and 
monitoring processes, thereby reducing administrative delays. The Committee 
understands that one of the major primary concerns of research wing is inadequate 
fund for wide ranging research sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
AIIMS in tandum with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the Ministry of 
Finance must ensure efficient funding and grant management by facilitating timely 
access to both intramural and extramural research grants and optimizing their 
utilisation. The Committee further recommends that the Research Wing of AIIMS, New 
Delhi must play the crucial role in navigating the complex regulatory landscape 
governing biomedical research, including ethical approvals, data protection mandates 
and compliance with clinical trial regulations. 
(Para 6.11.3) 
 
52. The Committee also recommends that AIIMS augment its research training 
ecosystem through regular capacity-building programmes on research methodology, 
ethics, data management and publication practices. To support greater access to 
scientific literature and improve research quality, the Committee encourages the 
Institute to fully leverage national initiatives such as One Nation One Subscription. 
(Para 6.11.4) 
 
53. Recognising the importance of translational research, the Committee 
recommends that AIIMS strengthen its partnerships with the biotechnology and 
pharmaceutical sectors and accelerate the operationalisation of the Centre for Medical 
Innovation and Entrepreneurship (CMIE) under the Section 8 company framework, 
alongside the implementation of a comprehensive Entrepreneurship Policy. The 
Committee understands that the establishment of a Section 8 company, the Centre for 

 
98 
 
Medical Innovation and Entrepreneurship (CMIE), alongside the implementation of an 
institutional Entrepreneurship Policy, is expected to further support innovation, start-
up incubation and commercialization of research outcomes, thus positioning AIIMS as a 
leading hub for medical research and technology development. The Committee 
reiterates its earlier recommendation that AIIMS should generate atleast 10% of its 
budgetary requirement through partnerships with biotechnology and pharmaceutical 
sectors. 
(Para 6.11.5) 
 
Outcome and Conclusions of Health Research Project 
 
54. The Committee appreciates the outcomes and the conclusions drawn from health 
research project undertaken by AIIMS, New Delhi, although the outcomes vary by 
project to project, however, the findings/conclusions show arrived are of remarkable 
magnitude for healthcare and treatment.  The Committee notes the measurable 
outcomes of health research project has translated into Enhanced diagnostics for 
multidrug-resistant, scientific advancement toward HIV cure strategies, formulating 
global ART protocols, reduction in cornea blindness, validation and commercialization 
of assistive tech innovations, filling of application for patents like Med tech innovations 
having immense bearing on maintaining healthcare and treatment of even lethal 
diseases.  The Committee is hopeful about the measurable outcome of ongoing health 
research projects and projects to be undertaken during 2026-27. 
(Para 6.12.2) 
 
55. The Committee notes with appreciation that multifaceted strategies viz. 3000 
annual publication in indexed national and international journals, organising Annual 
Research Day and workshops & conferences for knowledge dissemination, and 
collaboration and training workshops under partnership with repute health research 
institutions ensure knowledge transfer with wide outreach across the country.  The 
expects that findings of health research should not only enhance the knowledge of 
AIIMS faculty, scientists and students but should be disseminated across all other 
regional AIIMS and tertiary care hospitals.  Researchers at AIIMS must contribute 
significantly by developing best practice guidelines that serve as standardized references 
for both fundamental research and clinical research.  Technical resource centres have 
been established for making evidence-based guidelines for several health conditions. 
(Para 6.13.2) 
 
56. The Committee is of the considered view the positive impact of health research 
outcome must have bearing on the overall healthcare landscape and hopes that each 
breakthroughs in health research must aim at transforming the India’s healthcare by 
enhancing accessibility, equity and outcome and reducing out-of-pocket expenditure.  
The Committee recommends that the AIIMS management should strive in this direction 
in the better interest of the patients. 
(Para 6.13.4) 
 
 

 
99 
 
Submission by Associations on Research 
 
57. Underscoring the need to strengthen institutional framework the Committee 
recommends that AIIMS should establish Centres of Excellence integrating clinical 
care, diagnostics and research to strengthen translational outcomes. The Committee is 
of the firm view that expansion of research infrastructure with central laboratories, 
pharmacovigilance systems and incubator facilities is also required to support 
innovation and healthcare start-ups. In addition, priority should be given to developing 
a robust digital backbone with EMRs, academic and clinical registries and IPR 
protection systems to ensure data-driven research and decision-making. Concurring 
with the submission of the Nurses Union the Committee strongly recommends for the 
creation of dedicated Clinical Nursing Research Wings in every block and Centre, with 
adequate space and facilities to advance nursing research, professional standards and 
patient care outcomes. 
(Para 6.14.2) 
 
PATIENT CARE 
 
58. The Committee appreciates the launching of AIIMS portal, info.aiims.edu and 
various dashboards for combating overcrowding and reducing the patients loads in 
AIIMS, New Delhi besides real time access to facilities related information. The 
Committee desires that the AIIMS portal may be modified to make it more user friendly 
and if possible can be made more mobile friendly with centralized medical record 
system, where all the details of patients records and undertaken treatment so far may be 
uploaded for a ready reckoning and further reference.  The Committee also desires for 
replication of such mobile friendly interface with all departments of AIIMS in the better 
interest and benefits of the patients. The Committee strongly recommends for a better 
protocol for addressing the problem of overcrowding so as tominimise Patient 
discomfort. 
(Para 7.2.1) 
 
VOLUME OF PATIENTS FROM OTHER STATES  
59. The Committee notes with concern the disproportionately high patient load at 
the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi leading to 
congestion/long waiting time for patients not just inside the hospital but wobbling 
queues outside too. The OPD data for the period January to December 2024 reveals that 
a significant proportion of patients hailed from neighbouring and distant States viz. 
Delhi (39.72%), UP (23.45%), Haryana (13.29%), Bihar (12.64%), Uttrakhand (3.45%) 
and remaining from other States.  The Committee observes that such overwhelming 
reliance on AIIMS, New Delhi indicates not only the pre-eminent status of the Institute 
but also the lack of comparable facilities in other parts of the country. Such excessive 
concentration of patients in one institution has led to overburdened facilities, longer 
waiting times and strains on both infrastructure and manpower, ultimately 
compromising the quality of patient care and academic training. 
(Para 7.3.3) 

 
100 
 
 
60. Under the Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY), 22 new 
AIIMS, established in various States across the country are at different stages of 
operationalisation. The Committee understands that these institutions were envisioned 
precisely to reduce the patient load at AIIMS Delhi by providing high-quality tertiary 
care closer to the population in their respective regions. The Committee, in this 
connection, recommends that urgent steps be taken to strengthen the infrastructure, 
faculty, diagnostic facilities and overall patient care standards in all 22 new AIIMS so 
that the AIIMS like other Institutes  may emerge as credible and reliable alternatives to 
AIIMS, New Delhi. Additionally, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should 
ensure time-bound recruitment of faculty and non-faculty staff, expedite the 
commissioning of super-specialty departments and provide adequate budgetary support 
for state-of-the-art diagnostic and treatment facilities in such institutes. The Committee 
desires that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should furnish the details of 
updated status of the operations of these 22 AIIMS to enable the Committee to obtain a 
real picture and to assess the time by when the problem of overcrowding in AIIMS, 
Delhi will be resolved.  The Committee also recommends for setting up of AIIMS like 
institution in each state, including Karnataka, as patients from all over the country 
cannot make access for treatment of diseases from far flung areas.  The Committee 
further recommends for strengthening of all AIIMS like institutions in the states, like 
Telangana and Andhra Pradesh to be strengthened, as well equipped and manpowered 
as AIIMS, New Delhi to seek treatment of diseases at par to reduce the dependency of 
patients on AIIMS, New Delhi and thus reducing the overcrowding. 
(Para 7.3.4 
 
61. The Committee further recommends that effective referral mechanisms be 
developed in coordination with other AIIMS like institutions in various States, so that 
patients requiring tertiary care can be guided towards the nearest functional AIIMS 
rather than converging disproportionately on AIIMS, New Delhi. Public awareness 
campaigns should also be undertaken to build confidence in the quality of services being 
provided at these new AIIMS in various States. 
(Para 7.3.5) 
 
STEPS TO ADDRESS OVERCROWDING AND LONG WAITING TIME  
 
62. The Committee took into consideration the action taken by AIIMS, New Delhi to 
reduce overcrowding and long waiting times through the new specialty centres, the 
Online Registration System (ORS) and token-based walk-ins. The Committee 
appreciates the introduction of online appointments through the Online Registration 
System (ORS) portal, along with a token system designed to regulate walk-in patients on 
a first-come, first-served basis. The distribution of OPD slots as 50 per cent allocated for 
online appointments, 30 per cent reserved for walk-ins and the remaining 20 per cent 
earmarked for cross-referrals is a rational approach. However, the Committee is of the 
view that despite these measures, the demand for services at AIIMS continues to exceed 
its capacity. The Committee therefore recommends that AIIMS, New Delhi further 
strengthen its digital appointment management system by making it mobile-friendly, 

 
101 
 
multilingual and integrated with centralized electronic medical records, real-time 
updates, automated reminders and referral linkages with other AIIMS and regional 
institutions. These measures, along with physical patient-support mechanisms, would 
streamline patient flow, reduce unnecessary congestion from routine follow-ups and 
ensure equitable access. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare replicate the ORS and token-based model across all AIIMS 
and major central hospitals for greater efficiency and transparency nationwide. 
(Para 7.4.2) 
 
63. The Committee also recommends that a structured two-way referral system be 
established between AIIMS institutions and other medical colleges in order to ensure 
effective distribution of patients across healthcare facilities. The Committee is of the 
considered view that the adoption of a hub-and-spoke model, linking Primary Health 
Centres (PHCs), Community Health Centres (CHCs), district hospitals, medical colleges 
and AIIMS institutions, would facilitate seamless integration of services across different 
levels of care. The Committee also strongly recommends that the Government should 
seriously consider setting up the ‘Hub and Spoke’ model to address the problem of 
overcrowding in the hospitals in metropolitan cities. Such a system would enable 
patients to be directed to the most appropriate facility based on the nature and severity 
of their medical needs, thereby enhancing efficiency, reducing overcrowding at apex 
centres and improving outcomes. 
(Para 7.4.3) 
 
64. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, in consultation with AIIMS, explore the possibility of establishment of satellite 
centres of AIIMS around Delhi for all time given treatment and emergency, particularly 
in four part of Delhi viz. East Delhi, West Delhi, North Delhi and South Delhi and other 
suitable locations in the National Capital Region with just 100 to 150 bedded centres 
with estimated cost of Rs. 150 crore to Rs. 200 crore and search centres may be called as 
AIIMS Satellite Centre.   The Committee thinks once these satellite centres are tagged 
with AIIMS, there would be a lot of public acceptability.  Since in Delhi, the travel 
radius is almost 50-60 KM there is also the need to have cardiology, neurology and 
trauma centres of AIIMS, New Delhi in different parts of Delhi/NCR viz. Gurugram, 
Sonipat, Baghpat, Faridabad, Ghaziabad/Noida or at other suitable location because 
time is a crucial factor in the treatment of the heart attack, brain stroke and road 
accidents where the medical treatment is to be given within the golden hour.  Resident 
doctors may be posted on rotation basis in these centres, functioning as extensions of 
AIIMS, New Delhi, could provide outpatient consultations, diagnostics and follow-up 
care, thereby decongesting the main campus and ensuring easier access to patients 
residing in surrounding regions. Such decentralisation would not only improve patient 
convenience & timely treatment but also allow AIIMS, New Delhi to focus its core 
capacity on complex tertiary care, research and advanced training. 
(Para 7.4.4) 
 
 

 
102 
 
EXPANSION OF TELEMEDICINE SERVICES 
65. The Committee recommends that references from public representatives be 
given priority keeping in view that the public representatives are duly elected by a large 
population of their respective constituencies and the patients come to them with great 
expectations from far off corners of the country. 
(Para 7.4.4) 
 
66. The Committee is of the firm view that AIIMS management should focus more 
on the uses of telemedicine and make efforts to maximize the usage of telemedicine so 
that the problem of overcrowding is resolved to some extent. By utilizing telemedicine 
facilities the patient need not come from far distance, especially when patients have to 
just undergo little bit of treatment or small consultation online. The Committee, in this 
regard, recommends that the Institute must expand telemedicine services to extend its 
expertise to underserved regions of the country like rural, semi-urban, hilly and tribal 
areas. 
(Para 7.5.4) 
 
SETTING UP OF ANOTHER AIIMS IN NCR 
 
67. The Committee understands that AIIMS, New Delhi remains committed to 
addressing the challenges of patient overcrowding and wait times.  It is true that the 
expansion of the “Ashray” initiative and vishram sadans and various steps/measures are 
critical steps in ensuring the convenience and comfort of patients.  At the same time, the 
Committee also takes notes of the submission of the Ministry, as mentioned in the 
background note, that despite expansion of hospitals services, the demand for services at 
the AIIMS, New Delhi is always more than the capacity, therefore, the Committee is of 
the firm view that the Ministry should take a considered view to the recommendation of 
the Committee for setting up of another AIIMS like institution in NCR with separate 
administration and governing structure to overcome the problems of work overload in 
AIIMS, New Delhi.  The Committee considers that even if the facilities in AIIMS, New 
Delhi is expanded, under master plan with estimated expenditure of Rs. 15,558.37 crore 
the floor area would remain the same because expansion of facilities would grow 
vertically only, therefore, the problem of congestion would continue to a worrying 
challenge due to limited floor area.  The Committee, therefore, thinks it very essential 
and imperative to have one another AIIMS in other location in Delhi or NCR, therefore, 
recommends the Government to take a call its observations with all seriousness.  The 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should take a policy decision, plan and prepare 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) and pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance for 
budget allocation for the purpose. 
(Para 7.6.6) 
 
MECHANISM TO ADDRESS THE MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT REFERENCES 
 
68. The Committee is of the view that the AIIMS, New Delhi management should set 
up concrete mechanism to address the references of the Member of Parliament. The 

 
103 
 
officers of Public Relations (PR), say, Patient Care Coordinator (PCC) should be 
trained and sensitized to respond the calls and references of Members of Parliament 
with all care and caution as being the representative of their constituency, Members of 
Parliament are the last rays of their hope. Members face embarrassing situation if their 
recommendations fail to receive appropriate attention. The Committee understands that 
in the health profession, not only the doctors but the nurses who remain involved in the 
treatment or cure of the patients are required to be responsible and responsive with 
compassionate behaviour towards the patient as that will certainly stamp patient’s 
satisfaction to a great extent, ultimately leading to enhancement in AIIMS, New Delhi 
status as national pride. 
(Para 7.7.2) 
 
69. The Committee also recommends the AIIMS management to guide the staff 
deployed during night hours to take additional responsibility and care towards patient 
to ensure to access the institute in night hours and guide the patients responsibly and 
responsively to reach at appropriate healthcare centre without delay and with comfort. 
Such guidelines should be implemented in letter and spirit. 
(Para 7.7.3)  
 
ALLIED SERVICES PROVIDED TO PATIENTS 
 
70. The Committee appreciates the comprehensive patient support systems 
introduced by AIIMS, including the establishment of ASHRAY, patient-friendly 
navigation initiatives, expansion of sheltered waiting areas, provision of affordable 
accommodations and strengthening availability of affordable drug. These measures 
reflect a patient-centric approach and have significantly enhanced accessibility, comfort 
and equity in care delivery. The Committee, at the same time, underscores the need for 
further strengthening patient guidance and navigation within the campus, particularly 
for patients referred to various specialties/faculties/departments. 
(Para 7.8.3) 
 
71. The Committee understands that night shelter ashrams have been arranged for 
stay of patients during the night, however, there is urgent need to access the capacity of 
such night shelter as many of the patients does not get the shelter for the night stay. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommends that AIIMS, New Delhi management 
should seek the capacity of night shelter enlarged under Corporate Social Responsibility 
from all possible PSUs viz.  BEL, NTPC, SAIL, REC, GAIL etc. 
(Para 7.8.4) 
 
72. The Committee further recommends the establishment of multiple dedicated 
Help Desks strategically located across the campus. All such Help Desks should be 
manned by trained staff and linked with Patient Care Coordinators who can personally 
escort patients from one specialty or department to another, ensuring that no patient or 
attendant is left confused or disoriented in accessing critical services, especially during 
night hours. 
(Para 7.8.5) 

 
104 
 
 
73. The Committee also recommends continuous monitoring of existing 
mechanism/systems to ensure timely assistance, integration of digital navigation tools 
with physical guidance and adequate staffing to meet the high patient volume. Such 
measures will not only enhance the overall patient experience but also reduce delays in 
accessing consultations and treatments, thereby reinforcing its role as a model of 
patient-centred healthcare delivery. 
(Para 7.8.6)  
 
CSR-Corporate Social Responsibility 
 
74. The Committee recommends that AIIMS should explore CSR funding to 
supplement its efforts in creating infrastructure for patients and their attendants and 
work with NGOs to ease the burden. The Committee recommends for a dedicated CSR 
cell to be set up so that a proactive approach to attract CSR funding is developed and 
substantial resources/support can be garnered through CSR. 
(Para 7.9.1) 
 
WAITING TIME FOR TEST AND INVESTIGATIONS  
 
75. Taking into account an extraordinary investigation and laboratory loads on 
AIIMS, New Delhi on a daily basis (3000 Radiology procedure and over 2 Lakh 
laboratory tests), the Committee recommends that AIIMS, New Delhi, in collaboration 
with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, take immediate steps to reduce the 
pressure on its diagnostic services. In this regard, the feasibility and practicality of 
decentralization of laboratory and diagnostic services by strengthening such services at 
regional and district hospitals to manage routine and high-volume investigations closer 
to patients’ homes may be explored. 
(Para 7.10.2) 
 
76. The Committee further recommends that the Government should consider 
adopting a Public–Private Partnership (PPP) model by empanelling and compensating 
accredited private hospitals and diagnostic facilities at fixed standard rates. The 
Committee is of the view that such a system would allow insured patients, whether 
under public or private insurance, to access diagnostic services at private centres 
without additional financial burden. 
(Para 7.10.3) 
 
System for generation and dissemination of laboratory reports 
 
77. The Committee notes the progress made by AIIMS in implementing a fully 
electronic laboratory reporting system accessible through secure digital platforms. To 
further enhance efficiency in sample transport and reduce turnaround time, the 
Committee recommends AIIMS to expedite the feasibility assessment and 
implementation of a pneumatic tube system within the existing infrastructure. The 
Committee is of the view that introducing such a system, wherever technically viable, 

 
105 
 
will significantly improve workflow, reduce manual handling and strengthen overall 
patient service delivery. 
(Para 7.11.2) 
 
WAITING TIME OF SURGICAL PROCEDURES (OT details verbatim + background 
note) 
 
78. The Committee has been given to understand about the highest surgical and 
procedural workloads on AIIMS, New Delhi and the scale of demand is reflected in the 
waiting time across department ranging from a few weeks to several months viz. 
Neurosurgery waiting time extends upto 5 years and Burns and Plastic Surgery, 
Gastrointestinal Surgery, ENT, Ophthalmology, Paediatric Surgery and Obstetrics & 
Gynaecology, in particular, report long waiting time for routine and elective cases, 
underscoring the pressure on existing infrastructure. The Committee is of the view that 
in order to reduce the waiting time of laboratory investigation there is urgent need for 
further strengthening the Diagnostic services by adding more MRIs and CTs.  Now a 
days super speciality hospitals have a lot of tele-radiology systems that can be replicated 
at least for laboratory investigations. 
(Para 7.12.3) 
 
79. The Committee is of the view that the Government should decentralize the Lab 
services into regional district hospitals and even compensating private hospitals to carry 
out test at a fixed rate by the Government and using PPP model wherein the insurance 
patients, both under public insurance as well as private insurance can use private 
diagnostic facilities at standard rates. 
(Para 7.12.4) 
 
80. The Committee also understands the need for strengthening the periphery 
AIIMS in each states, District Hospitals and State Hospitals besides strengthening the 
infrastructure at Taluk, District, medical college level in all states for accessible and 
affordable treatment not only to combat the problem of overcrowding in AIIMS, New 
Delhi but also for providing protected time of 25% of its work activities to premiere 
institutions for genuine and high research work at the global scale. 
(Para 7.12.5) 
 
81. The Committee understands that in order to address the mounting surgical 
backlogs and prolonged waiting times at AIIMS, New Delhi a dual strategy should be 
adopted. On the one hand, AIIMS should continue to expand its own capacity through 
timely completion of the Master Plan, augmentation of high-dependency units, 
strengthening of post-operative and step-down facilities and further optimization of 
operation theatre utilization. On the other hand, a decentralization strategy should be 
pursued wherein elective and non-critical procedures are systematically forwarded or 
referred to other AIIMS, Government hospitals and regional tertiary care centres, 
thereby reducing the disproportionate load on AIIMS, New Delhi. 
(Para 7.12.6) 
 

 
106 
 
82. The Committee further recommends exploring partnerships with accredited 
private hospitals under a Public–Private Partnership (PPP) framework, where elective 
and non-critical procedures can be carried out at standardized government-notified 
rates, with provisions for reimbursement under public health insurance schemes and 
recognition of private insurance coverage. The measures so suggested would not only 
decongest AIIMS but also bring specialized surgical care closer to patients’ homes, 
reducing travel, cost and delays. In addition, AIIMS should develop a centralized digital 
referral and scheduling system linked with other AIIMS and empanelled hospitals, 
enabling patients to be allocated slots based on urgency and availability across the 
network. Such integrated & holistic approach would ensure timely access to care, 
greater efficiency in utilization of national healthcare infrastructure, and improved 
patient satisfaction. 
(Para 7.12.7) 
National Accreditation Board for Hospitals (NABH) Certification 
83. The Committee commends AIIMS, New Delhi for being the first high-volume 
hospital in the country to achieve NABH certification in several of its major blocks and 
centers. The Committee expresses deep concern that full accreditation across the 
Institute is still pending. The Committee strongly recommends that AIIMS, being a 
quality driven institution, must expedite the process of securing NABH accreditation for 
all remaining blocks and centers at the earliest. The Committee underscores that NABH 
accreditation is not merely a certification, but a transformative framework that ensures 
quality, safety and accountability in service delivery, therefore, NABH accreditation is a 
must.  The Committee, in this connection, recommends that for appointment for NABH 
coordinators under hospital administration, doctors cannot spend time on NABH 
accreditation, therefore, specifically appointed NABH coordinators should be entrusted 
with the responsibility of acquiring NABH accreditations.  The Committee is also view 
that NABH accreditation brings uniformity starting from mortuary, blood bank, etc. 
and any mishap may occur with prescription or drug disposal, hence, there should be 
Antibiotic Policy.  The Committee, therefore, understands that a strong Antibiotic 
Policy is the call of the day for a setup like AIIMS, New Delhi. 
(Para 7.13.2) 
 
NEONATAL INTENSIVE CARE FACILITIES 
 
84. The Committee appreciates that Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) at AIIMS, 
possesses world class Neonatal Infrastructure and through multidisciplinary 
collaboration with other departments and specialties, the NICU provides comprehensive 
and specialized care to critically ill newborns, achieving commendable outcomes in 
neonatal survival and recovery. The Committee, however, observes that the current 
NICU infrastructure is limited to the care of inborn neonates and out-born neonates are 
presently managed in other hospital areas, including paediatric wards and the 
Paediatric Intensive Care Unit, which are not specifically designed for neonatal 
intensive care. The Committee also takes note of the initiative undertaken by AIIMS to 
establish a separate Outborn Neonatal Intensive Care Unit in two phases to address this 
gap. The Committee has been given to understand that Phase-I, comprising four beds 

 
107 
 
would be operational within 12 to 18 month while Phase-II, expanding the facility to its 
full capacity of 13 beds over the next two to four years. 
(Para 7.14.4)  
 
85. In view of the growing demand for specialized neonatal care, the Committee 
recommends that AIIMS, New Delhi, expedite the establishment of the proposed 
Outborn Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) and ensure that both phases of 
implementation are completed within the stipulated timeframe.  The Committee 
strongly recommends for enhancement in the Neo-natal facility to at least 50 more beds 
keeping in view the vast number of patients requiring Neo-natal care. 
(Para 7.14.5) 
 
86. The Committee has come across that a lot of money is shelled out by poor on 
Neonatal Care as new born, say, of 20 days old or 60 days old are admitted in a private 
hospital and the bill for the treatment ranges to the tune of Rs. 15 lakh or even Rs. 20 
lakh, therefore, Neonatal care is as important as Cardiology, Neurology and Trauma.  
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Institute needs to strengthen the 
Neonatal Care by making adequate provision for trained manpower, infrastructure and 
infection-control measures to ensure the safe and effective functioning of the Neonatal 
Care Unit at affordable cost. 
(Para7.14.6) 
 
87. The Committee observes that newborn health interventions in the country are 
presently implemented under the broader framework of the National Health Mission 
through facilities such as Sick Newborn Care Units (SNCUs) and Newborn Stabilization 
Units (NBSUs), and that there is no standalone national programme or dedicated 
Centres of Excellence in the field of Neonatology. Considering the increasing 
importance of specialised neonatal care in reducing infant mortality and addressing 
complications related to premature births, congenital disorders and high-risk deliveries, 
the Committee is of the considered view that focused institutional strengthening in this 
domain is the need of the hour. The Committee also notes that neonatal mortality can be 
significantly reduced by strengthening the capacity of local doctors, nurses and frontline 
health workers through targeted training in essential newborn care, neonatal 
resuscitation, early identification of complications and timely referral. Continuous skill 
development of healthcare providers, particularly at peripheral health facilities, would 
ensure prompt and effective management of neonatal conditions and improve survival 
and quality of newborn care. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the AIIMS 
should examine the feasibility of developing a more structured approach for 
strengthening neonatal care services which can be a bench mark for other regional 
AIIMS alongwith other tertiary care centres to adopt. The Committee recommends for 
a collaborative approach with institutions which have a long proven legacy of providing 
neonatal care like the KEM Hospital Parel, Mumbai so as to device a affordable 
protocol for neo natal care on a population scale. 
(Para 7.14.7) 
 
 

 
108 
 
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEM 
 
88. The Committee appreciates the patient-centric initiatives undertaken by AIIMS, 
New Delhi through the introduction of the Santusht Portal and QR code–based 
grievance reporting, which empower patients to raise complaints and monitor their 
resolution in real time. The Committee recommends that patient centric initiative 
should be scaled up beyond the pilot phase and extended to all blocks and centres of 
AIIMS, New Delhi and eventually replicated across other AIIMS institutions 
nationwide. 
(Para 7.15.6) 
 
89. The Committee is also of the view that while institutional mechanisms are 
necessary, feedback collection must also be supplemented by an independent system to 
ensure credibility and transparency. The Committee, therefore, recommends AIIMS to 
explore the feasibility of engaging a reputed third-party agency to conduct regular 
patient satisfaction surveys and capture unbiased feedback on key parameters such as 
cleanliness, quality of food, waiting times, communication with doctors, nursing care 
and overall patient comfort. Such approach/initiative would ensure that patients feel 
free to share their honest experiences without fear of reprisal, thereby providing the 
administration with actionable insights for service improvement. 
(Para7.15.7) 
 
90. The Committee observes that AIIMS, New Delhi has redefined the benchmarks 
of public healthcare delivery in India, functioning under extraordinary pressure while 
sustaining high-quality care. The unparalleled volume and complexity of work handled 
by the Institute underscores its role as the foremost national centre of excellence in 
patient care, education and research and demonstrates its indispensable place in India’s 
healthcare ecosystem. The Committee, however, observes that the current 
infrastructure and manpower is under stress due to the ever increasing volume of 
patients. The Committee, therefore, recommends that urgent steps be taken to 
strengthen infrastructure, enhance manpower and expand capacity across clinical, 
diagnostic and research domains in view of the extraordinary patient load and the 
critical role of AIIMS. The measures so undertaken would ensure that the Institute 
continues to deliver high-quality, specialized care while also advancing its mandate in 
education and medical research. 
(Para7.15.8) 
 
HUMAN RESOURCE 
 
91. The Committee takes into account Human Resource Policy and Management of 
AIIMS and opines that the AIIMS Management would undertake concerted efforts and 
measures in appointment of Faculty through a transparent Selection Process as per the 
provisions of AIIMS Act, 1956. The Committee also desires that the Recruitment and 
promotion process of non-faculty must be clearly govern by rules and Regulations as 

 
109 
 
laid down by the DoPT keeping in view the Reservation policy, Pay Scales and service 
conditions. 
(Para 8.1.3) 
 
92. The Committee came across high rate of attrition of doctors and personnel from 
other allied services in AIIMS, New Delhi due to low salary and necessary facilities vis-
a-vis renowned hospitals thereby increasing workload on the remaining workforce. The 
Committee was impressed that the Government has imposed a cap that the salary of 
DM, Cardiologist, Nephrologist or Endocrinologist etc. would not be higher than the 
Chief Secretary, therefore, these doctors do not stay in higher institutions and leave it 
immediately after doing their super specialization to join the private sector where a new 
Cardiologist are paid to the tune of Rs. 4 to 5 lakhs whereas the Government pays 
around one lakh as per the pay structure available in the country, if so, is the fact, the 
Committee wills to point out that if the salary of the Member of Parliament is lower 
than the Chief Secretary, therefore, why not the salary of doctor can be higher than the 
Chief Secretary. The Committee is of the opinion that lot of money and time is spent to 
become a DM so for their retention in AIIMS, New Delhi it is necessary to pay them 
higher salary and better facilities available to lead a satisfied and actualised life. The 
Committee, in this regard, is of the considered view that if the Government wills to run 
super-speciality centres in AIIMS, New Delhi or all over the Country the Government 
should remove the pay barrier cap and raise the pay scale of doctors for their assured 
retention, on the one hand and to develop and standardized tertiary healthcare centres. 
The Committee strongly believes that tertiary level healthcare institutions can do more 
quality work, more research work and would be more contributory from the futuristic 
point of view once the salary of doctors in super-specialised centres is enhanced and 
made comparable to healthcare institutions in the private sector. 
(Para 8.1.4) 
 
93. The Committee is of the view that since AIIMS, Delhi envisage itself as a centre 
of excellence in Medical Education in Research and in Patient care. Its HR Policy must 
be aligned with its mission and vision i.e. in consonance with meritocratic recruitment 
supported academic integrity, training programme fostering clinical and Research 
Excellence and digital HR systems aiming at enhancing the governance and 
accountability. AIIMS management should chalk out specific course of action to fill up 
gaps in such alignment viz Low Faculty to Student ratio impacts the teaching and 
research mission, Limited career progression impacts motivation and innovation, 
Overburdened staff due to high patient load affects quality of care and academic output 
and More protected time needed for research or academics. 
(Para 8.1.5)  
 
VACANCIES IN NON-FACULTY POSITIONS 
 
94. The Committee is constrained to observe that the All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi, is presently functioning under severe shortage of both 
teaching and non-teaching staff. Out of a sanctioned strength of 1,306 faculty posts, as 
many as 508 remain vacant, while in the case of non-faculty staff, 3,056 out of 13,911 

 
110 
 
sanctioned posts are unfilled. The Committee notes with concern that such manpower 
deficit might adversely affect the Institute’s capacity to discharge its dual mandate of 
providing quality medical education and delivering world-class healthcare services. 
(Para 8.3.6) 
 
95. The Committee is alarmed to note that the highest number of vacancies exists at 
the level of Assistant Professor, which directly impacts the student–teacher ratio, 
academic mentorship and research productivity. The Committee further observes that 
vacancies in the cadre of Professors have been long pending due to protracted litigation 
and administrative delays, which might adversely impact leadership in several key 
departments.  
(Para 8.3.7) 
 
96. The Committee desires that AIIMS, New Delhi must have rationalized the 
pyramidal structure in appropriate ratio of Assistant Professors, Associate Professors 
and above as the future of Institution depends on the base of pyramid and the Assistant 
Professors are the future of the Institution, therefore, concerted efforts must be made to 
fill up the post of Assistant Professors, of course, keeping it to consideration the need to 
follow the roster system as per the constitution norms. 
(Para 8.3.8) 
 
97. In respect of non-faculty staff, the Committee is deeply concerned that shortages, 
particularly in the nursing cadre will not only increase the workload of the existing 
personnel but also pose a serious risk to patient safety, service delivery and the overall 
efficiency of healthcare operations. 
(Para 8.3.9) 
 
98. The Committee is of the firm view that such prolonged vacancies have the 
potential to dilute the academic standards of AIIMS Delhi and undermine its reputation 
as a centre of excellence in medical education, research and patient care. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that AIIMS Delhi should fast-track the ongoing 
recruitment processes and ensure that appointments to both faculty and non-faculty 
positions are completed within strict timelines. The Committee is of the opinion that 
while the reforms to introduce transparency, objective evaluation criteria and 
technology-driven recruitment are commendable, these measures, however, should not 
cause undue delay in filling up urgent vacancies. The Committee further recommends 
that contractual appointments be expanded as an interim measure to bridge immediate 
gaps, especially in the high-demand specialties and in the nursing cadre. 
(Para 8.3.10) 
 
99. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare extend all necessary support to AIIMS, New Delhi by way of expediting 
necessary approvals, removing administrative bottlenecks and providing adequate 
budgetary backing to conduct timely recruitment. The Committee further recommends 
that a system of biannual recruitment for nursing officers and an annual recruitment 
cycle for faculty and paramedical staff be institutionalised across all AIIMS institutions 

 
111 
 
so as to prevent the recurrence of such large-scale vacancies in the future. The 
Committee also recommends the Ministry to explore conducting NORCET more 
frequently than twice a year to increase the strength of nurse staff. 
(Para 8.3.11) 
 
100. The Committee strongly recommends that a joint monitoring mechanism 
between AIIMS Delhi and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare be established to 
periodically review recruitment progress, ensure accountability and project manpower 
requirements in consonance with the expansion plans of the Institute. The Committee 
emphasizes that addressing these shortages on an urgent basis is imperative to 
safeguard the academic excellence and healthcare standards of AIIMS Delhi. Any 
further delay in filling up these vacancies would, in the considered view of the 
Committee, severely compromise the ability of the Institute to retain its premier status 
and to meet the ever-growing demand for specialized medical services in the country. 
(Para 8.3.12) 
 
CADRE REVIEW & RESERVATION IN PROMOTIONS 
 
101. The Committee, after careful consideration of the submissions by representatives 
of various associations on pressing human resource challenges, is deeply concerned 
about the prolonged neglect of cadre review, last being conducted in 1992 leading to the 
acute shortage of promotion opportunities across different cadres in AIIMS. The 
Committee observes that the absence of cadre reviews at rational period of interval has 
led to stagnation, weakened staff morale and diminished efficiency, while the delay in 
filling up vacant posts, especially in Group D, continues to affect service delivery. 
Despite approval of fresh cadre review by the Standing Finance Committee and 
Governing Body, the proposal remain stalled at the Ministry level. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry take immediate steps to approve and 
implement the long-pending cadre review, ensuring the creation of adequate promotion 
posts for nurses, sanctioning of long-vacant positions and the establishment of clear and 
updated recruitment and promotion pathways for all categories of staff. 
(Para 8.4.4) 
 
102. The Committee further recommends the immediate implementation of provision 
of reservation in promotions in strict conformity with DoPT guidelines and National 
Commission for Scheduled Castes (NCSC) directives, alongside the creation of a fully 
functional reservation cell with regular monitoring of rosters and active participation of 
SC/ST representatives in advisory and policy-making committees. By addressing these 
issues in a comprehensive and time-bound manner, the Ministry will not only enhance 
staff motivation and retention but also strengthen institutional efficiency and ensure 
that AIIMS continues to function with the highest standards of excellence. 
(Para 8.4.5) 
 
 
 

 
112 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF ROTATORY HEADSHIP POLICY 
 
103. The Committee concurs with the submission of the Faculty Association of AIIMS 
(FAIMS) regarding the urgent need to implement the Rotatory Headship policy at 
AIIMS, New Delhi. Recognizing the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare’s earlier 
commitment to operationalize the said policy by June 2024, the Committee observes 
with a caution that further delay would undermine both faculty morale and institutional 
trust. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Institute take immediate steps to 
implement the Rotatory Headship policy and ensure democratic governance, equitable 
distribution of leadership roles and prevention of power centralization. The proposed 
reform, long overdue, is essential to foster departmental excellence, transparency and 
fairness and to uphold the reputation of the Institution as a model of academic and 
professional integrity. 
(Para 8.5.4) 
 
ABSORPTION/REGULARISATION OF PROJECT RESEARCH STAFF 
 
104. The Committee observes with concern that the Institute’s Order (Ref. No. 14/20-
Estt.(RCT) rejecting the absorption and regularisation of the eligible research staff 
despite 15 years of continuous service in various research projects is inconsistent with 
the established policy of AIIMS, past precedents and the recommendations of multiple 
Committees, as well as the directives of the Hon’ble Supreme Court and High Court. 
The Committee takes into account that between 1992 and 2021, over 164 project staff 
were absorbed under this very framework, thereby setting a clear institutional and legal 
precedent. The Committee concurs with the representation submitted by the Project 
Research Staff and recognizes their invaluable contribution to the Institute’s research 
ecosystem. Having devoted over 15 years of continuous service in diverse projects, these 
staff members represent a highly trained and experienced human resource that has 
been instrumental in sustaining and advancing the research output of AIIMS. 
(Para 8.6.6) 
 
105. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that AIIMS urgently reconsider 
the case of absorption and regularization of all eligible Project Research Staff who have 
completed 15 years of service. Their integration into the regular workforce is not only a 
matter of justice and policy consistency but is also essential for strengthening the 
Institute’s research capacity and output by retaining skilled manpower already trained 
and specialized in the research ecosystem of the Institute. The Committee is of the 
considered view that a core research cadre be developed, in line with judicial directives, 
to ensure long-term continuity, stability and growth of the Institute’s research 
endeavours. 
(Para 8.6.7) 
 
ISSUES FACED BY NON-FACULTY EMPLOYEES 
106. The Committee took into consideration the submission of Non-faculty employees 
of AIIMS regarding alleged discriminatory treatment meted to non-faculty staff despite 

 
113 
 
their vital role in the functioning of the Institute. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, in consultation with 
AIIMS, takes urgent response to address the concerns of non-faculty employees 
regarding parity in service conditions and welfare measures. Given their critical 
contribution to the functioning of the Institute, it is essential that non-faculty staffs are 
extended equal benefits that have been provided to their counterparts in other central 
institutions. The Committee is of the view that legitimate requests such as the option to 
shift from NPS to OPS, extension of productivity-linked bonuses and adoption of other 
welfare measures, which are in line with Central Government orders should be 
extended to non-faculty staff of AIIMS with due consideration. Ensuring equity in 
service conditions will not only enhance motivation and team spirit among employees 
but also strengthen institutional harmony and efficiency at AIIMS. 
(Para 8.7.2) 
 
WORKING HOURS OF RESIDENTS 
 
107. The Committee takes into account the submission of the Resident Doctors 
Association and expresses concern that Residents Doctors have to put in excessive duty 
hours, sometimes working upto 36 hours at a stretch well beyond the limits envisaged 
under the residency scheme. The Committee is of considered view that such extended 
working hours, while reflective of service exigencies, nevertheless to adversely affects 
the physical and mental health, diminish academic performance and potentially 
compromise the quality of patient care. Therefore, the Committee emphasizes the need 
for a balanced and humane duty structure. The Committee recommends that AIIMS 
management should strictly enforce the provisions of the Government of India 
Residency Scheme to ensure that the duty hour for Junior and Senior Residents do not 
exceed the prescribed limits. An institutional policy should be framed to regulate and 
cap consecutive duty hours, with provision for voluntary extra-duty shifts against 
appropriate compensation. The Committee further recommends that measures be put in 
place to balance clinical and academic responsibilities, particularly during examination 
and thesis submission periods. In this regard, the Committee recommends the Institute 
management, in consultation with resident doctors, to explore the feasibility and 
practicality of granting preparatory leave to final-year residents and arranging 
temporary recruitment of additional resident doctors to share the clinical workload.  
The Committee appreciates the role played by resident doctors in providing valuable 
fillip to the infrastructure constraints of regular doctors thus forming the backbone of 
healthcare. 
(Para 8.8.3) 
 
108. The Committee, in nutshell desires the AIIMS Management and the Department 
of Health and family welfare to take following steps for strengthening Human resources 
of AIIMS as a whole:- 
(i) Fast-track sanctioning and recruitment to fill vacancies and reduce 
workload imbalance; 

 
114 
 
(ii) Expanding infrastructure and improving work life equilibrium by 
upgrading residential facilities and improving work conditions to 
construction of additional accommodation for faculty and staff ; 
(iii) Introduction of Structured career pathways linked incentives by providing 
choice in career pathways- clinical/research/academic/mixed with defined 
KPIs to ensure protect time and quality outcomes; 
(iv) Mentorship and career development by organising career development 
programmes and workshops and extending support to early career faculty 
and Scientists; 
(v) Incentivisation upon meeting for surpassing defined KPI targets that may 
be aligned with the NHA’s guidelines on utilization of ABPMJAY revenuel; 
(vi) Strategic collaborations with AIIMS for promoting interdisciplinary and 
international collaborations to expose young researchers to global 
standards;  
(vii) Enhance HR autonomy for responsive decision-making;  
(viii) Align HR metrics with strategic goals in education, research, and service 
delivery; and 
(ix) AIIMS, New Delhi should devise a standard protocol duty hours of junior 
and senior residents to be followed by all establishments across the country. 
(Para 8.8.4) 
 
SWOT ANALYSIS AND STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT OF AIIMS NEW DELHI 
 
Strength 
109. AIIMS New Delhi continues to hold a distinguished position as India’s premier 
medical institution, supported by a strong global reputation and high patient trust. Its 
clinical excellence is reflected in its ability to manage more than 14,000 outpatient cases 
daily, while offering advanced super-specialty care across disciplines. The Institute 
maintains rigorous academic standards through its MBBS, MD/MS and DM/MCh 
programmes, attracting the nation’s most competitive candidates. With an annual 
research output exceeding 3,000 publications, AIIMS has established itself as a leading 
centre for clinical and biomedical research. Its autonomous governance structure, 
backed by a dedicated Act of Parliament, provides the flexibility needed to innovate in 
both academic and clinical domains. 
(Para 9.1.1) 
Weakness 
110. Despite these strengths, the Institute faces several internal challenges. Staff 
shortages, resulting largely from long lead times between post sanctioning and 
candidate joining; affect the balance between teaching, research and patient care. The 
absence of a structured referral system contributes to chronic overload of outpatient 
services, placing considerable strain on existing infrastructure. AIIMS also has very less 
formal collaboration with top global institutions, which limits opportunities for 
international exposure and joint research. Much of the campus infrastructure, including 
patient care and residential buildings, is over six decades old, requiring continuous 
maintenance with limited options for retrofitting. 
(Para 9.1.2) 

 
115 
 
Opportunities 
111. At the same time, AIIMS is presented with significant opportunities. Digital 
transformation offers a pathway to modernize diagnostics, telemedicine and e-
governance. The Institute is well positioned to align itself with global benchmarks set by 
institutions such as Harvard, Oxford, Tokyo University Hospital and Peking Union 
Medical College, strengthening its role as a leader in medical education and research in 
the Global South. 
(Para 9.1.3) 
Threats 
112. Externally, the Institute faces threats such as talent attrition, with skilled 
professionals seeking better remuneration and work-life balance abroad or in the 
private sector. Technological adoption, particularly in AI, robotics and digital health, 
has progressed slowly compared to global peers. Moreover, public expectations for free, 
high-quality care continue to rise, without proportional expansion in resources or 
manpower. 
(Para 9.1.4) 
113. The Committee suggests the AIIMS, New Delhi management to take into account 
weaknesses and threat part of SWOT-Analysis so that AIIMS New Delhi must adopt a 
series of strategic measures to address existing institutional weaknesses and mitigate 
emerging threats. The Committee, in this regard, recommends the Institute for fast-
track faculty recruitment by introducing streamlined hiring processes and offering 
competitive compensation packages, tenure-track positions, sabbaticals and research 
grants to attract and retain high-quality talent. The Committee feels that AIIMS should 
undertake reforms and operationalize a structured national referral framework to 
reduce OPD overload and ensure that the Institute primarily receives patients requiring 
advanced tertiary-level care. 
(Para 9.1.5) 
 
114. To enhance clinical efficiency and service delivery, the Committee recommends 
that AIIMS accelerate the integration of advanced technologies, including artificial 
intelligence, machine learning, data-science, robotic surgical systems and digital 
dashboards for patient flow and resource management. In order to capitalize on its 
strengths and emerging opportunities, the Committee desires that AIIMS strengthen its 
global collaborations by establishing Memoranda of Understanding with leading 
international universities for joint research, faculty exchanges and curriculum 
development. 
(Para 9.1.6) 
 
115. The Committee is of the firm opinion that adequacy of available fund at the nick 
of the time is indispensable for completion of undertaken construction and research 
projects without time and cost overruns. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
improving financial sustainability by budgetary allocation as per projected demand. 
Moreover, AIIMS should attract CSR contributions, philanthropic funding and other 
external resources to support infrastructure development and research innovation. The 
Committee desires that AIIMS establish interdisciplinary research hubs in key areas 

 
116 
 
such as genomics, bioengineering and public health, and promote start-up incubation 
and translational innovation through the Centre for Medical Innovation and 
Entrepreneurship (CMIE). 
(Para 9.1.7) 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
116. The Committee is in agreement with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
in regard to the requisite steps to be taken for strategic management of AIIMS, New 
Delhi in order to have Always a Better Control (ABC). The Committee is of the 
considered view that the strategic management for a better managerial control requires 
digital command and control system, performance based accountability, referral system 
strengthening, therefore, AIIMS management must strive towards this direction. The 
Committee further recommends that certain organizational interventions viz. leadership 
development programme and professionally functioning Inter-departmental 
Coordination Committees must be evolved in order to achieve efficient working 
equilibrium. 
(Para 9.2.2) 
 
AIIMS VIS-À-VIS GLOBAL INSTITUTIONS 
117. The Committee observes that while AIIMS New Delhi is distinguished by its 
exceptionally high clinical load, strong public health role and growing research 
footprint, institutions such as Harvard Medical School, Oxford Medical School, Tokyo 
University Hospital and Peking Union Medical College represent diverse models of 
advanced biomedical research, technologically driven healthcare and structured 
academic training. Such comparative assessment highlights the unique strengths of each 
institution and provides insight into areas where AIIMS may further align with global 
best practices to enhance its academic and clinical impact. 
(Para 10.1.2) 
118. The Committee takes into account that AIIMS New Delhi demonstrates 
exceptional clinical service delivery and emerging research capabilities, but requires 
further strengthening in areas such as research infrastructure, faculty-to-student ratios, 
simulation-based training and adoption of advanced medical technologies. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that AIIMS New Delhi undertake targeted reforms 
to align more closely with global best practices, particularly by expanding its research 
ecosystem, enhancing interdisciplinary collaboration and increasing protected time and 
funding for investigator-led research. The Committee further recommends for 
establishment of advanced and global standard simulation and innovation centers, 
similar to those in institutions like Harvard and Oxford, to modernize clinical training 
and improve competency-based education. 
(Para 10.1.3) 
119. The Committee is of the considered view that AIIMS, New Delhi must explore 
international academic partnerships and faculty exchange programmes to enhance 
global exposure for students and researchers. The Committee opines that strengthening 

 
117 
 
digital health systems, integrating AI-driven diagnostic tools and adopting structured 
referral mechanisms would go a long way in additionally improving efficiency and 
patient outcomes. 
(Para 10.1.4) 
 
Best Practices and Strategic Imperatives for Strengthening AIIMS New Delhi 
 
120. The Committee highlights that the leading global medical institutions reveals 
several best practices that AIIMS New Delhi must consider adopting to enhance its 
clinical efficiency, academic output and research excellence. One of the foremost areas is 
the development of a structured national referral system. Institutions such as the 
Oxford Medical Sciences Division in the United Kingdom and Tokyo University 
Hospital in Japan function within tiered healthcare systems that regulate patient flow 
and ensure that tertiary centers receive referrals only for complex cases. For AIIMS, 
implementing a similar framework would help reduce overwhelming OPD congestion, 
streamline case load and preserve the academic and research bandwidth essential to a 
premier teaching hospital. The Committee observes that AIIMS New Delhi stands at a 
critical juncture where adopting global best practices and strengthening institutional 
mechanisms can significantly enhance its clinical efficiency, academic excellence and 
research impact. In view of the comparative assessment with leading international 
institutions, the Committee recommends that AIIMS should develop and implement a 
structured national referral framework to manage patient load effectively and preserve 
the Institute’s academic and research capacity. 
(Para 10.2.1) 
 
121. The Committee wills to pin-point another key area that relates to faculty 
development and retention. Global institutions such as Harvard Medical School and 
Peking Union Medical College offer tenure tracks, well-defined research pathways, 
competitive remuneration packages and extensive opportunities for international 
collaboration. Keeping in view, the faculty vacancies at AIIMS reportedly around 30 
percent, introducing measures such as competitive service conditions, sabbatical 
provisions and research-linked incentives would significantly strengthen faculty 
retention and professional growth. The Committee recommends that faculty 
development and retention be accorded high priority, with measures such as 
competitive compensation, sabbatical provisions, tenure-linked pathways and research 
incentives to address existing vacancies and attract high-quality talent. The Committee 
also recommends AIIMS to expand technology-driven patient care, including wider 
adoption of AI-enabled diagnostics, digital health platforms, robotics and telemedicine 
systems. 
(Para 10.2.2) 
 
122. The Committee understands that AIIMS, New Delhi would also get benefitted by 
expanding technology-driven patient care, drawing from models at Tokyo University 
Hospital and Harvard, where artificial intelligence, robotics and telemedicine are 
integral to precision healthcare. The Committee is of the considered view that scaling up 

 
118 
 
digital health platforms such as e-Sanjeevani and integrating AI tools for diagnostics, 
triage and medical decision support would go a long way in enhancing efficiency, reduce 
waiting times and improve clinical outcomes. 
(Para 10.2.3) 
 
123. The Committee takes into account that in the domain of medical education, 
several global institutions have moved towards simulation-based learning, with Oxford 
and Harvard operating advanced simulation laboratories to train students in clinical 
skills without risk to patients. Therefore, the Committee is of the firm opinion that 
AIIMS could substantially enhance its skill-based training by investing in high-fidelity 
simulation centers and virtual reality–based learning environments. In the sphere of 
medical education, the Committee recommends that AIIMS establish advanced 
simulation and virtual reality–based training centers, similar to those in leading global 
institutions, to strengthen skill-based learning. 
(Para 10.2.4) 
 
124. The Committee firmly believes that a stronger interdisciplinary research 
ecosystem is concomitant to forward looking advanced, modern and scientific pattern of 
delivering healthcare at affordable cost. Institutions like Stanford and Harvard have 
pioneered cross-disciplinary labs that integrate bioengineering, data science, and 
medicine to drive translational research. AIIMS can adopt a similar approach by 
fostering collaborations across departments and partnering with institutions such as 
IITs, IISc and other national research centers. To enable these advancements, 
administrative and financial support will be critical. The Committee advises for 
fostering interdisciplinary research ecosystems and strengthening collaborations with 
institutions such as IITs, IISc and global universities to promote innovation in-depth 
research and research collaboration. 
(Para 10.2.5) 
 
125. The Committee is of the opinion that the Governance reforms, including 
leadership development programmes for senior positions and the introduction of Key 
Performance Indicators (KPIs) for academic, clinical and research excellence, can 
promote greater accountability and strategic focus. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that the AIIMS Management should leave no stone unturned in making 
concerted efforts in this direction in order to achieve the cherished goal. 
(Para 10.2.6) 
 
126. The Committee is of the view that the infrastructure investment is required to 
expand residential accommodations, enhance simulation and research facilities and 
upgrade digital systems for telemedicine and e-governance. Sustainable funding 
mechanisms, such as establishing endowment funds, attracting CSR or private-sector 
investments and increasing budgetary allocations for research and international 
exchange programmes, will further strengthen the Institute’s capacity. The Committee 
also recommends comprehensive administrative and financial enhancements, including 
leadership development programmes, introduction of clear Key Performance Indicators 
(KPIs), expanded infrastructure for accommodation and research, upgraded digital 

 
119 
 
systems, establishment of endowment funds and greater engagement with CSR and 
private-sector partners. 
(Para 10.2.7) 
General Recommendations 
 
Mission Mode for filling up vacant posts as per sanctioned strength 
127. The Committee expresses deep anguish over the staggering 35% vacancy rate 
(452 vacancies) in faculty positions, along with Junior/Senior residents (700+ vacancies), 
and non-faculty posts (2,540 vacancies) which constrain service delivery and strain 
existing staff. Most alarmingly, the data reveals that while 32 faculty members resigned 
or superannuated in the years 2024-25 and 2025-26 (till January 2026), however, no new 
faculty members joined the institute during said period. The Committee disapproves 
such recruitment paralysis that infact severely jeopardizes the academic and clinical 
standards of AIIMS, New Delhi. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Department to calk out Strategic Action Plan with focused, time-bound recruitment 
drive with measurable targets and  milestones, viz. target filling (at least 85%) of 
sanctioned posts on fast track mission mode.  The Committee desires that the current 
328 advertised faculty positions may be finalised within the first two quarters of FY 
2026-27. 
(Para 11.1.5) 
128. Furthermore, the Committee does not approve the persistent reliance on 
contractual faculty i.e. currently 73 Assistant Professors must be phased out in favor of 
permanent appointments to ensure institutional commitment and belongingness and for 
ensuring a long-term accountability, therefore, contractual arrangements should serve 
only as temporary stop-gap management.  The Committee is of the considered view that 
long-standing contractual incumbents meeting eligibility criteria should be offered a 
regularisation/absorption pathway for better interest of both the professionals and the 
institutions.  The Committee also considers that the Department should introduce 
retention incentives tied to hard-to-fill specialties and underserved postings to improve 
the offer-to-joining ratio. 
(Para 11.1.6) 
Fellowship Programme in Super Speciality Courses 
 
129. The Committee has come across the findings of studies on the impact of 
workload on the lifespan of a modern day doctor whereby due to mental stress the 
lifespan has come down by 8 to 10 years. Unless, the strength of faculty is enhanced the 
workload will remain too much. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry may commence fellowship programme in super-speciality courses so that 
AIIMS, New Delhi can be in a position to have some additional faculty in Cardiology, 
Neurology, Nephrology, and Neo-natology, etc. The Committee believes that once the 
fellowship courses are started some candidates who are already post DM will join the 
course that would ultimately increase the faculty and thereby reduce the workload to 
some extent. 

 
120 
 
(Para 11.2.1) 
Implementation of National Rare Disease Policy 
 
130. The Committee has come across that AIIMS, New Delhi has been recognized as 
the Centre of Excellence for treatment of Rare Disease and, therefore, it is but natural 
that AIIMS, New Delhi should implement the National Rare Disease Policy in letter and 
spirit. However, it is quite surprising that out of total number of patients suffering from 
Lysosomal Storage Disorder only 36 patients got the treatment, 42 patients are deprived 
of Enzyme Replacement Therapy (ERT) and five patients died waiting for the 
treatment. The Committee desires to know the number of patients who got approval for 
ERT treatment and the reasons for pending approval for the rest of the patients in 
AIIMS, New Delhi. The Committee recommends that LSDs patients must get immediate 
treatment in AIIMS, New Delhi. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare must monitor that AIIMS, New Delhi implement the 
National Rare Disease Policy without fail and also display SOPs in this regard. 
(Para 11.3.1) 
 
 
Mental Stress Management Session for Doctors and Allied Healthcare Practitioners 
 
131. The Committee is well aware that due to overcrowding of patients visiting from 
across the country for completely reliable and accurate treatment of various diseases, 
the doctors, allied healthcare practitioners and other staff of AIIMS, New Delhi remain 
constantly under severe mental stress, therefore, the Committee is of the considered 
view that there should be mental stress management session for the serving doctors and 
allied practitioners so that they found themselves fit to devote their mental focus 
towards treatment and palliative care of patient. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that Music Therapy for relieving their mental stress and opportunities for 
Yoga and Mediation may be arranged for doctors and allied professionals to keep them 
physically fit to take on the medical practices as per their assignment. The Committee 
believes so as nowadays mental stress is one of the reasons for most of the diseases, 
therefore, the mental strain and status of doctors and allied practitioners need to be 
taken care of and they should be given opportunity to participate in seminars, yoga-
sessions, meditation to get stress free and afresh. 
(Para 11.4.1) 
 
Exploring possibility for OPD in night 
 
132. The Committee came across a proposal from within for AIIMS, New Delhi 
management for exploring the possibility of opening OPD in the night in order to reduce 
the workload or overcrowding. An arrangement may be made for rotation of duties for 
deploying of doctors and allied practitioners on each day and night and the rest period 
for them be arranged on Monday if their turns comes on Sunday and the vice-versa. A 
plea has been taken into consideration that if aeroplane can fly day and night and train 
can run each day and night, there is no reason that OPD cannot be conducted likewise. 

 
121 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommends D/o Health and Family Welfare and the AIIMS, 
New Delhi management to explore the possibility of conducting OPD round the clock for 
reducing overcrowding and enabling the patient to access healthcare without much 
hassles. 
(Para 11.5.1) 
Cleanliness in the waiting areas and washrooms  
 
133. The Committee takes into account with appreciation the submission of director 
AIIMS, New Delhi that AIIMS management have been put in a lot of efforts in regard to 
cleanliness in the waiting areas and washrooms and the institute is continuing to get the 
first prize for the cleanest hospital of the country under Kayakalpa. The Committee, 
however, came across that AIIMS management is facing challenges to maintain 
cleanliness in the older building especially the main hospital. The Committee, in this 
regard, recommends the AIIMS management to make all out efforts to ensure that the 
older buildings are kept clean up to the expected level and ensure safety, quality and the 
cleanliness. 
(Para 11.6)  
 
GLOBAL STANDING  
 
134. The Committee recognizes AIIMS, New Delhi a leader in quality assurance, 
having received NABH and NABL certifications for multiple facilities including the 
Trauma Centre, Burns & Plastic Surgery Block, Surgical Block, and NCI Jhajjar. The 
Committee desires that the Institute’s infection control, hygiene standards and surgical 
safety protocols must serve as model for replication in AIIMS like institutions and other 
leading hospitals across the country. 
(Para 12.1.2) 
AIIMS, New Delhi : A legacy of Laurels, a Future of Excellence 
 
135. The Committee takes into account the pivotal role of the institute serving as a 
model for newly established AIIMS across the country necessitates regular review and 
policy-level support. The Committee recommends that AIIMS, New Delhi to optimally 
utilize opportunity to recognize and reinforce best practices, scientific, modern, 
innovative models worth scaling and ensure that the institute continues to uphold its 
foundational mandate. Lessons from AIIMS, New Delhi can guide performance 
benchmarks, patient handling frameworks, infrastructure planning, digital health 
implementation and research ecosystems for the broader AIIMS network set up under 
PMSSY. 
(Para 12.2.1) 
 
 
 
 
 