  
      PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA  DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE  
 Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi February, 2024/Magha, 1945 (Saka)  
REPORT NO. 152 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY SECOND REPORT ON ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 144TH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2023-24 (DEMAND NO. 47) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH (MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE) (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th February, 2024) (Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th February, 2024)  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
  

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
February, 2024
ONE HUNDRED 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
144TH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 202
NO. 47) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on
(Laid on the
 
 
 
  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2024/Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY SECOND REPORT
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2023-24 (DEMAND 
NO. 47) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th February, 2024
the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th February, 2024
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE 
REPORT ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 24 (DEMAND NO. 47) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH (MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE) February, 2024) February, 2024) 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2. PREFACE (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS (iii) - (iv) 
4. REPORT (v) 
 Chapter–I  Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Ministry 1 - 14 
 
Chapter–II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
does not desire to pursue in view of replies of the 
Ministry 
15 – 23 
 
Chapter–III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Ministry have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
24 - 26 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   - AT   A GLANCE 27 - 28 
6. MINUTES* -- 
 To be appended at a later stage

i 
 
COMPOSITIONOFTHECOMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita  -  Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
3. Shri Sanjeev Arora 
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
5. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel 
6. Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
7. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy 
8. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
9. Dr. Santanu Sen 
10. Shri A.D.Singh 
 
LOKSABHA 
11. Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
12. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
13. Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
14. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
15. Shri K. Navas Kani 
16. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
17. Shri C. Lalrosanga 
18. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
19. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
20. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
21. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Rao Munde 
22. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
23. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
24. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
25. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
26. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S. 
27. Dr. Jadon Chandra Sen 
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
31. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sumant Narain Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan Director 
3. Dr. Saket Kumar Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Noyaline Vinitha F.C. Joint Director 
5. Shri Girish Singh Senior Secretariat Assistant 
 
  
        

ii 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, present this 152nd Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 144th Report on Demands for Grants 2023-24 
(Demand No. 47) of the Department of Health Research (DHR), Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare.  
2. The 144 th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha on 15thMarch, 2023 and laid on the Table of 
Lok Sabha on 20th March, 2023. The Action Taken Notes of the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Report was received from the Departments in the Month of 
July, 2023.   
3.  The Committee made a total of 37 recommendations in the 144th Report, out of which 20 
recommendations have been accepted by the Department and have been categorized under 
Chapter-I. There are 14 recommendations that the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
of the Department’s replies that have been categorized under Chapter-II. There are 3 
recommendations/ observations, in respect of which replies of the Department have not been 
accepted by the Committee and the Committee has made further recommendations thereon and 
has been categorized under Chapter-III.  
4. The Committee, in its meeting held on 5th February, 2024 considered the Draft Report 
and adopted the same. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                             BHUBANESWAR KALITA 
5th February, 2024                                           CHAIRMAN 
Magha, 1945 (Saka)                                 Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
                  Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 ACRONYMS 
 
AIIMS 
BSL 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
Biological Safety Level 
CHC 
CCHRC 
Community Health Center  
Cachar Cancer Hospital and Research Centre  
CSIR Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
CSS 
CT 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme  
Computed Tomography  
CPWD 
DAE 
Central Public Works Department 
Department of Atomic Energy 
DBT Department of Biotechnology 
DHR 
DRDO 
DST 
Department of Health Research 
Defence Research and Development Organisation 
Department of Science and Technology 
DIAMOnDS 
EE 
FY 
DHR-ICMR Advanced Molecular Oncology Diagnostic Services  
Emotional Exhaustion  
Financial Year 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GIA Grants in Aid Scheme  
HCW 
HIV 
HLRC 
Healthcare Workers  
Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
Health Laboratory & Research Centre  
HTA 
IPL 
IPHL 
Health Technology Assessment 
Indian Premier League 
Integrated Public Health Laboratories 
ICMR 
ICAR 
Indian Council of Medical Research 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research  
JIPMER Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education & Research 
MDR-TB 
MIP 
Multi-Drug Resistant Tuberculosis 
Mycobacterium indicus pranii  
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MRHRUs Model Rural Health Research Units 
MRUs 
NJILOMD 
Multidisciplinary Research Units 
National JALMA Institute for Leprosy & Other Mycobacterial Diseases 
NCDs Non-Communicable Diseases 
NCDC National Control for Disease Control  
NER 
NHA 
North Eastern Region 
National Health Authority 
NIH National Institutes of Health 
NIRT National Institute for Research in Tuberculosis 
NITM   National Institute of Traditional Medicine, Belagavi 
NIV National Institute of Virology, Pune 
NMC National Medical Commission 
NRC Nutritional Rehabilitation Centers 
NSO National Statistical Office 

iv 
 
NTEP 
OOPE 
PGIMER 
National TB Elimination Programme 
Out-Of-Pocket Expenditure 
Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research 
PHCs Primary Health Centres 
PM-POSHAN 
PM-ABHIM 
RE 
Pradhan Mantri Poshan Shakti Nirman 
Prime Minister’s Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission  
Revised Estimate 
RMRC Regional Medical Research Centre 
RMNCH Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health 
RESEARCH Regional Enabler for South East Asia Research Collaboration for Health
SDG 
SEARO 
SOP 
Sustainable Development Goals  
South East Asia Region 
Standard Operating Procedure 
STW Standard Treatment Workflow  
VRDL Viral Research and Diagnostic Laboratories 
UPSC Union Public Service Commission 
UP Uttar Pradesh 
WHO 
XDR TB 
World Health Organisation 
Extensively drug-resistant TB  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
REPORT  
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 144thReport on Demands for Grants 2023-24 
(Demand No. 47) of the Department of Health Research (DHR), Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare.  
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the DHR in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows:  
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Para numbers 1.8, 1.9, 1.13, 2.5, 2.7, 3.3, 3.12, 3.13, 3.15, 3.16, 3.18, 3.23, 3.27, 
3.28, 4.4, 4.5, 4.7, 4.8, 4.20 and 4.23 of the Report 
       Total–20 (Chapter-I)  
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies: Para Numbers 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 
2.9, 2.13, 2.14, 2.17, 3.8, 3.10, 3.26, 3.30, 4.10, 4.14 and 4.15 of the Report. 
         Total–14 (Chapter-II)  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: Para Numbers 1.11, 2.15 and 2.18 of 
the Report. 
       Total–3 (Chapter-III)  
3.   The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding part of the 
Report. 

1 
 
CHAPTER- I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
1.1 Human Resource Management 
Recommendation 
1.1.1 The Committee is concerned to note that the posts of Scientist C, D and E in DHR are still 
vacant despite these posts being approved in 2017. The Committee, in its 132nd Report on Action 
Taken Note on 127th Report of Demand for Grants (DFG 2021-22) had recommended the 
Department to formulate a mechanism for completing the recruitment process within a definite 
time frame. The Committee believes that the task of filling up of these posts has become an 
insurmountable task for the Department that needs due attention and strategy for immediate 
resolution. 
(Para 1.8 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.1.2 The posts of Scientist C, D and E (2 posts each) are to be filled up by the Department of 
Health Research on Deputation including short-term contract (ISTC). Accordingly, advertisement 
was given at the All-India level inviting applications for these posts. Vacancy circular was sent to 
all Ministries/ Departments of the Government of India and also to all the State Governments. 
Vacancy circular was also uploaded on the website of DoPT and DHR. However, the process of 
filling up these posts became in fructuous. None of the applicants was found eligible for the post 
of Scientist ‘C. The only candidate recommended by the Union Public Service Commission 
(UPSC) for the post of Scientist ‘D’ did not join. The only candidate found eligible for the post of 
Scientist ‘E’ did not appear for personal interaction.  
1.1.3 Therefore, as per the advice of the UPSC, the process of filling up of these posts has been 
re-initiated and wide publicity to the vacancy was given once again similar to last time. The last 
date for receiving the applications is 17.06.2023. However, for the smooth functioning of the 
DHR schemes, scientists on a contractual basis have been engaged by the Department. 
 
Recommendation 
1.1.4 The Committee observes that despite various efforts of the Department to attract quality 
talent, unfortunately, the results have been paltry.  Keeping in view the fact that scientific 
research is the gateway for assured growth and economic development of the nation, the 
Committee recommends that the Government should further incentivize research in the medical 

2 
 
field.  Some of the developed countries like China, Germany, and US have done it with good 
results.  In India, however, it is seen that there are limited ways of retaining quality talent and 
experience, particularly within government and public health ecosystems. The Committee 
recommends that DHR must devise constructive ways to attract talent in the field of research.  
The work culture, systems of rewards, and recognition should be such that the prospective and 
shortlisted candidates are attracted towards working in DHR/ ICMR. The Committee desires that 
it may be informed of the steps taken towards this direction along with the results it yielded. 
(Para 1.9 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.1.5 ICMR is committed to devising ways to attract and nurture talent in the field of health 
research. The recent fellowships that have been devised to do the same are: the Nurturing Clinical 
Scientists Scheme (NCSS), to attract fresh MBBS students towards research and 
ICMR/NIAID/BMGF Clinical Research Fellowship Programme, to enable clinicians from India 
and the United States of America (USA) to conduct research & hands-on experience in Indian and 
US labs that will advance discovery to improve clinical practice and benefit public health in both 
countries.  
1.1.6 For recognition of excellence, ICMR has recently organized an intramural research and 
innovation meet where best research publications and innovations were felicitated. A programme 
for extramural research is also planned on similar lines.  
1.1.7 Several reforms are also being made at the organizational level like a more strengthened 
extra and intramural research system, seed grant to new recruits at ICMR etc. 
 
1.2 Preparation of Standard Treatment Workflows (STWs) for Diseases 
Recommendation 
1.2.1 The Committee acknowledges the Standard Treatment Workflows (STWs) developed by 
ICMR for varoius conditions affecting the Indian population. The Committee recommends the 
Department to spread awareness about the STWs amongst the medical professionals and also to 
put these STWs in implementation on a pilot basis and modify the STWs based on the feedback 
received. 
(Para 1.13 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.2.2 The Standard Treatment Workflows are being widely disseminated through various 
means as below: (1) Webinars are conducted by ICMR on various specialties and being widely 
attended by physicians across the country. Department of Health and Family Welfare are 

3 
 
conducting training of medical officers at the state level and plan to train 40,000 doctors across 
the country. First training of trainers has been conducted in the state of Madhya Pradesh where in 
district level program managers have participated. The STWs are being introduced as a District 
Residency Program for undergraduates and postgraduates. 
 
1.3 Analysis of Budgetary Allocations  
Recommendation 
1.3.1 The Committee notes with concern that all the schemes/ heads have been provided the 
desired budgetary allocation except ICMR.  The ICMR has been allocated less funds to the tune 
of 100 crores. The Committee believes that ICMR is an apex body for medical and biomedical 
research in the country and thus, should be provided with a sufficient budget to meet its intended 
objectives and targets. 
(Para 2.5 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.3.2 The observation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted. The department will seek an 
additional budget from the Ministry of Finance at the RE stage if a need arises. 
 
Recommendation 
1.3.3 The Committee notes that the budgetary allocation for the year 2023-24 of the 
Department of Health Research is only 3.34% of the total health budget as against 3.71% in 
2022-23. So, instead of an increase in the share of allocation for health research this year the 
allocation has witnessed a decline. In 2022, the Committee recommended that budgetary 
allocation to health research should be 5% of the total health budget. The Committee notes that 
its earlier recommendation has not been taken in cognizance and hence would like to reiterate 
that the budgetary allocation to the Department of Health Research should be increased to at 
least 5% of the total health budget as this would help create the necessary healthcare and 
research infrastructure to mitigate future health emergencies.  
(Para 2.7 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.3.4 The observation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted. The matterwill be pursued with the 
Ministry of Finance based on requirementsduring the RE stage. 
 
 

4 
 
1.4 SCHEMES/PROJECTS OF DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH  
Recommendation 
1.4.1 The Committee notes that though the Department has been allocated the exact budget it 
had projected for at the BE stage in 2023-24 but it is actually less than BE 2022-23. The 
Committee feels that while on one hand the mandate of the Department to spread the network of 
VRDLs, MRUs and MRHRUs is increasing every year, the decrease in budgetary allocation acts 
as a retarding force which derails the Department’s objective of strengthening the research, 
testing and diagnostic infrastructure of the country. The Committee is disheartened to note that 
the DHR schemes, which serve a major part of the Department’s mandate, are allocated a mere 
8.25% of the Department’s 2023-24 budget. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
targets set for different DHR schemes should be revaluated and consequently readjusted to meet 
the new challenges post-COVID-19 so that the research, testing and diagnostic infrastructure of 
the country at the primary and secondary levels are better equipped to handle COVID-19 
pandemic situations in the future.  
(Para 3.3 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.4.2 It is stated that the Budget Estimate for 2022-23 and 2023-24 are as under: 
Scheme Budget Provision (crore Rs.) 
2022-23 2023-24 
Multi-Disciplinary Research Units 60.00 60.00 
Model Rural Health Research Units 20.00 20.00 
 
1.3.3 The further recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted for compliance. 
 
1.4 ESTABLISHMENT OF MULTI DISCIPLINARY RESEARCH UNITS (MRUs) IN 
GOVERNMENT MEDICAL COLLEGES/ RESEARCH UNITS 
Recommendation 
1.4.1 The Committee acknowledges the Department’s efforts to promote and encourage medical 
research in the country by developing the infrastructure for research in Government medical 
colleges. The Committee notes that total financial outlay for the year 2021-22 to 2025-26 is Rs. 
288.11 crore. However, in 2022-23, the budgetary allocation for the scheme was reduced from Rs. 
60.00 crores allocated at the BE stage to 48.00 crores at the RE stage out of which till 31.01.2023 

5 
 
the Department has only been able to spend only Rs. 24.66 crores.  The Committee observes that 
with such pace of utilization, it would be difficult for the Department to fully utilize the allocated 
amount of Rs. 288.11 crore for the period 2021-22 to 2025-26. The Committee apprehendsthat 
slackened financial performance wouldlaggard thephysical performance. 
(Para 3.12 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.4.2 The actual Expenditure under the scheme for establishment of MRUs during 2022-23 was 
Rs. 44.73 crore, against RE (2022-23) of Rs. 48.00 crore, amounting to 93.19% expenditure of 
Revised Estimate for that year. The recommendation of theHon’ble committee has, however, been 
noted for guidance. 
 
Recommendation 
1.4.3 The Committee believes that effective implementation of this scheme can bring in the 
much needed revolution in the health research sector of the country as the medical colleges 
which are the bedrock of medical education in the country can set the ball rolling in developing 
the thinking process and innovative mindset to improve the understanding of pathogens, diseases 
and their management. In this context, the Committee recommends that the Department must 
work towards establishing a Multi-Disciplinary Research Unit in each of the Government 
Medical Colleges in the country. Furthermore, taking cue from the Hon’ble Finance Minister’s 
recent announcement in the Budget 2023-24 speech wherein the Finance Minister  announced 
that “facilities in select ICMR labs will be made available for research by public and private 
medical college faculty and private sector Research & Developments teams for encouraging 
collaborative research and innovation”, the Committee recommends that the Department must 
explore the possibility of establishing MRUs in the private medical colleges as well which would 
certainly boost the public-private collaborationin health research. 
(Para 3.13 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.4.4 As at the end of the year 2022-23, thetotal number of new Multi-Disciplinary Research 
Units stood at 115. The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee has, however, been noted for 
compliance. 
 
Recommendation 
1.4.5 The Committee notes that there are no VRDLs in the states of Nagaland and Sikkim. The 
Committee, in its 135th report had recommended that DHR should work in association with the 
State Governments of Nagaland and Sikkim and set up VRDL in these States. The Department in 

6 
 
its Action Taken Notes had responded that DHR will explore the potential sites in these States for 
the establishment of VRDLs. The Committee reiterates that since VRDLs are key to mitigating 
challenges posed by viral pandemics, the DHR should put in concerted efforts to work towards 
establishing VRDLs in Nagaland, Sikkim and spread the VRDL network in North-Eastern region 
in general.  
(Para 3.15 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.4.6 As per the scheme approval, VRDLs can be set up in the Central Research institutes and 
Government Medical Colleges. There is no institute in Nagaland and Sikkim fulfilling the 
conditionalities of the guidelines for setting up of VRDL therein. As and when such institutes are 
established by the state government, action on the establishment of VRDLs will be taken. 
 
Recommendation 
1.4.7 The Committee further notes that North- Eastern region has the highest caseload of 
cancer in India and there is high incidence of tobacco related Cancer in the North Eastern 
Region. Meghalaya and Arunachal Pradesh are two of the worst affected states in terms of 
incidence of cancer cases. The Committee feels that MRUs can play a key role in cancer research 
in determining factors causing high cancer cases in the North- Eastern region. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Department must establish MRUs in Arunachal Pradesh and 
Meghalaya and fully equip the MRUs with state-of-the-art research facilities so that the effective 
and viable research output can be generated.  
(Para 3.16 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.4.8 So far, 115 Multi-Disciplinary Research Units (MRUs) have been established in Govt. 
Medical Colleges across the country.  Of these 115 Units, the following 13 MRUs are in the 
North Eastern Region. 
S. No State Medical Colleges/MRUs 
1.  Arunachal Pradesh (1) TomoRiba Institute of Health & Medical Sciences 
2.  Assam (7) 
 
Silchar Medical College and Hospital, Silchar 
3.  Jorhat Medical College, Jorhat 
4.  Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed Medical College, Barpeta 
5.  Assam Medical College and Hospital, Dibrugarh 
6.  Gauhati Medical College, & Hospital, Guwahati  
7.  Diphu Medical College & Hospital, Diphu 

7 
 
S. No State Medical Colleges/MRUs 
8.  Tezpur Medical College & Hospital 
9.  Manipur (2) Regional Institute of Medical Sciences, Imphal 
10.  Jawaharlal Nehru Institute of Medical Sciences, Imphal 
11.  Mizoram (1) Zoram Medical College, Falkwan 
12.  Nagaland (1) Naga Hospital Authority, Kohima 
13.  Tripura (1) Agartala Govt. Medical College, Agartala 
 
1.4.9 Of all the Research Projects underway in MRUs 19.05% are in the field of Cancer only. 
The recommendation of the Committee has, however, been noted for further guidance. 
 
1.5 ESTABLISHMENT OF MODEL RURAL HEALTH RESEARCH UNITS (MRHRUs) 
Recommendation 
1.5.1 The Committee notes that MRHRUs are key to create infrastructure for transfer of 
technology to rural areas for improving the quality of health services. The Committee observes 
that the Department has not been able to meet its target of setting up 2 MRHRUs for the year 
2022-23 accordingly the budget allocated for the scheme has also remainedunutilised. The 
Committee urges the Department to realize the importance of the scheme and work assiduously 
towards achieving the intended targets. The Committee further recommends that the Department 
should revise the overall target of the scheme for the year 2021-22 to 2025-26 to better utilize the 
allocated budget of Rs. 192.36 crore and increase the spread of MRHRU to nourish the rural 
health research infrastructure.  
(Para 3.18 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.5.2 During the year 2022-23, three (03) Model Rural Health Research Units (MRHRUs) were 
sanctioned against the target of two. The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee has, 
however, been noted for guidance. 
 
1.6 PRIME MINISTSER ATMA NIRBHAR BHARAT HEALTH INFRASTRUCTURE 
MISSION (PM-ABHIM) 
Recommendation 
1.6.1 The Committee notes that 2021-22 is the second year of the implementation of the PM- 
ABHIM scheme. The Committee observes that the Department has been able to utilise just about 
20% of its BE allocation. Considering that the scheme has a fixed timeline for completion, the 

8 
 
Committee is surprised that the activities under the scheme have not moved beyond nascent 
stages of implementation. The Committee feels that the Department should have worked out the 
details of the activities under the scheme well in advance so that funds allocated for the 
implementation of these activities do not remain idle. The Committee recommends the 
Department to expedite the processes and complete the procedural formalities viz. tendering and 
allocation of projects at the earliest so that implementation of the scheme does not fall far behind 
the schedule. The Committee is disheartened to observe that the Department has done little 
preparatory exercise before implementing the components of such a crucial scheme. However, 
the Committee is hopeful that the Department will do a course correction and iron out the chinks 
in its processes to finish the projects under the scheme within the deadline.   
(Para 3.23 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.6.2 The civil work for the establishment of the National Institute of One Health and 04 
regional NIVs has been assigned to the CPWD who in turn floated the tenders. The civil works 
have not been commenced as tenders have not been finalized except for Bangaluru regional NIV 
for which a contract has been awarded to an agency for executing the civil work with the starting 
date as 01.04.2023 to be completed within 15 months of the award of contract. The Department 
has been monitoring the progress of various activities under the scheme constantly. Intense 
efforts are being made to complete the tendering process so that the construction activities may 
be started as soon as possible.  
1.6.3 ICMR has also formed a dedicated team specifically for the implementation of PM-
ABHIM without further lag.  
 
Recommendation 
1.6.4 The Committee notes that all the critical projects viz. Institute for one Health, Nagpur, 
four regional NIVs, and a Regional Research Platform for WHO South East Asia Region under 
the PM-ABHIM are yet to see the light of the day. The Committee views the shift in location of 
NIV from Chandigarh to Jammu as a lack of Coordination between the Department and State 
Government. The Committee feels that such last minute changes only cause unnecessary delays 
in the projects and in that turn procrastinate the completion of the other associated projects. The 
Committee recommends the Department finish the tendering process at the earliest and begin the 
civil construction work so as to adhere to the deadline of finishing the projects within 15 months.  
(Para 3.27 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.6.5 The work has been assigned to the CPWD who in turn floated the tenders. The civil 
works have not been commenced as tenders have not been finalized except for Bangaluru 

9 
 
regional NIV for which contract has been awarded to an agency for executing the civil work with 
the starting date as 01.04.2023 to be completed within the 15 months of the award of contract. 
The Department has been monitoring the progress of various activities under the scheme 
constantly. Intense efforts are being made to complete the tendering process so that the 
construction activities may be started as soon as possible. 
 
Recommendation 
1.6.6 The Committee also recommends the Department to complete the signing of MoU work 
with remaining member countries for the Regional Research Platform for WHO South East Asia 
Region and begin the civil construction work at the earliest.  
 (Para 3.28 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.6.7 The status of bilateral MoUs is as follows: 
i. MoUs have been signed by ICMR with Department of Medical Research (DMR), 
Ministry of Health and Sports of Myanmar, Myanmar in February, 2020 and with 
Nepal Health Research Council (NHRC), Nepal in January, 2021; Department of 
Medical Services (DMS), Thailand on 17th Aug, 2022  
ii. MoU finalised with Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC), Bangladesh and 
ready for obtaining GoI clearances for signing. 
iii. MoU drafted and under consultation with MOH, Maldives.  
iv. Connected and shared MoU with MOH, Bhutan, awaiting a response.  
v. Connected and shared MoU with MOH, Sri Lanka recently, awaiting a response.  
vi. Efforts are being made to connect with the interested counterpart agencies of ICMR-
DHR in Indonesia, Timor Leste. 
 
1.7 INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH, NEW DELHI 
Recommendation 
1.7.1 The Committee is pleased to note that budgetary allocation to ICMR and actual 
expenditure has witnessed a gradual increase over the past four financial years. The Committee, 
however, still feels that the budgetary allocation to the ICMR- the country’s premier medical 
research institution is not commensurate with the constantly expanding mandate of the ICMR. 
The Committee notes that the COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the importance of investing in 
an integrated regional, State and National level research infrastructure to protect the health of a 
Nation. The Committee notes that most of the budget allocated for research in India is generally 
allocated to domains like atomic research, defense research and space research as a result India 
has done remarkably well in these sectors, however the most basic but most important sector i.e. 
research in health has often been under funded. For instance, both CSIR and ICMR were 

10 
 
established in 1940s; however, today CSIR has grown exponentially with almost double 
budgetary allocation than ICMR.  
 
(Para 4.4 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.7.2 We thank the committee for their concern.  
1.7.3 ICMR has witnessed a gradual increase in budget allocation over the past few years. 
ICMR is developing new programmes and schemes to boost extra and intramural research in 
alignment with national health priorities. It will request sufficient grants during the next demand 
for grants. 
 
Recommendation 
1.7.4 Taking note of the budget allocation to the research councils, the Committee observes 
that the public investment in health research is still grossly insufficient. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that to develop and strengthen the health research infrastructure and 
invigorate the zeal for medical research in a diverse and vast country like India requires 
significant funding. The Committee is of the view that the DHR must come up with a strategic 
roadmap to increase its activities and enhancing its existing schemes/programmes/facilities. This 
would enable the Department to seek enhanced budget allocation and thereby increasing the 
funds available for health research. 
(Para 4.5 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.7.5 A 6-point strategic roadmap is prepared to enhance ICMR’s activities. The strategic 
directions include Focus research on finding solutions, establishingthe National Health Research 
Program, Re-vision ICMR institutes @2047, reforming Intramural and Extramural grants of 
ICMR, accelerate vaccines, therapeutics, diagnostics, devices, and strengtheningthe research 
ecosystem through DHR. An enhanced demand for grants would be made accordingly. 
 
Recommendation 
1.7.6 The Committee notes that ICMR spent around Rs. 1300 crores for research purposes in 
FY 2022-23. The Committee opines that considering India is facing multiple challenges on health 
front like rise in communicable diseases, non-communicable diseases like hypertension, Cancer 
and severe malnutrition, anemia in various pockets of the country, there is urgent need for ICMR 
to spend much more than Rs. 1300 crores on research. Limited budgetary allocation for research 
in health is a major reason behind the slow progress in the field of medical research The 

11 
 
Committee feels that lack of research is a systemic problem that pervades through entire 
hierarchy of health system viz. medical colleges, institutes, hospitals and research institutions. 
The Committee believes that to promote research, the ICMR should further increase its 
extramural expenditure. ICMR should operate in cohesion with managements of Government 
medical colleges, top faculties of such colleges should be identified and provided with a certain 
amount per year as research grants, this may help generate more research output.  
(Para 4.7 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.7.7 In order to bring about comprehensive reforms in the grant funding process, the ICMR is 
implementing changes to both intramural and extramural grants. For intramural grants, a priority-
based approach is being adopted, ensuring that funding is directed towards cutting-edge research 
that aligns with identified research priorities. To ensure high scientific quality, a two-step review 
process will be implemented, which includes rigorous evaluations by expert panels. On the other 
hand, extramural grants will be primarily investigator-initiated, encouraging researchers to 
propose innovative solutions to pressing healthcare challenges. There would be a clear firewall 
between intramural andextramural grants and thus extramural grants will not be made available to 
ICMR scientists.  Additionally, there will be robust monitoring mechanisms in place to ensure the 
quality and timely delivery of research outcomes. It is worth noting that fellowships will only be 
awarded from the Department of Health Research (DHR) funds, indicating a focused approach 
towards supporting promising researchers in their pursuit of advanced training and research in 
medical and health sciences. Through these reforms, the ICMR aims to foster a vibrant research 
ecosystem that encourages excellence, innovation, and impactful contributions to the field of 
medical research. 
 
Recommendation 
1.7.8 The ICMR, in association with National Medical Commission (NMC) should come out 
with policy/ guidelines to promote interest for medical research amongst undergraduate/ 
postgraduate medical students, students need to be exposed to research and not take it as an 
added burden. The policy/ guidelines should include ways to ensure that research should be part 
of the teaching program and adequate funds should be provided to ensure facilities and 
infrastructure for the same.  
(Para 4.8 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.7.9 The Department of Health Research (DHR) is dedicated to strengthening the research 
ecosystem in India. As part of its efforts, the DHR is developing a National Health Research 
Policy that places emphasis on enhancing research capacity and translating evidence into 
actionable outcomes. To bolster research capacity, the DHR is establishing Multi-disciplinary 

12 
 
Research Units in medical colleges and Model Rural Health Research Units to facilitate high-
quality research in diverse settings. The department also provides fellowships, including 
opportunities for PhD studies, to support the development of skilled researchers. The 
establishment of the ICMR Academy will further contribute to building research expertise through 
training and capacity-building initiatives. 
1.7.10 However, observation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted for compliance. 
 
1.8 COVID-19 Pandemic and Stepped Care Model for Perinatal Depression in Rural 
India: Lessons Learned and the Way Forward 
Recommendation 
1.8.1 The Committee notes that the COVID-19 pandemic has had a severe and long-lasting 
impact on the mental health and well-being of the people, in addition, limited access to mental 
health services has only worsened the situation. Also, no comprehensive study/ data on the 
impact of COVID-19 on mental health until now have been made available. The Committee, 
therefore, is happy to note that the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) along with the 
State Government of West Bengal is conducting a survey on COVID-19 infected patients to 
assess their mental health and recommends ICMR to do a similar survey at pan India level. The 
Committee believes that a comprehensive nation-wide survey particularly on the impact of 
Covid-19 on mental health may be helpful in ascertaining the mental hardships and trauma faced 
by people during the times of pandemic and the findings thus generated may be helpful in 
upgrading and improving the mental health services during public health emergencies and 
disasters in the future. The Committee also recommends the ICMR to explore the possibility of 
using the ‘Stepped Care Model’ to address the depression issues in old age population and 
jobless youth.  
(Para 4.20 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.8.2 ICMR has conducted severalstudies about mental health, especially during 
COVID:Assessment of post COVID symptoms and pre-existing healthImpairments in individuals 
aged 18 and older who have recovered from COVID-19 (a national level ongoing study including 
assessment of mental health and quality of life );  Mental Health Problems in COVID-19: A 
Multi-centric Study in Eastern and North Eastern India ( that shows  COVID-19 has impacted 
mental health of Indian population);  Psychological distress and burnout among healthcare 
worker during COVID-19 pandemic in India—A cross-sectional study (reported  risk of 
psychological distress was higher among HCWs);  Psychosocial impact of COVID-19 pandemic 
on healthcare workers in India & their perceptions on the way forward - A qualitative study ( 
HCWs report major changes in work-life environment that included excessive workload with 
erratic timings accentuated with the extended duration of inconvenient personal protection 

13 
 
equipment usage, periods of quarantine and long durations of separation from family);  COVID-
19 Pandemic and Stepped Care Model for Perinatal Depression in Rural India: Lessons Learned 
and the Way Forward ( Despite many challenges, the stepped care model was found to be 
sustainable, effective, and feasible for providing mental health services in the remote and rural 
regions of India). However, the observation of the committee is noted for compliance. 
 
1.9 DIAMOnDS - Oncopathology Services: Establishing DHR-ICMR Advance Molecular 
Oncology Diagnostic Services (DIAMOnDS) 
Recommendation 
1.9.1 The Committee observes that India is facing an unprecedented surge in non-
communicable diseases and Cancer is one such chronic disease which is growing at an alarming 
rate in India. Unfortunately, India’s healthcare system particularly outside urban centers are not 
equipped to handle this surge due to the acute paucity of diagnostic and treatment facilities. With 
the epidemic of Cancer lurking like any epidemic, the ICMR must devote more time and fundsto 
Cancer Research Projects that are aimed at how to make cancer treatment more affordable and 
accessible. The Committee is of the opinion that stress should be on the need for cancer 
prevention, early diagnosing, and screening. The Committee, therefore, recommends the ICMR to 
spread the network of such oncopathology labs under the DIAMOnDS scheme. The ICMR should 
set up more such labs in North-Eastern States where the incidence of Cancer is higher than other 
States. DHR/ICMR should use the infrastructure of Multi-Disciplinary Research Units which 
have a much bigger network to provide early detection, screening and diagnostic facilities for 
cancer. The Committee was informed that ICMR has issued Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP) for treatment of few types of Cancer.  The Committee recommends the ICMR to issue SOP 
for all types of Cancer treatment including surgery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy and 
palliative therapy.  
(Para 4.23 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.9.2 Under ICMR-India Cancer Research Consortium, Therapeutic, Diagnosis and Prevention 
are major pillars under which projects on prevention, early diagnosis and affordable technique are 
ongoing. Accessebility and Affordability are major areas of focus. Under ICMR-NCG, clinical 
trials for affordable treatment are planned. 
1.9.3 17 centres have been established under the DIAMOnDS Scheme for providing free of 
cost molecular oncopathology diagnostic services to the lung and breast cancer patients, with 3 
new DIAMOnDS centres to be established every year in India.  

14 
 
1.9.4 Each cancer site has its own specific management protocols and hence can’t be 
generalized for all cancer types. ICMR formulated Consensus Documents for Management of 20 
cancer types and work on 18 cancer sites is underway.  
1.9.5 However, the observation of the Hon’ble committee is noted for compliance. 

15 
 
CHAPTER–II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY'S REPLIES 
 
2.1 ANALYSIS OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS 
Recommendation 
2.1.1 The Committee discerns that the projected demand of Rs. 3080.00 crores for the year 
2023-24 is significantly less than the projected demand for last year i.e. Rs. 3467.65 crores.  The 
Committee wishes to be apprised of the reasoning behind lower projection of demands compared 
to last year’s projections, especially after considering the fact that with each passing year the 
responsibility and objectives of the Department are expanding and getting more comprehensive.  
(Para 2.2 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.1.2 The projected demand for the last year included an allocation of Rs. 690.00 crores under 
PM-ABHIM comprising Rs. 323.00 crores specifically dedicated to the procurement of Covid-19 
related items such as testing kits, reagents, equipment, etc. Since the procurement of COVID-19-
related items has been decentralized and delegated to the states, no budget has been demanded in 
BE 2023-24. Further, Rs. 367.00 crores was allocated for 2022-23for other major activities which 
include setting up of 9 BSL-3 Labs; Regional Research Platform of the South East Asia Region 
Countries; 4 Zonal National Institutes of Virology (NIVs) at Dibrugarh, Bengaluru, Jammu and 
Jabalpur; Division for Research on Disease Elimination Sciences & Health at National Aids 
Research Institute, Pune; strengthening already functional Viral Research & Diagnostic 
Laboratories (VRDLs)   and support for various other research institutes/Centres to strengthen 
research on the pandemic, etc. 
2.1.3 A substantial amount has already been released to set up the institutes during 2022-23. 
However, the civil work activities have not been started in full flow. Therefore, the amount for 
these activities has been capped as per the requirement resulting in a decrease in budget demand 
for the year 2023-24 as compared to 2022-23. 
 
2.1.4 However, when the need arises, the Department will seek additional budget from the 
Ministry of Finance at the RE stage. 
 
Recommendation 
2.1.5 The Committee observes that the projected demand by the Department and the 
corresponding budgetary allocation to the Department in the last three financial years i.e. 2020-

16 
 
21, 2021-22, and 2022-23 has seen a consistent increase, however, financial year (FY) 2023-24 
bucks this trend. In 2023-24, both projected demand and BE allocation have seen a decline in 
comparison to the FY 2022-23. The Committee notes that in 2023-24 numerous big-ticket 
projects like the establishment of 4 National Institute of Virology, Centre for One Health, 
multiple BSL-III labs along with critical research projects to fight TB, communicable and non-
communicable diseases would be undertaken by the Department. The Committee believes that the 
projected demand for the year 2023-24 is perhaps incommensurate with the Department’s 
proposed projects. Therefore, the Committee feels that the budgetary allocation to the 
Department for the year 2023-24 is grossly insufficient andrecommends that DHR/ICMR should 
revisit the allocation made and seek additional funds at the RE stage to achieve the set targets for 
the FY 2023-24.  
(Para 2.3 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.1.6 The increase in budget over the yearssince 2020-21 was due to the emergence of the 
Covid-19 pandemic in the country. Theamounts of Rs. 2100.00 crores, Rs. 526.28 crores, and Rs. 
323.00 crores were allocated for Covid-19 related procurement in the years 2020-21, 2021-22 and 
2022-23 respectively. Since the procurement of COVID-19-related items has been decentralized 
and delegated to the states no budget has been demanded in BE 2023-24. Further, a substantial 
amount has already been released to set up the institutes during 2022-23. However, the civil work 
activities have not been started in full flow. Therefore, the amount for these activities has been 
capped as per the requirement resulting in a decrease in budget demand for the year 2023-24 as 
compared to 2022-23  
2.1.7 However, when the need arises, the Department will seek additional budget from the 
Ministry of Finance at the RE stage. 
 
 
2.2 ANALYSIS OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS  
Recommendation  
2.2.1 The Committee was informed that the projected demand for each of the schemes has been 
allocated the desired funds with the exception of ICMR.  As against a projected demand of 
Rs.2459.58 crores only an amount of Rs.2359.58 crores have been allocated for ICMR in the BE 
2023-24. 
(Para 2.4 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.2.2 Matter of record. 

17 
 
 
Recommendation 
2.2.3 The Committee notes that the actual health research expenditure as percentage of GDP 
has been constant at 0.02 since 2021-22. Over the years there has been a consistentdemand for 
increase in the public expenditure on health research and with COVID-19 pandemic highlighting 
the importance of funding research in health, the Committee notes that health research 
expenditure as percentage of GDP is still very less. Given the population size of the country and 
its recent sour experiences particularly during second wave of the pandemic COVID-19, the 
Committee feels that there is a serious need to substantially increase the Government expenditure 
on health research infrastructure as public health resources, necessary to respond to outbreaks 
like COVID-19 are still weak in India. This would require huge investment for the development of 
clinical research infrastructure, upgradation of testing and diagnostic facilities, human resource 
and capacity development and other support services, hence the capital expenditure component 
desperately requires this transformational push, otherwise continuing with the usual budget 
allocation-expenditure pattern would result in just maintaining the existing system, and not 
reforming and making it ready to tackle the future health emergencies. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that the health research expenditure should gradually be increased to 0.1% of the 
GDP till FY 2025-26.  
(Para 2.9 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.2.4 The concern of the committee is well- appreciated. As already mentioned, Under Pradhan 
Mantri Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission, the expansion of existing research 
capacity would be undertaken for infectious disease emergency preparedness. Provisions have 
been made in the budget to decentralize the load on the National Institute of Virology, Pune 
through the establishment of 4 regional national institutes of virology in four regions (North, 
South, East and Central) of the country. Recently, foundation stones of 3 Zonal NIVs have been 
laid at Bengaluru, Jabalpur and Dibrugarh by the Hon’ble President of India. These NIVs will 
help in efficiently countering the threats of viral pandemics/epidemics in the future. To build bio 
safety and bio security-enabled infrastructure, budget 2021 proposes to upgrade 5 viral research & 
diagnostics labs into BSL–III laboratories and setting up of 4 mobile BSL-III labs. These will be 
used in outbreak situations for rapid processing and testing of specimens related to vector-borne, 
human, animal and environment etc. 
2.2.5 Apart from that ICMR is developing new programmes and schemes to boost extra and 
intramural research in alignment with national health priorities. It will request sufficient grants 
during next demand for grant. 
 
 

18 
 
2.3 Budget Utilization Trends 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.1 The Committee notes that in every financial year, the unused fund is a significant 
percentage of RE allocation. The Committee further observes that year after year the reasons 
behind the inability to fully utilise the allocated fund are same i.e. non-filling up of vacant posts, 
slow pace of expenditure under the schemes, ICMR and under the NER (north-eastern region), 
the Committee notes that the Department has done little to change the status quo. The Committee 
recommends that the Department must develop a robust mechanism for constant monitoring of 
projects/ schemes being handled by its implementing agencies/organizationsso as to identify 
without delay the factors causing underutilization of allocated funds. 
(Para 2.13 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.3.2 The plan of expenditure for the year has been discussed in the meetings taken by 
Secretary, DHR in the month of April 2023 in order to ensure that the pace of expenditure is 
monitored on monthly basis from start of the financial year. 
2.3.3 Also, filling up of about 1300 vacant posts in ICMR is underway under Rozgar Mission. 
This will increase the capacity of its implementing agencies. 
 
Recommendation 
2.3.4 The Committee while acknowledging that the boost in domestic production led to steep 
fall in prices of testing kits, testing equipment/ machines, reagents, etc., believes that the 
unutilized funds under this head could have been used by the Department to fund its underfunded 
schemes and the whole gamut of research activities, studies, awareness projects, etc. The 
Committee opines that the instances of underutilization of allocated funds have a negative 
bearing on the Department’s prospects of getting higher budgetary allocation in the succeeding 
financial year. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to develop a visionary 
approach and boost the fund absorption capacity of its implementing agencies so that the 
allocated funds are not surrendered at the end of the financial year. 
(Para 2.14 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.3.5 The plan of expenditure for the year has been discussed in the meetings taken by the 
Secretary, DHR in the month of April 2023 in order to ensure that the pace of expenditure is 
monitored on a monthly basis from the start of the financial year. 
2.3.6 Also, the filling up of about 1300 vacant posts in ICMR is underway under the Rozgar 
Mission. This will increase the capacity of its implementing agencies. 

19 
 
Recommendation 
2.3.7 The Committee observes that in FY 2022-23, PM - Ayushman Bharat Health 
infrastructure Mission (PM-ABHIM) scheme is the major laggard as far as the expenditure of the 
allocated fund is concerned. The scheme was allocated Rs. 690.00 crores in BE 2022-23, which 
was reduced to Rs. 378.27 crores in RE 2023-24 and out of this reduced budget the Department 
has only been able to spend Rs. 135.56 crores till date i.e. fund to the tune of Rs. 242.71 crores 
still remain unused. The Committee feels that the Department should have done the preparatory 
work viz. exploring expenditure avenues of the new scheme well in advance so that funds 
allocated do not remain unutilized.  
(Para 2.17 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.3.8 The fund allocation under PM-ABHIM for the year 2022-23 was meant to be utilized 
mainly on procurement of testing kits, reagents, lab equipment related to Covid-19 testing, 
establishment of 04 regional NIVs, Centre for One Health, and strengthening of VRDLs labs, etc.  
2.3.9 As covid-19 cases has significantly reduced, an amount of Rs. 81.00 crores only were 
utilized out of Rs. 323.00 crores allocation. The civil works related to the establishment of the 
regional NIVs, Centre for One Health, have not been commenced as tenders have not been 
finalized except for the Bangaluru regional NIV for which a contract has been awarded to an 
agency for executing the civil work with the starting date as 01.04.2023 to be completed within 
the 15 months of the award of contract. The Department has been monitoring the progress of 
various activities under the scheme constantly. 
 
2.4 ESTABLISHMENT OF NETWORK OF VIRAL RESEARCH AND DIAGNOSTIC 
LABORATORIES FOR MANAGING EPIDEMICS AND NATURAL CALAMITIES 
Recommendation 
2.4.1 The Committee notes that the target of the Department is to set up 166 VRDLs up to 
2025-26 out of which 146 VRDLs have already been established and for the year 2023-24 the 
Department has planned to set up 9 more VRDLs, thus achieving total number of VRDLs at the 
end of FY 2023-24 to 155. The Committee further notes that though the Department has set up 
146 VRDLs as on 21.02.2023, there are still many regions which have remained uncovered. 
Union Territories like Ladakh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep do not have a single 
VRDL. Similarly, the number of VRDLs in the central part of India and eastern UP is not 
commensurate with the population of these regions. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Department to revise its target for setting up of VRDLs till 2025-26 and increase the spread of 
VRDLs in the uncovered regions of the country as a priority. The Committee also feels that at 
least one regional-level VRDL should be established in bigger states like Andhra Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Maharashtra and UP. The Committee further recommends that all the 

20 
 
VRDLs in the country should be strengthened with the sequencing infrastructure to facilitate the 
genomic surveillance of infectious agents, further, all the regional level VRDLs should be 
strengthened with the BSL-3 facility to combat any future epidemics/pandemics more effectively. 
(Para 3.8 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.4.2 As per the scheme guidelines, the VRDL can be established in medicalcolleges, Research 
institutes, Military hospitals, Railway hospitals, and AYUSH hospitals only. The best possibilities 
are being explored for establishing diagnostic laboratories having appropriate sites in the UTs like 
Ladakh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep.  
2.4.3 The expansion of the VRDL network is in progress. Equal geographical coverage to the 
whole country is being taken care of while considering new proposals, however, special emphasis 
will be given to central India and Eastern UP. 
2.4.4 Targets for the sanction of Regional VRDLs under the scheme, have already been 
achieved. However, 5 new BSL-III labs are being established under PM-ABHIM. 
2.4.5 All the regional VRDLs have the provision for establishment of BSL-3 and genomic 
sequencing facilities and funds for the same have already been released.  
2.4.6 A total of five BSL-3 under the regional VRDL (AIIMS Bhopal, AIIMS Jodhpur, 
JIPMER Puducherry, PGIMER Chandigarh, and RMRC Dibrugarh) have already been made 
operational, and remaining (GMC Kozhikode, AIIMS Delhi, NICED Kolkata, RMRC 
Bhubaneshwar, AIIMS Patna, and AIIMS Bilaspur) are under various stages of setup e.g., site 
selection, tendering, construction, validation etc.   
 
Recommendation 
2.4.7 The Committee appreciates that the Department is on course to achieve the target of setting 
up 12 VRDLs in the financial year 2022-23. The Committee, however, recommends the Department 
to take proactive efforts and guide the State Governments to identify the location for setting up of 
VRDLs well in advance and then submit their proposals for setting up of VRDLs within the 
deadline so as to avoid undue delay in establishing VRDLs.  
(Para 3.10 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.4.8 The target for setting up 12 VRDLs has already been achieved for the financial year 2022-
23. DHR invites the proposal through the state govt. for setting up VRDLs. Various meetings 
have been conducted with the State Govt. officials for prioritizing the locations for the new 
VRDLs. Also, a provision has been made wherein the stage Governments have an online facility 
to submit their proposals. 

21 
 
2.5 PRIME MINISTSER ATMA NIRBHAR BHARAT HEALTH INFRASTRUCTURE 
MISSION (PM-ABHIM) 
Recommendation 
2.5.1 The Committee welcomes the decision to set up one Integrated Public Health 
Laboratories (IPHL) in all the districts of the country, the Committee hopes that network of IPHL 
along with VRDLs which are set up at regional, state, and medical college levels, will greatly 
improve the common citizen’s access to efficient, cost-effective, and quality laboratory services in 
the remotest corner of the country.  
(Para 3.26 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.5.2 Setting up of IPHLs is within the mandate of IDSP/NCDC. ICMR/DHR VRDLs are 
closely linked with the IPHLs and are involved in investigating the etiologies of samples where 
diagnosis cannot be established by the IPHLs and also undertake training and capacity building 
for IPHL staff. 
 
Recommendation 
2.5.3 The Committee acknowledges the efforts of the Department to increase the number of 
BSL-III labs functioning in the country. The Committee appreciates the Department’s innovative 
concept to set up Mobile BSL-III van. The Committee feels that such mobile laboratories are the 
best possible solution to provide on-site diagnosis with a rapid turnaround in remote and 
unreachable areas of the country where it is difficult to set up brick-and-mortar lab facilities.  
The Committee recommends the Department to set up more such mobile BSL-III labs and also to 
commence operations in all 29 BSL labs at the earliest.   
(Para 3.30 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.5.4 ICMR has procured two mobile BLS-3 vans on lease rental. These vans are currently 
stationed at NIV-Pune and RMRC-Gorakhpur. In addition, there is a provision for procurement 
of four (04) mobile BSL-3 vans under Prime Minister-Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure 
Mission (PM-ABHIM) scheme, which will be deployed in different parts of the country. 
Presently, the procurement of Mobile BSL-3 vans is under pipeline. 
2.5.5 Intense efforts are ongoing to operationalize all BSL-3. This includes periodic audits, site 
visits, troubleshooting and provision of adequate funding. 
 

22 
 
2.6 INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH, NEW DELHI 
Recommendation 
2.6.1 The Committee feels that ICMR has a very important role, particularly in the current 
post-COVID scenario where there is a sudden surge in myocardial infarctions in seemingly fit 
people. The Committee is glad to note that ICMR has taken cognizance of this issue and has set 
approaches to investigate the causes behind these unexplained death cases. The Committee is 
hopeful that adequate budgetary support will be provided to undertake these studies and it will 
be completed in a time-bound manner. The Committee notes that though there is insufficient 
evidence/data to prove whether these sudden deaths have been due to COVID-19 vaccines, but 
these cases of sudden deaths due to myocardial infarctions have definitely increased post-
COVID. The Committee, therefore, recommends the ICMR to give evidence-based clarification 
on the basis of the findings of its planned studies on this.  
(Para 4.10 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.6.2 This study is currently ongoing, and results will be shared once it has been completed. 
 
2.7 INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH, NEW DELHI 
Recommendation 
2.7.1 The Committee acknowledges the positive attitude of DHR/ICMR towards achieving the 
goal of eradicating TB by 2025. The Committee takes note of the measures and research projects 
undertaken by ICMR to fight TB and arrest its further spread. The Committee notes the 
effectiveness of “TrueNat” in detecting MDR-TB and recommends ICMR to ensure availability of 
“TrueNat” in all the PHCs and CHCs of the country. The Committee also recommends the ICMR 
to expedite the clinical trials, follow ups and other approvals of the VPM1002 and MIP vaccines 
for TB, so that these vaccines can be rolled out for public use at the earliest. The Committee 
further recommends the DHR/ICMR to spread awareness regarding TB amongst masses by 
taking comprehensive measures viz. through advertisements during sports tournaments like IPL, 
commercials before movies (like tobacco control programme for Cancer) in cinema halls.  
(Para 4.14 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.7.2 ICMR/DHR is working hand-in-glove with the central TB division of the MoH&FW to 
implement various demonstration projects on TB in close partnership with the program. Special 
efforts are being undertaken to ensure that research conducted on TB is aligned to generate 
evidence and assist the program in eliminating TB.  

23 
 
2.7.3 Follow-up of participants enrolled in the clinical trial of VPM1002 and MIP vaccines for 
TB is currently ongoing and will be completed by March 2024. Results are expected to be 
available in the second quarter of 2024. 
 
Recommendation 
2.7.4 The Committee notes that the twin problem of malnutrition and tuberculosis pose 
challenge to Health orders in considerable magnitude in certain States in the country. These two 
problems tend to interact with each other as nutritional status is significantly lower in patients 
suffering from tuberculosis. Similarly, malnutrition can lead to immunodeficiency which 
increases the person’s susceptibility to infection. In this light, the Government’s push for ‘Shree 
Anna’ (coarse grains) or millets as announced in Union Budget 2023-24 can play a key role in 
addressing the challenge of malnutrition particularly in children in India. The Committee 
therefore recommends the ICMR to undertake a research project in coordination with Indian 
Institute of Millet Research and develop a diet chart constituting different types of Shree Anna 
including Raagi, Bajra, Jowar, Ramdana, etc. The Committee is hopeful that this diet chart if 
included in PM-POSHAN (Pradhan Mantri Poshan Shakti Nirman) Scheme can go a long way in 
improving the nutritional status of children in India and thereby reducing the TB caseload in the 
country.   
(Para 4.15 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.7.5 The data generated by ICMR in the Nationwide TB prevalence survey indicates that 
malnutrition i.e. Body Mass Index (BMI) of <18.5, significantly increases the risk of TB 
occurrence. In another study conducted by ICMR in Chhattisgarh, it was seen that by adding 
nutritional supplements to the family contacts of TB patients, the overall incidence decreases by 
up to 50%. This underscores the importance of improving the nourishment of people to reduce 
the incidence of TB. 
2.7.6 ICMR is exploring through various avenues, in collaboration with MoH&FW and NITI 
Aayog on various ways to provide nutritional supplements to TB patients in selected districts to 
demonstrate the utility of this intervention in TB elimination, in addition to other interventions. 
 

24 
 
CHAPTER–III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
3.1 Health Technology Assessment in India (HTAIn) 
Recommendation 
3.1.1 The Committee notes that HTA is an invaluable tool as health budget in India is still 
insufficient. HTA is a key tool as it takes into account multiple factors such as cost effectiveness, 
reliability of technology, pricing, budget allocations, pricing,  etc. The Committee feels that 
development of an effective Health Technology Assessment system can significantly reduce out-
of-pocket expenditure which is very high in India and which often results in many Indians falling 
below the poverty line.  The Committee is of the firm opinion that if the system is developed in the 
Indian context,  i.e., considering thelimitations of the Indian healthcare system, as well as the 
economical, cultural, ecological, ethical, and philosophical considerations relevant to Indian 
policymaking, these HTA systems can form the guidelines on decision-making on pricing, price 
cappings, reimbursement and also investments in the Indian healthcare system. 
(Para 1.11 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.1.2 The Health Technology Assessment program has been supporting the Central and the 
State Health Systems for Evidence-baseddecision-making on the implementation of new health 
technologies, revision of health benefit packages, designing of new screening programs, pricing 
and procurement. 
3.1.3 Health Technology Assessment is a sub-scheme under the umbrella scheme of Human 
Resource and capacity development. 
3.1.4 It is also proposed to institutionalize Health Technology Assessment by the creation of an 
attached office in the Department of Health research. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.1.5 The Committee notes that the Department has taken concrete actions to establish 
and support the Health Technology Assessment (HTA) program. The Committee, 
therefore, recommendsthat the program's coverage be expanded to encompass a wide range 
of healthcare interventions, including medical devices, pharmaceuticals, and healthcare 
services. Capacity building and training should be prioritized to develop a skilled 
workforce capable of conducting high-quality assessments. Stakeholder engagementis 

25 
 
essential, including the involvement of patients, healthcare providers, academia, industry 
representatives, and civil society providing diverse perspectives. Transparency, 
accessibility, and accountability should be upheld, and a monitoring and evaluation 
framework should be in place to assess the program's impact on the healthcare system.  
 
3.2 Budget Utilization Trends 
Recommendation 
 
3.2.1 The Committee further notes that it is an established fact that increase in public 
expenditure on health and likewise health research helps reduce Out-Of-Pocket Expenditure 
(OOPE) on health by common citizens. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department 
to utilize the unused funds on spreading the network of testing and diagnostic facilities, bridging 
the critical gaps in infection surveillance systems, funding the research projects to make the 
treatment of chronic diseases like Cancer more affordable and accessible. The Committee is of 
the firm opinion that such measures would not only result in improvement of budget expenditure 
numbers of the Department but also in reducing the Out-Of-Pocket Expenditure (OOPE) on 
health by common citizens.  
(Para 2.15 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.2.2 Under ICMR-NCG, clinical trials for affordable treatment are planned. Under Breast 
Cancer Survival Studies, it is aimed to improve survival rates in breast cancer patients, to begin 
with using the Hub and Spoke model to bring uniformity and also improve quality of life. Under 
the ICMR-India Cancer Research Consortium, Therapeutic and Diagnosis are two major pillars 
under which affordable techniques are being developed.  
3.2.3 17 centers have been established under the DIAMOnDS Scheme for providing free-of-
cost molecular oncopathology diagnostic services to lung and breast cancer patients, with 3 new 
DIAMOnDS centers to be established every year in India for the 15th finance commission period. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.2.4 To strengthen the efforts taken by the Department, the Committee recommends 
creating a sustainable approach to healthcare expansion, emphasizing long-term 
investments in research and development, public awareness campaigns, data monitoring, 
partnerships, capacity building for healthcare professionals, and transparency in fund 
allocation. These measures not only improve the Department's budget expenditure figures 
but also have a profound impact on reducing OOPE for health services. This will ultimately 
benefit the overall health and well-being of the citizens. 
 

26 
 
Recommendation 
3.2.5 The Committee notes that period of PM-ABHIM scheme is from 2021-22 to 2025-26 only 
and DHR/ICMR has a major role in implementing scheme’s key components like bio-security 
preparedness, establishment of Integrated Public Health Laboratories in all 730 districts, setting 
up of a national institution for One Health, 4 New National Institutes for Virology, a Regional 
Research Platform for WHO South East Asia Region and 9 Bio- Safety Level III laboratories. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends the Department to address the shortcomings and 
bottlenecks which are hampering the smooth implementation of projects undertaken by the 
Department under the PM-ABHIM scheme as with only three years left in the period of scheme, 
the Department cannot afford to miss deadlines of completion  of its projects otherwise it will not 
only lead to loss of precious money but also affect  deadlines of other prospective projects.  
(Para 2.18 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.2.6 The work has been assigned to the CPWD who in turn floated the tenders. CPWD has 
awarded the contracts for civil work of regional NIV Bengaluru for completion within a stipulated 
time frame of 15 months.  While the remaining are at various stages of the tendering process.  
Efforts are being made to awardcontracts to the agencies for the commencement of the civil works 
of the remaining regional NIVs as soon as possible. The establishment of Integrated Public 
Health Laboratories in all 730 districts is being dealt with by the NCDC, Department of 
Health and Family Welfare. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.2.7 The Committee further recommends the Department develop a robustproject 
monitoring and management system to track the project execution process closely, establish 
performance metrics, and ensure that every component of the PM-ABHIM scheme is on 
track for timely completion. Streamlining the procurement process is crucial, as it could 
lead to bottlenecks if not done efficiently. Moreover, coordination with the Central Public 
Works Department (CPWD) and other agencies in civil work is important, as it directly 
affects project timelines.In the matter of establishing Integrated Public Health Laboratories 
in 730 districts, close coordination with the Department of Health and Family Welfare and 
NCDC must be establishedfor taking regular updates and advance planning.The 
Department should also do regular reporting on project status and challenges and 
addressthe issues quickly in order that these vital public health initiatives are up to date. 
 
 
 

27 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
 
Health Technology Assessment in India (HTAIn) 
Further Recommendation 
 The Committee notes that the Department has taken concrete actions to establish 
and support the Health Technology Assessment (HTA) program. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the program's coverage be expanded to encompass a wide 
range of healthcare interventions, including medical devices, pharmaceuticals, and 
healthcare services. Capacity building and training should be prioritized to develop a 
skilled workforce capable of conducting high-quality assessments. Stakeholder engagement 
is essential, including the involvement of patients, healthcare providers, academia, industry 
representatives, and civil society providing diverse perspectives. Transparency, 
accessibility, and accountability should be upheld, and a monitoring and evaluation 
framework should be in place to assess the program's impact on the healthcare system.  
(Para 3.1.5) 
Budget Utilization Trends 
Further Recommendation 
 To strengthen the efforts taken by the Department, the Committee recommends 
creating a sustainable approach to healthcare expansion, emphasizing long-term 
investments in research and development, public awareness campaigns, data monitoring, 
partnerships, capacity building for healthcare professionals, and transparency in fund 
allocation. These measures not only improve the Department's budget expenditure figures 
but also have a profound impact on reducing OOPE for health services. This will ultimately 
benefit the overall health and well-being of the citizens. 
(Para 3.2.4) 
Further Recommendation 
 The Committee further recommends the Department develop a robust project 
monitoring and management system to track the project execution process closely, establish 
performance metrics, and ensure that every component of the PM-ABHIM scheme is on 
track for timely completion. Streamlining the procurement process is crucial, as it could 
lead to bottlenecks if not done efficiently. Moreover, coordination with the Central Public 
Works Department (CPWD) and other agencies in civil work is important, as it directly 
affects project timelines. In the matter of establishing Integrated Public Health 
Laboratories in 730 districts, close coordination with the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare and NCDC must be established for taking regular updates and advance planning. 

 
The Department should also do r
address the issues quickly in order that
 
 
A pie-chart depicting the status of action taken by the Department of Health 
Research on the 144th Report has been given hereunder:
 
38%8%Status of action taken by the Department of Health Research in respect of 144th  Report 
28 
The Department should also do regular reporting on project status and challenges and 
quickly in order that these vital public health initiatives 
chart depicting the status of action taken by the Department of Health 
Report has been given hereunder: 
***** 
54%8%Status of action taken by the Department of Health Research in respect of 144th  Report of the CommitteeRecommendations/ Observations accepted by the GovernmentCommittee does not desire to pursue in view of Ministry's repliesCommittee has made further recommendations
egular reporting on project status and challenges and these vital public health initiatives are up to date. (Para 3.2.7) chart depicting the status of action taken by the Department of Health 
  
Status of action taken by the Department of Health Research in respect of 144th  Report Recommendations/ Observations accepted by the GovernmentCommittee does not desire to pursue in view of Ministry's repliesCommittee has made further 