PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
ONE HUNDRED FOURTH REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the One Hundredth Report on Demands for
Grants 2017-18 (Demand No. 43) of the
Department of Health Research
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  20 th December , 2017)
(Laid on the T able of Lok Sabha on  20 th December , 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2017/Agrahayana, 1939 (Saka)
104
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
ONE HUNDRED FOURTH REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the One Hundredth Report on Demands for
Grants 2017-18 (Demand No. 43) of the
Department of Health Research
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  20th December, 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  20 th December , 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2017/Agrahayana, 1939 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................
Chapter-I Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have been accepted by the Committee.......................... 2-5
Chapter-II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire
to pursue in view of the Government's replies................................. 6-9
Chapter-III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee.................... 10-17
Chapter-IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of
the Government are still awaited..................................................... 18
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE.................................................. 19-21
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 23-26

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2017-18)
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Y adav — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Manas Ranjan Bhunia
3. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
4. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
5. Shri Jairam Ramesh
6. Shri Ashok Siddharth
7. Shri K. Somaprasad
8. Dr. C. P . Thakur
9. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
10. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Thangso Baite
12. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chouhan (Nandu Bhaiya)
13. Dr. (Ms.) Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
14. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
15. Dr. K. Kamaraj
16. Shri Arjun Lal Meena
17. Shri Anoop Mishra
18. Shri J.J.T. Natterjee
19. Shri Mahendra Nath Pandey
20. Shri Chirag Paswan
21. Shri C. R. Patil
22. Shri M. K. Raghavan
23. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
24. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde

(ii)
25. Shri Gyan Singh
26. Shri Bharat Singh
27. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
28. Shrimati Rita Tarai
29. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
30. Shri Manohar Utawal
31. Shri Akshay Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Under Secretary
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
Shrimati Gunjan Parashar, Research Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family
Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, hereby present
this One Hundred Fourth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Committee's One Hundredth Report on Demands for
Grants (Demand No.43) of the Department of Health Research, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
for the year 2017-18.
2. The One Hundredth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health
and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th March,
2017. Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report, received from the
Department of Health Research were considered by the Committee at its meeting held on the
12th December, 2017.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on the
12th December, 2017.
N
EW D ELHI; PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV
12th December, 2017 Chairman,
Agrahayana 21, 1939 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Health and Family Welfare,
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
AYUSH : A yurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy,
DHR : Department of Health Research
DBT : Department of Bio-Technology
ECHO : Extension for Community Healthcare Outcome
ICMR : Indian Council of Medical Research
MDRTB : Multi-drug-resistant tuberculosis
MRUs : Multi-Disciplinary Health Research Units
MRHRU : Model Rural Health Research Unit
NAP : National Action Plan
NIMR : National Institute of Malaria Research
NIRT : National Institute of Research in Tuberculosis
NIRTH : National Institute of Research in Tribal Health
NITM : National Institute of Traditional Medicine
RMRC : Regional Medical Research Centre
RNTCP : Revised National TB Control Programme
TB : Tuberculosis
UCs : Utilization Certificates
USFDA : U S Food and Drug Administration
VRDs : V iral Research and Diagnostic Laboratories
VRDL : V irus Research and Diagnostic Laboratory
WHO : Word Health Organisation
XDRTB : Extreme drug Resistant Tuberculosis
(iv)

REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundredth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 43) of
the Department of Health Research for the year 2017-18.
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the 100th Report. They have been categorized as follows:
(i) (Chapter-I) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have been accepted by the Committee: 2.4, 3.4, 3.8, 3.21,4.6, 5.6, 6.3, 7.4
Total - 8
(ii) (Chapter-II) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
in view of the Government's replies: 2.19, 3.10, 3.11, 3.13, 3.18, 6.4, 8.5
Total - 7
(iii) (Chapter-III) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee: 2.1, 2.2, 2.10, 2.11, 2.12, 2.15, 3.6,
3.7, 3.15, 4.7, 5.3, 6.6, 8.3
Total - 13
(iv) (Chapter-IV) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited:
Total - Nil
3. The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.

2
CHAPTER -I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
1.1 The Committee notes that there is a huge, persistent and recurring mismatch between the projected
demand for funds and actual allocation of the schemes/projects of the Department of Health Research.
The Department has informed that it has impacted the implementation of schemes of the DHR by
restricting the sanctioning of new units/labs on priority, providing recurring grants to the ongoing projects
and upgradation of the health research infrastructure of ICMR and pendency of extramural proposals due
to non-availability of budgetary allocation. The Committee is of the view that funds constraint should
not be a hurdle in prioritizing health research and developing new drugs, vaccines and diagnostics.
(Para 2.4)
Action Taken
1.2 Observations of the Hon'ble Committee are noted for compliance.
III. INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH
Recommendation/Observation
1.3 The Committee notes that there is a huge difference in the funds allocated for ICMR against its
projected demand in all the five years from 2013-14 to 2017-18. The shortfall of funds have been
massive by any standard and is certain to have an adverse bearing on the implementation of various
intramural and extramural research projects of ICMR . Given the satisfactory track-record of ICMR in
utilising the budgeted funds, the Committee wonders as to what financial yardstick was applied leading
to a substantially reduced allocation of funds in BE 2017-18 vis-a-vis the projected demand. In view
of the dynamic International health research environment and the current and future health challenges
of the country, the role of ICMR is very crucial in generating new knowledge in frontier areas of research
in health and related issues. Taking note of the written submission of the Department that an additional
amount of 
`835.00 crore is required for 2017-18 to meet the needs of the Department in new and
emerging areas of health research as per national priorities, the Committee in the earlier part of this
Report has recommended allocation of the additional amount for the Department. The Committee
simultaneously recommends to the Department to deploy the available resources for cutting edge research
for diseases and translating such research into outcomes for tackling diseases which have been prioritized
at National level by the Department of Health Research. (Para 3.4)
Action Taken
1.4 Department appreciates and is thankful to the Hon'ble Committee for highlighting the shortfall of
funds to ICMR and recommending allocation of more funds to meet the needs of emerging areas of
2

3
Health research. As desired, ICMR would take action for prioritizing the research activities in relation to
national health challenges and translating health research outcome for the benefit of the society. ICMR
will deploy its available resources in cutting edge research in the areas like Cancer Research, Diabetes,
Tuberculosis, Innovation and Translational Research, Vector borne diseases, etc.
Recommendation/Observation
1.5 The Committee observes that despite the fact that India contributes disproportionately to the global
disease burden, health research in India is hamstrung by paucity of relevant data and the Secretary (HR)
admitted that "we need large population based surveys" to do meaningful research. The Committee is
of the view that if we are not able to capture relevant data despite the information technology resources
currently available in India, it is indicative of not only infrastructural weaknesses, but suboptimal use
of IT in data collection also. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to develop a strong
database, the Department should work in close coordination with other science agencies, academia, all
research institutes including privately owned research institutes, laboratories, medical universities, medical
colleges and build a strong technology platform for information sharing and research collaborations.
(Para 3.8)
Action Taken
1.6 Managing big data in healthcare generated through multi-dimensional research is a big challenge.
ICMR has now focused its research in big data analytics and it is also proposed to develop a strategy
for data systems and Research Platforms. Major efforts for this will be made under this platform. ICMR
Policy on research data sharing and access will be initiated with establishing a multidisciplinary/multi-
stakeholder committee for developing, guiding and monitoring implementation of policy. It will be followed
by data system organization, creation of a platform for research, disease specific/thematic digital data
repositories and global availability of ICMR generated data in coming years. The MOU recently signed
with Project ECHO will help in this endeavour. ICMR will also work in coordination with other S&T
agencies, medical colleges, Universities for the same.
ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE
Recommendation/Observation
1.7 The Committee observes that the issuing of guidelines for antibiotics use by ICMR to 20 hospitals
is quite recent. The Committee feels that this issue is a serious one which requires immediate attention
and action. The Committee, therefore, believes that a dedicated action plan on antimicrobial resistance,
including antibiotic resistance needs to be prepared by ICMR on a priority basis. The Committee strongly
recommends for standardization of the protocol for the administration of antibiotics and expects that a
process of sensitizing the medical community about the perils of antibiotic resistance should be taken up
on a national scale by involving medical associations, Industry associations, medical academia, media
and other groups. The Committee is also of the view that aggressive awareness generation programmes
regarding use of antibiotics without a prescription must be taken up to educate people in this regard.
(Para 3.21)

4
Action Taken
1.8 A country specific National Action Plan (NAP) has been prepared by all the agencies collectively
under the leadership of WHO. ICMR is a key stakeholder for research and development under NAP.
1.9 For Standardizing administration of Antimicrobials, the ICMR has organized four Antimicrobial
Stewardship workshops to train doctors from 30 hospitals to rationalize antibiotic prescriptions in tertiary
care hospitals.
IV INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT FOR HEALTH RESEARCH
Recommendation/Observation
1.10 The Committee has been given to understand that against the projected outlay 
` `145.00 crore for
2017-18 under the head - Establishment of Network of Laboratories for Managing Epidemics & Natural
Calamities, an allocation of ` 59.00 crore has been made in 2017-18 which is higher than the previous
year's allocation of ` 39.25 crore. The Committee observes that India continues to have epidemics due
to various infectious pathogens and it is imperative to promptly respond to localised outbreaks before
they pose bigger health challenges. It is in this context that building a network of well-equipped viral
diagnostic laboratories is necessary. The Committee recommends that the scheme should not be allowed
to be plagued with under funding and the Department should seek more funds, if needed, at RE stage.
(Para 4.6)
Action Taken
1.11 Requirement of `167.65 crores has been projected for the scheme for the year 2017-18.
V. DEVELOPMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE FOR PROMOTION OF HEALTH RESEARCH
ESTABLISHMENT OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH UNITS (MRUs) IN GOVERNMENT
MEDICAL COLLEGES
Recommendation/Observation
1.12 Against the projected demand of 
`178.00 crore, the scheme has got `36.00 crore only for 2017-18
and this clearly shows that the fund allocation for MRUs is rather low. MRUs are targeted to promote
and encourage quality medical research and provide assistance to State Government medical colleges
across the country to set up appropriate research facilities and carry out focussed research on non-
communicable diseases. Given the growing burden of non-communicable diseases that often require life-
long management, this scheme is of immense importance. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Government should ensure that more resources are allocated to MRUs to give an impetus to medical
research on non-communicable diseases. The Committee also recommends that the MRUs should be
benchmarked with the best institutions in their domain internationally. (Para 5.6)
Action Taken
1.13 A minimum requirement of `145.92 crores has been projected for the year 2017-18 in the proposal
for continuation of the scheme beyond 12th Five Year Plan and upto 2019-20.

5
1.14 Performance of MRUs is being reviewed from time to time by the external experts and guidance
is also provided from the national level on the research activities so that MRUs could emerge as excellent
centres of research in the medical colleges.
VI. ESTABLISHMENT OF MODEL RURAL HEALTH RESEARCH UNITS (MRHRUs) IN THE
STATES
Recommendation/Observation
1.15 The Committee is constrained to note that out of the 15 MRHRUs planned to be established during
the Twelfth Plan period, only 8 MRHRUs have been established which have initiated research activities
and the remaining have either been approved only or are in the pipeline. Evidently, the Department has
lagged behind in achieving the targets set for the 12th Five Year Plan. The Committee would therefore
like the Department to ascertain the exact reasons responsible for non-achievement of the targets and
take corrective measures accordingly so that the intended outcomes are achieved in future and there are
no time and cost overruns due to slippages in implementation of this project. (Para 6.3)
Action Taken
1.16 Against the 12th Plan target to establish 15 MRHRUs, 14 MRHRUs have been approved till date.
All the MRHRUs could not initiate the research activities since the Units were sanctioned in phases
starting from 2013-14 and it took time in the allocation of requisite land by the State Government,
construction of the building, procurement of equipment, recruitment of staff and particularly since it
involved creation of health research infrastructure at the rural level. The implementation of this path
breaking initiative is progressing satisfactorily and outcomes will be visible in the very near future.
VII. DEVELOPMENT OF TOOLS/SUPPORT TO PREVENT OUTBREAK OF EPIDEMICS
1.17 The Committee finds that only ` 46 lakh has been spent out of the total allocation of `2.25 crore
during 2016-17 under the head-Development of Tools/Support to Prevent Outbreak of Epidemics and
expenditure of another `37.00 lakhs is in the pipeline. It is obvious that this project is certain to register
huge savings. The Committee would expect the Department to be more prudent in making their estimates
under this Head and ensure that the funds are fully utilized. (Para 7.4)
Action Taken
1.18 Against the allocation of `2.25 crore in 2016-17, the utilisation upto 31.3.2017 is `1.63 crore, as
follows:
(i) National Institute of Virology, Pune and National Institute of Malaria Research, New Delhi
(`37.00 lakhs) and National Institute of Cholera and Enteric Diseases (NICED), Kolkata
(`8.57 lakhs); (ii) SV Institute of Medical Sciences, Tirupati ( `37.88 lakhs) and King Institute
of Preventive Medicine and Research (KIPMR), Chennai ( `28.07 lakhs) and JIPMER,
Puducherry ( `51.33 lakhs) for activities related to prevention of outbreaks.
1.19 The recommendations of the Committee for exercising prudence in estimating the requirements and
ensuring maximum utilization are noted for compliance.

6
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
UTILISATION CERTIFICATES
Recommendation/Observation
2.1 The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the Department to liquidate the pending UCs.
However, there are still 18 pending UCs which date back to 2013-14 and 2014-15, majority being from
the year 2013-14. The Committee, recommends the Department to adopt a multi-pronged strategy for
liquidation of pending UCs within a period of six months. (Para 2.19)
Action Taken
2.2 Out of the 18 pending UCs, 4 have already been settled. Matter is being followed up with the
concerned medical colleges and Principal Secretaries (Health & 'Family Welfare) of the concerned States
for expeditious submission of the UCs. The need for settlement of the UCs is also emphasized during
the review meetings with the concerned medical colleges.
III. INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH
Recommendation/Observation
2.3 The Committee observes that India is the highest TB burden country in the world and the biggest
challenge from healthcare point of view is increase in incidence of multi drug resistant and XDRTB,
especially in the rural areas. Though the Government has rolled out the administration of Bedaquiline,
the first TB drug approval by the USFDA in over 40 years, in six public health hospitals in the country
to specifically treat multi-drug resistant TB, a lot remains to be done to improve multidrug resistant TB
treatment outcomes. The Committee therefore recommends that ICMR should focus its research on multi-
drug resistant TB strains with a view to discovering potent drug combinations combating MDRTB. The
Committee desires to be apprised of the initiatives taken in this regard. (Para 3.10)
Action Taken
ICMR initiative to tackle MDR-TB:
2.4 In a joint initiative with the Department of Biotechnology and Ministry of Health & Family Welfare,
the ICMR is conducting the evaluation of TruenatRif an indigenous molecular diagnostic kit for diagnosis
of MDR-TB. The test is found to be at par with another imported molecular test Gene Xpert which is
currently being used under Revised National TB Control Programme (RNTCP). The TruenatRif is cost
effective, rapid and can be placed at District Microscopy Centers under RNTCP and will facilitate early
detection of MDR-TB thus preventing transmission and spread of MDR-TB. The kit is currently undergoing
feasibility study under RNTCP which is likely to be completed by August, 2017 and would subsequently
be ready for launch and incorporation under RNTCP.
6

7
2.5 ICMR also plans to initiate therapeutic clinical trials for MDR/XDR TB using regimen containing
new drugs.
2.6 Besides a new molecule Transitmycin has been discovered by National Institute of Research in
Tuberculosis (NIRT) in collaboration with IIT, Madras and Periyar University, which has been found to
be effective in MDR-TB in in-vitro studies. The molecule will be taken forward through series of animal
studies and subsequent human trials for development of the drug for treatment of MDR-TB.
2.7 A landscaping exercise has been completed and new drug leads identified in various national and
international Labs have been identified. These will be taken into pre-clinical and clinical testing in
partnership with industry for new drug development.
TB Elimination Programme:
2.8 ICMR has also initiated efforts to tackle TB in mission mode and have initiated process to establish
a suitable institutional framework to bring together all major national players (with international collaborators)
at one platform to help Revised National Tuberculosis Programme (RNTCP) to achieve TB elimination
by 2025. The framework will also have a strong partnership between Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare and other science agencies, national and international organizations. The vision of the proposed
framework is "To achieve Elimination of TB from India by investing in new tools (drugs, diagnostics,
and vaccines) as well as provide these solutions to the world."
Recommendation/Observation
2.9 The Committee observes that Sickle Cell Anaemia and Thalassemia are endemic in certain areas of
the country, particularly in the tribal areas. Sickle Cell Anaemia and Thalassemia are genetic diseases
and cannot be treated by random medicines. The bone marrow transplant is a cure for Sickle Cell
Anaemia, but very few people are able to get that, both for lack of facilities and prohibitive costs. The
Committee would therefore like the Department to focus its research upon these two diseases with a view
to introducing effective interventions into our healthcare system. (Para 3.11)
Action Taken
2.10 ICMR's National Institute of Immunohematology and National Institute of Research in Tribal Health
(NIRTH), Jabalpur are involved in high quality research in the area of Sikcle Cell Anemia and Thalassemia.
ICMR has developed a test for molecular diagnosis of beta thallassemia. ICMR has also set up a Satellite
Centre for sickle cell anemia at Chanderpur, Maharashtra. These efforts will help in cutting edge research
in both these areas. An inter-ministerial Group has been set up by the Department of Biotechnology
(DBT) with ICMR as partner for management Of Sickle Cell Anemia in the country.
AYUSH-ICMR Collaboration
Recommendation/Observation
2.11 India has a strong foundation and rich heritage of AYUSH systems and provide people options to
avail treatment of their choice. The Committee is of the view that the collaboration of ICMR with
AYUSH is a step in the right direction. Such collaborative efforts will provide documented evidence of

8
the side-effects, contra indications and drug reactions, give credibility to AYUSH systems and also help
in fostering a synergy between the two systems of medicines (i.e. Allopathy and AYUSH). If AYUSH is
to be brought to the global stage, validation of AYUSH drugs is imperative. Therefore, the Committee
recommends to the Department to prepare a framework for validation of classical drugs and according
high priority to AYUSH formulations and facilitating interdisciplinary AYUSH research. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the progress made in this direction. (Para 3.13)
Action Taken
2.12 ICMR is fostering research in area of traditional medicine with the support from its National
Institute of Traditional Medicine (NITM) at Belagavi. It is also planned to leverage traditional knowledge
with an attempt to identify promising research leads for their validation for the public good in collaboration
with Ministry of AYUSH wherein other ICMR institutions will also be involved. For this ICMR has
developed a vision document for leveraging traditional knowledge.
Development of Dengue Vaccine
Recommendation/Observation
2.13 The Committee observes that the introduction of the Sanofi dengue vaccine has safety dimensions
and all caution needs to be exercised to ensure that a situation does not arise where the harm done would
outweigh the benefits therefrom. The Committee also observes that given the high incidences of dengue
in different parts of the country, a definite timeline must be given for the development of dengue vaccine
so that cases of dengue are dealt with properly. The Committee would also like to be apprised about the
expenditure incurred in research for development of dengue vaccine in the last five years.  (Para 3.18)
Action Taken
2.14 ICMR is not directly involved in the development of dengue vaccine and has also not incurred any
expenditure on the same. Presently, the only available vaccine for dengue, globally is Dengvaxia of Sanofi
Pasteur. The vaccine is differentially effective against all four serotypes with least effectiveness for
dengue virus type 2. India lacks cross sectional country wide data on seroprevalence of dengue in the
community. ICMR has, therefore, initiated a study to determine age stratified seroprevalence of dengue
in 15 States of the country. Other related viruses like Chikungunya and JE will also be tested.
VI. ESTABLISHMENT OF MODEL RURAL HEALTH RESEARCH UNITS (MRHRUs) IN THE
STATES
Recommendation/Observation
2.15 In order to ensure success of National Health Programmes at the ground level (i.e. rural area), the
Committee strongly recommends that the Department should explore the possibility of setting up of one
MRHRUs in each State. (Para 6.4)
Action Taken
2.16 In the proposal for continuation of the scheme beyond 12th Five Year Plan and for the period upto
2019-20 (14th Finance Commission Cycle), it is proposed to establish 13 additional MRHRUs, bringing
the total coverage to 28 MRHRUs.

9
VIII. SCHEME OF NORTH EASTERN AREAS
2.17 The Committee notes that major research studies include the cancer registry program, development
of kit for the detection of paragonimiasis and research studies in the area of malaria, cancer, scrub
typhus, rotavirus, nipah virus, West Nile virus, JE, lymphatic filariasis. The Committee would like to
highlight the fact that special attention needs to be given to the North East Region because they lag
behind in health indicators. Given the prioritized focus on the area, the Committee is of the view that
all out efforts need to be made by the Department to utilize the funds in a time bound manner so that
the desired health outcomes for this region are achieved. Further, focused attention should also be given
to development of required infrastructure in this region. (Para 8.5)
2.18 The infrastructure development schemes of Department of Health Research are applicable to the
Government Medical Colleges/Institutions only. The scope of funding projects in NE region is very
limited since there are only 10 medical colleges in the NE region and three States, namely, Arunachal
Pradesh, Mizoram, Nagaland and Sikkim do not have any Government Medical College. However,
presently, 10 medical colleges/institutions are covered under establishment of Viral Research and Diagnostic
Laboratories (VRDs) and Multi-Disciplinary Research Units have been approved in three medical colleges.
2.19 ICMR has only one Institute in NE region i.e. Regional Medical Research Centre (RMRC), Dibrugarh,
which is working in the areas of cancer, JE/AES, Ricketsia, paragonimiasis, etc. and is also having a
Regional Viral Research and Diagnostic Laboratory (VDRL).
2.20 National Institute of Malaria, Delhi has set up a field unit at Guwahati, which is working in the area
of malaria.
2.21 It is also proposed to establish a Biomedical Research Centre at Guwahati for further development
of Health Research infrastructure in the NE region.
2.22 In addition the ICMR has taken initiative to address issues and improve maternal and child health
in the region particularly in Assam as both maternal and under five mortality rates are high in the State.
2.23 It is proposed to set up a demographic and health surveillance site in Assam including the tea garden
areas to build longitudinal data of the population on morbidity and mortality and undertake research
including operation research on key health issues identified.
2.24 Proposal has been formulated for collaboration with TATA Tea Gardens, Dibrugarh, Assam to build
capacity (knowledge and skills) of the health care providers of tea garden hospitals for screening of
cervical, breast and oral cancer.
2.25 To build capacity for research among faculty of medical colleges, universities, Seed Grant programme
has been initiated under which a token grant of ` 20.00 lakh is provided to the investigators to undertake
research project in the North East Region.
2.26 Department has noted the observation of the Committee and will make all attempts to utilise the
funds allocated for North East Region.

10
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
3.1 The total Twelfth Plan outlay (2012-13 to 2016-17) earmarked for the Department of Health
Research (including ICMR) was 
`10029.00 crore. Out of the total outlay, BE allocation from 2012-13
to 2016-17 was `3575.17 crore which was further reduced to `3266.50 crore at RE stage. The actual
expenditure was ` 3180.99 crore for the entire Twelfth Plan Period. The year-wise BE and RE allocations
and actual expenditure under the Plan component during the Twelfth Plan is as follows:
(` in crore)
Financial Year B E RE Actual Expenditure % increase of expenditure
over previous year
2012-13 660.00 464.00 461.84 -
2013-14 726.00 575.00 569.61 23.33
2014-15 726.00 610.00 590.65 3.70
2015-16 713.17 667.60 647.82 9.67
*2016-17 750.00 950.00 911.07 40.66
T
OTAL 3575.17 3266.50 3180.998* 32.56
* Expenditure upto February, 2017.
(Para 2.1)
Action Taken
3.2 Against the BE provision of `750.00 crore and RE provision of `950.00 crore under Plan in
2016-17, the expenditure incurred upto 31st March, 2017 is `930.80 crore (97.98%)
Recommendation/Observation
3.3 The Committee notes that against the Twelfth Plan Outlay of 
`10029.00 crore only `3575.17 crore
was allocated to the Department at BE stage which was further reduced to `3266.50 crore in the Revised
Estimate (32% of the approved outlay). The actual expenditure was `3180.99 crore upto February, 2017.
The Committee observes that there is a huge mismatch to the tune of ` 6762.50 crore between the Twelfth
Plan Outlay and the RE allocation made for the Department. The Committee observes that though it
is always possible to generate more value for the funds allocated, it would be unrealistic to expect to
10

11
achieve key goals of Health Research or to make spectacular break-through in the newly-emerging
frontier areas of Health Research with only 32% of the approved outlays. India's rapidly growing
economy has thrown up huge health challenges and Department of Health Research has a crucial role
to play in ensuring health care to the population by way of generation of new knowledge and its
translation into health products.  The Government, therefore, owes an explanation to the Committee on
the reasons behind such a huge gap between the budgetary allocation made for the Department of Health
Research from 2012-13 to 2016-17 and the total approved outlays for the Twelfth Five Year Plan and
its impact on the Department's vision "to bring modern technology to the people through innovations".
(Para 2.2)
Action Taken
3.4 The Twelfth Plan Outlay was approved by the then Planning Commission based on the approved
cost of new schemes formulated by the Department of Health Research and the requirements of ICMR
for various activities. However, year to year budgetary allocations were decided by the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure) despite projected demand by the Department during budgetary
discussions.
3.5 The shortfall in allocations have affected implementation of the five newly launched schemes of
Department of Health Research in 2013-14 as well as funding of intra mural and extra mural research
projects and strengthening of health research infrastructure.
Further Recommendation
3.6 The Committee notes from the Department's reply that year to year budgetary allocations
were decided by Ministry of Finance despite projected demand by the Department during budgetary
discussions and shortfall in allocations have affected implementation of the five newly launched
schemes in 2013-14. However, on perusal of the expenditure figures, the Committee notes that
the same are below the RE allocations made from 2012-13 to 2016-17, thereby leading to cuts
in allocations in subsequent RE allocations as a result of which the functioning of the five
schemes got adversely affected. The Committee therefore strongly recommends that in order to
ensure adequate allocations from Ministry of Finance in the future, a robust monitoring
mechanism should be put in place for proper utilization of allocated funds through effective
financial management to ensure that the schemes do not get sidetracked due to lack of funds.
Recommendation/Observation
3.7 The Committee observes that the health challenges in India are huge and complex due to its large
population, rapid industrialization, demographic transition, huge maternal and infant mortality and high
burden of diseases like communicable diseases (TB, Malaria, HIV, emerging and re-merging infections),
non-communicable diseases (Cardio-vascular diseases, diabetes, cancer etc). To address the high disease
burden, our national health research agenda needs to be updated constantly and indigenous health
products would need to be developed to combat these challenges.
This is all the more important in view of the fact that the global trade and intellectual property
rights regimes have made it difficult to use health products and processes developed outside due to their
high costs and restrictions placed on producing cost effect generics. (Para 2.10)

12
Action Taken
3.8 Department appreciates the observations of the Hon'ble Committee.
Recommendation/Observation
3.9 A paradigm shift in pursuing the national research agenda will therefore need to be made to address
these challenges but this is not possible with the current low budget allocation to the Department of
Health Research. The Committee takes note of the Secretary's submission that the budget of the National
Institute of Health in the U.S. whose functions are as that of ICMR in India, is 32 billion dollars a year
and a large amount of that budget goes into basic research. The Committee also takes note of the
Secretary's submission that it takes two-and-a-half billion dollars to develop a new drug from scratch
and it needs thousands of scientists working on it at different stages. (Para 2.11)
Action Taken
3.10 Department appreciates the observations of the Hon'ble Committee.
Recommendation/Observation
3.11 Taking all the above facts into account, the Committee observes that if the objective of providing
affordable quality healthcare for the people and translating research outputs into measurable social and
national outcome is to be realized, investments in health research will have to be increased substantially.
The Committee therefore lends its support to the Department's demand for additional funds to the tune
of 
`835.00 crore for 2017-18 and recommends that the Ministry of Finance should increase the budgetary
allocation to the Department of Health Research so that the Department is able to ensure continuity in
critical healthcare research. (Para 2.12)
Action Taken
3.12 Need for allocation of additional funds would be emphasized with justification at the time of pre-
budget discussions in the Ministry of Finance for deciding the RE 2017-18 and BE 2018-19.
Further Recommendation
3.13 The Committee would like to know the quantum of additional funds allocated to the
Department of Health Research at RE 2017-18 stage in pursuance to the recommendation of the
Committee. The Committee also desires to be apprised whether the Department through ICMR
generates any funds internally.
Recommendation/Observation
3.14 The Committee is constrained to note the under-utilisation of funds w.r.t. to three schemes of the
Department. The Committee feels that on one hand the Department is reporting under-utilisation of funds
with respect to its three schemes and on the other hand, the Department had given an enhanced amount
as its projected requirement for the next financial year. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Department should strongly monitor the funds allocated at BE stage so as to ensure that the projected
funds sought are allocated at RE stage in 2017-18. (Para 2.15)

13
Action Taken
3.15 Necessary action will be taken to project the requirements on rational/realistic basis at RE stage.
Further Recommendation
3.16 The Committee is not satisfied with the routine reply of the Department that "necessary
action will be taken to project the requirements on rational/realistic basis at RE stage". As this
is not a comprehensive reply, the Committee would like the Department to indicate the specific
action taken or proposed to be taken by it for realistic and effective budgetary formulation and
proper utilization of allocated funds through prudent management of funds and timely
implementation of the schemes.
III. INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH
Recommendation/Observation
3.17 Currently, health research in the country is primarily carried out by 31 Institutes of ICMR which
was established in 1911 and is one of the oldest medical research bodies in the world. The Committee
observes from the information furnished that in two years i.e. 2015 and 2016, only 1685 research papers
(965 in 2015 and 720 in 2016) have been published by ICMR scientists and 3 patents have been granted
against 45 patents filed. This clearly indicates that the health research output is not up to the mark and
not commensurate with the magnitude and disease burden in India. Given the fact that the country
contributes to a fifth of the world's share of diseases (12th Plan Report) and one of the vital elements
in improving this situation is the need for a relevant research base that would equip policy makers to
take informed health policy decisions, the health research output needs to be augmented substantially to
cater to the health challenges faced. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the ICMR should evolve
mechanisms to boost quality health research output by way of building alliances and partnerships and
create a vibrant ecosystem for the purpose. The Committee is of the view that evolving such frameworks
would lead to granting of more patents which, in turn, would generate the much needed funds for ICMR
and health research. (Para 3.6)
Action Taken
3.18 ICMR has noted the observations of the Hon'ble Committee and as suggested will strive hard in
developing new partnerships for enhancing research output. ICMR has recently signed a MoU with
Project ECHO (Extension for Community Healthcare outcome) at the University of New Mexico Health
Science Centre (UNMHSC) with a mission to de-monopolize knowledge and augment the capacity to
provide best healthcare for the remote and underserved people. MoU has also been signed with IIT to
use best technology for innovation and translational research. MoU with AYUSH will help in better
understanding of the Traditional Medicines. More such partnerships will be developed.
Further Recommendation
3.19 The Committee appreciates that ICMR has recently signed MoUs with (i) Project ECHO
(Extension of Community Healthcare Outcome), at the University of New Mexico Health Science
Centre (UNMHSC); (ii) IIT for best technology innovation; and (iii) AYUSH for traditional medicines.

14
The Committee is of the view that ICMR needs to vigorously pursue its research collaborations
and also ensure an increased emphasis on translating discoveries into health/medical products
and disseminating such discoveries in a way that is optimally beneficial to the public. The
Committee would like to be apprised of health outcomes stemming from these collaborations.
Recommendation/Observation
3.20 As per submission of the Secretary (HR), ICMR has about 800 scientists working across the 32
institutes. The Committee is of the view that for a country of the size and scale of India, the human
resource within ICMR is very small and needs to be augmented substantially. The Committee simultaneously
believes that India faces unique health challenges due to its large population and high disease burden
and augmentation of human resources of ICMR alone will not serve the purpose unless we develop a
critical mass of scientists who are dedicated to carry out basic, applied and clinical research and
innovation. It is thus obvious that enhancing the health research output will require tapping of all
available avenues of research. One of the many such avenues is the research being carried out in our
medical colleges where research is a mandate of postgraduate training in both MCI and NBE programmes.
The country produces around 30,000 Postgraduate students every year who are required to complete a
research thesis for a degree. But due to multiple reasons, like inconsequential research topics, inappropriate
research metholodies, poor guidance etc., potential scientific talent of PG students is wasted. If post-
graduate students could be guided to conduct research relevant to the national health system, critical
human resource gaps can be filled. The Committee would therefore, like the ICMR to guide post graduate
students in their dissertations by linking with them and faculty guides across India. (Para 3.7)
Action Taken
3.21 ICMR has a robust HRD Program and having many schemes which are meant for guidance to post
graduates students in their dissertation, MD/MS/DM/MCh/MDS thesis support. This scheme is primarily
aimed at promoting good quality research in medical colleges through students pursuing post-graduation
courses as well as to improve visibility and accessibility of their research work to larger research
audience. ICMR provides financial assistance of `50,000/- to selected candidates pursuing postgraduate
courses. Number of Awards are limited to 100 per year MDS being not more than 20%. The candidate
should be medical graduates who are admitted to these courses in any of the MCI/DCI recognized
Institutes/Colleges and who wish to avail ICMR award/financial assistance for pursuing their post
graduate thesis. The financial assistance of `50000/- would be provided in two instalments:
` 35,000/- at the time of selection when the award letter is issued and `15,000/- at the end of the course
on production of required documents, including one publication in an indexed journal.
ICMR also has a short term studentship program for under-graduate medical students to develop
interest in health research in initial years of life. Around 1000 fellowships are given per year and sum
of `10,000 are sanctioned for this. More such efforts will be made in future.
Further Recommendation
3.22 While making the above recommendation the Committee had expected the Department to
chalk out an action plan for linking research thesis for postgraduate degree across several

15
medical institutions in the country so as to generate nationally relevant data periodically on
antibiotic resistance, air pollution related health effects, adverse effects of new drugs in Indian
patients, diabetes etc. However, the reply of the Department is silent on this issue. The Committee
would, therefore, like this issue to be addressed by the Department.
ICMR Intervention with Multiple Nutrition to Fight Malnutrition
Recommendation/Observation
3.23 The Committee believes that with the intervention of multiple micro-nutrients amongst children for
eliminating malnutrition, a major problem of the country could be solved. The World Bank estimates that
India is one of the highest ranking countries in the world in respect of the number of children suffering
from malnutrition. The 2015 Global Hunger Index Report ranked India 20th amongst leading countries
with a serious hunger situation. India's National Family Health Survey (NFHS) and State Government's
School Health Programme (SHP) have also indicated that the number of anaemic and malnourished
children is rising. As per the latest SHP report for the year 2015-16, the number of anaemic children
are 6.06 lakh that increased from 5.13 lakh in 2014-15. In view of the above, the Committee recommends
that the efficacy of this intervention with multiple micro nutriments should be tested in different regions
of the country on a priority basis. If the results are successful, the intervention programme could be
implemented as a national programme to tackle malnutrition. The Committee would also like to emphasize
upon the need for co-ordination between the concerned Ministries/Departments to make the programme
successful. (Para 3.15)
Action Taken
3.24 ICMR do agree with the observations of the Committee for the problem of malnutrition in the
country and has made attempts in this direction through its National Institute of Nutrition at Hyderabad.
The Institute has come up with a micronutrient mix that is likely to be opted by Government for its
flagship programmes. The product has been tested on 400 children in Nalgonda district of Andhra
Pradesh in 2014. During initial research, scientists found that anaemia among pre-school going children
came down from 48 per cent to 10 per cent. There was an impact of micronutrient on cognitive activities
too. The micronutrient tested by the National Institute of Nutrition has seven micronutrients, including
two minerals and five vitamins. These include Vitamin A, Vitamin B12, Folic Acid and Vitamin C. An
extended multisite study is required.
Further Recommendation
3.25 The Committee is happy to note that the National Institute of Nutrition of ICMR has come
up with an effective micronutrient mix for children in management of anemia among children
during initial research in Nalgonda district of Andhra Pradesh but more multi site research
studies need to be carried out to evaluate its potential benefits. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department should conceptualize and implement the multi site research
study regarding the micronutrient within a time-frame. The Committee is, however, constrained
to note that the reply of the Department is silent on the issue of inter-Ministerial coordination
on combating anemia among children as emphasized by the Committee. The Committee, therefore,
desires to be updated in this regard.

16
IV INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT FOR HEALTH RESEARCH
Recommendation/Observation
3.26 The Committee also notes that the number of VRDLs in the country are not evenly distributed in
all States, which results in loss of time and resources in transporting samples from States having no
VRDLs to States having presence of VRDLs. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends setting up
of at least one VRDL in each State to ensure that 'samples' collected are analysed in shortest possible
time, in order to stem any outbreak of epidemic. (Para 4.7)
Action Taken
3.27 Efforts will be made to have an equitable geographical distribution of VRDLs in the country.
Further Recommendation
3.28 The Committee treats the Ministry's reply as an 'open ended' one. This approach simply
generalise the issue instead create doubts whether the Department is serious about setting up
more VRDLs in the country. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Department
should come out with a blueprint to set up VRDLs in each State and approach the Ministry of
Finance with a tangible plan for require to funds for setting up VRDLs in every State, as any
further delay would only exacerbate the veritable time bomb of diseases engulfing this country
year after year.
V. DEVELOPMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE FOR PROMOTION OF HEALTH RESEARCH
ESTABLISHMENT OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH UNITS (MRUs) IN GOVERNMENT
MEDICAL COLLEGES
Recommendation/Observation
3.29 The Committee observes that 12 medical colleges have not been released funds due to pending UCs.
The Committee does not understand why there is a persistent delay in furnishing of UCs and apprehends
that the delay in submission of UCs may lead to time overrun and cost escalation of MRUs. The
Committee is of the firm view that if the Department streamlines its monitoring mechanism and pursues
liquidation of UCs in a sustained manner, all pending UCs can be liquidated within a short span of time.
The Department should therefore take up the issue of pendency of UCs at the highest level to expedite
their liquidation. (Para 5.3)
Action Taken
3.30 Out of 12 medical colleges, 6 medical colleges have already cleared the pending UCs in respect of
other schemes of MoH&FW. Funds have already been released to 3 medical colleges and releases in
respect of the other 3 medical colleges are in the pipeline. Letters have been addressed to the Principal
Secretaries of Health and Family Welfare of the remaining States for expeditious settlement of UCs so
that the process of release of grant under the scheme of Multi-Disciplinary Research Units (MRUs) could
be initiated.
Further Recommendation
3.31 The Committee notes that though out of 12 medical colleges, 6 medical colleges have cleared
the pending UCs, the Department has not mentioned the reasons as to why the remaining six

17
medical colleges have not been able to liquidate their pending UCs. The Committee would,
therefore, expect the Department to accomplish the liquidation of pending UCs of the remaining
medical colleges within a stipulated time period and apprise the Committee about the results
achieved in actual liquidation of pending UCs.
VI. ESTABLISHMENT OF MODEL RURAL HEALTH RESEARCH UNITS (MRHRUs) IN THE
STATES
Recommendation/Observation
3.32 The Committee notes that setting up of MRHRUs in States is dependent upon the receipt of
proposals from States. Keeping in view the fact that there exists wide disparities between States, the
Committee is of the view that it becomes the responsibility of Centre to ensure that benefits of this scheme
be reaped by all the States and hence it should facilitate and guide them in sending their proposals. The
Centre should also proactively initiate activity in all States to set up MRHRUs. (Para 6.6)
Action Taken
3.33 The recommendation is noted for compliance.
Further Recommendation
3.34 The Committee finds the reply as too routine one. The Committee expected some details
of the measures which are being taken to guide the States in sending their proposals for setting
up of MRHRUs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should in clear
terms spell out the steps being taken by it to ensure setting up of MRHRUs in every State.
VII. SCHEME OF NORTH EASTERN AREAS
Recommendation/Observation
3.35 The Committee notes that the Department has persistently not utilized the funds in the years
2015-16 and 2016-17. The Committee is of the view that the North-Eastern region being hilly and under
developed, requires special focus and the Department should take special efforts and ensure that funds
allocated are utilised in proper manner. (Para 8.3)
Action Taken
3.36 The observation of the Committee is noted for compliance.
Further Recommendation
3.37 The Committee notes that the Department has not utilized the funds properly under this
head, though north-eastern part of the country lags behind from the rest of India in healthcare
indicators. Merely stating that "the observation of the Committee is noted for compliance" is
not sufficient. The Department should also clearly spell out as to how it contemplates to tackle
the problem of underutilisation of allotted funds. The Committee would advise that efficient
expenditure monitoring and financial discipline may be ensured. The Committee also recommends
that the Department should prepare an appropriate action plan in this regard, for the year
2018-19.

CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
18

RECOMMENDA TIONS AND OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Committee notes from the Department's reply that year to year budgetary allocations
were decided by Ministry of Finance despite projected demand by the Department during budgetary
discussions and shortfall in allocations have affected implementation of the five newly launched
schemes in 2013-14. However, on perusal of the expenditure figures, the Committee notes that
the same are below the RE allocations made from 2012-13 to 2016-17, thereby leading to cuts
in allocations in subsequent RE allocations as a result of which the functioning of the five
schemes got adversely affected. The Committee therefore strongly recommends that in order to
ensure adequate allocations from Ministry of Finance in the future, a robust monitoring
mechanism should be put in place for proper utilisation of allocated funds through effective
financial management to ensure that the schemes do not get sidetracked due to lack of funds.
(Para 3.6)
The Committee would like to know the quantum of additional funds allocated to the
Department of Health Research at RE 2017-18 stage in pursuance to the recommendation of the
Committee. The Committee also desires to be apprised whether the Department through ICMR
generates any funds internally. (Para 3.13)
The Committee is not satisfied with the routine reply of the Department that "necessary
action will be taken to project the requirements on rational/realistic basis at RE stage". As this
is not a comprehensive reply, the Committee would like the Department to indicate the specific
action taken or proposed to be taken by it for realistic and effective budgetary formulation and
proper utilisation of allocated funds through prudent management of funds and timely
implementation of the schemes. (Para 3.16)
III. INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH
The Committee appreciates that ICMR has recently signed MoUs with (i) Project ECHO
(Extension of Community Healthcare Outcome), at the University of New Mexico Health Science
Centre (UNMHSC); (ii) IIT for best technology innovation; and (iii) AYUSH for traditional
medicines. The Committee is of the view that ICMR needs to vigorously pursue its research
collaborations and also ensure an increased emphasis on translating discoveries into health/
medical products and disseminating such discoveries in a way that is optimally beneficial to the
public. The Committee would like to be apprised of health outcomes stemming from these
collaborations. (Para 3.19)
While making the above recommendation the Committee had expected the Department to
chalk out an action plan for linking research thesis for postgraduate degree across several
medical institutions in the country so as to generate nationally relevant data periodically on
antibiotic resistance, air pollution related health effects, adverse effects of new drugs in Indian
19

20
patients, diabetes etc. However, the reply of the Department is silent on this issue. The Committee
would, therefore, like this issue to be addressed by the Department. (Para 3.22)
ICMR INTERVENTION WITH MULTIPLE NUTRITION TO FIGHT MALNUTRITION
The Committee is happy to note that the National Institute of Nutrition of ICMR has come
up with an effective micronutrient mix for children in management of anemia among children
during initial research in Nalgonda district of Andhra Pradesh but more multi site research
studies need to be carried out to evaluate its potential benefits. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department should conceptualize and implement the multi site research
study regarding the micronutrient within a time-frame. The Committee is, however, constrained
to note that the reply of the Department is silent on the issue of inter-Ministerial coordination
on combating anemia among children as emphasized by the Committee. The Committee, therefore,
desires to be updated in this regard. (Para 3.25)
IV INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT FOR HEALTH RESEARCH
The Committee treats the Ministry's reply as an 'open ended' one. This approach simply
generalise the issue instead create doubts whether the Department is serious about setting up
more VRDLs in the country. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Department
should come out with a blueprint to set up VRDLs in each State and approach the Ministry of
Finance with a tangible plan for require to funds for setting up VRDLs in every State, as any
further delay would only exacerbate the veritable time bomb of diseases engulfing this country
year after year. (Para 3.28)
V. DEVELOPMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE FOR PROMOTION OF HEALTH RESEARCH
ESTABLISHMENT OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH UNITS (MRUs) IN GOVERNMENT
MEDICAL COLLEGES
The Committee notes that though out of 12 medical colleges, 6 medical colleges have cleared
the pending UCs, the Department has not mentioned the reasons as to why the remaining six
medical colleges have not been able to liquidate their pending UCs. The Committee would,
therefore, expect the Department to accomplish the liquidation of pending UCs of the remaining
medical colleges within a stipulated time period and apprise the Committee about the results
achieved in actual liquidation of pending UCs. (Para 3.31)
VI. ESTABLISHMENT OF MODEL RURAL HEALTH RESEARCH UNITS (MRHRUS) IN THE
STATES
The Committee finds the reply as too routine one. The Committee expected some details
of the measures which are being taken to guide the states in sending their proposals for setting
up of MRHRUs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should in clear
terms spell out the steps being taken by it to ensure setting up of MRHRUs in every State.
(Para 3.34)

21
VII. SCHEME OF NORTH EASTERN AREAS
The Committee notes that the Department has not utilised the funds properly under this
head, though north-eastern part of the country lags behind from the rest of India in healthcare
indicators. Merely stating that "the observation of the Committee is noted for compliance" is
not sufficient. The Department should also clearly spell out as to how it contemplates to tackle
the problem of underutilisation of allotted funds. The Committee would advise that efficient
expenditure monitoring and financial discipline may be ensured. The Committee also recommends
that the Department should prepare an appropriate action plan in this regard, for the year
2018-19. (Para 3.37)

MINUTES

II*
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 12th December, 2017 in Committee Room 'A',
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Y adav — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
3. Shri Jairam Ramesh
4. Shri Ashok Siddharth
5. Shri K. Somaprasad
6. Dr. C. P . Thakur
7. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
8. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey
LOK SABHA
9. Shri M. K. Raghavan
10. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
11. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
12. Shri Akshay Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Under Secretary
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
Shrimati Gunjan Parashar, Research Officer
WITNESSES
** *
25
* Minutes of first meeting pertain to other matters.
*** Relate to other matters.

26
Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman informed the Members that the meeting has been convened to : (i)
consider and adopt the draft ***, 104th and *** Action Taken Reports pertaining to Departments of ***,
Health Research & Ministry of *** respectively; and ***.
3. The Committee first took up for consideration the draft draft ***, 104th and *** Action Taken
Reports pertaining to Departments of Research, ***. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the
said Reports. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence Shri Jairam Ramesh, MP (Rajya
Sabha) and in their absence Dr. Vikas Mahatme, MP (Rajya Sabha) to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha
and Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal, M.P (Lok Sabha) and in his absence Shri M.K. Raghavan, M.P (Lok Sabha) to
lay the Reports in Lok Sabha on 20th December, 2017.
4. * * *
Oral evidence of the Additional Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. * * *
12. The Committee then adjourned at 4.47 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.