 
 
                                                                                       
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2020/ Kartika,  1942 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
121 
ONE HUNDRED TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
On 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ONE 
HUNDRED TENTH REPORT ON FUNCTIONING OF FOOD SAFETY 
AND STANDARDS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
(Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 21st November, 2020) 
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 25th November, 2020) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2021) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail :  rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
 
 
  

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
                                                             
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2020/ Kartika,  1942 (SAKA) 
  
ONE HUNDRED TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
On 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ONE 
HUNDRED TENTH REPORT ON FUNCTIONING OF FOOD SAFETY 
AND STANDARDS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
(Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 21st November, 2020) 
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 25th November, 2020) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2021) 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2. PREFACE (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS (iii - iv) 
4. REPORT 1 - 91 
 Chapter–I –  Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Ministry 
1 - 24 
 Chapter–II –  Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee does not desire to pursue in view of replies of 
the Ministry 
25 - 42 
 Chapter–III –  Recommendations/Observations in respect 
of which replies of the Ministry have not been accepted by 
the Committee 
43 - 77 
 Chapter–IV – Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which final replies of the Ministry are still awaited 
78 - 82 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   - AT   A  
GLANCE 
83 - 90 
6. MINUTES 91 - 93 
7. ANNEXURES 94 - 103 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2019-20) 
1.      Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   -   Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri A.K. Antony 
3. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4. *Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
5. Shri Suresh Prabhu  
6. Dr. Santanu Sen  
7. *Shrimati Indu Bala Goswami 
8. Shri K. Somaprasad  
9. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
10. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey  
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Vacant 
12. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
13. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
14. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
15. Shrimati Malothu Kavitha 
16. Shri P. K. Kunhalikutty 
17. Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya 
18. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
19. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
20. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
21. Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
22. Dr. Bharati Pravin Pawar 
23. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
24. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
25. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
26. Dr. Subhas Sarkar 
27. Shri D. N. V. Senthilkumar S. 
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
31. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu        Secretary 
2. Shri J. Sundriyal   Joint Secretary  
3. Shri V.S.P Singh   Director 
4. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar                      Additional Director 
5. Shrimati Harshita Shankar     Under Secretary 
6. Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma  Assistant Committee Officer 
7. Ms. Monika Garbyal   Assistant Committee Officer 
8. Shri Parth Gupta   Assistant Research Officer 
 (i)
                                                           
 Shri Udayanraje Pratapsingh Bhonsle, Member resigned from the membership of the Lok Sabha w.e.f 14th September, 2019. 
*Shri Chaudhary Birender Singh, Member resigned from the membership of the Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 20th January, 2020. 
  Shrimati Kahkasha Perween, Member retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 9th April, 2020 
*Shri Bashistha Narain Singh nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 22nd July, 2020 
*Shrimati Indu Bala Goswami nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 22nd July, 2020 
 

 
 
PREFACE 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, present this One Hundred Twenty First  Report of the Committee on Action Taken by 
Government on the Recommendations/ Observations contained in One Hundred Tenth Report on 
Functioning of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India.  
2. The One Hundred Tenth Report of the Department -related Par liamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of 
Lok Sabha on 9 th August, 2018. Action Taken Note of the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Report was received from the Ministr y on 4th February, 2019 .  Two sets of 
questionnaires on the ATN were forwarded to the Department of Health & Family Welfare and 
the Department furnished the replies thereto on 20th June, 2019 and 5th June, 2020 respectively.  
3.  The Committee has noted that the statement on the status of implementation of the 
recommendations contained in the said Report of the Committee has not been laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha in pursuant to the direction of Chairman, Rajya Sabh a dated 24th 
September, 2004. 
4. The Committee made a total o f 126 recommendations in its 110 th Report.  Out of the 12 6 
recommendations, a total number of 40  recommendations have been accepted by the Ministry, 
has been categorized under Chapter I and there  are a total number of 33 recommendations, which 
the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Ministry’s replies,  has been categorized 
under Chapter II.  A total number of 46 recommendations/ observations in respect of which 
replies of the Minis try have not been accepted by the Committee and the Committee has made 
further recommendations thereon, has been categorized under Chapter III while a total number of 
7 recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have not  been 
received, has been categorized under Chapter IV.   
5. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 
the 7th September, 2020. 
 
NEW DELHI 
7th September, 2020  
Bhadra  .....,  1942 (Saka) 
PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
CHAIRMAN 
Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary                                                                                           
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
(ii) 

 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
ADD      : Acute diarrhoeal disease 
AIIHPH      : All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health 
AO      : Authorised Officers 
ASCI      : Advertising Standards Council of India 
BTT      : Bellier Turbidity Temperature Test 
BIS      : Bureau of Indian Standards 
CEO      : Chief Executive Officer 
CAC      : Central Advisory Committee 
CBEC      : Central Board of Excise and Customs 
CAG      : Controller and Auditor General 
CFL      : Central Food Laboratory 
C.T.O.      : Chief Technical Officer 
CSS      : Central Sector Scheme 
CFTRI      : Central Food Technological Research Institute 
CSCs      : Common Service Centres 
DRDO      : Defence Food Research Laboratory 
Dos      : Designated Officers 
DEHP      : Diethylhexyl Phthalate 
DGFT      : Directorate General of Foreign Trade 
EC      : Empowered Committee 
EMAT      : Electronic Milk Adulteration Tester 
ECI      :  Export Council of India 
FSSAI      : Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
FLRS      : Food Licensing and Registration System 
FSOs      : Food Safety Officers 
FBO      : Food Business Operators 
FSMS      : Food Safety Management System 
FoSCoRIS     : Food Safety Compliance through Regular Inspection and Sampling 
FSDBs      : Food Safety Display Boards 
FSIS      : Food Safety and Inspection Service 
FOSTAC     : Food Safety Training and Certification 
FRSL      : Food Standardization and Research Laboratory 
FSW      : Food Safety on Wheels 
FDA      : Food and Drug Administration 
FICS      : Food Import Clearance System 
GFLP      : Good Food Laboratory Practices 
GM      : Genetically Modified 
GEOs      : Genetically Engineered Organisms 
GEAC      : Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee 
GE      : Genetically Engineered 
IDSP      : Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme 
INFoLNET     : India Food Laboratory Network 
IICT      : Indian Institute of Chemical Technology 
ICDS      : Integrated Child Development Scheme 
IIT      : Indian Institute of Technology 
SNF      : Safe and Nutritious Food 
IEC      : Information, Education, Communication 
KEFTA      : Kerala Food Technologists Association 
KAPL      : Karnataka Antibiotics & Pharmaceuticals Ltd. 
LIMS      : Laboratory Information Management System 
LoQ      : Level of Quantification 
LMOs      : Living Modified Organisms 
MSG      : Monosodium Glutamate 
MSME      : Ministry of Small and Medium Enterprises 
NABL      : National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories 
NVCC      : Nag Vidarbha Chamber of Commerce 
NOC      : No Objection Certificate 
NRL      : National Reference Laboratory 
 
(iii) 
 
 

 
 
NTH      : National Test House 
NIN      : National Institute of Nutrition 
NPOP      : National Programme for Organic Production 
NASVI      : National Association of Street Vendors of India 
NIFTEM     : National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management; 
NCR      : Non Conformance Report 
PFNDAI     : Protein Foods and Nutrition Development Association of India 
PDS      : Public Distribution System 
PGS      : Participatory Guarantee System-India 
RMS      : Risk Management System 
RDA      : Recommended Dietary Allowance 
SOP      : Standard Operating Procedures 
SLSC      : State Level Steering Committee 
SAC      : State Advisory Committee 
SWIFT      : Single Window Clearance Interface to Facilitate Trade 
UNEP      : United Nations Environment Programme 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (iv) 

 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the One Hundred Tenth Report on Functioning 
of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India. 
2. Action Taken Notes have  been received from the Government in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the Report followed by the replies of the Ministry to the 
question prepared by the Secretariat. They have been categorized as follows:  
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: Para s 
1.20, 1.53, 1.25, 1.26, 1.42, 1.54, 2.12,  2.3, 2.30, 2.39, 2.55, 3.8, 3.23, 3.24, 3.30, 
3.34, 3.43, 3.49, 3.51, 3.53, 3.66, 3.74, 4.31, 4.39, 4.41, 4.48, 5.11, 5.12, 5.13, 
5.22, 5.24, 5.37, 5.38, 5.39, 5.54, 5.55, 5.56, 6.9, 6.33, 6.39  
 
                                                                                  Total–    40   (Chapter-I)  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
(for now) i n v iew of replies of the Ministry: Para s 1.22, 1.28, 1.40, 1.41, 2.17, 
2.20, 2.18, 2.27, 2.49, 3.11, 3.16, 3.19, 3.20, 3.29, 3.36, 3.47, 3.58, 4.12, 4.23, 
5.27, 5.46, 5.60, 5.61, 5.72, 5.77, 5.87, 5.88, 6.10, 6.13, 6.14, 6.24, 6.30, 6.38.   
              
                                                                          Total–     33    (Chapter-II)  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have 
not been accepted by the Committee: Para s 2.6, 2.9, 2.23, 2.15, 2.32, 2.3 4, 2.37, 
2.41, 2.46, 2.52, 3.10, 3.21,  3.39, 3.40, 3.42, 3.59, 3.72, 3.73, 3.77, 4.5, 4.21, 
4.22, 4.30, 4.37, 4.47, 4.49, 4.54, 4.55, 4.57, 5.1, 5.19, 5.20, 5.21, 5.30, 5.50, 5.51, 
5.52, 5.62, 5.67, 5.71, 5.76, 5.81, 6.19, 6.20, 6.27, 6.35 
 
   Total–     46     (Chapter-III)  
(iv)      Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited: Paras 2.26, 2.31, 2.43, 3.62, 4.24, 5.45, 6.42 
                                        Total-  7    (Chapter-IV) 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER–I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.1 It has been given to understand that FSSAI is presently operating with staff from 
state apparatus.  The Committee opines that FSSAI cannot function to its optimum level 
without employing technical persons as permanent staff.  The Committee recommends that 
FSSAI should be restructured and persons with domain knowledge and expertise in the food 
sector should be employed to run organization.  
 
1.2 The Committee notes the shortcomings pointed out in CAG report about the 
administration of food safety laws.  The Committee opines that there is a need to restructure 
or revamp the FSSAI so as to enable it to meet the multiple challenges in the arena of food 
safety and regulation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that only technically 
competent officers with exper tise in subject of food science should be appointed/ selected in 
FSSAI so that they are most suitable for the task assigned to them by FSS Act 2006. 
(Para 1.20 & 1.53) 
Action Taken 
 
1.3 The Ministry submitted that the Recruitment Regulations notified on 1s t October 
2018 and the posts sanctioned at various levels by Government are based on the 
organizational restructuring of FSSAI.  The mandate of FSSAI under the Food Safety and 
Standards Act, 2006 is to ensure safe and wholesome food for human consumption. This 
overarching mandate calls for action on traditional regulatory functions (setting standards, 
regulations, enforcement, food testing, risk management, research etc.), combined with the 
need for capacity building and consumer empowerment.  Accordingly, the Recruitment 
Regulations have 3 broad categories of posts to fulfill the mandate viz. Scientific and 
Technical posts (that constitute the bulk of the posts): IT and Specialized Services (including 
inter-alia training and capacity building, social and be havioural change communication etc.) 
and Support Services. Hence, the structure of the organization has been carefully created to 
ensure that the varied nature of its functions are handled effectively. 
 
1.4 The Ministry also submitted the following details: 
 
 135 posts have been re -designated at various levels as per details at Annexure 1.This 
re-designation reflects the enhanced job description in the light of evolving functions 
of the Authority, and also the merging of numerous fragmented cadres and sub -cadres 
into 3 major groups as brought out above, for smoother administration and better 
career growth prospects. 
 Of the 824 posts sanctioned, 415 posts have been advertised at various levels in the 
first phase of recruitment. Almost 1.6 lakhs applications ha ve been received against 
the advertised posts and a robust selection procedure, comprising of a Computer 
Based Test, Written Examination and Interview (as applicable) is in place. The exams 
are scheduled in July 2019 and September/October 2019.  The second  phase of 
recruitment will be taken up after the completion of the first phase, with the aim to 
complete the recruitment process within a period of 2 years.  
 The contractual employees have been given weightage  in selection and have an 
opportunity to appear and qualify through the selection process. Further, since the 

2 
 
process of recruitment is being taken up in phases, contractual employees would have 
more than 1 opportunity to prepare and participate in the selection process 
 
1.5 The Ministry further submitted that the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
(FSSAI) has advertised a total 307 vacancies at various levels in Phase -I of recruitment 
process vide Advt. No. DR-01/2019, DR-02/2019 & DR-03/2019. 
  
1.6 The recruitment process for 04 posts of Director and 06 posts of Food Analyst 
advertised against Advt. No. Dr-01/2019 and DR-03/2019 has been completed. Against these 
posts,  of the selected persons, 3 are contractual employees of FSSAI.   Selection pr ocess for 
other posts is going on and is likely to be completed by end of this year. Second phase of 
recruitment will be started thereafter. All vacant posts will be included in the second phase of 
recruitment. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.7 The Committee notes that as per the information available on the website of FSSAI, 
out of its 9 members of Central Advisory Committee (CAC) representing the interests of food 
industry, agriculture, consumers relevant research bodies and food laboratories, 5 are from 
Delhi.  The ex -officio Chairman of CAC is also Delhi based which makes this number six.  
Given the fact that there are 24 chapters under trade laws dealing with food and scope of 
FSSAI and there is vast pool of expertise available country -wide, this Delhi cen tric 
composition of CAC hardly represent various interest groups.  The Committee feels that this 
factor is certainly depriving FSSAI of the sage advice and expertise of the immense talent 
present in the food sector in the country.  This also leads the Committee to the conclusion that 
there is no transparent procedure for selection of members of CAC.   
1.8 The Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be written guidelines on the 
selection process of members of CAC and the whole selection criteria s hould be made 
transparent.  Bio data of selected candidates and their areas on competency/proven track 
record should be displayed on the website of FSSAI.  It also recommends that the 
composition of CAC be broad based so that the pool of expertise in the f ood sector spread 
across the country could be tapped. 
(Para 1.25 & 1.26) 
Action Taken 
1.9 The recommendations of the Committee have been accepted and a transparent 
procedure for selection of members of CAC has been initiated. 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
1.10 The Committee observes that the responsibility for surveillance and enforcement of 
food laws lies squarely on the State/UT Governments.  But given the resource crunch in the 
States, it would be unrealistic to expect that the States would be in a positi on to improve the 
infrastructure and increase the manpower without central assistance for overhauling their 
food regulatory system. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare should work out a fully Centrally Sponso red Scheme for up-gradation of 
manpower, strengthening of food safety infrastructure including food testing laboratories and 
setting up a robust surveillance system at State level.  
(Para 1.42) 
 
 

3 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.11 On the Committees recommendations for a fully Centrally Sponsored Scheme for 
upgrading manpower, strengthening infrastructure and robust surveillance systems at the state 
level, it is submitted that FSSAI is implementing a Central Sector Scheme for strengthening 
of food testing laboratories and upgrading manpower. 37  State Food Laboratories of 29 
States/UTs have been upgraded and grants of Rs.220.30 crores  released. 43 mobile food -
testing vans called Food Safety on Wheels (FSW) have been delivered to 31 States/UTs. For 
upgradation of manpower, FSSAI has created centralized content and trainers for regulatory 
staff of States/UTs, which has been uniformly adopted. Further, 1500 lab personnel have 
been trained. Regarding hiring of manpower, while States/UTs sanction posts at the state 
level, centra l government has recently sanctioned 824 posts for FSSAI. To increase the 
manpower at State level, FSSAI has been taking up the issue of need for adequate manpower 
at various platforms with States/UTs. Several States namely, Gujarat, Chattisgarh, Manipur, 
Tripura, Nagaland, West Bengal, Meghalaya, Goa, Maharashtra and Jharkhand have already 
proceeded in this regard and recruited full time DOs and FSOs. The number of FSOs and 
DOs has gone up from 2324 and 630 in 2015 to 3373 and 741 in 2019, respectively. 
1.12 Other issues such as a robust surveillance system at the State level are being 
addressed through use of a common IT platform across States/UTs and setting of uniform 
checklists. 
 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
1.13 The Committee would like the Ministry to  launch a national level awareness 
programme to sensitize all the sections of the society on the food safety subject aiming to 
infuse a national commitment towards reduction of food contamination from all the stages of 
food chain.  This sort of a mission m ode project will assure that the stakeholders take full 
ownership and responsibility and ensure self -compliance of the FSS Act, 2006.  Also, a 
comprehensive food policy must be devised and the shortcomings of the present Act need to 
be rectified.   
(Para 1.54) 
Action Taken 
1.14 The Eat Right India Movement, aligned with the Government of India’s focus on 
public health through its three key programs ‘Ayushman Bharat’, ‘Swachh Bharat Mission’ 
and ‘Poshan Abhiyan, centres around the key themes of eat safe and eat healthy. The 
Movement and other social and behavioural change initiatives of FSSAI have witnessed 
enthusiastic engagement and keen participation from all stakeholders. Eat Right India aims at 
a 360 0 approach for citizen guidance and behavioural change through Safe and Nutritious 
Food (SNF) everywhere - at home, workplace, school. Resource books developed for Home 
(Pink Book) and Schools (Yellow Books) have been disseminated widely, both through print 
and electronic media;7000+schools have enrolled and c onducted 11000+ activities to 
promote healthy eating among students; 75000+ children participated in the Eat Right 
Creativity Challenge; Mascots Master and Miss Sehat have touched 1.5 million people, 
mostly schoolchildren. Simultaneously, food businesses h ave participated enthusiastically in 
the Food Safety Training and Certification (FoSTaC) initiative, with over 1.5 lakh Food 
Safety Supervisors trained through 160 training partners across 35 States/UTs through 5400+ 
training programs. Programs such as Cle an Street Food Hub have been adopted in 13 states, 
while Hygiene Rating, a certification Scheme for Restaurants/Caterers has completed 600+ 
audits. In a unique outreach initiative, aPan-India cycle rally, Swasth Bharat Yatra launched 

4 
 
on 16th October 2018, to spread the message of Eat Right India mobilised 21,000+ volunteer 
cyclists, covered over 20,000 kms and touched 2100+ locations in 100+ days, reaching out 
to2.5 crore people.Its biggest benefit has been in terms of re -energising States, food 
businesses and professionals, who are working at their level to take the movement forward.  
1.15 While the results so far have been encouraging, most of these initiatives are still in 
their nascent stages. Any behavioural change initiative takes decades of sustained effort to 
show noticeable changes in habits and culture. Hence, FSSAI envisions the Eat Right 
Movement as one that grows organically as a self -perpetuating movement, co-owned and co-
led by various partners, using the broad framework and resources put together. 
1.16 The mandate of FSSAI derives from the framework of the legislation viz. the Food 
Safety and Standards Act 2006, and various policies and initiatives of FSSAI are framed and 
undertaken within this legislative framework. Accordingly, to fulfil the broad mandate of 
ensuring safe food for all citizens of the country, and also enable food businesses in 
complying with various provisions within the scope of the Act, FSSAI has taken several steps 
like easing of food imports, adoption of ingredients based approach to standards and 
simplification of process of registration and licensing. Further, as advised by the Committee, 
to address shortcomings in the present Act and thereby ensure a comprehensive food policy, 
some  amendments in the FSS Act have been pr oposed to plug gaps and in furtherance of 
fulfilment of objectives of the Act which include inter alia: bringing ‘Animal Feed’ within the 
ambit of FSS Act to enable FSSAI to monitor inputs such as pesticides and veterinary drugs 
used by producers of animal  farm products; provision of deterrent punishment in case of 
unsafe food if it has potential to cause death or grievous hurt; provision of Reference 
Laboratories for the purpose of method development, method validation etc.; and including 
exports within the ambit of FSS Act. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.17 Considering all the facts, the Committee is constrained to observe that though the 
Supreme Court struck down the Product Approval System based on the advisories issued by 
FSSAI in August 2015, FSSAI took a very long time to review all the cases of NOCs gra nted 
under this system.  The status of 192 NOCs is still not clear as to whether these products are 
covered under any new regulations or not.  The Committee endorses the view of CAG that 
FSSAI failed to ensure the cancellation of licenses issued under this  suspended system.  
There is every likelihood that FBOs with invalid licenses under this system are still producing 
and selling unsafe food to the consumers. FSSAI should therefore expedite the whole process 
of withdrawal of such NOCs and carry out within six months’ inspection of the FBOs that 
claim to comply with the new regulations.  
(Para 2.12) 
Action Taken 
1.18 An order was issued on 1 st January, 2018 where all the 212 NOC holders were 
advised to confirm whether their products were in complete complian ce with the 
requirements of the regulations under which they now stand covered and also to get their 
licenses re-issued as per the appropriate category. Out of these, 8 NOC holders requested for 
re-examination of their NOCs as per the Non Specified Food Re gulations, 2017. 
Subsequently the remaining 204 NOCs issued were withdrawn on 27 th September 2018 under 
intimation to the Central Designated Officers and Authorized Officers. 
1.19 It was decided to carry out inspection in respect of   NOC cases in which lic ence was 
held  which related to 37 FBOs. The Central Licensing Authorities of FSSAI arranged for 

5 
 
inspection of all 37 units. Out of these 37 cases, 27 FBOs applied for modification in their 
license, 3 FBOs’ license have since expired, 6 FBOs were found to be compliant and 1 FBO’s 
license was cancelled. 
 
Recommendation /Observation 
1.20 The Committee notes that the first objective of FSSAI,  is to lay down science based 
standards for articles of food and regulate their manufacture, storage, distribution, sale and 
import to ensure availability of safe and wholesome food. However, the indicators of food 
safety show that the objective of formati on of FSSAI has not been fulfilled as the quality of 
food stuffs is deteriorating and use of contaminants is increasing day by day.  Milk and food 
which were safe previously are no longer safe because adulteration and use of hazardous 
chemicals for artificial ripening of fruits and vegetables have witnessed tremendous increase 
in the recent past.  The Committee observes that FSSAI has failed to assess the impact of the 
FSS Act on food safety and therefore recommends that FSSAI should systematically evaluate  
the performance of the FSS Act, its rules and regulations.  Certain indicators need to be 
developed to measure the outcomes of the food safety policy and institutions.  
(Para 2.3) 
Action Taken 
 
1.21 Recommendations of the Standing Committee have been note d and in its compliance 
action has been initiated to develop indicators needed to measure the outcomes of the food 
safety policy and institutions. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.22 The Committee notes with concern that many of the harmful components and 
contaminants enter the food system at the time of primary production whereas such primary 
food production is exempted from the coverage of the law.  The Committee believes that this 
exclusion of the farmer/fisherman or farming operations including fisheries, livestock from 
FSS Act is a major challenge and lacuna in the Act because unless the raw material is of good 
quality, the good quality of final product cannot be ensured.  The Committee agrees that it is 
important to ensure that the food is safe right from  the beginning of the food chain and for 
this, the Food Authority will have to work closely with the primary producers.  The major 
issues in primary production like overuse of pesticides, use of growth hormones, drug use in 
livestock etc. pose health risks  and a significant threat to ensuring food safety.  The 
Committee is convinced that without primary production system coverage, food will never be 
safe.  The Committee is aware that once hazardous contaminants, excessive antibiotics 
residues and pesticides  etc. enter the food system, there is no technology by which they can 
be removed from the foods.  The Committee, therefore, expects the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare to make guidelines/code of practices and the Ministry of Agriculture to 
impose res trictions on pesticides and harmful components.  The issue of amendment to 
necessary guidelines/code of practices may be taken up with the highest authorities 
concerned.  
(Para 2.30) 
Action Taken 
1.23 This Ministry entirely endorses the concern about issue s of food safety arising from 
exclusion of primary production from the ambit of the FSS Act, 2006. In many countries, 
around the world, counterpart food safety authorities are responsible for plant health, animal 

6 
 
health. There is particular focus on risk a rising from unsafe animal feed, plant protection 
products and veterinary drugs including antibiotics under the overall concept of ‘One Health’.  
 1.24 Sub clause (i a) is proposed to be added in Section 3 (1) of FSS Act to define the 
‘feed’ as under: 
3 (1) (ia) “Feed” means any substance which is ground pelleted or crumbled, 
contain source of energy and tissue building constituents like carbohydrates, 
protein, fat, minerals etc. which will provide all of the nutritional requirements 
necessary for the mainte nance of life or for promoting production of food 
producing animals including feed additives, various products of vegetable or 
animal origin, in their natural state, fresh or preserved, compound feed, 
medicated feed, genetically modified feed and products derived from the 
industrial processing thereof, and organic or inorganic substances, whether or 
not containing additives, which are intended for use in the preparation of 
compound feeding stuffs or as carriers of pre -mixtures. It does not include 
veterinary medicinal products and water. 
1.25 A proviso has been proposed to be added in Section 18 (3) of the FSS Act which 
reads as under: 
Provided that the producers of animal farm products shall apply inputs such as 
pesticides and veterinary drugs and adopt suc h practices that does not 
contaminate food by following the Code of Practices prescribed by the Food 
Authority in consultation with the concerned Ministries. 
1.26 In a meeting recently held on 30.05.2019 in FSSAI attended by representatives of 
Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Bureau of Indian Standards, NDRI, CIFT 
etc. necessity of setting up of a Central Regulatory Framework to exercise control on 
manufacture, storage, transport, sale and import of food, feed additives and premixes, was 
felt. Formal consultation or draft amendment proposal would however be firmed up while 
circulating the draft Cabinet Note on proposed draft amendment proposals. 
1.27 The FSSAI has proposed to its administrative ministry for amendment in the Food 
Safety and Standards Act, 2006 for inclusion of feed under the ambit of FSSAI. The proposal 
is under consideration. Meanwhile, FSSAI has issued directions that All Compound Cat tle 
Feed manufacturers shall be registered with BIS and shall comply to BIS standards. Further, 
FSSAI has prepared the draft regulation and good hygiene practices for feed manufacturing 
units which shall be implemented after amendment in the FSS Act. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.28 The Committee recommends that some provisions fixing the responsibility for the 
custody of the seized article should be introduced in the FSS Act. A provision should be 
added that in cases where it is not possible for food busin ess operator to keep the seized 
article, the Food Safety Officer should maintain the seized article in his safe custody. A 
proper storage facility should be provided to the FSO. Also, in case the seized article is in the 
custody of FBO, special attention s hould be paid that the FBO does not attempt to sell the 
same articles in the market. Proper record of the seized article should be maintained by the 
FSO.  
(Para 2.39) 
 
 

7 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.29 Though Section 38 of the FSS Act have implied provisions of keeping the seized 
articles of food in the custody of FSO, an explicit provision is also being made through 
amendment of the Act.  States/UTs have been asked to have reasonable space for keeping of 
samples and seized articles with FSOs /DOs.   
Recommendation /Observation 
 
1.30 The Committee recommends that provisions regarding sealing the premises of FBO 
that operate without license and actions to be taken against such an FBO should be added in 
the Act. The Food Safety Officer should stop the production of any  food article and 
immediately send the food sample for analysis. The food articles that have been supplied to 
the market should immediately be recalled and information regarding the same should be 
intimated to the general public. Strict actions have to be taken against such FBOs operating 
without licenses/ registrations and heavy penalty must be imposed.  
(Para 2.55) 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.31 The FSS Act provides for FSSAI license/registration to commence or carry on a food 
business. While there is provision of penalty and imprisonment against operating a food 
business without valid FSSAI license/registration, a provision for sealing of premises seems 
desirable and would be examined if Act needs to be amended or a provision in the 
Rules/Regulations would suffice.   
Recommendation /Observation 
1.32 The Committee is constrained to observe that the unregistered FBOs and FBOs 
operating with expired licenses pose a threat to public health. The Committee would like to 
emphasize that the Food Licensing and Registration System (FLRS) should be updated 
regularly mentioning the name of the FBOs whose licenses have expired or cancelled. The 
Committee also would like to point out that granting of licenses without complete paperwork 
by State Licensing Authorities (SLAs) or Cen tral Licensing Authority (CLA) indicate a 
casual approach of the authorities since granting of licenses and issuing registration 
certificate is vital to ensuring a stringent food safety regime and such job should be done 
meticulously and seriously. A robus t and reliable database on FBOs needs to be prepared for 
effective monitoring of FBOs. The Ministry should also take initiative towards encouraging 
the States/ UTs to establish a system of inter -connected databanks on FBOs, food licenses 
issued, cancelled, expired etc and a centralized databank may also be created to which all 
State Food Regulatory Authorities should be linked.  
(Para 3.8) 
 
Action Taken 
1.33 FBO License database (for active, expired and cancelled licenses) is available 
centralized in the FLRS system. Concerned Designated Officer (DO) for his/her jurisdiction 
has access to view this database. The Commissioner of Food Safety of State (FCS) has f ull 
right to view complete State data. This is available at https://foodlicensing.fssai.gov.in.  

8 
 
1.34 As a result of efforts made   , number of licensed/registered food business operators 
has increased to 75 ,56,104 as on 31 st May, 2020 (59382 -Central License, 1315804 -State 
license, 6180918-registrations). 
  
1.35 FSSAI has already issued guidelines for e -commerce platforms vide order dated 
2ndFebruary, 2017.  FSSAI regularly works with E -Commerce FBOs to impro ve their Food 
Safety Compliance and ensure enforcement of the said order. It is conceptualised to initiate 
audits of E-Commerce entities in future. 
 
Recommendation /Observation 
1.36 The Committee recommends that there has to be uniform structure across the country 
with respect to the guidelines to be followed in case of exigencies warranting food recall. The 
Committee notes that FSSAI had released guidelines for food recall and has directed the top 
200 food companies to submit their food recall plans. The C ommittee recommends 
examining of the Food Recall Plan of all the companies on the same lines. This should also 
include the procedure to be followed at the time of an emergency food recall. FSSAI should 
ensure that every food business irrespective of its si ze should have a food recall plan and 
ensure compliances with the recall procedure. The Committee calls upon every FBO to 
mandatorily submit a Food Safety Management System (FSMS) Plan during application for a 
new FSSAI License or renewal of FSSAI License.  FSSAI has to ensure that the food recall 
guidelines are implemented stringently. 
1.37 The Committee notes that according to various reports, about 30% food supplied in 
India is either adulterated or unsafe and recommends that no unsafe food products shoul d be 
allowed to be kept on the shelf as such products post serious health issues.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that FSSAI should provide recall reports on its website on a 
fortnightly basis so that consumer is aware of all adulterated or misbrande d food products.  
The Committee is aware that FSSAI has constituted a Risk Assessment Cell to carry out 
functions of risk assessment to support risk management and risk communications.  The 
Committee desires to be apprised of the findings of the Risk Asses sment Cell and the action 
taken thereon. 
(Para 3.23 & 3.24) 
Action Taken 
1.38 The Food Safety and Standards (Food Recall Procedure) Regulations, 2017  notified 
on 18.01.2017   lay down procedures covering  issues such as  initiation of food recall 
process, Operation of Food Recall System, Food Recall Plan, Recall Communication , Rec all 
Status report, Food recovery, post recall report, Termination of a recall, Follow up action, 
Responsibility of the  Food Business operator, Responsibility of the Commissioner of Food 
Safety of the State or Union Territory, and the Responsibility of the Food Authority .   
1.39 The Food Recall plan has been received from over 120 food companies. The Recall 
plans have been examined. A model recall plan has also been developed. In addition, 
provision for recall of food products as per guidelines for recall plan is being integrated with 
Food Licensing and Registration System (FLRS) platform. As regards FSMS, under licensing 
and Registration Regulations, FBOs are required to submit FSMS plan at the time of new 
license and renewal. These documents are scrutiniz ed by the licensing authorities while 
processing the application. The central licensing authorities have been directed to consider 
renewal cases subject to submission of recall plan by FBOs.   
 

9 
 
1.40 The recommendation of the committee is noted and the appropriate action on the 
same shall be taken accordingly. Further, FSSAI would provide recall reports on its website 
as per the recommendation of the Committee.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.41 The Committee recommends that the process to make the online payment system for 
licensing/registration should be expedited and proper awareness should be spread in the 
States.  The FBOs should be timely informed to remove any deficiency in the application.   
The Committee would like the FSSAI to ensure speedy issuance of license to FBOs once they 
have submitted their responses to the queries.  The Committee strongly recommends adopting 
a fast track single window approval system for the new Licenses/registrat ions and renewals 
of Licenses which will also accelerate the ease of doing business.   
(Para 3.30) 
Action Taken  
 
1.42 In view of the difficulties faced by FBO in making payment towards licence 
/registration fee etc., an Online payment system has been made  functional for all States/UTs. 
FBOs can now make payment in a Central Pool Account opened by FSSAI and the amount is 
transferred to the concerned States/UTs. 
 
1.43 FSSAI has also taken steps to simplify and expedite the procedures of licensing and 
registration like reduction of number of documents, introduction of self - declaration, removal 
of physical submission of documents, issuance of license online, etc. and further is in the 
process to improve the licensing and registration system. 
 
1.44 The FLRS has  been improved to make it more user friendly and has helped in 
reaching out to the FBOs. All this has resulted in significant increase in the number of FBOs 
applying for registration and licensing during the last few years. Services of CSC -SPV for 
registration of small FBOs has been discontinued. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.45 The Committee agree with FSSAI that some stringent measures are essential for 
ensuring that the FBOs comply with the FSS Act.  The Committee believes that life time 
licenses are not at all feasible and desirable as the information regarding the food business has 
to be timely updated and checked.  Life time licenses can result in lax compliance with the 
food safety standards whereas requirement of annual returns and renewal of licenses ensures 
checks and balances for compliance with the food safety norms.  
(Para 3.34) 
Action Taken 
1.46 The views of the Committee have been agreed to. FSSAI has examined the feasibility 
of granting license/registration on permanent basis. Apart from its revenue implications, there 
are a few other difficulties in granting permane nt license. At the time of renewal of license, 
presently the food businesses are required to provide details of the technically qualified 
person in charge of operations as well as the person responsible for complying with 
conditions of license.  In case renewal is done away with, the details of these person’s integral 
to food safety would not be captured.  Moreover, at the time of renewal, the licensing 
authority can verify the food safety history of the food business based on which he can renew 

10 
 
the license or decide otherwise.  In the absence of a renewal mechanism, enforcement would 
have to be implemented by means of suspension and cancellation of license. Renewal of 
license/registration acts as a monitoring mechanism.  As a compliance of the FSS Act, Rule s 
and Regulations made thereunder, an FBO has to provide certain details like water testing 
reports, medical examination reports of food handlers and filing of annual returns etc. at the 
time of renewal.  The apprehension is that once licenses are made per manent, the FBO would 
not have much motivation to file these returns as FBO would stand disconnected from 
FSSAI/Regulator after the issue of permanent license. Enforcement again would then perforce 
be done through suspension and cancellation of license. Th erefore, there is no proposal to 
issue life time licenses.   
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.47 The Committee also notes that the rejection rate of the licenses for renewal is very 
low in the country.  The Committee recommends that licenses for FBOs should n ot be issued 
blindly and a well established mechanism should be developed for scrutinizing such FBOs 
who apply for renewal of the license.  In developed countries like US, application of renewal 
licenses is taken seriously and there is a high rate of rejections due to non-conforming of food 
standards.  FSSAI should also examine the FBO’s previous track record with regards to 
compliance with the FSS Act.  Any previous non -compliance should be taken seriously.  The 
Committee recommends expediting the developm ent of an e -portal that will create a 
compliance history of food business which the Food Authority can refer while renewing 
licenses.  The Food Authority should also develop a detailed inspection plan for companies 
that apply for renewal of licenses and mandatory check the premises of the FBOs.  
(Para 3.43) 
Action Taken 
 
1.48 FSSAI has already developed and  rolled out  (June, 2020) the Food Safety and 
Compliance System (FoSCoS)    in a phased manner in different States/UTs.   It will replace 
existing online Food Licensing and Registration System (FLRS). FoSCoS functions on cloud 
based server with upgraded software and hardware and will resolve the often reported issue 
of slowness of existing FLRS portal. The cardinal change is the methodology of licensing for 
manufacturers which now shall be based on standardised product list as against text box 
approach earlier. Further to promote ease of doing business, FSSAI is providing provision of 
online submission of annual return (Form D1) w.e.f FY 2019 -20 through FoSCoS which will 
eliminate need to submit and track evidence of receipt of returns in manual mode.  Mandatory 
documents have been rationalised and many paper based declarations have been replaced 
with online declaration. The central theme is to enhance the ease  of doing business for the 
food business operators.  
 
1.49 As regards Inspections, an e -portal https://foscoris.fssai.gov.in has been developed   
and is under implementation. Even though, as per regulations for licensing, inspection is not 
mandatory at the time of renewal; however, inspection is carried out, if and when required. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.50 The Committee feels that in a country like India that has a large unorganized food 
sector with many small food businesses; it becomes more important to conduct inspections in 
a time bound manner.  The DOs and FSOs should inspect the premises of FBOs and guide the 
manufacturers to maintain proper hygienic conditions.  There should be surprise inspections. 
Every effort must be made so that the FBOs do not evade the inspection process.  In view of 

11 
 
various instances of corruption cases reported and to avoid nex us between the FBOs and 
lower level employees of the Food Regulatory Authorities, the place of inspection should be 
decided by the State Food Commissioners and the reports of the inspection should be directly 
submitted to him. The Committee would like to p oint out that United States has a separate 
agency called Food Safety and Inspection Services (FSIS) that conducts inspections and 
monitors food related establishments. It is a separate authority handling the inspection system 
in the United States for which  their inspectors undergo a unique training program.  The FSIS 
inspectors insure that the meat, poultry and egg products are safe and do not result in any 
food borne diseases.  The Committee would like FSSAI to introduce a specialized training 
programme for food inspections on similar lines.  This will ensure timely inspection and help 
in identification of the FBOs engaged in the manufacture of adulterated or unsafe products.  
Further, the inspection process should be streamlined to ensure that the same is used to 
regulate and monitor food safety and not harass FBOs.   
(Para 3.49) 
Action Taken 
 
1.51 The inspection procedure is being digitalized through FoSCoRIS  and data on 
inspection reports will be available online and can be viewed by Food Safety Commissioner, 
Designated Officer and FSSAI as well.  In addition, the data of sampling and testing is also 
being digitalized through InFoLNet portal.  
 
1.52 A well tr ained and qualified regulatory workforce is essential for uniform and 
consistent application of the Act across the country. Realizing the importance of such training 
for food safety management, The Food Safety and Standards Rules, 2011 provide for training  
of Designated Officers (DOs) and Food Safety Officers (FSOs) by FSSAI. Accordingly, 
FSSAI has designed a Training Policy for Food Safety Regulatory Officials. The Training 
module comprises of Induction as well as refresher training to get regulatory staff  acquainted 
as well as updated about regulatory provisions from time to time. 
1.53 To ensure transparency, predictability and consistency of inspections, FSSAI has 
developed Inspection checklists as well as Training Modules for safe and hygienic food 
handling practices detailed in Schedule 4 of the FSS Licensing Regulations 2011.  
1.54 For food regulatory staff, training on Inspections is incorporated both in the classroom 
training module and on -the-job phase of the Induction training programme for Food Saf ety 
Officers of all states. Through ‘on - job’ phase of the Induction training, Food Safety Officers 
are exposed to on -ground inspection systems under the guidance of senior officers. As a 
complementary activity, a special training programme has been initia ted for food businesses 
under Food Safety Training and Certification (FoSTaC), where the same inspection checklists 
are incorporated. 
1.55 Through this two pronged approach, of capacity building of regulatory staff as well as 
food businesses, a transparent system of inspection by the regulatory staff as well as building 
a culture of self-compliance by the food business operators is being developed. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.56 The Committee recommends that a risk based inspection program should be induc ted.  
The Inspectors should maintain a proper record of the inspections conducted.  All the 
States/UTs should establish an electronic database of food failures and testing reports.  The 
committee would like to emphasize on creation of such an electronic da tabase which will not 

12 
 
only help in better monitoring of the Food Business Operators but also shift the present 
system of random inspections to focused surveillance.  
(Para 3.51) 
Action Taken 
 
1.57 To optimally utilise the limited regulatory manpower with States and focus on high -
risk food businesses, FSSAI has developed a comprehensive Risk Based Inspection System 
(RBIS). Under Risk Based Inspection System (RBIS), food businesses are categorized 
according to risk involved which forms the basis for prioriti sation and frequency of 
inspection.   The data of RBIS has been shared with States/UTs and they  have been requested 
and advised to start carrying out inspections of FBO’s premises based on their risk based 
classification of license/registration data. 
1.58 Random inspection to focussed surveillance can be done through the INFoLNET 
software application https://infolnet.fssai.gov.in. For better monitoring of FBOs, (i) the 
proposed Food Compliance System (FoSCoS) wil l take care of the comprehensive reports 
being sought that will help in better FBOs’ monitoring; (ii) huge data is being collected 
through the implementation of the FoSCoRIS and this data availability will help in the better 
monitoring of the FBOs.   
 1.59 FSSAI has developed an IT Solution platform for India Food Laboratory Network 
(INFOLNET). This Laboratory Management System (LMS) is a centralized system that 
connects and collates the network of laboratories. The information on the INFOLNET would 
help categorize laboratories on a fit for purpose basis i.e., for regulatory requirements, routine 
testing, appellate testing etc. This LMS will also be a one stop portal for gathering 
information pertaining to a food testing laboratory, ranging from ownership de tails, 
infrastructure availability, technical capacity, scope of testing through to test results of 
different samples. Apart from being the backbone of the network, this LMS will also be 
integrated to other FSSAI’s core IT systems, such as FLRS (Licensing and Registration), 
FICS (Import Clearance), Quick access, FoSTAC (Training), etc.  The centralized 
information will also help risk analysis, developing science based standards, capacity 
building and training.  
 
1.60 INFOLNET was launched in January 2018 an d has been rolled out completely for 
food testing laboratories. As on date, 368 laboratories have registered themselves on 
INFOLNET of which 169 laboratories have been approved and 25 laboratories are under 
approval by FSSAI.  Remaining are either rejected or returned for incomplete details.  
 1.61 It is also mentioned that recognition of FSSAI notified laboratories which are not on 
INFoLNeT is deemed to have been suspended. This exercise is undertaken generally on 
monthly basis.    
1.62 Further, FSSAI has asked States/UTs to undertake survey of milk and oils (trans fatty 
acid). The samples will be sent for analysis only to those of the private laboratories which are 
on INFOLNET. 
 
1.63 Recently, FSSAI has also placed a Staging Server, on trial, in order to i ntegrate the 
Food Import Certification System (FICS) with INFoLNeT; and, the authorized officers are 
checking the effectiveness of the system in collaboration with some of the laboratories that 
are carrying out imported food testing. 
 

13 
 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
1.64 The Committee is of the view that the importance of surveys and their outcomes can 
very well be documented to help in creation of a national database relating to food safety.  
The Committee therefore recommends creation of a National Food Safety Database s o that 
India is better prepared to tackle any outbreak of food borne diseases and other food safety 
related issues.  This database can be accessed by the consumers, food industry and other 
private and public health organization at large.  It will ensure ef ficient risk assessment and 
better preventive actions can be taken.  
(Para 3.53) 
Action Taken 
1.65 FSSAI has issued a direction to Food Safety Commissioners for requesting Health 
Secretaries to nominate the Food Safety Officer (FSO) of each district as member of the 
Rapid Response Team (RRT) under Integrated Diseases Surveillance Program (IDSP) who 
will undertake the activities mentioned therein. This direction would enable state authorities 
to receive communication with respect to food borne illness inc idents/outbreaks, as and when 
they occur, and take appropriate actions accordingly. 
1.66 Further, in order to have a fully functional and robust system for monitoring of food 
borne illnesses, FSSAI along with WHO is developing a platform with facility to g enerate 
alerts as and when foodborne illness incidences are reported and take appropriate and quick 
action, and also create a database of all foodborne diseases/incidences reported in the 
country. 
1.67 This will be integrated with Integrated Health Informa tion Services (IHIS) platform 
which is already being developed by WHO in coordination with IDSP under Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare.  
 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
1.68 The Committee recommends development of specific training modules for the 
manufacturers, importers, sellers, distributors and the FBOs.  The training should be industry 
specific and for a shorter period.  Regular trainings should be conducted for FBOs and small 
industries to adequately equip them to comply with the standards of the F SS Act.  Training 
program can also act as a mechanism to check the status of FBOs, the validity of their 
licenses and as a tool to keep them updated of the changes in the food safety environment in 
the country. As regards training fees, the Committee recom mends that the training should be 
imparted free of cost for small food businesses.  The Committee is very well aware of the 
shortage of staff but every effort should be made by FSSAI to conduct some training 
programme in a year for the FBOs.  FSSAI/State F ood Safety Authorities should also ensure 
that the training partners who conduct training programmes are experienced and skilled.  A 
holistic training program dealing with compliance with the FSS Act, good manufacturing 
practices, Safe food handling, pract ices, guidelines, hygiene standards etc. should be 
conducted at regular time intervals.   
(Para 3.66) 
Action Taken 
1.69 A large scale Food Safety Training and Certification Program (FoSTaC) to train Food 
Safety Supervisors/ food handlers across the food va lue chain has been initiated by FSSAI. 

14 
 
There are 17 courses meant for different food businesses like Catering, Manufacturing, 
Retail, Milk and Milk products processing etc. These are short duration courses of between 4 
to 12 hours each at 3 levels - Basic, Advanced and Special. The contents of these 
programmes have been created by FSSAI through domain experts. In a cascading model, 
Training of Trainers is done by FSSAI and Training Partners are empanelled, who in turn 
train the Food Safety Supervisors. 
1.70 FSSAI is also providing training to Food Business Operators to ensure food safety 
and compliance. So far approximately 359000 + people have been trained across the country 
through more than 13329 training programmes.Further, with outbreak of CoVID -19 in 
March, 2020, FSSAI had to stop all physical training programmes. Entire FoSTaC ecosystem 
with 242 Training partners and 699 Trainers were utilised to train the food industry and food 
handlers about CoVID-19 precautionary measures while handling food. Till d ate, nearly 800 
training programmes on CoVID 19 precautionary measures have been conducted and 33000+ 
people trained.   FSSAI is also going to start regular FoSTaC courses online which will 
include online assessment. Not only Food Safety Supervisors’ Progra mme but also Training 
of Trainers programme will commence online from 1st June, 2020 onwards. 
 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
1.71 The Committee recommends that all States/UTs should have 1 DO for every District 
and 1 FSO for each Development Block in rural areas and 1 FSO for every 1000 FBOs in 
urban Areas. FSSAI has informed that a proposal to increase the staff strength of FSSAI has 
been taken up by the Government. The Committee is hopeful that the proposal for increasing 
the staff strength of FSSAI to mon itor the centrally licensed FBOs directly would be 
considered favourably by the Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
issue of creation of posts may be expedited. The recruitment regulations should be notified 
and vacancies for the post  of Designated Officers and Food Safety Officers should be filled 
immediately.   
(Para 3.74) 
Action Taken 
 
1.72 The Government of India has created 493 new posts in FSSAI raising the sanctioned 
posts for FSSAI from 356 to 824. Further, Recruitment Regulations have been finalised and 
notified in the official gazette and the process of recruitment has been initiated. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.73 The Committee is constrained to note that absence of a mechanism to monitor NABL 
empanelled labs is a matter of grave concern as the reliability and accuracy of results of 
testing for various parameters remains questionable. The Committee feels that the ve ry 
purpose of accreditation of labs is defeated if they are not able to execute their mandate 
efficiently. The Committee strongly recommends that the FSSAI should inspect, monitor and 
investigate these labs at periodic intervals so that their efficacy in t esting samples on the 
requisite parameters is maintained.  
(Para 4.31) 
Action Taken 
 
1.74 An audit/inspection plan for monitoring and investigation of food testing laboratories 
recognized by FSSAI has been prepared and is  being implemented.  

15 
 
Recommendation /Observation 
1.75  The Committee observed that in our country availability of technical graduates is not 
a problem but availability of employable graduates is. Collaboration between the 
Universities/Educational Institutions and Industry is very important  for skill development. 
The Committee is of the view that the connect between the Industry and the Educational 
Institutions needs to be fostered and encouraged. The graduates need to be given on ground 
practical training so that they acquire adequate skills to be employed. There is a huge demand 
of technical manpower in the food testing laboratories but this gap remains unfilled despite 
large pool of technical graduates available in the country. The graduates in Food Science and 
Technology should be groomed  to undertake the technical responsibility in these labs. This 
can solve the twin problems of increasing unemployment among the graduates and the 
shortage of manpower in labs. Further, the Committee also recommends that every Central, 
State and Private foo d testing laboratory must have a mandatory minimum number of staff 
specially Food Analysts in order to make it adequately functional. FSSAI and the Sate Food 
Authorities should also ensure that only qualified graduates with Science background are 
employed in the labs. The Food Analyst should work within a time limit and submit his 
report within a prescribed period. The laboratory Quality Audit should also pay special 
attention to the fact that only skilled people with technical knowledge form part of the staff. 
(Para 4.39) 
Action Taken 
1.76 In order to encourage fresh post graduates to have job prospects in food industry/ food 
testing laboratories for taking food analyst as a profession, FSSAI has started Junior Analyst 
Examination (JAE) along with the regul ar Food Analyst Examination. The Junior Analysts 
after acquiring the three years of mandatory experience in food testing analysis are given one-
time opportunity to appear in practical examination. Upon clearing practical examination, 
Junior Analysts will b e declared as Food Analyst under FSSR, 2011. In the three JAEs, 269 
candidates have been declared qualified and their placement in reputed food labs is being 
facilitated to give them requisite practical experience. 
1.77 Further, a Guiding Document containing the requirement of minimum number of 
technical staff, including Food Analyst is already in place. States/UTs are being reminded 
from time to time to fill up their vacant posts to make their laboratories fully functional. An 
audit/inspection plan for monitoring and investigation of laboratories recognized by FSSAI is 
also being prepared and would be finalized shortly. 
1.78 The requisite qualification for food analyst is mentioned in Rule 2.1.4 of Food Safety 
and Standard Rules, 2011 which is inter-alia as follows- 
“A person shall not be qualified for appointment as Food Analyst under the Act unless 
he/ she:- 
(i) Holds a Master’s degree in chemistry or Biochemistry or Microbiology or Dairy 
Chemistry or Food Technology, Food And Nutrition or holds Bachelor of Technology 
in Dairy/Oil or holds degree in Veterinary Sciences from a university establishes in 
India by law or is an associate of the Institution of Chemists (India) by examination in 
the section of food Analysts conducted by the Institution of Chemists (India) or any 
other equivalent qualification recognized and notified by the Central government for 
such purposes and has not less than three years experience in the analysis of food ; 
and  

16 
 
(ii) has been declared qualified for appointment as a Food analyst by a board appointed 
and notified by the Authority”. 
 
1.79 Most of the institutions and universities/ colleges under the universities are offering 
courses/ educational degrees which are required for food analyst 
Recommendation /Observation 
1.80 The Committee recommends norms desired for proper functioning of food testing lab 
with adequate manpower may be strictly adhered to in accordance with the suggestions of the 
Joint Committee of Parliament.  
(Para 4.41) 
Action Taken 
1.81 FSSAI has prepared a Guiding Document containing norms desired for proper 
functioning of a food testing laboratory with adequate manpower.  
Recommendation /Observation 
1.82 The Committee has taken cognisance of the Government’s proposal for opening 
laboratories equipped with most modern and sophisticated apparatus. Having laboratories 
with no proper equipments will not achieve the objective. Her e the Committee agrees with 
the observations of the Joint Committee of Parliament on Prevention of Food Adulteration 
(Amendment) Act, 1974 that though a high tech food testing laboratory is desirable but for 
financial constraints and the scarcity of traine d analytical chemists, microbiologists, 
technicians and other food –scientists, it may not be advisable to pen many laboratories. 
Therefore, the Committee emphasises that it would be more advisable to ensure that facilities 
available in existing laboratori es are strengthened/upgraded instead of setting up of new labs 
with inadequate infrastructure and manpower.   
(Para 4.48) 
Action Taken 
 
1.83 Focus of Central Sector Scheme is on strengthening/upgradation of existing State 
Food Testing Laboratories (SFTLs).  Even, FSSAI’s efforts are currently directed at 
upgrading its two existing labs. 
  
Recommendation /Observation 
1.84 The Committee understands that on a Writ Petition (Civil) No. 159 of 2012 before the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court, it had directed the FSSAI and State Food Safety Authorities to 
check the menace of milk adulteration. However, no concrete action has been taken by 
authorities to combat milk and food adulteration. The Committee desires to be apprised of 
status of the action taken thereon by the FSSAI and State Food Regulatory Authorities.   
(Para 5.11) 
Action Taken 
1.85 In compliance of the directions given by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India vide its 
Order dated 05.08.2016 in the matter -WP (C) No.159 of 2012 titled as Swami Achyutanand 
Tirth & Ors. V/s Union of India & ors. to check the menace of adulterated milk, FSSAI has 
communicated/advised States/UTs vide office letter dated 17th August, 2017 to comply with 
the directions of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India on 10 points.   States /UTs have taken 
follow up action on these directions.  Action taken report is also given at Annexure 2.   

17 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.86 The Committee is not convinced with the sampling procedure, analysis time and 
protocols followed in the national milk quality surveys conducted by FSSAI in 2011 and 
2016 as they were not uniform. The Committee observes that a precise and accurate 
conclusion out of survey(s) can be drawn only with appropriate sample size. Sample size of 
1791 and 1663 in the surveys of 2011 and 2016 were not adequate. Taking into account the 
size of population and the quantity of milk produced in the country, the Committee would, 
therefore, exhort the Ministry to ensure that in future the sample size of such sur veys should 
be appropriate and truly representative. The Ministry has to ensure that protocols followed for 
such surveys are uniform so that they lead to valid conclusions. The Committee also desires 
to be kept apprised of the findings of the national milk quality survey initiated in May, 2018. 
(Para 5.12) 
Action Taken 
1.87 FSSAI has conducted a survey on quality of milk. It initiated a Nationwide 
Qualitative Screening of milk samples for on -spot qualitative and quantitative analysis of 
milk. The survey was  initiated in May, 2018 with a sample size   of   6432 samples taken 
from 1100 towns with a population of over 50,000 across all 29 States and 7 Union 
Territories for qualitative and quantitative analysis. Scope of NMSQS 2018 covered 3 quality 
parameters ( Fat, SNF and water), 13 common adulterants (vegetable oil/fat, 
detergents/caustic soda, hydrogen peroxide, sugar, glucose, urea, starch, Maltodextrin, boric 
acid, ammonium sulphate, nitrates, cellulose, and neutralizer; and 3 contaminants (antibiotics, 
pesticides, aflatoxin M1,).  All the 6432 samples were collected and analysed qualitatively 
immediately onsite in mobile vans and nearly 30% of those samples that tested positive for 
any of the adulterants and/or contaminants were tested quantitatively in lab oratory to 
ascertain whether the samples were compliant or non-compliant to limits set.    
1.88 As per NMSQS final report released in October, 2019 -   
- About 7%  samples were found to be unsafe for consumption due to presence of 
harmful contaminants in e xcess of specified limits coming mainly from poor quality 
of feed, irresponsible use of antibiotics and poor farm practices 
- Only 12 out of total 6432 samples had adulterants that affect the quality of milk 
- About 41% of milk samples of the total were, h owever, non -compliant with 
reference to one or the other quality parameters [fat, Solid not -fat (SNF), sugar and 
maltodextrin] but were without any safety issues.   
1.89 Details of survey are  available at https://www.fssai.gov.in/home .   Thus, the survey  
results indicate clearly that milk being sold in India is largely safe for consumption.  This is 
contrary to the popular perception carried by the consumers owing to misrepresented 
information for various reasons including deceitful campaigns and unsubstantiated reports 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.90 The Committee understands that India is the largest producer and consumer of milk in 
the world and most of the milk is consumed in its basic form. The Collection and distribution 
of milk especially in smaller towns and villages however remain largely unorg anised as the 
same is done by small scale livestock keepers in an unregulated manner which often results 
in poor quality of milk. The Committee would, therefore, like that FSSAI/Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare in consultation with State/UT Government s should strive to put in place 

18 
 
a regulatory mechanism for spot testing of milk supplied by branded milk suppliers as well as 
small-scale milk distributors in town and villages through Milk Testing Labs at all stages 
right at the door step of consumer.    
(Para 5.13) 
Action Taken 
 
 1.91 FSSAI is providing Mobile Food Testing Labs called Food Safety on Wheels (FSW) 
to States/UTs that are equipped to perform simple tests for common adulterants in milk, apart 
from others.  
 
1.92 Further, Electronic Milk Adulteration Testing Machines ( EMAT) were also 
distributed to States/UTs for analysis of milk parameters and to differentiate between genuine 
and spurious milk. Cow milk, buffalo milk and mixed milk can be detected from village milk 
collection centres, mil k chilling centres, dairy plants, milk testing laboratories and can be 
easily used in remote areas where testing facilities are not available. NDRI, Karnal and many 
other institutions have brought out rapid milk testing kits and these are commercially 
available.  
 
1.93 FSSAI has also published a booklet called ‘ Detect Adulteration with Rapid Test 
(DART) ‘which is a compilation of common quick tests for detection of food adulterants 
including that in milk at household level. 
 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
1.94 The Committee is aware that in our rural areas, people buy loose mustard oil 
extracted from the local extraction machines. The Committee would like the FSSAI to 
impress upon the State Governments to ensure that till such time a blanket ban is worked out 
on the sale of loose edible oils, a system for testing of oil samples from the local extraction 
machines are put in place to ensure that they   are not contaminated with seeds of argemone 
or other toxic materials.  
(Para 5.22) 
Action Taken 
 
1.95 The suggestion of the Standing Committee has been noted and  States/UTs are being 
advised to step up surveillance/enforcement activities to check contamination and 
adulteration of edible oils including mustard oil. 
 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
1.96  The Committee appreciates the FSSAI initiative for fortification of oils given the 
large scale micronutrient deficiency in the country. However, FSSAI needs to establish 
adequate infrastructure for testing the fortified oil and for this assistance should be taken from 
different National Institutes working in the scientific field. Fortification of oil should be 
encouraged among the manufacturers with a proper monitoring mechanism of the fortified oil 
testing. Regular and timely inspections have to be conduct ed by the food authority. 
Moreover, there is need to conduct more research to find out the efficacy of vitamins pre and 
post usage in fortification of oil.  
(Para 5.24) 
 
 

19 
 
Action Taken 
1.97 To build infrastructure of testing of fortificants  in oil, FSSAI has started training of 
FSSAI notified laboratories in the country. There is already a provision of uploading the test 
reports from NABL accredited labs by the fortified food manufacturers on the Food 
Fortification Resource Centre (FFRC) web site https://ffrc.fssai.gov.in/ffrc/home for self -
compliance. 
1.98 The standards of fortified food staples have finally been notified on 2 nd August, 2018. 
Compliance to the standards will come into effect f rom 1 st January, 2019. As on date, 438 
Food Safety officers (FSOs) have been sensitized on food fortification including procedure of 
surveillance.   
1.99 Documented scientific evidence on benefits of  oil fortification is present and 
available on the FFRC Website at https://ffrc.fssai.gov.in/ffrc/oil_scientific_evidence FSSAI 
is encouraging more research projects on the same. 
 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
1.100 The Committee expresses serious concern over rampant use of toxic chemical 
formalin for preserving fish and calcium carbide for artificial ripening of fruits. This Sector 
being unorganised and there being fewer food inspectors for quality checks are seriou s 
challenges of food safety. However, an even bigger challenge is to raise consumer awareness 
about food safety standards in the country.  The Committee emphasizes that while ensuring 
stringent enforcement of food safety laws, we need capacity building not  just of the food 
professionals, but also of consumers. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a National 
Consumer Awareness Campaign in partnership with all stakeholders including the Central 
and State Agencies, Street vendors, universities and college s, NGOs, small and big food 
industry players need to be launched for safety issues including use of hazardous chemicals in 
fruits and vegetables.  
(Para 5.37) 
Action Taken 
1.101 FSSAI has developed a guidance document entitled ‘Issue of Formalin in Fish ’for 
awareness of people from all sectors. Further, an SOP on ‘Artificial ripening of fruits’ has 
already been prepared and a Guidance document /Orders have been issued. 
1.102 As r egards National Consumer Awareness campaign on issues of food safety in 
partnership with various entities, FSSAI is taking a collaborative approach to foster and 
promote a sense of shared responsibility and empower and engage with all stakeholders. 
Through its consumer focussed initiatives like SNF, Food Smart Consumer, Safe Water 
portal etc. and FBO focussed initiatives like FoSTaC, Serve Safe, Clean Street Food etc., 
FSSAI is reaching out and developing strong engagements with citizens and FBOs focussing 
on food safety and hygiene, healthy and nutritious food etc.    
 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
1.103 The Committee would urge upon FSSAI to issue advisories to State Food Regulatory 
Authorities to monitor use of calcium carbide, formalin and other hazardous  chemicals for 
artificial ripening of fruits and take stringent action for violation of the regulatory provisions 
of the relevant Act/rules. Farmers also need to be sensitized to understand the benefits of 

20 
 
natural ripening of fruits and vegetables. The Com mittee also notes that the Government has 
banned Oxytocin drug and restricted its manufacture and sale to prevent its misuse. Oxytocin 
would now only be manufactured by Karnataka Antibiotics and Pharmaceuticals Ltd. 
(KAPL) and rampant misuse of Oxytocin wi ll be checked. The Committee therefore 
recommends that on similar lines, the manufacture of toxic chemicals such as Calcium 
Carbide and Formalin etc. should be restricted and only a few companies should manufacture 
these chemicals for industrial use. Also the Committee recommends FSSAI to promote safer 
alternatives to chemicals used as preserving and ripening agent.   
(Para 5.38) 
Action Taken 
1.104 Under sub-regulation 2.3.5 of Food Safety and Standards (Prohibition and Restriction 
on Sales) Regulations, 20 11, use of acetylene gas, commonly known as carbide gas, in 
artificial ripening of fruits has been prohibited.  As an alternative, ripening of fruits by using 
ethylene gas at a concentration upto 100 ppm (100µ/L) depending upon the crop, variety and 
maturity is now permitted.  Ethylene is a safer alternative. it may be mentioned that ethylene 
is a hormone which is produced in the fruits naturally to facilitate their ripening   in a natural 
way.   
1.105 As also suggested by the Standing Committee, periodic advisories have been issued to 
the State Food Authorities to monitor use of calcium carbide   for artificial ripening of fruits 
and take stringent action for violation of the provisions. Further, whenev er a specific instance 
is reported about use of banned carbide gas for ripening, the matter is immediately taken up 
with Food Safety Commissioners of States/UTs for taking strict action in respect of reported 
instances.  
1.106 Further, a Guidance Note on a rtificial ripening of fruits has been published to create 
awareness among food business operators/ traders, consumers and other stakeholders related 
to various aspects of artificial ripening of fruits. It also includes Standard Operating 
Procedure detailing all facets of artificial ripening using ethylene gas and its reliable sources. 
In addition, a direction was issued on 16.08.2018 on use of ‘ethephon’ in powder form for 
artificial ripening of fruits and the same was uploaded on FSSAI’s website for wider 
publicity. It clarifies that ethephon in powder form may also be used as a source of ethylene 
gas provided that it shall be packed in sachets and shall not come in direct contact with fruits.  
1.107 It may be stated that Calcium Carbide/Formaldehyde etc. h ave many industrial uses. 
Regulating/restricting the manufacture and sale of such products does not come within the 
purview of FSSAI. 
 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
1.108 The Committee would like to point out that the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA), Maharashtra has directed the manufacturers to use blue colour for industrial ice which 
helps in differentiating it from the edible ice. Industrial ice manufacturers have already been 
directed to use Indigo Carmine or Brilliant Blue FCF upto 10 parts per milli on (ppm). The 
Committee recommends that this visual difference between industrial ice and edible ice 
should be replicated in all the States and Union Territories. This will help in preventing the 
use of industrial ice in place of edible ice and ensure that  industrial/contaminated ice is not 
used in drinks. State Regulatory Authorities should conduct regular inspections at ice 
manufacturing sites and strict actions must be taken against manufacturing units and vendors 
who manufacture/use ice from contaminate d water. Timely inspections have to be conducted 

21 
 
at the premises. The ice that is manufactured for preservation and the ice for edible purposes 
should not be manufactured at the same location.  
(Para 5.39) 
Action Taken 
1.109 With a view to check misuse of non-edible ice as edible ice, a decision has been 
taken and conveyed   to all States/UTs that food colour (Indigo Carmine or Brilliant blue up 
to 10 ppm) must be used in production of non -edible ice, including non -edible ice blocks 
coming in contact with food products during preservation/storage/transportation of perishable 
food commodities, to give it a bluish look/appearance so as to enable clear differentiation 
with edible ice which must remain colourless. All Food Business Operators engaged in 
production /use of edible/non -edible ice have been instructed to ensure visible distinction 
between edible and non-edible ice by using food colour as mentioned above in non -edible ice 
w.e.f. 1st June, 2018. Food Safety Commissioners of States/UTs have been asked to  enhance 
surveillance/enforcement on sale of non -edible ice so as to ensure compliance of this 
directive.  
 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
1.110   The Committee desires the FSSAI to ensure that all the provisions laid down in the 
FSS Regulations are being followed by all the importers and imported food products fulfil all 
the required standards and international benchmarks. The Committee recommends that 
FSSAI should frame specific guidelines for the food products that have been banned 
elsewhere in the world. Special care should be taken to ensure that expired food items do not 
get clearance and the country should not be a dumping ground for food item s rejected 
elsewhere due to quality issues.  
(Para 5.54) 
Action Taken 
 
1.111 To streamline the food import system, FSSAI has an online system known as F ood 
Import Clearance System (FICS). The FICS is integrated with the customs’ ICE -GATE 
(Indian Customs Electronic Commerce/Electronic Data interchange (EC/EDI) Gateway) 
system. 
 
1.112 Risk Management System (RMS) is implemented in ICE -GATE wherein, based on 
the risk categorization of the food, compliance history of the importer and country of origin 
etc. co nsignments are referred to FSSAI for clearance. Such food articles  are subjected to 
scrutiny of documents, visual inspection, sampling and testing in order to determine their 
conformance to the safety and quality standards laid down under various Food Safe ty and 
Standards Regulations. If sample is found conforming a No Objection Certificate (NOC) is 
generated and in case of otherwise, Non -Conforming Report (NCR) is generated.  For food 
consignments imported into India, a special condition has been introduce d through an 
amendment in Regulation 2 (b) (6) of Food Safety and Standards (Import) Regulations, 2017 
whereby food products having a valid shelf life of not less than sixty per cent or three months 
before expiry at the time of import, whichever is less, s hall not be cleared by Customs. As a 
result, entry of food products nearing expiry or after expiry date is prohibited. Food Import 
samples are tested with reference to the Standards prescribed under various FSS Regulations. 
The Standards notified by FSSAI are globally benchmarked while being consistent with 
Indian context. It is unlikely that a food product which is banned outside is allowed to enter 

22 
 
into the country as the Indian Standards are harmonized with Codex and other International 
Standards.    
 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
1.113 The Committee also recommends close monitoring of imported food items once the 
food item enters the market. Any quality issue that is reported across the country should be 
taken seriously. In the eventuality of ban on imported item entering the Indian mark et, the 
information should be immediately shared with the industry as well as the consumers. There 
should be a recall plan for immediate withdrawal of imported food items.   Based on the 
advisory issued by FSSAI on 11.06.2018, Director General of Foreign T rade (DGFT), 
prohibited the import of milk and milk products (including chocolates and chocolate products 
and candies/confectionary/food preparations with milk or milk solids as an ingredient) from 
China till 23.12.2018. 
(Para 5.55) 
Action Taken  
1.114 The Licensing Authority cancels or suspends food import license if there is 
contravention of the provisions of FSS(Import) Regulations or the Food Safety and Standards 
(Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses) Regulations, 2011.  
1.115 Data regarding rejections of imported food consignments are also being uploaded on 
monthly basis on FSSAI website. A monthly report on rejections are also sent to the 
Embassies of the respective Countries along with the reasons for rejections and necessary  
applicable FSS Rules and Regulations.  Further, Food Import Rejection Alert system has 
been developed to capture non-compliances of all imported food products. 
1.116 Information in respect of recall plan has been furnished in reply to Para 3.23 above.  
Recommendation /Observation 
 
1.117  The Committee has been given to understand that presently it takes five to eight days 
to get import clearance for a   food consignment while there has been demand to reduce this 
time for ease of doing business. The Committee recommends that steps should be  taken to 
reduce the import clearance time but not at the cost of quality and safety aspects. Especially 
with respect to the perishable items. FSSAI should aim on reducing the import clearance time 
significantly so that only fresh food items reach the consumers.  
(Para 5.56) 
Action Taken 
1.118 FSSAI has taken many steps for reducing the clearance time of Imported Food items 
such as: 
a) Introduction of provisional No Objection Certificate (PNOC) for imported pre -
packaged retail food articles vide directions dated 01.05.2018, in addition to Provisional 
No Objection Certificates (PNOC) for imported food items having short shelf -life (less 
than 7 days) such as fresh fruits & vegetables which require special storage conditions.  
With the PNOC, an importer can move t he imported food consignment to a   well -
equipped storage facility till receipt of the lab test results, but can’t release the same in 
the market. This step results into reduction of the demurrage charges. 
 

23 
 
b) FSSAI has identified laboratories in exporting countries viz. Bangladesh and Bhutan for 
prior testing of food samples.The test analysis certificate issued by these laboratories 
are accepted at Indian points of entry for food import clearance and such consignments 
are not subject to further testing upon arrival in India. 
 
   c)   A regular monitoring of time taken for testing of imported food items by labs is being 
carried out regularly. The poor performing labs are removed from the system. 
 
1.119 As a result of the above measures, time taken in import clearance has been reduced 
significantly.   
 
Recommendation /Observation 
1.120 The Committee underlines the need to establish a proper monitoring mechanism for 
checking the claims of the packaged food . FSSAI should ensure that the food companies do 
not make any false claims regarding the nutritional information. All the packaged food 
irrespective of the size of the packet should include a list of ingredients, additives, nutritional 
information etc. so that the consumer makes a well informed choice.  
(Para 6.9) 
Action Taken 
1.121 FSSAI has revised Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labelling) Regulations 
and has framed three separate Regulations.  One of which is Food Safety and Standards 
(Advertisements and Claims) Regulations which has now been finally notified. These 
regulations specify general principles for claims and provide conditions for specific claims 
like nutritional claims, non-addition claims, health claims, claims related to dietary guidelines 
or healthy diets, conditional claims and prohibited claims. Further, it includes the schedules 
for approved Nutrition claims, Health claims for disease risk & fortified foods, cl aims 
regarding use of words like natural, fresh, pure, original, traditional, premium, real etc.  
1.122 Provision has also been made for restricting the advertisements and/or claims for 
food articles that undermines the products of any other manufacturer for the purpose of 
promoting their products or influencing consumer behavior.  
Recommendation /Observation 
1.123  The Committee applauds the FSSAI’s Safe and Nutritious Food (SNF) @School 
Initiative which entails dissemination of simple food safety messages through books that have 
been developed by FSSAI. The Committee reiterates the initiative of FSSAI that activities 
promoting food safety should be made part of the school curriculum. More efforts have to be 
put to deliver age appropriate messages to the students. The Committee recommends all the 
States to introduce Yellow book developed by FSSAI in the schoo ls. The Yellow book 
should also be made available in the regional languages and necessary changes can be made 
according to the region.   
(Para 6.33) 
 Action Taken 
1.124 FSSAI has requested States and State Education Boards to incorporate Yellow book 
into the curriculum. The Training Manual, Yellow Book and videos have been shared with 
Central Institute of Educational Technology (CIET) -NCERT for review and inclusion in the 
main curriculum. In addition to ensure outreach of the initiative, FSSAI is making fol lowing 
efforts:   

24 
 
 More than 500 School teachers across the country have been trained as Master 
Trainers/ Health & Wellness Coordinators by FSSAI to promote healthy diets among 
school children.  
 
 Yellow Books and Training Manual for teachers have been hosted on Ministry of 
Human Resource and Development (HRD)’s DIKSHA portal for teachers.  
 
 Till date, more than 600 mascot activations have been done across the country at 
schools and public places. 
1.125 States like Gujarat and Tamil Nadu have already translated the books in regional 
languages. 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
1.126 The Committee also observes that States are famous for their local food items which    
are produced by small scale industries generally in households. There is a growing demand 
for these food items in other States. In view of absence of regulations for suc h food items, it 
is imperative that to ensure safety, food products of different States should adhere to basic 
standards of food safety. The Committee recommends that the FSSAI should co -ordinate 
with State Food Departments for  monitoring of such food ite ms generally produced by 
cottage small scale industries in order to ensure adherence to basic  food safety standards. 
 
(Para 6.39) 
Action Taken 
 
1.127 FSSAI has already started training of the small - scale/ cottage industries in the food 
sector which are mostly run by the Self Help Groups under the FoSTaCsystem. This activity 
will be scaled up as per recommendation of the Standing Committee. 
  

25 
 
CHAPTER–II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.1 The Committee notes that FSSAI is the apex regulatory body for food safety in the 
country and the Preamble to FSS Act inter -alia seeks to lay down science based standards for 
articles of food and ensure availability of safe and wholesome food for human con sumption.  
Food Safety is thus a specialized job and FSSAI being a science based organization should be 
equipped with proper tools and capabilities and headed by someone with the requisite 
technical acumen and appropriate expertise to address the challengi ng task of food regulation 
for a country like India.  Engaging man-power with technical skill and competence, therefore, 
becomes imperative for effective rendering of important mandate given to FSSAI.  The 
Committee is of the opinion that the regulatory body should be run by experts/scientists in the 
food sector with bureaucratic support.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
qualifications   and procedures of selection and appointment of Chairman and CEO of FSSAI 
be reviewed so that the best profe ssional with domain expertise are selected for this onerous 
regulatory responsibility. While reviewing and modifying the process of selection and 
appointment of Chairman and CEO, the Government may take a cue from similar regulatory 
mechanisms functioning in some of the developed countries like USA, UK, Australia etc.  
 
(Para 1.22) 
   
Action Taken  
 
2.2 The process of selection of Chairperson, FSSAI who is the head of this organization, 
has been laid down in section 5 & 6 of the Food Safety and Standards Ac t, 2006. In terms of 
Section 5 (3) of the Act, the Central Government appoints Chairperson, FSSAI from amongst 
the persons of eminence in the field of food science or from amongst the persons from 
administration who have been/are associated with the subjec t in the level not below the rank 
of Secretary to the Government of India. Chairperson and CEO are appointed on the basis of 
administrative experience in diverse fields . They work with aid and advice of technical 
experts available in Scientific Panels of F SSAI on different subjects. Experience, so far, has 
shown that they have functioned very effectively in discharge of their responsibilities.  
 
Recommendation /Observation 
   
2.3 The Committee recommends that proper guidelines for selection of members in the 
Scientific Committee must be made and strictly adhered to. The Scientific Panel should also 
have some members with industrial experience so that the diverse views from other se ctors 
are also accommodated.  
(Para 1.28) 
Action Taken 
2.4 The FSSAI selects the members of Scientific Committee/Panels in their individual 
capacity and not as a representative of any organization based on “Guidelines for Internal 
Procedure for Selection o f Members of the Scientific Committee and Scientific Panels” 
approved by the Food Authority. The Guidelines are strictly followed.  Further, it may be 

26 
 
added that the Hon’ble Supreme Court in its order dated 08.02.2011 had directed the 
Authority to remove t he members of Scientific Committee/Panels who were in private 
employment, particularly in food sector, where there would be potential conflict of interest.  
2.5 However, FSSAI takes advantage of people with industrial experience in various 
ways. For instance, FSSAI has set up Standards Review Groups comprising of people mainly 
from industry to get their inputs on setting up food standards. Further, technical panels to 
develop food safety practice manual, training curriculum etc. are primarily comprising of 
experts from industry.   
 
Recommendation//Observation 
2.6 The Committee notes that FSSAI has cited financial constraint as one of the main 
reasons in its failure to upgrade the food safety mechanism in the country.  The annual budget 
allocated to FSSAI is extremely low when compared to annual budgets of counterpart 
organizations in different countries. This highlights the inadequate attention being given to 
matters related to food safety. The Committee would like to emphasize that food safety not 
only ensures good health but is also vital for economic growth and progress.  The food 
processing industry has tremendous potential to remunerative prices to farmers for their 
produce.  However, tapping such opportunities is possible only if our food safety apparatus is 
brought at par with international standards.  
(Para 1.40) 
Action Taken 
2.7 The budgetary allocation and expenditure in FSSAI have both seen a sizeable 
increase. In t he 5 year period from 2015 -16 to 2019 -20, the budgetary allocation has 
increased from Rs. 69.2 crores to 360 crores i.e. an increase of more than 5 times.  Utilization 
has also significantly increased from 66% in the year 2015 -16 to 99% in the year 2018 -19 as 
can be seen below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.8 This has been possible due to the efforts of FSSAI, supported by Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare and the positive response of Ministry of Finance e.g. as in the case of 
financial support of Rs 482 crores for strengthening/upgradation of Food Testing 
Laboratories; or creation of 493 additional posts in FSSAI. Regular follow -up by FSSAI and 
support of MOHFW and Finance Ministry has resulted in an allocation of Rs 360 crores for 
the current Financial Year. 
2.9 The Provisional expenditure for 2019 -20 is    Rs. 273.77 Crore, which is 89.86% of 
Final Estimate amount. The Unspent amount for the FY 2018-19 was Rs. 3.45 Crore,. During 
the Year, FSSAI has received Rs. 301.22 Crore from MoH&FW. Therefore the Final 
Financial 
Year 
Allocation (Rs crores) Expenditure 
(Rs. Crores 
 
 
  
2015-16 69.20  45.51 
2016-17 78.30 76.16 
2017-18 185.58 181.13 
2018-19 261.50 258.05 
2019-20 360 --- 

27 
 
Estimate of amount available with FSSAI was Rs. 304.67 Crore out of which FSSAI spent 
Rs. 273.77 Crore during 2019 -20 and an amount of Rs. 30.90 Crore is unspent for the FY 
2019-20. 
  
2.10 Strengthening of Food Testing Laboratories (SoFTeL) Scheme was approved b y the 
MoH&FW with a total outlay of Rs. 481.95 Crore for 3 years . Year wise expenditure under 
the Scheme (2016-17 to 2019-20 ) is as below: 
 
(Rs. In crores) 
2016-17 13.50 crore 
2017-18 87.88 crore 
2018-19 158.00 crore 
2019-20 102.30 crore 
 
 2.11 An amount of Rs. 283.71 Crore has been allocated to FSSAI as B.E for the FY 2020 -
21 against the projected demand of Rs. 410.00 Crore.   Hence , the FSSAI may seek further 
funder under supplementary grants.  
 
Recommendations/Observation 
2.12 The Committee underlines the need for an effective allocation of financial resources 
to FSSAI coupled with an effective State Food regulatory mechanism to strengthen the food 
safety infrastructure in the country. The Committee, accordingly, recommends a qu antum 
jump in the budgetary allocation for FSSAI.  The States should also enhance outlay for food 
safety to ensure safe and wholesome food for the citizens.  
(Para 1.41) 
Action Taken 
2.13 States / UTs are being regularly advised to increase outlay for food  safety for reasons 
stated by the Standing Committee. 
 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
2.14 The implementation and enforcement of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 rests 
primarily with the State/UT Governments, for which regular surveillance, monitoring and  
inspection are required to be undertaken by them.  The Committee however notes that many 
States do not have a separate food safety Department.  The Committee is of the view that 
food adulteration, lack of quality checks, misleading labelling, sale of defective food products 
etc. that have become the norm these days are primarily an offshoot of absence of a dedicated 
and robust food safety apparatus at the State Level. The Joint Committee of Parliament on the 
Prevention of Food Adulteration (Amendment), 197 4 had recommended long back that for 
effective implementation of the Act, a separate food safety department under the control of 
the Director of Health should be established in all the States.  Endorsing the same view, the 
Committee strongly recommends est ablishment of a separate agency or Department of Food 
Safety in each State for enforcing a robust food safety mechanism in the country.  The 
Committee also recommends that the creation of a dedicated food regulatory mechanism in 
each State be taken up by t he Union Government with the State Governments at the highest 
level.    
 

28 
 
2.15 The Committee notes that there is no uniformity in the food safety infrastructure 
across the country.  Some States do not even have a food safety department and a food safety 
appellate tribunal.  The food testing laboratories lack functional equipments as well as 
technical manpower.  This inadequate arrangement has failed to control food adulteration in 
the country.   Therefore, the Committee recommends removal of this existing in consistency 
and introduction of a uniform structure across the country.  The Central Government should 
work in cooperation with the State Government to establish a uniform food safety regulatory 
regime in the country.  It is also very important for the foo d testing laboratories across 
States/UTs to follow uniform procedure/methodology and guidelines so that consistent results 
are obtained.   
(Para 2.17 & 2.20) 
Action Taken  
 
i. The issue of setting up separate food safety department has been taken up with 
States/UTs regularly. As per the data shared by States/UTs in Quarterly Progress 
Report on State Specific recommendations of CAG and the PSC, process of creation 
of separate food safety department has been initiated in 6 States/UTsviz Andhra 
Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Goa &Uttrakhand. 
ii. FSSAI had initially proposed in the draft amendments the setting up of the ‘State 
Food Authority’ to be headed by the Chief Secretary of the State for coordination and 
supervision for enforcement of the Act. However, some of the State Governments did 
not find favour with such a proposal considering it as transgression of their legislative 
powers in the federal structure. It was also felt that the structure of food safety 
departments of States/ UTs cannot be uniform but would necessarily vary considering 
peculiar facts in State/ UT such as demography, geography, terrain, spread & reach of 
food businesses, food habits of general populace. Therefore, on reconsideration, the 
proposal to have an independent Food Safety Department and State Food Authority in 
each State/ UT has been dropped and is not among the amendment proposals 
submitted by FSSAI to the Ministry. 
 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
2.16 In some States/UTs officers in Health Department are holding additional charge of 
food safety department.  Section 30 of the FSS Act states that the State Government shall 
appoint the Commissioner of Food Safety for the State for efficient implementation of food 
safety and standards and other requirements la id down under the Act.  The Section spells out 
the functions of the Commissioner of Food Safety in terms of  (i) regulating manufacture, 
storage, distribution or sale of any article of food in the interest of public health, (ii) carrying 
out survey of the industrial units engaged in manufacture or processing of food, (iii) 
conducting or organising training programmes for the personnel, (iv) generating awareness of 
food safety, (v) ensuring an efficient and uniform implementation of the standards and (vi) 
sanctioning prosecution for offences etc. The Committee understands that the Food Safety 
Commissioner has to perform a wide range of functions.  It, therefore, recommends that the 
officer should be conversant with food science and technology and should be a whole time 
officer.  Part time arrangement for such important functions in many States/UTs will not 
serve the interest of the Act. 
(Para 2.18) 
Action Taken 
 
2.17 FSSAI has already requested States/UTs to appoint full time Food Safety 
Commissioner and, if there is any need, they may constitute an inter -departmental committee 

29 
 
to implement it. Out of 36 States/UTs, 15 States/UTs at present   have full time Food Safety 
Commissioners. None of the States/UTs have constituted an inter -departmental committee 
with regard to appointment of full time Food Safety Commissioner.   Due to efforts made, 
now 15 Full Time Food Safety Commissioners, 432 Full Time Designated Officers and  2563 
Full Time Food Safety Officers are in position. State -wise details of States/UTs having Food 
Safety Commissioners on full time basis or on additional charge basis is at Annexure-3.  
 
2.18 State wise details of full time as well as part time Designate d Officers (DOs) and 
Food Safety Officers (FSOs) is also available at Annexure-3.  
 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
2.19 The Committee gathers that a large number of food products are sold as health food, 
‘’rich in..., contains added....., fortified with...., added with...., natural, herbal, organic’’ etc. 
As of now, there are no definitions for these products under the FSS Act, 2006 and 
consumers are also not aware of these terms and their health implications.  Though large 
number of products is sold by manufacturers under these claims, these terms are not clear to 
manufacturers either. Even the food inspectors have their ow n interpretation due to which 
corrupt practices are prevailing.  The Committee is of the view that since these claims have 
health as well as financial implications for the consumer, the matter should not be left to 
market forces and manufacturers.  In fact , all term and claims used on the label must be 
defined under the Act or the rules and no one should be allowed to make claims without 
scientific evidence or data.  Besides all these terms must have verification criteria and 
reporting system under the law.   
(Para 2.27) 
Action Taken 
2.20 The Food Safety and Standards (Advertisements and Claims) Regulations have been 
notified which will address this issue and will allow the use of such words or phrases only 
under certain conditions/criteria.   
2.21 Further, these regulations specify general principles for claims and provides 
conditions for specific claims like nutritional claims, non -addition claims, health claims, 
claims related to dietary guidelines or healthy diets, conditional claims and prohibited claims . 
This would adequately address the concerns raised by the Standing Committee.  
Recommendation /Observation 
2.22 The Committee would like the food authorities to take stringent actions against FBOs 
working without licenses and impose fines and penalty agai nst the errant. Such FBOs pose 
risk to the lives of many and should be suitable punished/ penalized as per the provisions of 
the Act. The regular offenders should also be given wide publicity in newspapers and social 
media so that the masses are aware of t he wrong practices. The Committee emphasizes the 
optimum utilization of the food testing labs by collection and analysis of more and more food 
samples. FSSAI may prescribe a minimum number of samples to be collected by each Food 
Inspector. Online reporting of all the samples tested by food analysts should be documented 
and close scrutiny of these samples should be done on a daily basis. Persons involved in 
sampling and analysis should be accountable for cases which fail in court due to wrong 
sampling and wrong analysis.  
(Para 3.11) 
 

30 
 
Action Taken 
2.23 In terms of Section 31 (1) of FSS Act, 2006, n o person shall commence or carry on 
any food business except under a license. Further, Section 63 of FSS Act, 2006 provides 
penalties for operating food business without a valid license under FSS Act, 2006. 
2.24 Further, FSSAI has recently issued directions to States/UTs for fixing the enhanced 
targets of food samples to be collected and analyzed in the food laboratories.  
2.25 To bring transparency and accountability in inspection, FSSAI has developed a digital 
inspection system - FoSCoRIS which enables inspection through Tablet/Mobile. It has 
features such as geo tagging, real time data collection that enables the FSOs to take photo and 
upload them with inspection  report to support their findings. Basic objectives of the 
FoSCoRIS are already stated in response to para 2.41 above. 
 
2.26 The data of sampling and testing is also being digitalized through InFoLNet  portal 
which enables online reporting of all the samples tested by food analysts to bring in 
transparency.   
  
Recommendation /Observation 
2.27 The Committee agrees with the reply of the FSSAI that Condition No 4, 12 and 14 are 
fundamental to ensuring food safety. FSSAI should follow a mechanism to ensure that the 
Food Business Operators follows and strictly adhere to these conditions. The Committee also 
notes that the manufactures/ importers/ distributors have to be needful that they buy and sell 
food products only from licensed/ registered vendors. Also, the State Licensing Authorities 
and the Food Safety Officers should ensure through timely inspections that these conditions 
are being followed by the FBOs. A technical help in the food business premise s will help in 
effective control and safety of the production process. Hence, these conditions are essential to 
ensure that safe manufacturing practices are being followed by the food business operators. 
The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the FBOs  should strictly buy/ sell only from 
vendors who hold a valid FSSAI license. The Committee believes that FSSAI alone cannot 
enforce the FSS Act. It is the duty and the responsibility of the FBOs, vendors, consumers to 
be vigilant about food safety issues and help in effective implementation of the Act. Needless 
to mention, food safety can be ensured by combined effort of the Government, the FBOs and 
the consumers as food safety is a shared responsibility. Industry should also play a proactive 
role when it comes to manufacturing safe food and complying with the food safety norms. 
(Para 3.16) 
Action Taken 
2.28 To buy and sell food products only from/to licensed/registered vendors is one of the 
conditions for license and is a part of the inspection checklist. D uring the inspection, the 
records of sale and purchase are checked to ensure that the food product is sold to registered/ 
licensed vendor and raw material is purchased from registered/ licensed supplier.  
2.29 Consumers have a right to information, informe d choice, right to education, safe and 
nutritious food, right to redress their grievances. In recognition of these rights, FSSAI has 
taken many initiatives, aimed at empowering consumers and protecting their interest. FSSAI 
developed an exclusive Consumer Education Portal to educate consumers on all issues 
pertaining to food safety. This portal also provides consumers with a forum/platform 
providing an opportunity to express their views, ask questions and register their complaints. 
To create consumer awaren ess about food safety and hygiene, FSSAI has introduced colour -

31 
 
coded ‘Food Display Board’ which includes FSSAI license/registration number, appropriate 
food safety and hygiene practices to be followed by FBOs in their establishments. Further, a 
Food Safety  Connect Portal has also been created by FSSAI to facilitate consumers to 
provide feedback and register complaints. 
 
Recommendation /Observation 
2.30 The Committee observes that the purpose of licensing and registration is to ensure 
that minimum safety sta ndards are in place with food operators before they offer products to 
consumers. However, certain unscrupulous Food Safety Officers/ Food Inspectors indulge in 
unethical and illegal practices without concern for the health of common people, as a result of 
which unhygienic factories are being given licenses in gross violation of the quality norms 
prescribed under the FSS Act 2006. With a view to curb such corrupt practices, the 
Committee recommends that no factory visit or inspection should be done without 
photographic evidences of the factory’s hygienic conditions. All inspection reports must be 
accompanied by photographs of all the sections of the factory.  
 
2.31 The Committee also recommends that all sampling and inspections should be made on 
real time bas is and result (s) of sample should be reported online from the site itself with 
photographs of the samples and the witnesses. 
(Para 3.19 & 3.20) 
Action Taken 
 
2.32 Videography/photography of food premises   is being carried out in most cases during 
inspections by Food Safety Officers as evidence of inspection/violation and to curb any 
wrongdoing.  Further, to bring transparency and accountability in inspection, FSSAI has 
developed a digital inspections system - FoSCoRIS which enables inspection through 
Tablet/Mobile. It has certain features like geo -tagging, real time data collection that enables 
the FSOs to take photo and upload them with inspection report to support their findings.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
   
2.33 The Committee takes note of the fact that the proprietary food has been defined in 
regulations 2.12 of Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) 
Regulations, 2011 as food which has not been standardized under these regulations but does 
not include any normal food, food for special dietary use, functional food, nutraceutical, 
health supplement etc.  They can be made from milk/milk products, cereals, eggs or meat 
products, vegetables, fruits or nuts etc like ready to cook cereals including instant poha, 
upma, chips, instant coffee tea, masala mixes, mixes used for making items like cakes, sweets 
etc.  In case of proprietary food, there is always a possibility of innovation.  However, there 
are many other concerns associated with proprietary food like permitted ingredients including 
food additives that can be used in the proprietary food and chances of combinatorial effect of 
ingredients.  The Committee is of the view that at a time when States are struggling to 
provide basic food sa fety infrastructure, an additional responsibility of granting licenses to 
proprietary food can be a burden.  Until and unless there is a proper scientific panel and 
research team in each food safety department, keeping a check on the quality and safety 
proprietary food can be a big issue.  At present, many States do not even have a separate food 
safety department, let alone a scientific research team.  Therefore, granting licenses for 
Proprietary Food should be the prerogative of the Central Licensing Authority.   
(Para 3.29) 

32 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.34 As per Schedule 1 of the FSS (Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses), 
Regulations 2011, Central license is required for “all food business operators manufacturing 
any article of food containing ingredients or substances or using technologies or pro cesses or 
combination thereof whose safety has not been established through these regulations or which 
do not have a history of safe use or food containing ingredients which are being introduced 
for the first time into the country.”  
 
2.35 Therefore, propr ietary food is being verified by FSSAI. An IT system has been 
recently developed for food products verification. As far as adverse combinatorial effect is 
concerned, in general, no such adverse effects have been found, if the ingredients are safe as 
per th e Scientific Committee. However, if such cases are brought to the notice of the 
Authority, risk assessment would be carried out on case to case basis.  
 
Recommendation /Observation 
2.36 The Committee is in agreement with the justification behind separating the two lines 
of activities in terms of licensing and enforcement through FSOs.  Due  to staff shortage, the 
FSO is burdened with multiple assignments and is not able to do justice with  the main 
duties/tasks assigned to him for enforcement of the FSS Act.  The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends to the Ministry and Food Authority to take into cognizance the ground realities 
and contemplate solutions for the same apart from augmenting the manpower.  
(Para 3.36) 
Action Taken 
2.37 There is shortage of manpower in the States/UTs. In the 12th meeting of Central 
Advisory Committee (held on 1st August, 2014), it was recommended that all States/UTs 
should have 1 DO for every District and 1 FSO for  each Development Block in rural areas 
and 1 FSO for every 1,000 FBOs (Food Business Operators) in urban areas. This issue has 
also been deliberated in the 1 st Round Table Conference with the Health Ministers and 
Principal Health Secretaries of States/UTs, in January, 2018. Accordingly, FSSAI has written 
to Chief Secretaries of all States/ UTs, where there is shortage of manpower, to create posts 
of DOs & FSOs as per norms and fill up the vacancies. Several States have responded 
favourably and situation is now improving.  Chapter II 
 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
2.38 The Committee is of the view that Inspections form the core of a food safety network 
and therefore FSSAI or the State food authorities should conduct inspections before issuance 
of any license or make inspections mandatory post issuance of license/registra tion.  There 
should be a provision wherein the FBO should submit a detailed plan to be adopted in case of 
an emergency situation.  
(Para 3.47) 
 Action Taken 
 
2.39 To the extent possible, inspection post issuance of license is being done. In case of 
registration, this is not feasible due to the large numbers. In order to address manpower 
constraints, a system of 3 rd party inspection/ audit has also been introduced.  It may also be 

33 
 
pointed out that FBOs are required to have FSMS plan and the same is required to be 
declared by FBOs at the time of new license/renewal of license. 
 
Recommendation /Observation 
2.40 The Committee feels that analysis of the sample in the food testing labs will be 
successful only when the sample that is picked up by a FSO is properly stored and 
transported to the laboratory.  The guidelines on sampling have to be followed.  The FSOs 
have to be trained, qualified in the procedure of lifting, keeping and send samples properly so 
that the samples that are sent to the labs give accurate results.  It is necessary to specify a time 
limit by which a FSO should submit the samples to the Food Analyst for laboratory analysis.  
(Para 3.58) 
Action Taken 
2.41 There is a manual of FSSAI on General Guidelines of Sampling which prescribes 
basic recommendations for the selection of sampling plans, statistical design for sampling, 
sampling procedure etc.  Food Safety Officers and Designated Officers are being trained from 
time to time on how to collect, store and send samples to Food Analysts for analysis.   
Recommendation /Observation 
2.42 The Committee notes that the times of 14 days stipulated for analysis of samples of 
food articles seems inadequate given the state of the present lab infrastructure in the country, 
but the efforts should be made to decrease this time limit rather than increasing it. Reliable 
and speedy food testing is important for determining the qualitative parameters of the food. 
The Committee therefore, recommends that the food authority and the State/ UT 
Governments should ensur e that the laboratories where the food is sent for analysis have 
adequate number of technical staff and are technical staff and are technically equipped so that 
the time frame of fourteen days can become a practical possibility. 
2.43 The Committee takes no te of the existing food testing infrastructure in the country 
and observes that given the magnitude of the problem of food contamination and adulteration 
in the country, availability of mere 266 laboratories in a country with 130 crore population 
are grossly insufficient.  The Committee is of the considered view that despite having a legal 
framework for food regulation in place, India is struggling with enforcement of food safety 
norms and standards because the number of food testing labs per million people  in the 
country is far below than the USA, China, Germany etc. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Centre should provide financial assistance to strengthen the state food 
regulatory systems so that each State has sufficient number of food testing  laboratories 
proportionate to the population of the State. The Committee desires to be apprised of the steps 
taken by the Ministry to create new laboratories and strengthen the existing laboratories as 
well. 
(Para 4.12 & 2.49) 
 Action Taken 
2.44 FSSAI is conducting a Meta Study on the status of Food Testing Laboratories (FTLs) 
in India. Interim report has already been received. As per this report, there are over 750 FTLs 
in India, of which 191 FTLs are notified by FSSAI while another 76 State Food Labs are  
functioning under transitory provision. 

34 
 
2.45 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is already providing financial assistance 
through FSSAI for strengthening of State Food Testing Laboratories in the country.  Under 
this Scheme, 42 State Food Testing labor atories (SFTLs) would be upgraded across the 
country, at least one in each State/UT and two in larger States, subject to readiness of the 
States/UTs. This would create a network of modern government food testing laboratories in 
the country at State level.  
2.46 12 referral laboratories are also being strengthened under this scheme.   Seven referral 
laboratories have already been taken up for upgradation and a grant of Rs.13.72 crore 
(approx.) has been released to them.  
2.47 During the FY 2019-20, 3 more State Food Testing Laboratories one each in  Haryana 
(Karnal), Kerala (Ernakulam) and Tripura,  have been taken up for upgradation under the 
Central Sector Scheme raising the total no. of State Food Testing Laboratories taken up for 
upgradation to 39 in 29 States/UTs. 
2.48 So far, 90 Mobile Food Testing Laboratories (MFTLs) have been delivered to 33 
States/UTs across the country in phase manner. All MFTLs are operational except 36 MFTLs 
which have been delivered to States/UTs after February, 2020. These 36 MFTLs are likely to 
be operational by respective States/UTs after lockdown due to COVID -19 is over. All these 
MFTLs have been provided to States/UTs based on their geographical area, readiness in 
terms of manpower, etc. and performance of utilization of MFTLs in previous phase(s).  
 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
2.49 The media reports suggest that India is one of the top three countries to face 
rejections in the monthly refusal list of food items by the Operational and Administrative 
System for Import Support (OASIS) of the US FDA.  The Committee understands that some 
private food testing laboratories do not fail sample of their clients for fear of losing business. 
There have also been instances when food samples tested in Indian food labs were found ’o f 
good quality’ but failed quality tests when they reached their foreign destinations. These 
rejections bring bad name to the country. The Committee considers this state of affairs as 
very serious and recommends that an enquiry be conducted into such cases  reported during 
the last three years so that the responsibility is fixed and appropriate action is taken against 
the guilty. 
(Para 4.23) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.50 This matter would not fall under direct oversight of FSSAI, however, in consultation 
with export p romoting agencies, a list of such cases as pointed out by the Committee would 
be prepared and then appropriate action taken. 
 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
2.51 The Committee is surprised to note that the standards for oil have not been revised 
since 1960. The Committee would like the FSSAI to set a timeline on priority for expediting 
the whole process of revision of standards conducive to the food processing indu stry as well 
as ensuring food safety. All the stakeholders need to be consulted and involved in the whole 
process. While establishing the Indian standards, international benchmarks such as CODEX 
standards for oil should also be considered. The Committee ho pes that new revision in 
standards would take into account the nature of oil -seed, changes in atmosphere and soil 

35 
 
conditions to ensure the availability of safe edible oil to the consumer. The Committee 
desires to be kept updated in this regard. 
(Para 5.27) 
Action Taken 
2.52 It is not true that standards of oil have not been revised since 1960.  Standards of oils 
have been revised from time to time. Several new parameters like fatty acid composition of 
edible oil, Total polar compound standard for repeated frying of oil, perox ide value in 
vegetable oils, trans fats in refined vegetable oil etc. have been added and some parameters 
like Bellier Turbidity Test have been removed from vegetable oils etc. Several new standards 
like Palm Stearin; Palm Kernel Olein; Palm Kernel Stearin ; Superolein, Chia Oil, Virgin 
coconut oil etc. have also been developed which are at different stages of notification. 
2.53 Data is being generated to review the standards of Sunflower Oil, Mustard Oil, 
Soybean Oil, Groundnut Oil and Sesame Oil. 
2.54 While revising the standards, the scientific panel takes into consideration all relevant 
factors.  The Panel would be specifically advised to look into factors stated by the Standing 
Committee.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.55 The Committee applauds the measures taken by Sikkim to dissuade the use of 
plastics by not giving licences/licences not being renewed every year if shopkeepers were 
using plastic bags/heavy fines being imposed/consumers being made aware/campaigns being 
carried out in school to educate children on the damage plastic can do. The Committee would 
like the FSSAI to study the Sikkim model and encourage other States to strive to emulate the 
measures being taken by the Government of Sikkim to curb the use of plasti cs to ensure that 
the next generation is able to live in a plastic free environment.  
(Para 5.46) 
Action Taken 
2.56 While, the issue primarily concerns Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change, FSSAI would study Sikkim model and use it in its awa reness building activities as 
may be feasible. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.57 The Committee is constrained to note that custom officials who have a different job 
profile have been notified as Authorised  Officers and appointed to act as Food Safety 
Officers in order to check safety of imported food at 135 points of entry for importing food in 
the country. The Committee is unable to reconcile itself with the fact that such appointments 
have been made in co ntravention to the FSSAI’s own regulations which mandate food safety 
officers to have technical qualifications but the custom officials notified as Authorised 
Officers for food safety checks are not checked against the mandated qualifications before the 
additional charge of food safety of imported food is handed over to them. The Committee 
would, therefore, in the first instance, like the FSSAI to explain this apparent violation of its 
own regulations.  
(Para 5.60) 

36 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.58 The FSS (Import) Regulations, 2017 do not prescribe technical qualification for 
Authorised Officer. As per FSS (Import) Regulations, 2017 “Authorised Officer” means “ a 
person appointed as such by the Chief Executive Officer of the Food Safety and Standards  
Authority of India by an order for the purpose of performing functions under section 25 of the 
Act”. 
 
2.59 Further, Chapter IX of FSS (Import Regulations, 2017, mentions that “The Food 
Safety and Standards Authority of India shall notify the officers for the purpose of food 
import clearance to ensure compliance of the provisions of the Act, and it may also notify 
officers from other government agencies  to maintain the standard o perating procedure for 
food import clearance.” Accordingly, customs official at 396 points of entry (where FSSAI 
does not have its officers) throughout the country  have been notified as Authorised Officers 
by FSSAI. Thus, there is no violation of FSS Regula tions in notifying customs officers as 
Authorised Officers for the purpose of food import clearance. 
 
2.60 Also, Customs officials notified as Authorised Officers are regularly being trained by 
FSSAI to update them with FSSAI Act and Rules & Regulations made thereunder. 
 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
2.61 In addition to above, the Committee is of the considered view that the appointment of 
customs officials for food safety checks amounts to compromised food safety in the country. 
While the Committee is all for the ease of doing business and cutting down del ay in clearing 
imported food consignments through the single window process, it firmly believes that the 
food safety be given a top priority. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
should draw an action plan to appoint dedicated food safety  officials across all food 
importing points in the country.   
(Para 5.61) 
Action Taken 
 
2.62 With additional sanctioned strength, FSSAI could possibly man a few additional 
points of entry from where food products imports are significant. As the number of p oints of 
entry are very large, it would not be possible for FSSAI to take over all such points from 
customs. However, the custom officers would continue to be trained for the purpose of food 
clearance. 
 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
2.63 The Committee further notes that the Ministry of Food and Public Distribution has 
recommended distribution of fortified wheat flour in States in place of wheat grain, and the 
distribution of fortified edible oil under the Public Distribution System (PDS). As on date, 49 
fortified products are available in open market across all 5 commodities. 13 States have 
already implemented fortification across districts or the entire state and 9 States have initiated 
action. The Committee recommends that FSSAI should en sure that the distribution of 
fortified wheat flour and edible oil through PDS adheres to the standards set.  
(Para 5.72) 
 

37 
 
Action Taken 
2.64 It is informed that the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution vide 
circular No. 13 -4/2016-BP-II dated 22 nd December, 2016 has directed all States/UTs which 
are distributing wheat flour to use only Fortified Atta for distribution under PDS.  
2.65 It is heartening to note that the availability of the fortified products in the open market 
has been steadily increasing. There are 65 brands and over 100 fortified products available in 
the open market across all commodities. There has been tremendous traction in the oil and 
milk industry, with 47 percent of the packaged refined edible oil industry and 22 per cent of 
the organized milk industry fortifying their product range as per FSSAI standards. In spite of 
a fragmented market structure, a number of wheat flour, rice and salt industry brands have 
begun fortifying their products. So far, 11 wheat flour brands, 2 rice brands and 16 edible salt 
brands have their fortified products in the open market. 
2.66 FSOs are undergoing sensitization and training to ensure compliance and verify 
quality of fortified food products. As the standards on Food Fortification are n ow notified 
(2nd August, 2018), surveillance of FBOs to verify compliance to standards would be 
initiated. 
Recommendation /Observation 
2.67  The Committee opines that food safety is also to be kept in mind while designing the 
site/floor plan of a restaurant. The places of the equipment, the cooking area, the storage, sink 
and drainage area, position of garbage containers, restrooms etc. should be clearly 
demarcated so that there is no cross contamination. The Committee understands that through 
the new provi sion does not seek submission of such documents under the simplified 
registration/Licensing process, yet this should not be at the cost of ensuring food safety. The 
Committee recommends that the site plan premises of the restaurant should be mandatorily 
checked by the food authority. Because even if good quality food articles are used, a poor 
design may lead to cross contamination and increased health issues.   
(Para 5.77) 
Action Taken 
 
2.68 Under the FSS (Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses) Regulations, 2011, 
FBOs are required to submit blueprint/layout plan of the processing unit showing the 
dimensions in metres/square metres and operation -wise area allocation and the same is 
scrutinized by licensing authority while processing the application and during the course of 
inspection of the premises later.  
2.69 FSSAI has so far certified 20 clean street food hubs across various cities of different 
States. State wise number of such certi fied clean street food hubs are: Gujarat – 10, 
Maharashtra-5, Madhya Pradesh -1, Punjab-1, Tamil Nadu -1, Chandigarh -1, Chattisgarh-1. 
Further, FSSAI has so far identified 101 street food hubs across 19 States which are to be 
converted into clean street food  hubs. Details in this regard are  available at link 
https://fssai.gov.in/CleanStreetFood/indexhome 
 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
2.70 The Committee agrees with the recommendation of the Defence Food Research 
Laboratory and understands that there is a need to address the existing overlap between 
standards. BIS and AGMARK Standards should be reviewed to explore the extent to which 
they can  be merged into the FSS Act Standards regulations.  The focus should be on the 

38 
 
simplification of standards without compromising them. There should be a clear division of 
responsibility between FSSAI, BIS, and the Dte of Marketing and Inspection (DMI). The 
responsibility and mandate of each authority has to be addressed. Mandatory and voluntary 
requirements lead to ambiguity that can be avoided if there is one mandatory standard for 
each product. This will give relief to the food suppliers and they will have  to fulfil only one 
mandatory regulation/requirement for a particular product. All the standards can base their 
criteria on the international standards of the Codex Alimentarius Commission (FAO). 
 
2.71 The Committee understands that multiplicity of Standar ds and certification from 
different agencies is a cumbersome process for the industry. The main idea behind FSS Act 
has been the consolidation of Food laws but varied Standards under a law defeats this very 
idea. The Committee recommends one certification procedure under the FSS Act. For 
Blended oils and Fat spread products there should be one Standards that can be obtained by 
merging the AGMARK certification and the FSS Standards.  
(Para 5.87 & 5.88) 
Action Taken 
 
2.72 FSSAI   is mandated to lay down science based standards for articles of foods. These 
are framed considering safety aspects and are minimum standards which are mandatory. 
While BIS standards are quality standards   and voluntary in nature, AGMARK standards are 
grading based quality standards and cover as many street food clusters as possible. 
2.73 However, while framing standards, international best practices like Codex, USFDA, 
EU, FSANZ etc. and domestic standards of BIS, AGMARK etc. are also referred and 
considered.  
2.74 Further, FSSAI has harmonized standards with Codex such as food additive 
provisions, processing aid, several other standards of various food categories etc.  
2.75 In order to review the mandatory certifications of various food products under BIS & 
AGMARK, comments were sought from various stakeholders. These were discussed with 
stakeholders and following decisions were taken:  
1.  To continue with the mandatory certification of food products under BIS. 
2.  To remove Carbiacallosa, Honey Dew, Kangra Tea, Til  Oil (Sesame Oil), and Light 
Black Pepper from mandatory certifications under AGMARK and amend the Food 
Safety and Standards (Prohibition and Restrictions on Sales) Regulations, 2011, 
accordingly. 
3  The Committee also recommended to have further discussio n on the mandatory 
certification of Blended Edible Vegetable Oils under AGMARK. This could be 
dispensed with once efficacy of fatty acid profile to establish composition of 
admixtures is established. 
2.76 Accordingly, the issue of compulsory AGMARK Certifi cation has been reviewed in 
FSSAI and the Draft Food Safety and Standards (Prohibition and Restrictions on Sales) 
Amendment Regulations, 2018 relating to removal of mandatory certification of AGMARK 
w.r.t. carbiacallosa, honey dew, kangra tea, and til oil and the proposed Draft Food Safety 
and Standards (Packaging and Labelling) Amendment Regulations, 2018 relating to removal 
of AGMARK seal on Light Black Pepper have been proposed and at present under 
consideration of this Ministry.  

39 
 
2.77 The suggestion of the Committee in the context of blended oils and fat spread 
products has been noted. 
2.78 There is no overlap in FSSAI and BIS or AGMARK standards because the mandate 
of FSSAI standards is different than of BIS or AGMARK standards. FSSAI standards are 
mandatory standards and are minimum standards, There is no provision of grades. While 
AGMARK a nd BIS standards  are voluntary and have grades  based on their superiority in 
quality. However, the BIS and AGMARK standards are considered by the relevant Scientific 
Panels while framing the standards of food products to be notified in Regulations under FS S 
Act,2006. 
Recommendation /Observation 
2.79 The Committee understands that assessing the safety of food contact material is very 
crucial as there is always a high   possibility of chemicals leaking from the material down to 
the food. This can change the c omposition of the food and make the food unsuitable for 
consumption. Moreover, the food packaging material on reaction with food article can 
introduce toxicity. Therefore, the Committee recommends that FSSAI should specify the 
toxicity levels of the food c ontact materials under different conditions especially during 
storage, processing and transportation where the food package can be exposed to different 
environmental conditions. The Committee also recommends constitution of a scientific 
working group to study the impact of food packaging on health aspects. FSSAI needs to bring 
standards and specifications for food packaging materials so that any unwanted toxic 
contamination by use of substandard packaging material is avoided.   
(Para 6.10) 
Action Taken 
2.80 Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations that specify that all packaging 
materials of plastic origin shall pass the prescribed overall migration limit of 60mg/kg or 
10mg/dm2when tested as per Indian standard, IS 9845, with no visible colour migra tion has 
been finalised. This also includes that newspaper or any such material shall not be used for 
storing and wrapping of food. 
2.81 These regulations are aimed at establishing requirements for packaging materials 
ensuring that they are safe for use in  packaging and do not cause any health hazard to 
consumer or lead to change in sensory property or composition of foods. T he list of safe 
packaging materials has also been broadened.  A suggestive list of packaging materials for 
different food categories is also specified therein. 
2.82 It may be pertinent to mention here that, FSSAI has conducted a study jointly with 
Indian Institute of Packaging (IIP) and National Test House (NTH) to determine the 
migration of chemical contaminants and heavy metals from pa ckaging into food.  Based on 
the results followed by key recommendations of the Packaging Review Group, definitions 
of food grade, overall migration limit,  primary food packaging, specific migration limit  have 
been included in the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulation, 2018  along with 
other inclusions.   
Recommendation /Observation 
2.83  The Committee recommends that any changes in the Packaging and Labelling 
regulations should be timely disclosed to the FBOs so that they get enough time to conform 
to the changed standards. The regulations should be implemented in a phased manner rather 

40 
 
than haphazardly. Proper training to the FBOs is essential for enforcement of the labelling 
norms.  
(Para 6.13) 
Action Taken 
 
2.84 FSSAI has a policy on time -frame for FSS regulations to come into force. The 
Regulations are either effective from 1stJanuary or 1st July subject to a minimum of 6 months. 
In several cases, transition time of even more than 6 months is given, if so required. 
Accordingly transition time is being given for each regulation and it is ensured that FBOs are 
not unnecessarily inconvenienced and they get adequate time for switchover.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.85 The Committee understands that the illiterate section of the country may find it 
difficult to read the labels and gauge the nutritional information on food packages. The 
Committee notes that National Institute of Nutrition has recommended new forms of labelling 
especially symbol based as it is more effective for a country like India. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that FSSAI should collaborate with such institutes and wor k on 
labelling based on colours and symbols. The Committee also recommends the traffic light 
labelling system as practised in other countries for packaged food items in India. This 
labelling will enable people to have a better idea of the nutritional conte nt of the packaged 
foods. Food with high salt, sugar and fat content will be marked red which is a sign for 
unhealthy, food amber for moderate, and green for low (healthy). 
(Para 6.14) 
   
Action Taken 
 
2.86 FSSAI has draft notified FSS (Labelling &  Display) Regulations on 25th June, 
2019.Besides provisions on general and specific labelling requirements, these regulations also 
propose to make it mandatory to display red colour -coding on front -of-the-pack labels on 
packaged food products that have hig h-fat, high-sugar and high -salt content levels, thereby 
encouraging consumers to make healthier food choices.  
 
 2.87 However, on the basis of comments received from various stakeholders including 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI),  FSSAI is in  process of reviewing the 
thresholds proposed in the Regulations. 
  
Recommendation /Observation 
 
2.88 The Committee recommends that whether the food is exported, imported or 
domestically produced, it should follow a uniform standard and should be tested on the same 
parameters. The domestic consumers cannot be treated as second class citizens and therefore,  
the standard for imported/domestic production should be at par with international 
benchmarks. The Committee also recommends that there should be only one organisation to 
overlook the National Food Control System and also monitor the imported, exported and  
domestically manufactured food item.   
(Para 6.24) 
Action Taken 
 
2.89 It is submitted that food for export have to be as per standards and requirements of the 
country to which it is being exported. As regards imported food in India, the standards for 
imported food and food produced in India are same. The Indian standards are  globally 

41 
 
benchmarked.  Internationally available standards including Codex Standards, USFDA, EU 
standards, Food Safety Australia New Zealand (FSANZ) etc. and nationally available 
standards like BIS and AGMARK are studied and reviewed and on the basis of t heir study, 
harmonization of standards is carried out.  Thus, the standards formulated by FSSAI are 
globally benchmarked while being consistent with Indian context. 
 
2.90 As regards recommendation about single agency to overlook National Food Control 
System and monitor imported, exported and domestically manufactured food item, while 
food safety in respect of domestic and imported food is regulated by FSSAI, the export of 
food is regulated by agencies like EIC, APEDA etc. and FSSAI is regulating exports for a 
limited purpose. In this regard, it is submitted that as per Section 3(n) of the Act, the activities 
related to manufacture, processing, packaging, storage of food are covered under food 
business requiring a license.  Therefore, FBOs that manufacture food products in India and 
then export them also come within the purview of FSS Act, 2006 for the purpose of licensing 
and meeting norms.  
 
2.91 Currently, there is some dua lity. FSSAI would have, no objection if only one 
organisation is entrusted with the work of overlooking the National Food Control System and 
monitors imported, exported and domestically manufactured food products as is the case in 
most other countries. 
 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
2.92 The Committee recommends the creation of a cell that deals with different queries of 
FBOs regarding regulations. FBOs form the backbone of the food safety regime and it is the 
responsibility of the FSSAI to ensure that their problems and queries are immedi ately solved. 
Accurate knowledge about food safety practices and procedures will help in better 
compliance by FBOs which will in turn ensure production of safe food. The Committee also 
recommends holding monthly meetings and seminars for the FBOs where the y are provided 
information regarding any change in amendments and regulations and are constantly updated 
with the current good manufacturing practices.    
(Para 6.30) 
Action Taken 
2.93 Information regarding any minor/major change in amendments and regulati ons are 
always uploaded on FSSAI website in the form of draft notifications for inviting 
stakeholders’ comments. Any representation from any FBO is always given due 
consideration. If required they are given privilege of presenting their views before the Of ficer 
concerned/Scientific Panels/Committee. 
2.94 Further, FSSAI also addresses and resolves concerns received on social media 
platforms from FBOs/General Public. 
2.95 FSSAI has a dedicated Helpline service already to resolve the queries of FBOs, 
Consumers and other stakeholders. In addition, regular meetings are held with various 
stakeholders for wider consultations on various issues concerning food safety and nutrition. 
2.96 FSSAI is very conscious of the fact that FBOs are well informed of the requiremen t 
as in Rules and Regulations. For that in view, it is of utmost importance to FSSAI to give 
priority to any query from FBOs which are responded to as soon as possible. FBOS’ queries 
received through email at licensing@fssai.gov.in and enforcement1@fssai.gov.in are 
responded to within 24 hours on an average. The above position is revealed from the fact that 

42 
 
the number of calls received through helpline increased fr om 50,000 in August, 2017 to 
1,57,000 in July, 2018 i.e. increase of three fold. 
Recommendation /Observation  
2.97 The Committee recommends that FSSAI should set standards for these local 
beverages. Standards for the alcoholic content in the traditional be verages will ensure the 
supply of quality drinks and prevent instances of alcohol poisoning. There is a need to 
standardise the ingredients use and regulate the production especially for local traditional 
heritage drinks so that these local drinks are safe  for consumption and at the same time 
commercially competitive and at par with international drinks.  
(Para 6.38) 
    
Action Taken 
 
2.98 The standards of the ‘’Alcoholic Beverages’’ has been prescribed under the Food 
Safety and Standards (Alcoholic Beverages Standards) Regulations, 2018. Standards for local 
beverages viz. mahua and cashew spirit (feni) are included under regulations 2.2.1 (for Plain 
Country Liquor) and 2.3 (for Feni) of Food Safety and Standards (Alcoholic Beverages) 
Regulations, 2018. 
 
2.99 Additionally, standards for pot -still distilled spirits as specified under regulation 2.9 
of Food Safety and Standards (Alcoholic Beverages) Regulations, 2018 include alcoholic 
beverages that are obtained from cashew, apple and mahua  flowers or any other source of 
fermentable carbohydrates of agricultural origin. The aforementioned standards are at par 
with the internationally acceptable standards.  
 
  
 
  

43 
 
CHAPTER- III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.1 The Committee understands that the process of framing regulations involves extensive 
consultations with various stakeholders including related ministries, agencies, NGOs, farmer 
organizations etc.  However, failure to examine the requirements to frame regu lations in 
respect of remaining seven areas even after a decade of enactment of the Act is indicative of 
FSSAI’s lethargy and procrastinated decision making in the matter.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that FSSAI should frame and notify the remaini ng regulations within 
a period of one year from the date of presentation of this Report to the Parliament.  
(Para 2.6) 
Action Taken 
 
3.2 While, most of regulations have been framed and notified, a few that are at various 
stages of consultations/ finalization would be notified within one year as advised by the 
Standing Committee.  
Further Recommendation 
 
3.3 The Committee is pained to note t hat more than two years has elapsed since the 
presentation of the Report to the Parliament but the Ministry is yet to notify a few 
regulations. The Committee expresses its deep anguish over the lackadaisical approach 
of FSSAI and recommends to notify the remaining notification at the earliest.  
 
Recommendation 
3.4 The Committee would like to draw the attention of the Ministry to the 
recommendation of the Lok Sabha Committee on Subordinate Legislation which has 
stipulated (December 2011) that the rules shoul d be notified within six months of last date of 
receipt of comments from stakeholders if a large number of such comments/ suggestions have 
been received and within three months if nil or less comments are received.  The CAG Audit 
observed that though only one to two comments of minor nature were received on the draft 
notifications in four cases, FSSAI took five to ten months for final notification.  FSSAI while 
notifying rules should consider the recommendations of the Lok Sabha Committee on 
Subordinate Legislation and work to strengthen its scientific and administrative machinery so 
that further delays are avoided.  Moreover, the frequency of meetings of Scientific 
Committee and Panels and Food Authority should be increased and a strict timeline should be 
set and adhered to.  
(Para 2.9) 
Action Taken 
3.5 To ensure that the rules /regulations are notified as per the recommendations of the 
Lok Sabha  Committee on Subordinate Legislation, an SOP has been prepared prescribing 
timeline at each stage. With that in view, the meetings of the Scientific Panels and Scientific 
Committee are being conducted more frequently.   
 
 

44 
 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.6 The Committee notes that the Ministry has neither spelt out the details of SOP 
for prescribing timeline at each stage nor has given reasons for delay in notification of 
rules.  The Committee is of the view that timely notification of rules and regulation 
would pave the way for better implementation of the Act and further strengthen the 
food safety ecosystem in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends FSSAI to 
strictly adhere to the recommendations of the Lok Sabha Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation. 
  
Recommendation /Observation 
3.7 The Committee notes that packaged drinking water is already included in the 
definition of food.  The Committee recommends that the definition of drinking/portable water 
should also be added to Section 3 (1) (j).  The water  that is served as drinking water in the 
eateries should also come under the purview of the FSS Act.  The water that is provided in 
the food business premises such as eating outlets should also be timely inspected.  All this 
should be done to ensure that the FBOs provide clean drinking water in their eateries.  
(Para 2.23) 
  
Action Taken 
 
3.8 Proposal to amend the FSS (Food Products and Food Additives) Regulations, 2011 to 
define purified drinking water and prescribe standards for the same is at final stage. As per 
Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses) Regulations, 
2011, all manufacturing units and hotels/restaurants are required to follow sanitary and 
hygienic standards and ensure continuous supply/storage of potable  water at the premises. 
They are required to get water tested from NABL accredited lab every six months. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.9 The Committee recommends that the State Level Advisory Committee should be 
constituted in every State with the Food Saf ety Commissioner as the Chairperson and all the 
stakeholders as its members.  The guidelines for its constitution and role should be issued.  
The Committee agrees with Central Advisory Committee (CAC) that the Director of the State 
Food Testing Lab, office rs of the Food Authority and representative from the industry 
associations should also be included as its members.  The Committee feels that the presence 
of such a system at State and District level will not only help in better handling of licensing/ 
registration regulations but also facilitate integration of local bodies with the Food Safety 
Administration.  The Committee would like the Authority to nudge the State Governments to 
expedite formations of State and District Level Advisory Committees.  Monthly  meetings 
should be conducted by these Committees and appropriate actions taken to ensure robust food 
safety surveillance in the State. Section 70 of the FSS Act requires the State Government to 
establish one or more tribunals to be known as the Food Safet y Appellate Tribunal to hear 
appeals from the decision of the Adjudicating Officer under Section 68.  The Committee 
observes that there is no Food Safety appellate tribunal in Bihar, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Mizoram, Nagaland, Odisha, Sikkim and Tamil 
Nadu even after more than a decade of the FSS Act.  The Committee therefore recommends 
establishing of tribunal in each of these States so that the litigation process can be fast 
tracked.  
(Para 2.15) 

45 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.10 The State Level Advisory Committees (SLACs) have been constituted in all 
States/UTs. District Level Advisory Committees (DLACs) have been constituted in 23 
States/UTs. Process to constitute the said Committees in the remaining States/UTs has been 
initiated. Fresh instructions have been issued to ensure effective working of these 
Committees.  
 
3.11 As far as Appellate Tribunals are concerned, Appellate Tribunals have now been 
constituted in 30 States/UTs.  
Further Recommendation 
 
3.12 The Committee notes that the Appellate Tribunal has been constituted in 30 
States/UTs. The Committee expects the Ministry to expedite the process of establishing 
the Appellate tribunal in the remaining States so that the litigation process can be fast 
tracked. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to facilitate the formation of 
District Level Advisory Committees in the remaining States/UTs.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.13 The Committee also recommends that there must be a nationwide campaign on Good  
Agricultural Practices across all food sectors.  Ministry of Agriculture must establish 
dedicated website for this purpose in regional languages to communicate good practices.  
Agriculture Universities of respective States be roped in to educate farmers a bout Good 
Agriculture and Animal Production Practices and maintaining database on contamination.  
Additionally, FSSAI/ State Food Safety Authorities should conduct training and awareness 
program about the Act and best Agriculture practices for the primary producers.  The focus of 
such training should be to prevent food contamination at the primary level and evolve a 
proper monitoring mechanism.  
(Para 2.32) 
  
Action Taken  
 
3.14 The work of developing Guidance document on Good Agricultural Practices to reduce 
risks related to food safety has been initiated. Once the Guidance Document on Good 
Agricultural Practices for various food sectors is ready, issue of training and awareness 
programme about Good Agricultural Practices would be considered.  
 
3.15 FSSAI has fixed the Maximum Residue Limits (MRLs)/tolerance limit for various 
pesticides and antibiotics in food commodities under Food Safety and Standards 
(Contaminants, Toxins and Residues) Regulations, 2011, which are reviewed from time to 
time. Since the various MRLs/tolerance limits are established on the basis of Good 
Agricultural Practices (GAP), Good Animal Husbandry Practices (GAHP), Good Animal 
Feeding Practices (GAFP) etc, implementation of these Good Practices are crucial. Adoption 
of GAPs, GHAPs and GFAPs primarily rest with the Department of Agriculture, Department 
of Animal Husbandry & Dairying in collaboration with their counterparts in States/UTs. 
FSSAI has highlighted these issues with all the counterparts to adopt and implement GAPs, 
GHAPs and GFAPs. 
 
    
 

46 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.16 The Committee understands that adoption of GAP, GAHP, GAFP, etc, is 
primarily vested with Department of Agriculture, Department of Anim al Husbandry 
and Dairying which functions in collaboration with States/UTs. But since these good 
practices would ultimately go a long way in helping FSSAI achieve its objectives, it is 
imperative that FSSAI makes all out efforts to see that these practices  are adopted and 
implemented. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the work of developing 
Guidance document on Good Agricultural Practices is completed at the earliest so that 
the training and awareness programme could be started. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.17 The Committee has taken cognizance of certain sting operations conducted by some 
TV channels showing some food inspectors readiness to approve sub -standard products 
against payment of bribes or sometimes even manipulate food items if the supplier does not 
pay them bribe. Lack of an effective accountability mechanism for malpractices and 
provision of absolute discretion of food inspectors in the matter of picking up samples leaves 
the door wide open for corruption. There appears a clear nexus between corrupt  food 
inspectors and unethical Food Business Operators. Once a food product is found to have 
violated food safety procedures by the Food Regulator, there is no effective recourse 
available because the appeal procedure is entirely internal and departmental and even a legal 
challenge is too slow to be effective. Taking into consideration the above, the Committee 
recommends that an anti- corruption unit be created to prevent food inspectors from engaging 
in bribery and extortion.  
(Para 2.34) 
Action Taken  
 
3.18 As and when any malpractices are reported/ noticed by FSSAI, the same are being 
taken up with the concerned State/UT Governments for strict action against the defaulters. 
Most of the Departments have their own vigilance section, which takes care of such  
complaints. 
 
3.19 The issue relating to creation of separate anti -corruption units in States/ UTs for food 
safety was taken up in CAC meeting on 07.09.2018. All States/ UTs felt that considering all 
States/ UTs have their vigilance/ anti - corruption department, separate unit for food safety is 
not required. 
 
3.20 Whenever any instance of corruption against food inspector or food safety official of 
States/UTs have come to the notice of FSSAI, the   same is taken up with concerned State 
Food Safety Commissioner for thorough investigation and appropriate action under the 
State/UT Govt. Rules  as  they are under the administrative control of States/UTs. FSSAI has 
adopted various measures to prevent  unethical practices . These measures are as under:- 
i. Physical submission of  documents related to licensing/registration of food business 
has been stopped. 
ii. To bring transparency in food safety inspection and sampling, FSSAI introduced 
online inspection and sampling system i.e. Food Safety compliance through regular 
inspection and sampling system (FoSCoRIS). 
iii. All processes of Food Licensing and Registration of food businesses are  made online.  
iv. Introduced desktop surveillance. 

47 
 
v. Started weekly Video Conference with State/UT and periodical interactions between 
Officers of  FSSAI and State/UTs at highest level. 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.21 The Committee takes note of the various measures taken by FSSAI to prevent 
unethical practices and hopes that they will be able to contain corrupt practices to some 
extent.  But since cases of adulteration in food items are on the rise, the Committee feels 
that there is a need to force some stringent measures in this regard.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterates its recommendations and urges upon FSSAI to nudge the 
States/UTs to take corruption in food safety matters seriously. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.22 The Committee underlines the need of suitable guidelines for the disposal of seized 
and confiscated food items. The Food Safety Officer and the Designated Officers need to be 
trained on the disposal of seized articles of food so that the seized articles do not pose any 
threat. The Committee is in total agreement with the suggestion that the disposal of seized 
item/ article be within the jurisdiction of the court in which the ca se has been filed. The 
Committee, therefore recommends, that Section 47 (4) be modified suitably to ensure a 
provision for prescribing procedure and manner for disposal of seizure in the Act. 
(Para 2.37) 
Action Taken 
 
3.23 The SOP for disposal of seized an d confiscated food items will be formulated to be 
followed by enforcement authorities uniformly. 
 
Further Recommendation 
  
3.24 The Committee expresses its concern over non formulation of the SOP even after 
two years of the presentation of the Report and therefore, recommends to expedite the 
process to enable the enforcement authorities to act uniformly in the matter.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.25 The Committee feels that such power to the Food Safety Officer may be misused by 
some unscrupulous officers to harass the food business operator. But at the same time 
inspecting the food packages is essential and fundamental duty of a Food Safety Officer. The 
Committee recommends that FSO should be empowered to check any package and break 
open the door of any premises where any article of food may be kept for sale but all this 
should be within the prescribed guidelines and the same must  be video graphed for solid 
evidence. The FSO should keep a record of packages inspected and the number of packages 
that were opened during inspection. The Committee feels that the Food Authority should also 
ensure that the Food Safety Officers are not bul lied and harassed. The FBOs and the FSOs 
should both respect and support each other. FSSAI should be committed to ensuring safe 
working environment for the FSOs as well as the FBOs. Any kind of harassment, 
intimidation, bullying or discrimination from both  sides should be condemned. The 
Committee recommends that the above provision in Section 10(5) of the PFA Act may be 
incorporated in this Act after due consideration in the Ministry and vetting by Ministry and 
vetting by Ministry of Law and Justice. 
(Para 2.41) 

48 
 
Action Taken 
3.26 Any FBO facing any harassment can always take up the matter with concerned Food 
Safety Commissioner, State Vigilance or FSSAI. Further, to bring transparency and 
accountability in inspection, FSSAI has developed a digital inspection s system - FoSCoRIS 
which enables inspection through Tablet/Mobile. It has certain advanced technological 
features like geo- tagging and real time data collection and it enables the FSOs to take photo 
and upload them with inspection reports to support their findings.  
3.27 Basic objectives of the FoSCoRIS Application are: 
 To create a district wise and state wise food safety compliance matrix of the country. 
 Create a Food safety compliance verification platform. 
 To reduce the time of inspection process and action to be initiated. 
 To build a transparent system within the inspections framework. 
 Create a platform to authenticate and validate the inspection reports. 
 To ensure that the inspections are actually done and without any deviations. 
 The process shall initiate Quick Response during Food Safety Emergencies. 
3.28 During implementation of digital inspection system in the three States i.e. Punjab, 
Madhya Pradesh and Tamil Nadu and all 5 regional offices of FSSAI, some technical bugs 
were identified which were sorted out. It was observed that Mobile network is one of the 
major challenges in the implementation of FoSCoRIS for inspections of FBO units located in 
remote areas. Another challenge faced by States to implement FoSCoRIS is lack of basic 
amenities vizIT enabled handheld devices to their officers which hinder th e implementation 
of FoSCoRIS. Subsequently, an offline module (app version) of FoSCoRIS has also been 
developed and shared with States/UTs to further encourage to come forward and adopt this 
system. FoSCoRIS has been fully implemented in FSSAI Regional Off ices and now 
inspections are being carried out on FoSCoRIS only. 
3.29 Out of the 36 States/UTs, 25 States/UTs have so far adopted digital inspection system 
of FoSCoRIS. The response of offline module of FoSCoRIS is also encouraging. All the 25 
States/UTs  that have so far adopted digital inspection of FoSCoRIS are carrying out 
inspections of food premises either through online   or offline module   depending upon 
availability of  net connectivity 
3.30 As suggested, it is proposed to amend the FSS Act, to incl ude a provision on the lines 
of Section 10(5) of Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 which empowers FSO to 
break open the door of any premises where any article of food may be kept for sale. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.31 The Committee has been given to understand that out of the 36 States/UTs, 25 
States have so far adopted digital inspection system of FOSCORs. The Committee finds 
that one of the major challenges of putting in place the FOSCORIS system has been the 
non-availability of mobile network in the remote areas and also of other amenities.  The 
Committee appreciates that apart from an online module, an offline one has also been 
developed to address the problem. The Committee, however, feels that in order to 
successfully implement the application , it is essential that States/UTs concentrate on 
providing basic amenities to its FSO. The Committee desires that States/UTs can sign 
an MoU with a mobile network company to have uninterrupted connectivity in remote 
areas so that the FSOs can carry out their duties efficiently.  
 

49 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.32 The Committee notes that this conflict in time period may lead to practical difficulties 
and cause unnecessary confusion and delays. The Committee therefore recommends that a 
clause must be added to  Section 42(3) specifying that the time of 14 days shall start after the 
completion of the scrutiny of the food analyst report by the designated officer. The scrutiny 
shall include the final disposal of objection/appeal raised on food analyst report. Speci al 
attention should be paid that the perishable food items with a short life are tested before 
getting spoiled so that the test reports are authentic.  
(Para 2.46) 
Action Taken 
 
3.33 The following provisions are being proposed in Section 42(3) of FSS Act 
i. It is proposed that in case the Designated Officer comes to the conclusion that there is 
no contravention of any provision of the Act, he would direct the FSO to release the 
articles of food seized within three working days.  
ii. In respect of some defects/non-conformance such as failure to comply with directions 
of FSOs, unhygienic and unsanitary processing or manufacturing of food, it may not 
be necessary to have food analyst’s report.  
Further Recommendation 
 
3.34 The Committee desires that the proposed amendments to Section 42(3) of FSS 
Act be expedited so that perishable food items with a short span of life are tested before 
getting spoiled.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.35 The Committee recommends that all the States should strictly adhere to the FSS 
regulations and the final order should be passed within 90 days from the date of first hearing. 
The Adjudicating Officer should be a full time officer. The practice of appointin g Additional 
District Magistrates as Adjudicating Officers should be reviewed. It become difficult for 
Officers working on additional charge to do justice to their job. Also it is important for 
adjudicating officers to be knowledgeable and experienced whil e dealing with cases 
involving food safety. Therefore, the Committee recommends that only officers having 
experience and expertise in food safety should be appointed as adjudicating officer. The 
Committee also recommends that the adjudicating officer shoul d set a time frame and 
actively monitor the progress of each case. Attempts should be made to incorporate 
technology into the proceedings by digitizing all the records.   
(Para 2.52) 
Action Taken 
 
3.36 State wise details of   number of Adjudicating Officers is attached as Annexure -3. As 
per reports received from States/UTs; details of number of civil and criminal cases launched 
and action taken thereon during 2018-19  is as under ;- 
 
No. of Cases Launched 
 
                                    Criminal 2813 
                                     Civil 18550 
                                     Convictions                701 
                                     Penalties                 12734 

50 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.37 On perusal of the State wise details of Adjudicating Officers, Designated 
Officers, Food Safety Officers, etc The Committee noted the following:- 
(i) 15 States have full time Food Safety Commissioners while 21 States have 
given additional charge of Food Safety to other officials. 
 (ii) Total of 705 Adjudicating Officers in the States 
(iii) Total 432 full time DOs in all States. States like Bihar, Chhattisgarh, 
Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Mizoram, Odisha, Rajasthan and Tripura 
have nil full time DOs.  Part time DOs 138 in all St ates, like Chhattisgarh, 
Haryana, Karnataka, Odisha, Rajasthan. Therefore, States like Bihar, 
Madhya Pradesh, Mizoram, Tripura do not have a single DO (either full 
time or part time). 
(iv) Total 2563 full time FSOs in all the States with the exception of R ajasthan 
Part time FSOs 100 in States like Karnataka, Rajasthan and Sikkim. 
(v) As regards Appellate Tribunal, all States except Himachal Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, Lakshadweep, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Ladakh have 
an Appellate Tribunal. 
3.38 It is evident f rom the above that there are lot of variations amongst the States 
with respect to the number of AOs, DOs, FSOs, etc. The Committee is concerned to note 
that whereas the States like Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Mizoram and Tripura do not have 
a single DO.  To the  utmost surprise, the State of Rajasthan does not have a single full 
time FSO.  The Committee also notes that Karnataka is the only State which has full 
time as well as part time DOs and FSOs.  The Committee, therefore, would like FSSAI 
to pro-actively persuade States like Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Mizoram, Tripura to have 
Designated Officers appointed in their States and also persuade Rajasthan to appoint 
full time FSOs in its State. Further, States, not having an Appellate Tribunal, may also 
be persuaded to have one in their States.  
3.39 The Committee takes note of the civil and criminal cases and action taken 
thereon. As per the information given, total number of cases registered in 2018 -19 was 
21,363 (2813 - Criminal Cases + 18550- Civil Cases) and out of that, there were only 701 
convictions and 12,734 penalties imposed.  The status of remaining 7928 cases has not 
been shared with the Ministry.  The Committee, however, believes that there is no strict 
adherence to the FSS regulations and cases are not bein g dealt within 90 days. The 
Committee emphasized upon the need, therefore, reiterates its recommendation 
including the one for having a full time Adjudicatin g Officer to enable them to do 
justice to their assigned duties.  
 
Recommendation /Observation 
3.40 The Committee notes that out of total 72,499 samples analyzed in 2015 -2016, a total 
of 16,133 samples were found to be adulterated and misbranded. 1450 criminal and 8529 
civil cases were filed which resulted in conviction in 540 cases. Similarly, in the y ear 2016-
2017, out of 78,340 samples analyzed, 18,325 were found to be adulterated and misbranded. 
13,080 cases were filed which resulted in conviction in 1605 cases. The Committee finds that 
there is a huge gap between the total number of cases filed and total number of convictions as 

51 
 
the rate of conviction seems to be quite low. This indicates that the FBOs involved in 
supplying adulterated or misbranded food products are not caught and get away easily 
without punishment. The Committee express its anguish  over the low conviction rates and 
desires the Ministry to undertake scrutiny as to whether the low conviction rates are a result 
of shortage of trained manpower, lax enforcement or the statute being riddle with 
inadequacies and take remedial measure accor dingly. The Committee would also like the 
Ministry to pursue the matter of low conviction rates with the Ministry of Law and Justice to 
find a solution to the problem. The Committee believes that regular monitoring, inspection 
and lifting of samples needs to be done by the Central/ State Authorities so as to save the 
people from consuming adulterated and misbranded food items.   
(Para 3.10) 
Action Taken 
3.41 Penal provisions prescribed under chapter IX of FSS Act, 2006 provide both penalty 
and/or conviction with imprisonment of minimum six months and up to life term. In addition 
to the conviction, penalties have also been imposed on defaulting FBOs in several cases 
wherein only punishment with fine has been prescribed under FSS Act, 2006. However, the 
recommendations of the Committee have been noted and same will be taken up with the 
States/UT Governments to expedite disposal of pending cases within a time frame so that 
guilty are appropriately penalised.  
3.42 On the issue of low conviction rate, States/UTs have been asked to gear up their 
machinery to ensure proper taking up and monitoring of court cases to ensure that the 
wrongdoers are brought to book.   
3.43 As recommended by the Committee, the matter will a lso be taken up with the 
Ministry of Law and Justice to find a solution to the problem. 
3.44 Focus is on strengthening regular surveillance, monitoring, inspection of premises of 
food business operators and sampling of food products .   FSSAI time and again  has 
highlighted these issues with States/UTs through quarterly meetings of Central Advisory 
Committee, regular Video Conferences with State/UT Governments and periodical 
interactions between officers of FSSAI and State/UTs at highest levels.  
 
 Year-wise targets for FSOs for taking samples have been prescribed. 
 FSSAI has also released manual for    Food Safety Officers (FSOs). It documents 
practices and procedures to be followed by the field staff including sampling in 
accordance with the provisions of the A ct and Rules . It also   lists an 8-point code of 
ethics for them. 
 Regular training for regulatory staff including FSOs, Designated Officers and 
Adjudicating officers is being held. So far, nearly 1400 personnel have been trained.  
 FSSAI  is facilitating St ates by providing funds for upgradation of   State food labs 
with high end equipments . So far,   39 State Food Testing labs of 29 States/UTs have 
been  assisted. FSSAI has also provided  90 mobile food testing labs to 33 States/UTs 
. It is also proposing to  provide funds for   providing infrastructure for proper storage 
of lab samples. 
 Regular Exams are being held to ensure adequate availability of qualified Food 
Analysts in the country.  
 FSSAI has arranged 73 training programs   in association with Governmen t 
institutions ,International bodies and Private Labs on   NABL awareness programs, 
Good Food Laboratory Practices (GFLP) programme and specialized training 

52 
 
programmes  on analysis of   pesticides, mycotoxin, ,Veterinary Drug Residues & 
Antibiotics and Dope substances in food supplement. A total of 2000 laboratory 
personnel participated in these programmes.    Further, 144 online training programs 
were conducted during lockdown period from 5 th April, 2020 to 18 th May, 2020 in 
which all the laboratory personnel  of States/UTs and FSSAI’s notified laboratories, 
Food Business Operators, Consumers etc. were allowed to participate. A total of 
34,703 persons participated in these online training programs 
 Surveillance is an integral part of Regulatory Compliance and St ates/UTs regularly 
conduct surveillance activities and carry out intensive surveillance drives as per their 
surveillance plans. FSSAI has worked out an annual surveillance plan and shared with 
States/UTs to chalk out their annual surveillance plan taking i nto account certain 
factors like geographical location, availability of food items, active/specific 
surveillance drives during festivals or specific occasions, degree of risk associated 
with food commodities etc. Based on the activities done in their respe ctive areas, 
States and UTs are submitting surveillance reports to FSSAI from time to time. This 
plan has been subsequently followed up in various Central Advisory Committee 
meetings, Video Conferences, and other meetings with Food Safety Commissioners of 
States and UTs. 
  
 Further Recommendation 
3.45 The Committee takes into cognizance the efforts being made like regular 
surveillance, monitoring, inspection of food premises, sampling of food products, 
regular training of officers concerned, upgradation  of food labs etc.  The Committee is 
of the firm view that in addition to these interventions, pro-active and concerted efforts 
need to be made by FSSAI to regularly prompt the States/UTs for gearing their 
machinery to develop a system which has zero toler ance towards violation of any food 
safety norms by FBOs. Timely and appropriate punishment would definitely prove to 
be a deterrent for the violators of food safety laws and this could be achieved only by 
increasing the conviction rate. The Committee, ther efore, reiterates that FSSAI should 
take up the issue of low conviction rate with the Ministry of Law & Justice to find a 
solution to the problem as early as possible.  Further, the Committee would also like the 
FSSAI to assess the surveillance Reports submitted by States/UTs to FSSAI and identify 
the best performing State/UTs so that the benchmarking model could be followed by 
other low performing States.    
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.46 The Committee also desires to be informed of how many licences of  FBOs were 
cancelled during the three years for not meeting the quality norms prescribed under the FSS 
Act 2006. 
(Para 3.21) 
Action Taken 
 
 Details of cancelled licenses on the grounds of non-compliance are given below:  
Year State license Central license 
2015 2 - 
2016 4 2 
2017 10 - 
2018 26 1 

53 
 
 
3.47 It may be noted that under one license/registration Food Business Operators can 
manufacture and sell various food products. Therefore, if particular food products of an 
FBO do not meet the quality norms then he i s penalized/prosecuted as per penal provisions 
prescribed under Chapter IX of FSS Act, 2006 instead of outrightly cancelling their 
licenses.  In such cases license/registration of Food Business Operators are rarely cancelled.  
 
Further Recommendation 
3.48 Considering the extent of food adulteration prevalent now -a-days in the 
country, the number of cancelled licenses with State and Central is very low and thus 
genuinely raises apprehension over food safety monitoring mechanism.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.49 The Committee observes that FSSAI has left the task of undertaking the surveys to the 
States ignoring the fact that the State machinery is not equipped to take such surveys.  This 
has also been highlighted in the CAG Report.  CAG Audit found that neit her FSSAI nor the 
Food Safety Commissioners of States have conducted any such survey.  The very perception 
of FSSAI that surveys are neither feasible nor desirable is not acceptable.  The Committee 
feels that while FSSAI is completely ignorant of the impor tance of surveys, the fact is that 
such surveys will not only help in better insight of the food safety situation in the country but 
also make monitoring and surveillance easy. 
 
3.50 The Committee is of the view that the importance of surveys cannot be 
underestimated and therefore, FSSAI should conduct timely surveys for the identification of 
food business operators.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that both FSSAI and State 
Food Authorities must focus on conduct of surveys.  The need of the hour is to  augment the 
manpower who can conduct the survey at the Central as well as State level.  Till the time, the 
required manpower is arranged, the FSSAI and the State Food Authorities can very well 
outsource the work of surveys to a third party.   
(Para 3.39 & 3.40) 
Action Taken 
 
3.51 The Food Authority has reviewed the need and feasibility of conducting such survey 
of food business operators.  Since, all food businesses are required to be either registered or 
licensed under the FSS Act, 2006, therefore, registration and licensing has to be taken up 
along with such surveys by the State Governments. 
 
3.52 In the  Central Advisory Committee meeting held on 15 th May 2018, all States/UTs 
were advised to carry out surveys and special drives to identify FBOs tha t are not registered 
or licensed and register and licence them, as the case may be. Such drives have been taken up 
by different States/ UTs. 
 
3.53 As per FLRS data, there is an increasing trend in online FLRS for registrations issued 
in last six months; which is evident from the increase indicated against few States i.e. West 
Bengal (107.6%), J &K (45%) Tamil Nadu (39%), Kerala (31%) Maharashtra (23%), 
Chhattisgarh (26%). Wherever required, these would be outsourced.   
 
3.54 Further, FSSAI has developed State Food Safety Index to measure the performance of 
States/UTs  on various parameters of Food Safety.   The Index is a dynamic quantitative and 

54 
 
qualitative benchmarking model that provides an objective framework for evaluating food 
safety across all States /UTs. This index is based on performance of State/ UT on five 
significant parameters, namely; Human Resource and Institutional Data, Compliance, Food 
Testing Infrastructure & Surveillance, Training and Capacity Building and Consumer 
Empowerment. Appropriate weightage has been assigned to these parameters. The parameter 
on Human Resources and Institutional Data measures the availability of human resources like 
FSOs, DOs, facility of adjudications and appellate tribunals, functioning of   State/District 
level Advisory Committees etc. The parameter on Compliance measures the yearly increase 
and promptness in issue of state/licenses /registrations also number of samples lifted and 
tested.  
  
3.55 Parameter on food testing infrastructure measures the availability of labs in the 
States/UTs for testing of food samples, whether they are NABL accredited , availability of 
mobile food testing labs , surveillance activities conducted etc.  
  
3.56 Parameter on Training and Capacity Building   considers availability of trained 
regulatory staff and trained Food Safety Supervisors Parameter on  Consumer Empowerment  
measures the performance of States/UTs in various consumer empowering initiatives of 
FSSAI e.g. f ood fortification, BHOG, Hygiene rating of Restaurants, RUCO   , Clean Street 
Food Hubs 
  
3.57 Thus this index gives an insight into food safety mechanism in the country and   helps 
identify gaps in  various relevant parameters to enable further corrective action.   
  
 Further Recommendation 
 
3.58 The Committee notes that Section 16 (2) (g) of FSS Act provides for conducting 
survey of enforcement and administration of this Act in the country. The Committee 
observes that FSSAI has not yet framed the regulations under the section rather it has 
suggested for deletion of the section in the amendments proposed under FSS Act. The 
Committee reiterates its recommendation and strongly believes that surveys will 
provide a better understanding of the food safet y management system in the country., 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends FSSAI to make regulations under 
Section 16 (2)(g) for conducting surveys by the Central/State agencies as well as 
outsourcing the work to a third party. 
 
3.59 The Committee appreciates FSSAI’s initiative of creating a State Food Safety 
Index and recommends FSSAI to rank States and UTs as per this index and identify the 
States and UTs on ranking credit basis i.e best performance States and poor 
performance States. The Committe e also recommends FSSAI to make use of this index 
in launching State specific initiatives and programs that will help the State in identifying 
the loopholes and strengthening its weak areas. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.60 The Committee notes the changes proposed in the Food Safety (Licensing and 
Registration of Food Business) Regulation 2011 and observes that until and unless the 
regulations are strictly implemented, running food business without licenses will always pose 
a major challenge in ensuring food safety.  The FSS Act already empowers the Food 
Authority to conduct regular/surprise inspections but the inspection system has proved to be 
very inefficient.  The Committee welcomes the mandatory annual inspection proposal  by the 
Food Authority but only framing regulation will not bring any change.  The Committee 

55 
 
recommends that FSSAI and the State Food Authority should first ensure that the shortage of 
officers in the food safety regime is properly addressed so that mandat ory provision fetches 
the desired results.  Needless to say, for this officers with technical qualifications should be 
recruited and required posts should be created.  The Committee recommends a strict Food 
Safety compliance  through regular inspection and  sampling system (FoSCoRIS) in all the 
States to bring transparency in food safety inspection and sampling.  Regular inspection and 
awareness among the FBOs is also necessary for implementation of good hygienic and 
manufacturing practices.  All FBOs involv ed in processing, manufacturing, packing, storing, 
catering and distribution need to be educated about self compliance.  The Committee 
recommends that the FBOs should clearly display the FSSAI License number at their food 
premises and the practice of Food Safety Display Boards (FSDBs) should be encouraged 
among all the FBOs.  Until and unless the FBOs comply with the present regulatory 
standards, new regulatory reforms will not succeed in developing a food safety culture in the 
country.  
(Para 3.42) 
Action Taken 
 
3.61 States/UTs have, from time to time, been impressed upon to have adequate number of 
inspections to ensure effective food safety compliance and wherever needed initiate the 
process for additional manpower. FSSAI’s communication dated 27th June 2018 addressed to 
Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs requested them to look into the matter for creation/filling 
up the posts of DOs and FSOs as per norms to fill the gap and shortage with sufficient and 
competent human resources. 
 
3.62 To bring transparency and accountability in inspection, FSSAI has developed a digital 
inspections system - FoSCoRIS which enables inspection through Tablet/Mobile.  FSSAI is 
also providing training to Food Business Operators to ensure food safety and compliance. So 
far approximately 359000 + people have been trained across the country through more than 
13329 training programmes.Further, with outbreak of CoVID -19 in March, 2020, FSSAI had 
to stop all physical training programmes. Entire FoSTaC ecosystem with 242 Training 
partners and 699 Trainers were utilised to train the food industry and food handlers about 
CoVID-19 precautionary measures while handling food. Till date, nearly 800 training 
programmes on CoVID 19 precautionary measures have been conducted and 33000+ people 
trained.  FSSAI is also going to start regular FoSTaC courses online which will include 
online assessment. Not only Food Safety Suprvisors’ Programme but also Training of 
Trainers programme will commence online from 1st June, 2020 onwards. 
 
3.63 FSSAI regulations provide that all Food Business Operators shall display true copy of 
license/registration at a prominent place at all times within the premises/food vans/carts 
where the Food Business Operator carries on the food business. Also, as per the  direction 
under Section 16 (5) of Food Safety & Standards Act, 2006 regarding operationalisation of 
Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration of Food Business Amendment) 
Regulations, 2018, in addition to the requirement of displaying FSSAI lic ense, it is also 
mandatory for  the restaurants to display a Food Safety Display Board at all times at a 
prominent place in the premises. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.64 The Committee is of the considered view that FSSAI should take up the issue of 
shortage of manpower in the States/UTs on a priority basis.  The Committee would also 
like to suggest that ranking of States/UTs on the basis of infrastructure, manpower and 

56 
 
performance be periodically prepared by FSSAI and also displayed on its website to 
motivate the best performing States and also encourage the poor performing 
States/lagging on these parameters, especially manpower. 
 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
3.65 The Commi ttee appreciates the initiatives of FSSAI in launching FoSCoRIS and 
recommends that it should be implemented by all the States/UTs.  This platform has features 
like geo -tagging, time -stamping of inspections and real -time verification.  This IT enabled 
system will introduce uniformity and transparency in food safety inspections on pan India 
basis.  The FSO should be trained on handling the devices and they should conduct inspection 
through these devices which have been provided by FSSAI.  The information sha red by FSO 
through this system should constantly checked by the Designated Officers and the State Food 
Safety Commissioners.  Web based FoSCoRIS System in all the States/UT’s would ensure 
that existing discrepancy in food inspection and subsequent lifting,  storing and dispatching 
samples is eliminated and the Food Safety Officers become more accountable, efficient in 
their tasks.    
(Para 3.59) 
Action Taken 
 
3.66 25 States/UTs have so far adopted digital inspection system of FoSCoRIS. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.67 The Committee notes that 25 States/UTs have adopted digital inspection system 
of FoSCoRIS.  The Committee, however, desires that FSSAI must try to ensure that 
digital inspection system of FoSCoRIS in the remaining States/UTs is impleme nted at 
the earliest.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.68 The Committee has learnt that the State Food Authorities are grossly understaffed and 
this results in inadequate supervision of the FBOs.  As per information given by FSSAI, the 
total number of Food Safety Officers in the country has increased from 2324 to  3130 i.e 
34.7% in last three years.  States where the increase in no. of FSOs is significant are Uttar 
Pradesh (200%).  Karnataka (191%) Kerala (97%) and Gujarat (25%).  However, there are 
some States where there has been a decline in no. of FSOs e.g. Pun jab (43%), Rajasthan 
(25%) and Madhya Pradesh (13%) but this number is not sufficient.  If the manpower 
requirement of Food Regulatory Authorities do not correspond with their volume of work 
such shortage is bound to strain their ability to discharge their mandated functions efficiently. 
(Para 3.72) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.69 This issue was highlighted in the Conference of State Health Ministers/ Secretaries 
held on 8/9.1.2018, States/UTs were impressed upon to have adequate number of manpower 
to enforce the provi sions of FSS Act, Rules and Regulations made thereunder. Further, 
FSSAI wrote to all Chief Secretaries of States/UTs vide letter dated 27 th June 2018 to look 
into the matter for creation/filling up the posts of DOs and FSOs as per norms to fill the gap 
and shortage with sufficient and competent human resources. Some progress is being 
reported from States. 

57 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.70 The Committee takes note of the efforts made by FSSAI on strengthening the 
human resource in the State Food Regulatory Bodies.  The efforts are showing some 
positive results also.  The Committee, therefore, desires that FSSAI must continue to 
pursue and convince States/UTs to strengthen their manpower. 
 
Recommendation /Observation 
 
3.71 The Committee, therefore, desires the Ministry to draw an action plan in coordination 
with State/UT Governments for overcoming the shortage of manpower of Foods Regulatory 
Bodies.  The Committee also recommends that as a short -term measure, professionally 
qualified persons should be engaged on short -term contract till adequate manpower is made 
available. Due to the very sensitive nature of regulatory work great care will need to be u sed 
to ensure that they do not indulge in corrupt and illegal practices.  
(Para 3.73) 
 Action Taken 
 
3.72 In the Conference of State Health Ministers/ Secretaries held on 8/9.1.2018, 
States/UTs were impressed upon to have adequate number of manpower to enf orce the 
provisions of FSS Act, Rules and Regulations made thereunder. Further, FSSAI has written 
to Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs vide letter dated   27 th June 2018 to look into the matter 
for creation/filling up the posts of DOs and FSOs as per norms to fill the gap and shortage 
with sufficient and competent human resources. The recommendation of the Committee, 
including regarding short term measures sugge sted, will be shared with the States/UTs to 
expedite the process.   
 
3.73 As far as, FSSAI is concerned, Government has sanctioned additional 493 posts at 
various levels. Once these posts are filled up, they would be posted at different places and 
would help in better administration of the Act in States/ UTs.   
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.74 The Committee hopes that recruitment of additional 493 posts at various levels 
would address the shortage of manpower to a great extent. The Committee, however, 
would like the Ministry to chalk out long term action plan in tandem with State/UTs 
Government to overcome the shortage of manpower in State Food Regulatory Bodies. 
However, short term plan the FSSAI should ensure that States/UTs engage 
professionally qualified persons on short-term contract till adequate manpower is made 
available.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.75 The Committee takes a serious note of the fact that before the amendment, minimum 
qualification of bachelors’ degree in Science with Chemistry as one subject and compulsory 
training was required for a DO which has been done away with. T he Committee fails to 
understand the reason for diluting the qualification of DO from technical to non -technical. 
The Committee recommends that previous qualification requirement and necessary training 
for a DO should be restored. Only full time officers s hould be appointed as DO so that better 
food safety surveillance mechanism can be enforced. The Committee would like to 
emphasise that the Designated Officer (DO) is a key post to ensure effective compliance and 

58 
 
enforcement of the food safety law in the co untry. At the State level, the Food Safety 
Commissioner is the head of the enforcement machinery and the DO is responsible for the 
food safety administration of a district. DO acts as the licensing authority and is authorised to 
issue or cancel licenses of  FBOs and gets the report and samples of article of foods from 
Food Safety Officer analysed. DO can prohibit the sale of any article which are not as per 
prescribed standards. The recent amendment authorises the Commissioner of Food Safety to 
appoint Sub -Divisional Officer of the area on additional charge basis  as the designated 
officer and he/she is not required to undergo any training. 
(Para 3.77) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.76 Full-time designated officers (DOs) have not been appointed in many States/ UTs. 
Other District officials like SDOs are appointed as part - time DOs. Sometimes, such officers 
do not possess degree in science with chemistry, hence the change now made by the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare. Efforts are being made so that only full - time D Os are 
appointed in all States/ UTs. 
 
3.77 As regards compulsory training for Dos is concerned, it is submitted that as per FSS 
Rule 2.1.2.1 (ii), the officers appointed as DOs shall undergo training as specified by the 
Food Authority, within a period of s ix months from the date of appointment. Similarly, 
before notifying any person as FSO, besides having the required educational qualifications, 
successful completion of training as specified by the Authority is a pre-requisite as per Clause 
2.1.3.1(iii) of FSS Rules, 2011 read with Section 37 of FSS Act, 2006. FSSAI reviews the 
training requirements regularly and takes up with States/UTs to ensure that the above 
conditions are adhered to both in case of DOs and FSOs.        
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.78 The Committee is of the view that appointing SDOs as part time DOs should not 
be viewed as a permanent solution to shortage of manpower. SDO has multiple 
responsibilities and duties to perform and additional charge as DO would not do justice 
to the urgency req uired for an efficient food safety monitoring mechanism. The 
Committee is not in agreement with the idea of doing away with technical qualification 
for a DO and recommends Ministry to consider restoration of the minimum 
qualification of bachelors degree in  Science with Chemistry as one subject for 
appointment as DO, in the first instance and if the candidates are not available, at least, 
the candidates must have science stream at the higher secondary level. 
 
Recommendation /Observations 
 
3.79 The Committee is happy to note that National Food Laboratory in Ghaziabad and 
Kolkata are being upgraded with sophisticated instruments under public - private-partnership 
mode and would contribute immensely in analytical and qualitative testing. The Committee 
calls upon the Ministry to set up two more such labs with cutting edge technology and state 
of the art facilities to cater to the needs of food testing in all four regions of the country. 
Emphasis should also be given on research and development and offering engageme nt of 
only the best of the talent in the country. These four labs would help in ensuring a highly 
standardized analytical testing facility in the surrounding regions for sound food safety 
network.  
(Para 4.5) 

59 
 
Action Taken 
3.80 There is already a proposal f or two National Food Laboratories (NFLs) at Chennai 
and Mumbai as well. All the four FSSAI Food Laboratories will have the cutting edge 
technology and state -of- the -art facilities to cater to the needs of food testing in respective 
regions.  
Further Recommendation 
3.81 The Committee has been informed about the proposal to establish two National 
Food laboratories (NFLs) at Chennai and Mumbai. The Committee has however been 
not updated on the upgradation of NFL at Ghaziabad and Kolkata. The Committee lays 
great emphasis on establishing a robust Food testing infrastructure in the country and 
therefore, strongly recommends FSSAI to expedite the implementation of the proposals. 
It would like the Ministry to submit a note on current status of all four laboratories.   
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.82 The Committee is constrained to note that most food labs including those accredited 
by the NABL do not have facilities to test articles of food on all parameters. For food safety, 
the samples have to be checked for heavy metals contamination, pesticide residues, bacterial 
contamination, toxic chemicals etc., therefore, it is important that the laboratories are 
functional, well equipped and adequately staffed. The Committee treats microbiological 
analysis and testing as a specialized field for a country like ours that has relatively high 
outbreak of food borne diseases. Specialized training is required for the sampling procedure 
and the particular test method. There should be a specialized technical officer for carrying out 
microbiological testing. The Food Safety Officer should also be trained on the kinds of 
samples that have to be lifted for microbiological testing and analysis The Committee opines 
that all the food testing labs across the country should follow a uni form procedure/ 
methodology of testing so that accurate results are obtained. Further, a guideline document 
for tolerances of macro and micro nutrients based on different categories of food should be 
developed. There is also a need to have a Laboratory qua lity audit mechanism so that all the 
samples are analysed qualitatively. There should be a fixed list of parameters for testing a 
specific food item and such parameter should be uniform across the food testing labs in the 
country. FSSAI should prepare a li st of food safety parameters that should be mandatorily 
checked. The Committee also recommends that the imported food should mandatorily be 
checked for all the parameters. Manuals of food testing procedures must be brought out as 
early as possible to ensure uniformity in testing and methodology.   
(Para 4.21) 
 Action Taken 
 
3.83 FSSAI has published 14 Manuals of Method of Analysis for different food products 
categories to ensure the uniformity in test results among the laboratories. Besides this, a 
Guidance Document on “Good Food Laboratory Practices” for food testing personnel has 
also been released. These are available on the website of FSSAI.  Three Manuals of Method 
of Analysis are under finalization. 
3.84 FSOs and DOs are being trained on sampling and a nalysis including on lifting of 
samples for microbiological testing.    
 
 
 
 

60 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.85 The Committee is of the view that only publication of Manuals will not facilitate 
a uniform Laboratory Testing System in the country. FSSAI will have to ensure that 
these manuals on Method of Analysis and Good Laboratory Practices are diligently 
followed by all the FTLs in the country. The Committee observes that FSSAI has not 
paid the desired attention to the prevailing inadequate facilities for checki ng the food 
articles on all parameters in the labs. The persisting flawed practice of deeming a food 
article safe even when it fails on some parameters raises serious concern about the 
accuracy of the testing methodology. The Committee, therefore, recommen ds FSSAI to 
guide the Laboratories about the specific food safety parameters on which any food 
article should be mandatorily checked. Imported food should only be allowed in the 
market when it has passed the mandatory parameters as per the global norms. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.86 The Committee recognises the importance of a network of National Referral 
Laboratories whose very mandate is to set standards for testing, validation, development of 
new testing methods etc.  The Committee believes that the se referral labs can play a pivotal 
role in bringing about uniformity in food testing and prescription of parameters. The 
Committee recommends FSSAI to promote such labs which can help in enforcing and 
evolving new standards in tune with best international  practices. Such standards and 
methodology as furthered by these referral labs would certainly impact the food testing labs 
across the country and make their results credible and reliable. Further, specific time line 
must be specified for referral labs to give their reports. 
(Para 4.22) 
Action Taken 
 
3.87 A network of referral laboratories notified by FSSAI u/s 43(2) of FSS Act, 2006, is 
for testing of food samples on appeal against primary testing of samples by a laboratory 
notified u/s 43(1) of FSS Act, 2006. As regards timeline specified for referral laboratories to 
submit reports, FSSAI  has already initiated the process to amend the FSS Rules, 2011 to 
incorporate the provision of 14 days’ time period for a referral laboratory to submit their test 
reports. 
 
3.88 FSSAI has recognized 14 notified laboratories as National Reference Laborator ies 
for the purpose of method development, method validation, capacity building and research, 
etc. These labs have been recognized under regulation 3 of Food Safety and Standards 
(Recognition and Notification of Laboratories) Regulations, 2018. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.89 The Committee recommends that FSSAI should expedite the process of 
amending the FSS Rule, 2011 for incorporating the provision of 14 days time period for 
a referral laboratory to submit their test reports.  The Committee further reiter ates its 
recommendation for adoption of best international practices by the National Referral 
Laboratories with respect to standards for testing and validation.  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.90 The Committee observes that accredited competent food testing laboratories are 
fundamental to ensuring a stringent food safety mechanism in the country. Today when food 

61 
 
security is a global concern, different methods are employed to increase the agricultur al 
productivity and crop production. Excessive use of pesticides and insecticides to increase 
agricultural production is not an unknown phenomenon. Rampant use of pesticides and 
insecticides results in toxic chemical entering the food chain. Similarly, mic robiological 
testing and chemical hazard analysis for foods, drug residue testing etc. require a food testing 
laboratory fully equipped with modern technology. The Committee is of the firm view that 
NABL accreditation of labs would certainly ensure high st andards of testing and enhance 
credibility and reliability. The Committee, therefore , strongly recommends that FSSAI must 
insist on NABL accreditation of all labs for efficient food quality management system. 
(Para 4.30) 
Action Taken 
 
3.91 All food labs n otified by FSSAI require NABL accreditation. However, there are 59 
States food labs that continue to function under transition position without NABL 
accreditation. FSSAI has time and again advised the States/ UTs to get NABL accreditation 
for State Food Testing Laboratories (SFTLs) for their notification under section 43(1) of FSS 
Act, 2006. So far, 15 State Food Testing Laboratories have obtained NABL accreditation and 
notified under section 43 (1) of FSS Act, 2006.   14 State Food Labs have been discontinu ed 
under ambit of Section 98 of FSS Act. Further,   FSSAI is assisting States/UTs under the 
Central Sector Scheme (CSS) subject to the condition that their SFTLs would obtain NABL 
accreditation within two years from the date of release of final instalment.  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.92 The Committee strongly recommends FSSAI to accelerate the drive to accredit 
the remaining FTLs that have not been notified by it so far. The Committee also urges 
the Ministry and FSSAI to take up the matter of accreditation w ith the States and 
ensure speedy notification of the State Food Testing Laboratories under Section 43(1) of 
FSS Act, 2006. Operation of most of the existing labs without NABL accreditation raises 
serious apprehension over the FTLs quality and technical com petence. The Committee 
is worried that most of these labs may not have undergone a third party 
assessment/audit. The Committee also opines that FSSAI should take strict measures 
against the labs that have repeatedly been failing in quality assessment/audit . Labs that 
are already NABL accredited should also be investigated periodically. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.93 The Committee notes the acute shortage of manpower in the States/UTs as well as 
FSSAI. Non-availability of the technical manpower is one of the primary reasons behind poor 
functioning of these food testing laboratories. The number of food analyst is very l ow in the 
country considering the magnitude of food adulteration prevalent in the country. Even if the 
State laboratories receive the sophisticated instruments, they are not put to use because 
technical manpower to handle such sophisticated instruments is absent. The Committee 
recommends that each State/UT should frame its recruitment regulations according to its size 
and population and regular exams should be conducted to recruit suitable persons in food 
testing laboratories. A minimum number of technical staff required for proper functioning of 
food testing laboratory should be prescribed.  
(Para 4.37) 
 
 

62 
 
Action Taken 
3.94 The matter relating to sanctioned of posts and recruitment of technical staff has been 
taken up with the States/UTs from time to time. 
 3.95 Number of qualified food analyst has significantly increased by FSSAI in recent 
times.  Till date, there are 452 food analysts in the country against the estimated requirement 
of 600 -800 food analysts. FSSAI conducts food analyst examination every yea r and more 
food analysts would be available in near future.  
3.96 Guidance document for setting up a food testing laboratory,tha inter-alia contains the 
requirement of number of personnel and their educational qualification & experience for 
running a food testing laboratory has been prepared and circulated to States/ UTs. In addition, 
this document would help the States/ UTs in planning and design phases while establishing a 
food laboratory.  
Further Recommendation 
 
3.97 As per data submitted by FSSAI, there are 452 Public/Food Analysts against the 
estimated requirement of almost 800 food analyst. The Committee concludes that many 
laboratories may be operating without any Food Analysts. This is a sorry state of affair 
and speaks volumes of the inadequate  technical competence of the FTLs in the country. 
The Committee would like FSSAI to urgently take up the matter of increasing the 
number of personnel in the laboratory with the States. The Committee underlines an 
urgent need for the States/UTs to work in c lose partnership with FSSAI for ensuring a 
better food safety mechanism in the country. The Committee further urges the 
States/UTs to follow the guidance document for setting up a food testing laboratory. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.98 State food testing  laboratories are in urgent need of a major overhaul and upgrade 
both in terms of shortage of analytical personnel and equipments to perform sophisticated 
analysis of pathogens including chemicals, microbial toxins, heavy metals, residues of 
pesticides, et c. Food is a matter of health encompassing crucial life and death issues and 
therefore, according a high priority to food safety is the need of the hour. Since the 
implementation and enforcement of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 is primary the 
responsibility of the State /UT Food Regulatory Authorities, equipping them with the high -
end sophisticated equipments is therefore, very essential. In that direction, the Committee 
welcomes implementation of the Central Sector Scheme for “Strengthening of Food T esting 
System” in the country. The Committee is, however, constrained to note the tardy progress of 
the scheme which is evident from the fact that the Scheme with a total outlay of Rs. 481.95 
crore and targeted to be implemented between 2016 -17 and 2018 -19 has so far witnessed 
releases to the tune of Rs. 109.95 crore only. Given the fact that only nine months are left 
before the Financial Year 2018-19 concludes, the Scheme is certain to face massive financial 
under performance. Apparently, there are serious  shortcomings in the mechanisms of Centre -
State coordination in implementation of this scheme. The Committee therefore, desires the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to address the pending issues pertaining to 
implementation of the Scheme by taking up corrective measures with sustained monitoring. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the results of the efforts of the Ministry at the 
earliest.  
(Para 4.47) 
  

63 
 
Action Taken 
3.99 Grant of Rs. 481.95 crore approved under the Central Sector Scheme   is fo r six 
components including upgradation of SFTLs. There is an Empowered Committee constituted 
under the chairmanship of the Chairperson, FSSAI, to guide and oversee implementation of 
CSS. As per the decision of the EC, 42 SFTLS would be upgraded at a cost o f Rs. 402.60 
crore. So far, 39 SFTLs of 29 States/UTs have been taken up for the upgradation; and, grant 
of Rs. 312.98  crore has been sanctioned/ released to these States/UTs. Some of the proposals 
are still under consideration. Grant is being released to  States/UTs subject to readiness of the 
States in terms of space, infrastructure, manpower, etc.  
 
3.100 As on date, FSSAI has imparted training to 1842 laboratory personnel/analysts of 
food testing laboratories. Further, due to nation -wide lockdown, FSSAI organized a total of 
144 online training programs from 5 th April, 2020 to 18 th May, 2020 in which all the 
laboratory personnel of States/UTs and FSSAI’s notified laboratories, Food Business 
Operators, Consumers etc. were allowed to participate. A total of 33,805 persons participated 
in these online training programs.  
3.101 It is pertinent to mention here that entire funds provided by the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare to FSSAI under the scheme have been released and the remaining funds 
under the Scheme is being made available to FSSAI to address the pending issues.  
3.102 Final report of the Meta Study on the status of Food Testing Laboratories (FTLs) has 
been received. The recommendations related to Food Testing Labs are summarized in 
Annexure 4 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.103 The Committee has taken cognizance of the progress made in regard to 
implementation of the Central Sector Schemes for 'Strengthening of Food Testing 
System' in the country.  It finds that out of a total outlay of Rs. 481.95 crore, a sum of 
Rs. 312.98 crore has been sanctioned/released to States/UTs, while substantial balance 
amount to the tune of Rs. 168.97 crore still remained unspent as some of proposals are 
still under consideration. Non-utilisation of 35% funds and that too for a Central sector 
projects does not augur well and leaves a quantum made on t he fixed management of 
the Ministry. 
 
3.104 The Committee takes note of the fact that out of the total target of upgrading 42 
SFTLS, upgradation of 39 SFTLS spread over 29 States/UTs have been taken up.  The 
Committee desires that upgradation of the remain ing 3 labs may also be started at the 
earliest.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.105 The Committee understands that due to the scarcity of food analysts, most State Drug 
Testing Labs operate far below their desired capacity and in many cases, laboratories have 
had to be shut down due to the unavailability of Food Analysts. As per a Times o f India 
report published in 2014, Rajasthan had closed down seven public health laboratories due to 
the shortage of food analyst. The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to chalk out 
an action plan for overcoming the shortage and expanding the po ol of food analysts. The 
Committee also desires to be apprised of the actual number of Food Analysts vis -a-vis their 
requirement.    
(Para 4.49) 

64 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.106 Food Analyst is a statutory position under the FSS Act and Rules. It is the duty of the 
Food Analyst to analyze the food sample or to get it analyzed through other analysts working 
in the laboratory. As per FSS Act & Rules, the Food Analyst is the authorized person to sign 
the test reports. Therefore, there should be at least one food analyst an d appropriate number 
of other laboratory personnel in the food laboratory as per number of food samples to be 
tested.  
 
3.107 Till date, there are 452 food analysts in the country against the estimated requirement 
of 600 -800 food analysts. FSSAI conducts food analyst examination every year and more 
food analysts would be available in near future.  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.108 Notwithstanding the fact that the Committee has been emphasizing on the need 
of recruitment of Food Analysts in the country, there  has been no perceptible change in 
the situation. The Committee, therefore, recommends FSSAI to expedite the 
recruitment of Food Analysts in the country and also take up the matter with the State 
Governments. Special attention should also be paid on the qu alification of the Food 
Analyst so that only technically qualified and experienced personnel are recruited on 
the post of Food Analysts. There is also a need to develop a monitoring mechanism for 
the work done by Food Analysts so that they are not tempted into giving false reports.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.109 The Committee is of the view that mobile food testing labs hold immense potential to 
improve the food safety situation in the country in general and in remote areas in particular. 
The Committee feels that the Mobile Food Testing Labs should be used for cre ating 
awareness, transporting samples, educating consumers and on spot test facilities as suggested 
by FSSAI. These mobile labs can open new job opportunities for the unemployed youth of 
our country. India has a large number of science and technical gradua tes but in absence of 
job specific technical vocational training, they are unskilled& deemed unsuitable for jobs. 
The Committee recommends that the FSSAI should utilise the rich demographic dividend of 
the country and conduct extensive training program for  the youth. These young graduates 
should be trained in managing these mobile labs in every block. The Committee opines that 
mini labs are a cost effective method for basic analysis and smaller laboratories and sample 
collection points at various areas of s urrounding districts of main laboratories will cater to 
the testing need efficiently. This will distribute the workload and evenly manage the samples 
throughout the state. The sample collection points should be at an optimum distance from the 
food testing labs so that there is no delay in sending the samples to the labs and results are 
declared quickly.  
 
3.110 The Committee has been given to understand that each mobile lab would cover every 
20 districts of the State. However, given the large size of our co untry and huge population, 
we need far more Food Safety on Wheels (FSWs). The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that number of FSWs should be sanctioned taking into consideration the size of population 
of a State so as to ensure facilities of testing food w ithin the reach of the general public. The 
Committee also recommends that FSSAI should realistically assess the need of FSWs in the 
States and one FSW in each district must be provided to increase its outreach among the 
common man.    
(Para 4.54 & 4.55) 

65 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.111 Along the lines of the recommendations of the Standing Committee, FSSAI has 
scheme to provide 50 mobile food testing laboratories, called as Food Safety on Wheels 
(FSWs) to the States/UTs based on their readiness especially in terms of av ailability of 
manpower with them for running of FSWs. These FSWs would not only address the issue of 
lack of food testing infrastructure in the remote areas but also cater to the basic analytical 
needs of consumers. Apart from testing and training, the FSW s also help the regulatory staff 
or the field functionaries in the States/UTs to enhance their outreach; and, also help in 
conducting surveillance activities even in far-flung areas. 
 
3.112 FSWs are utilized for (i) surveillance and creating awareness rega rding the food 
safety in remote areas in the State, large public congregations, schools and consumer 
organisations; (ii) transporting samples picked from remote areas to the nearest food testing 
laboratory; (iii) education of the consumers in various aspec ts of food safety laws and 
common hygiene practices; (iv) on the spot test facilities for qualitative adulteration of 
common food items like ghee, milk, khoya, sweets, edible oil, non -permitted food colours in 
various foods like namkeens, spices, prepared foods etc.  
 
3.113 Each FSW can test >54 parameters qualitatively across seven different food 
categories. In addition, each FSW has a provision for performing simple microbiological 
tests if the States so desire. The FSW is provided at a cost of ~ 50 lakh INR each, including a 
recurring grant of Rs. 5 Lakhs per year for 3 years towards Petrol, Oil, Lubricants & 
consumables. As on date, 40 FSWs have been sanctioned/delivered to 29 States/UTs. Since 
there are fund constraints in FSSAI, States/UTs may also hav e their own FSWs. Some of the 
States like J&K and Union Territory of Chandigarh have their own mobile testing labs also.  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.114 The Committee notes the potential of mobile food testing laboratories, Food 
Safety on Wheels (FSWs) and recommends FSSAI to upgrade and increase the number 
of FSWs especially in remote areas. The Committee reiterates its recommendation on 
utilising the rich demographic dividend of the country and urges FSSAI to conduct 
extensive training program for the youth. The Committee strongly recommends FSSAI 
to devise a special training program for the youth for operating these mobile testing 
labs.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.115     The Indian food safety regime is well below the international benchmarks in terms 
of availability of desired lab infrastructure, food safety institutions, regulatory policies, 
manpower (technical & non -technical) and financial resou rces. The Food Safety and 
Standards Act, 2006 (FSS Act) is the primary law for the regulation of food items and its 
regulation. However, the survey by CIFTI and FICCI has revealed that about one -third of the 
industry is unaware about the FSS Act and its re gulation.  This lack of information among 
food suppliers, sellers and buyers is one of the major challenges in the present food safety 
regime. The Committee strongly believes that it is the obligation and the duty of the State to 
spread awareness on food s afety and quality and ensure that any food borne disease does not 
go unreported. A robust overhaul of the current food safety regime is needed so that the food 
law is implemented both in letter and spirit.    
(Para 4.57) 

66 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.116    FICCI/ CIFTI Report was submitted in May 2010. Visibility of FSSAI and awareness 
about food safety and healthy diets has increased significantly in recent years. A massive 
outreach programme, Eat Right India”, Swasth Bharat Yatra, directly connecting to most of 
cities/ towns in India is currently underway.  
  
3.117   In addition, FSSAI has taken steps to make industry aware about FSS Act and its 
regulations.  Industry representatives are represented in Central Advisory Committee as well 
as in the Food Authority. Wherever necessary, industry is consulted in the process of 
standards formulation and for making food safety regime more robust.  
 
3.118 Further, FSSAI is also providing training to Food Business Operators on provisions of 
Act and Regulations to ensure food safety and compliance. So far approximately 59000+ 
people through more than 2300 training programmes have been trained across the country.  
3.119 FSSAI considers that it is also the responsibility of Industry Associations to spread 
the awareness about the Act and Regulations amongst the members. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.120 The Committee feels that awareness on food safety and quality provisions and 
implication of FSS Act and its regulation is still lacking. The Committee understands 
that the massive outreach programme of FSSAI viz. 'Eat Right India' Swasth  Bharat 
Yatra etc. would go a  long way in spreading awareness about the provisions of the 
FSSAI and its regulation.  The Committee, therefore, feels that a lot more needs to be 
done by FSSAI on these fronts. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.121 The Committee expresses its serious concern over the growing menace of 
adulteration of milk and dairy products by unabated use of hazardous chemicals and 
substances like pesticides, caustic soda, urea, detergents, antimicrobial residues, white paint 
etc. and also the sale of synthetic milk in different parts    of the country. It is indeed alarming 
that as per a national level milk quality survey conducted by FSSAI in 2011, 68% of milk 
samples were found to be adulterated and non -conforming to the stipulated quality standards. 
Consumption of adulterated and synthetic milk is hazardous and poses grave risks to human 
health. The Government, therefore, needs to bring forth necessary amendments to the FSS 
Act 2006 and Indian Penal Code providing for enhancement of punishment for adulteration 
of milk and milk products. The Committee therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare, in consultation with State/UT Governments, must take expeditious 
action to bring in necessary amendments in the st atute and apprise the Committee in this 
regard.  
(Para 5.10) 
Action Taken 
3.122 National milk survey, 2011 is being wrongly interpreted in media.  Whereas, it is true 
that about 56% samples of milk in 2011 survey were found to be substandard, mainly on 
account of lower fat and SNF than specified in standards, the remaining about 12% samples, 
all in southern part, were found to have traces of detergent.  More detailed survey 
corroborates this.  It goes on to suggest that problem of milk adulteration/ synthet ic milk is 

67 
 
not alarming. However, all kind of adulteration posing risk to human life needs to be 
addressed adequately.  Therefore, FSSAI has proposed an amendment to curb the rampant 
adulteration by inserting Section 59A in the Food Safety and Standards Ac t, 2006 relating to 
the adulteration of food products which reads ‘ Any person who whether by himself or by any 
other person on his behalf, adds an adulterants to food so as to render it injurious for human 
consumption with an inherent potential to cause de ath or likely to cause serious injury 
irrespective of the fact whether it causes actual injury,  death or not, shall be punishable for 
a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life 
and also fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees’.  
Further Recommendation 
 
3.123 The Committee notes the provisions of proposed amendments in Section 59 A in 
the Food Safety and Standard Act, 2006 intended to curb the rampant adulteration of 
the food products and the pena l provision thereon. The Committee, however, 
recommends the Ministry to expedite the process of the proposed amendments so that 
the growing menace of adulteration of milk and dairy products having serious health 
implication is combated in right earnest.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.124  The Committee observes that loose edible oils are prone to adulteration and even if 
edible oil sellers comply with food safety regulations and standards at the first point of sale, 
there is no guarantee that the oil would remain unadulterated as they pass through several 
hands. There have been countless instances of sale of adulterated loose oils which have 
resulted in masses being afflicted by dropsy. The Committee gathers that Delhi –based  
consumer organisation, namely, Consumer Voice, had in the year 201 6 collected samples of 
loose edible oils of eight varieties, namely Mustard, Sesame, Groundnut and Cottonseed from 
15 States and got them tested on safety as well as quality parameters in a NABL accredited 
laboratory. The laboratory results revealed that a dulteration was found in loose oil samples 
collected from all 15 States and 8% samples of coconut oil, 74.07% samples of cottonseed 
oil, 74% samples of mustard oil were found adulterated. Adulterated edible oil is one of the 
main reasons behind several dis eases like cardiac arrest, cancer, epidemic dropsy, liver 
damage, paralysis etc. Without packaging, batch number or FSSAI license number it is very 
difficult to trace the source of the problem. in the event of health epidemic breaking out due 
to adulterated edible oils.   
 
3.125 With a view to safeguard the interests of consumers, the Committee would like to 
recommend to the Central Govt to impress upon the State Governments to ensure that edible 
oils are retailed in packaged form only.  
 
3.126 The Committee simultaneously observes that there is another dimension to the sale 
of edible oil in loose form which should not be lost sight of. Small consumers especially daily 
wage labourers and the rural poor purchase loose edible oils out of their payment on daily  
basis. They cannot afford to buy oil sold in pack of one litre or more and therefore buy loose 
edible oil in small quantity. It is, therefore, absolutely essential for the FSSAI to push for 
smaller packages of 100ml and 200 ml of edible oil.  
(Para 5.19, 5.20 & 5.21) 
Action Taken 
 
3.127 Provisions for packaging requirements for sale of edible oil are as under:  
 

68 
 
Sub regulation 2.3.15 (1) of Food Safety and Standards (Prohibition and Restriction 
on Sales) Regulations, 2011 provides: 
 
“No person shall sell o r expose for sale, or distribute, or offer for sale, or dispatch, or 
deliver to any person for the purpose of sale any edible oil- 
(a) which does not conform to the standards of quality as provided in the FSS Act, 
2006, Rules and Regulations made there under; and  
(b) which is not packed in container, marked and labeled in the manner as specified in 
FSSAI regulations. 
Provided that the State Government may, in the public interest, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, in specific circumstances and for spec ific period by a notification 
in the official Gazette, exempt any edible oil from the provisions of this Act.” 
3.128 Thus, FSS Act provides for sale of edible oils in packaged form only except for sale 
of loose oils in specific circumstances as permitted by the State Governments through 
Gazette notification. FSSAI has taken up the matter with State/UT Governments from time to 
time to stop/discourage sale of edible oil in loose form.  To reduce the sale of loose edible oil 
in the country, FSSAI has also advised various associations representing edible oil Industry to 
bring out small sachets/ pouches of edible oil at prices affordable to people from 
economically weaker sectors of society. 
3.129 Further, States/UTs have again been advised to check on sale of loose edible oil in the 
country.  Many edible oil companies are now brining out edible oil in small sachets/pouches 
to cater to economically weaker sections of society.  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.130 Taking note of rampant sale of loose edible oil in vill age and remote towns, the 
Committee recommends FSSAI to take up the issue with States and UTs Government. 
Keeping in view the need of economically weaker section of the society, edible oil 
companies has appropriately been allowed to make edible oil availab le in small 
pouches/sachets. The Committee, nevertheless, recommends FSSAI to carry out regular 
inspection in FBOs where large scale oil is consumed especially in shops where the 
leftover cooking oil is being used multiple times. The Committee is of the vi ew that the 
FSSAI should conduct regular training for acquainting the FBOs about the safe 
disposal of the oil and understand how repeated heating of the oil dangerously changes 
the fatty acid composition of the oil.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.131 Keeping in view the annual growth in edible oil consumption, the Committee 
underlines the need for an ecosystem for collection of used cooking oil and its conversion 
into biodiesel keeping in view the increase in non -communicable life style diseases that a re 
increasing day by day. FSSAI in coordination with the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare should also on a continuous basis evolve standards for the Indian population in 
respect of edible oils in India to determine as to what constitutes ‘safe standar ds ‘for 
consumption of edible oils in order to minimize the risks of non -communicable life style 
diseases.  
(Para 5.30) 
 
 

69 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.132 FSSAI has issued regulations that specify the limit for Total Polar Compounds (TPC) 
to be at a maximum 25%, beyond  which the cooking oil is considered to be unsafe for 
consumption.  In order to increase awareness, strengthen enforcement and create ecosystem 
for collection of edible oil, FSSAI has launched an initiative on used cooking oil called 
RUCO (Repurpose Used Cooking Oil)  
3.133 A Guidance Note on Handling and Disposal of Used Cooking Oil has also been 
published.  This covers the standard operating procedures to be followed for handling & 
disposal of used cooking oil by small FBOs, big FBOs as well as households.   
Further Recommendation 
3.134 The Committee observes that many street food stalls keep selling fried food 
reusing the same oil. The Committee understands that FSSAI has issued regulation on 
limit for TPC to a maximum of 25% beyond which the cooking oil is unsafe for 
consumption.  The Committee, therefore, recommends FSSAI to conduct on the spot 
inspection in food stalls to ensure the permissible 25% limit for Total Polar Compounds 
(TPC) is not crossed and penal action taken against those defaulting FBOs.  Moreover, 
the Committee is of the view that mere issuance of advisory is not the solution and 
FSSAI will have to take more pro -active steps to facilitate the mandatory inclusion of 
street food vendors in this initiative. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.135  The Committee observes that in India the GM food imports require approvals under 
the Environment Protection Act of 1986 and the Food Safety and Standards Act of 2006. 
While the former law covers the environmental impacts of the food products, the latter 
assesses the food’s impact on human health. Since no regulation has been finalized for GM 
products, it is still banned in the country. Further, even after the Environment Ministry gives 
clearances for imports, permission is also required under the food safe ty law but importers 
have got away without having the mandatory approval under the Food Safety and Standards 
Act. A large number of products are coming in India with GM ingredients but neither 
consumers nor authorities are aware of what is inside because t here is nothing mentioned on 
the label. Taking the above fact into account, the Committee recommends formulation of 
regulations to the effect that those importing foods must provide mandatory declaration on 
the label mentioning that ‘this food is from GM f ree source’. Countries like China, Australia 
and the European Union nations have strict regulations about GM foods labelling so that the 
consumer makes informed choices.   
3.136 The Committee observes that even after more than a decade of enactment of FSS Act, 
a regulatory vacuum exists in the import of GM Food. FSSAI has neither put the regulations 
for such approvals in place nor taken any measures to stop the imports. The Committee 
recommends that the FSSAI should urgently finalise “Guidelines for safety assessment of 
food derived by GM technology” and implement them within three months of presentation of 
the Report to the Parliament. FSSAI should also work to upgrade the GM food testing 
infrastructure and make use of the already present laboratories in th e country and equip them 
with latest technology.   
3.137 The Committee is perturbed to note that the action (or lack of it) in regulation of GM 
foods by FSSAI has been painstakingly slow. Recently FSSAI had decided to have the 
labelling norms for genetically modified food products in order to give informed choice to the 

70 
 
consumers. All food products having total Genetically Engineered (GE) ingredients 5% or 
more shall be labelled. The labelling shall be –“Contains GMO/Ingredients derived from 
GMO’. The absen ce of regulation for a decade in respect of GM foods would have caused 
irreversible damage to the consumers, who are the core constituency for whom FSSAI was 
set up. The Committee strongly censures the FSSAI for this lackadaisical attitude and 
implores upon it to pull up its socks and ensure that the regulation made in respect to GM 
foods be implemented within a time bound period and also provide training to its personnel 
involved in regulation of GM foods. The Committee also directs that FSSAI should also 
educate the citizens of the country as to what constitutes GM foods as a vast majority of 
people are not aware of the concept of GM foods.  
(Para 5.50, 5.51 & 5.52) 
Action Taken 
3.138 FSSAI draft notified FSS (Labelling & Display) Regulations on 25th June,  2019 
inviting comments from stakeholders. The comments received were duly considered by 
concerned Scientific Panel and the Regulations modified accordingly. It  is now under 
process of approval by the Food Authority. Thereafter it would be sent to MoHFW fo r final 
notification. 
 
3.139 FSSAI has drafted Regulation on GM Foods which is under consideration of MoHFW 
for draft notification 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.140 The Committee in its 110 th Report had raised concerns over the snail pace of 
drafting of regulations and guidelines with respect to the labelling norms, safety 
assessment of food derived by GM technology etc.  The Committee is disappointed to 
note that even after two years of the p resentation of this Report, the regulations have 
not been notified. The Committee, therefore, strongly urges upon the Ministry to 
expedite the process of notification of Regulation on GM foods so that the import of 
food products is regulated and every food  product with a GM ingredient is inspected. 
The Committee seeks to be informed about the strategy chalked out for making public 
awareness campaign by FSSAI on the concept and constitution of GM Foods and its 
implication.  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.141 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry that the officers of the 
FSSAI are present at six ports, namely Chennai, Mumbai, Kolkata, Delhi, Kochi and 
Tuticorin covering 21 points of entry. To assess the quantum of food products routed through 
these 21 points of entry vis-a-vis 135 other custom locations, the Committee would like to be 
apprised of total volume and worth of food item imports routed through these 2 1 and 135 
points of entry separately.  
(Para 5.62) 
Action Taken 
 
3.142 Data regarding clearance of imported food as provided by Customs for the financial 
year 2016-17 through 21 points of entry being handled by FSSAI and other points of entry 
which are being handled by Customs is  at Annexure 5. 
 

71 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.143 The Committee observes that the data submitted by the Ministry is outdated as 
the same pertains to the year 2016 -17. The Committee recommends the Ministry to 
submit latest data regardin g clearance of imported food through different points of 
entry being handled by FSSAI and other points of entry which are being handled by 
customs.   
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.144 The Committee notes that FSSAI has recently framed regulations for organ ic food 
which makes it mandatory for the domestic producers to certify their food as organic either 
from the National Programme for Organic Production (NPOP) System or from the cheaper 
Participatory Guarantee System -India (PGS), under which farmers form a collective and 
vouch for the others’ produce. The Committee also notes that earlier this certification was 
compulsory only for exports and optional for domestic supply. The Committee appreciates 
this regulation of certifying organic food as this will remov e non -certified /fake products 
from the market. Further, the Committee also recommends that a separate certification 
mechanism should be in place for small farmers who cannot afford these two certification 
options at an additional cost.   
(Para 5.67) 
Action Taken 
 
3.145 PGS is targeted at farmers including small farmers and FSSAI is working with the 
Ministry of Agriculture to make Participatory Guarantee System (PGS) more small -farmer 
friendly.  At the same time, FSSAI is considering allowing Participatory Guarantee Systems 
Organic Council (PGSOC), which represents tens of thousands of small and marginal farmers 
in the country, as a third system for certification of organic food. 
 
3.146 To ensure consumer’s trust, there is need of genuineness and authenticity of foods 
claimed as ‘Organic’. To ensure this, a regulatory mechanism backed by a robust certification 
system is required. Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has the mandate to 
regulate manufacture, distribute, sale or import  “organic foods” as per the provisions laid 
under Section 22 of the Food Safety Standards Act, 2006. Organic foods are regulated by 
Food Safety and Standards (Organic Foods) Regulations, 2017 notified under the provisions 
of the Act. Food Safety and Standards (Organic Foods) Regulations, 2017 stipulate  that - 
 the organic food offered or promoted for sale shall comply with the provisions of one 
of the systems namely Participatory Guarantee System for India (PGS -India) 
implemented by Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare or the National 
Programme for Organic Production (NPOP) implemented by APEDA under Ministry 
of Commerce and Industry.    As per the Regulations, a product may carry a 
certification or quality assurance mark of one of the systems mention ed above in 
addition to the Food Safety and Standard Authority of India’s organic logo (Jaivik 
Bharat logo).  The consumers can easily identify the organic foods by looking at the 
Jaivik Bharat logo and can get assured about these being genuinely organic. 
 To address the difficulties of the small and marginal farmers/ small FBOs, Organic 
food which is marketed through direct sales to the end consumer by the small original 
producer or producer organisation is exempted from provision of the certification 
system i.e., NPOP or PGS -India. Small original producer or producer organisation is 
the one whose annual turnover is not exceeding Rs 12 Lakhs per annum. 

72 
 
(The Food Safety and Standards (Organic Foods) Regulations, 2017 can be obtained from 
Website: www.fssai.gov.in.) 
 
3.147 The initiatives taken recently  to address the difficulties of small producers/FBOs are : 
I. The proposal for inclusion of a provision for ‘aggregator/intermediary’ and ‘In -
conversion’ products in the Food S afety and Standards (Organic Foods) Regulations, 
2017 was approved by Food Authority and is under Draft Notification Stage. The 
objective for the said amendment are stated below: 
 An amendment to permit Aggregator/Intermediary to collect organic food from s mall 
farmers and sell it to the end consumer directly has been proposed as small farmers 
have low quantities of organic produce to sell and cannot afford to go to the market. 
Such aggregator shall be such whose annual turnover is less than Rs 50 Lakhs per 
annum and shall maintain records of traceability and other documents and abide by 
the Standards. They cannot use Jaivik Bharat Logo. 
3.148 Another amendment is to mention “In conversion to Organic” on the labels for the 
products which are in conversion und er NPOP or PGS -India. Since Jaivik Bharat Logo 
cannot be used on such labels, mentioning “In -conversion to organic” on the labels will 
provide Food Business Operators with some extra edge over conventional foods and will get 
better price. It may be mention ed that ‘conversion’ is the process of changing an agricultural 
farm from conventional to organic   and varies from one year to three years depending on the 
type of crop. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.149 The Committee appreciates that FSSAI understands the difficulties faced by 
small FBOs in accessing the market. The Committee, however, is quite apprehensive of 
the proposal for inclusion of a provision for "aggregator/ intermediary" in the FSS 
(Organic Foods) Regulations, 2017.  The Committee, in this regard , recommends that 
FSSAI should take necessary measures to ensure that the small FBOs are not exploited 
and get adequate remuneration of their produce. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.150 The Committee notes that safety net programs –both Mid -day Meal(MDM) and 
Integrated Child Development Scheme (ICDS) have mandated the use of fortified wheat 
flour, oil and doubled fortified salt nationally, ensuring that the most vulnerable sections of 
society receive appropriate and timely nutrition. The Committee is of the view that the above 
safety net programs involve economies of scale and are not in the domain of Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare. However, in the present scheme of things, provisio n of even 
basic items under these two programs is prone to massive pilferage/sub -
standardisation/leakages. Various media reports have highlighted many cases of food 
poisoning involving contamination and adulteration of meals under the MDM Scheme 
making several children severely ill. Even under ICDS, health of small children and lactating 
others is at stake due to unsafe food items. How FSSAI would ensure provision of fortified 
foods under these programs remains to be seen as conversion of intent into actual  realisation 
is what counts the most. The Committee while not discounting the importance of these 
schemes would like the FSSAI to embark upon a time -bound due diligence process on the 
States which have an efficient distribution of resources under these two  safety net programs 

73 
 
and introduce the fortified items in these States and replicate the success of these programs in 
other States in a time bound manner. 
(Para 5.71) 
Action Taken 
 
3.151 As suggested by the Standing Committee, FSSAI has compiled State best  practices 
and supply chain models of States like Gujarat, Haryana (Wheat flour in ICDS) and Odisha, 
Karnataka, Chandigarh (Rice in MDM and ICDS). This has been published in the form of a 
report titled “Food Fortification in India: Status and Road Ahead -  Need for a Strategic Shift 
for Further Scale Up”. This will help in supporting the States to create an implementable 
scale up plan for fortification. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.152 The Committee recommends that the observation/message, enshrined in the 
report titled “Food Fortification in India: Status and Road Ahead - Need for a Strategic 
Shift for Further Scale Up” detailing State best practices and supply chain models of 
Select states, be implemented by other States. The Committee believes that the children 
benefitted under two cherished programmes of the country viz. Mid -Day Meal (MDM) 
and Integrated Child Development Scheme (ICDS) would be beneficiary of fortified 
foods.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.153 The Committee recommends that every eatery including hotels, fast food chains, 
restaurants and e -commerce food sellers should provide statutory information concerning 
packaging and labelling of food item on menu cards, advertise ment and display panels and 
also mandatorily print calorie information on their menu so that the consumer makes 
informed choice and healthy eating is promoted. The Committee also notes that restaurants 
do not have a fixed quantity of the meal they serve. T he Committee recommends that the 
eateries should also specify the quantity of the portion in their menu. FSSAI has issued 
various guidelines for restaurants but time and again cases of non -adherence to the basic 
hygiene practices have been reported. The Co mmittee therefore recommends that once the 
eatery has been issued license, timely inspection should be conducted. Also, before giving 
license, the basic infrastructure of the premises should be inspected and checked for its 
compliance with the FSSAI guidelines.   
(Para 5.76) 
Action Taken 
3.154 Amendment in FSS (Packaging & Labelling) Regulations w.r.t. Display of 
information in food service establishments is under consideration of FSSAI for final 
notification. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.155 The Committee desires that the proposed amendments in FSS (Packaging & 
Labelling) Regulation with regard to display of information in food service 
establishment be notified without delay.  The Committee also recommends that apart 
from display of informatio n relating to calorific value of food and nutritive value of 
food in the menu, quantity of portion should also be specified in the menu. The 

74 
 
Committee also reiterates its recommendation for periodic inspection of basic 
infrastructure of food service establ ishment and the adoption of standard hygiene 
practices therein.    
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.156 The Committee is of the view that such initiatives on the lines of Project Clean Street 
Food are laudable and worth emulating across the country. Such a measure would also help in 
getting feedback in the areas where the street vendors lack in hygiene issue s and the data can 
be mapped by FSSAI. Such data would form a base for ensuring certain food safety standards 
in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that FSSAI in partnership with State 
Governments should evolve a mechanism to train such regi stered street vendors and also 
collate data on difficulties vendors face in food hygiene. FSSAI should formulate the 
standards to regulate street food vendors within a period of one year from the date of 
presentation of this Report of the Committee to the Parliament.   
(Para 5.81) 
Action Taken 
 
3.157 The observations of the Committee are noted. It is submitted that to help Street Food 
Vendors meet food safety standards, a Training Program for Street Food Vendors has been 
developed. Further, holistic benchma rks for ‘Clean Street Food Hubs’ have been defined, 
which set standards, inter alia, for Personal Hygiene, Surrounding hygiene, Basic 
Infrastructure Requirements and Training of Street Food Vendors. To encourage clusters of 
Street Food Vendors to meet the benchmarks, a standard operating procedure has also been 
defined whereby an Auditing agency does a gap analysis as per the checklist and State Food 
Authorities, Municipal Authorities etc. along with voluntary/corporate partners collaborate to 
fill in the i dentified gaps. Thereafter, another audit is conducted and if the benchmarks are 
met, the entire cluster is certified as a Clean Street Food Hub and awarded a plaque in 
recognition. The first such Clean Street Food has been certified in Ahmedabad and FSSAI  
has also written to all State governments to take this initiative forward and cover as many 
street food clusters as possible. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.158 The Committee recommends FSSAI to escalate its efforts in implementing food 
safety norms and guide lines in view of the outbreak of pandemic Covid -19 and 
thereafter in the wake of unlocking Phase. The Committee further recommends FSSAI 
to collaborate with different groups of street vendors and FBOs and increase the reach 
of its digital training program on hygiene issues for ensuing food safety standards 
during this peculiar phase. The Committee opines that the need of the hour is to draw 
area specific programs for street food vendors and strict adherence to safety practices 
such as using disinfectant, we aring protective gears, maintaining social distancing etc. 
in the FBO premises.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.159 The Committee would like to emphasise upon the   power and hold of advertisements 
on gullible consumers who may be adults, senior citizens, c hildren who are easily influenced 
and swayed by the promises of better quality of health and wellbeing by consuming various 
food products. Several of such advertisements may be misleading which can not only fleece 
the consumers of their money for a wasted product but also harm their wellbeing. The 

75 
 
Committee would like the Food Authority to take this issue with utmost seriousness and 
devise ways to stop misleading advertisements. The Committee feels that FSSAI can suo 
moto take cognisance of such advertisements   and involve the ASCI for appropriate actions. 
 
3.160 The Committee recommends creation of a food advertising monitoring cell that can 
monitor all the food advertisements and take up complaints related to advertisem ents. The 
Committee would like FSSAI to share information w.r.t. number of complaints received by 
ASCI and the action taken against the offenders. The misleading advertisements should be 
banned immediately and the information be shared with the public. 
(Para 6.19 & 6.20) 
 
Action Taken 
3.161 The revised Food Safety and Standards (Advertisements and Claims) Regulations 
addresses these issues. These include general and specific requirements for claims and 
provides for a provision for restricting the advertisements and/or claims for food articles that 
undermines the products of any other manufacturer for the purpose of promoting their 
products or influencing consumer behavior.  
3.162 Further, in order to monitor the food advertisements and take up complaints related to 
advertisements, FSSAI signed an MoU with ASCI in 2016 which was subsequently renewed 
on 13th Feb, 2018. ASCI comprehensively monitors cases of misleading advertisements in the 
Food and Beverage sector (F&B) across various media and process complaints against 
misleading F&B advertisements. MoU also requires ASCI to report to FSSAI non -
compliance of ASCI’s dec isions for further action as required as per provisions of FSSAI 
Act. The Status as on date is as under: 
No. of advertisements scrutinised by ASCI - 395 
No. of cases where compliance/ assurance received from advertisers - 180 
Cases referred to FSSAI  for further action - 69 
 
3.163 Further, for quick redressal of cases where action is required from FSSAI, a high level 
review committee has been constituted in FSSAI to review the progress of all misleading 
advertisements/claims and initiate necessary action as per the approved SOP. 
3.164 ASCI escalated 45 cases of misleading advertisements with FSSAI in 2018 -19. In all 
such cases, FSSAI has taken up the issue with concerned Commissioner of Food 
Safety/Central Licensing Authorities for appropriate action under t he provisions of FSS Act, 
2006, Rules and Regulations made thereunder.   Accordingly, notices were served to the 
concerned FBOs wherein they were directed to either withdraw the advertisement or submit 
their justification in support of the alleged advertise ment. In most of the cases FBOs 
withdrew their advertisement and in some cases FBOs submitted their justification which are 
under consideration. 
3.165 Further, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has gazette notified 
the Food Safety and St andards (Advertising and Claims) Regulations on 19.11.2018. Many 
claims, listed in various schedules of these regulations with related criteria, are permitted to 
be made by food business operators without the need for seeking prior approval from the 
food regulator. However, other types of claims not standardized under these regulations may 
require approval from the Food Authority and should be supported with sound scientific 
basis. A detailed procedure for approval of claims included in these regulations, f ood 
businesses may seek prior approval from FSSAI for reduction of disease risk claims other 
than those specified in these regulations. 

76 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.166 The Committee reiterates its recommendation that FSSAI should create a food 
advertising monitoring cell to monitor all the food advertisements and disseminate the 
information regarding misleading advertisements to the public. 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.167 The Committee recommends that all the complaints related to food safety be taken 
seriously and immediate action should be taken by the food authority. A timeframe should be 
established for speedy disposal of the cases. FSSAI should also analyse the status of 
pendency in these portals. The   same data should also be shared with the respective States so 
that immediate action can be taken. Most of the people in the country may not be aware of 
the food safety connect system and the different means through which  food safety concerns 
can be voiced. Therefore, the Committee recommends spreading awareness among the 
consumers. Skits and Plays can be an effective method to spread awareness regarding 
consumer rights. A dedicated helpline should also be opened for food safety complaints and 
wide scale advertisement regarding these different means should be publicised.   
(Para 6.27) 
Action Taken 
 
3.168 Complaints/Concerns of consumers and FBOs received by FSSAI through various 
channels (Web Portal & Mobile App, FSSAI Help line, Emails, WhatsApp, Twitter, 
Facebook, INGRAM – National Consumer Helpline portal, PMOPG, posts etc.) are 
consolidated by FSSAI into a single portal i.e. Food Safety Connect Portal.  A unique code is 
generated against each lodged complaint/concern, prioritized according to their risks and then 
forwarded to concerned State Designated Officers and FBOs for necessary action. Thus, 
FSSAI has established a robust grievance redressal mechanism and working towards its 
continuous improvement and strengthening by involving the States / UTs. 
 
3.169 In order to make general public aware about issues pertaining to food safety, the 
FSSAI has created an exclusively dedicated interactive portal www.foodsmart.fssai.gov.in for 
making all food purchasers into smart, alert and aware consumers. The portal tells them how 
to make an informed choice, whether they are buying raw food, processed food or eating out. 
It also provides consumers with a forum/platform providing an opport unity to express their 
views, ask questions and register their complaints. FSSAI has also developed Pink Book, 
Yellow Book, DART Book, etc.  for spreading awareness among general public and school 
children about food safety.  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.170 The Committee takes note of a dedicated interaction portal for making food 
purchasers into smart, alert and aware consumers. The Committee would like the 
FSSAI to take certain initiatives for spreading awareness among the rural consumers 
too since these c onsumers may face difficulty in accessing the FSSAI portal and a 
helpline number instead would certainly give voice to their complaints.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends to FSSAI to have dedicated helpline number for addressing the 
complaints of such consumers.  
 
 
 

77 
 
Recommendation /Observation 
3.171 The Committee recommends that FSSAI should promote computerised records rather 
than insisting on registers. The digitised records will help in better data management and 
better accessibility. This will also help in bringing transparency in the food business 
management system and prevent unnecessary wastage of paper and loss of any information. 
(Para 6.35) 
 Action Taken  
3.172 FSSAI has taken several initiatives to digitize data. Physical submission of 
documents for License has been done away with and all the documents are now required to 
be submitted online on FLRS. The inspection procedure is also being digitized through Food 
Safety Compliance Through Regular Inspection and Sampling (FoSCoRIS) and data on 
inspection reports will be available online. In addition, the data of sampling and testing is 
also being digitized through Indian Food Laboratory Network (InFoLNet) portal.  
3.173 The online Food Licensing and Registration System (FLRS) is  fully functional across 
the country. Further, FSSAI is launching Food Safety and Compliance System (FoSCoS) 
which will replace existing online Food Licensing and Registration System (FLRS) in a 
phased manner in different States/UTs. FoSCoS functions on cl oud based server with 
upgraded software and hardware and will resolve the often reported issue of slowness of 
existing FLRS portal. FoSCoS is envisaged to be the one -stop ‘Compliance Portal’ for food 
safety and in future will be escalated to have more modu les for functional needs such as 
advanced MIS, audit module, linkage with InFolNet, hygiene rating etc. FoSCoS essentially 
has the same flows as FLRS, so that users have convenience in using FoSCoS. The cardinal 
change is the methodology of licensing for m anufacturers which now shall be based on 
standardised product list. Module for filing of Annual Return is incorporated in FoSCoS. 
Mandatory documents have been rationalised and many paper based declarations have been 
replaced with online declaration. The c entral theme is to enhance the ease of doing business 
for the food business operators without compromising food safety. 
  
Further Recommendation 
3.174 The Committee notes the FSSAI's initiative in digitising the different aspects of 
food safety infrastruct ure and record management to ensure not only better data 
management and easy accessibility but also transparency in food business management.  
Nevertheless, considering the low level of digital literacy in the country, the Committee 
recommends FSSAI to also ensure that the FBOs get the required capacity and training 
to access these platforms. 
 
  

78 
 
CHAPTER–IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.1 The Committee notes that the use of food dyes has to be regulated because time and 
again, the food dyes have been linked to health problems. Excessive use of colouring matter 
in food may cause allergic reaction to some people or hyperactivity in sensitive children.  The 
Food Authority should ensure that the artificial colouring matter used in food meets the strict 
food safety requirements.  The uniform guidelines for food dyes will ensure that the food 
samples are correctly analysed and labelled as substand ard or unsafe as per the prescribed 
limit.  The Committee recommends that the provisions proposed by the office of Food Safety 
Commissioner, Kerala be considered for addition to the Section after due legislative vetting.  
Use of colouring matter above the prescribed limit or use of non -permitted colouring matter 
should both be punishable and stringent action should be taken against FBOs involved in this 
practice.   
(Para 2.26) 
Action Taken 
 
4.2 To review existing Food Safety and Standards Regulations on Foo d Colours, a 
Working Group (WG) was constituted by the Scientific Committee under the Scientific Panel 
on Food Additives, Flavourings, Processing Aids and Materials in Contact with Food dated 
05.07.2018 with the following Terms of Reference: 
(i) To collect and collate relevant scientific data, either from the industry or available in 
the public domain, for risk assessment of food colors. 
(ii) The evaluation of the data and risk assessment of the food colors for their use in 
various food categories. 
(iii) To recommend appropriate nomenclature for the natural and synthetic food colours. 
(iv) To review the current levels of usage for food colours and propose new limits, if 
required. 
(v) To review the existing vertical standards of food colours and to develop vertical 
standards for all remaining colours. 
 
2. Till date 4 meetings of Working Group has been convened. The work done so far is as 
under: 
(i) Task related to nomenclature for the natural and synthetic food colours has been 
completed by WG. The same has also been deliberated and approved by the Scientific 
Panel.  
 
(ii) Review of the existing standards of food colours and to develop vertical standards for 
all remaining colours is under consideration and following parts has been completed 
deliberated and approved by the Scientific Panel: 
 
 The standard for colour preparations was reviewed and revised accordingly to 
include both natural and synthetic food colours. 
 Provision for lake colours was revised based on specification laid down by 
Joint FAO/WHO Expert committee on Food Additives (JECFA).  

79 
 
 It was suggested that for using combination of colours, the maximum limit for 
use in a particular food category m ay not be fixed because of the absence of 
any scientific basis and rationale. 
 
(iii) Collection and collation of data for risk assessment of food colours has been done. 
However, its review and evaluation will be taken up by the WG basis on which 
existing levels of usage for food colours in different food categories will be reviewed. 
 
3.  After completion of the task by the WG, the final report will be placed before the 
Scientific Panel. After approval by the Scientific Panel, it will be placed before Scientific 
Committee for further evaluation and subsequently Food Authority for approval. 
4. The aforesaid task is of scientific nature which requires collection and collation of 
relevant data and their detailed examination in view of various aspects of human risks. It is 
therefore, difficult to assign a fixed time frame for completion of the work.  Five meetings of 
the WG have been conducted so far. WG carried out a detailed review of the standards and 
provisions related to food colours.   The WG has almost completed i ts task. The 
recommendations of the WG are as under: 
 
(i) Nomenclature: WG suggested to have no distinction between natural and synthetic 
food colours and decided to call them simply as “food colours”. It was recommended 
that each food colour shall be declared on the label of the product using their INS 
number with full nomenclature as prescribed under regulations. 
(ii) Colouring foods will not fall under the definition of food colours.  
(iii) Maximum limit of food colours in combination : It was decided that no maximum 
limit for colours in combination can be fixed in absence of any scientific basis. 
(iv) Food Colour - Preparation and Mixtures: It was suggested revising the standard to 
generalise for food colours irrespective of its type-natural or synthetic. 
(v) Aluminium Lakes of Colouring Matters :  Provision for lake colours was revised 
based on specification laid down by Joint FAO/WHO Expert committee on Food 
Additives (JECFA).  
(vi) Vertical standards on Food Colours : The specifications for all the fo od colours 
listed in Food Safety and Standards Regulations (FSSR) including those which do not 
have any standards at present were thoroughly examined. After detailed deliberations, 
it was decided to adopt the JECFA specifications for all the food colours. Each 
parameter was thoroughly examined for the food colours for its adoption in FSSR. 
(vii) Risk assessment of food colours permitted in FSSR 
WG carried out risk assessment of the food colours having lowest Acceptable Daily 
Intakes (ADI), i.e. Canthaxanthi n and Erythrosine. Accordingly, their limits in 
different food categories were reviewed and revised. 
4.3 The WG recommendations were placed before the Scientific Panel on Food 
Additives, Flavourings, Processing Aids and Materials in Contact with Food. The Panel 
examined it and provided certain suggestions with respect to the vertical standards of food 

80 
 
colours. They requested the WG to finalize their task and present the final report of their 
entire exercise before the panel. 
4.4 The work is to be finalized by the WG which may be completed in its next meeting 
and thereafter the final report will be presented before the Panel. After approval from the 
Scientific Panel, the final report will be placed before the Scientific Committee for further 
evaluation and subsequently, before the Food Authority for approval. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
4.5 The Committee further recommends that all the laws including Agricultural Produce 
Marketing Committee Act hurting safe food production should be reviewed and amended to 
ensure food safety for citizens.  The Committee desires to be apprised about the outcom e in 
this matter.  
(Para 2.31) 
Action Taken 
 
4.6 The FSS Act, 2006 is being   amended to fill up gaps, if any, to make it an effective 
and robust tool to ensure safe and nutritious food for all. For that purpose, the provisions of 
all related laws are being considered. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.7 The Committee learnt that FSSAI has recently proposed amendments for stringent 
punishment for adulteration to the FSS Act. The amendment proposes that any person 
who”adds an adulterant to food so as to rend er it injurious for human consumption with an 
inherent potential to cause his death or is likely to cause grievous hurt, irrespective of the fact 
whether it causes actual injury or not, shall be punishable for a term which shall not be less 
than 7 years bu t which may extend to imprisonment for life and also fine which shall not be 
less than Rs 10 lakh”. The Committee endorses the proposed amendments and recommends 
its inclusion in the FSS Act subject to the condition that adequate provisions may also be 
made to prevent its misuse.   
(Para 2.43) 
Action Taken 
4.8 Recommendations of the Hon'ble Committee are noted for further action. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.9 The Committee recommends that FSSAI should expedite the process of framing up 
suitable guidelines for disposing off the seized articles.  The Food Safety Officers and the 
Designated Officers need to be trained on the disposal of seized articles of food so that the 
seized articles do not pose any threat.  This procedure should be followed by all the States 
and stringent actions should be taken against erring food officials.   
(Para 3.62) 
Action Taken 
 
4.10 The SoP for disposal of seized and confiscated food items will be formulated to be 
followed by enforcement authorities uniformly.  
 

81 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.11 The Committee also recommends that every laboratory recognised  for food testing 
should be required to submit daily report online to FSSAI about the number of samples tested 
and the number of food articles found defective or unsafe.  
(Para 4.24) 
Action Taken 
 
412 InFoLNet, an IT based software of Laboratory Management  System captures real 
time data regarding receipt of samples, analysis of samples and test reports. Once this system 
is fully operational, all details on number of samples tested, number of food articles found 
defective or unsafe would be available online on real time basis. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.13 The Committee is aware of the ill effects of plastic on the environment and human 
health. Plastic is non-biodegradable and it cannot be recycled but only down -cycled. There is 
strong evidence that the chemicals leached from plastic and PET containers cause  harm to 
human health but the ban on plastic and PET packaging of food article remains unaddressed 
by the Government. Since the subject of human health and food safety falls under the domain 
of FSSAI, the Committee would like the Ministry of Health and Fam ily Welfare to set up a 
high level committee with members representing all entities to take a policy decision on 
banning the usage of plastic and PET packaging food articles.  
(Para 5.45) 
Action Taken 
4.14 In this regard, it may be stated that in pursuance  to direction of the Hon’ble National 
Green Tribunal (NGT) to phase out with clear timelines on the use of PVC in all packaging, 
hoardings/banners, use-and-throw and short -life items, Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate change vide order dated 18.0 9.2017 has constituted a Technical Committee for 
recommending policy option for ban of short -life PVC and Chlorinated plastic wherein 
FSSAI is a Member.   
4.15 In addition, FSSAI has prescribed requirements for packaging material under Food 
Safety and Stan dards (Packaging and Labelling) Regulations 2011, wherein regulation 2.1. 
(2)covers the requirements for containers made of plastic materials which should conform to 
the following Indian Standards Specification, used as appliances or receptacles for packin g or 
storing whether party or wholly, food articles, namely: - 
1. IS: 10146 (Specification for Polyethylene in contact with foodstuffs); 
2. IS: 10142 (Specification for Styrene Polymers in contact with Foodstuffs); 
3. IS: 10151 (Specification for Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC), in contact with Foodstuffs); 
4. IS: 10910 (Specification for Polypropylene in contact with foodstuffs); 
5. IS: 11434 (Specification for Ionomer Resins in contact with foodstuffs); 
6. IS: 11704 (Specification for Ethylene Acrylic Acid (EAA) copolymer; 
7. IS: 12252 (Specification for Poly alkyleneterephathalates (PET); 
8. IS: 12247 (Specification for Nylon 6 Polymer; 
9. IS: 13601 Ethylene Vinyl Acetate (EVA); 
10. IS: 13576 Ethylene Metha Acrylic Acid (EMAA). 

82 
 
4.16 The FSS Regulations further prescribes that all packaging ma terials of plastic origin 
shall pass the prescribed overall migration and colour migrations limits.  These regulations 
would soon be updated and replaced with Standalone packaging regulations that would 
address issues of food safety arising from packaging material, including plastics, in a more 
comprehensive manner.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.17 The Committee is of the view that the role of FSSAI in ensuring food safety 
standards in Mega Food Parks is of immense importance as monitoring of all processes of 
food manufacturing in a specified area can effectively be carried out as is being done in th e 
Patanjali Mega Food Park. The Committee appreciates the concept of Mega Food Park which 
ensures adherence to food safety standards as well as bridging the gap between the farm and 
the market. The Committee has been given to understand that all the 42 san ctioned Mega 
Food Parks would be operational by 2019. In view of this, the role of FSSAI would increase 
and there is an urgent need for FSSAI to augment its resources in all respects so as to carry 
out its mandate of an effective food quality control management system.  
(Para 6.42) 
Action Taken 
 
4.18 With the sanction and filling up of posts/ including 493 new posts, FSSAI would be 
fully geared to carry out its mandate of effective food safety / quality control in the whole and 
particularly in the Mega Food Parks as pointed out by the Standing Committee. 
 
 
  

83 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
 
LICENSING, REGISTRATION, INSPECTION AN SAMPLING 
 
 The Committee is pained to note that more than two years has elapsed since the 
presentation of the Report to the Parliament but the Ministry is yet to notify a few 
regulations. The Committee expresses its deep anguish over the lackadaisical approach 
of FSSAI and recommends to notify the remaining notification at the earliest.  
 
(Para 3.3) 
LICENSING AND REGISTRATION ISSUES 
 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry has neither spelt out the details of SOP 
for prescribing timeline at each stage nor has given rea sons for delay in notification of 
rules.  The Committee is of the view that timely notification of rules and regulation 
would pave the way for better implementation of the Act and further strengthen the 
food safety ecosystem in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends FSSAI to 
strictly adhere to the recommendations of the Lok Sabha Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation. 
  
(Para 3.6) 
 
 The Committee notes that the Appellate Tribunal has been constituted in 30 
States/UTs. The Committee expects the Min istry to expedite the process of establishing 
the Appellate tribunal in the remaining States so that the litigation process can be fast 
tracked. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to facilitate the formation of 
District Level Advisory Committees in the remaining States/UTs.  
 
(Para 3.12) 
 
 The Committee understands that adoption of GAP, GAHP, GAFP, etc, is 
primarily vested with Department of Agriculture, Department of Animal Husbandry 
and Dairying which functions in collaboration with States/UTs. But since these good 
practices would ultimately go a long way in helping FSSAI achieve its objectives, it is 
imperative that FSSAI makes all out efforts to see that these practices are adopted and 
implemented. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the work of developing 
Guidance document on Good Agricultural Practices is completed at the earliest so that 
the training and awareness programme could be started. 
 
(Para 3.16) 
 
 The Committee takes note of the various measures taken by FSSAI to prevent 
unethical practices and hopes that they will be able to contain corrupt practices to some 
extent.  But since cases of adulteration in food items are on the rise, the Committee feels 
that there is a need to force some stringent measures in this regard.  The  Committee, 
therefore, reiterates its recommendations and urges upon FSSAI to nudge the 
States/UTs to take corruption in food safety matters seriously. 
 (Para 3.21) 
 

84 
 
 The Committee expresses its concern over non formulation of the SOP even after 
two years of the presentation of the Report and therefore, recommends to expedite the 
process to enable the enforcement authorities to act uniformly in the matter.  
 
(Para 3.24) 
 
 The Committee has been given to understand that out of the 36 States/UTs, 25 
States have so far adopted digital inspection system of FOSCORs. The Committee finds 
that one of the major challenges of putting in place the FOSCORIS system has been the 
non-availability of mobile network in the remote areas and also of other amenities.  The 
Committee appreciates that apart from an online module, an offline one has also been 
developed to address the problem. The Committee, however, feels that in order to 
successfully implement the application, it is essential that States/UTs concentrate on 
providing basic amenities to its FSO. The Committee desires that States/UTs can sign 
an MoU with a mobile network company to have uninterrupted connectivity in remote 
areas so that the FSOs can carry out their duties efficiently.  
(Para 3.31) 
 
 
 The Committee desires that the proposed amendments to Section 42(3) of FSS 
Act be expedited so that perishable food items with a short span of life are tested before 
getting spoiled.  
(Para 3.34) 
FOOD SAFETY SURVEY 
 
 On perusal of the State wise details of Adjudicating Officers, Designated 
Officers, Food Safety Officers, etc The Committee noted the following:- 
(i) 15 States have full time Food Safety Commissioners while 21 States have 
given additional charge of Food Safety to other officials. 
 (ii) Total of 705 Adjudicating Officers in the States 
(iii) Total 432 full time DOs in all States. States like Bihar, Chhattisgarh, 
Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Mizoram, Odisha, Rajasthan and Tripura 
have nil full time DOs.  Part time DOs 138 in all States, like Chhattisgarh, 
Haryana, Karnataka, Odisha, Rajasthan. Therefore, States like Bihar, 
Madhya Pradesh, Mizoram, Tripura do not have a single DO (either full 
time or part time). 
(iv) Total 2563 full time FSOs in all the States with the exception of Rajasthan 
Part time FSOs 100 in States like Karnataka, Rajasthan and Sikkim. 
(v) As regards Appellate Tribunal, all States except Himachal Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, Lakshadweep, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Ladakh h ave 
an Appellate Tribunal. 
(Para 3.37) 
 
 It is evident from the above that there are lot of variations amongst the States 
with respect to the number of AOs, DOs, FSOs, etc. The Committee is concerned to note 
that whereas the States like Bihar, Madhya Prade sh, Mizoram and Tripura do not have 
a single DO.  To the utmost surprise, the State of Rajasthan does not have a single full 

85 
 
time FSO.  The Committee also notes that Karnataka is the only State which has full 
time as well as part time DOs and FSOs.  The Co mmittee, therefore, would like FSSAI 
to pro-actively persuade States like Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Mizoram, Tripura to have 
Designated Officers appointed in their States and also persuade Rajasthan to appoint 
full time FSOs in its State. Further, States, not  having an Appellate Tribunal, may also 
be persuaded to have one in their States. 
(Para 3.38) 
 
  The Committee takes note of the civil and criminal cases and action taken 
thereon. As per the information given, total number of cases registered in 2018 -19 was 
21,363 (2813 - Criminal Cases + 18550- Civil Cases) and out of that, there were only 701 
convictions and 12,734 penalties imposed.  The status of remaining 7928 cases has not 
been shared with the Ministry.  The Committee, however, believes that there is no strict 
adherence to the FSS regulations and cases are not being dealt within 90 days. The 
Committee emphasized upon the need, therefore, reiterates its recommendation 
including the one for having a full time Adjudicating Officer to enable them to do 
justice to their assigned duties.  
(Para 3.39) 
 
INSPECTIONS 
 The Committee takes into cognizance the efforts being made like regular 
surveillance, monitoring, inspection of food premises, sampling of food products, 
regular training of officers concerned, upgradation of food labs etc.  The Committee is 
of the firm view that in addition to these interventions, pro -active and concerted efforts 
need to be made by FSSAI to regularly prompt the States/UTs for gearing their 
machinery to develop a system which has  zero tolerance towards violation of any food 
safety norms by FBOs. Timely and appropriate punishment would definitely prove to 
be a deterrent for the violators of food safety laws and this could be achieved only by 
increasing the conviction rate. The Comm ittee, therefore, reiterates that FSSAI should 
take up the issue of low conviction rate with the Ministry of Law & Justice to find a 
solution to the problem as early as possible.  Further, the Committee would also like the 
FSSAI to assess the surveillance Reports submitted by States/UTs to FSSAI and identify 
the best performing State/UTs so that the benchmarking model could be followed by 
other low performing States.    
(Para 3.45) 
 
 Considering the extent of food adulteration prevalent now -a-days in the 
country, the number of cancelled licenses with State and Central is very low and thus 
genuinely raises apprehension over food safety monitoring mechanism.  
(Para 3.48) 
 
LIFTING OF SAMPLES 
 
 The Committee notes that Section 16 (2) (g) of FSS Act provides for conducting 
survey of enforcement and administration of this Act in the country. The Committee 
observes that FSSAI has not yet framed the regulations under the section rather it has 
suggested for deletion of the section in the amendments proposed under FSS Act. The 
Committee reiterates its recommendation and strongly believes that surveys will 
provide a better understanding of the food safety management system in the country., 

86 
 
The Committee,  therefore, strongly recommends FSSAI to make regulations under 
Section 16 (2)(g) for conducting surveys by the Central/State agencies as well as 
outsourcing the work to a third party. 
(Para 3.58) 
 
  The Committee appreciates FSSAI’s initiative of creating  a State Food Safety 
Index and recommends FSSAI to rank States and UTs as per this index and identify the 
States and UTs on ranking credit basis i.e best performance States and poor 
performance States. The Committee also recommends FSSAI to make use of thi s index 
in launching State specific initiatives and programs that will help the State in identifying 
the loopholes and strengthening its weak areas. 
(Para 3.59) 
 
TRAINING OF FBOS 
 
 The Committee is of the considered view that FSSAI should take up the issue  of 
shortage of manpower in the States/UTs on a priority basis.  The Committee would also 
like to suggest that ranking of States/UTs on the basis of infrastructure, manpower and 
performance be periodically prepared by FSSAI and also displayed on its websit e to 
motivate the best performing States and also encourage the poor performing 
States/lagging on these parameters, especially manpower. 
 
(Para 3.64) 
 
SHORTAGE OF MANPOWER 
 
 The Committee notes that 25 States/UTs have adopted digital inspection system 
of FoSCoRIS.  The Committee, however, desires that FSSAI must try to ensure that 
digital inspection system of FoSCoRIS in the remaining States/UTs is implemented at 
the earliest.   
(Para 3.67) 
 
 The Committee takes note of the efforts made by FSSAI on strengthening the 
human resource in the State Food Regulatory Bodies.  The efforts are showing some 
positive results also.  The Committee, therefore, desires that FSSAI must continue to 
pursue and convince States/UTs to strengthen their manpower. 
(Para 3.70) 
 
 The Committee hopes that recruitment of additional 493 posts at various levels 
would address the shortage of manpower to a great extent. The Committee, however, 
would like the Ministry to chalk out long term action plan in tandem with State/UTs 
Government to overcome the shortage of manpower in State Food Regulatory Bodies. 
However, short term plan the FSSAI should ensure that States/UTs engage 
professionally qualified persons on short-term contract till adequate manpower is made 
available.   
 
(Para 3.74) 
 
 The Committee is of the view that appointing SDOs as part time DOs should not 
be viewed as a permanent solution to shortage of manpower. SDO has multiple 
responsibilities and duties to perform and additional charge as DO would not do justice 
to the u rgency required for an efficient food safety monitoring mechanism. The 

87 
 
Committee is not in agreement with the idea of doing away with technical qualification 
for a DO and recommends Ministry to consider restoration of the minimum 
qualification of bachelors  degree in Science with Chemistry as one subject for 
appointment as DO, in the first instance and if the candidates are not available, at least, 
the candidates must have science stream at the higher secondary level. 
(Para 3.77) 
 
EFFICACY OF FOOD TESTING LABS 
 
  The Committee has been informed about the proposal to establish two National 
Food laboratories (NFLs) at Chennai and Mumbai. The Committee has however been 
not updated on the upgradation of NFL at Ghaziabad and Kolkata. The Committee lays 
great emphasis on establishing a robust Food testing infrastructure in the country and 
therefore, strongly recommends FSSAI to expedite the implementation of the proposals. 
It would like the Ministry to submit a note on current status of all four laboratories.   
(Para 3.81) 
TESTING PROTOCOLS AND PROCEDURES 
 
 The Committee is of the view that only publication of Manuals will not facilitate 
a uniform Laboratory Testing System in the country. FSSAI will have to ensure that 
these manuals on Method of Analysis and Good Laboratory Practices are diligently 
followed by all the FTLs in the country. The Committee observes that FSSAI has not 
paid the desired attention to the prevailing inadequate facilities for checking the food 
articles on all parameters in the labs. The pers isting flawed practice of deeming a food 
article safe even when it fails on some parameters raises serious concern about the 
accuracy of the testing methodology. The Committee, therefore, recommends FSSAI to 
guide the Laboratories about the specific food s afety parameters on which any food 
article should be mandatorily checked. Imported food should only be allowed in the 
market when it has passed the mandatory parameters as per the global norms. 
 
(Para 3.85) 
 
 The Committee recommends that FSSAI should expe dite the process of 
amending the FSS Rule, 2011 for incorporating the provision of 14 days time period for 
a referral laboratory to submit their test reports.  The Committee further reiterates its 
recommendation for adoption of best international practices  by the National Referral 
Laboratories with respect to standards for testing and validation.  
(Para 3.89) 
 
NABL ACCREDITATION OF LABS 
 
 The Committee strongly recommends FSSAI to accelerate the drive to accredit 
the remaining FTLs that have not been notified by it so far. The Committee also urges 
the Ministry and FSSAI to take up the matter of accreditation with the States and 
ensure speedy notification of the State Food Testing Laboratories under Section 43(1) of 
FSS Act, 2006. Operation of most of the existing labs without NABL accreditation raises 
serious apprehension over the FTLs quality and technical competence. The Committee 
is worried that most of these labs may not have undergone a third party 
assessment/audit. The Committee also opines that F SSAI should take strict measures 
against the labs that have repeatedly been failing in quality assessment/audit. Labs that 
are already NABL accredited should also be investigated periodically. 

88 
 
 
(Para 3.92) 
STATUS OF MANPOWER IN LABS 
 As per data submitted by FSSAI, there are 452 Public/Food Analysts against the 
estimated requirement of almost 800 food analyst. The Committee concludes that many 
laboratories may be operating without any Food Analysts. This is a sorry state of affair 
and speaks volumes of the inadequate technical competence of the FTLs in the country. 
The Committee would like FSSAI to urgently take up the matter of increasing the 
number of personnel in the laboratory with the States. The Committee underlines an 
urgent need for the States/UTs to  work in close partnership with FSSAI for ensuring a 
better food safety mechanism in the country. The Committee further urges the 
States/UTs to follow the guidance document for setting up a food testing laboratory. 
(Para 3.97) 
 
 The Committee has taken cog nizance of the progress made in regard to 
implementation of the Central Sector Schemes for 'Strengthening of Food Testing 
System' in the country.  It finds that out of a total outlay of Rs. 481.95 crore, a sum of 
Rs. 312.98 crore has been sanctioned/releas ed to States/UTs, while substantial balance 
amount to the tune of Rs. 168.97 crore still remained unspent as some of proposals are 
still under consideration. Non-utilisation of 35% funds and that too for a Central sector 
projects does not augur well and le aves a quantum made on the fixed management of 
the Ministry. 
(Para 3.103) 
 
STRENGTHENING OF STATE FOOD TESTING LABORATORIES (SFTLs) 
 
 The Committee takes note of the fact that out of the total target of upgrading 42 
SFTLS, upgradation of 39 SFTLS spread over 29 States/UTs have been taken up.  The 
Committee desires that upgradation of the remaining 3 labs may also be started at the 
earliest.  
(Para 3.104) 
 
 Notwithstanding the fact that the Committee has been emphasizing on the need 
of recruitment of Food Analysts in the country, there has been no perceptible change in 
the situation. The Committee, therefore, recommends FSSAI to expedite the 
recruitment of Food Analysts in the country and also take up the matter with the State 
Governments. Special attention should also be paid on the qualification of the Food 
Analyst so that only technically qualified and experienced personnel are recruited on 
the post of Food  Analysts. There is also a need to develop a monitoring mechanism for 
the work done by Food Analysts so that they are not tempted into giving false reports.  
 
(Para 3.108) 
FOOD SAFETY ON WHEELS (FSW) 
 
 The Committee notes the potential of mobile food testi ng laboratories, Food 
Safety on Wheels (FSWs) and recommends FSSAI to upgrade and increase the number 
of FSWs especially in remote areas. The Committee reiterates its recommendation on 
utilising the rich demographic dividend of the country and urges FSSAI to conduct 
extensive training program for the youth. The Committee strongly recommends FSSAI 

89 
 
to devise a special training program for the youth for operating these mobile testing 
labs.   
(Para 3.114) 
 
 The Committee feels that awareness on food safety and quality provisions and 
implication of FSS Act and its regulation is still lacking. The Committee understands 
that the massive outreach programme of FSSAI viz. 'Eat Right India' Swasth Bharat 
Yatra etc. would go a  long way in spreading awareness about the provisions of the 
FSSAI and its regulation.  The Committee, therefore, feels that a lot more needs to be 
done by FSSAI on these fronts. 
(Para 3.120) 
REGULATION OF FOOD ITEMS 
 
 The Committee notes the provisions of proposed amendments in Section 59 A in 
the Food Safety and Standard Act, 2006 intended to curb the rampant adulteration of 
the food products and the penal provision thereon. The Committee, however, 
recommends the Minis try to expedite the process of the proposed amendments so that 
the growing menace of adulteration of milk and dairy products having serious health 
implication is combated in right earnest.  
(Para 3.123) 
 
REGULATION OF PRESERVATIVES/CHECMICALS USED FOR STOR AGE FOR 
FISHES, ARTIFICIAL RIPENING OF FRUITS/VEGETABLES AND EDIBLE ICE 
 
 Taking note of rampant sale of loose edible oil in village and remote towns, the 
Committee recommends FSSAI to take up the issue with States and UTs Government. 
Keeping in view the need of economically weaker section of the society, edible oil 
companies ha s appropriately been allowed to make edible oil available in small 
pouches/sachets. The Committee, nevertheless, recommends FSSAI to carry out regular 
inspection in FBOs where large scale oil is consumed especially in shops where the 
leftover cooking oil i s being used multiple times. The Committee is of the view that the 
FSSAI should conduct regular training for acquainting the FBOs about the safe 
disposal of the oil and understand how repeated heating of the oil dangerously changes 
the fatty acid composition of the oil.  
(Para 3.130) 
PLASTIC IN FOOD ITEMS/WATER 
 
 The Committee observes that many street food stalls keep selling fried food 
reusing the same oil. The Committee understands that FSSAI has issued regulation on 
limit for TPC to a maximum of 25% beyond which the cooking oil is unsafe for 
consumption.  The Committee, therefore, recommends FSSAI to conduct on the spot 
inspection in food stalls to ensure the permissible 25% limit for Total Polar Compounds 
(TPC) is not crossed and penal action taken a gainst those defaulting FBOs. Moreover, 
the Committee is of the view that mere issuance of advisory is not the solution and 
FSSAI will have to take more pro -active steps to facilitate the mandatory inclusion of 
street food vendors in this initiative. 
(Para 3.134) 
 
 
 

90 
 
REGULATION OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED (GM) FOODS 
 
 The Committee in its 110 th Report had raised concerns over the snail pace of 
drafting of regulations and guidelines with respect to the labelling norms, safety 
assessment of food derived by GM technology etc.  The Committee is disappointed to 
note that even after two years of the p resentation of this Report, the regulations have 
not been notified. The Committee, therefore, strongly urges upon the Ministry to 
expedite the process of notification of Regulation on GM foods so that the import of 
food products is regulated and every food  product with a GM ingredient is inspected. 
The Committee seeks to be informed about the strategy chalked out for making public 
awareness campaign by FSSAI on the concept and constitution of GM Foods and its 
implication.  
(Para 3.140) 
 
REGULATION OF IMPORTED FOOD ITEMS 
 
 The Committee observes that the data submitted by the Ministry is outdated as 
the same pertains to the year 2016 -17. The Committee recommends the Ministry to 
submit latest data regarding clearance of imported food through different points o f 
entry being handled by FSSAI and other points of entry which are being handled by 
customs.   
(Para 3.143) 
REGULATION OF ORGANIC FOOD 
 
 The Committee appreciates that FSSAI understands the difficulties faced by 
small FBOs in accessing the market. The Committee, however, is quite apprehensive of 
the proposal for inclusion of a provision for "aggregator/ intermediary" in the FSS 
(Organic Foods) Regulations, 2017.  The Committee, in this regard, recommends that 
FSSAI should take necessary measures to ensu re that the small FBOs are not exploited 
and get adequate remuneration of their produce. 
 
(Para 3.149) 
REGULATION OF FORTIFIED FOOD 
 
 The Committee recommends that the observation/message, enshrined in the 
report titled “Food Fortification in India: Status and Road Ahead - Need for a Strategic 
Shift for Further Scale Up” detailing State best practices and supply chain models of 
Select states, be implemented by other States. The Committee believes that the children 
benefitted under two cherished programmes of the country viz. Mid -Day Meal (MDM) 
and Integrated Child Development Scheme (ICDS) would be beneficiary of fortified 
foods.  
(Para 3.152) 
 
REGULATION OF FOOD IN EATERIES 
 
 The Committee desires that the proposed amendments in FSS (Packaging &  
Labelling) Regulation with regard to display of information in food service 
establishment be notified without delay. The Committee also recommends that apart 
from display of information relating to calorific value of food and nutritive value of 
food in th e menu, quantity of portion should also be specified in the menu. The 
Committee also reiterates its recommendation for periodic inspection of basic 

91 
 
infrastructure of food service establishment and the adoption of standard hygiene 
practices therein.    
(Para 3.155) 
PACKAGING 
 
 The Committee recommends FSSAI to escalate its efforts in implementing food 
safety norms and guidelines in view of the outbreak of pandemic Covid -19 and 
thereafter in the wake of unlocking Phase. The Committee further recommends FSSAI 
to collaborate with different groups of street vendors and FBOs and increase the reach 
of its digital training program on hygiene issues for ensuing food safety standards 
during this peculiar phase. The Committee opines that the need of the hour is to draw  
area specific programs for street food vendors and strict adherence to safety practices 
such as using disinfectant, wearing protective gears, maintaining social distancing etc. 
in the FBO premises.  
(Para 3.158) 
 
 The Committee reiterates its recommendati on that FSSAI should create a food 
advertising monitoring cell to monitor all the food advertisements and disseminate the 
information regarding misleading advertisements to the public. 
 
(Para 3.166) 
 
 The Committee takes note of a dedicated interaction portal for making food 
purchasers into smart, alert and aware consumers. The Committee would like the 
FSSAI to take certain initiatives for spreading awareness among the rural consumers 
too since these co nsumers may face difficulty in accessing the FSSAI portal and a 
helpline number instead would certainly give voice to their complaints.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends to FSSAI to have dedicated helpline number for addressing the 
complaints of such consumers.  
(Para 3.170) 
INFORMATION EDUCATION COMMUNICATION (IEC) 
 
 The Committee notes the FSSAI's initiative in digitising the different aspects of 
food safety infrastructure and record management to ensure not only better data 
management and easy accessibility but also transparency in food business management.  
Nevertheless, considering the low level of digital literacy in the country, the Committee 
recommends FSSAI to also ensure that the FBOs get the required capacity and training 
to access these platforms. 
(Para 3.174) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

92 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
  

93 
 
XVI 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11 a.m. on Monday, the 7 th September, 2020 in Main 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. L Hanumanthaiah 
3. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
4. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
LOK SABHA 
5. Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya 
6. Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
7. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
8. Dr. Subash Sarkar 
9. Shri Anurag Sharma 
10. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
11. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
12. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri J. Sundriyal Joint Secretary 
Shri V.S.P.Singh Director 
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar Additional Director  
Smt. Harshita Shankar Under Secretary 
 
Representatives of All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi 
1. Dr. Randeep Guleria, Director 
2. Shri Subhashish Panda, Deputy Director 
Representative of Public Health Foundation of India (PHFI); 
3. Prof. K. Srinath Reddy, President, Public Health Foundation of India (PHFI) 
Representatives of Population Foundation of India (PFI). 
4. Ms. Poonam Muttreja, Executive Director, 

94 
 
5. Shri Bijit Roy, Associate Director; and  
6. Ms. Purnima Khandelwal, Senior Programme Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed 
that the meeting was convened  to consider and adopt two draft Action Taken Reports of  the 
Committee on the 110 thReport on Functioning of Food Safety and Standards Authority of 
India and 120 th Report on Demands for Grants 2020 -21 (Demand No.4) of the Ministry of 
AYUSH, respectively. *** 
3.   The Committee first took up for consideration the draft 121st Report of the Committee 
on Action Taken by the Government on the 110 th Report on Functioning of Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India and the draft 122 nd Report on Action Taken b y the Government 
on recommendations contained in the Committee's 120 th Report on Demands for Grants 
2020-21 (Demand No.4) of the Ministry of AYUSH, respectively. The Committee, after a 
brief deliberation, adopted both the Reports without any modification.  
 
4. to 8 *** 
9.   A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
10.  The Committee adjourned at 1:47 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________________________________________________________________ 
* Relates to other matter 
 

95 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
  

96 
 
Annexure-1 
Details of Re-designated post 
S.No Old Name Pay 
Level 
New Name Pay 
Level 
No. of the 
Posts 
Remarks 
1 Lab Attendant  1 Multi Tasking Staff 1 19 19 posts of multi tasking staff 
are exchanged in lieu of 19 
posts of Lab Attendant 
2 LDC/Store 
Keeper/Hindi Typist 
2 Junior Assistant 
Grade II 
2 6 6 Posts of Junior Assistant 
Grade II are exchanged in lieu 
of 6 posts of LDC/Store 
Keeper /Hindi Typist. 
3 1 Librarian  
+ 
3 Account Assistant 
6 Assistant 6 4 4 posts of Assistant are 
exchanged in lieu of 1 post of 
Librarian and 3 posts of 
Account Assistant  
4 Private Secretary  6 Personal Assistant 6 18 18 posts of personal assistant 
are exchanged in lieu of 18 
posts of Private Secretary  
5 Junior Analyst 7 Technical Officer 7 5 5 posts of Technical Officer 
are exchanged in lieu of 5  
posts of Junior Analyst and 
Junior Analyst 
(Microbiologist)  
6 Senior Finance & 
accounts 
Officer/Admin & 
Accounts Officer 
(Zones) 
8 Administrative 
Officer 
8 7 7  posts of Administrative  
Officer are exchanged in lieu 
of 7  posts Senior Finance & 
accounts Officer/Admin & 
Accounts Officer (Zones) 
7 2 posts of Law 
Officer, 5 posts of 
Assistant Director, 12 
posts of Senior 
Analyst and 12 posts 
of Scientist Group IV 
(1) 
10 Assistant Director 
(Technical) 
10 31 31 posts of Assistant Director 
(Technical) are exchanged in 
lieu of 2 posts of Law Officer, 
5 posts of Assistant Director, 
12 posts of Senior Analyst and 
12 posts of Scientist Group IV 
(1) 
8 3 posts of Chief 
Technical Officer, 5 
posts of 
Microbiologist and 6 
posts of Scientist IV 
(2) 
11 Deputy Director  11 14 14 posts of Deputy Director are 
exchanged in lieu of 3 posts of 
Chief Technical Officer, 5 
posts of Microbiologist and  6 
posts of Scientist IV (2) 
9 Scientist IV (3) 12 Joint Director  12 6 6 post of Joint Director are 
exchanged in lieu 6 posts of 
Scientist IV (3) 
10 1 Financial Advisor 
and 4 posts of 
Scientist IV (4) 
13 Director 13 5 5 posts of Director are 
exchanged in lieu of 1 posts of 
Financial Advisor and 4 posts 
of Scientist IV (4) 
11 Chief Management 
Service Officer 
14 Executive Director 14 1 1  post of Executive Director is 
exchanged in lieu of 1 post of 
Chief Management Service 
Officer 
 
12 2 posts of Chief 
PAQA Officer & 
Chief Enforcement 
Officer 
14 Advisor  14 2  2 posts of Advisor are 
exchanged in lieu of 2 posts of 
Chief PAQA Officer & Chief 
Enforcement Officer 
13 Senior Laboratory 5 Junior Assistant 
Grade I 
4 12 12 posts of Senior Laboratory 
Assistant in the pay level 5 are 

97 
 
being downgraded to 12 posts 
of Junior Assistant Grade –I in 
pay level 4 
14 Senior Finance & 
accounts 
Officer/Senior  
Accounts Officer 
(Lab) 
9 Administrative 
Officer 
8 4  4 posts of Senior Finance & 
Accounts Officer/Senior 
Accounts Officer (Lab) are 
downgraded from level 9 to 
Administrative Officer at level 
8 
15 Chief Scientific 
Advisor 
15 Executive Director  14 1 1 post of Chief Scientific 
Advisor in pay level 15 is 
downgraded to 1 post of 
Executive Director in level 14 
Total 135 
 
 
  

98 
 
Annexure-2 
ATR on the Directions/Observations of Hon’ble Supreme Court in SLP No. 1379 of 2011, Swami 
Achyutanand Tirth& Ors vs Union Of India &Ors on 5 August, 2016  
 
Direction/ Observation Action Taken 
1) Union of India and the State Governments shall take 
appropriate steps to implement Food Safety and 
Standards Act, 2006 in a more effective manner. 
Union of India and the State Governments 
through FSSAI and State Food Authorities are 
taking several steps to implemen t Food Safety 
and Standards Act, 2006 in a more effective 
manner. 
2) States shall take appropriate steps to inform owners of 
dairy, dairy operators and retailers working in the State 
that if chemical adulterants like pesticides, caustic soda 
and other chemic als are found in the milk, then 
stringent action will be taken on the State Dairy 
Operators or retailers or all the persons involved in the 
same. 
Suitable advisory for the same has been issued to 
the State authorities on the same and it has been 
re-iterated from time to time.  
3) State Food Safety Authority should also identify high 
risk areas (where there is greater presence of petty food 
manufacturer/business operator etc.) and times (near 
festivals etc.) when there is risk of ingesting adulterated 
milk or milk products due to environmental and other 
factors and greater number of food samples should be 
taken from those areas. 
National Milk Safety and Standards Survey, 
2018 has provided a comprehensive view milk 
quality ain over 1100 cities and towns covering  
all States / UTs. Based on this, risk -based 
surveillance and monitoring in identified hot 
spots would be taken up with the support of State 
Food Authorities.   
4) State Food Safety Authorities should also ensure that 
there is adequate lab testing infrastructure and ensure 
that all labs have/obtain NABL accreditation to 
facilitate precise testing. State Government to ensure 
that State food testing laboratories/district food 
laboratories are well -equipped with the technical 
persons and testing facilities. 
 
 
 
 
By notifying 172 food -testing laboratories 19 
referral laboratories for primary testing and 
appellate testing respectively, FSSAI has created 
a nation -wide network of food testing 
laboratories in the country that includes testing 
of milk and milk products. 
Further, States/UTs are being supported to 
upgrade their own food testing laboratories so 
that these adequately equipped with necessary 
technical persons and testing facilities including 
comprehensive testing of quality parameters, 
contaminants and adulterant in milk and milk 
products. So far, 29 State labsin 25 States/UTs 
have been supported.  
5) Special measures should be undertaken by the State 
Food Safety Authorities (SFSA) and District 
Authorities for sampling of milk and milk products, 
including spot testing through Mobile Food Testing 
Vans equipped with primary testing kits for conducting 
qualitative test of adulteration in food. 
FSSAI is providing mobile food testing vans labs 
and EMAT machines to State Food Safety 
Authorities (SFSA) for spo t testing of milk and 
conduct of basic quantitative tests to assess 
adulteration of milk. So far, 32 mobile food 
testing vans to 27 States/UTs  have been 
provided. In addition, EMAT (Electronic Milk 
Adulteration Tester) has also been to 29 
State/UTs.  
6) Since the snap short survey conducted in 2011 revealed 
adulteration of milk by hazardous substances including 
chemicals, such snap short surveys to be conducted 
periodically both in the State as well as at the national 
level by FSSAI. 
While, in case of raw mil k, States / UTs would 
be advised to carry out snapshot surveys, for 
processed milk, a system of regular monitoring 
of milk quality is being put in place, wherein 
milk quality and safety would be checked 
periodically for all milk processing plants with 
periodicity calibrated based on tracking of test 
results.   

99 
 
 
7) For curbing milk adulteration, an appropriate State 
level Committee headed by the Chief Secretary or the 
Secretary of Dairy Department and District level 
Committee headed by the concerned District C ollector 
shall be constituted as is done in the State of 
Maharashtra to take the review of the work done to 
curb the milk adulteration in the district and in the State 
by the authorities. 
Review of activities taken up in the States/UTs 
and Districts has be en included in the terms of 
reference of the State Advisory Committee for 
food safety and nutrition and District level 
Committeefor food safety and nutrition headed 
by the Chief Secretary and District Magistrate 
respectively. For this specific purpose, the y have 
been advised to set up a sub -committee of 
stakeholders, if required for closer monitoring.  
8) To prevent adulteration of milk, the concerned State 
Department shall set up a website thereby specifying 
the functioning and responsibilities of food safety 
authorities and also creating awareness about complaint 
mechanisms. In the website, the contact details of the 
Joint Commissioners including the Food Safety 
Commissioners shall be made available for registering 
the complaints on the said website. Al l States should 
also have and maintain toll free telephonic and online 
complaint mechanism. 
FSSAI has created a website for monitoring 
quality and safety of milk in the country with 
details of complaint handling system for each 
State. States have also been advised to strengthen 
their complaint handling system.   
9) In order to increase consumer awareness about ill 
effects of milk adulteration as stipulated in  Section 
18(1)(f) the State  Food Authority/Commissioner of 
Food Safety shall inform the general public  of the 
nature of risk to health and create awareness of food 
safety and standards. They should also educate school 
children by conducting workshops and teaching them 
easy methods for detection of common adulterants in 
food, keeping in mind indigenous tech nological 
innovations (such as milk adulteration detection strips 
etc.)  
A series of steps have been taken for consumer 
awareness across the country with special focus 
on school children. This is also an important of 
the Eat Right India movement taken up. This 
includes organising of Eat Right Melas, Food 
Safety Magic Box for testing of common 
adulterants and booklet for detection of 
adulterants (including in milk) through rapid 
testing (DART).  
10) Union of India/State Governments to evolve a 
complaint mechani sm for checking corruption and 
other unethical practices of the Food Authorities and 
their officers. 
FSSAI has created a code of ethics for field level 
food safety officials. States have been advised to 
develop effective systems to address complaints 
of co rruption and unethical behaviour of food 
safety officials.     
  

100 
 
Annexure 3 
S. 
No. 
Name of State FSC No. of 
AOs 
No. of DOs 
  
No. of FSOs   
Appellate 
Tribunal 
    Full 
Time 
Additional 
Charge 
  Full 
Time 
Part  
Time 
Full Time  Part  Time   
1 Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands 
Yes   3 3 0 14 0 Yes 
2 Andhra Pradesh Yes   13 13 0 132 0 Yes 
3 Arunachal Pradesh   Yes 25 1 0 3 0 Yes 
4 Assam   Yes 27 4 0 32 0 Yes 
5 Bihar   Yes 38 0 0 14 0 Yes 
6 Chandigarh   Yes 1 1 0 5 0 Yes 
7 Chhattisgarh   Yes 27 0 27 56 0 Yes 
8 Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli&Daman & 
Diu 
  Yes 3 3 0 3 0 Yes 
9 Delhi Yes   11 10 0 16 0 Yes 
10 Goa Yes   2 2 0 20 0 Yes 
11 Gujarat Yes   33 32 0 309 0 Yes 
12 Haryana Yes   22 0 25 75 0 Yes 
13 Himachal Pradesh   Yes 11 12 0 11 0 No 
14 Jammu & Kashmir Yes   20 20 0 75 0 Yes 
15 Jharkhand Yes   24 45 0 23 0 No 
16 Karnataka Yes   30 20 16 45 40 Yes 
17 Kerala Yes   27 14 0 145 0 Yes 
18 Lakshadweep*   Yes 1 1 0 13 0 No 
19 Madhya Pradesh   Yes 51 0 0 163 0 Yes 
20 Maharashtra Yes   7 56 0 229 0 Yes 
21 Manipur   Yes 16 10 0 22 0 Yes 
22 Meghalaya   Yes 11 4 0 11 0 Yes 
23 Mizoram   Yes 9 0 0 2 0 No 
24 Nagaland   Yes 11 4 0 7 0 No 
25 Odisha   Yes 30 0 36 30 0 Yes 
26 Puducherry   Yes 2 1 0 2 0 Yes 
27 Punjab   Yes 22 22 0 35 0 Yes 
28 Rajasthan   Yes 40 0 34 0 58 Yes 
29 Sikkim Yes   8 2 0 4 2 No 
30 Tamil Nadu   Yes 32 32 0 271 0 Yes 
31 Telangana Yes   33 12 0 6 0 Yes 
32 Tripura   Yes 3 0 0 4 0 Yes 
33 Uttarakhand   Yes 13 12 0 29 0 Yes 
34 Uttar Pradesh Yes   75 72 0 576 0 Yes 
35 West Bengal Yes   23 23 0 180 0 Yes 
36 Ladakh   Yes 1 1 0 1 0 No 
Total     705 432 138 2563 100   
 
Note: FSC=Food Safety Commissioner, AO=Adjudicating Officer, DO=Designated Officer, FSO=Food 
Safety Officer. 
  

101 
 
 Annexure 4 
S.N. Recommendations Follow up action required 
1. Monitoring of compliance of food testing 
by FBOs for optimal utilization of 
laboratories capacity - through 
INFOLNET/3rd party  
Presently, laboratories are being connected on to the 
INFOLNET which will be followed by FSOs and FBOs (for 
now link for FBOs to access is not available on 
INFOLNET) 
2. Creation of a national lab advisory 
committee for guiding FSSAI on issues 
related to food testing labs  
It is being considered 
3. Ensuring availability of adequate number 
of qualified staff especially food analy st 
and their training on safety parameters 
(like pesticides and heavy metal)  
Recruitment of staff is the prerogative of States/UTs. The 
matter has been raised with them a number of times in CAC 
meeting, VCs, letters etc. and they are being on regular basis. 
Further, there are adequate numbers of Food/Public Analysts 
in India. 
Apart from organizing specialized trainings on safety 
parameters (like pesticides, veterinary drugs including 
antibiotics, mycotoxins, etc), FSSAI has also established 
training ce ntres at Mumbai (called International Training 
Center on Food Safety & Applied Nutrition in association 
with EIC and GFSP) and at Ghaziabad to train on safety 
parameters (called Food Safety Solution Center in association 
with M/s Thermo Fisher; and, Center  for Microbiological 
Analysis Training in association with M/s Merck). These 
centres will be epicentres of capacity building for food 
analysts, especially in the government sector.  
4. Development of uniform sampling and 
supervision framework 
The work is being carried out by the Panel and method review 
group on priority.  
5. Creation of training centres for Hands on 
Training 
As mentioned above, ITC -FSAN at Mumbai and two training 
Centres created at the NFL, Ghaziabad have already been 
created for achieving the goal of hands on training. 
6. Organising national level awareness 
generation program with stakeholders to 
push testing demand by consumers 
FSSAI has provided mobile food testing laboratories called 
Food Safety on Wheels (FSW) which has options for t esting, 
awareness and training. 43 FSWs are in place in different 
States/UTs. These FSWs have been undertaking activities to 
create awareness amongst common citizenry about 
importance of food testing and eating safe.   
7. Drawing an Action Plan in coordin ation 
with State/UT Governments for 
overcoming the shortage of manpower of 
Food Regulatory Bodies. 
General norms are already in place as far as fulfilling the 
shortage FSOs and DOs across the States/UTs.  
As regards to laboratory staff, a Guidance Document  on 
setting up of FTLs has already been shared with States/UTs 
and is available on the website of FSSAI. This document 
gives  a general guideline in regards to the number of staff 
required in a state food testing laboratory. 
8. Delegation of financial powers to state 
laboratories for smooth operation of labs 
on regular basis 
This needs to be done by the State governments. Also, the 
matter has been raised with States/UTs a number of times 
during CAC meetings, video conferences with States and 
during the visit of FSSAI officials to different States/UTs.  
9. Establishment of a separate agency or 
department of Food Safety in each State 
for better enforcement  
This needs to be done by the State governments. 
10. Formation of a cerntralized pool of 
vendors an d equipment service providers 
for the convenience of labs 
FSSAI has empanelled vendors for a few high end equipment. 
The Government e -Market (GeM) portal has provision for 
sourcing equipment, consumables and services. 
11. Providing grant by MoFPI only to 
NABL/FSSAI recognized laboratories  
This relates to MoFPI.  
12. Establishment of Single Window System 
(SWS) instead of multiple accreditation 
and recognition. 
Steps to this effect has  already been taken and an integrated 
audit system for accreditation and recognition of food testing 
laboratories has become operational with FSSAI being part of 
it, since April 2019.  

102 
 
Annexure 5 
Part 1: India's Import of specified food products through specified ports during the financial year 2016-17 
      Port_EDI 
Location 
Code 
Port Descriptions Unit of 
Quantity 
No. of Bill of 
Entries of 
imported food 
items filed with 
Customs 
Quantity Value (INR) 
INAGTB AGARTALA KGS 263 4011840 470660678 
    LTR 36 1196475 25163905 
INAKV6 ICD ANKLESHWAR KGS 99 1397665 142625339 
    LTR 1 12545 864408 
INAMD4 AHMEDABAD AIR CARGO 
COMPLEX 
KGS 1034 352986 2560474655 
    LTR 2 2109 1060463 
INAMG6 ICD GUWAHATI(AMIN GAON) KGS 3 162000 6473304 
INAPL6 CFS ALBATROSS/ICD DADRI KGS 228 14519342 1555300890 
INATQ4 ACC AMRITSAR (RAJASANSI) KGS 25 26214 15689773 
INATRB ATTARIROAD,AMRITSAR KGS 10569 242339137 20125893016 
INBDM6 ICD SONIPAT KGS 101 12795380 306857550 
    LTR 4 135312 18335534 
INBFR6 ICD Piyala Ballagarh KGS 14 178050 16761908 
INBGK6 ICD JODHPUR KGS 6 350472 29641675 
INBLR4 BANGALORE AIRPORT KGS 5869 893466 3980947401 
    LTR 29 9483 2806070 
INBNG6 ICD TARAPUR (MAHAGAON) KGS 16 479534 26234483 
INBNYB BARHNI KGS 35 45623 26352405 
INBRC6 ICD VADODARA/BARODA KGS 261 16844155 424168421 
INBSL6 ICD BHUSAWAL KGS 16 612000 79830289 
INCCH6 ICD CHINCHWAD KGS 23 139100 26606603 
    LTR 10 138504 18516444 
INCCJ4 ACC CALICUT, KARIPUR KGS 4 5834 464657 
    LTR 62 20689 4230662 
INCJB4 ACC COIMBATORE KGS 2 161 177577 
INCPL6 CGML DADRI KGS 36 575833 64057758 
INCPR6 ICD CHOWPAYAL KGS 14 1498000 10402106 
INDAH1 DEHEJ SEA KGS 6 56650000 814864930 
INDHA6 ICD Dhannad KGS 48 5918000 54973475 
INDIG6 ICD DIGHI PUNE KGS 10 33923 14803703 
    LTR 4 3281 476754 
INDUR6 ICD DURGAPUR, WB KGS 3 125000 4854100 
INGGV1 GANGAVARAM PORT KGS 11 92458000 1734574819 
INGHR6 ICD GARHIHARSARU KGS 579 26464710 2122958182 
    LTR 45 410359 114389430 
INGJXB GHAJADANGA KGS 268 15915800 777626896 
    LTR 85 3743000 132813970 
INGOI4 ACC GOA,DABOLIM KGS 17 15697 12361569 

103 
 
    LTR 2 1019 161062 
INHLIB HILI (WEST) KGS 52 4980000 300483604 
INHYD4 HYDERABAD AIRPORT KGS 2363 519867 3487254896 
    LTR 16 10477 7292629 
INHZA1 HAZIRA PORT, SURAT KGS 313 713235023 15727354055 
    LTR 3 11770 779543 
INIGU6 ICD Irgur KGS 2 86400 7317000 
INILP6 ICD Irungattukottai KGS 32 1872000 255901386 
ININD6 ICD  PITHAMPUR  (INDORE) KGS 64 7440712 128151389 
INIXY1 KANDLA SEA KGS 10263 6943669872 321232988263 
    LTR 15 47686161 1792462012 
INJAI4 JAIPUR A.C. KGS 1 1 412 
    LTR 1 300 17378 
INJBNB JOGBANI KGS 1251 7758150 597672169 
    LTR 1 700 376744 
INKAK1 KAKINADA SEA KGS 365 1262404900 60541378132 
INKBC6 ICD KRIBHCO, HAZIRA SURAT KGS 7 79593 9000511 
    LTR 2 2446 170800 
INKDL6 SEZ Kandla KGS 891 18777742 2339056800 
    LTR 105 1448456 95496301 
INKKU6 ICD KANAKPURA KGS 301 20514343 619375679 
INKNU6 ICD Juhi Railway Yard Kanpur KGS 146 9547279 415413663 
INKRI1 KRISHNAPATNAM KGS 738 1492835113 75699091554 
    LTR 130 3742542 188074901 
INKRK1 KARIKAL KGS 101 337506100 10930924709 
INKYM6 ICD KOTTYAM KERALA KGS 2 120000 1524935 
INLDH6 ICD LUDHIANA KGS 585 32955392 2428206518 
    LTR 16 212760 59667160 
INMBD6 ICD Pakwara Moradabad/Meerut KGS 204 26156800 295136010 
INMDA1 MAGDALLA PORT SEA KGS 1 160 68400 
INMDD6 ICD MANDIDEEP KGS 13 593090 20927117 
INMHDB KOTWALIGATE (MOHEDIPUR) KGS 1 125000 4514063 
INMPR6 ICD MALANPUR KGS 5 452000 21121770 
INMREB MOREH KGS 333 6660000 1186673227 
INMRM1 MARMAGOA SEA KGS 353 214780793 10439673471 
    LTR 24 361083 41025746 
INMUN1 MUNDRA KGS 4861 2255986778 106338497986 
    LTR 207 141249655 5431526858 
INMWA6 ICD MALIWADA KGS 8 210000 11809842 
INNGP6 ICD NAGPUR KGS 369 31385075 1024005480 
    LTR 10 29603 2103294 
INNML1 NEWMANGALORE  SEA KGS 3175 1213287640 68110838526 
    LTR 1 54216 3147279 
INNPT1 NAGAPATTINAM KGS 12 34500000 1719555389 
INPAV1 PIPAVAB(VICYOR) KGS 454 33272465 824644951 

104 
 
    LTR 4 32940000 1324891063 
INPMP6 PIMPRI  (PUNE) KGS 1 7200 2582946 
INPNK6 ICD PANKI, UP KGS 209 15601137 391738355 
INPNV6 ARSHIYA INTL. FTWZ-SEZ, 
RAIGAD 
KGS 417 15925447 4426483983 
    LTR 35 635030 370373150 
INPNY6 ICD PONDICHERRY KGS 49 4383835 52685924 
INPRT1 PARADIP SEA KGS 30 166572003 6420895251 
INPTL6 ICD PATLI KGS 296 15862895 449863962 
    LTR 1 7000 445499 
INPTPB PETRAPOLE LAND KGS 282 12039001 413248160 
INRAI6 ICD RAIPUR KGS 20 1343000 21776143 
INREA6 ICD REWARI KGS 37 5365000 49055477 
INRTM6 ICD RATLAM KGS 18 673250 77718161 
INRXLB RAXAUL LAND KGS 148 3735787 256078281 
    LTR 5880 80210958 7375006199 
INSAC6 ICD SACHIN, SURAT KGS 6 16641 4834183 
    LTR 6 8595 1770045 
INSAU6 ICD THAR DRY PORT KGS 33 1251819 62778658 
INSBI6 ICD SABARMATI KGS 885 47826656 2554463311 
    LTR 3 1173 985478 
INSIK1 SIKKA KGS 25 374818800 9323564416 
INSNF6 ICD HYDERABAD KGS 339 6772820 1352439371 
    LTR 62 308786 382982695 
INSNI6 ICD KANECH, INLOGISTICS KGS 94 4181408 425146873 
    LTR 1 3150 443086 
INSTRB SUTARKANDI KGS 356 3153723 294371650 
    LTR 285 8387861 285859084 
INSTT6 CFS STARTRACK DADRI KGS 91 8205924 365034365 
    LTR 1 6225 2409859 
INSTV6 EPZ/SEZ SURAT KGS 192 944147 354341960 
INTHA6 ICD THAR DRY PORT, JODHPUR KGS 60 3746661 343161421 
INTLG6 TELEGAON KGS 213 5003207 872001912 
INTRV4 TRIVANDRUM AIRPORT KGS 3 69 603809 
    LTR 76 26411 5137702 
INVPI6 ICD VAPI KGS 8 258792 37291690 
INVTZ1 VISAKHAPATNAM SEA KGS 1505 698659136 23623155277 
    LTR 35 1613397 42809932 
INVTZ4 VISHAKHAPATNAM AIRPORT KGS 2 2 123039 
INWAL6 ICD WALUJ KGS 5 18270 1612913 
INWFD6 ICD BANGALORE KGS 774 18590596 1364726580 
    LTR 212 5145119 561603913 
 
*** 
 