Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Sixty-ninth Report on Demands for 
Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 49) of the Department of Heath Research 
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
 
 
REPORT NO. 
77
SEVENTY SEVENTH REPORT


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

43
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
SEVENTY SEVENTH REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Sixty-ninth Report on Demands for
Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 49) of the Department of Health Research
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  9 th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  9 th December, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)-(v)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—20
Chapter–I – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have been accepted by the Committee .......................... 2—11
Chapter–II – Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ................ 12—15
Chapter–III – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee ................. 16—19
Chapter–IV – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited ................................................... 20
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 21
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 23—26
7. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 27 —37
8. L IST OF R EPORTS PRESENTED EARLIER ................................................................................. 38—42

(i)
& Vacant vide disqualification as a member of the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) w.e.f. 19 th September, 2013.
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
2. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
3. Shrimati B. Jayashree
4. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
 
&7. Shri Rasheed Masood
8. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
9. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
10. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Kirti Azad
12. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
13. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
14. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
15. Shrimati Priya Dutt
16. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
17. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
18. Dr. Monazir Hassan
19. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
20. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Mahabal Mishra
23. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Ramkishun
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
30. Shri P.T. Thomas
31. Vacant

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
hereby present this Seventy-seventh Report of the Committee on Action Taken by Government on
the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Committee’s Sixty-ninth Report on Demands
for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 49) of the Department of  Health Research, Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare for the year 2013-14.
2. The Sixty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
26
th April, 2013.  Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report,
received from the Department of Health Research were considered by the Committee at its meeting
held on the 29
th November, 2013 .
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on
the 29 th November, 2013.
BRAJESH PATHAK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
November 29th, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Agrahayana 8, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Health and Family Welfare

ACRONYMS
AES – Acute Encephalitis Syndrome
AF – Academy of Finland
AIDS – Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome
ATNs – Action Taken Notes
BMBF – German Federal Ministry of Education and Research
CCEA – Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
CDC – Centres for Disease Control
CIHR – Canadian Institutes of Health Research
CSCS – Central Secretariat Clerical Service
CSS – Central Secretariat Service
CSSS – Central Secretariat Stenographers Service
DARE – Department of Agricultural Research and Education
DBT – Department of Biotechnology
DG – Director General
DHF – Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever
DHR – Department of Health Research
DIT – Department of Information Technology
DOH – Department of Health
DoPT – Department of Personnel and Training
DRDO – Defence Research and Development Organisation
DST – Department of Science and Technology
EFC – Expenditure Finance Committee
ELISA – Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay
GIA – Grant-in-aid
HAC – Health Account Committee
HGF – Helmholtz Association (Germany)
HIV – Human Immunodeficiency Virus
HPV – Human Papilloma Virus
HRD – Human Resource Development
H R – Health Research
IAL – International Associated Laboratory
ICAR – Indian Council of Agricultural Research
(iv)

ICMR – Indian Council of Medical Research
ISRO – Indian Space Research Organization
IT – Information Technology
ICMR – Indian Council of Medical Research
JE – Japanese Encephalitis
JWG – Joint Working Group
KI – Karolinska Institute
LSHTM – London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine
MoHFW – Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
MoU – Memorandum of Understanding
MRC, UK – Medical Research Council, United Kingdom
MRHRUs – Model Rural Health Research Units
MRSA – Methicillin Resistant Staphylococcus Aureus
MRUs – Multi-disciplinary Research Units
MTAB – Medical Technology Assessment Board
NARI – National AIDS Research Institute
NE-PRC – North-East Project Review Committee
NE Region – North-Eastern Region
NGO – Non-Government Organisation
NHRC – Nepal Health Research Council
NICE,UK – National Institute of Clinical Excellence, United Kingdom
NIE – National Institute of Epidemiology
NIF – National Innovation Foundation
NIIH – National Institute of Immunohaemotology
NIH – National Institutes of Health
NIN – National Institute of Nutrition
NIOP – National Institute of Pathology
NJIL&OMD – National JALMA Institute of Leprosy and Other Mycobacterial
NIPER – National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research Diseases
PGIMER – Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Research
PPP – Public Private Partnership
PVL – Panton Valentine Leukocidin
RAPD – Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA
R&D – Research and Development
RHRC – Regional Medical Research Centre
SAFHR – South Asian Forum for Health Research
STDs – Sexually Transmitted Diseases
WHO – World Health Organisation
(v)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in Sixty-ninth Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 49) of the
Department of Health Research for the year 2013-14.
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the 69
th Report. They have been categorized as follows:
(i)   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
been accepted by the Committee: 2.6, 3.3, 3.10, 3.17, 4.3, 6.3, 6.6, 7.4, 7.6, 9.4,
10.4 Total–11 (Chapter-I)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies: 2.7, 2.13, 6.2, 8.2, 9.2 Total–5 (Chapter-II)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee: 2.10, 3.5, 5.5, 6.9 Total–4 (Chapter-III)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited: 3.7, 10.3 Total–2 (Chapter-IV)
3. The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. Budgetary Allocation
Recommendation/Observation
1.1 The Committee observes that the five new schemes/projects of the Department of Health
Research could not be made operational even during 2012-13 due to lack of approvals, though the
Department had come into existence in 2007 and become functional in 2008 with the appointment
of its first Secretary. The Committee is unable to comprehend the reasons for not getting the
required approvals even after a lapse of five years since the creation of the Department, which has
resulted in massive financial under-performance vis-à-vis the approved outlay of Rs. 4496.08 crore
for the Eleventh Plan. The Committee has been exhorting the Department to pay focused attention
for completing all pre-project formalities and obtaining necessary approvals on time so that the
budgeted funds are not locked up for want of approvals and surrendered later. The Committee is,
however, constrained to note that little attention seems to have been paid to its advice in this regard
which has resulted in persistent and substantial under-utilisation of budgeted funds. The first year
of the Twelfth Plan Period has already lapsed and the current year is the 2
nd year of the Twelfth
Plan. The Committee notes that the EFC approval for the three new Schemes were accorded, albeit
belatedly, on 22.03.2013. Two of the five new schemes have not been approved as yet. The
Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to make more rigorous efforts and
proactively pursue approval of the remaining two schemes with the agencies concerned. The
Committee desires to be apprised of the updated status in this regard. The Committee also
recommends that a roadmap be chalked out to implement the Schemes and progress of their
implementation be monitored at highest level in the Department so that the desired outcomes are
achieved. The Committee desires that all the approved schemes should be made operational at least
during current financial year. Approvals to the remaining schemes may be accorded at the earliest
so that they may also become operational during the current year.
(Para 2.6)
Action Taken
1.2 Out of the five schemes formulated by the DHR, three schemes have already been
approved, viz. (1) Establishment of Model Rural Health Research Units (MRHRUs) in the States on
22.3.2013; (2) Establishment of Multi-disciplinary Research Units (MRUs) in Government Medical
Colleges on 27.6.2013 and (3) Establishment of a Network of Laboratories for Managing Epidemics
and Natural Calamities on 27.6.2013.
1.3 As regards the remaining two schemes, the appraisal process has been completed in
respect of the scheme regarding “Grants in Aid scheme for inter- sectoral Convergence and
Promotion and Guidance on Health Research” and the EFC meeting has been fixed on
27
th August, 2013. Regarding the scheme on “Human Resource Development for Health Research”
final appraisal note has been issued by the Planning Commission on 13.8.2013 and is being
processed for further action.
2

3
1.4 The matter is being vigorously pursued with the concerned departments and the position in
this regard is being reviewed periodically at the level of Secretary (DHR).
1.5 The Department has initiated the pre-implementation activities for all the five schemes by
inviting proposals. The Department has received requests from 64 Medical College for MRUs,
8 proposals for MRHRU and 10 proposals for virology laboratories from the various State
Governments. The DHR has received 531 concept proposals for GIA scheme and identified 30
faculty members for HRD fellowship for training within India and abroad.
1.6 Letters have been addressed to the Chief Secretaries and Principal Secretaries of Health/
Medical Education of the concerned States for completion of requisite formalities for
implementation of the shortlisted proposals in respect of the three approved schemes.
1.7 The Department plans to implement all the five schemes in the current financial year and
expect to utilize the allotted budget in full.
III. Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR)
Recommendation/Observation
1.8 The Committee places on record its appreciation for the achievements of ICMR during the
Eleventh Plan. However, in view of the dynamic international health research scenario and the
current and future health challenges of the country, the ICMR has an uphill task to accomplish and
milestones to achieve. The Committee would, therefore, like the ICMR to collaborate with
internationally acclaimed institutions in the field of Health research in order to facilitate a vibrant
and relevant health research system in the country.
(Para 3.3)
Action Taken
1.9 The Department is thankful to the committee for appreciation of XI Plan achievements. As
per committee reference to international collaboration, it is to be stated that ICMR collaborates with
many international agencies like WHO, NIH, CDC, etc and has a separate International Health
Division, which looks after this work and many MOUs, bilateral, tripartite agreements with many
countries have been signed in the field of health research, that help in building and enhancing health
research environment in the country.
1.10 ICMR is involved in collaborative programmes in biomedical research between India and
other countries as well as with national & international agencies such as Ministry of Science &
Technology, Indian and foreign missions and WHO, etc. There are few specific agreements signed
by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare with other countries and rest are those signed directly
by ICMR with international organizations/ institutions such as INSERM in France, German Federal
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) and Helmholtz Association (HGF) in Germany,
National Institutes of Health(NIH)/Centres for Disease Control (CDC) in USA, Canadian Institutes
of Health Research (CIHR) in Canada, University of Sydney and George Institute for International
Health in Australia, Medical Research Council (MRC) UK, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine (LSHTM) in UK, Karolinska Institute (KI)  in Sweden, Academy of Finland (AF).
1.11 The International Cooperation has helped the Indian scientists to establish collaborative links
with various countries for updating scientific knowledge, developing technologies and tools for
control and prevention of various diseases. It has facilitated resource generations, joint publications
and patents. It has increased research capacity building through trainings and fellowships and
helped in infrastructure development.

4
Recommendation/Observation
1.12 The Committee notes that a number of outcomes have been projected for the year 2013-14.
The Committee recommends that the desired outcomes be achieved within the targeted time-frame.
The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the achievements made vis-à-vis the targets set. The
Committee observes that it takes time to translate the research leads into tangible health products
or in application of the knowledge generated through research and a lot of work remains to be
done to bridge the gap between ‘what is known’ and ‘what is done’. Concerted efforts are required
to be made to bring research outcomes into application in the better interest of the public. The
Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised of the finding of the Committee constituted to
identify the leads from the completed extramural research projects. The Committee would also like
to be intimated of the specific health products/processes accruing from the above research projects.
(Para 3.10)
Action Taken
1.13 Leads emerging from intramural research as well as extramural projects during Eleventh
Plan are given in Annexure III. It is also to be added that a harvest group is proposed to be set-
up at the ICMR to identify the emerging leads from extramural projects and convert them into
products for public health. It is to further added that 30 new technologies (Annexure IV) ready
for transfer have been identified for the year 2013-14 and proposals have been invited from private
partners to take up these technologies to convert them into products for public use.
1.14 A fully functional Translational Research cell is already functioning in the ICMR for
translating the research leads under various subject heads into public health products. In addition,
area specific Committees have been/are being set up to be informed about the leads obtained from
completed extramural research projects.
Recommendation/Observation
1.15 The Committee observes that no single system of health care has the capacity to solve all
of the country’s health care needs. It is in this context that promotion of research in the area of
traditional medicines including Ayurveda, Naturopathy, Tibbia, Sowa-Rigpa and Homoeopathy
becomes vital for the public health care system. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
research projects on traditional medicines be pursued vigorously and the innovations accruing
therefrom be introduced into public health service within a designated time-frame. The Committee
desires to be kept apprised of the success achieved in this regard.
(Para 3.17)
Action Taken
1.16 Though research on Herbal products is the domain of AYUSH Department under MoHFW
but ICMR also pursue and support research in Traditional Medicine for different disease conditions
and has a full fledged Institute viz., Regional Medical Research Centre, Belgaum, which is specially
working in this area. Major recent achievements of the Institute are: (a) scientific validation of
Herbal Medicine, (b) role of herbal medicine in treating diseases in the region; (c) preparation of
database of ethno medicinal plants of Western Ghats; (d) strengthening human resource in the area
of herbal and traditional medicine; (e) collaboration with traditional and herbal medicine practitioners
in the region to create awareness, promote scientific temperament, collect, collate and disseminate
relevant scientific information in the area of herbal medicine.
1.17 The centre has also been successful in: (a) preparation of database, establishment of
museum and herbal garden of ethno medicinal plants of Western Ghats and creating awareness

5
among visitors regarding traditional medicine system in the region; (b) providing services to
neighboring research institutes and NGOs in respect of identification and authentication of medicinal
plants and information on collection, cultivation and utility of medicinal plants; (c) establishment of
molecular and microbiology laboratory for testing of herbals against highly resistant bacteria. The
observations of the Committee are being informed to the Department of AYUSH.
1.18 Extramural research in traditional medicine is supported through Center for Advanced
Research, ad hoc research schemes and fellowships as well as through interagency programs:
(a) Centre for Advanced Research in Yoga and Neurophysiology at Swami
Vivekananda Yoga Research Foundation, Bangalore: Studies demonstrated the
overall neurophysiological correlates of meditation offer objective support for
meditation as therapy and as an effective strategy to perform better in cognitive tasks
and to organize higher brain functions specific to education in children and adults. The
centre has produced 7 Ph. D thesis and 8 MSc dissertations and four Annual month
long training programs and 7[1 international] short term research trainings were
conducted.
(b) Advanced Centre of Reverse Pharmacology in Traditional Medicine , Kasturba
Health Society, Mumbai: Studies demonstrated  that Curcuma longa  and curcumin
have proliferative effects in the hippocampal neural progenitors in aged rats, with
cognitive improvement. Nyctanthes abor-tristis showed antimalarial efficacy and safety
in vitro  and in vivo . W. somnifera  showed good tolerability and strength-enhancement
in human volunteers.
1.19 Presently 44 ad-hoc research projects, 40 fellowship projects are ongoing in traditional
medicine.
1.20 Novel methods have been established for in vitro  propagation of Ancistrocladus heyneanus
which is reported to have  anticancer activity. Random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD)
fingerprinting has been done of the medicinal plant Saraca asoca (Roxb.) used for treatment of
gynaecological disorders. A study on status of Methicillin Resistant Staphylococcus aureus  (MRSA)
infections was conducted which indicated the high prevalence of Methicillin resistant
Staphylococcus  aureus  (MSSA) with Panton Valentine Leukocidin (PVL) gene and further
epidemiological studies will be done in hospitals and community levels in the region. Molecular
studies were carried out on diphtheria and diarrheal pathogens and the studies helped in control of
outbreak in the region.
1.21 The work on non-codified plants used in traditional medicine practice is ongoing and two
projects completed as a result of which established exclusive herbarium and plant repository for
non codified plants and a laboratory was set up for screening of pathogenic microbial strain against
herbal extracts and building of analytical capacity to elucidate the compounds from such plants.
These non codified plants that are claimed to have therapeutic value by the grass root healers are
proposed to be studied for safety and efficacy studies. Around 800 traditional practices will be
taken for scientific validation under this programme.
ICMR-NIF joint collaborative programme in traditional practices: ICMR entered into a MoU
with National Innovation Foundation (NIF) for a period of five years on 23
rd June 2006. A task
force discussed the plan and formulated the structure of the proposal to be submitted to ICMR
so that scientific validation and value addition in traditional knowledge can help solve many day-
to-day problems of people. Under the scheme, value will be added by ICMR Labs and other
scientific institutions recognized by it to outstanding traditional herbal knowledge and innovations
to generate useful leads and share the benefits. The promising leads among the non-codified herbal
practices will be developed as marketable products. The MoU was further extended for a period

6
of next five years by DG, ICMR and is operative till 23 rd June 2016. Under ICMR- NIF
collaboration evaluation of anti typhoid and anti-diarrheal activities of medicinal plants claimed by
traditional healers have been undertaken. It is proposed to evaluate about 800 practices during 12 th
plan.
Collaboration with Department of AYUSH:  This collaboration aims at scientific validation of
traditional and other herbal formulations for HIV/AIDS cases. Under this collaboration following
facilities have been set up:
● Standardisation and Quality Control of traditional formulations at NIPER, Mohali and
SASTRA, Thanjavur
● In-vitro screening of the formulations for their anti HIV activity at NARI, Pune.
● Preclinical Pharmacology and Safety testing of the formulations at NIN, Hyderabad
● Monitoring of the clinical trials at Central Bio-statistical Monitoring Unit at NIE,
Chennai
1.22 Besides, ICMR has also brought out Monographs and Books on the medicinal values of
Herbal plants. During XI Plan, a total of 15 publications were brought out in the area of medicinal
plants viz, Quality Standards of Indian Medicinal Plants, Reviews on Indian Medicinal Plants,
Phytochemical Reference Standards of Selected Indian Medicinal Plants.
1.23 These publications are useful for developing plant drugs of adequate quality, safety and
efficacy of wider acceptance. Translate practically generated knowledge into direct utility for Indian
Drug Industry engaged in production of plant based drugs and for the Pharmacopoeial
Commissions in India & abroad for developing official quality standards on plant based drugs.
1.24 Review Monographs on Indian Medicinal plants  serve as comprehensive, informative and reliable
source of information providing information on new leads, thus helping in systematic and planned
evaluation of Medicinal plants, including drug design, basic and applied research. To develop
phytochemical Reference standard markers from select medicinal plants for standardization of drugs for
the stakeholders engaged in establishing and maintaining quality of medicinal plants and their products.
IV. Programmes for the North East
Recommendation/Observation
1.25 The Committee welcomes the initiatives taken by the Department to undertake studies and
projects specific to North Eastern Region and exhorts that focused attention be paid to the
implementation of the above projects by way of streamlined monitoring so that tangible outcomes
could be achieved and benefits emerging there from percolate down to the people.
(Para 4.3)
Action Taken
1.26 ICMR supports research activities in NE Region and 10% of the budget is spent on
research studies in NE area. During XI Plan period total 63 Projects were funded by the ICMR
in North Eastern areas.
1.27 A Centre for Advanced Research in the area of Medicinal plants has been set up in Kolkata
and Manipur. The Centre has developed DNA Fingerprinting pattern to establish species specific
DNA markers that may be used for identification of Species specificity of some medicinal plants
like Zanthoxylum acanthopodium, Zanthoxylum oxyphyllum,  Acorus calamus  Curcuma longa,

7
Curcuma caesia and curcuma zedoaria  which are used for Alzheimer’s disease, anticancer, anti-
inflammatory activity. The experimental material, viz. wild landraces, for the species under study
were collected by Botanical Survey of India from widely different locations at different altitudes
in North Eastern and Eastern India under this project.  Training has been imparted on Plant DNA
Fingerprinting and chemical analysis of medicinal potential to young faculty members and students.
The work has resulted into 6 publications.
1.28 Further the fingerprinting pattern to establish species specific DNA markers set up by this
centre can be widely used by the pharmaceutical companies to ensure the authenticated use of the
various plant materials for preparation of the drugs so as to ensure its efficacy. The centre is being
approached by such companies to obtain training of their scientists on the same.
1.29 The North East India also shares international borders with neighbouring countries like
Nepal, China, Myanmar and Bangladesh, and being a gateway to South East Asia, attains a specific
importance to various problems due to communicable diseases and cross border transmission.
Among them are: vector borne diseases; viral diseases including dengue/DHF, JE, chikungunia,
AES, West Nile virus, measles hepatitis, HPV, HIV/STDs; rickettesial diseases; acute diaarhoeal
diseases; bacterial diseases including TB and some parasitic diseases (including neurocysticercosis
(because of close association with pigs), paragonimiasis etc.). The region also has biodiversity rich
herbs, plants, micro flora and fauna, which must be explored for health benefits and their use as
natural products in treatment for various micro organisms and diseases. In this backdrop, priority
areas of research in communicable diseases that can be pursued in the North East Region, have
been identified, with an objective to put up these areas on the website of ICMR and invite ‘call
for proposals’. The projects that will be received subsequently will be short-listed and reviewed in
a Committee of Experts before placing the same in the NE-PRC for funding by ICMR. The focus
of NE projects is primarily to conduct translational research and to cater the problems of North
East for the benefit of people and patient welfare.
1.30 Under a special North East Initiative, several schemes have been initiated which include
providing support for full proposals through the North East Project Review Committee, providing
seed money grant up to Rs.10 lakhs to the new researchers of the NE Region. Some research units
are also being set up in all the medical colleges of NE Region. All these schemes are designed to
promote research aptitude and capabilities in the Scientists working in the NE Region so that they
can later continue the research activities and benefit the people of their region.
● The Multidisciplinary Research Unit (MRU) of DHR/ICMR including up-gradation of
animal house facility in State Government Medical College in the Northeast is being
established with the following objectives:
● To bridge the gap in the infrastructure which is inhibiting health research in the NE
Medical College by assisting them to establish multidisciplinary research laboratory and
animal house facility with a view to improving the health research and health services.
● To ensure the geographical spread of health research infrastructure.
● Such multi-disciplinary laboratory(ies) will be established in a centralized area in the
college accessible to the faculty and the student. In addition, the house facilities will
also be upgraded as per the PCAA requirement.
● In Arunachal Pradesh, the Health Account Scheme (HAS) project has been initiated.
This will provide live time trends of health status of the community at the study site
through provision of health screening and education in a comprehensive manner.
● ICMR developed an ELISA kit for identification of paragonimiasis (lung fluke) after
characterization of Paragonimus species in NE India.

8
VI. Grant–in–Aid Schemes for Inter-Sectoral Convergence and Promotion and Guidance
on Research Governance Issues
Recommendation/Observation
1.31 Grant in Aid scheme for projects requiring inter-sectoral coordination, translation specially
in PPP mode and IT enabled governance, trans-disciplinary as well as implementation research.
(Para 6.3)
Action Taken
1.32 The Department has identified 75 leads and out of which 30 are identified as priority leads
for Translational Research in ICMR during 2013-14. Rest of 45 leads will be taken up in next
phase. The Department will also identify the ‘research leads’ from other coordinating agencies like
DST, DBT, DRDO, ICAR CSIR etc. which could be taken up under Translational Research in a
inter-sectoral mode. Leads emerged from ICMR Research will be converted to products involving
private partners including the public private partnership (PPP) model.
Recommendation/Observation
1.33 The Committee observes that very important activities are envisaged to be accomplished
under the Grant in Aid Scheme for Inter-Sectoral Convergence & Promotion and Guidance on
Research Governance Issues. The Committee in its 56th Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13)
of the Department of Health Research had observed that the accomplishment of targets set under
the Scheme would require involvement of a number of agencies/organizations and recommended
creation of an institutional coordination mechanism for synergizing the core competencies of the
different organizations/agencies. The Committee is not aware whether such a dispensation has
come into existence or not. The Committee, therefore, would like to be updated in this regard.
(Para 6.6)
Action Taken
1.34 A Group of Secretaries has been constituted by Hon’able Minister of Health and Family
Welfare. The committee is consisting of Secretaries from DST, DBT, DRDO, DARE/ICAR, ISRO,
Dept. of Space, DIT etc., to coordinate and collaborate on Health Research activities among
various departments. A steering committee to identify complementary areas and to initiate
collaborative programmes has started functioning.
1.35 As per the recommendation of the Group of Secretaries meeting held in March, 2013, the
working Group met on 24.07.2013 to identify the areas for inter-sectoral coordination.
1.36 A separate initiative is being undertaken by the Cabinet Secretariat to promote inter-sectoral
mechanism between various Government Departments. The DHR is also a part of this initiative.
VII. Development of Infrastructure for Promotion of Health Research
Recommendations/Observations
1.37 (i) Establishment of Multi-Disciplinary Research Units (MRUs)
The Committee, recommends that the proposal of Darbhanga Medical College and Hospital
for establishing MRU may also be considered for approval and a MRU be set up there at the
earliest.
(Para 7.4)

9
Action Taken
1.38 A proposal for establishing the Multi-disciplinary Research Unit at Darbhanga Medical
College, Bihar has been received. The proposal will be placed before the review committee to
evaluate the proposal. The Department will process the proposal on priority basis to establish the
Multi-disciplinary Research Unit at Darbhanga Medical College.
Recommendations/Observations
1.39 (ii) Establishment of Model Rural Health Research Units (MRHRU):
The Committee observes that though first year of the Twelfth Plan has already elapsed and
the 2nd Year has started, no MRU or MRHRU has been set up till date. From the information
furnished by the Department, the Committee gathers that the EFC/Cabinet clearance for the above
schemes is yet to be received, which would entail further delay. Considering the fact that around
150 MRUs and 50 MRHRUs are targeted to be set up during the Twelfth Plan, the Committee
apprehends that it would be difficult to achieve the targets set, which would also lead to budgeted
funds remaining unutilized and therefore concerted action may be taken in this regard. It is,
therefore, imperative on the part of the Department to vigorously pursue the matter and get the
necessary clearances in the right earnest and well in time. The Committee desires to be kept
apprised regularly of the progress made towards setting up of MRUs and MRHRUs .
(Para 7.6)
Action Taken
Establishment of MRHRUs:
1.40 The scheme has been approved by the EFC on 22.3.2013 and sanction has been issued with
the approval of the competent authority on 21.6.2013. In accordance with the approved scheme,
the Model Rural Health Research Units are to be established at 15 places during the Twelfth Plan
period in a phased manner (7 in 2013-14 and 8 in 2014-15) at a total estimated cost of Rs.67.66
crores.
1.41 Based on the proposals received from the States, the Department has short-listed 8 Centres
for establishing MRHRUs and communication has been sent to State Governments on 29.07.2013
for completing the requisite formalities for implementation.
Establishment of MRUs in Medical Colleges:
1.42 The scheme has been approved by the CCEA on 27.6.2013. Sanction for implementation of
the scheme has been issued with the approval of the competent authority on 15.7.2013.
1.43 In accordance with the approved scheme, the Multi-Disciplinary Research Units are to be
established in 80 medical colleges during the Twelfth Plan period in a phased manner (35 in 2013-14
and 45 in 2014-15). Based on the advance action already taken by the Department and the
proposals received from the various States, the Department has short-listed 31 Medical Colleges
spread all over the country and communication has been sent to respective State Governments on
29.07.2013 for completing the requisite formalities. The committee will be apprised of the progress
of implementation from time to time.
IX. International Cooperation in Medical and Health Research
1.44 The Committee is happy to note that one of the activities proposed for 2013-14 inter-alia
talks of sharing the expertise of developed and developing countries for transfer of technology and

10
training in cutting edge of science. The Committee also desires to be informed of the achievements
made so far.
(Para 9.4)
Action Taken
1.45 In 201 1-12, (at the end of March 2012) a grant of Rs.4.0 Crores was released under
Human Resource Development scheme of DHR for limited activities for that year. The Department
selected 33 faculty members to get training in India as well as in foreign countries in cutting edge
areas. Some of the selected persons are still undergoing the trainings in Indian as well as in foreign
institutes, as the training could be initiated in later half of the 2012. Out of 33 selected candidates
10 were sent to foreign institutes to get trained in cutting edge areas.
1.46 The trained manpower is expected to initiate research in their respective parent institutes
after completing the training.
1.47 The other activities under ICMR in this area are as under:
● ICMR and INSERM (France) having a long standing collaboration under an MoU
signed in 1989,  agreed to enter into a new facet of collaboration by setting up of an
International Associated Laboratory (IAL) in the field of Immunology and Haematology
at NIIH, Mumbai in 2011 and the project has been initiated in 2012.
● India’s capacity and potential for research has been evaluated and acknowledged by
various international agencies and it has been reiterated that international cooperation is
essential for quality research.  ICMR has embarked upon a fellowship programme for
researchers belonging to developing countries to work in Indian laboratories. One
scientist from Cuba and 2 from Nigeria visited ICMR Institute (RMRC Port Blair,
NJIL&OMD, Agra and NARI, Pune respectively) for training.  The scientists from
developing countries were trained in various advanced molecular techniques,
diagnostics and other immunological methods in the Indian labs as per the requirement
of each candidate.
● The South Asian Forum for Health Research (SAFHeR) was established in 2003 at
Kathmandu for enhancing regional collaboration and partnership in health research
among South Asian countries in order to achieve better health for the people of South
Asia. In 2011, the ICMR was requested by Nepal Health Research Council (NHRC) to
lead this forum for next 3 years and act as the Secretariat for SAFHeR.
● Accordingly, ICMR/DHR organized the Fourth Regional Meeting of SAFHeR during
5th to 7 th February, 2012 at New Delhi and  the member countries of SAFHeR were
represented by the scientists/officials of their National Health Research Councils or
Ministries of Health.
● As a follow up of this Fourth meeting of SAFHeR, steps have been initiated on new
activities such as to organize a workshop for undergraduate medical students in
Clinical and Laboratory Medicine Research by the NIOP, ICMR in near future.
● The ICMR International Fellowship Programme was initiated in 2005 for Indian
biomedical scientists aims to augment capacity strengthening of institutions involved in
basic, applied, epidemiological and clinical sciences through exposure of Indian
researchers to the latest international advancements in knowledge, to understand the
disease and find strategies for their prevention and cure. ICMR International
Fellowships were awarded to 30 senior and 58 young Indian biomedical scientists

11
during 2007-2012 or XI Plan period. The Indian scientists have learnt the various
technologies utilized by them in the foreign labs during the fellowship training and
utilized the expertise gained in the future programmes of parent Indian institutes. The
fellowships have also resulted in ultimate benefit to patients in clinical settings and
various publications and projects.
● During Eleventh and Twelfth five year plan periods, the number of fellowships and
fellowship amount has been enhanced.
● During the year, 2012-13, four HMSC meetings were organized in which a total of 128
international collaborative projects were discussed and 99 projects were approved for
international collaboration/assistance.
X. Manpower Requirements of Department of Health Research
Recommendation/Observation
1.48 The Committee also expresses its concern over a large number of posts lying vacant
vis-à-vis the sanctioned strength, which is certain to impinge on the smooth functioning of the
Department. The Committee would recommend that the matter should be pursued at the highest
level with the concerned authorities for expeditious filling up of the vacancies at the earliest. A
Department cannot function with so many vacancies. If the government did not create a separate
Department, things would have been different. But now that the government has created the
Department, all the commitments should be fulfilled. An early action may be taken in this regard.
(Para 10.4)
Action Taken
1.49 The Department has taken up the matter with concerned authorities at Secretary(HR)’s
level. The Department will vigorously pursue it with DOPT/DOH for early filling up of sanctioned
posts.

12
12
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES
II. Budgetary Allocation
Recommendation/Observation
2.1 The Committee notes that there is significant variation between the Budget Estimates and
the actual expenditure incurred in respect of the five new schemes of the Department. Persistent
mismatch between the Budget Estimates and the actual expenditure indicates that budget
formulation is being done without applying proper financial yardsticks. The Committee feels that
there is an imperative need to minimize the huge mismatch between the Budget Estimates and the
actual expenditure so as to observe the fiscal norms in letter and spirit. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that corrective measures be initiated and implemented for realistic projection of fund
requirements of the Department in future.
(Para 2.7)
Action Taken
2.2 The provisions of General Financial Rules and the guidelines issued by the Ministry of
Finance (Budget Division) for budget formulation, financial management and periodical
monitoring are duly followed by the Department of Health Research. Since all the schemes
formulated by DHR are new schemes to fulfil the objectives as per the mandate of the newly
created department, budget provisions for these schemes are being made from time to time
based on the total estimated project cost as well as the year-wise phasing of physical and
financial targets of the schemes. It is necessary to make requisite budgetary provisions for the
schemes as in the absence of this, the schemes are not taken up for consideration and
appraisal. However, despite best efforts by the Department, the schemes could not be approved
during the Eleventh Plan.
2.3 Now since the three schemes have already been approved and sanctioned and the
remaining two schemes are also expected to be cleared during the current financial year,
maximum utilization of budgeted funds is expected with the implementation of the schemes. The
suggestion of the Committee for making realistic projection of fund requirements is noted for
compliance.
Recommendation/Observation
2.4 The Committee observes that the ICMR is the main technical wing of the Department of
Health Research and is responsible for formulation, coordination and promotion of bio-medical
research in the country. The Committee, therefore, notes with serious concern the likely adverse
impact of the funds crunch on the intramural and extramural research priorities of ICMR. The
Committee desires that Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance may reconsider the allocation for
ICMR for the Twelfth Plan after making a fair assessment.
(Para 2.13)

13
Action Taken
2.5 The Department of Health Research appreciates the support from the Honourable Members
of the Parliamentary Standing Committee for recommending enhancement of the budgetary
allocation for intramural and extramural research of ICMR and suggesting Planning Commission and
Ministry of Finance for re-consideration of allocation for ICMR/DHR for its various schemes
during Twelfth Plan. The Department will put forward the recommendations of the Committee to
the Planning Commission/ Ministry of Finance during pre-budget discussion at Revised Estimate
Stage.
2.6 Due to budgetary cuts during 2012, very few projects approved by Project Review
Committees could be funded after September, 2012. In addition, even funding of several ongoing
research projects has also been considerably delayed. The list of activities proposed during the
Twelfth Five Year Plan has already been submitted for consideration and approval of the High
Power Committee. Department will make efforts to convince Planning Commission and Ministry of
Finance for adequate allocation of funds so that ICMR is able to function optimally.
VI. Grant–in–Aid Schemes for Inter-Sectoral Convergence and Promotion and Guidance
on Research Governance Issues
Recommendation/Observation
2.7 The Committee gathers from the information furnished that the Grant in Aid Scheme for
Inter-Sectoral Convergence and Promotion and Guidance on Research Governance Issues is yet to
be cleared by the EFC/Cabinet. The Committee, in the earlier part of the Report, has commented
about proactively pursuing for approval of various Schemes with the agencies concerned and
completing all pre-project formalities well in time. The Committee recommends here also to take
similar action in respect of the above Scheme as well.
(Para 6.2)
Action Taken
2.8 The appraisal process of this scheme has been completed and the proposal has been moved
for seeking the date from Secretary (Expenditure) for convening the meeting.
2.9 Meanwhile, the Department has initiated the pre-project activities of the scheme and has
already received 530 concept/research proposals under the various components of the scheme.
VIII. Managing Epidemics and National Calamities
Recommendation/Observation
2.10 The Committee observes that viral diagnosis has emerged as a major health challenge. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should draw up an action plan for timely
implementation of the scheme for setting up of laboratory network for research on viral and other
infections. Efforts may be made to achieve physical and financial targets.
(Para 8.2)
Action Taken
2.11 The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA), in its meeting held on 27.6.2013, has
approved the setting up of 10 regional labs, 30 State level labs and 120 medical college level labs
under the scheme for Establishing a Network of Laboratories for Managing Epidemics and Natural

14
calamities. The scheme is estimated to cost Rs.646.83 crore during the Twelfth Five Year Plan
(Rs.485.13 crore after taking into account the States’ Share). The Department is to establish 2
Regional level, 5 State level and 10 Medical College Level Laboratory. The Department has short
listed 7 States for establishing State and Medical College Level laboratories in 2013-14, two sites
for establishing Regional level laboratory in 2013-14.
2.12 The following two institutes have been identified for setting up of Regional Virology Labs:
1. Post Graduate Institute of Medical Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh
2. Regional Medical Research Centre (ICMR), Dibrugarh
2.13 The Department has received proposals from 12 States for the establishment of 3 State
Level and 10 Medical College level labs. Letter has been sent to the States on 8.8.2013 for
completion of requisite formalities for implementation. However, efforts made under ICMR System
are mentioned in Annexure V .
IX. International Cooperation in Medical and Health Research
Recommendation/Observation
2.14 The Committee observes that though adequate budgetary provisions had been made in BE
2012-13 for the above head, no international conference could be organised so far. The Committee
is of the view that international conference involving eminent scientists and erudite scholars help
in sharing and dissemination of knowledge. The Committee would therefore, advise the Department
to initiate action for organising international conferences and symposia during 2013-14 and also
ensure that sharing of knowledge and expertise could lead to finding some solutions to health
challenges of the country.
(Para 9.2)
Action Taken
2.15 The component or activities related to organize or support International Conference in
Medical and Health Research is a part of activities of EFC on ‘the Grant-in-Aid Scheme, which
could not be approved in 2012-13 and therefore the budget allotted for activities under the scheme
could not be utilized.
2.16 However, ICMR has been on forefront in international collaboration and have been involved
in organizing or supporting International conferences.
2.17 The following International activities are proposed to be undertaken during the year 2013-14
for sharing of knowledge and expertise. The dates and venue are decided after mutual discussions
with foreign countries subject to mutual convenience and availability of funds:
Bilateral Joint Working Group (JWG)/JSC meetings:                                        
● Indo-US HIV/ AIDS JWG  in USA
● Indo-US JWG on Diabetes Research in USA/India
● ICMR-INSERM  JWG in India
● ICMR – MRC JSC in UK
Bilateral meetings/Workshops (coordinating Divisions in ICMR):                  
● Indo-Russian workshop on Medical Research in Russia (ECD)

15
● Indo-Norway workshop on AMR+HIV/AIDS in Norway and/or India (ECD)
● Indo-Sweden-(INSPIRE) workshop on Infectious Diseases in India (ECD)
● Indo-German workshop on Bio-ethics in Germany (IHD/BMS)
● Indo-Finland workshop on Diabetes (RCH)
● Indo-US workshop on HIV/AIDS (ECD) in USA
MoUs under process/proposed/under negotiation for collaboration between:
● Department of Health Research, MOH&FW, Government of India and National Institute
of Health and Clinical Excellence, UK
● Joint statement of work between International AIDS Vaccine Initiative, New York and
ICMR
● Government of Saskatchewan, Canada and ICMR
● National Health and Medical Research Council, Australia and ICMR
● German Research Foundation (DFG), Germany and ICMR
● Request by ICMR for joining the Drugs for Neglected Diseases Initiative (DNDi)
Foundation
● Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, USA and ICMR
● International Consortium on Anti-Virals, Canada and ICMR
● Collaborative Programmes with neighbouring countries through the mechanisms of
South Asia Health Research Forum.

16
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
3.1 The Committee observes that scientific knowledge generated through health and bio-medical
research is used to develop drugs, diagnostics, vaccines and devices that ultimately find place in
the health care systems of the country. It is also worth mentioning that health research has a vital
role to play in the discovery and development of indigenous health products. Taking all these
factors into account, the Committee apprehends that allowing the new schemes to be plagued with
under-funding from the very beginning would prove detrimental to generation of new knowledge
in the area of health research. The Committee, therefore, lends its support for enhancement of
funds for the schemes at the RE stage. The Committee, simultaneously, recommends to the
Department to pay focused attention to more efficient deployment of the available resources.
(Para 2.10)
Action Taken
3.2 The Department of Health Research appreciates the support from the Honourable Members
of the Parliamentary Standing Committee for recommending enhancement of the budgetary
allocation of the Department at the RE stage for its various schemes. The Department will put
forward the recommendations of the Committee to the Planning Commission/ Ministry of Finance
while discussing the Revised Estimate for additional allocation of budget.
3.3 The Department will pay special attention and take care towards efficient deployment of
available resources.
Further Recommendations
3.4 While making its recommendation in para 2.10 of its 69
th Report, the Committee had
expected the Department to formulate effective measures for efficient deployment of
available resources. Merely stating that the “Department will pay special attention and take
care towards efficient deployment of available resources”, is not sufficient. The Committee
would, therefore, recommend to the Department to formulate and implement measures for
more productive use of the available resources. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the steps taken in this regard.
III. Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR)
Recommendation/Observation
3.5 The Committee welcomes the on-going evaluation of the research activities of ICMR by an
16

17
independent Committee. The Committee would impress upon the Department to expedite submission
of the recommendations of the independent Committee and place them in the public domain. The
Committee desires to be apprised of the composition, findings of the independent Committee and
the follow-up action taken thereon. The Committee would also like to know if it is possible to
involve reputed scholars of developed countries in the evaluation of the research projects of ICMR.
(Para 3.5)
Action Taken
3.6 On the observations of the Committee, it is stated that a High Power Committee evaluated
the ongoing Eleventh Plan schemes of the ICMR in a series of meetings (total 8) held during
December, 2012 to May, 2013 and their observations and findings/recommendations have been
incorporated in a draft report being finalized, which is likely to be submitted to the Govt soon.
Once approved, it will be made available in the public domain. Composition of the Committee is
shown in Annexure-I.
3.7 Regarding involving reputed scholars for evaluation of research projects, it is a matter of
policy decision, whether people from foreign countries can be involved as part of Project Review
Committee and Task Force Committee or not as some R&D may be of strategic in nature. In the
past overseas scholars were associated with some of the task force projects. It may be stated that
the quality and competence of Indian scholars is equally good. Projects which are bilateral in nature
are independently reviewed by Indian and Foreign experts.
Further Recommendations
3.8 The Committee observes that considerable time has already passed since the
constitution of the independent Committee. The Committee would, therefore, reiterate its
recommendation that the submission of its report be expedited.
3.9 The Committee also observes that a lot remains to be achieved as far as development
and evaluation of health research projects is concerned. Concerted efforts need to be taken
in this regard.
V . Human Resource Development for Health Research
Recommendation/Observation
3.10 The Committee observes that much delay has already taken place in implementing the
schemes pertaining to Human Resource Development which resulted in the surrender of the entire
budgeted funds for 2012-13. The Committee would expect the Department to avoid recurrence of
such a situation and get the EFC clearance at the earliest. The Committee would also like the
Department to complete other pre-project activities within the shortest possible time. The
Committee desires to be kept apprised of the developments in this regard.
(Para 5.5)
Action Taken
3.11 The EFC Note for the said scheme was circulated on 19th February, 2013 for the
comments of various appraisal agencies. Final appraisal note has been issued by the Planning
Commission on 13.8.2013 and is being processed for further action.

18
3.12 The Department has already initiated the pre-implementation activity of the scheme and
short-listed 30 applicants for the award of the fellowships.
Further Recommendations
3.13 The Committee is not happy with the snail’s pace of the progress made towards
implementing the scheme pertaining to Human Resource Development. More than 7 months
have passed since the Committee recommended to the Department to get the EFC clearance
at the earliest but the matter is still “being processed for convening EFC meeting”. The
Committee observes that the Department has taken unduly long time in processing the
matter and reiterates its recommendation that the scheme of Human Resource
Development be finalized promptly and implemented at the earliest.
VI. Grant–in–Aid Schemes for Inter-Sectoral Convergence & Promotion and Guidance
on Research Governance Issues
Recommendation/Observation
3.14 The Committee recommends that early action be taken for setting up MTDB which will go
a long way in promoting development of indigenous medical technologies.
(Para 6.9)
Action Taken
3.15 Action is already underway to establish proposed Medical Technology Assessment Board
(MTAB) in the Department of Health Research, which primarily aims to assess/evaluate the
appropriateness and cost-effectiveness and essentiality of the available and new health technologies
in India. Department will like to apprise the committee that this Board will be an authority for
extracting available evidence and gather other data/information through model projects for
improving the research governance in health in India.
● The MTAB would examine the numerous and heterogeneous health technology
providers, payers and adopters in India.
● The MTAB would be empowered to make recommendations to the Government of
India after suitable health technology assessment systems through evaluation on the
appropriateness and cost effectiveness of medical technologies, interventions and
procedures for introduction/procurement in India.
● The MTAB would be set up through consultation with stake holders like technology
generators, industry, regulators, economists, user groups and experts knowledgeable
about similar medical/health technology assessment systems abroad like NICE, UK and
similar models from Canada, Australia, Thailand etc.
● The MTAB will be a part of the overall regulatory/promotional structure being
established in the DHR to accelerate indigenous production of health products/
instruments/medical devices that are vital for providing cost effective health care.
● As part of this initiative, a MOU has just been signed between the DHR and the
National Institute of Clinical Excellence (NICE), UK. Follow-up action is being initiated
to identify areas for collaboration for exchange of knowledge on procedures used by
NICE for regulatory arrangements in UK in the first phase.

19
● An Apex Advisory Committee to set up the board has been constituted and started
functioning.
Further Recommendations
3.16 The Medical Technology Assessment Board (MTAB) is proposed to be assigned with
very critical activities. However, the reply of the Department does not indicate any time-
frame within which the MTAB would become functional. A timeline may be fixed for
completing the task.

CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
III. Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR)
Recommendation/Observation
4.1 The Committee notes that some very important research activities/projects in varied areas
are targeted to be undertaken/continued during the year 2013-14. The Committee would like to be
apprised in due course of time, of the quantifiable and specific achievements made vis-à-vis targets
set for the year 2013-14.
(Para 3.7)
Action Taken
4.2 The proposed research activities targeted for 2013-14 are attached (Annexure II). The
Committee will be apprised of quantifiable and specific achievements of these activities in due
course of time.
X. Manpower Requirements of Department of Health Research
Recommendation/Observation
4.3 The Committee notes that despite coming into existence of DHR as a separate Department
in 2007, the cadre-controlling authority for the DHR is the Department of Health and Family
Welfare. The purpose being served by having such an arrangement is beyond the comprehension
of the Committee. The Committee feels that such an arrangement would only delay the process of
filling up of vacant posts and should, therefore, be dispensed with. The Committee would
therefore, like the Department of Health Research to bring the above observation to the notice of
the authorities concerned for an appropriate decision. The Committee desires to be apprised of the
response of Department of Health and Family Welfare in this regard.
(Para 10.3)
Action Taken
4.4 The Department appreciates the recommendations of the Committee that cadre controlling
of DHR should not be Department of Health and Family Welfare. Department of Health is the cadre
controlling authority in respect of Secretarial Services viz. CSS/CSSS/CSCS. As the Department
has only limited posts of these services having a separate cadre may not be feasible. However, the
Department will explore possibilities with the concerned authorities for appropriate action in this
matter to fill up the post on urgent basis. The Observation of Committee will be communicated
and the Committee will be apprised of the response.
20

21
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
While making its recommendation in para 2.10 of its 69 th Report, the Committee had
expected the Department to formulate effective measures for efficient deployment of
available resources. Merely stating that the “ Department will pay special attention and
take care towards efficient deployment of available resources”, is not sufficient. The
Committee would, therefore, recommend to the Department to formulate and implement
measures for more productive use of the available resources. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the steps taken in this regard. (Para 2.10)
Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR)
The Committee observes that considerable time has already passed since the
constitution of the independent Committee. The Committee would, therefore, reiterate its
recommendation that the submission of its report be expedited.
The Committee also observes that a lot remains to be achieved as far as development
and evaluation of health research projects is concerned. Concerted efforts need to be taken
in this regard. (Para 3.5)
Human Resource Development for Health Research
The Committee is not happy with the snail’s pace of the progress made towards
implementing the scheme pertaining to Human Resource Development. More than 7 months
have passed since the Committee recommended to the Department to get the EFC clearance
at the earliest but the matter is still “being processed for convening EFC meeting”. The
Committee observes that the Department has taken unduly long time in processing the
matter and reiterates its recommendation that the scheme of Human Resource
Development be finalized promptly and implemented at the earliest. (Para 5.5)
Grant–in–Aid Schemes for Inter-Sectoral Convergence and Promotion and Guidance on
Research Governance Issues
The Medical Technology Assessment Board (MTAB) is proposed to be assigned with
very critical activities. However, the reply of the Department does not indicate any time-
frame within which the MTAB would become functional. A timeline may be fixed for
completing the task. (Para 6.9)

MINUTES

XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
(2013-14)
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 29 th November, 2013 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
3. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
4. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Kirti Azad
7. Dr. Tarun Mandal
8. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
9. Shri Harin Pathak
10. Shri Ramkishun
11. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
***
***
II. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members and informed them
about the agenda of the meeting i.e. (A) To consider and adopt draft:- (i) 75
th Report of the
Committee on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations/Observations contained in the
68th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of AYUSH;
(ii) 76
th Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations/
25
*** Relate to other matters.

26
*** Relate to other matters.
Observations contained in the 70th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
the Department of AIDS Control; and (iii) 77 th Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the
Government on Recommendations/Observations contained in the 69th Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Health Research; and ** *
III. Adoption of the Draft Reports
3. The Committee then considered and discussed the three draft Reports mentioned above.
After some discussion, the Committee adopted the three Reports. The Committee, thereafter,
decided that the said Reports along with the 73
rd and 74 th Reports on the Indian Medical Council
(Amendment) Bill, 2013 and the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013 respectively(presented to the Hon’ble
Chairman, Rajya Sabha and forwarded to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 20
th November, 2013)
may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Monday, the 09th
December, 2013. The Committee authorized its Chairman to finalise the names of the Members to
present the reports in both Houses.
***
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Committee was kept.
10. The Committee then adjourned at 12.45 
P.M.

27
ANNEXURE

29
ANNEXURE-I
Composition of the High Power Committee
The High Power Committee (HPC) was constituted in December, 2012 by the Ministry of
Health and Family welfare as a requirement of the Ministry of Finance while approving the Twelfth
plan Proposals of the ICMR/DHR to evaluate the ongoing schemes/activities of the ICMR that will
spill over from Eleventh to Twelfth Plan.
The committee composition is as follows:
1. Prof. P.N. Tandon Chairperson
President, National Brain Research Centre, Manesar, Haryana
Former Prof and Head, Neurosurgery, AIIMS, New Delhi
2. Dr. S.K Joshi
Former Secretary, DSIR and Director General, CSIR, New Delhi
3. Dr. Seyed E. Hasnain
Former Vice Chancellor, University of Hyderabad
Presently Professor, IIT, New Delhi
4. Lt. Gen. (Retd) D. Raghunath ,
Former Director General, Armed Forces Medical Services, Bangalore
5. Dr M. Gourie Devi
Former Vice Chancellor and Director, NIMHANS, Bangalore
6. Prof Indira Nath
Raja Raman Fellow, Former Prof. of Biotechnology, AIIMS, New Delhi
7. Dr. Dharma Rakshak Ayapati
Director-Vice Chancellor, Nizam’s Institute of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad
8. Dr. K. Mohan Das
Vice Chancellor, Kerala University of Health Sciences, Former Director, Sree Chitra Tirunal
Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology (SCTIMST), Thiruvanthapuram
9. Dr W. Selvamurthy
Former Chief Comptroller and Distinguish Scientist, DRDO, Delhi
Currently President, ASTIF and Chair Professor for Life Sciences Amity University Campus,
Noida
10. Dr J.M. Tharakan
Sr Professor of Cardiology, SCTIMST, Thrivanantpuram
11. Dr G. K. Rath
Prof and Head, Dr B.R. Ambedkar Institute Rotary Cancer Hospital, AIIMS, New Delhi
12. Dr V . M. Katoch
Secretary, DHR and DG, ICMR Member Secretary
13. Shri S. K. Srivastava
Additional Secretary and Financial Advisor, MOHFW

30
30
ANNEXURE-II
Targeted Research Activities for 2013-14
Extramural Spill-over (ongoing) activities of ICMR during 2013-14
Extramural Activities 2013-14 (Rs. in Lakhs)
Advanced Centres 9 (1025)
Task Force Projects 131 (2824)
Adhoc Projects 509 (4255)
Research Fellowships 454 (1156)
Long Term Projects 6 (3765)
Other Essential Activities 81 (2464)
T
OTAL : 1190 (15489)
Figures are the number of Projects/centres continuing
New studies proposed for 2013-14 are:
● Programmes on Health Systems Research (HSR), Social & Behavioual Research,
Projects on Gender and Health.
● Modules on Mental Health and Forensic Aspects of Women victims of Sexual Violence.
● Projects through open system of research with focus on 10 priorities identified in
Twelfth Plan.
● Establish ICMR centres in areas not covered so far.
● New Proposals in the Priority Areas of Delivery and Utilization, Stigma related
Diseases, Life Style associated Diseases, Reproductive Health, Health Equity, Behaviour
Change Communication etc.
● Review of ongoing translational program of ICMR, Setting of Standards/Centre for
technology transfer to Industry and assessment of starts received, Identification of
leads from extramural programs during last 5 years.
● Programmes on Epidemiology and Communicable Diseases, Adhoc projects approved
and not funded in 2012-13 as well as new ad-hoc projects.
● Research Programmes using Viral Diagnostic Laboratories (VDL) network, Tribal
Health Forum, Vector Science Forum (VSF), Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance
(AMRS), Acute Encephalitis Syndrome (AES) etc.
● Research-cum-intervention projects, Non-polio AFP, Laboratory containment of wild
poliovirus, V accines/Vaccine Preventable Diseases, Rota virus surveillance (RVS),
Rickettsia, Rubella susceptibility study.

31
● Research programmes on non-communicable diseases (NCDs) including Review of
Guidelines for Management and Treatment of Cancer Sites, Management for Acute
Coronary Events (MACE) Registry, Rural Population Based Stroke Registry at
Ludhiana, Diabetes (INDIAB-NE), Studies on indoor air pollution.
● Advanced centres on Environmental Health- Air Pollution, Mental Health, Task Force
on Climate Change, Indo-US program on Environment and Occupational health,
Research to understand mechanisms of ageing and longevity, Brain ageing and neuro-
degeneration research on Frailty in the aged, Assessment of Nutritional Status in
elderly, Institute for Research in Ageing(IRA), Celiac Disease, Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver
Disease, ICMR Childhood Obesity Task Force, ICMR Task Force on Assessment of
Non-communicable Diseases and their Risk Factors in Tribal Population, Development
of a hospital based Trauma, Accidents and injuries database.
● Research studies related to maternal, perinatal issues, promote antenatal care Task
force on Iron Deficiency anemia, Vitamin A, Iodine and vitamin D deficiency.
● Research Programmes in Basic Medical Sciences including Task Force on Stem Cell
Research, Pharmacogenomics and Nanomedicine, National Task Force on Inborn
metabolic Disoders: newborn Screening of CH and CAH, Lysosomal Storage Disorders,
Thalassemia Control in Delhi and Chandigarh, National Task Force Study on Setting up
of a network of Genetic Centres in the Country, Clinical Pharmacology projects on
research methodology, antibiotic stewardship, pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics, Task Force projects in Muticonsortium for drug development.
● Draft Biomedical and Health Research Regulation Bill, 2013, Guidelines for
Nanomedicine and nanomaterials, Revision of the Ethical Guidelines on Biobanking/
datasets, ICMR-FERCAP Training Courses, Short term Studentship Program, National
Task Force on Research Oriented Medical Education, Special programme for medical
colleges.
● Strengthening International cooperation, Bilateral Joint Working Group (JWG) and Joint
Screening Committee (JSC) meetings, Indo-Foreign activities such as Bilateral
Meetings/Workshops/Symposium, Call for applications for ICMR International
Fellowships, Exchange of scientists under collaborative programmes/projects approved
and implemented under bilateral programmes.
● Visits under DST coordinated bilateral Joint Working Group Meetings with various
countries, “Managing the Indo -German (ICMR-HGF) Science Center for Infectious
Diseases (IG-SCID)”, Health Ministry’s Screening Committee Meetings, Transfer of
human biological material for commercial purposes.
● Expanding the existing activities of tribal health forum to synergize efforts of identified
7 ICMR institutes. Special efforts will be made to focus the research activities in NE
to address the health needs of that population., Strengthening of RMRCT (Jabalpur),
NIOH, Ahmadabad, at NJILOMD, Agra.
● Second phase of Task-Force Biomedical Informatics Centres of ICMR, ICMR
Computational Genomics Centre, update of ICMR DHR Website, Network, Internet,
email, antivirus and Video Conferencing Services, ICMR Data Repository and Business
Intelligence.
● Reviews on Indian Medicinal Plants (V ols 11-13), Quality Standards of Indian Medicinal
Plants (V olume-12), Phytochemical Reference Standards of selected Indian Medicinal
Plants (V olume-3), Medicinal Plant Monographs on Diseases of Public Health

32
Importance, Database on various aspects of Medicinal Plants, Adhoc Projects on Herb
drug interaction studies of selected herbs and Allopathic drugs in the treatment of Type
2 diabetes, Rheumatoid arthritis and epilepsy.
● Publication of 100 year old Indian Journal of Medical Research (IJMR), Publication of
Periodicals like ICMR Bulletin, ICMR Patrika, Annual Reports of ICMR and DHR,
Participation in Exhibitions, Book Fairs, organize Popular lecture and ICMR Puraskar
for Popular Medical Book in Hindi.
● HRD activities like JRF, SRF, PDF, support to faculty for participation to abroad, etc
will continue.

33
ANNEXURE-III
Leads Emerged from Intramural and Extramural Research
A total of 38 patents were filed during XI Plan based on intramural research and 12 patents
have been granted.  Four technologies were transferred/commercialized.  In extramural research,
a total of 12 patents were filed and 8 were granted patents (Table).   This number would be much
more as information from individual scientists are being received who were granted adhoc projects
by various divisions of the ICMR.  Information has also been received on 72 new leads emerged.
Table.   Number of Patents Filed/Granted/Technology Transferred during Eleventh Plan
Years Intramural Extramural
Patents Patents T echnology Patents Patents
filed Granted Transferred/ Filed Granted
Commercialized
2007-08 7 1 – – 4
2008-09 5 5 – 2 1
2009-10 5 3 – – 1
2010-11 7 1 2 3 1
2011-12 14 2 2 7 1
T
OTAL:3 8 1 2 4 1 2 8
33

34
34
ANNEXURE IV
Affordable technologies for public health: Ongoing Translational Programmes of ICMR/DHR
1. Test reagents/strips for diabetes.
2. Development of killed vaccine for Japanese Encephalitis (JE).
3. Recombinant protein-based assay for diagnosis of hepatitis E.
4. ELISA for Rotavirus, major cause of diarrohoea in children.
5. ELISA for Ferritin as marker for assessing bioavailability of iron using Caco-2 cell line.
6. Dried Blood spot (DBS) – collection kit for sub-clinical deficiency of Vit.A.
7. Development of PCR based method to detect food borne pathogens.
8. Rapid diagnosis of TB.
9. Development of DOT ELISA for diagnosis of sequalae to Chlamydia trachomatis infection
using cHSP60.
10. Development of Monoclonal Antibody to Chlamydia trachomatis .
11. Species specific PCR assay for detection of L. donovani  in clinical samples.
12. Designing of a Personal Cooling Garment system.
13. Diagnostic method for Chlamydia trachomatis .
14. Resazurin Reduction Test (RRT) for assessment of metabolically active sperm.
15. Rapid Diagnostic kit (RDB) for the detection of b- thalassemia syndromes; inherited blood
disorder.
16. A cyclic lipopeptide of Bacillus subtilis subsp. subtilis (VCRC B471) with potential to kill
mosquito stages.
17. A process for diagnosis of infective (L3) stage specific RT-PCR for detection of Wuchereria
bancrofti in vector mosquito Culex quinquefasciatus.
18. B 426 - A bacterial metabolite from Pseudomonas fluorescens  showing mosquito pupicidal
activity.
19. A process for the preparation of mosquito larvicidal formulation from Bacillus thuringiensis
var. israelensis.
20. Development of magnifying device for screening cervical cancer.
21. Identified plant’s extracts as replacement of fetal calf serum/Blood/Blood products free
media for propagation of Leishmania parasites.
22. Development of PCR based diagnosis for visceral leishmaniasis from Urine samples.

35
23. Novel non-invasive method for diagnosis of visceral leishmaniasis by rK39 testing of sputum
samples.
24. Development of a LAMP assay for diagnosis of human malaria.
25. Development of a latex based agglutination technique for the detection of leptospiral
antibodies during acute stage of the disease.
26. Development of recombinant IgM ELISA for the diagnosis of Leptospirosis.
27. Test/Reagents for lung fluke useful for differential diagnosis from lung TB; one version
developed and found useful; refined version within one year.
28. Expanded Polystyrene Beads based application in Tamil Nadu rural sector as an adjunct to
Mass Drug Administration (MDA).
29. Development of multiangular viewer for identification of mosquitoes.
30. Evaluation of Occupational Health Problems of Cycle Rickshaw pullers and Re-design of
Cycle Rickshaw on Ergonomic Principles.

36
ANNEXURE V
Network of Viral Diagnostic Laboratories
The scheme for establishment of network of laboratories for diagnosis of viral infections
was piloted in the year 2010 through the ICMR system as adhoc project. The entire initiative was
taken up in a project mode for a period of five years. As of now, fifteen laboratories in fourteen
States of the country are functional.
(i) The list of functional laboratories is as follows:
Sl. No. Name of the Centre Date of Start
1. King George Medical University, Lucknow March 2010
2. Regional Medical Research Center, Bhubaneshwar March 2010
3. Regional Medical Research Center, Portblair March 2010
4. Kasturba Medical College, Manipal. March 2010
5. National Institute of Virology Field Unit, Allapuzha, Kerala March 2011
6. SMS Medical College, Jaipur March 2011
7. Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala March 2011
8. Pt. JLM Medical College, Raipur, Chattisgarh March 2011
9. King’s Institute of Preventive Medicine, Chennai Dec. 2011
10. Rajendra Memorial Research Institute of Medical Sciences, Patna Dec. 2011
11. Regional Medical Research Center, Jabalpur Dec. 2011
12. Rajendra Institute of Medical Sciences, Ranchi Dec. 2011
13. Andhra Medical College, Visakhapatnam Dec. 2011
14. Regional Medical Research Center, Dibrugarh March 2013
15. Government Medical College, Agartala March 2013
These laboratories are well equipped to test almost 25-50 viruses of the following
categories:
1. Viruses transmitted by respiratory route:  measles, rubella, mumps, influenza
parainfluenza, adeno, respiratory syncitial, etc.
2. Viruses transmitted by oro-fecal route:  hepatitis A, E, rota, astro, entero, etc.
3. Vector-borne Disease Viruses: dengue, chikungunya, Japanese encephalitis, West
Nile, Chandipura, etc.
4. Zoonotic viruses:  rabies, nipah, etc.
36

37
5. Sexually transmitted Viruses:  HBV, HSV , HPV , etc.
6. Blood-borne viruses:  HBV , HCV , etc.
7. Neurotropic viruses:  JE, HSV , entero, etc.
8. Reactivated viruses:  CMV , BK, herpes, etc.
9. Cancer causing viruses:  HTLV , EBV, HPV , etc.
In the year 2012-13, these labs tested over 70,000 samples of suspected viral etiology from
different parts of the country and also investigated about 54 outbreaks.
Proposed laboratories in current financial year (2013-14):
Ten more laboratories are proposed to be established as a part of DHR scheme approved
by CCEA. at Sher-i-Kashmir Institute of Medical Sciences, Srinagar, Government Medical College,
Jammu, J & K, Indira Gandhi Medical College, Shimla, Himachal Pradesh, Jawaharlal Institute of
Postgraduate Medical Education and Research, Pondicherry, Osmania Medical College, Hyderabad,
Andhra Pradesh, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, ICMR
Virus Unit, Kolkata, B.J. Medical College, Ahmedabad, Sikkim Manipal University, Gangtok and
Government Medical College, Amritsar.
Besides this, a Resource Centre for QA/QC and training of various categories of staff under
the VDL is proposed to be established at National Institute of Virology, Pune and an online data
mining system for VDL will be established at NIE, Chennai. All essential approvals for most of
these laboratories have been completed.
DHR/ICMR is providing equipment, manpower and consumables to different laboratories for
a total period of five years. All labs are currently ongoing.
Since now, the DHR scheme for “Establishment of a network of laboratories for
managing epidemics and natural calamities” has been approved; all the ongoing as well as
new labs in pipeline will be funded through DHR.

38
38
LIST OF REPORTS PRESENTED EARLIER
Report Subject
No.
12
1. Report on Demands for Grants 2004-05 of Department of Health. (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
2. Report on Demands for Grants 2004-05 of Department of Family Welfare. (Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare)
3. Report on Demands for Grants 2004-05 of Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
4. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the First Report of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants
(2004-05) of the Department of Health. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
5. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Second Report of the Committee on
Demands-for-Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Family Welfare. (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
6. Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Third Report of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants
(2004-05) of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
7. Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Department of Health and Family Welfare.
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
8. Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Department of Family Welfare. (Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare)
9. Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
10. Report on the Homeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005
11. Report on the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005
12. Report on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2005
13. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee on
Demands-for-Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Family Welfare. (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
14. Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants
(2005-06) of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)

39
12
15. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the First Report of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants
(2005-2006) of the Department of Health. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
16. Report on Demands for Grants 2006-07 of Department of Health and Family Welfare.
(Ministry of Health and family Welfare)
17. Report on Demands for Grants 2006-07 of Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
18. Report on the Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy Pharmacy Bill, 2005
19. Report on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005
20. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the Committee on
Demands-for-Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare.
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
21. Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
observations contained in the Seventeenth Report of the Committee on Demands-for-
Grants (2006-07) of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
22. Report on Demands for Grants 2007-08 of Department of Health and Family Welfare.
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
23. Report on Demands for Grants 2007-08 of Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health
and family Welfare)
24. Report on Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research
Puducherry Bill, 2007
25. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty-second Report of the
Committee on Demands-for-Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Health and Family
Welfare. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
26. Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Twenty-third Report of the Committee on Demands-for-
Grants (2007-08) of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
27. Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of Department of Health and Family Welfare.
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
28. Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
29 Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of Department of Health Research. (Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare)
30 Report on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007
31. Report on the Paramedical And Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill, 2007

40
12
32. Report on the Clinical Establishments (Registration And Regulation) Bill, 2007
33. Report on the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh
(Amendment) Bill, 2008
34. Report on the functioning of the three Vaccine Producing PSUs, namely, the Central
Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor and the
BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai
35. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Twenty Seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the
Department of Health and Family Welfare. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
36. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Twenty eighth report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the
Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
37. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Twenty ninth report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the
Department of Health Research. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
38. Report on Major Issues concerning the three vaccine producing PSUs, namely the
Central Research Institute(CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor
and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai
39. Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Health and Family
Welfare. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
40. Report on Demand for Grants 2010-11 of Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
41. Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 of Department of Health Research.
42. Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 of Department of AIDS Control. (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
43. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Thirty-Eighth Report
on major issues concerning the three vaccine producing PSUs, namely, the Central
Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of india (PII), Coonoor and the
BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai
44. Report on the Transplantation of Human Organs (Amendment) Bill, 2009
45. Report on Issues Relating to Availability of Generic, Generic-branded and Branded
Medicines, Their Formulation and Therapeutic Efficacy and Effectiveness
46. Report on the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Bill 2010
47. Report on the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research,
Puducherry (Amendment) Bill, 2010
48. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained in the Forty-First Report on Demands for Grants 2010-2011 (Demand
No. 48) of the Department of Health Research. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)

41
12
49. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained in the Forty-Second Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 of the
Department of AIDS Control. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
50. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained in the Fortieth Report on Demands For Grants 2010-11 (Demand No. 47)
of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
51. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained in the Thirty-Ninth Report on Demands For Grants 2010-11 (Demand
No. 46) of the Department of Health And Family Welfare.
52. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health And Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its 43rd Report on
Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its 38th Report on major
issues concerning the three Vaccine Producing PSUs, namely, the Central Research
Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor and the BCG
Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai.
53. Report on the National Institute of Mental Health And Neuro-Sciences, Bangalore
Bill, 2010
54. Report on Demand for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 46) of the Department of Health
and Family Welfare. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
55. Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 47) of the Department of
AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
56. Report on Demands For Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 48) of the Department of Health
Research. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
57. Report on Demand for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 49) of the Department of AIDS
Control. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
58. Report on Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the forty fifth Report on issues relating to availability of Generic, Generic-
Branded and Branded Mediciens, their formulation and Therapeutic Efficacy and
Effectiveness
59. Report on the Functioning of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation
(CDSCO)
60. Report on the National Commission For Human Resources For Health Bill, 2011
61. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 47)
of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
62. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand
No. 49) of the Department of AIDS Control. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)

42
12
63. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Sixth Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 48)
of the Department of Health Research. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
64. Report on Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Fourth report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 46)
of the Department of Health and Family Welfare. (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
65. Report on the Proposal to Introduce the Bachelor of Science (Community Health)
Course
66. Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty Ninth Report on the functioning of Central Drugs Standards
Control Organisation (CDSCO)
67. Report on Demands For Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 47) of the Department of Health
and Family Welfare. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
68. Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 48) of the Department of
AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
69. Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 49) of the Department of Health
Research. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
70. Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 50) of the Department of AIDS
Control. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
71. Report on the Functioning of Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS)
72. Report on Alleged irregularities in the Conduct of Studies Using Human Papilloma Virus
(HPV) Vaccine by Path in India
73. Report on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
74. Report on the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013
75. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Sixty-Eighth Report on Demands For Grants 2013-14 (Demand
No. 48) of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
76. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Seventieth Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 50)
of the Department of AIDS Control. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.