 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2025/Pausha, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
167 
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
157th REPORT ON QUALITY OF MEDICAL EDUCATION IN INDIA 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 11th December, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 11th December, 2025) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2025/Pausha, 1947 (Saka) 
 
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
157th REPORT ON QUALITY OF MEDICAL EDUCATION IN 
INDIA 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 11th December, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 11th December, 2025) 
 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)-(ii) 
2. PREFACE (iii) 
3. ACRONYMS (iv) - (v) 
4. REPORT (vi) 
 Chapter–I  Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Ministry 1-11 
 
Chapter–II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
does not desire to pursue in view of replies of the 
Ministry 
12-14 
 
Chapter–III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Ministry have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
15-26 
 Chapter–IV – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Ministry are still awaited 27 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   - AT   A GLANCE 28-31 
6. MINUTES* -- 
 To be appended at a later stage

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Rajib Bhattacharjee  
3. Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade 
4. Dr. Sikander Kumar  
5. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel  
6. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy  
7. Shri Ashok Singh  
8. Shri Rameswar Teli  
9. Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai  
10. Shri C. Sadanandan Master 
LOK SABHA  
11. Shri Ramvir Singh Bidhuri 
12. Dr. Vinod Kumar Bind  
13. Ms Iqra Choudhary  
14. Shri Mukeshkumar Chandrakaant Dalal  
15. Shri Sanjay Uttamrao Deshmukh  
16. Dr. Bachhav Shobha Dinesh  
17. Dr. Dharamvira Gandhi  
18. Dr. Kadiyam Kavya  
19. Dr. Prabha Mallikarjun  
20. Dr. C. N. Manjunath  
21. Shri Balya Mama Suresh Gopinath Mhatre 
22. Dr. Rajesh Mishra 
23. Shrimati Aparajita Sarangi  
24. Dr. Sharmila Sarkar  
25. Dr. Hemant Vishnu Savara  
26. Dr. Byreddy Shabari  
27. Dr. Mahesh Sharma  
28. Dr. Rani Srikumar  
29. Shri  Parimal Suklabaidya  
30. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman  
31. Mrs. Ruchi Vira  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri K.S. Somashekhar  Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar  Director 
4. Shri Vivek Chandra  Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Renu Sreekanth  Under Secretary 
6. Shri Jagannath Sahoo     Secretariat Assistant 
 
  

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Rajib Bhattacharjee   
3. Shri Niranjan Bishi 
4. Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai 
5. Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade  
6. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel  
7. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy  
8. Shri Ashok Singh  
9. Shri Harbhajan Singh 
10. Shri Rameswar Teli 
 
LOK SABHA  
11. Shri Ramvir Singh Bidhuri 
12. Dr. Vinod Kumar Bind  
13. Ms Iqra Choudhary  
14. Shri MukeshkumarChandrakaant Dalal  
15. Shri Sanjay Uttamrao Deshmukh  
16. Dr. Bachhav Shobha Dinesh  
17. Dr. Dharamvira Gandhi  
18. Dr. Kadiyam Kavya  
19. Dr. Prabha Mallikarjun  
20. Dr. C. N. Manjunath  
21. Shri Balya Mama Suresh Gopinath Mhatre 
22. Dr. Rajesh Mishra 
23. Shrimati Aparajita Sarangi  
24. Dr. Sharmila Sarkar  
25. Dr. Hemant Vishnu Savara 
26. Dr. Byreddy Shabari  
27. Dr. Mahesh Sharma  
28. Dr. Rani Srikumar  
29. Shri  Parimal Suklabaidya 
30. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman  
31. Mrs. Ruchi Vira  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri K.S. Somashekhar     Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhasker Director 
4. Shri Vivek Chandra Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Renu Sreekanth Under Secretary 
 

iii 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, present this 167th Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 157th Report on Quality of Medical Education 
in India.  
2. The 157th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha on 9th February, 2024 and laid on the Table of 
Lok Sabha on  9th February, 202 4. The Action Taken Notes of the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Report was received from the Department in the month of 
October 2024.   
3.  The Committee made a total of 35 recommendations/observations in the 157th Report, out 
of which 16 recommendations have been accepted by the Committee and have been categorized 
under Chapter-I. There are 3 recommendations that the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the Department‟s replies that have been categorized under Chapter-II. There are 15 
recommendations/ observations, in respect of which replies of the Department have not been 
accepted by the Committee and the Committee has made further  recommendations thereon and 
have been categorized under Chapter -III. While 1 recommendation/observation in respect of 
which final replies of the Ministry have not been received, have been categorized under Chapter- 
IV. 
4. The Committee, in its meeting held on 24th September, 2025 considered the Draft Report 
and adopted the same. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                       PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
24th September, 2025         CHAIRMAN 
Ashwin, 1947 (Saka)           Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
                 Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
 
 

iv 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
ABHA ID Ayushman Bharat Health Account ID 
AEBAS Aadhaar-Enabled Biometric Attendance System 
AETCOM Attitude, Ethics, and Communication 
AIIMS All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
AYUSH Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, and Homeopathy 
BCBR Basic Course in Biomedical Research 
CBME Competency-Based Medical Education 
CCTV Closed-Circuit Television 
CHC Community Health Centre 
DGHS Director General of Health Services 
DM Doctorate of Medicine 
DNB Diplomate of National Board 
Dr.NB Doctorate of National Board 
FDP Faculty Development Program 
FMG Foreign Medical Graduate 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GME Graduate Medical Education (as in GME Track, USA) 
ICMR Indian Council of Medical Research 
IT Information Technology 
M.Ch Master of Chirurgiae (Master of Surgery) 
MBBS Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery 
MCQ Multiple Choice Question 
MD Doctor of Medicine 
MoHFW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
MOU Memorandum of Understanding 
MS Master of Surgery 
MSR Minimum Standard Requirements 
NBEMS National Board of Examinations in Medical Sciences 
NEET National Eligibility cum Entrance Test 
NEET-SS National Eligibility cum Entrance Test - Super Specialty 
NExT National Exit Test 
NITI Aayog National Institution for Transforming India 
NMC National Medical Commission 
NMMTA National M.Sc. Medical Teachers' Association 
NMR National Medical Register 
PG Postgraduate 
PGMER Postgraduate Medical Education Regulations 
PGMSR Postgraduate Minimum Standard Requirements 
PPP Public-Private Partnership 
QCI Quality Council of India 
RHTC Rural Health Training Centre 

v 
 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
TEQ Teachers Education Qualifications 
UG Undergraduate 
UGMEB Undergraduate Medical Education Board 
UG-MSR Undergraduate Medical Standards Regulations 
UHTC Urban Health Training Centre 
USA United States of America 
UT Union Territory 
WFME World Federation for Medical Education 
WHO World Health Organization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

vi 
 
REPORT  
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 157th Report on Quality of Medical Education 
in India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare.  
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  
in respect of the recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as 
follows:  
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted b y the Government:  2.4, 2.5, 
2.6, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14, 2.16, 2.18, 2.19, 2.20, 2.25, 3.14, 3.15, 4.4, 4.5, 4.15 
       Total–16 (Chapter-I)  
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies: 1.18, 3.8, 3.10 
         Total–3(Chapter-II)  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee : 1.16, 1.17, 1.21, 1.22, 2.11, 2.24, 2.26,  2.29, 3.5, 3.6, 
4.7, 4.8, 4.11, 4.12, 4.13 
       Total–15(Chapter-III)  
(iv)  Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry are still 
awaited: Para Numbers: 2.30 
Total– 1 (Chapter-IV)  
3.   The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding part of the 
Report. 

1 
 
CHAPTER- I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
Medical Colleges and Seats in India 
 
Recommendation 
1.1.1 The Committee notes that the current situation regarding medical seats both in UG and PG 
in our country is a critical issue that warrants immediate attention. With an annual influx of 
approximately 2 million aspiring medical students at UG and only 1/20ti mes available seats, the 
demand far exceeds the supply, similarly, the number of available seats at PG level is far less 
than the demand. The Committee acknowledges the urgency of addressing this challenge while 
maintaining the quality of medical education  at its highest standard. To address this issue 
effectively, several measures can be taken. First and foremost, there is a need to significantly 
increase medical seats in both undergraduate and postgraduate courses. The government's 
existing scheme, which focuses on the establishment of new medical colleges attached to district 
or referral hospitals, can be instrumental in achieving this goal. By expanding this initiative, the 
Government can create more opportunities for aspiring medical students.  
(Para 2.4 of the Report) 
 
1.1.2 The Committee further recommends that it is essential to make optimal use of the existing 
infrastructure. Ensuring that all available resources and facilities are utilized efficiently can help 
accommodate a larger number of students without compromising t he quality of education. 
Additionally, streamlining the admission process by implementing a standardized national 
entrance examination can improve fairness and transparency in seat allocation.  
(Para 2.5 of the Report) 
 
1.1.3 Encouraging private investment  in medical education is another avenue to explore. 
Providing incentives and regulatory support to private institutions willing to establish medical 
colleges can not only increase seat availability but also introduce healthy competition and 
innovation in m edical education. The Committee also recommends the Ministry leverage 
technology for distance learning and organise virtual classrooms that can be a supplementary 
solution to address the shortage of seats, allowing a more significant number of students to access 
medical education without overburdening physical infrastructure.  
(Para 2.6 of the Report) 
 
 

2 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.1.4 There are 706 medical colleges that admit close to 110,000 medical students each year for 
MBBS course. Close to 70,000 seats are available for postgraduate education under NMC 
recognized institutions as well as the NBEMS recognized hospitals. 
 
The government has launched new post -graduate courses in emerging and in -demand specialties 
such as Geriatric Medicine, Emergency Medicine, S ports Medicine, Palliative Medicine, and 
Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation. This initiative seeks to address the shortage of specialists in 
these vital areas while expanding the availability of PG seats in medical colleges. To ensure that 
vacant seats are filled after the counseling process, the admission benchmark percentile has been 
reduced. However, the cut -off marks will not fall below a set minimum to maintain the high 
standards of medical education in the country. 
The Guidelines for Undergraduate Cou rses, as outlined in the Establishment of New Medical 
Institutions, Starting of New Medical Courses, Increase of Seats for Existing Courses & 
Assessment and Rating Regulations 2023 (MSR -2023), specify the minimum infrastructure and 
faculty requirements based on student intake. Any relaxation in these requirements would require 
a policy revision of MSR-2023. According to these guidelines, a 50 -seat UG medical college can 
be established if a fully functional hospital with 220 beds is available. 
The quality of  medical education is determined by three key factors: clinical material 
(authenticated by ABHA ID), trained faculty (confirmed through AEBAS), and infrastructure 
(verified through inspections, including virtual ones). The NMC has updated requirements per 
student admission and reduced the number of mandatory departments. Consultations with 
stakeholders suggest a student limit of 150 per class to improve fairness and overall quality. 
Priority is given to opening colleges in underserved areas, which will impr ove healthcare 
accessibility through better hospitals.  
NEET-UG, NEET-PG, and NEET -SS are the entrance exams conducted for medical admissions 
at various level such as MBBS/PG courses/SS courses. The counseling process for each exam is 
centralized or state -specific, where seats are allocated based on ranks, reservation policies, and 
institutional preferences which ensures a standardized and transparent admission process.  
As of the academic year 2025 -26, over 300 private, society, and trust -run medical colle ges are 
recognized by the NMC. Under current regulations, any private entity can establish a medical 
college by meeting the requirements set forth in MSR-2023.  
The government has increased number of medical colleges and subsequently increased MBBS 
seats. There is an increase of 102% in Medical Colleges from 387 before 2014 to 780 as of now. 
Further, there is an increase of 130% in MBBS seats from 51,348 before 2014 to 1,18,190 as of 
now and increase of 138.3% in PG seats from 31,185 before 2014 to 74,306 a s of now. 
Furthermore, there is an increase of 69.4% in Private medical colleges from 206 before 2014 to 
349 as of now whereas total increase of 114.8% UG seats in private medical colleges from 26880 
before 2014 to 57766 as of now. 
 

3 
 
1.1.5 The measures/steps taken by the Government to increase the doctor/medical professional in 
the country include:- 
i. Centrally Sponsored Scheme for establishment of new medical college by upgrading 
district/ referral hospital under which 131 new medical colleges are already fun ctional 
out of 157 approved medical colleges.  
ii. Centrally Sponsored Scheme for strengthening/ upgradation of existing State 
Government/Central Government Medical Colleges to increase MBBS and PG seats. 
iii. Under “Upgradation of Government Medical Colleges by co nstruction of Super 
Specialty Blocks” of Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY) scheme, a 
total of 75 projects have been approved, of which 69 projects are complete.    
iv. Under the Central Sector Scheme for setting up of new AIIMS, 22 AIIMS have bee n 
approved. Undergraduate courses have started in 19 of these. 
v. DNB qualification has been recognized for appointment as faculty to take care of 
shortage of faculty. 
vi. Enhancement of age limit for appointment/ extension/ re -employment against posts of 
teachers/Dean/Principal/ Director in medical colleges upto 70 years. 
 
The latest NMC regulations have simplified the process of establishing new institutions, making 
it easier to start medical colleges. A 220-bed hospital, for example, can support a medical college, 
and initiating PG education in such hospitals demands significantly lower infrastructure costs. 
 
Imbalance in Distribution of Medical Colleges 
Recommendation 
1.2.1 The WHO norms recommend a doctor -population ratio of 1:1000, and as per the NMC, the 
country has already achieved a ratio of 1:856. However, the concern area associated with opening 
a new medical college is the number of prescribed department -wise and total patient Bed 
capacity, read along with the requirement of their 80 per cent average occupancy in the attached 
hospital. The Committee would recommend the Government that such one - size-fits-all criterion 
prescribed in the UG -MSR may be revisited to take into account the geographic imbalances, if 
any, and formulate region-specific guidelines/ norms.  
(Para 2.12 of the Report) 
 
1.2.2 The Committee also recommends the Government to chalk out a comprehensive India -
specific approach that considers the nation's healthcare needs in the next 20 -25 years, identifies 
the categories of doctors, viz. pediatricians, ophthalmologists, neurosurg eons, critical care 
specialists, infectious disease specialists that the country would need rather than just randomly 

4 
 
increasing general surgery, pharma, and anatomy seats. The Committee believes that such a 
concerted effort to produce need -based specialis ts/ doctors commensurate with disease -burden 
specialists will secure India's healthcare needs in the future. The Committee recommends that in 
the case of the current scenario modalities for a fair distribution of doctors„ workforce across the 
country espec ially in underprivileged areas can be worked out by the NMC by offering 
incentives, monetary or otherwise.  
(Para 2.13 of the Report) 
 
1.2.3 The Committee notes that a travel time of 30 minutes between the college campus and the 
attached hospital has been prescribed in the guidelines. The Committee while taking cognisance 
of the rationale behind this travel time criteria fails to understand the logic behind keeping 
separate distance criteria of 30 kilometers (Tier -I cities) and 50 kilometers (for other cities) 
between RHTC/UHTC/CHC and the medical college. The Committee recommends the National 
Medical Commission review this criterion and cons ider incorporating suitable travel time instead 
of distance.  
(Para 2.14 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
1.2.4 It is desirable to cross WHO standards, particularly when comparing the doctor -to-public 
ratio with that of developed countries. Government is utilizing available hospitals to enhance 
medical education, with the NMC playing an active role in supporting this initiative. A 
significant step forward is the revision of teacher eligibility qualifications, allowing existing 
specialists to be appointed o r re -designated as faculty members. The requirement for three 
mandated departments for starting an MBBS course has been removed, and colleges now receive 
recognition status from the outset, rather than after five years. Annual declarations by colleges, as 
mandated in the Act, will be evaluated, and renewals based on these reports will facilitate 
permission for annual admissions. 
 
1.2.5 To optimize the use of available resources, the Minimum Standard Requirements for 
Postgraduate Courses 2024 (PGMSR -2024) ha ve been updated. These reforms facilitate the 
introduction of PG courses with two seats, standalone PG courses in government hospitals, and 
the simultaneous introduction of PG courses alongside UG courses in government colleges. 
Additionally, the required number of beds per unit for starting PG courses has been reduced, and 
it is no longer mandatory to have a Senior Resident for the initial two seats, which will help 
increase postgraduate admissions. 
1.2.6 Strengthening the quality of medical education is a lso a priority, addressed through reforms 
in regulations, MSR requirements, curriculum updates, and changes to assessment methods.  
1.2.7 There is an urgent need to standardize the number of specialists in each medical field. 
Planning for the required numb er of specialists over the next decades is critical, and multiple 
inputs are necessary to forecast these figures. PGMER -2023 aligns with the NMC‟s mandate to 
address specialized healthcare needs through structured training for super-specialty courses under 
the NEET-SS exam. It also includes a District Residency Program to support capacity expansion 
in critical areas. 

5 
 
1.2.8 As per MSR -2023, Schedule -I, the college must be situated on a single plot, with the 
distance between the college and hospital not excee ding a 30 -minute travel time, ensuring 
efficient use of students' time. Additionally, for internship training, as outlined in MSR -2023, 
Schedule-I, clause 6.5(a), interns in X category (Tier -1) cities may be posted to Health Centers 
within 30 km, with the limit extended to 50 km in rural or hard -to-reach areas due to 
transportation challenges. 
 
Evaluation of the existing curriculum and its relevance to healthcare needs, the need for 
transformation 
 
Recommendation 
1.3.1 The Committee notes that the NMC guidelines on Competency -Based Medical Education 
(CBME) Regulations, 2023, are comprehensive and comparable to best global practices and thus 
a welcome step in upgrading the curriculum of medical education in India. The Committee, 
however, believes there are some areas where the guidelines could be improved to make them 
more feasible and effective in the Indian context. The current policies need to be more 
transparent in implementing CBME in practice. Implementing CBME ca n be challenging for 
medical colleges, especially those with limited resources. Specific guidance to develop the 
CBME curricula, assessments, and teaching methods would prove to be useful in reaping early 
benefits. Furthermore, the Committee feels that the  transition to CBME will require significant 
changes to medical education programs; therefore, medical colleges will need support, including 
augmenting faculty training and access to resources from the NMC and other stakeholders in 
making this transition. The Committee also notes that medical colleges in India vary widely 
regarding resources, faculty expertise, and student demographics. The CBME guidelines should 
consider this diversity and be flexible enough to be implemented in different settings. The CBME 
guidelines should consider this diversity and be flexible enough to be implemented in different 
settings. To maintain the true spirit of CBME, the Committee feels that there should be a regular 
periodic review and monitoring of the medical curriculum.  
(Para 2.16 of the report) 
 
1.3.2 The Committee acknowledges the critical elements introduced in the new curriculum to 
help students acquire practical skills. The Committee strongly recommends the rigorous and 
comprehensive implementation of the AETCOM module within the MBBS curriculum.  This 
module is paramount as it is pivotal in cultivating the right attitude, ethics, and communication 
skills among medical students. Patient care is not solely about clinical knowledge and technical 
skills; it hinges on empathy, compassion, and effective  communication. By instilling these 
qualities in future healthcare professionals, we can significantly enhance the overall quality of 
patient care. Therefore, the Committee recommends the Government ensure that the AETCOM 
module is enforced consistently an d effectively to empower medical students with the essential 
attributes needed to provide holistic and patient - centered healthcare. In addition to the 
implementation of AETCOM, the Committee recommends the incorporation of these criteria in 

6 
 
NEET so that the aptitude of aspiring medical students can be assessed. Such aptitude tests at the 
entrance level go beyond mere knowledge assessment of aspirants, often obtained through rote 
learning and mastering MCQ -based exams, and evaluate the genuine interest and passion of the 
candidate for the field of medicine. It will enable the system to identify candidates who have a 
sincere calling for the profession and distinguish them from those who may be under external 
pressure or legacy expectations. By doing so, we ca n ensure that medical work continues to 
attract individuals who are genuinely committed to delivering high-quality healthcare.  
(Para 2.18 of the report) 
 
 
1.3.3 In a general context, the Committee has observed that there is a frequent change in the 
regulations notified by the National Medical Commission. The Committee would recommend 
that before notification of any regulation, a robust and thorough study involving the opinions/ 
viewpoints of various stakeholders should be undertaken. 
(Para 2.19 of the report) 
 
1.3.4 The Committee was apprised of the fact that some private medical colleges seemingly fail 
medical graduates deliberately during mid -semester exams which results in repetition of the 
semester, and charging additional fees for repeating the semester or exa m. This practice causes 
stress on the medical students, financial and otherwise. The Committee therefore recommends 
that UGMEB may develop appropriate feasible modalities for monitoring assessment, 
revaluation, etc. without charging any additional fee.  
(Para 2.20 of the report) 
 
Action Taken  
 
1.3.5 The curriculum for the undergraduate medical education has been revised with a focus on 
skill building. The competence based medical education is a refined  way of imparting those 
skills. This is also facilitated by early clinical exposure to these students. Focus has been shifted 
to both vertical and horiz ontal integration of training. Training in soft skills, such as attitude, 
ethics, and communication is emphasised at all levels of their education us ing the module that is 
separately developed for this purpose. Students are encouraged to get an exposure in Ayush 
systems as electives in the student as well as in the internship days. Students are given an option 
to accumulate extra credit points in diffe rent areas that are not necessa rily covered in the 
curriculum. The postgraduate education has prescribed some minimum inputs by way of various 
clinical procedures in different select specialties. 
 
1.3.6 Guidelines on Competency -Based Medical Education (CBME) Regulations, 2023, have 
been reviewed by the Undergraduate Medical Education Board (UGMEB) to enhance the quality 
of medical education in India. This review has led to the issuance of the new CBME Regulations, 
2024, which were published on the NMC w ebsite on September 12, 2024. The process remains 
ongoing, with UGMEB committed to continuously improving the curriculum to ensure high -

7 
 
quality medical education and its effective implementation. The latest CBME guidelines, 
effective from the academic year 2024-25, introduce bilingual teaching, learning, and assessment 
modes. These will include languages such as Assamese, Bangla, Gujarati, Hindi, Kannada, 
Malayalam, Marathi, Odiya, Punjabi, Tamil, and Telugu, in addition to English. 
 
1.3.7 The Attitude, Ethics and Communication module (AETCOM) module introduced within the 
MBBS curriculum by UGMEB has been positively received by the Committee, and the board is 
actively overseeing its comprehensive implementation across medical colleges and institutions.  
 
1.3.8 The Ministry has reviewed the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) followed by NMC for 
framing regulations under NMC Act, 2019 and recommended the necessary changes to NMC. 
Accordingly, In the 11th meeting of the NMC, a new SOP was adopted. This SOP outli nes a 
structured process for drafting regulations, which includes consultations with stakeholders, legal 
vetting, and engagement with MoHFW the Ministry of Law & Justice to ensure thorough review 
and stability before any regulation is notified. 
 
1.3.9 Complaints received against medical college by the NMC are documented and appropriate 
action are taken during the annual renewal process for MBBS seats, with further action as 
deemed necessary. 
 
Research Support and facilities 
Recommendation 
1.4.1 The Committee recommends the NMC encourage the medical colleges to develop a 
tradition of research in the college so that upcoming MBBS students and later MD / MS students 
gain sufficient exposure in the research ambience of the institute. Furthermore, col leges should 
incentivize quality research both at the student and faculty level.  
(Para 2.25 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
1.4.2 By its new guidelines, the undergraduate medical education board of NMC has mandated a 
basic research unit in all the medical colleges. This will encourage research. The guideline also 
supports and Integrative research unit for supporting modern science research in AYUSH related 
sciences. The Teachers Education Qualifications (TEQ) mandates research publication for 
promotions. Those who are pursuing Post -Graduate courses are also expected to do a research 
project as a thesis. Training in basic research methodology is also mandated. 
 
Faculty Development Programme 
 
 

8 
 
Recommendation 
1.5.1 The Committee notes that faculty development is vital for ensuring that faculty members 
have the skills and knowledge they need to teach and train students effectively. The Committee 
understands that in our country, elementary, primary, and secondary scho ol teachers must 
undergo training in formal schools or colleges of education to be eligible for appointments and 
promotion. Still, there is no such requirement for selecting teachers in medical colleges in India. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends the NMC  to release the guidelines on the―Faculty 
Development Programme" without any delay. The policies should be formulated to support the 
achievement of the goal to enhance the quality and relevance of education for future healthcare 
professionals. These guidel ines should encompass critical areas such as clinical instruction, 
small group facilitation, large group presentations, feedback and assessment, personal and 
organizational growth, leadership, and scholarly activities. The strategies and formats for faculty 
development should exhibit flexibility, ensuring they are tailored to the specific healthcare 
requirements of our nation, institution, and learners. Faculty development programs (FDPs) can 
encompass a range of activities, including continuing education, on-the-job training, traditional 
classroom settings, in -person, online,or via tele/videoconferences, self -paced learning, 
mentorship, involvement in communities of practice, or a combination of these  approaches.  
(Para 3.14 of the report) 
1.5.2 Furthermore, the Committee notes that conducting faculty training through regional bodies 
and nodal centers has limited availability and capacity. Therefore, the Committee recommends 
establishing a National Institute for Training of Medical Teachers. A dedicated ins titute would 
provide year -round access to training for medical college faculty, effectively expanding the 
capacity for teacher development and establishing standardized quality benchmarks. This may 
also lead to the institutionalization of training procedures and best practices. 
 (Para 3.15 of the report) 
Action Taken 
1.5.3 The faculty development programme has been revised and the numbers of places where 
such training can be given have been increased. Completion of such training has been linked to 
promotional process. 
 
Rating and Accreditation of Medical Colleges 
 
Recommendation 
1.6.1 The Committee commends NMC on receiving World Federation for Medical Education 
(WFME) Recognition. The Committee notes that though this recognition would enable Indian 
medical graduates to pursue PG training and practice in countries such as Australia, USA, 
Canada, and New Zealand, it may also lead to the country's top talent leaving India for better 
opportunities abroad. Therefore, the Committee recommends the Government not only take 

9 
 
appropriate steps to limit the exodus of medical professionals but at  the same time take proactive 
measures to make India an attractive destination for international students and healthcare 
professionals.  
(Para 4.4 of the report) 
 
Action Taken  
1.6.2 Government of India has taken various measures/steps to limit the exodus of medical 
professionals, which include the following; 
i. DNB qualification has been recognized for appointment as faculty.  
ii. Enhancement of age limit for appointment/ extension/ re -employment against posts of 
teachers/Dean/Principal/ Director in medical colleges upto 70 years. 
iii. Diploma holders appointed as Senior Residents before 08.06.2017 and are continuously 
working as Senior Resident in the same Institute shall be eligible for the post of Assistant 
Professor and subsequent promotion as per TEQ.  
iv. Under the C entral Sector Scheme for setting up of new AIIMS, 22 AIIMS have been 
approved. Undergraduate courses have started in 19 of these. Medical Professional prefer 
working at AIIMS because of their reputation for high -quality medical care, advanced 
research facilities, and a strong academic environment, making them highly sought -after 
places for medical practice and further specialization within the medical field 
v. A Senior Consultant, recognized as PG Teacher as per NBEMS criteria and is working 
/has worked as PG teacher in a Government Medical Institution running NBEMS 
recognized PG training programme will be eligible to become Professor in a NMC 
recognized Medical College of his/her specialty in which he/she was a PG teacher, if 
he/she is in possession of qualifi cation of that specialty (M.D., M.S., DNB, or D.M, 
M.Ch. or Dr.NB as applicable) on completion of three years of experience as PG teacher. 
Total number of years of experience as PG teacher after becoming eligible as professor 
will be considered as experience as professor. 
vi. A non-teaching Consultant/Specialist/Medical Officer, possessing Postgraduate Medical 
Degree, working for at least four years in a minimum 220 bedded teaching/non -teaching 
Govermment Hospital shall be eligible to become an Assistant Profes sor of that broad 
specialty. They should have completed the Basic Course in Biomedical Research 
(BCBR) prior to become eligible for such post. 
1.6.3 In order to make India an attractive destination for international students and healthcare 
professionals, Temporary Registration Guidelines are issued by NMC wherein a foreign citizen 
who is enrolled as a medical practitioner in accordance with the law regulating the registration of 
medical practitioners in that country on being sponsored to practice medicine i n India is 
permitted temporary registration for the following purposes: 
(i) For pursuing Postgraduate and Super -Specialty courses recognized under the National 
Medical Commission Act, 2019. 

10 
 
(ii) Fellowship/Certificate Courses/Clinical Research/Clinical Training/Observership. 
(iii) Expert Visit- for providing the training in techniques/procedures required in various areas of 
the medical profession and not available in the country. 
(iv) Voluntary Clinical Service- Visiting as a doctor for performing community service. 
 
 
Rating and Accreditation of Medical Colleges 
Recommendation 
1.7.1 Furthermore, the Committee recommends the NMC develop global standards criteria 
along with QCI (Quality Council of India) to rate medical colleges, both private and 
government, based on the parameters that are specific to medical education. 
 (Para 4.5 of the report) 
 
Action Taken   
1.7.2 The Medical Assessment & Rating Board of NMC has entered into an MOU with Quality 
Council of India to develop the format for Rating of the medical colleges. This process has been 
completed partially and the work is in progress.The regulations for the recognition of 
qualification and monitoring of the standards of medical education have been prepared for 
continuing annual accreditation. 
 
Other Key Areas 
Recommendation 
 
1.8.1 Continuing Medical Education (CME): The Committee feels that there is a need to 
introduce regulatory provisions for CME covering the Teachers, practicing Doctors and students 
pursuing higher medical education. The Committee is of the view that CME enables  healthcare 
professionals to maintain, enhance, and update their knowledge, skills, and competencies 
throughout their careers. It is a very crucial aspect of professional development in the medical 
field which ensures that doctors are aware of the latest a dvancements in medicine, technology, 
and healthcare practices. This ultimately results in achieving better patient outcomes. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that UGMEB and PGMEB explore the possibility of 
including components such as attending workshops, conferences, seminars, publishing papers in 
medical journals, etc. for medical students, and as an incentive measure such 
students/faculty/medical professionals can earn extra credits for partaking in them. The 
Committee hopes that the CME being a dyna mic and evolving process would enable medical 
practitioners to provide high -quality care while staying current in the ever -evolving healthcare 
landscape.  
(Para 4.15 of the report) 
 
Action Taken  

11 
 
1.8.2 Components such as attending workshops, conferences, seminars, publishing papers in 
medical journals etc. for medical students have been included in the Competency Based Medical 
Education curriculum framed by NMC. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

12 
 
CHAPTER–II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY'S REPLIES 
 
Quality of Medical Education: Global Perspectives 
 
Recommendation 
2.1.1 As regards the maintenance of a national database of resident doctors, the Committee 
recommends that NMC maintain a real -time national database akin to the GME Track of the 
USA. This national database can allow access to multiple stakeholders viz, Ministry , States, 
Medical Colleges, and other concerned parties. This database can also serve as a tool to decimate 
the limitation of resources in the newly opened institutions and operate as a platform for 
experience and knowledge sharing among the resident docto rs. Against this background, the 
Committee would also like to highlight the issue of dual registration of doctors with the 
respective State Medical Council where they practice and any other place where they may 
relocate subsequently. This gives rise to multiple registrations of doctors with various State 
Medical Councils, making tracking difficult. The Committee would like to recommend the 
generation of a unique registration number for the doctors at the NMC level. This move can also 
leverage the national database and usher in uniformity in the registration of practicing doctors. 
(Para 1.18 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
2.1.2 As per the provisions made under Section 31 of the NMC Act, 2019, the National Medical 
Commission is responsible for maintaining a N ational Register, which contains details such as 
the name, address, recognized qualifications, and other specified particulars of licensed medical 
practitioners. This is aimed at ensuring proper tracking and regulation of medical professionals. 
The regulat ion governing the Registration of Medical Practitioners and Licence to Practice 
Medicine, 2023, which pertains to the National Medical Register (NMR), was published on 
10.05.2023. To facilitate the registration process, the NMR portal was launched on 23.08 .2024 
by the Hon'ble Minister for Health & Family Welfare. 
 
2.1.3 The NMR portal is a centralized, web -based application designed to maintain a dynamic 
and comprehensive database of all allopathic medical doctors registered in India. This platform 
captures important details regarding each medical professional, providing  a streamlined and 
organized system for their registration and licensure. Registration on this portal is an ongoing 
process, allowing for continuous updates and ensuring that the data remains current and accurate. 
 

13 
 
Faculty Qualifications and Competence 
Recommendation 
2.2.1 The Committee notes that the NMC's "Teacher's Eligibility Qualifications in Medical 
Institutions Regulations, 2022", are a significant step forward in improving the quality of 
medical education in India. By requiring higher qualifications for teachers, ma ndating training 
in medical education technology and biomedical research, and having more rigorous promotion 
criteria, the new regulations will help to ensure that medical teachers in India are highly skilled 
and qualified. The Committee, however, opines t hat along with the rigorous promotion criteria, 
NMC should focus more on Teacher -Learning Programmes than on manpower and 
infrastructure. The Commission should also formulate norms to incentivize and encourage 
faculty to take up training for skills improve ment and devise policies creating an ambience to 
kindle interest in research in the faculties. Furthermore, the Committee recommends the NMC 
design and strictly implement exhaustive training programs for faculties to enhance their 
understanding of the principles, functioning, and practices of CBME.  
(Para 3.8 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
2.2.2 The Faculty Development Programme of the NMC aims to enhance the quality of medical 
education by equipping teachers with the necessary skills and knowledge. It focuses on 
sensitizing educators to new teaching and assessment methods, developing their clini cal and 
academic skills to become competent teachers, administrators, researchers, and mentors. The 
program also helps clinicians acquire essential communication and behavioral skills, while 
encouraging the use of modern information and research methodolog y tools to update their 
knowledge and stay abreast of advancements in medical education. 
2.2.3 Under Graduate Medical Education Regulations 2023, the new curriculum training requires 
the teaching faculty to understand and apply the concepts of group dynamics in teaching students, 
team building exercises, and small group teachings, encourage the students towards self -directed 
learning and enhance their skills to become team leaders at the primary health care level. These 
training skills shall be imparted thr ough various programmes as described in the guidelines to be 
notified from time to time.The NMC has placed the draft TEQ regulations 2024 in the public 
domain for comments and feedback from stakeholders. 
 
Recommendation 
2.3.1 The Committee recognizes the regulator's aspiration to introduce competency -based 
learning for MBBS students and foster clinical exposure from the early stages of their education. 
This direction is indeed in line with international trends in medical educa tion. However, the 
sudden cessation of non -MBBS candidates teaching non & non -para-clinical subjects, such as 
anatomy, pharmacology, and microbiology, presents a complex situation. While upholding high 

14 
 
educational standards is paramount, there is a need fo r a balanced and gradual approach that 
accommodates the interests and expertise of non -MBBS candidates. The Committee 
recommends a thoughtful and phased strategy to address this issue. It is advisable to introduce a 
transitional period that allows non -MBBS faculty members to continue teaching these subjects 
until enough MBBS -qualified educators become available. This gradual shift will ensure that 
students continue to receive a comprehensive education as the transition toward competency -
based learning takes place. Furthermore, it is crucial to emphasize faculty development for non -
MBBS educators, offering them opportunities to enhance their teaching skills and align their 
curriculum with evolving standards in medical education. This will help them remain eff ective 
contributors to medical education. Non -MBBS educators often bring unique perspectives and 
expertise to the field. Rather than limiting their involvement, their expertise can be integrated 
into the education system through collaborative efforts, inte rdisciplinary research, and 
innovative teaching methodologies. 
(Para 3.10 of the report) 
Action Taken  
 
2.3.2 In the said matter, while considering an appeal preferred by the National M.Sc. Medical 
Teachers' Association (NMMTA), Delhi, MoHFW directed NMC to continue to adopt the old 
pattern of permissible percentage of non -medical teachers in the Departments of A natomy, 
Physiology, Biochemistry, Pharmacology and Microbiology. However, the directions of 
MoHFWhas been challenged before Hon‟ble Court and the matter is sub-judice. 
 
 
 
  

15 
 
CHAPTER–III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
Quality of Medical Education: Global Perspectives 
 
Recommendation 
3.1.1 The Committee has observed that countries across the world have adopted the Flexner 
Model changing it suitably whenever required. The Committee, on scrutiny of various governing 
authorities for medical education across the countries mentioned above, has observed that the 
National Medical Commission of India meets international professional standards in medical 
education. The Committee has further observed that barring a few countries at the global level, 
the shortage of doctors at present or for the futur e seems to be an all -pervading problem. The 
developed countries are able to meet this shortfall by serving as attractive destinations for 
medical graduates from developing countries and by easing the process for the practice of 
medicine by the Internationa l Medical Graduates. In the context of the standardised tests for 
medical education, the Committee has taken note of the fact that behavioural and social sciences 
are also becoming part of the testing process of various countries to assess the ethics, inte grity, 
etc. of the medical aspirants.          
(Para 1.16 of the report) 
 
3.1.2 The Committee recommends National Medical Commission undertake a comparative study 
of best practices of its parallel organisation in various countries. The Committee feels that this 
measure can help NMC to usher in best practices followed around the wor ld and help in making 
NMC an institution par excellence.         
(Para 1.17 of the report) 
 
 
3.1.3 The Committee notes that the National Medical Commission (NMC) has an excellent 
opportunity to improve the quality of medical education in India. However, it must address 
various issues related to modernising medical education and introduce reforms to b ring 
remarkable improvements in the overall healthcare system in the country. The NMC can take 
several essential and immediate steps to strengthen medical education in India, including setting 
and enforcing high standards for medical education, promoting r esearch in medical education, 
supporting faculty development, and making medical education more accessible. The Committee 
believes that by taking these steps, the NMC can help to produce a new generation of highly 
qualified and competent medical graduates.        
(Para 1.21 of the report) 

16 
 
 
3.1.4 The Committee notes that the importance of quality in medical education must be 
considered when considering its direct impact on the quality of healthcare services. High -quality 
medical education is the foundation upon which competent and compassionate healthcare 
professionals are built. It equips them with the necessary knowledge, skills, and ethical principles 
essential for providing safe and effective care to patients. The Committee recommends the 
Ministry develo p a robust medical education system and emphasise evidence -based practices, 
critical thinking, and continuous learning, ensuring that healthcare practitioners stay up to date 
with medical advancements. In this way, quality medical education would not only secure the 
present generation„s healthcare needs but also be an investment in the future of healthcare. 
 
(Para 1.22 of the report) 
 
Action Taken  
 
3.1.5 The medical education through the colleges accredited to the National Medical Commission 
(NMC) are expected to have uniform standards. This is achieved by way of uniform curriculum 
as well as uniform inputs that are required for education. The education follows accepted 
international model. For this reason, NMC made an application to an international a ccreditation 
body, World Federation of Medical Education (WFME). The organization visited the NMC on 
two different occasions and evaluated different parameters. This also included visit to colleges 
which are running under the NMC Regulations. After the ins pection and verifying the 
compliance, the WFME has accredited the NMC for a period of 10 years. This accreditation is a 
testimony to the quality of education from the Indian medical colleges under the National 
Medical Commission. Students educated from the se colleges are now seen on par with the 
medical graduates across the world in most countries. They can compete to get higher education, 
or jobs in those countries. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.1.6 The Committee appreciates that the World Federation of Medical Education (WFME) 
has conferred National Medical Commission (NMC) International Accreditation for a 
period of ten years. However, such conferment has further entrusted NMC the pivotal role 
for consolidating high quality medical education in the country which is in fact, the basic 
foundation upon which the competent and compassionate healthcare professionals/system 
are superimposed. NMC is required to ensure quality medical education for fostering  
affordability, accessibility, and availability of next generations healthcare needs. The 
Committee is of the considered view that only robust & modern medical education system 
with adequate investment on advanced physical infrastructure and skilled & trained faculty 
would be a guarantee for a better healthcare in future . Therefore, the Committee 
understands that international accreditation to NMC is not the end of NMC’s role but the 
beginning of its responsibility towards strengthening equitable quality education system 

17 
 
across the country with due impetus on evidence based practices with scientific and modern 
advancement, critical thinking to imbibe professional pursuit, ethical integrity and social 
behavioral inclination amongst medical practitioners.   
 
Imbalance in Distribution of Medical Colleges 
 
Recommendation 
3.2.1 The Committee has taken note of the detailed Minimum Standards Regulations (UG -MSR) 
notified on 16 th August 2023. While examining the subject, the Committee came across several 
concerns over some of the guidelines for opening of a new Medical College and a lso regarding 
permission to increase the number of undergraduate seats. The permission for an increase in 
MBBS seats will be granted for 50, 100 and 150 seats from the academic year 2024 -25. The 
Committee notes that based on the guidelines for 200 and 250 seats at various places have 
provisions for infrastructure and faculty positions. The Committee further notes that many 
medical colleges have 200 and 250 seats. The Committee was apprised that the ideal batch size 
for a faculty to impart teaching is 150. T he Committee, however, believes that as per the 
guidelines, given the infrastructure and faculty position required in place, a college, whether old 
or new, may be considered for granting permission to increase, in phases, the undergraduate seats 
up to a maximum of 250.  
(Para 2.11 of the report) 
 
 
Action Taken  
3.2.2 The distribution of these 1,10,000 MBBS seats is uneven across the states. The national 
average is about 75 seats per million population. Whereas these numbers are close to 150 per 
million in some states like Karnataka, Telangana and Tamil Nadu. There are some states that 
have less than 50 seats per million population.For this reason, the NMC brought out a guideline 
that colleges can be opened in places where there are fewer than hundred MBBS seats per million 
population. Any government investment on medical colleges should focus on these states. If for 
some reason, some states still want to add medical colleges in underserved districts, such 
opportunity should be encouraged to government medica l colleges to use the locally available 
government Hospital. For example, districts with fewer than 300 beds in their hospitals can open 
medical colleges of 50 MBBS intake. In this context, it is interesting to note that the hon'ble High 
Court bench of Madhurai in Tamil Nadu had made an observation that medical colleges, through 
their hospitals, also serve as imparting healthcare services. Therefore, an even distribution of 
medical colleges and in turn, the hospitals, helps the population to receive, higher  degree of 
medical care more evenly. The court made this observation in the context of Pondicherry and the 
nearby Tamil Nadu districts who had very high numbers of medical colleges per unit population 
For example, Pondicherry has close to 2000 or even more  MBBS seats for a population of just 
about 1 million. So is the case in some nearby districts of Tamil Nadu. 
 

18 
 
Further Recommendation  
3.2.3 The Committee notes with concern the fact that there is uneven distribution of 
medical seats across the country  as some States have a high concentration of medical seats 
while some are severely lacking against the national average  of 75 MBBS seats per million 
population. The Committee observes that Karnataka, Telangana and Tamil Nadu have 
approximately 150 MBBS seats per million and Puducherry has close to 2000 or even more 
MBBS seats for a population of just about one million . While some other States have less 
than 50 seats per  million population viz. Bihar has only 21 seats per million . The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the NMC must come forward with 
guidelines for establishing new medical colleges in States  where there are fewer than 
hundred MBBS seats per million population.  The Committee further suggests that the 
Government may consider to plan to  open new medical colleges to provide quality medical 
education in Delhi so that students from Delhi have not to travel to other states or even 
other countries to pursue medical education.”   
 
3.2.4 The Committee appreciates the UG -MSR 2023 guidelines regarding setting up of new 
medical colleges providing approval for annual intake capacity of 50/100/150 MBBS seats. 
Notwithstanding the same, the Committee believes that as per the guidelines, given that the 
infrastructure and faculty position required are in place, a college, whether old or new, 
may be considered for granting permission to increase the undergraduate MBBS seats up 
to a maximum of 250 in a pha sed manner. The Committee further recommends that 
adequate attention must be given for opening of medical colleges in unde rserved districts 
which can be encouraged to use the locally available Government medical colleges and 
hospitals for imparting healthcare services.  
 
Research Support and facilities 
 
Recommendations 
 
3.3.1 The Committee notes that research is an integral part of medical education and thus has to 
be sufficiently supported by both the Government and medical colleges. The Committee further 
notes that the actual health research expenditure as a percentage of GDP has constantly remained 
at 0.02 since 2021 -22. The Committee feels that medical research and innovation needs further 
impetus and there is an urgent need to substantially incr ease the Government expenditure on 
health research infrastructure or provide incentives/ ecosystem for collaboration with leading 
private research firms.          
(Para 2.24 of the report) 
 
3.3.2 To have result -oriented and gainful research, the Committee also recommends the 
Government form guidelines to decide on priority research fields based on disease burden and 
focus areas of the country. For this, colleges can form a collegium of senior fa culties and decide 
on the research priority; funds for such research should be partly provided by the institute and 
partly by Government agencies like ICMR.  
(Para 2.26 of the report) 

19 
 
Action Taken  
3.3.3 Budget allocation for Health Research Department of the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare (in Rs crore) has been increased by 47% from Rs. 2663 crores for year 2021 -22 to 
approx 3900 Crores for year 2025 -26. The National Medical Commission prescribes dynamic 
curriculum for PG Courses which includes use of latest technology . Measures are taken by the 
way of Continuing Professional Development and conferences etc. to train the post graduate 
students of medical colleges on latest technology. Re search paper in PG courses and requirement 
of publication of research work done by the faculty for granting Promotion has been made 
mandatory. 
 
Further recommendation  
 
3.3.4 The Committee is not satisfied with the response of the Government in regard to 
Committee’s recommendation on budgetary support to research work . Keeping in view, 
that the spending by both the Government as well as the medical colleges in health research 
has remained stagnant in terms of the percentage of GDP since  last few financial years, the 
Committee recommends further that medical research and innovation needs massive 
impetus and there is an urgent need to substantially increase the Government expenditure 
on health research infrastructure or provide incentives/ ecosystem for collaboration with 
leading private research firms. To have result -oriented and gainful research, the 
Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Government should formulate guidelines 
to decide on priority research fields based on disease burden and focus areas of the country. 
For this, colleges can form a collegium of senior faculties and decide on the research 
priority; funds for such research should be partly provided  by the institute and partly by 
Government agencies like ICMR.  
 
Affordability of Medical Education 
Recommendation 
3.4.1 The Committee was apprised that there is significant variation among the States/UTs in the 
amount of fee charged; the cost of medical education ranges between a whooping 60 lakh and 
one crore rupees, or more. In order to alleviate the financial stress on the students, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry, in collaboration with States, consider need -based 
scholarships to deserving s tudents. Other suggestive options that can be explored are – running 
the medical college and hospital on a PPP model, giving tax benefits to the company/group, etc. 
The Committee, however, further recommends prescribing minimum marks in the NEET -UG 
exam for each category of students seeking admission. 
 (Para 2.29 of the report) 
 

20 
 
Action Taken 
3.4.2  NMC appointed a committee to examine the fees in medical education. The affordability 
of medical education is a concern that NMC has been addressing. After exhaustive discussions 
and appropriate consultations, the committee recommended to the government th at fee structure 
that can be applied to 50% of the seats in private medical colleges. The committee recommended 
that the state government fee to be levied to this 50% of MBBS seats. While for the other 50% it 
has to be decided in consultation with the fee regulatory committee of each of these states. This 
matter is under investigation in the Hon'ble court. And hence it has not been put to 
implementation.  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.4.3  The affordability of medical education in the country continues to a matter of 
concern for the Committee due to huge cost of medical education that ranges between Rs. 
60 lakhs to Rs. 1.00 crore or even more, as if, there is no takers for the poor guard ian to get 
their off -springs admitted in the medical colleges. The Commit tee endorses that the 
Government may apply the fee structure to 50% of seats in private medical colleges and the 
State Government fee may be levied to this 50% of MBBS seats while the other 50% to be 
decided in consultation with the fee regulatory committee of each of the States. 
 
3.4.4 The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry in collaboration with 
States consider need -based scholarships to deserving students. Other suggestive options 
that can be explored are - running the medical college and hospital on a PPP model , giving 
tax benefits to the company/group, etc.  
 
Faculty Shortage and the Issue of Ghost Faculty 
 
Recommendation 
3.5.1 The Committee feels that establishing additional medical colleges is undoubtedly a positive 
stride in addressing the chronic shortage of healthcare professionals. However, in this effort, it is 
crucial to ensure the production of genuinely qualified doctor s which is incumbent upon the 
presence of well -qualified and experienced faculty members. Teachers in medical colleges are 
the cornerstone of a robust medical education system, shaping not only the knowledge and skills 
but also the ethical foundations of f uture medical practitioners. The Committee believes that 
whether it is the expansion of medical colleges or the implementation of progressive initiatives 
like NMC's Competency -Based Medical Education (CBME) module, the efficacy of these 
reforms hinges on t he availability of a dedicated, skilled teaching force. The shortage of 
qualified teachers is a common thread in both scenarios and addressing this issue is paramount. 
In this regard, the Committee has taken note of the findings of NMC for 246 medical coll eges. 
The Committee views that NMC's efforts, like AEBAS - based attendance CCTVs in colleges, 
have yet to deliver much as issues like ghost faculty and zero faculty attendance have only 
escalated as per the NMC's assessment. Therefore, the Committee is of the consensus that the 

21 
 
faculty shortage issue in India is twofold: first, there is a genuine shortage of qualified faculty 
members, and second, even the available faculty often lacks the inclination to teach at the 
college level. To address the issue of ghost faculty and ensure that the available faculty comes to 
the college to teach, the Committee recommends the Government to strictly enforce the 
regulations already in place to curb the problem of ghost faculty and zero attendance. NMC 
should conduct regul ar inspections of medical colleges and take action against colleges that are 
found to be violating the regulations.  
(Para 3.5 of the report) 
3.5.2 Additionally, streamlining the recruitment process is imperative. The significant delays in 
the recruitment process must be reduced through the simplification of bureaucratic procedures 
and the incorporation of technology for quicker application processing and interview scheduling. 
An efficient recruitment process is necessary to expedite faculty appointments an d fill vacant 
positions without unnecessary delays. NMC should make it easier for students and parents to 
report ghost faculty and zero attendance. Furthermore, the Committee feels that the Government 
should undertake some essential steps for retaining fac ulty viz. improved working conditions for 
faculty members, transparent career progression paths, etc. Clear criteria and milestones for 
promotions by recognising and rewarding excellence in teaching, research, and clinical work 
need to be chalked out. Regu lar performance evaluations are crucial in identifying and 
addressing concerns promptly.  
(Para 3.6 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.5.3 The NMC has by its guidelines stipulated minimum standard requirements. This includes 
the minimum numbers of staff to be available for teaching the given number of MBBS students. 
There are several challenges which have led to what may appear as shortage of  faculty. As a 
consequence, ghost faculty has become a curse to medical education. Some faculty either do not 
come regularly or put false attendance. There are places where all faculty are not appointed as the 
matter may be under the state government. 
 
3.5.4 Sanctioning of posts and the reservations may also come in the way of filling all vacancies 
completely. In the most places faculty are appointed on contract or on ad -hoc basis that does not 
provide any incentive for retaining the faculty. Salary in a te acher's job may be less attractive 
compared to private practice. Colleges which are distantly located from urban areas have 
different challenges in getting faculty. Services required for the family, e.g., education of the 
children, produce another challeng e to move out to urban places for jobs. Incentivizing the post 
of a teacher can be an alternative to attract enough number of faculty. Together, there are 
multiple approaches to improve faculty presence and overcome the shortage. 
 
3.5.5 The teachers' educa tional qualifications regulation is being revised to be inclusive and 
hence augment faculty pool that can be resourced for purpose of medical education. Increased 

22 
 
availability of PG seats by doubling of the numbers in the last 10 years can also help mitiga ting 
the shortage. Still, there are some branches of medical education, particularly the lab -based 
departments, where there are different challenges. 
 
3.5.6 NMC has introduced the Adhaar based biometric attendance system that is expected to 
monitor better attendance from the appointed faculty. Improvements in this monitoring by way of 
more robust IT solutions that include face recognition, and geo positioning monitoring of 
attendance will add to the sensitivity of monitoring the faculty attendance and hence  mitigate the 
menace of ghost faculty. 
 
Further recommendation 
3.5.7 The Committee feels that to address faculty shortages in medical colleges, especially in 
remote areas, it is essential to provide incentives for teaching positions. The Committee is of 
the considered view that c ompetitive salaries, job security, and structured career growth 
need to be prioritized over ad -hoc or contractual appointments  for streamlining and 
strengthening the faculty. Such emphasis will ensure the production of generally qualified 
doctors and instituting a robust medical education system . In this regard, the Committee is 
in agreement with the  Government, however,  the Committee would further recommend  
that special incentives such as housing support, education facilities for children, and rural 
service allowance need to be introduced  to attract and retain faculty in distant locations. 
The Committee reiterates that c lear criteria and milestones for promotions by recognizing 
and rewarding excellence in teaching, research, and clinical work are required to embedded 
in the system. Regular performance evaluations are crucial in identifying well-qualified and 
experienced faculty members. Moreover, streamlining the sanctioning of posts and ensuring 
a balanced reservation policy will facilitate the timely filling up of vacancies, ultimately 
strengthening medical education and healthcare services. 
3.5.8 The Committee is in agreement with the Ministry that Ghost Faculty is undoubtedly a 
curse to the medical education,  however, Committee believes that recently introduced 
‘Aadhar based Biometric Attendance System by NMC’ regarding attendance, would go a 
long way in combating and curbing the problem of Ghost Faculty and Zero Attendance. 
Administrative monitoring by way of most robust IT solutions viz. face recognition and geo 
positioning monitoring of attendance would definitely give impetus to the sensitivity of 
monitoring the faculty attendance and hence mitigate the menace of ghost faculty.  
 
Foreign Medical Graduates 
 
Recommendation 
3.6.1 The Committee believes that the FMG Regulations 2021 are a pivotal framework to 

23 
 
maintain and uphold the quality of medical professionals in India. However, these regulations 
must adopt a facilitative role rather than imposing unwarranted obstacles in the r egistration and 
internship process for foreign medical graduates. The NMC should address the inconsistencies in 
granting permanent registration to foreign medical graduates across various States. The 
Committee recommends the NMC strike a balance between qu ality assurance and inclusivity, 
ensuring that bureaucratic or procedural impediments do not unduly burden foreign medical 
graduates who meet the necessary standards. By acting as facilitators, regulatory authorities can 
streamline the registration and int ernship procedures, enhancing the integration of foreign 
medical graduates into the Indian healthcare system.  
(Para 4.7 of the report) 
3.6.2 Alternatively, the Committee has also taken note of the fact that with the expansion of the 
number of medical colleges in India, the reliance on Foreign Medical Graduates to maintain the 
doctor to population ratio may dwindle in the near future. Moreover, the Committee has also 
come across the fact that given the high standards of medical education in India, several FMGs 
are unable to clear the examination process despite several attempts. Given the future scenario, 
the Committee recommends that the Governm ent take a serious view on this issue and come up 
with some advisories to dissuade students from pursing medical education abroad.  
(Para 4.8 of the report) 
Action Taken  
3.6.3 NMC is concerned with the high numbers of students seeking admission outside the 
country for MBBS studies. These colleges that train Indian students leading to MBBS courses are 
not under direct supervision or monitoring by the NMC. Therefore, the foreign medical graduate 
license examination was conducted and is continued to be oper ational and is a major step. Over 
and above this testing, the foreign medical graduate regulation mandates one year of compulsory 
rotating medical internship as an additional training in medical education hospitals or in big non -
teaching hospitals. The eli gibility to study such course requires the NEET passing ranks, 
eligibility, like for all other MBBS students in our country. 
 
3.6.4 To discourage such outflow of aspiring medical graduates, and facilitate their education in 
the country, the national medica l commission and its predecessor, the Medical Council of India 
(BOG) have together contributed to the medical education opportunities, MBBS seats, in the 
country. There is a scope to improve this number. If the rule of hundred MBBS seats per million 
population is put to practice, another 40,000 seats can be added in our country. This will help 
medical education for aspirants in colleges that are under supervision and monitoring of the 
National Medical Commission. 
 
Further Recommendation  
3.6.5 The Committee observes that, in view of huge number of MBBS aspiring students and 
limited MBBS seats in various colleges, high number of students seek admission outside the 

24 
 
country, however, the foreign medical graduate  have to face the herculean  challenges in 
passing license examination and seeking permanent registration across various States . The 
Foreign Medical Graduate Regulation  2021 mandates one year of compuls ory rotating 
medical internship as an additional training in medical education hospitals  or in big non -
teaching hospitals. Since, to some extent, foreign medical graduates is useful in maintaining 
the doctor to population ratio, therefore, the Committee reiterates its recommendation that 
FMG Regulations 2021 should Act as facilitator thereby streamlining the registration and 
internship procedures while keeping the quality assurance of Indian Healthcare System.  
3.6.6 The Committee also understands that  it is the responsibility of the Government of the 
day to curb the outflow of aspiring medical graduates and facilitate their education in the 
country. In order to improve the doctor to population ratio  and to reduce the reliance on  
foreign medical graduates it would be appropriate  for the Government  to encourage  
expansion of medical colleges in the country to accommodate the education of MBBS 
aspiring students in the country itself. The Committee takes note of the UG -MSR 
Guidelines 2023 that prescribes 100 MBBS seats per million population and an additional 
40000 seats, if added, will meet this ratio requirement. The Committee is of considered view 
that the Government shall make concerted efforts to implement the prescribed 100 seats 
per million population as per UG -MSR 2023 guidelines.  Moreover, the Committee also 
takes note of the Budget announcement 2025 -26 regarding the addition of 10,000 seats in 
the medical colleges during 2025 -26 and addition of 75,000 seats in next five years. The 
Committee is of the firm view that once the Budge t announcement is implemented the 
MBBS aspirant students would hardly need to move outside the country  for seeking 
medical education.  
Graduate Outcome Assessment & NMC EXIT Test 
 
Recommendation 
3.7.1 The Committee acknowledges that the NMC intends to introduce a standardized 
assessment of medical graduates through the National Exit Test (NExT). The Committee notes 
that standardized assessment of medical graduates would ensure that all medical graduate s have 
a uniform level of knowledge and skills, regardless of where they studied. This improves the 
quality of medical education and training in India and makes the process of licensure and 
postgraduate admissions more transparent and fairer. The Act provi des for three years for 
unrolling of NExT, the Committee has taken note that NExT is yet to be implemented.  
(Para 4.11 of the report) 
 
3.7.2 Given the pivotal role the NExT exam is poised to play in medical education, the 
Committee recommends the Government exhaustively examine the implications of 
implementation. The Committee advocates for meticulous due diligence in addressing the 
concerns of all relevant stakeholders. Furthermore, the Committee recommends that the 

25 
 
Government allocate ample time for thorough preparation and provide an early release of the 
exam schedule, along with other relevant details regarding the examination. This will enable the 
first batch of candidates to prepare adequately and smoothly transition t o the new examination 
format. Additionally, considering the diverse background of medical colleges from which the 
first batch of NExT aspirants would come, the Committee suggests that the evaluation criteria 
should be moderate. It is imperative to ensure t hat no group of graduates faces an undue 
advantage or disadvantage in the examination. Striking a fair and equitable balance in the 
evaluation process will be pivotal in ensuring the success and fairness of the NExT exam.  
(Para 4.12 of the report) 
 
3.7.3 Moreover, the Committee believes in addition to standardised final assessment of 
graduates, there is an urgent need to universalize or standardise undergraduate and postgraduate 
education. Reputed institutes like AIIMS impart different quality of medica l education while 
newly opened medical institutes need such quality. Keeping this in view, the Committee 
recommends the Government to divide India into zones, and in each zone reputed institutes like 
AIIMS can function as mentor institutes for all the othe r medical colleges in that zone. Mentor 
institutes shall play a significant role in monitoring the standard of education and the classes in 
the newly set medical colleges or private medical colleges.  
(Para 4.13 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
3.7.4 Introduction of NEXT marks a substantial shift in MBBS education. Its examination format 
differs significantly from NEET. The implementation of NEXT is set to bring significant changes 
to university examinations as well. It has the potential to impact teac hing methods, learning 
approaches, and other assessments throughout MBBS courses, starting from the earliest stages. 
Additionally, the simultaneous introduction of a Post -internship Practical Examination at the end 
of the internship period is also a new development. 
 
3.7.5 The regulations for the National Exit Test (NEXT) were published by NMC 28.06.2023 
however considering the response, the Government under NMC Act, 2019 defer the 
implementation and decided to examine the matter relating to implementation/ preparation of 
conducting the NExT exam. Accordingly, the Ministry appointed a Committee on 03.10.2023 
headed by DGHS for recommendation to implement NEXT -1. Subsequently, the committee was 
reconstituted under the Chairmanship of Member, NITI Aayog to take  this matter forward. 
Meetings of the Committee have been convened for decided way forward. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.7.6 The Committee is of the considered view that introduction of NExT will instill a 
universal  and standardized assessment of medical graduates having uniform level of 

26 
 
knowledge and skills and ultimately leading to quality medical education and training 
across the country. The Committee is in agreement with the Ministry that NExT indicate a 
paradigm shift in teaching methods, learning approaches, critical assessment through 
MBBS courses. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Committee reconstituted 
under the Chairmanship of Members, NITI Aayog would submit its recommendation at the 
first opportunity for implementation of NExT Exam as per pre -conceived schedule. The 
Committee is also in agreement with the Ministry that the simultaneous introduction of a 
Post-internship Practical Examination at the end of the internship period would further 
ensure fair and equitable balance in the process of license, evaluation process and post -
graduate admission.  
 
3.7.7 The Committee reiterates its recommendation that th e Government should divide 
India into different zones and in each zone reputed institutes like AIIMS can function as 
mentor institutes for all the other medical colleges in that zone. Mentor institutes shall play 
a significant role in monitoring the standa rd of education and the classes in the newly set 
medical colleges or private medical colleges.  
 
 
 
  

27 
 
CHAPTER–IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
Affordability of Medical Education 
Recommendation 
4.1.1 The Committee further recommends the Ministry to formulate a comprehensive framework 
to address bureaucratic hurdles and effectively implement the partnership of private medical 
colleges with the district hospitals. The Committee belie ves that this initiative will not only 
provide sufficient clinical material to the MBBS students but also decrease the setting up and 
functioning cost of private colleges, thereby rationalizing the costs of medical education. 
Additionally, as another measu re to reduce the cost of medical education in private colleges, the 
Committee recommends the Government subsidize the necessary equipment/ machines for the 
setting up of―Skill Labs in private colleges as they are sophisticated and costly and are often 
imported. In addition, the Government should create need -based scholarship programs to assist 
economically disadvantaged students in covering their tuition fees. These scholarships could be 
funded through government and private sector contributions, creating a n accessible path to 
medical education for all.  
(Para 2.30 of the report) 
Action  Taken 
4.2.2 The hurdles experienced shall be examined and necessary steps shall be taken to mitigate 
difficulties. 
 
 
  

28 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
 
Quality of Medical Education: Global Perspectives 
 
1. The Committee appreciates that the World Federation of Medical Education 
(WFME) has conferred National Medical Commission (NMC) International Accreditation 
for a period of ten years. However, such conferment has further entrusted NMC the pivotal 
role for c onsolidating high quality medical education in the country which is in fact, the 
basic foundation upon which the competent and compassionate healthcare 
professionals/system are superimposed. NMC is required to ensure quality medical 
education for fostering  affordability, accessibility, and availability of next generations 
healthcare needs. The Committee is of the considered view that only robust & modern 
medical education system with adequate investment on advanced physical infrastructure 
and skilled & trai ned faculty would be a guarantee for a better healthcare in future . 
Therefore, the Committee understands that international accreditation to NMC is not the 
end of NMC’s role but the beginning of its responsibility towards strengthening equitable 
quality education system across the country with due impetus on evidence base d practices 
with scientific and modern advancement, critical thinking to imbibe professional pursuit, 
ethical integrity and social behavioral inclination amongst medical practitioners.   
(Para 3.1.6) 
Imbalance in Distribution of Medical Colleges 
 
 2. The Committee notes with concern the fact that there is uneven distribution of 
medical seats across the country as some States have a high concentration of medical seats 
while some are severely lacking against the national average of 75 MBBS seats per mill ion 
population. The Committee observes that Karnataka, Telangana and Tamil Nadu have 
approximately 150 MBBS seats per million and Puducherry has close to 2000 or even more 
MBBS seats for a population of just about one million. While some other States have less 
than 50 seats per million population viz. Bihar has only 21 seats per million. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the NMC must come forward with 
guidelines for establishing new medical colleges in States where there are fewer than 
hundred MBBS seats per million population.  
(Para 3.2.3) 
3. The Committee appreciates the UG -MSR 2023 guidelines regarding setting up of 
new medical colleges providing approval for annual intake capacity of 50/100/150 MBBS 
seats. Notwithstanding the same, the Committee believes that as per the guidelines, given 
that the infrastructure and faculty position required are in place, a college, whether old or 
new, may be considered for granting permission to increase the undergraduate MBBS seats 
up to a maximum of 25 0 in a phased manner. The Committee further recommends that 
adequate attention must be given for opening of medical colleges in unde rserved districts 

29 
 
which can be encouraged to use the locally available Government medical colleges and 
hospitals for imparting healthcare services.  
(Para 3.2.4) 
 
Research Support and facilities 
 
4. The Committee is not satisfied with the response of the Government in regard to 
Committee’s recommendation on budgetary support to research work. Keeping in view, 
that the spending by both the Government as well as the medical colleges in health research 
has remained stagnant in terms of the percentage of GDP since last few financial years, t he 
Committee recommends further that medical research and innovation needs massive 
impetus and there is an urgent need to substantially increase the Government expenditure 
on health research infrastructure or provide incentives/ ecosystem for collaboration with 
leading private research firms. To have result -oriented and gainful research, the 
Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Government should formulate guidelines 
to decide on priority research fields based on disease burden and focus areas of the country. 
For this, colleges can form a collegium of senior faculties and decide on the r esearch 
priority; funds for such research should be partly provided by the institute and partly by 
Government agencies like ICMR.  
(Para 3.3.4) 
 
Affordability of Medical Education 
5. The affordability of medical education in the country continues to a matter of 
concern for the Committee due to huge cost of medical education that ranges between Rs. 
60 lakhs to Rs. 1.00 crore or even more, as if, there is no takers for the poor guard ian to get 
their off -springs admitted in the medical colleges. The Commit tee endorses that the 
Government may apply the fee structure to 50% of seats in private medical colleges and the 
State Government fee may be levied to this 50% of MBBS seats while the other 50% to be 
decided in consultation with the fee regulatory committee of each of the States.  
(Para 3.4.3) 
 
6. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry in collaboration 
with States consider need -based scholarships to deserving students. Other suggestive 
options that can be explored are- running the medical college and hospital on a PPP model, 
giving tax benefits to the company/group, etc.  
(Para 3.4.4) 
 
 
 

30 
 
Faculty Shortage and the Issue of Ghost Faculty 
 
7. The Committee feels that to address faculty shortages in medical colleges, especially 
in remote areas, it is essential to provide incentives for teaching positions. The Committee is 
of the considered view that competitive salaries, job security, and structure d career growth 
need to be prioritized over ad -hoc or contractual appointments for streamlining and 
strengthening the faculty. Such emphasis will ensure the production of generally qualified 
doctors and instituting a robust medical education system. In thi s regard, the Committee is 
in agreement with the Government, however, the Committee would further recommend 
that special incentives such as housing support, education facilities for children, and rural 
service allowance need to be introduced to attract and  retain faculty in distant locations. 
The Committee reiterates that clear criteria and milestones for promotions by recognizing 
and rewarding excellence in teaching, research, and clinical work are required to embedded 
in the system. Regular performance evaluations are crucial in identifying well-qualified and 
experienced faculty members. Moreover, streamlining the sanctioning of posts and ensuring 
a balanced reservation policy will facilitate the timely filling up of vacancies, ultimately 
strengthening medical education and healthcare services. 
(Para 3.5.7) 
8. The Committee is in agreement with the Ministry that Ghost Faculty is undoubtedly 
a curse to the medical education, however, Committee believes that recently introduced 
‘Aadhar based Biometric Attendance System by NMC’ regarding attendance, would go a 
long way in combating and curbing the problem of Ghost Faculty and Zero Attendance. 
Administrative monitoring by way of most robust IT solutions viz. f ace recognition and geo 
positioning monitoring of attendance would definitely give impetus to the sensitivity  of 
monitoring the faculty attendance and hence mitigate the menace of ghost faculty.  
(Para 3.5.8) 
Foreign Medical Graduates 
 
9. The Committee observes that, in view of huge number of MBBS aspiring students 
and limited MBBS seats in various colleges, high number of students seek admission outside 
the country, however, the foreign medical graduate have to face the herculean challenge s in 
passing license examination and seeking permanent registration across various States. The 
Foreign Medical Graduate Regulation 2021 mandates one year of compulsory rotating 
medical internship as an additional training in medical education hospitals or in big non -
teaching hospitals. Since, to some extent, foreign medical graduates is useful in maintaining 
the doctor to population ratio, therefore, the Committee reiterates its recommendation that 
FMG Regulations 2021 should Act as facilitator thereby stre amlining the registration and 
internship procedures while keeping the quality assurance of Indian Healthcare System.  
(Para 3.6.5)  
 

31 
 
10. The Committee also understands that it is the responsibility of the Government of 
the day to curb the outflow of aspiri ng medical graduates and facilitate their education in 
the country. In order to improve the doctor to population ratio and to reduce the reliance 
on  foreign medical graduates it would be appropriate for the Government to encourage 
expansion of medical col leges in the country to accommodate the education of MBBS 
aspiring students in the country itself. The Committee takes note of the UG -MSR 
Guidelines 2023 that prescribes 100 MBBS seats per million population and an additional 
40000 seats, if added, will meet this ratio requirement. The Committee is of considered view 
that the Government shall make concerted efforts to implement the prescribed 100 seats 
per million population as per UG -MSR 2023 guidelines. Moreover, the Committee also 
takes note of the Budge t announcement 2025 -26 regarding the addition of 10,000 seats in 
the medical colleges during 2025 -26 and addition of 75,000 seats in next five years. The 
Committee is of the firm view that once the Budget announcement is implemented the 
MBBS aspirant stude nts would hardly need to move outside the country for seeking 
medical education.  
(Para 3.6.6) 
 
Graduate Outcome Assessment & NMC EXIT Test 
 
11. The Committee is of the considered view that introduction of NExT will instill a 
universal  and standardized assessment of medical graduates having uniform level of 
knowledge and skills and ultimately leading to quality medical education and training 
across the country. The Committee is in agreement with the Ministry that NExT indicate a 
paradigm shift in teaching methods, learning approaches, critical assessment through 
MBBS courses. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Committee reconstituted 
under the Chairmanship of Members, NITI Aayog would submit its recommendation at the 
first opportunity for implementation of NExT Exam as per pre -conceived schedule. The 
Committee is also in agreement with the Ministry that the simultaneous introduction of a 
Post-internship Practical Examination at the end of the internship period would further 
ensure fair and equitable balance in the process of license, evaluation process and post -
graduate admission.  
(Para 3.7.6) 
 
12. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Government should divide 
India into different zones and in each zone reputed institutes like AIIMS can function as 
mentor institutes for all the other medical colleges in that zone. Mentor institutes sha ll play 
a significant role in monitoring the standard of education and the classes in the newly set 
medical colleges or private medical colleges.  
(Para 3.7.7) 

32 
 
 
A pie-chart depicting the status of action taken by the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare on the 157th Report has been given as hereunder: 
 
 
 
 
 
******* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46%
8%
43%
3%
Status of action taken by the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare in respect of 157th  Report 
of the Committee
Recommendations/ Observations 
accepted by the Government
Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of Government's 
replies
Committee has made further 
recommendations
Final replies of the Government 
have not been received