       PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA   DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON  HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE   
   Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi December 2024/ Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)   
REPORT NO.    160 
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY REPORT ON ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 155TH REPORT ON FUNCTIONING OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME (CGHS) (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2024) (Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th February, 2025)   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
  

       PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA   DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON  HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE        Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi December 2024/ Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)  
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY REPORT ON ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 155TH REPORT ON FUNCTIONING OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME (CGHS) (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2024) (Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th February, 2025)  

CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2. PREFACE (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS (iii)-(iv) 
4. REPORT (v) 
 Chapter–I   Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government 1-8 
 
Chapter–II  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
does not desire to pursue in view of replies of the 
Government 
9-13 
 
Chapter–III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee 
14-21 
 Chapter–IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government have not been received 22-23 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   - AT   A  GLANCE 24-26 
6. MINUTES* -- 
*To be appended at later stage 

i 
 
COMPOSITIONOFTHECOMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sanjeev Arora 
3. Shri Rajib Bhattacharjee  
4. Dr. Ajeet MadhavraoGopchade 
5. Dr. Sikander Kumar  
6. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel  
7. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy  
8. Shri Ashok Singh  
9. Shri RameswarTeli 
10. Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai 
LOK SABHA  
11. Shri Ramvir Singh Bidhuri 
12. Dr. Vinod Kumar Bind  
13. Ms Iqra Choudhary  
14. Shri MukeshkumarChandrakaant Dalal  
15. Shri Sanjay Uttamrao Deshmukh  
16. Dr. Bachhav Shobha Dinesh  
17. Dr. Dharamvira Gandhi  
18. Dr. Kadiyam Kavya  
19. Dr. Prabha Mallikarjun  
20. Dr. C. N. Manjunath  
21. Shri Balya Mama Suresh Gopinath Mhatre 
22. Dr. Rajesh Mishra 
23. Shrimati Aparajita Sarangi  
24. Dr. Sharmila Sarkar  
25. Dr. Hemant Vishnu Savara 
26. Dr. Byreddy Shabari  
27. Dr. Mahesh Sharma  
28. Dr. Rani Srikumar  
29. Shri  Parimal Suklabaidya 
30. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman  
31. Mrs. Ruchi Vira  
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sumant Narain Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan Joint Secretary 
3. Dr. Saket Kumar Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Renu Sreekanth Under Secretary 
5. Shri Roshan Lal Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 

ii 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and 
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, 
present this 160th Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 155th Report on Functioning of Central 
Government Health Scheme (CGHS).  
2. The One Hundred Fifty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table 
of the Lok Sabha on8th February 2024. The Action Taken Notes of the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received from the Departments in the Month of 
July, 2024.   
3.  The Committee made a total of 36 recommendations in the 155th Report, out of which 14 
recommendations have been accepted by the Government and have been categorized under 
Chapter- I. There are 09 recommendations, which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government’s replies that have been categorized under Chapter-II. There are 11 
recommendations/ observations, in respect of which replies of the Government, have not been 
accepted by the Committee and the Committee has made further recommendations thereon and has 
been categorized under Chapter-III. While 02 recommendations/observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government have not been received, have been categorized under Chapter-IV. 
4. The Committee, in its meeting held on the 18th December, 2024 considered the Draft Report 
and adopted the same. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                 PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV  
December, 2024                         CHAIRMAN 
Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)    Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
      Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS  
ADHD  - Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder  
ADs   - Additional Directors 
AIIMS  - All India Institute of Medical Science 
ALC  - Authorised Local Chemist  
API   - Application Program Interface  
CAPF   - Central Armed Police Forces  
CGHS   - Central Government Health Scheme  
CMO   - Chief Medical Officer  
CMSE   - Combined Medical Services Examination 
CoS  - Committee of Secretaries  
CPGRAMS  - Centralised Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System  
CPWD  - Central Public Works Department  
CT   - Computed Tomography 
DoPT  - Department of Personnel and Training  
DPC   - Departmental Promotion Committee  
DVDMS  - Drug Vaccine Distribution and Management System  
ECHS   - Ex-servicemen Contributory Health Scheme  
ESIC   - Employees State Insurance Corporation  
GDMO  - General Duty Medical Officer 
GMP   - Good Manufacturing Practice   
HCOs   - Healthcare Organisations 
ICU   - Intensive Care Units  
ISQua  - International Society for Quality in Healthcare  
IT   - Information Technology 
JAP  - Jan AushadhiPariyojana 
JNVs  - Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas 
KVs  - KendriyaVidyalayas 
LAC   - Local Advisory Committee  
MDNIY  - Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga   
MoA  - Memorandum of Agreement 
MoHFW - Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  
MoU   - Memorandum of Understanding  
MRI   - Magnetic Resonance Imaging  
MSD   - Medical Stores Depot  
MSO   - Medical Stores Organisation  
NABH  - National Accreditation Board for Hospitals and Healthcare Providers 
NABL   - National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories 
NHA   - National Health Authority  
PBG   - Performance Bank Guarantee  
PET   - Positron Emission Tomography  
PMBJP  - Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya JanaushadhiPariyojana 
QCI   - Quality Council of India 

iv 
 
SSC   - Staff Selection Commission  
UPSC   - Union Public Service Commission  
WCs   - Wellness Centres 
WHO   - World Health Organization  
ZAC   - Zonal Advisory Committee  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
 
REPORT  
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 155th Report on Functioning of Central 
Government Health Scheme (CGHS). The Report on the subject was presented to the House on…. 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Department of Health and Family Welfare 
in respect of the recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows:  
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 
1.4.3, 2.3.1, 2.4.3, 2.4.4, 2.5.3, 2.6.3, 2.8.2, 2.8.3, 2.8.4, 2.10.3, 2.10.4, 2.10.5, 2.11.2 
and 2.13.1.  
       Total– 14 (Chapter-I)  
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government's replies: 1.4.4, 2.2.3, 2.3.3, 2.7.3, 2.9.4, 2.10.2, 2.11.3, 
2.12.1 and 2.12.2. 
         Total–09 (Chapter-II)  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee: 2.2.1, 2.2.2, 2.3.2, 2.5.1, 2.5.2, 2.5.5, 2.6.4, 
2.7.4, 2.9.3, 2.10.6, and 2.12.3. 
       Total– 11 (Chapter-III)  
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited: 2.14.1 and 2.15.2. 
       Total–02 (Chapter-IV)  
 
3.  The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding part of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

vi 
 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER–I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.1 BUDGET ALLOCATION FOR CGHS 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
1.1.1 The Committee recommends the Ministry implement measures aimed at maximizing 
the utilisation of funds allocated to the CGHS. Furthermore, the Ministry should establish a 
robust mechanism to ensure optimal utilisation of these funds and curb any instances of 
wasteful expenditure. This proactive approach will ensure the judicious use of resources and 
enhance the overall efficiency of the CGHS. 
(Para 1.4.3 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.1.2 To ensure maximum and effective utilization of allocated budget to CGHS, the 
following mechanism has been adopted: 
 
(i) the senior officers of the Ministry and CGHS are monitoring the progress of works 
by holding regularly meeting with Additional Director of CGHS cities, 
 
(ii) Standard Operating Procedure guidelines have also been framed for timely 
execution of construction work in particular Financial Year, which provides that 
proposals may be planned in preceding financial year and should be submitted in 1st 
week of April so that timely approvals can be conveyed and work completed in that 
Financial Year, 
 
(iii) Monthly Expenditure Plan and Quarterly Expenditure Plan are prepared and 
accordingly expenditures are incurred.  
 
1.2 INFRASTRUCTURE IN A CGHS WC 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.2.1 The Committee has learned about the poor infrastructure of some wellness centres, 
viz. shabby buildings, lack of proper sitting arrangements, lack of proper lighting, cleanliness, 
availability of basic amenities, etc. The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry should 
periodically review the condition of available infrastructure at wellness centres, and necessary 
renovation or maintenance work should be carried out in a planned manner. The Ministry 
should allocate separate and sufficient funds for periodic upkeep and up-gradation of the 
wellness centres. 
(Para 2.3.1 of the Report) 

2 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.2.2 Additional Director CGHS cities have been directed to inspect the wellness centers 
under their control and review the condition of infrastructure at wellness center and take prior 
action for obtaining estimate and keep separate funds in Budget for undertaking maintenance 
work in consultation with CPWD where such for renovation/ maintenance work is required 
and submit compliance to the Directorate. Senior officials of CGHS are taking periodic 
meeting to make sure proper action is taken on the complaint of the beneficiaries, to review 
the condition of infrastructure at wellness centres and monitor the pace of ongoing 
renovation/ maintenance work. 
 
1.3 STAFFING UNDER CGHS 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.3.1 The Committee noted an additional requirement of about 20 to 30 % of the sanctioned 
strength of doctors, paramedical and administrative staff, over and above the sanctioned 
strength, in all CGHS set-ups across the country. The additional requirement for a Junior 
Health Administrative Assistant is around 70% of the present sanctioned strength. Further, 
during the deliberation, the Ministry informed the Committee that a considerable percentage 
of the sanctioned strength of medical and administrative staff is also lying vacant. This leads 
to a poor doctor-to-beneficiary ratio, long waiting times for patients in CGHS dispensaries, 
and a decrease in the quality of patient care. 
(Para 2.4.3 of the Report) 
 
 
1.3.2 The Committee is of the view that opening or operating CGHS centres without 
sufficient doctors and staff has no meaning and causes inconvenience to beneficiaries. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry expedite the recruitment process and fill 
up all vacant positions. To ensure an adequate doctor-to-patient ratio in all CGHS wellness 
centres, the recommendations of SIU may be implemented expeditiously. Based on the total 
number of beneficiaries being served by a Wellness centre, minimum criteria for doctors to 
see the patients per day may be fixed and strictly adhered to. On being enquired, the Ministry 
informed that around 500 contractual doctors have been engaged in addition to regular 
doctors to improve the doctor-to-beneficiary ratio. 
(Para 2.4.4 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.3.3 Requisition of 584 vacancies for GDMOs for all over India posting has already been 
placed before UPSC to be filled through CMSE - 2023. Recruitment against vacant posts is a 
continuous process. For Group B (Non Gazetted) and Group C direct recruitment posts under 
CGHS, recruitment is being done through Staff Selection Commission (SSC) by the 
designated Zonal Heads/ADs (i.e. CGHS Delhi, CGHS Prayagraj, CGHS Kolkata, CGHS 

3 
 
Mumbai, CGHS Chennai, CGHS Chandigarh, CGHS Bengaluru, CGHS Guwahati and CGHS 
Bhopal).  
 
1.3.4 Further, all the AD of CGHS cities have been directed from time to time to conduct 
Departmental Promotion Committee (DPC) meetings for the promotional posts under their 
respective administrative control. During the Mission Recruitment of Government of India 
(monitored by DoPT), around 1200 vacant Group B (NG) and Group C posts (including posts 
of Junior Health Administrative Assistants) have been reported to SSC. 
 
1.4 AVAILABILITY AND QUALITY OF MEDICINES SUPPLIED AT 
WELLNESS CENTRES 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.4.1 The Committee is further of the view that the course of some of the medicines, like 
antibiotics, is required to be started by the patients on the same day or immediately, as 
prescribed by the medical officer of the dispensary or by the doctor of the empanelled HCOs 
(visited after a referral from the dispensary). In case such medicine is not readily available in 
the dispensary, the same is indented. A patient cannot wait for two days to receive that 
indented medicine, and the procedure of buying directly from the ALC and getting the same 
reimbursed later causes inconvenience to the patient, who should rest to recover early instead 
of running from pillar to post. The Committee, therefore, feels that the turnaround time to 
receive indented medicine should be reduced to less than 24 hours. The Ministry should make 
necessary course corrections to ensure that the indented medicines are available by the very 
next day morning. 
 (Para 2.5.3 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.4.2 This practice is already incorporated in the terms and conditions of ALC supply. Due 
care is taken to supply medicine the next day, such as antibiotics and other emergency 
medicines. 
 
1.5 CLEARANCE OF BILLS OF EMPANELLED HOSPITALS 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.5.1 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry to ensure timely settlement of 
bills despite functioning under different kinds of constraints. However, the Committee 
observed that many bills due for payment are carried over to the next financial year owing to 
various reasons, which is affecting the credibility of CGHS. It is one of the major reasons for 
refusal of treatment to CGHS beneficiaries by some of the empanelled hospitals. The 
Committee simultaneously observes that the empanelled hospitals are in financial distress 
because of outstanding dues from CGHS. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry establishes a mechanism for daily review of pending bills to ensure that the 

4 
 
processing of bills gets smoother and disbursements are made seamlessly. The Ministry 
should fix a turnaround time for the settlement of bills. 
 (Para 2.6.3 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.5.2 Hospital Cell of CGHS HQ processes only credit bills of Serving CGHS Employees, 
which is comparatively a very small amount. The bulk of the credit bills of the empanelled 
HCOs pertain to CGHS pensioners and a separate network of CPDs, SAs, DDOs and PAOs 
has been created for payment to the HCOs through the NHA (National Health Authority). The 
processing of the bills by the CPD, SAs, DDOs etc is monitored daily by the AD Admin and 
sent to the higher authorities. 
 
1.6 INTEGRATIVE MEDICINE 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.6.1 The Committee appreciates the Ministry’s initiative to integrate the Indian system of 
medicine with the network of CGHS wellness centres. However, from the information 
received from the Ministry, it is evident that the number of AYUSH centres expanded to 107 
in August 2023 from 85 in March 2014, which translates to about a 25% increase over nine 
years. The Committee is of the view that such a meagre increase in the number of AYUSH 
centres does not align with the Government’s vision to popularise the indigenous system of 
healthcare in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry consider 
setting up more AYUSH centres across the country and taking initiatives to popularise the 
Indian system of medicine among the beneficiaries of the CGHS. 
(Para 2.8.2 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
1.6.2 As per Ministry vide Order No. Z.15025/36/2017/DIR/CGHS/EHS dated 16.04.2019, 
53 Ayush units (27 Homeo and 26 Ayurvedic units) were sanctioned, out of which 25 units 
(16 Homeopathic and 09 Ayurvedic units) were made functional which comes to total 107 
including 01 Ayurvedic Hospital, Lodhi Road, Delhi. Remaining Wellness Centers will be 
opened once the process of appointment of Pharmacists through SSC is completed.  
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.6.3 The Committee also observes that out of the 107 AYUSH units, 84% of the units 
pertain to Ayurveda and homoeopathy. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry consider setting up more AYUSH centres pertaining to Yoga, Siddha, and Unani 
alternative systems of medicine across the country.   
(Para 2.8.3 of the report) 
 

5 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.6.4 Opening of New Ayush Wellness Centres is subject to availability of resources, 
approval of Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for creation of new posts and the 
number of beneficiaries/ demand from the beneficiaries. It is informed that there are no 
dispensaries for Yoga & Naturopathy system under CGHS. However, there are four Yoga 
Kendras which are providing the services under Yoga (Yoga Classes etc.) to the CGHS 
beneficiaries. 
 
1.6.5 Apart from this CGHS and Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga, Delhi (MDNIY) 
has signed the MoA for providing the Yoga Instructors in different CGHS dispensaries at 
Delhi/ NCR. As of now, there are 20 Yoga instructors deployed at different CGHS 
dispensaries. Moreover, Yoga & Naturopathy private NABH Hospitals/ Institutions are being 
empanelled under CGHS to provide the best quality treatment to the CGHS beneficiaries. As 
far as the opening of Unani and Siddha Wellness Centres is concerned, there is meagre 
demand from the beneficiaries about the opening of new Wellness Centres of these systems. 
Also, the Siddha system is mainly popular in Southern India i.e., Tamil Nadu. At present in 
Chennai, CGHS is having 02 Siddha Units whereas in Delhi, CGHS is having 01 Siddha unit. 
 
1.6.6 CGHS had issued the O.M vide F. No – 11011/ 90/2016-CGHS/ (HEC)/ AYUSH/PT-
II./255-281 dated 05.07.2023 for the empanelment of Unani and Siddha Hospitals on the lines 
of Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy.    
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.6.7 The Committee has learned that about 36% of CGHS AYUSH centres are in the 
Delhi- NCR region. Further, about 60% of AYUSH centres are located in the cities of Delhi- 
NCR, Bengaluru, Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad and Kolkata. The Committee has seen that 
the distribution of AYUSH centres is concentrated in these six major cities. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should take proactive steps to set up more AYUSH 
centres in newer cities. 
 (Para 2.8.4 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.6.8 As per the O.M vide order No. Z.15025/36/2017/DIR/CGHS/EHS dated 16.04.2019 
53 units (27 Homeo and 26 Ayurvedic units) were sanctioned wherein, the following CGHS 
cities are also covered, apart from the six major cities (Delhi/ NCR, Bengaluru, Mumbai, 
Chennai, Hyderabad and Kolkata). CGHS cities where Ayurvedic Units are opened are 
Bhopal, Gandhi Nagar, Indore, Jabalpur, Panaji, Raipur, Visakhapatnam. CGHS cities where 
Homeopathic Units are opened are Agartala, Aizwal, Bhopal, Bhuvaneshwar, Dehradun, 
Gandhi Nagar, Gangtok, Gurugram, Imphal, Jabalpur, Puducherry, Ranchi, Shillong, 
Visakhapatnam. 
 

6 
 
1.6.9 The remaining Ayurveda and Homeopathic Wellness Centres are yet to be opened at 
the following CGHS cities soon: 
 
Homoeopathic 
(13) 
Chandigarh, Faridabad, Ghaziabad, Greater Noida, 
Indirapuram, Indore, Itanagar, Jammu, Noida, Panji, 
Raipur, Sahibabad, Shimla. 
Ayurvedic 
(19) 
Agartala, Aizwal, Chandigarh, Dehradun, Faridabad, 
Gangtok, Ghaziabad, Greater Noida, Guwahati, 
Indirapuram, Imphal, Itanagar, Jammu, Noida,  
Puducherry, Ranchi, Sahibabad, Shillong, Shimla, 
 
1.6.10 There is a proposal for reviewing requests received for opening of New Ayush 
Wellness Centres in other CGHS Cities from the Welfare Associations/ VIPs namely Ambala, 
Pune, Hyderabad, Vadodara, Saharanpur (Meerut), Kota, Ajmer (Jaipur), Kochi. Till now, 
new requests have been received to open a total of 08 Ayurveda, 06 Homeopathy and 02 
Unani units. 
 
1.7 GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.7.1 During the meeting with the Committee, the Ministry presented a pie chart providing 
the distribution of different kinds of grievances that come across different CGHS wellness 
centres and zones. The Committee noted that most of the grievances were related to medicine 
and the wellness centre. The Committee recommends that the Ministry thoroughly study the 
grievances about these two areas and take proactive measures rather than reactive actions to 
reduce these grievances. 
(Para 2.10.3 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.7.2 Most of the complaints are received regarding infrastructure of the Wellness Centre. 
Many new CGHS Buildings have been constructed and wellness centre have been shifted 
there. Alternative service providers for uninterrupted network have been provided for smooth 
functioning of the wellness centre. Continuous efforts are being made to ensure timely supply 
of medicines to the beneficiaries.   
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.7.3 The Committee has also been informed of the unsympathetic and indifferent approach 
towards patients by the doctors and other staff of the CGHS dispensaries. There are also 
complaints regarding the difference in treatment given to the serving and retired beneficiaries. 
The Committee expresses its dismay over such a state of affairs and recommends that the 
Ministry implement communication skills and sensitisation workshops to instill soft skills and 
professionalism in the CGHS workforce and improve their attitude towards patients, 
particularly the senior citizens. 
(Para 2.10.4 of the report) 

7 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.7.4 The complaints received in this section regarding behaviour of medical staff are 
forwarded to the concerned zonal office for further necessary action. Regular meeting are 
conducted by the Addl. Director with the CMO In-charges to improve communication skills 
and attitude towards patients, particularly the senior citizens. At the time of induction, soft 
skill training is imparted to the newly appointed medical officers. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.7.5 The Committee is aware of the complaints of the beneficiaries on the denial of 
empanelled private hospitals to admit CGHS beneficiaries for in-patient treatment because of 
the non-availability of beds. There are also instances of some empanelled hospitals/diagnostic 
centres charging exorbitantly and collecting more fees than CGHS rates. The Committee 
impresses upon the Ministry to deal with such grievances in a deterrent manner and initiate 
prompt penal action against the erring hospital if any irregularity is observed. 
 (Para 2.10.5 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
1.7.6 Whenever any complaint is received against any HCO for denial of treatment or 
charging of excess rates, action is taken against HCO as per terms and conditions of MoA and 
in case of repeated complaints, suitable penalty is imposed and if necessary, hospital is also 
de-empanelled. Additional Director CGHS cities have been directed to take stern action 
against the erring HCOs in case of violation of terms and conditions of MoA under intimation 
to the Directorate. After perusal of the complaints, show cause notice is issued and the case is 
settled by issuing recovery order and penalising the HCO by deducting the PBG as per the 
MoA with the HCOs. 
 
1.8 REFERRAL SYSTEM UNDER CGHS 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.8.1 The Committee has, however, learnt that as per present practice, even after obtaining a 
referral in the first instance, if the consultant in the private hospital prescribes any 
tests/investigation/treatment, the beneficiary is required to report back to the dispensary and 
get that prescribed tests/investigation/treatment endorsed from the CGHS doctor. The 
Committee feels that the present referral system is cumbersome, which only inconveniences 
the beneficiaries and adds to the woes of a patient with poor health. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry devise appropriate solutions to simplify the referral system so that a 
beneficiary is not required to visit the CGHS dispensary multiple times just to get the 
prescribed tests done following a referral in the first instance. 
 
 (Para 2.11.2 of the Report) 
 

8 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.8.2 Ministry has issued revised guidelines for referral process under CGHS vide OM 
dated 28.06.2024. Now, no further endorsement from CGHS is required for undergoing 
routine listed investigations & minor procedures not requiring admission in the hospital as 
advised by the specialist within the validity period of 3 months from the date of issue of the 
initial referral. Referral/ endorsement from CGHS shall be required for special investigations 
like CT Scan, MRI Scan, PET Scan and any other investigation costing over Rs. 3,000/- and 
the referral will be valid for 3 months. In addition, the beneficiaries of age 70 years and above 
can directly visit empanelled HCOs for treatment, without having to visit Wellness Centres 
for referral.  
 
1.9 NEED TO IMPROVE THE FUNCTIONING OF LAC AND ZAC 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.9.1 The Committee was apprised of the Local Advisory Committee (LAC) constitution at 
the Wellness Centre level and Zonal Advisory Committee (ZAC) in each of the Zone of 
Additional Directors in CGHS wellness centres. The Committee underlines the need for 
regular interaction between public representatives and government organisations /departments 
with regard to monitoring and effectively delivering public services. The LAC and ZAC are 
effective platforms for interaction between the CGHS officials and local Members of 
Parliament (MPs) of the area. The Committee feels that such platforms help strengthen the 
services delivered by CGHS, as Members of Parliament, apart from being public 
representatives, are also beneficiaries themselves. Hence, their feedback in such interactions 
will greatly benefit CGHS. However, the Committee has come to know that many MPs have 
never received a call from anybody regarding the schedule of such Committee meetings. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to take up this issue and give necessary 
directions to CGHS authorities to ensure that the local MPs in the area of CGHS dispensary 
are informed well in time about the conduct of LAC and ZAC meetings. The Ministry should 
also monitor the compliance of such directions by the CGHS authorities. 
 
 (Para 2.13.1 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.9.2 Ministry understands the noble cause of the matter. The Additional Director, CGHS 
cities have been directed to take action in order to inform Local MPs well in advance about 
the conduct of LAC and ZAC meetings well in advance as per recommendation of committee 
and submit compliance to the Directorate so that Local MPs can interact with public and 
review the functioning of CGHS facilities. 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
CHAPTER–II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
2.1 BUDGET ALLOCATION FOR CGHS 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.1.1 The Committee believes that there is a need to expand the coverage network of CGHS 
in existing and new cities, for which separate allocation needs to be made. These special 
funds may be utilized to open new wellness centres, polyclinics, and separate CGHS wings in 
government hospitals. The Committee feels that such a step will enable the Ministry to set a 
time-bound date and targets to complete the opening of new CGHS facilities. 
(Para 1.4.4 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
2.1.2 Before the expansion of CGHS in new cities or existing cities, the approval of 
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance is taken for creating the posts of staff and 
infrastructures. Then from the existing budget of particular financial year of CGHS, all 
necessary arrangement (Building, ALC, IT Infrastructures, etc.) are being made. Further 
expenditures are met by technical supplementary or next financial year Budget.  
 
2.2 NEED FOR AUGMENTING WELLNESS CENTRES 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.2.1 The Committee was informed that there are 18 CGHS polyclinics across the country. 
The Committee is of the view that 18 polyclinics against 43 lakh beneficiaries across the 
country are insufficient. The Committee would like the Ministry to take proactive steps for 
setting up new CGHS centres and consider exploring setting up wellness centres and 
polyclinics at a rapid pace in underserved areas, especially the suburbs of large cities where a 
considerable population of serving and pensioner beneficiaries reside. The Ministry should 
ensure that all aspirational districts in the country have CGHS centres and empanelled 
hospitals. The number of CGHS centres and their geographical reach are the main facets. The 
Committee feels that the Government needs to consider relaxing existing norms or creating 
new norms for opening new wellness centres, particularly for beneficiaries of rural, hilly, 
remote, and Northeastern parts of the country. 
 (Para 2.2.3 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
2.2.2 Of late, the Hon’ble HFM has granted in-principal approval for opening 20 CGHS 
Wellness Centres in Bhilai, Durg, Bahadurgarh, Sabarmati, Rewari, Rohtak, Dharmashala, 

10 
 
Kangra, Jamshedpur, Udupi, Shivamogga, Mangaluru, Narmadapuram, Patiala, Bharatpur, 
Alwar, Warangal, Haldwani, Nainital and Tirupati. 
 
2.3 INFRASTRUCTURE IN A CGHS WC 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.3.1 The Committee further recommends the Ministry conduct a survey and collect data on 
the number of beneficiaries referred to higher centres and the reasons for such referrals. This 
would help in examining the lack of facility because of which the patient was required to be 
referred, and based on that report, the Ministry should consider developing infrastructure and 
facilities in the CGHS wellness centres and engaging specialist doctors and other allied staff. 
 
 (Para 2.3.3 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
2.3.2 CGHS WCs are providing primary health care services to the beneficiaries. Secondary 
and tertiary facilities are provided by Govt. and Private Hospitals including empanelled for 
treatment of CGHS beneficiaries. In Govt. Hospital no referral is required and referral is not 
required for beneficiaries above 70 years of age and they can go to hospital directly. Referral 
through computer generated slip is issued only to pensioners under the age of 70 years for 
taking treatment in private empanelled hospital. Hence it is difficult to collect the data. 
 
2.4 CONSULTATION AND DIAGNOSTIC RATES 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.4.1 As part of the revision of rates, the Committee recommends the Ministry review the 
rates of all the remaining procedures and diagnoses in CGHS in a time-bound manner. While 
revising the rates, the Ministry should consult the HCOs and other stakeholders extensively. 
The Ministry may also get the rates audited by a professional agency and should clearly state 
the basis on which the rates of different procedures are revised. The Committee further 
recommends the Ministry put in place a mechanism to review the rates of 
procedures/diagnosis under CGHS every third year periodically and to keep the rates 
reasonable enough to attract the interest of a large number of HCOs. 
(Para 2.7.3 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.4.2 Rates revision is under process and rates for various 
procedures/treatment/investigation is mentioned below – 
 
1. Revision of CGHS rates for Consultation, Room rent and ICU charges –on 12.04.2023 
Link for relevant OM https://cghs.gov.in/CghsGovIn/faces/ViewPage.xhtml?id=NDQ0NA== 

11 
 
2. Revision of CGHS rates for 36 radiological Investigations on 19.06.2023 
Link for relevant OM https://cghs.gov.in/CghsGovIn/faces/ViewPage.xhtml?id=NDY3NA== 
3. Revision of CGHS package rates for 38 Cardiology procedures and inclusion of 2 new 
Procedures on 19.12.2023. 
Link for relevant OM https://cghs.gov.in/CghsGovIn/faces/ViewPage.xhtml?id=NTEwMg== 
4. Revision of CGHS package rates for 61 General Surgery Procedures on 01.02.2024. 
Link for Relevant OM https://cghs.gov.in/CghsGovIn/faces/ViewPage.xhtml?id=NTE3NA== 
Proposal for revision of CGHS rates in Gynaecology & Obstetrics is under submission to IFD 
and revision of rates in other specialties is under process. 
 
2.5 SEPARATE FACILITY FOR CGHS BENEFICIARIES AT GOVERNMENT 
HOSPITALS 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.5.1 Apart from agreeing with eminent public medical institutions, the Committee feels 
that the Ministry should also consider constructing secondary and tertiary CGHS hospitals (at 
least ten hospitals across the country) with cutting-edge facilities and research on which the 
beneficiaries can have the belief, particularly for the treatment of some serious diseases like 
cancer, cardiovascular, renal failure, etc. 
 (Para 2.9.4 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
2.5.2 CGHS provides primary health care facility through a network of Allopathic WCs and 
AYUSH units. Presently, there is no proposal to open new CGHS hospitals. 
 
2.6 GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.6.1 The Committee was apprised that as of August 2023, in the financial year 2023-24 
(including the carried forward from the financial year 2022-23), a total of 1526 grievances 
had been received on CPGRAMS, out of which 1271 (about 83 %) had been disposed of with 
total 255 grievances pending. The Committee appreciates the actions of the Ministry to 
redress the grievances of the CGHS beneficiaries. However, the Committee would like to see 
100% Redressal of beneficiaries’ grievances. This would enhance the trust of beneficiaries 
and the credibility of the institution. The Ministry should further strengthen the grievance 
Redressal mechanism to deal with grievances proactively and fix the timeline to redress them 
with regular monitoring at the Joint Secretary level. The Committee also believes that the 
complaint registration mechanism should be as simple as possible, particularly for senior 
citizens and beneficiaries who are not techno-savvy. 
(Para 2.10.2 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
2.6.2 Current status of CPGRAMs. 

12 
 
 
Brought Forwarded 53 
Grievance Received 1191 
Grievance Disposed 1203(101%)  
Pending 41 
 
2.7 REFERRAL SYSTEM UNDER CGHS 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.7.1 The Committee appreciates the existing guidelines of direct consultation for 
beneficiaries aged 75 years and above. It would further recommend the Ministry review the 
guidelines to bring all CGHS pensioners/beneficiaries aged 60 years and above into the ambit 
of direct private consultation from empanelled hospitals. This would align with the existing 
set-up as pensioners/beneficiaries aged 60 years and above receive cashless treatment from 
private empanelled hospitals. 
 (Para 2.11.3 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
2.7.2 Ministry has issued revised guidelines for referral process under CGHS vide OM 
dated 28.06.2024 (https://cghs.gov.in/CghsGovIn/faces/ViewPage.xhtml). Now, the existing 
age of 75 years and above, for which direct consultation without CGHS referral was allowed, 
has been lowered down to 70 years and above. 
 
2.8 INCREASE IN THE EMPANELMENT OF BIG HOSPITALS UNDER CGHS 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.8.1 The Committee has come to know that on the one side, many small hospitals approach 
the authorities for empanelment under CGHS, but the beneficiaries do not want to visit these 
hospitals due to lack of facilities whereas, on the other side, some good hospitals, where the 
beneficiaries would like to visit, are not willing to get empanelled under CGHS. The 
Committee acknowledges the efforts of the Ministry to persuade big hospitals to empanelment 
under CGHS by improving the processing system, like taking steps to make the bill settlement 
quick and raising the rates of consultation and procedures under CGHS. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry examine the grading system by NABH and, if required, may 
suggest a more efficient grading system based on a point system. Such grading of NABH may 
be used for grading the hospitals like Grade ‘A’, ‘B’, etc. and fix the CGHS rates for hospitals 
as per the grading of the hospitals. Even now, the Ministry is doing the same for NABH and 
non-NABH hospitals. This may be extended further as per the grading of NABH-accredited 
hospitals. The Ministry may also study the NQAS scoring of public sector hospitals to make 
changes in NABH grading. 
(Para 2.12.1 of the report) 

13 
 
 
Action Taken 
2.8.2 CGHS follows the guidelines of International Society for Quality in Healthcare 
(ISQua) for empanelment of HCOs. If NABH grading like Grade ‘A’, ‘B’ etc. is done then it 
may result in discrimination of HCOs. Continuous empanelment process of HCOs is going 
on. CGHS gives NABH rates to HCOs which are fully Accredited and QCI recommended 
HCOs are given non-NABH rates. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.8.3 Further, to increase the empanelment of better hospitals under CGHS, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry ask the CGHS authorities at a zonal level to search for 
hospitals doing good in their areas and make result-oriented efforts to bring them under 
CGHS empanelment. The Committee feels that the empanelment process needs to be 
simplified for non-CGHS covered cities and brought at par, like that for CGHS-covered cities. 
Many of these cities also have considerable CGHS beneficiaries. 
(Para 2.12.2 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.8.4 For Non-CGHS covered Cities/Areas – HCOs are empanelled under CS(MA), EHS, 
MoHFW. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
CHAPTER–III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
3.1 NEED FOR AUGMENTING WELLNESS CENTRES 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.1.1 The Ministry informed that as of August 2023, the CGHS had a presence in 80 cities 
with 340 CGHS Allopathic wellness centres. The Committee has noted that out of these 340 
allopathic wellness centres, 26% are concentrated in the Delhi NCR region. Further, only six 
states (excluding the Delhi NCR region) have more than 10 CGHS centres. This highlights 
that the distribution and accessibility of CGHS services across different regions of the country 
are not equitable and need to be addressed. The Committee noted that the state of Arunachal 
Pradesh and the UTs of Ladakh, A & N islands and Lakshadweep have no CGHS wellness 
centre. 
(Para 2.2.1 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.1.2 The main reasons behind concentration of CGHS WCs in Delhi is that all Ministries/ 
Departments are situated in Delhi and majority of Head Quarters of Attached and Subordinate 
Offices of Govt. of India are situated in Delhi. However, as per the requests of beneficiaries 
and by various feasibility analysis through regular meetings, New Wellness Centres at 
different locations across the country have been opened. One such CGHS WC is already 
sanctioned for Itanagar, Arunachal Pradesh and likely to be functional soon.  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.1.3 The Committee notes from the replies (paras 2.1.2 & 3.1.2) of the Government, 
the process of securing and release of funds for expansion of CGHS as well as the reason 
for higher concentration of CGHS Wellness Centres in Delhi NCR. However, the replies 
do not address the recommendation of the Committee about the need to further expand 
the coverage of CGHS in existing and new cities so as to have distribution and 
accessibility of CGHS services across different regions of the country in the ideal 
proportion. Accordingly, the Committee wants the Government to furnish a 
comprehensive action taken reply in this regard.   
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.1.4 The Committee is aware that there are many cities and towns where there are a 
sizeable number of Central Government employees, pensioners, and their dependents, but no 
CGHS wellness centre exists there. As a result, the beneficiaries, particularly the retired 
beneficiaries, are required to travel long distances to get medical treatments, causing 

15 
 
inconvenience to them. The Committee opines that this scenario, apart from being financially 
draining on the beneficiaries, also causes various other hardships to the beneficiaries. 
(Para 2.2.2 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
3.1.5 Opening of a new Wellness Centres are considered as per extant norms, which include 
minimum 6000 Central Government serving employees in the particular city, subject to 
availability of resources, sanction for creation of posts of Medical Officers, Staff Nurse, 
Pharmacists, and Clerical Staff etc. by the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, 
and availability of suitable accommodation for new Wellness Centre. Due to the crunch of 
resources, the Ministry takes a considerate view regarding creation of posts at an appropriate 
time. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.1.6 The Committee understands that the Ministry considers several factors when 
opening new wellness centres, including resources, creation of posts, accommodation, 
etc. The Committee has, however, noted an imbalance in the distribution of these 
centres, with 26% in Delhi NCR but only six states having more than 10 centres each. To 
address this, the Committee recommends modifying the norms, such as adjusting the 
beneficiary requirement based on area remoteness, on the lines of organisations like 
ESIC. The Committee also urge the Ministry to overcome barriers like resource 
availability and to work with the Ministry of Finance for creating necessary posts. 
 
3.2 INFRASTRUCTURE IN A CGHS WC 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.2.1 There is a lack of Ambulance service at many of the Wellness Centres. This is 
required in critical cases of referrals and emergencies. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry also consider allocating separate funds for arranging at least one ambulance in each 
Wellness Centre so that the patient can be taken to the higher medical centre promptly for 
emergency treatment. The Ministry should also prepare a model list of essential services and 
equipment that all CGHS Wellness Centres should have available. 
 (Para 2.3.2 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.2.2 CGHS WCs are providing primary health care services to the beneficiaries. For any 
emergency situation a beneficiaries have a choice to go to any nearby empanelled or Govt. 
Hospital instead of waiting at CGHS WC for ambulance. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 

16 
 
3.2.3 The Committee agrees with the contention of the Ministry that CGHS wellness 
centres are providing primary health care services to the beneficiaries and in any 
emergency situation, the beneficiary has the option to visit nearby empanelled or 
Government hospital. But the Ministry has not responded to the recommendation of the 
Committee regarding the model list of essential services and equipments. Hence, the 
Committee is reiterating its recommendation on the importance for having a model list 
of essential services and equipments that should be available in the Wellness centre and 
post that list on its website and the reception area of the respective Wellness centre for 
information.  
 
3.3 AVAILABILITY AND QUALITY OF MEDICINES SUPPLIED AT 
WELLNESS CENTRES 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.3.1 It has come to the Committee’s notice that the medicines are often not procured 
promptly, causing inconvenience to the beneficiaries. In many cases, the bid/ contract of the 
ALC are not renewed well in time, and the dispensary is not in a position to supply the 
medicines. 
(Para 2.5.1 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.3.2 Utmost care is taken to supply the medicines promptly to the beneficiaries from the 
Wellness centres (MSD and Jan Aushadhi Supply or through ALC). ALC contracts are being 
renewed well on time so that no inconvenience occurs to the patients.  
 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.3.3 The Committee recommends the Ministry to investigate the issues of delay in 
procurement and subsequent distribution of medicines. The Ministry may bring necessary 
changes in the guidelines and simplify the procedure for the local purchase of medicines to 
ensure an uninterrupted supply of medicines. The Committee also recommends that the 
Ministry establish a mechanism to ensure the continuous availability of basic/ essential 
medicines at CGHS dispensaries so that the need for local purchase does not arise. The 
Ministry should take necessary steps towards course correction, including making the 
required funds available for regular supply of medicines.  
(Para 2.5.2 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.3.4 Application Program Interface (API) has been developed and is in place, with which 
the MSO and MSD can observe their stock position and supplies in pipeline. Drug Vaccine 
Distribution and Management System (DVDMS) is in place in MSO, which has improved our 
inventory management and distribution.   
 
Recommendations/Observations  

17 
 
3.3.5 The Committee has come to know that there are complaints regarding the quality of 
medicines disbursed at the pharmacy counter of the dispensary. Questions have been raised 
regarding the effectiveness of medicines procured through MSO and JAP. The quality of 
medicines is of paramount importance while providing healthcare services, and complaints 
regarding the quality should be taken seriously. This is also essential to ensure compliance 
with the Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) standards of the World Health Organization 
(WHO). The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry establish a mechanism ensuring 
rigorous testing of medicines. The Ministry may inspect these laboratories and surprise test 
any random batch of medicines through any third independent NABL-accredited laboratory. 
The Ministry may also consider testing random batches of medicines from a reputed 
international laboratory. 
 (Para 2.5.5 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.3.6 A quality assurance and inspection protocol is already in place by MSO, for the supply 
of medicines to its CGHS. Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP) has a 
quality assurance protocol in place, where testing is already being done by an NABL certified 
laboratory. Random testing, as per the Committee’s observation is already being done. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.3.7 In replies (paras 3.3.2, 3.3.4 & 3.3.6) to recommendations of the Committee 
related to delay in procurement & subsequent distribution of medicines, supply of 
medicines and quality of medicines disbursed at the pharmacy counter of the 
dispensary, the Ministry gave an account of the extant systems in place for addressing 
the issues. The Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry that if the existing 
systems were foolproof, there would not have been so many complaints/grievances upon 
which the Committee felt the need to recommend. Therefore, the Committee reiterates 
its recommendations and wants the Ministry to review the existing systems and suggest 
some effective measures to mitigate these persisting problems. 
 
3.4 CLEARANCE OF BILLS OF EMPANELLED HOSPITALS 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.4.1 The Ministry may consider periodic meetings of CGHS authorities with the HCOs at 
the regional level to deliberate upon the regularly raised objections, which HCOs can correct 
in future. The Government may also consider payment to HCOs using predictive statistical 
analysis/tools about the cost of treatment. This can enable the system to determine the rentage 
of the amount to be deducted and thereafter, release the balance amount automatically. Such a 
step will be in the interest of both the beneficiaries and HCOs and will also, to some extent, 
address the grievances related to denial of treatment by hospitals. 
 (Para 2.6.4 of the report) 
Action Taken 

18 
 
 
3.4.2 It will be in the interest of all stakeholders to have periodic meetings with the HCOs 
and the same may be arranged including all the stake holders like CPDS, SAs and DDOs etc 
for smooth and efficient functioning of the system. Regarding payment to HCOs using 
predictive statistical analysis/tools about the cost of treatment, it is a policy decision. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.4.3 The Committee notes that the Ministry agrees with the observation that periodic 
meeting with HCOs is in the interest of all stakeholders. Further, the Committee would 
like to be apprised about the mechanism established by the Ministry to ensure periodic 
deliberative meetings between the CGHS authorities and HCOs to discuss the regularly 
raised objections. The Committee notes the submission of the Ministry that payment to 
HCOs using predictive statistical analysis/tools about the cost of treatment is a policy 
decision. The Committee would like the Government to consider this recommendation at 
the policy level. This is in interest of both the beneficiaries and HCOs, and would 
address their grievances in an effective manner. 
 
3.5 CONSULTATION AND DIAGNOSTIC RATES 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.5.1 The Committee observed that some procedures related to physiotherapy, mental 
disorders, psychological counselling, therapies, etc., are either not covered under CGHS or 
their categorisation is not well defined. This area needs the attention of the Ministry. 
Particularly after the COVID-19 pandemic, mental health issues are on the rise and should be 
seriously taken by the Ministry. In view of the serious concerns expressed by the Committee 
in its 148th Report on Mental Health Care and its Management in Contemporary Times, the 
Committee would recommend the Government to review and expand the coverage of mental 
health ailments and treatment procedures. 
 (Para 2.7.4 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.5.2 Most of the empanelled HCOs have facilities of physiotherapy, mental disorders, 
psychological counselling, therapies, etc. Link of OM dated 01.05.2023: 
https://cghs.gov.in/CghsGovIn/faces/ViewPage.xhtml# 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.5.3 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare vide OM dated 01.05.2023 provided 
the guidelines for availing treatment for occupational therapy, speech therapy, 
behavioural therapy, autism spectrum disorder, ADHD and specific learning disabilities. 
However, the Committee feels that this covers only a small spectrum of mental health. 
Hence, the Ministry should make a holistic review and expand the coverage of mental 

19 
 
health ailments and treatment procedures. Further, the Committee is also of the opinion 
that the categorisation of procedures and respective rates related to physiotherapy 
should be well defined under CGHS.   
 
3.6 SEPARATE FACILITY FOR CGHS BENEFICIARIES AT GOVERNMENT 
HOSPITALS 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.6.1 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry in extending cashless treatment 
(including secondary and tertiary treatment) to the beneficiaries of CGHS. The Ministry 
should enter into agreements with more AIIMS, Institutes of National Importance and 
eminent Government and Autonomous hospitals across the country to extend cashless 
facilities to CGHS beneficiaries. The Committee also feels that the proposal to collaborate 
with partner health organisations like Railways, ESIC, and ECHS should be pursued 
generously. The Ministry should also consider collaborating with State Government health 
centres and hospitals. Such collaborations would encourage the sharing of infrastructure and 
interoperability. This would also help increase the accessibility of health care services to 
remote areas across the country with less burden on the government exchequer. 
 (Para 2.9.3 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.6.2 Presently there is no provision for inter operability and sharing of infrastructure 
between health organizations like railways, ESIC, ECHS etc. However, the Government is 
planning to examine the feasibility of such option. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.6.3 The Committee recommends the Government expedite the examination of the 
issue and take concrete steps towards enabling such interoperability and sharing of 
infrastructure with other health organizations. The Committee would also reiterate that 
the Ministry should enter into agreements with more AIIMS, Institutes of National 
Importance and eminent Government and Autonomous hospitals across the country to 
extend cashless facilities to CGHS beneficiaries.   
 
3.7 GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.7.1 The Committee observes that patient satisfaction is essential for measuring healthcare 
quality. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry put in place a mechanism 
measuring and evaluating CGHS beneficiaries’ experiences in CGHS wellness centres and the 
empanelled private hospitals. Such an exercise may help the Ministry determine critical 
drivers of beneficiaries’ dissatisfaction with health care delivery. This would also help to 
develop and implement improvement strategies across the healthcare sector under CGHS. 
 (Para 2.10.6 of the report) 
Action Taken 

20 
 
3.7.2 CGHS has issued an OM dated 23/10/2023 "Inspection Proforma to be used by 
Wellness Centres for assessment of functioning of Wellness Centres". This proforma has been 
used by Wellness Centres successfully in the last three months and shall be used for regular 
assessment of functioning of Wellness Centres. PDF Pg 16 of the attached OM has the 
proforma for beneficiary feedback regarding the Wellness Centre, which is assessed by the 
concerned Additional Director of the city/zone of CGHS. Presently, there is no feedback 
proforma for feedback from beneficiaries regarding HCOs. However, feedback is received 
from beneficiaries through emails, through CPGRAMs portal and CGHS own Grievance 
portal, which are attended to, by the concerned officer. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.7.3  The Committee is happy to note that the Inspection Proforma available at the 
Wellness Centre has a page for beneficiary feedback. But the Committee is of the view 
that obtaining feedback from the beneficiaries regarding the empanelled private 
hospitals is of great importance in developing and implementing improvement strategies 
across the healthcare sector. Accordingly, the Ministry should establish a dedicated 
feedback cell roping in the technical expertise and AI assistance in each Additional 
Director zone of CGHS. Such feedback cell should dedicatedly contact the beneficiaries 
through call or SMS services and obtain their satisfaction and suggestions on the 
services received in the CGHS wellness centre or empanelled private hospital. In this 
regard, the existing CGHS application (myCGHS) may be revamped to include the 
service of securing feedback would be beneficial in the effective working of the entire 
CGHS system. 
 
3.8 INCREASE IN THE EMPANELMENT OF BIG HOSPITALS UNDER CGHS 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.8.1 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may also consider enforcing mandatory 
empanelment of healthcare facilities in the private sector falling under the following 
categories: 
i. health facilities availing tax benefits. 
ii. those receiving land grants/ concessions from the Centre/State Governments for 
their establishment. 
iii. facilities affiliated with medical colleges; and 
iv. any other category deemed fit by the Government. 
 
(Para 2.12.3 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
3.8.2 Relates to policy division 
 
Further Recommendation 

21 
 
 
3.8.3 The Committee noted that the recommendation may relate to the policy division 
and expects the Government to submit a detailed reply on each of its recommendation 
including this one. Many healthcare facilities in private sector avail tax benefits, land 
grants/concessions and subsidies from the Government. Some of the healthcare 
providers affiliated with medical colleges also took benefits of Government schemes. 
Such benefits and schemes are floated by the Government to encourage investment in 
healthcare sector. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that in order to 
enhance the empanelment coverage under CGHS, the Government should consider 
enforcing mandatory empanelment of healthcare facilities in private sector falling under 
the categories mentioned therein.  
   
  

22 
 
CHAPTER–IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
 
 
4.1 EXPANSION OF COVERAGE OF CASHLESS TREATMENT 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
4.1.1 The Committee has been informed that certain categories of beneficiaries are provided 
treatment on a cashless basis. The Committee feels that it is not appropriate that the CGHS 
services are cashless for some people and others have to take reimbursement. It is informed 
that the processing and payment of hospital bills pertaining to CGHS are being completed on 
the IT platform of NHA. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry consider 
expanding the ambit of cashless treatment to all beneficiaries. The Ministry may consider 
using NHA’s IT platform or explore the possibility of developing new software for the 
common use of all Ministries and Departments to streamline the process for 
payment/reimbursement of cashless treatment 
 (Para 2.14.1 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.1.2 At present, all Central Government pensioners, ex-MPs, Freedom Fighters, Ex 
Governors, ex- Judges of High Courts, etc., and their dependents having a CGHS Card 
(excluding pensioners of autonomous bodies and their dependents) can avail cashless health 
services through NHA’s IT platforms at CGHS empanelled hospitals and diagnostic centres. 
In addition to above, as per signed MoU between CGHS and HCOs, the serving employees of 
MoHFW and CGHS are also entitled to avail cashless CGHS facilities. The Serving 
beneficiaries of CAPF are also eligible for credit facility through NHA Portal. All other 
CGHS beneficiaries will continue to avail health services as per the old system.  
 
4.1.3 The recommendation of Committee to extend cashless CGHS facilities to all the 
eligible Central Serving employees shall be examined in this Ministry. 
 
 
4.2 EMPLOYEES OF JAWAHAR NAVODAYA VIDYALAYAS (JNVs) AND 
KENDRIYA VIDYALAYAS (KVs) UNDER CGHS 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
4.2.1 Employees of Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas (JNVS) and Kendriya Vidyalayas (KVs) 
under CGHS. The committee is of the view that the participation of autonomous bodies with 
CGHS is abysmal. Out of about 450 such bodies, only 60 are covered under CGHS. Most 
autonomous bodies, particularly the KVs and JNVs, have employees with all India transfer 
liability. The coverage under CGHS would benefit the employees of these organisations in 

23 
 
providing health care facilities across the country. The committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to take up this issue with the Ministries and Departments concerned. 
 (Para 2.15.2 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
4.2.2 CGHS is a contributory health scheme primarily meant for central government 
employees and pensioners. Earlier, the CGHS facilities were extended to some Autonomous/ 
Statutory Bodies in the past, however, the same were no longer being extended to any new 
group of persons or organization, citing the reason that the resources under CGHS are fully 
committed and stretched. The decision to not extend the CGHS facility to any new 
group/body was taken in the Committee of Secretaries’ (CoS) meeting held on 23.12.2008 
and the same was reiterated in CoS meeting dated 04.06.2015. 
 
4.2.3 It is stated that the CGHS facilities were extended on payment of service charges on 
cost to cost basis in advance on yearly basis at the rates determined by DoHFW in 
consultation with o/o Chief Advisor (Cost), DoE, MoF. However, now, the resuming of 
extending of CGHS facilities to employees of new Autonomous/ Statutory Bodies is being 
examined.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

24 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  - AT   A  GLANCE 
 
NEED FOR AUGMENTING WELLNESS CENTRES 
 
 The Committee notes from the replies (paras 2.1.2 & 3.1.2) of the Government, 
the process of securing and release of funds for expansion of CGHS as well as the reason 
for higher concentration of CGHS Wellness Centres in Delhi NCR. However, the replies 
do not address the recommendation of the Committee about the need to further expand 
the coverage of CGHS in existing and new cities so as to have distribution and 
accessibility of CGHS services across different regions of the country in the ideal 
proportion. Accordingly, the Committee wants the Government to furnish a 
comprehensive action taken reply in this regard.   
(Para 3.1.3 of the ATR) 
 
 The Committee understands that the Ministry considers several factors when 
opening new wellness centres, including resources, creation of posts, accommodation, 
etc. The Committee has, however, noted an imbalance in the distribution of these 
centres, with 26% in Delhi NCR but only six states having more than 10 centres each. To 
address this, the Committee recommends modifying the norms, such as adjusting the 
beneficiary requirement based on area remoteness, on the lines of organisations like 
ESIC. The Committee also urge the Ministry to overcome barriers like resource 
availability and to work with the Ministry of Finance for creating necessary posts. 
(Para 3.1.6 of the ATR) 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE IN A CGHS WC 
 
 The Committee agrees with the contention of the Ministry that CGHS wellness 
centres are providing primary health care services to the beneficiaries and in any 
emergency situation, the beneficiary has the option to visit nearby empanelled or 
Government hospital. But the Ministry has not responded to the recommendation of the 
Committee regarding the model list of essential services and equipments. Hence, the 
Committee is reiterating its recommendation on the importance for having a model list 
of essential services and equipments that should be available in the Wellness centre and 
post that list on its website and the reception area of the respective Wellness centre for 
information.  
(Para 3.2.3 of the ATR) 
 
AVAILABILITY AND QUALITY OF MEDICINES SUPPLIED AT WELLNESS 
CENTRES 
 
 In replies (paras 3.3.2, 3.3.4 & 3.3.6) to recommendations of the Committee 
related to delay in procurement & subsequent distribution of medicines, supply of 
medicines and quality of medicines disbursed at the pharmacy counter of the 

25 
 
dispensary, the Ministry gave an account of the extant systems in place for addressing 
the issues. The Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry that if the existing 
systems were foolproof, there would not have been so many complaints/grievances upon 
which the Committee felt the need to recommend. Therefore, the Committee reiterates 
its recommendations and wants the Ministry to review the existing systems and suggest 
some effective measures to mitigate these persisting problems. 
(Para 3.3.7 of the ATR) 
 
 
CLEARANCE OF BILLS OF EMPANELLED HOSPITALS 
 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry agrees with the observation that periodic 
meeting with HCOs is in the interest of all stakeholders. Further, the Committee would 
like to be apprised about the mechanism established by the Ministry to ensure periodic 
deliberative meetings between the CGHS authorities and HCOs to discuss the regularly 
raised objections. The Committee notes the submission of the Ministry that payment to 
HCOs using predictive statistical analysis/tools about the cost of treatment is a policy 
decision. The Committee would like the Government to consider this recommendation at 
the policy level. This is in interest of both the beneficiaries and HCOs, and would 
address their grievances in an effective manner. 
(Para 3.4.3 of the ATR) 
 
CONSULTATION AND DIAGNOSTIC RATES 
 
 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare vide OM dated 01.05.2023 provided 
the guidelines for availing treatment for occupational therapy, speech therapy, 
behavioural therapy, autism spectrum disorder, ADHD and specific learning disabilities. 
However, the Committee feels that this covers only a small spectrum of mental health. 
Hence, the Ministry should make a holistic review and expand the coverage of mental 
health ailments and treatment procedures. Further, the Committee is also of the opinion 
that the categorisation of procedures and respective rates related to physiotherapy 
should be well defined under CGHS.   
(Para 3.5.3 of the ATR) 
 
SEPARATE FACILITY FOR CGHS BENEFICIARIES AT GOVERNMENT 
HOSPITALS 
 
 The Committee recommends the Government expedite the examination of the 
issue and take concrete steps towards enabling such interoperability and sharing of 
infrastructure with other health organizations. The Committee would also reiterate that 
the Ministry should enter into agreements with more AIIMS, Institutes of National 
Importance and eminent Government and Autonomous hospitals across the country to 
extend cashless facilities to CGHS beneficiaries.   
(Para 3.6.3 of the ATR) 

26 
 
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL 
 
  The Committee is happy to note that the Inspection Proforma available at the 
Wellness Centre has a page for beneficiary feedback. But the Committee is of the view 
that obtaining feedback from the beneficiaries regarding the empanelled private 
hospitals is of great importance in developing and implementing improvement strategies 
across the healthcare sector. Accordingly, the Ministry should establish a dedicated 
feedback cell roping in the technical expertise and AI assistance in each Additional 
Director zone of CGHS. Such feedback cell should dedicatedly contact the beneficiaries 
through call or SMS services and obtain their satisfaction and suggestions on the 
services received in the CGHS wellness centre or empanelled private hospital. In this 
regard, the existing CGHS application (myCGHS) may be revamped to include the 
service of securing feedback would be beneficial in the effective working of the entire 
CGHS system. 
(Para 3.7.3 of the ATR) 
 
INCREASE IN THE EMPANELMENT OF BIG HOSPITALS UNDER CGHS 
 
 The Committee noted that the recommendation may relate to the policy division 
and expects the Government to submit a detailed reply on each of its recommendation 
including this one. Many healthcare facilities in private sector avail tax benefits, land 
grants/concessions and subsidies from the Government. Some of the healthcare 
providers affiliated with medical colleges also took benefits of Government schemes. 
Such benefits and schemes are floated by the Government to encourage investment in 
healthcare sector. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that in order to 
enhance the empanelment coverage under CGHS, the Government should consider 
enforcing mandatory empanelment of healthcare facilities in private sector falling under 
the categories mentioned therein.  
  (Para 3.8.3 of the ATR) 
 
  

A pie-chart depicting the status of action taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the  
 
 25%30%6%Status of action taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare in respect of 155th  Report of the Committee
27 
chart depicting the status of action taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the 155thReport has been given hereunder: 
******* 
39%25%Status of action taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare in respect of 155th  Report of the CommitteeRecommendations/ Observations accepted by the GovernmentCommittee does not desire to pursue in view of Government's repliesCommittee has made further recommendationsFinal replies of the Government have not been receivedchart depicting the status of action taken by the Department of Health and Family 
  
Status of action taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare in respect of Recommendations/ Observations accepted by the GovernmentCommittee does not desire to pursue in view of Government's Committee has made further Final replies of the Government 