 1
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
41 
 
 
        DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 FORTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
ON 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2010-11 (DEMAND NO.48) OF 
THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE) 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28TH APRIL 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE  LOK SABHA ON 28TH APRIL, 2010) 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT,  
NEW DELHI 
April, 2010/ Vaishakha , 1932 (SAKA) 
 
  


 2
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
FORTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
ON 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2010-11 (DEMAND NO. 48) OF 
THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE) 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28TH APRIL, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE  LOK SABHA ON 28TH APRIL, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
April, 2010/ Vaishakha  1932 (SAKA) 
 


 3
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
 
PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE-------------------------------------------------------------      (i)           
2. PREFACE---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------   (ii)         
3. REPORT-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------   1--32 
*4 O BSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE---------------------------------       
*5. M INUTES--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------       
              
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* To be appended at printing stage. 

 4
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-2010)                       
   
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shri Amar Singh    -    Chairman 
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
3. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
5. Shri Balbir Punj 
6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
7. Shrimati Brinda Karat 
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley 
9. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy 
10. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
11. Shri J. M. Aaron Rashid 
12. Shri Ashok Argal 
13. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel 
14. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
15. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
16. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan 
17. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
18. Shri S. R. Jeyadurai 
19. Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi 
20. Shri N. Kristappa 
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
22. Shri Datta Meghe 
23. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel 
25. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
26. Shri M. K Raghavan 
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha 
28. Shrimati Meena Singh 
29. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
30. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
31. Shri Ratan Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
              
 Shrimati Vandana Garg,            Additional Secretary 
Shri R.B.Gupta,                         Director 
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta,     Joint Director 
             Shri Dinesh Singh,                    Assistant Director 
 Shri Satis Mesra            Committee Officer 
 
(i) 
 

 5
PREFACE 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and 
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Forty-first Report of the Co mmittee on the Demands for Grants (Demand No.48) 
of the Department of Health Research, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2010-11. 
2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from the 
Department of Health Research, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and also heard the Secretary 
and other officials of that Department on the said  Demands for Grants (2010-11) in its meeting held 
on the 6th April, 2010. 
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same  in its meeting held on the 
26th April, 2010. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                         Amar Singh 
26
th April, 2010                                                                                       Chairman, 
Vaishakha 7, 1932 (saka)                                               Department-related Parliamentary                                       
                                                                             Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)  
 

 6
REPORT 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1 The Department of Health Research was created in the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare in 2007 and be came functional in November, 2008 with appointment of the 
first Secretary, who is also DG, ICMR. 
 
1.2 Department of Health Research (DHR) aims  at bringing modern health technology 
to people by encouraging innovations related to diagnostics, treatment methods as well as 
prevention- vaccines; translating the innovations into products/processes  by facilitating 
evaluation/testing in synergy with other Dep artments of Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare as well as other Departments engaged in health research and introducing these 
innovations into public health service through health systems research.  
  
1.3 The Committee has been given to understand that there are very few laboratories 
apart from National Institute of Virology (N IV) and National Centre for Disease Control 
(NCDC) which are engaged in health research.  Health research is confined to a handful of 
medical colleges as the remaining medical colleges lack requisite infrastructure and 
manpower for conducting research.  Also, th ere are negligible incentives available for 
conducting medical research.  The Secretary, Health Research informed the Committee that 
the following major schemes are envisaged for augmentation of infrastructure and 
manpower. 
 
a) Creation of Network of Laboratories for Viral Diagnosis 
 
Proposal to set up four categories of laboratories across the country: 
• National Institute of Communicable Diseases (NICD) and NIV to be 
 national reference centres, (BSL-IV facilities) 
• Grade I laboratories (28): Reference Centre for Each State (BSL-III facilities) 
• Grade II laboratories (60): Equipped with BSL2 
• Grade III laboratories (80): 
 
b) Special support to the medical colleges: 
• Assistance for setting up advanced centres on various aspects of  

 7
      medicine in different institutions/places 
                Establishing  
• Modern biology units. 
• Advanced centres in selected medical colleges in a phased manner. 
 
c) Establishment of Model  Rural Health Research Units 
 
Proposal to: 
• establish infrastructure at the new model rural health research units, 
• strengthen the existing units 
• set up training facilities for doctors and other health care personnel on 
diagnosis, treatment & epidemiology at these units. 
 
1.4     The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department towards 
promotion of basic, applied & clinical health  research and to ensure infrastructure for 
research work.  The Committee hopes that  all major schemes envisaged by the 
Department would be implemented and translated into action within the next six 
months.   
 
1.5        The Committee feels that for ensuring  translation of research there is a need to 
concentrate on taking research to its logica l conclusion in the fi eld of drugs, vaccines 
(both preventive and therapeutic) diagnosis, microbicides, vector and control products 
and platform technologies.  The Committee re commends that the Department should  
make all efforts for achieving the above objectives. 
 
1.6     The Committee further recommends that there is a need to put in place necessary 
framework and guidelines for research activitie s.  Ethical guidelines should be ensured 
through proper legislation, professional self-regulations and external bodies.  The 
priority areas should be identified and prior ity should be set for various aspects of the 
health research.  A National Health Resear ch Policy should be framed and a National 
Health Research Forum should be created  at the earliest.  Appropriate mechanism 
should be established for mapping and accred itation of Health Research Institutions.  
Besides, Knowledge Management Policy should be framed at the earliest. 
 
 
 

 8
II BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
 
2.1 The Committee notes that out of total Elev enth Plan Outlay of Rs.4696.08 crore, only 
Rs.1496.49 crore  have been allocated for the first four years of the Plan  period which is 34 
percent of the total outlay.  The remaining ou tlay of Rs. 3199.51 crore is to be allocated and 
utilized in the final year of the Eleventh Plan period i.e. 2011-12.   
 
2.2 The Committee expresses its displeasure over the funds management of the 
Department.  Under no circumstances it coul d be possible for the Department to utilize 
66% of the total Plan outlay in the final year of the Eleventh Plan Period. 
 
2.3 As per the information furnished by the Department, the BE and RE allocations and 
the expenditure figures in respect thereof for 2008-09 and 2009-10 are as follows: 
         (Rs. In crores) 
Financial 
Year 
        BE                                                        RE 
       P l a n          N o n  p l a n             P l a n  
 
Non plan 
        Expenditure  
Plan                     Non 
plan 
2008-09 Rs. 420.00    Rs. 111.75       Rs. 420.00            Rs. 
147.00  
Rs. 389.85         Rs. 
176.12 
2009-10 Rs. 420.00   Rs. 186.00        Rs. 400.00            Rs. 
200.00  
*Rs. 399.85      * Rs. 
184.07 
          *(till Feb. 2010) 
2.4 Total Budgetary allocation for the Department in BE 2010-11 is Rs. 660.00 crore out 
of which Rs. 500.00 crore is the plan comp onent and Rs. 160.00 crore is the non plan 
component.  The plan compon ent reflects an increase of  Rs. 100.00 crore over the RE 2009-
10 allocation. 
 
2.5 On being asked about the projections made by the Department for      2010-11, the 
Department has informed that against a proj ection of Rs. 1644.39 crore (Plan), provision of 
only Rs. 500.00 crore has been made.  The major programmes likely to be affected due to 
shortfall include the proposals to establish a network of virus diagnostic laboratories, 
establishment of facilities for health researc h in medical colleges and the establishment of 

 9
model rural health research units. Apart fr om this, funding of projects for product 
development in key areas is also likely to be affected. 
 
2.6 The Committee expresses its dissatisfacti on on such a big gap between the 
required and allocated funds.  The Committee notes that the major programmes likely to 
be affected as a result of the shortfall of Rs.1144.39 crores in plan allocation are 
establishment of network of virus diagnostic laboratories,  facilities for health research 
in medical colleges and model rural health re search units.  Prevalen ce of various virus 
infections like swine flue, dengue, Chikunguny a etc. is a very common feature in the 
country and large number of people suffer every year due to various viral infections.  
Presently there is acute shortage of virus diag nostic laboratories in the country and as a 
result of meagre plan allocation for 2010- 11, the effective control of various virus 
infection-related life threatening ailments wo uld be a distant dream.  Similarly, in the 
absence of adequate facilities for health research in medical colleges, the very purpose of 
coordination between the medical education and health research would be defeated.  
More than 70 per cent populat ion resides in the rural ar eas and as a result of non-
establishment of model rural health research units, the rural population of the country 
would be deprived of the critical health care facilities like disease diagnostics.   
 
2.7 The Committee views with serious concern that such critical areas of health 
research would be affected adversely due to resource crunch.  The Committee observes 
that scientific knowledge generated through h ealth and bio-medical research is used to 
develop drugs, diagnostics, devices and vaccine s that ultimately find place in the health 
system of the country.  The Committee, th erefore, recommends that the funds crunch 
should not be allowed to come  in the way of establishing a network of virus diagnostic 
laboratories, facilities for health research , model rural health research units and 
generation of new knowledge in such a crucial area as health research. 
 
 
2.8 The Committee also notes that the Planni ng Commission had allocated an amount 
of Rs. 800 crore for 2010-11 for the Department, which was subsequently reduced to Rs. 
500 without assigning any reason therefor.   Considering the fact that the Department 

 10
was specifically created to gi ve impetus to bio-medical res earch in the country, which is 
a sector that is very crucial to the health and well-being of the people of the country, the 
Committee is of the considered view that Rs. 500.00 crore will not be su fficient to fulfill 
the mandate of the Department. The Committee, therefore, recommends that allocation 
for the Department for this fiscal should  be increased to Rs. 800.00 crore, initially 
allocated by the Planning Commission.  
 
2.9 Though the Committee is all for enhanced a llocation for the Department, its scrutiny 
of various other Major Heads of Account has also revealed non-utilization of the entire 
budgeted allocation which is a matter of concern.  The Committee notes that funds 
allocated for the following schemes have remained unutilized during 2008-09 and 2009-10 
with only taken money spent in one or two schemes:-  
• Promotion, Coordination and Development of Basic, Applied and Clinical Research 
• Promotion and Guidance on Research Governance Issues 
• Inter-sectorial Coordination in Medical, Biomedical and Health 
• Advanced Training in Research in Medicine and Health 
• International Cooperation in Medical and Health Research 
• Matters relating to Epidemics, Natural Calamities and Develo pment of Tools to 
prevent outbreaks 
• Coordination in the field of Health Research with Governments, Organisations and 
Institutes  
 
2.10 Explaining the reasons behind non-ut ilization of budgeted funds during 2008—09, 
and 2009-10, the Department has stated that since the Department was notified only on 17
th 
September, 2007 and the work of the Departme nt commenced with the appointment of the 
first Secretary in November, 2008, the only on going scheme transferred to the Department 
was that relating to the ICMR. Although the responsibilities entrusted to the new 
Department were multiple, there were no matchi ng mechanisms or processes to undertake 
these schemes. In view of the above, all compon ents under heads other than ICMR  needed  
to be taken up as new initiatives. 
 
2.11 The Committee has also been informed that new schemes have been formulated 
over the last year so as to fulfil the mandat e and work entrusted to the Department. These 
proposals now require approval of the Pla nning Commission as well as other mandatory 

 11
clearances like SFC, EFC and CCEA.  Howeve r, with formulation of new schemes, the 
process has commenced for securing mandatory clearances to commence the scheme and it 
is anticipated that most of these will be launched in 2010-11. However, the final outcome 
will depend on the quantum of funding and the mandatory clearances. 
 
2.12 The Committee is constrained to note that funds amounting to Rs. 129.00 crore 
and Rs. 8.00 crore allocated in 2008-9 and 2009-10 respectively remained blocked 
presumably due to delay in approvals and non-finalization of plans/schemes. Rs. 83.00 
crore has been allocated for the above pr ojects for 2010-11. The Committee exhorts the 
Department to secure all mandatory clearances and initiate the implementation of the 
above projects so as to ensure optimum utilization of the allocated funds for 2010-11.   
 
2.13 The Committee notes that there is a huge mismatch between the projected 
demands by the Department and the approved BE for the year 2010-11.  The same was 
the trend in 2008-09 as well, when against the projected demand of Rs. 1613.00 crore on 
the plan side, the Department was allocate d Rs. 531.75 crore and the actual expenditure 
(plan) was Rs. 389.85 crore only. While the Co mmittee is supportive of the Department’s 
demand for higher allocation, it is, also, imperative on the part of the Department to take 
suitable measures to reverse this trend of  unrealistic projection of fund requirements 
and make its estimates only after proper assessment and planning. If the budget 
formulation is reduced to a ritualistic exer cise, it leads to under-utilization/non-
utilization of scare resources which a country like India can ill-afford. The Committee 
would  
 
 
therefore like to be apprised of the measures taken for objective and realistic 
formulation of the budget requirement of  the Department.  The Committee also 
recommends that the Department prepare a comprehensive action plan for optimal 
utilization of the funds, which should be revi ewed periodically by the Secretary of the 
Department.   
 

 12
2.14 The plan allocation for the North Eastern Areas in RE 2008-09 and RE 2009-10 was 
Rs. 40.00 crore each and the entire allocation wa s utilized during both the above years.  An 
allocation of Rs. 50.00 crore has been made in BE 2010-11.   
 
2.15 The Committee welcomes the enhanced allocation for the North Eastern Areas for 
2010-11, which is fully justified in view of the excellent track-record of the Region in the 
matter of utilization of the funds allocated in the past.  However the Committee would 
like to be enlightened as to whether the entire budget allocation was spent for the 
intended purposes during 2008-09 and 2009-10 or some part of it was transferred to the 
non-lapsable pool to be utilized later. 
 
 
III INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH   
 
3.1 The Indian Council of Medical Research is the apex body for the formulation, 
coordination and promotion of bio-medical and health research in the country. 
3.2 The Indian Council of Medical Researc h promotes biomedical research in the 
country through intramural as well as extramu ral research.  Intramural research is carried 
out currently through the Council's 29 Research Institutes/Centres/Units. These include (i) 
18 mission-oriented national institutes   located in different parts of India that address 
themselves to research on specific areas such as tuberculosis, leprosy, cholera and 
diarrhoeal diseases, viral diseases includin g AIDS, malaria, kala-azar, vector control, 
nutrition, reproduction, immunohaemat ology, oncology, medical statistics,  etc;  (ii) 6 
Regional Medical Research Centres
 that address regional health problems, and also aim to 
strengthen or generate research capabilities in different geographic areas of the country; 
and (iii)  5 Unit/Centres  dealing with food & drug toxicology, viral diseases, handling 
microorganisms of highly infectious nature, pr enatal diagnosis for  neonatal retardation etc 
and supply of various animal models an d feeds for experimental purposes.    
Extramural research  is promoted by ICMR through (i) Setting up Centres for Advanced 
Research in different research areas around existing expertise and infrastructure in selected 

 13
departments of Medical Colleges, Universities and other non-ICMR Research Institutes.(ii) 
Task force  studies which emphasise a time-bound, goal-oriented approach with clearly 
defined targets, specific time frames, standardized and uniform methodologies, and often a 
multicentric structure.(iii) Open-ended research on the basis of applications for grants-in-
aid received from scientists in non-ICMR Research Institutes, Medical colleges, Universities 
etc. located in different parts of the country. 
3.3 Actual expenditure figures vis-a vis the BE and RE (plan) for the years 2008-09 and 
2009-10 in respect of Indian Council of Medical Research is as follows:-           
      
            (Rs. In crores) 
2008-09 2009-10 
BE  
 
RE  Actual 
Expenditu
re 
BE  RE  Actual 
Expenditure 
(till February, 
2010) 
Rs. 246.00 Rs. 379.00 Rs. 350.18 Rs. 368.00 Rs. 359.50 Rs. 261.52 
  
3.4 The Department has informed the Committ ee that against the projected demand of 
Rs. 990.00 crore, the plan allocation for Indian  Council of Medical Research (ICMR) in BE 
2010-11 is Rs. 360.00 crore which is just fraction ally higher that the RE 2009-10 (Rs. 359.50 
crore) and lower by 19.00 crore than RE 2008-09 (Rs. 379.00 crore).  Explaining the 
reduction during 2009-10 at RE stage to Rs. 359.50 crore, the Department has informed that 
the reduction was done by the Ministry of Finance on account of resource constraints.  
 
3.5 In reply to a query regarding the schemes to be taken up on a priority basis, the 
Department has stated that the major schemes that are proposed to be taken up based on 
the current allocations are: 
 
• Extramural grants to medical colleges, universities etc.   
• Up-gradation of existing ICMR institutions  
• Fellowship programmes  
• Training support to Non ICMR Scientists  
• Translation programmes  

 14
 
3.6 Important ongoing activities that are likely to be affected are – extramural grants to 
medical colleges, universities; commissioning and start up activities of (a) BSL-IV and (b) 
Primate Research Facility at Sasunavgarh (Mumbai) and programmes on tribal Health. 
 
3.7 The Committee notes that the shortfall between the amount allocated and the 
amount projected for ICMR is to the tune of Rs. 630.00 crore which is quite large by any 
standards and is certain to have an advers e bearing on the implementation of various 
research projects of ICMR.  The Committee observes that in view of the dynamic 
international health research environment a nd the current and future health challenges, 
the role of ICMR is very crucial and if its projects are plagued with under-funding, it can 
have very serious repercussions and undermine the desired outcomes in the health 
sector.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that more funds be allocated to ICMR.  
Simultaneously, the Committee impresses upon the ICMR, to exercise better fiscal 
discipline and take credible and tangible ac tion to improve the financial administration 
which will ultimately bolster its claims for more funds. 
 
3.8  In reply to a question reg arding specific contribution made by the ICMR towards 
coordinating Health Research undertaken by  different institutes/agencies and recent 
innovations, if any, at the ICMR leading to  better management of communicable and non-
communicable diseases, the Department has st ated that ICMR has taken the following 
initiatives for coordinating Health Research undertaken by different Institutes/agencies:  
i. ICAR and its Institutes: committee to oversee research on Zoonotic diseases.  
ii. DBT and its Institutes: committee to c oordinate research on HIV especially 
microbicides and vaccines. 
iii. NIH&FW : on contraceptives and mother and child health, teaching  
iv. Vaccines : consultations with DBT, ICG EB, NII, NCDC, Department of Health, 
academia (AIIMS, PGI, CMC, Vellore), in dustry (Serum Instit ute of India, Bharat 
Biotech, Panacea etc.)  
 

 15
3.9 The Committee was informed that a nu mber of innovations have been made 
recently by ICMR leading to better management of communicable diseases. 
 
3.10 ICMR’s National Institute of Virology, Pune has developed a recombinant Hepatitis 
E DNA vaccine and JE Vaccine. Technology/St rain has been transferred to Bharat Biotech 
for vaccine development. (NIV, Pune).  Similarly, technology for Hepatitis A Vaccine 
developed by NIV, Pune has been transferred to  industry.  Lastly recombinant oral cholera 
vaccine has been developed in partnership with DBT, CSIR ( NICED). 
 
3.11 A number of path-breaking achievemen ts have been made in the area of 
Microbicides and Diagnostics. 
 
3.12 ICMR has also played a major role in the control of outbreak of  communicable 
diseases like Influenza, acute Encephalitis in the country during 2009-10. 
 
3.13 ICMR has also been actively engaged in the Surveillance of other viral diseases, 
research in HIV/AIDS, TB, Cancer, Cardiova scular diseases.  Reproductive and Child 
Health, Nutrition, community studies, food and drug to toxicology were the other areas of 
research being undertaken by ICMR. 
 
3.14 The Committee is happy to note the sterli ng achievements of ICMR and places on 
record its appreciation for the endeavors made  by it.   At the same time, the Committee 
would like to highlight two key concerns iden tified in the Eleventh Plan, i.e.(i) bridging 
the “Know-do” gap and (ii) delivery of the products of health research to the people who 
need it most. It has been observed that wh ile health research has made appreciable 
progress, there remains a time lag in translating the research outcome into tangible 
health products or in application of the kn owledge generated through research and that 
there is a need to mobilize research to brid ge the gap between what is known and what 
is done.  Equally important is to ensure that  the products of hea lth research reach and 
are used by the people who need it most.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the specific health products/processes accruing from each of the above 
innovations/achievements of ICMR should be introduced into public health service and 

 16
be made accessible to all sections including th e most deprived sections of the society.  
The Committee would like to be kept apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
3.15 The Committee observes that health research projects funded with public money 
should be assessed in terms of tangible health outcomes for the masses and there should 
also be a mechanism for evaluating the hea lth benefits ensuing from such research 
projects.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that a system be put in place to do 
audit of health research being funded, who lly or partially, with government money, so 
that an assessment could be made as to whethe r or not the health research being done is 
justified and relevant.  
 
3.16 The Committee takes special note of the following achievements of ICMR. 
• A phase I HIV vaccine trial using the prime boost approach was initiated in NARI, 
Pune and TRC, Chennai. The enrollment for the trial has been completed and the 
volunteers are now being followed.  
• Draft guidelines on management   of    buccal mucosa  cancer and cervical cancer are 
being finalized on the lines of suggestions of experts. 
• A Web Based Management for Acute Coronary  Events (MACE) Registry network has 
been initiated  
• New proposal on “ICMR- Indian National Diabetes Study-Phase I,” has been 
initiated at three states and one Unio n Territory with the aim to understand 
prevalence of diabetes and pre-diabetes along its association with the genetic aspects.  
 
3.17 The Committee would like to be apprised of the final outcomes of the above 
research projects.  
 
3.18 The Committee also notes that a number of outcomes have been projected for the 
year 2010-11 in respect of ICMR regarding its Regular programme and Translational 
programme, Establishment of new centres, strengthening the international cooperation, 
tribal health in North-East and other under-privileged areas/population, manpower 
development, and health system research.  The Committee recommends that the desired 
outcomes should be achieved within the fixed time frame.  The Committee would also 
like to be apprised of the achievements made in respect of each of the above 
programmes/projects.   
 

 17
3.19 In reply to a specific query regarding majo r research projects on traditional medicine 
undertaken by ICMR, follow-up action for br inging the achievemen ts thereof into the 
mainstream for the benefit of the public, and the number of such on-going projects, the 
Department has informed that in the past the Council has focused on 6 refractory diseases 
viz. anal fistula, viral hepatitis, diabetes mellitus, urolithiasis, bronchial asthma and 
filariasis. Treatment of anal fistula by Kshaarasootra was standardised for benefit of 
general public. Finger printing profile has b een created for selected plant preparations and 
agro-technology of selected plants Picorrhiza kurroa and Pterocarpus marsupium for various 
clinical trials.   
 
3.20 Currently, ICMR is funding 48 projects  in traditional medicine. The ICMR has 
developed both qualitative and quantitative standards on 274 medicinal plants which are 
of therapeutic use and is being used by th e industry and practioners of traditional 
medicine. Scientific information on more than 2000 medicinal plants species has been 
condensed in 9 volumes of review monographs.  In addition, ICMR is   collaborating with 
Department of AYUSH and CSIR (“Golden Tria ngle Partnership”)   for the validation of 
traditional AYUSH drugs and development of new drugs for the identified diseases; and 
with the National Innovation Foundation for validating the safety and efficacy of the 
therapeutic practices. 
 
3.21 The Committee observes that no single system of health care has the capacity to 
solve all of India’s health care needs.  It is in this context that the scientific research in 
the area of traditional medicine assumes added significance. The Committee notes that 
the ICMR is funding 48 projects in tradition al medicine. The Committee is of the view 
that it is more important to focus on health  outcomes rather than health outlays.  The 
Committee, therefore, urges upon the Department not to remain complacent by merely 
funding the 48 projects but to reorient its attention for the health outcomes accruing 
from the above research projects.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
health outcomes of all the research projects under reference.    
 

 18
3.22 The Committee also recommends that the task of validation of traditional AYUSH 
drugs and development of new drugs for identified diseases should be accomplished 
within the stipulated time frame.  Similarly,  the project for validating the safety and 
efficacy of therapeutic practice should be co mpleted well in time.  It would also like to 
be informed of the achievements made so far from the “Golden Triangle Partnership, 
and ICMR’s collaboration with the National  Innovation Foundation” for validating the 
safety and efficacy of therapeutic practices.  
 
3.23 The Committee notes from the Background Material furnished by the Department 
that as many as 16 research projects concer ning family planning for which a budget of 
Rs. 97,53,940/- was committed during 2008-09, are still pending and no amount has been 
released out of the budgeted allocation.   In the absence of any reasons, the Committee is 
unable to comprehend the non-release of the budgeted allocation.  The Committee 
therefore, recommends that all such research projects should be completed at the earliest 
and bottlenecks, if any, should be removed.  It would also like to be apprised of the 
reasons behind the pendency of the projects  under reference and non-release of the 
committed funds for those projects. 
 
3.24 On being asked as to what mechanism is in place to facilitate objective and 
expeditious and hassle-free approval of the re search proposals received by the ICMR, the 
Department replied that the proposals receiv ed at the Council for funding go through a 
process of peer review (evaluation by experts).  Generally a meeting of a committee of 
experts is convened.  The proposals are re viewed from technical point of view, the 
methodology, ethical issues, scientific merit of  hypothesis, scheme of statistical analysis, 
s a m p l e  s i z e  f o r  b u d g e t  r e q u i r e d  e t c .   O n  the basis of recommendations of the expert 
committee, the projects are approved and funds  released.  For heavily funded projects 
and/or invited projects, the principal investigator  is also invited at the meetings to present 
and clarify issues to the experts, to cut down the time required for seeking clarifications.  
The process is being further streamlined to redu ce the time from subm ission of the project 
and conveying the decision on funding. 
 

 19
3.25 The Committee is happy to note that streamlining the process of approval of the 
research proposals is underway.  In this era of fast-paced scientific developments, 
speedy approval of the research projects is critical for generating and unleashing full 
potential of scientific knowledge.  The Co mmittee, accordingly, recommends that the 
process of approval of the research projects should be streamlined in such a way that  
their approval is accorded well within the stipulated time frame. 
 
 
 
 
IV PROMOTION, COORDINATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF BASIC, APPLIED 
AND CLINICAL RESEARCH. 
 
4.1 Plan allocation for promotion, Coordination, and Development of basic, applied and 
clinical research was Rs. 50.00 crore for 2008-09.  However, the schemes could not be 
finalized and therefore no expenditure was incurred under this he ad during 2008-09.  
These schemes could not be commenced during  2009-10 as well, as a result of which Rs. 
2.00 crore allocated under this head remained  unspent. Rs. 49.00 crore has been allocated 
for the purpose for     2010-11.  The Departme nt has informed the Committee that this will 
be its major activity for which it had proposed  an amount of Rs. 369.00 crores for 2010-11.  
The enhanced level of projected demands wa s meant for commencements of the following 
5 new sub-schemes:- 
• Special support to the Medical Colleges for medical research  
• Establishment of Model Rural Health Research Units  
• Establishment of a Network of Virus Diagnostic Laboratories  
• Programme for gender and health  
• Programme for online teaching and learning 
 
4.2 The project proposals are likely to be fina lized within the next three months, after 
which they would be moved for mandatory clearances. The Department has further 
informed that Rs. 49.00 crore may not be s ufficient to commence the above schemes and 
therefore it proposes to commence the sma ller programmes, i.e. Programme for Gender 
and Health and Programme for on- line teaching and learning on medical research and will 
seek a revision at the RE stage to take up all the five programmes. 

 20
 
4.3 The Committee notes that the above schemes were targeted to be commenced 
during 2008-09.  However they could not be fi nalized even during 2009-10.  Three years 
of the Eleventh Plan have elapsed and the in ordinate delay witnessed in finalization of 
these ambitious schemes leaves the Comm ittee wondering as to how the envisaged 
objectives under the schemes would be achieved in the next two years of the Plan.  Since 
the Department has not shed any light on the factors responsible for the inordinate 
delay, the Committee can only guess that these schemes got stuck in the quagmire of 
approval delays arising out of  bureaucratic red-tapism, leading to scare resources 
remaining idle during 2008-09 and 2009-10, which could otherwise have been put to 
more productive use.  However, the Committee is of the considered view that lack of 
funding should not be allowed to come in the way of commencement of the above five 
sub-schemes. The Committee notes that due to reduced allocation, the Department 
would not be able to start major activities under this head like Special support  to 
Medical Colleges for medical research, Estab lishment of Model Rural Health Research 
Units, and Establishment of  a Network of Virus Diagnostic Laboratories.  The 
Committee, therefore, lends its full support for enhanced allocation for the above sub-
schemes and recommends that adequate funds be allocated for satisfactory 
operationalization of the 5 schemes mentioned above.  The Committee simultaneously 
exhorts the Department to obtain mandatory clearances without further loss of time. 
  
V PROMOTION AND GUID ANCE ON RESEARCH GOVERNANCE  ISSUES. 
5.1 The Plan allocation under this head was Rs. 1.00 crore in 2009-10 which has now 
been increased to Rs. 3.00 crore in 2010-11, though the projected demand of the Department 
under this head was Rs. 6.75 crore.  The allocation under this head is meant for the 
following purposes:- 
¾ Creation of National Health Research Forum;  
¾ Establishing mechanisms for mapping of health research institutions, 
accreditation,  
¾ Enactment of an Ethics Bill and the establishment of the National Biomedical 
Research Authority. 
 
 

 21
5.2 The Department has informed the Commi ttee that since these programmes could 
not be commenced in 2009-10, there was no utilization in the last year.  The Department has 
also informed that during 2010-11, it proposes to carry out all the above activities.  
 
5.3 The Committee is dismayed to note th at the allocations made for 2008-09 and 
2009-10 have been surrendered in toto due to non-finalization of the programmes.  The 
Committee, therefore, feels it imperative for the Department to urgently finalize all the 
projects envisaged under this head so that  it can put a strong case for enhanced 
allocation at RE stage.  The Committee would al so like to be apprised of the progress 
made towards operationalising the above projects.  
 
5.4 On being asked as to whether the Group of Secretaries within the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare started functioning and  its role, the Department has informed that 
with approval of the Hon’ Minister fo r Health and Family Welfare, orders for 
establishment of the said committee have alread y been issued and the first meeting will be 
convened shortly. The role for the Group of Se cretaries would be to discuss issues relating 
to health research which are over lapping in nature and application value for introduction 
of research findings in health care practices.   
 
5.5 The Department has also informed that the Health Research Forum is proposed to 
be established by March, 2011, as a part of th e proposed National Health Research Policy. 
The draft policy has been prepared and placed in the public domain for comments.   
 
5.6 The Committee welcomes these initiatives for better co-ordination of research-
related activities amongst the major stake-holders. 
 
VI INTER-SECTORIAL COORDINATION  IN MEDICAL, BIOMEDICAL AND 
HEALTH RESEARCH 
  
6.1 The plan allocation for Intersectorial Coordination in Medi cal, Biomedical and 
Health Research is Rs. 5.00 crore in BE 2010-11, against the projected demand of Rs. 18.00 

 22
crore by the Department. The following activi ties are proposed under this head for 2010-
11:- 
• Establishing a unit to evaluate and recomme nd technologies for improving the health 
care  
• Creating a dedicated cell that will link th e developers with the industry and also 
holding annual meetings so that the leads could be translated into products/processes 
fast.  
• Start-up funding proposals in a public pr ivate partnership mode by focussing on 
proposals which have a promise of developing a product or process. 
• Establishment of an innovati on promotion fund for encou raging innovations in areas 
that are identified to be of public health importance. 
• Establishment of a rapid clearing house me chanism for evaluation of health research 
technologies  
• Establishment of consultancy encouragemen t programmes so as to encourage better 
utilization of the talent within the academic.  
• Establishment of  national awards in tran slational research in the field of drug 
development, diagnostics, vaccines and devi ces with a special focus on indigenous 
development of technologies for public health care. 
 
6.2 The Department has informed that since these programmes could not be 
commenced during 2009-10, there was no utilizat ion in that year.  The Committee has been 
given to understand that these schemes are being finalized. Finalisation of the schemes 
would, however, depend on the allocations.  Th e schemes that are proposed to be taken up 
on a priority basis within the reduced allocations are:  
• Establishing a unit to evaluate and recomme nd technologies for improving the health 
care  
• Establishment of  national awards in tran slational research in the field of drug 
development, diagnostics, vaccines and devi ces with a special focus on indigenous 
development of technologies for public health care 
• Start-up funding proposals in a public pr ivate partnership mode by focussing on 
proposals which have a promise of developing a product or process. 
 
6.3 The Committee is distressed to note that the non-utilization of the allocated plan 
funds during 2009-10 was on account of slippages in finalizing and implementing the 
envisaged projects and if this trend conti nues to persist in 2010-11, the allocated funds 
will again have to be surrendered.  The Committee, therefore, recommends to the 

 23
Department to undertake concerted action for timely finalization and implementation of 
the above projects so that the Department can go ahead for enhanced allocation at RE 
stage.  The Committee would also like to be a pprised of the concrete action initiated and 
the progress made in this direction.  
 
 
VII ADVANCED TRAINING IN RESEA RCH IN MEDICINE AND HEALTH 
7.1 The aim of this scheme is to assist in the creation of a cadre of skilful researchers in 
fields such as clinical trials; Toxicology; GCP; GLP; QC&OA; Genomics; Geriatrics; Modern 
Biology; Biotechnology; Stem cells; Genetics; and Drugs chemistry. A programme is being 
launched to provide access to work in frontline areas in st ate- of- the- art facilities, 
providing fellowships for training, supporting multidisciplinary and multi-sectoral team of 
researchers and plans to develop a career advancement scheme for young researchers.  
Financial assistance is envisaged under this scheme to provide – 
• Access to researchers to work in state-of-the-art facilities within and outside India; 
• Fellowships for training in the above fields within India and abroad; 
• Targeted research investments focused on emerging opportunities and challenges; 
• Support to multidisciplinary and multi-sectoral teams of researchers as well as teams of 
researchers working in medical colleges, universities research institutes and NGOs; 
• For the creation of a national initiative in  partnership with rele vant stakeholders to 
attract and retain the young to a career in health research. 
 
7.2 In order to implement this scheme, Dep artment of Health Research would identify 
state of the art facilities within and outside India and work mechanisms including financial 
support so that these facilities are available for training and also technology support to 
investigators who plan to work on frontlin e areas of medical and health research.   
Fellowships for trainings in the above frontline and emerging areas, would be provided for 
training within India and abroad for relati vely young investigators who are working on 
health related areas and where the plans for utilizing the training are well focussed and 
concrete.  
 
7.3 An Expert group has been constituted to identify the areas in which the Department 
of Health Research will complement the efforts of other science agencies in order to avoid 

 24
any duplication of effort.  However, the fi nal outcome will depend on the quantum of 
funding and the mandatory clearances. Activiti es proposed to be undertaken during 2010-
11 are: programme to provide access to work in fr ontline areas in state-of-the-art facilities, 
providing fellowships for training, supporting multidisciplinary and multi-sectoral team of 
researchers and career advancement scheme for young researchers. 
 
7.4 The plan allocation of Rs. 8.00 crore has been made under this  head in BE 2010-11 
against the projected demand of Rs. 13.50 cror e by the Department.  The Department has 
informed that since these pr ogrammes have not commenced, utilization was only Rs. 5.00 
lakhs in 2009-10. 
 
7.5 The Committee in its 28 th Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) had noted that 
Rs. 5.50 crore had been earmarked under this head in BE 2008-09 and apprehended that 
such an allocation of funds would not be su fficient to meet the requirement of this 
scheme.  However, the Committee is unhappy to note that even Rs. 5.50 crore could not 
be utilized in 2008-09, leading to drastic reduction of the allocation to Rs. 1.00 lakh at the 
RE stage.  Given the above facts,  it is not surprising that the allocation of funds in BE 
2010-11 is substantially lower than the pr ojected demand of the Department. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recomme ndation that the Department should ensure 
proper implementation of all the activities co ntemplated under this Head.  Only then its 
demand for higher allocation at the RE stag e will have credibility.  The Committee also 
notes that mandatory clearances are yet to be obtained for the schemes/projects under 
this head.  While the Committee recommends that lack of funding should not be 
allowed to impact on the schemes under this  head, it also exhort s the Department to 
move forward towards initiating the process of obtaining necessary clearances.   
7.6 The Committee would also like to be appris ed of the findings of the Expert Group 
constituted to identify the areas in which the Department of Health Research will 
complement the efforts of other science agencies.  
 
 
 

 25
 
VIII INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION IN MEDICAL AND HEALTH RESEARCH 
 
8.1 Department of Health Research has started  working on the mechanisms to facilitate 
and accelerate international cooperation in medical and health research by providing 
contributions to international organizations, participations abroad, organizing international 
conferences in India, sending DHR delegation s to international bodies, hosting foreign 
delegations and supporting Indian compon ent of Indian studies under bilateral 
programmes. 
 
8.2 The plan allocation for International Cooperation in Medical Research was Rs. 1.00 
crore in BE 2009-10 which was reduced to Rs. 30.00 lakh, at RE stage.  The allocation has 
now been increased to Rs. 8.00 crore in BE 2010-11 against the projected demand for Rs. 
10.08 crore under this head. 
 The following activities are proposed under this head:- 
• Contributions to international organisations 
• Participation in conferences abroad (Non-ICMR) 
• Organising international conferences in India 
• DHR delegations to international bodies 
• Supporting Indian component of research studies under bilateral programmes 
• Hosting foreign delegations 
 
8.3 The Department has informed the Committ ee that four international Conferences 
were supported in 2009-10.  Since the above programmes have not commenced, utilization 
was only Rs. 30.00 lakhs in 2009-10. 
 
8.4 The Committee regrets to note that this is  yet another case of poor planning and 
unrealistic projections for allocation of f unds, leading not only to substantial under-
utilization of funds but also to the above programmes remaining non-starter.  
Notwithstanding substantial under utilization of funds in 2009-10, an enhanced 
allocation of Rs. 8.00 crore has been made in BE 2010-11.  The Committee exhorts the 

 26
Department to prepare an action plan fo r optimum utilization of funds allocated for 
2010-11 under this head and also thrash out lingering issues, if any, expeditiously so as 
to commence the programmes without any further delay.   
 
IX MATTERS RELATING TO EPIDE MICS, NATURAL CALAMITIES AND 
DEVELOPMENT OF TOOLS TO PREVENT OUTBREAKS. 
 
9.1 Under this scheme it is proposed to establish a revolving fund to facilitate a rapid 
mobilisation of outbreak/disaster response (t echnology component) to infectious disease 
outbreaks or a natural or man made disaste r. The scheme will work in coordination with 
relevant departments of Ministry of Health  and Family Welfare and also agencies like 
National Disaster Management Authority etc.  
 
9.2 This programme will specially facilitate fo cussed research to assist in dealing with 
emerging and re-emerging diseases; identifica tion of agent; development of diagnostic 
tests; formulation of case management modules and preventive strategies; establishment of 
laboratories to handle new, exotic and dangerous organisms. 
 
9.3 DHR has already initiated action to estab lish coordination with the Department of 
Health & National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) to develop management 
modules. In consultation with NDMA two e xpert groups for this purpose have been 
constituted. The Apex Committee have started  functioning under the chairmanship of 
Member, NDMA to identify the areas for the creation of thes e modules.  The other action 
group will meet periodically to implemen t the guidelines suggested by the apex 
committee. 
 
9.4 The efficacy of this approach was establis hed in the wake of the recent HINI episode 
where DHR succeeded in playin g a leadership role in coordinating efforts to augment 
diagnostic capability, successfully partneri ng with other departments of M/H&FW and 
other Ministries to develop a national response, taking initiatives to develop indigenous 

 27
diagnostic reagents, vaccines and indigenous production of raw material (shikimic acid) for 
production of oseltamivir.   
9.5 An allocation of Rs. 5.00 crore has been ma de on the plan side in 2010-11 for matters 
relating to Epidemics, Natural Calamities an d Development of Tools to prevent Outbreaks 
of Disasters.  The Department had demanded an amount of Rs. 9.00 crore under this head 
for the following purposes:- 
• Establishment of  a revolving fund to facilitate a rapid mobilisation of 
outbreak/disaster response to deal with epidemics/ pandemics/ outbreaks/ disasters 
• Development of training modules for different categories of health personnel  
• Establishing a network of labs/ institutes / personnel for areas related to disaster 
management. 
• Need based development of assays/vaccines/research on causation and forecasting. 
 
9.6 The Department has informed that modalities are being finalised and the 
programmes are proposed to be finalised and initiated during 2010-11. 
 
9.7 The Committee observes that very important activities have been proposed under 
the above head.  However, merely conceptualizing the schemes on paper will not lead to 
anything if they are not operationalised within a specific time-frame. 
9.8 The Committee notes that the plan funds to the tune of Rs. 1.00 crore were 
allocated for B.E 2009-10.  However, no expenditure was incurred under this head during 
2009-10 and the entire amount was surrendered.   The Committee expects that at least 
from this year onwards, the funds would be administered in a more diligent manner, 
making disaster management a more mean ingful exercise.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the modalities for the schem es are finalised with fair amount of 
promptitude and mandatory clearances are obtained well in time.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the progress made towards implementation of the above 
programmes.  
X COORDINATION IN THE FIELD  OF HEALTH RESEARCH WITH 
GOVERNMENTS, ORGANIZATIONS AND INSTITUTES. 
 

 28
10.1 The Department had projected an amount of Rs. 51.30 crore under this head, against 
which it has been allocated Rs. 5.00 crore in  BE 2010-11.  The following activities are 
proposed to be undertaken under this head:- 
• Scheme for joint funding of projects wi th agencies like DST, DBT, DARE, DSIR, 
Department of Space, and Deptt. of Environment and NDMA etc in mutually 
complementary areas  
• Establishment of Sentinel sites for disease surveillance 
• Proposed special studies will be on aspect s such as translational programmes focused 
on diagnostics, vaccines and newer therapeutics; Zoonosis and nutrition, applications of 
nanotechnology in medicine (diagnosis as we ll as treatment), GIS, climate change and 
health and tools/ infrastructure to mana ge the effects of natural and man-made 
disasters. 
 
10.2 The Department has informed that si nce these programmes have not commenced, 
utilization was only Rs. 15.00 lakhs during 2009-10 out of the budgeted provisions of Rs. 
1.00 crore.  The Department has informed that it proposes to establish a mechanism for 
coordination & joint funding of projects with  agencies such as DST; DBT; DARE; DSIR/ 
CSIR; Department of Space; Department of Environment; National Disaster Management 
Authority and National Knowledge Commission  etc. An Apex Committee of Secretaries 
has already been set up. An Implementation Committee to develop the Guidelines for this 
coordination is already on the job.  Joint projects will be developed and funded as a part of 
these programmes. While the DHR will coordina te and fund the application side of these 
investigations with a focus on human health, other relevant areas of technology will be 
funded by the respective agency. 
 
10.3 The Committee observes that there is huge mismatch between the projected 
demand of the Department and the allocated funds under this head for 2010-11.  The 
Committee also takes note of the submissi on by the Department that since these 
programmes have not commenced, utilizatio n was only Rs. 15.00 lakhs in 2009-10.  The 
Committee is constrained to observe that th e Department was not very prudent in its 
budget formulation. The Committee theref ore recommends that henceforth the 

 29
Department should make its estimates only after proper assessment of actual 
requirement of funds under this head. 
 
10.4 The Committee notes the submission of the Department that it proposes to 
establish a mechanism for coordination and jo int funding of projects.  However, the 
only forward movement in this direction is the setting up of an apex Committee of 
Secretaries.  The Committee observes that there are a number of government 
organizations conducting research in various specific areas and therefore, creation of an 
institutional coordination mechanism is must for synergizing the core competencies of 
the different research organizations/agencies.  The Committee, therefore, recommends to 
the Department to urgently institutionalize the coordination mechanism. 
 
10.5 The Committee would also like to be a pprised of the progress made towards 
developing the Guidelines for Coordination with other 
Departments/organisations/agencies. 
 
10.6  The Committee also observes that very important activities are envisaged to be 
undertaken under this head.  However, the Committee is not aware of the roadmap for 
meaningful realization of the goals set under this head.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends to the Department to draw up an  action plan in coordination with other 
organizations/agencies concerned to implemen t the projects envisaged under this head 
in a time-bound manner.   
 
XI MATTERS RELATING TO SCIENTIF IC SOCIETIES AND ASSOCIATIONS, 
CHARITABLE AND RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS IN MEDICINE AND 
HEALTH RESEARCH AREAS. 
 
11.1 The Department has informed the Commi ttee that an amount of Rs. 22.50 crore had 
been projected under this head for the current fiscal against which an allocation of Rs. 3.00 
crore has been made for Scientific Societie s and Associations, Charitable and Religious 
Endowments in Medicine and Health Rese arch Areas for 2010-11 as compared to Rs. 1.00 
crore provided in BE   2009-10. 
The following activities are envisaged to be undertaken under this head:- 

 30
• Programme to develop and establish protocol s for prevention, diagnosis and treatment 
of diseases through scientific professional associations/ bodies / endowments etc..;   
• To create expert groups to develop guidel ines, evaluate any technology that specialty 
feels important and provide developm ental grants for implementing the 
recommendations emanating from these expert groups/workshops. 
 
11.2 On being asked about the actual expendit ure figures, the number of Societies and 
Associations provided with assistance duri ng 2009-10 and the criteria for selection under 
this head, the Department has informed th at since these programmes have not been 
commenced, there was no expenditure in 2009- 10 and no societies were provided with 
assistance. In 2010-11, professional societies would be co opted to undertake the above 
work and programmes will be initiated. 
 
11.3 The Committee deprecates the Department  for its inability to implement one 
project after another on time and projecting budgetary demands in an unrealistic 
manner.  This calls for serious introspectio n.  The Committee genuinely hopes that the 
projects envisaged under this head would commence during the current fiscal and 
exhorts the Department with all the power at its command to start the ground work for 
implementation of the programmes under this head in right earnest.   
 
 
XII PROVISION FOR PROJECTS/SCHEMES OF NORTH EASTERN AREAS AND 
SIKKIM 
12.1 The plan allocation for Provision of proj ects/schemes of North Eastern Areas and 
Sikkim was Rs. 42.00 crore in BE 2009-10 which wa s marginally reduced to Rs. 40.00 crore 
at the RE stage.  The allocation has been increased to Rs. 50.00 crore in 2010-11 against the 
projected demand for Rs. 149.49 crore by the De partment.  The entire RE amount of Rs. 
40.00 crore earmarked for the 2008-09 and 2009-10 has been utilized.   
 
12.2 On being asked to indicate the physical achievements of the on-going projects and 
details of new projects contemplated to be started during 2010-11, the Department has 
stated that  ICMR’s Regional Medical Research Centre, Dibrugarh, set up on 12
th July, 1982, 

 31
has been conducting quality research on various health issues/areas of special significance 
to the North–eastern region including thala ssaemias, oesophageal cancers, hypertension 
and coronary heart diseases, malaria and Japane se encephalitis. These research activities 
have provided significant leads which would be further investigated for better 
understanding of the special medical problems of the region. 
 
12.3 The Department has also informed that during the year 2009-10, close to 90 studies 
were continued and several new studies have b een initiated to address the major health 
concerns of the North East region.  Some of th e studies being undertaken in specific states 
of North-East are as follows:  
• Assam: Paragonimiasis, malaria, cancer regi stries, esophageal cancer, HIV/AIDS, 
hypertension and  Coronary Heart Diseases, filaria, tuberculosis, thallasemia, Japanese 
encephalitis , medicinal plants, nutrition and drug abuse; 
• Arunachal Pradesh :  Drug resistant malaria, medicinal plants, Hepatitis, Cancer 
registry and paragonimiasis; 
• Mizoram:  Coronary heart diseases and hyperten sion, Cancer registry, stomach cancer,  
HIV/AIDS and substance abuse, malaria; 
• Meghalaya: cancer registry, nutrition, medicinal plants, breast and oral cancer; 
• Manipur:  cancer, HIV/AIDS and Drug abuse, Medicinal plants; 
• Sikkim: Cancer registries, other cancer studies; 
• Nagaland: Cancer registries, other cancer studies, malaria; 
• Tripura:  Cancer registry, other cancer studies. 
 
12.4 New projects in the areas of diabetes, hepa titis, malaria and other areas of regional 
importance will be taken up on priority basis.  The ongoing activities, as indicated above, 
would be continued. 
 
12.5 The Committee notes that the ICMR’s Regional Medical Research Centre, 
Dibrugarh has been conducting research on various health issues/areas of special 
significance to the North Eastern Region, wh ich have provided significant leads.  The 
Committee also notes that during 2009-10, close to 90 studies were continued and several 
new studies have been initiated to address the major health concerns of North Eastern 
Region.  The Committee would like to be  apprised of the specific health 
products/processes that have been generated through the research activities/studies 

 32
undertaken in the North Eastern Region and us ed for treatment of ailments specific to 
the people of the region.  
 
12.6 On being asked as to what mechanism is  in place to ensure that the projects 
envisaged for the North Eastern Region are im plemented within the designated time-line 
and the funds allocated for the purpose are utilized optimally, the Department, in a written 
submission, has stated that all the extramural  projects and activities proposed to be 
conducted in the NE Region are reviewed by the North-East Project Review Committee.  
This has been specifically constituted to exam ine the relevance of the projects to the North-
East, developing of infrastructure and the manpower in the NE Region and enhancement 
of technical skills available in the North-Ea st. This Committee meets regularly 3-4 times a 
year to review the proposals received and provide suitable recommendations. All the 
intramural activities of the Regional Medica l Research Centre, Dibrugarh, which is located 
in the NE and conducts all its research in the North-Eastern Region, are reviewed by the 
Scientific Advisory Committee constituted for this purpose. Both th ese committees ensure 
that the research activities are conducted in a timely fashion and the funds are utilized 
optimally.  
 
12.7 The Committee is happy to note that  there are two Committees, one each for 
review of extramural research and intramural research, in order to ensure that research 
projects are conducted in a timely fashion.  However, the Committee would like to be 
apprised of all the research projects sanctioned during 2008-09 and 2009-10 and the 
designated time-line for their implementation. The Committee would also like to be 
informed of the physical achievements of th e various on-going and new projects under 
this head during 2010-11.  
 
XIII       HPV VACCINE 
 
13.1        During the interaction with th e Secretary, Health Research, his attention was 
drawn towards the ongoing trials of HPV vaccine on the children in Khammam district of 

 33
Andhra Pradesh and reported deaths of the child ren therefrom. Exact status in this regard 
was sought from the Secretary .  The Secretary, Department of Health Research informed 
the Committee that it was a vaccine against the Papilloma virus which causes cervical 
cancer in women.  The Drug Controller General  of India had given approval for marketing 
of HPV vaccine in India as a vaccine to be prescribed by the clinicians as per schedule ‘Y’ of 
the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and then a post -marketing surveillance.  The Committee was 
informed that the proposal for trial came tw o years back before the ICMR through PATH, 
an American NGO and the logic for allowing the trial was to see acceptability of this 
vaccine on Indian population.  Besides, these trials were approved by the National Ethical 
Committee and the State Ethical Committee.  Attention of the Secretary was drawn to 
DCGI guidelines whereunder third phase trial cannot be conducted on children until a 
similar trial was conducted on adults.  It wa s admitted by the Secr etary that the DCGI 
guidelines were not adhered to in the present case but this vaccine is given before the 
sexual activity begins and then it protects against cancer.  That was the reason for allowing 
trials on girls of the age of 10-14 year s.  The Committee was assured that State 
Governments of Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat wo uld be asked to get the ongoing clinical 
trial stopped immediately.   
 
13.2    Taking serious view of procedural and ethi cal lapses on the part of the Ministry, 
the Committee sought the matter of allowing trial of the vaccine as also the approval for 
its marketing in the country to be enquired into by a premier investigating agency and 
to take further appropriate follow-up action in  the matter.  It also asked that findings of 
the investigating agency and the follow-up ac tion taken in this regard may be furnished 
to the Committee at the earliest .  The Committee took a serious view in the matter and 
recommends the Department of Health Research  that in future all guidelines and norms 
should be adhered to before allowing trials of any drug including vaccines on Indian 
population.  The Committee also recommends th at the Drug Controller General of India 
should observe optimum precautions and follow all norms and guidelines while 
allowing marketing of any drug including the vaccines in the Indian market. 
 
XIV MANPOWER REQUIREMENTS FOR DHR AND ICMR 

 34
 
14.1 In response to query about manpower requirement of ICMR Institutes & DHR 
programme in medical colleges & states, the De partment of Health Research has informed 
that manpower was required for DHR prog rams/schemes both for 27 institutes and 70 
field stations of ICMR. 
 
Manpower Component for ICMR 
 
14.2 Indian Council of Medical Research, a premier and oldest medical Scientific 
Organisation in the country has 23 institutes/c enters.  6 Regional Medical research centers 
and over 70 field stations located all over the country.   
 
14.3 Total staff strength of 5124 can be ca tegorized (Scientific Staff, - 746 (14.5%) 
Technical Staff- 2379 (46.4%) and Administrative Staff - 1999 (39%). 
   
14.4 Committee was also informed that there ar e large number of vacant posts in all 
categories, i.e. Scientific (80), technical ( 200) and administrative (300). Action has already 
been initiated under new Recrui tment Rules and these are likel y to be filled by July, 2010. 
In the last 25 years no new post has been sanctioned.  .  
 
14.5 A high level Performance Appraisal Board  (PAB) appointed by the Government has 
recommended 500 scientists posts, as indicated below:  
 
 
Name of Institute/Cente No. of Scientist Posts 
DMRC, Jodhpur 16 
NIMS, Delhi 10 
NIN, FDTRC & NCLAS Hyderabad 50 
ICPO, Noida 16 
NIMR, Delhi 27 
ICMR Virus Unit, Kolkata 8 
RMRC, Dibrugarh 21 
VCRC, Puducherry 18 
NIIH, Mumbai 12 
NICED, Kolkatta 18 
RMRIMS, Patna 22 

 35
RMRC, Jabalpur 11 
NIOH, Ahmedabad  32 
Field Stations & Regional Units, 
Ahmedabad 
40 
RMRC, Belgaum 24 
NIE, Chennai 17 
NIRRH, Mumbai 34 
GRC, Mumbai 8 
IOP, New Delhi 9 
RMRC, Port Blair 5 
RMRC, Bhubaneswar 8 
NJIL & OMD, Agra 13 
CRME, Madurai 11 
NIV, Pune 17 
MCC, Pune 20 
EVRC, Mumbai 14 
TRC, Chennai 6 
NARI, Pune 13 
Total 500 
 
 
14.6 In addition matching research fellows an d technical posts (1000) would be required 
to work with 500 scientists.  . 
 
 
Manpower Components for DHR 
 
14.7 DHR would also be establishing its units in 150 medical colleges all over the country 
to assist states in providing modern facilities to the public for improving their health.  In 
addition it will establish model rural health research centres in all the states.  Besides 
training of mid career professionals in re search, it needs 210 scientists and 400 technical 
staff.   
 
14.8 The Committee is surprised to note that  our premier institute in the field of 
medical research has been working with the minimum staff for all these years.  The very 
fact that not a single post has been cr eated  during the last 25 years confirms 
Committee’s concerns in this regard.  Not only this, a large number of posts, that too, in 
scientific and technical grade are lying vaca nt.  The Committee is not aware since when 

 36
such a situation has been continuing.  The Committee can imagine the kind of work 
stress being faced by our scientists, specially during the time of epidemic outbreaks.  
The Committee recommends that all the existing vacant posts in ICMR should be filled 
up without any further delay.  All 500 posts of scientists and 1000 matching posts of 
research fellows and technical posts should be created at the earliest and filled up. This 
exercise needs to be carried out in a time- bound manner. It should be ensured that 
unduly long time is not taken in getting the posts created, followed by a protracted 
exercise of getting them filled up.  Similar concerted efforts would also be required for 
creation and filling up of 210 posts of scientis ts and 400 posts of technical staff required 
for the Department of Health Research.  The Department will have to play a proactive 
role so that lack of specialized manpower does not hamper the crucial research activities, 
both ongoing and proposed.  

 37
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS   AT A GLANCE 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 The Committee appreciates the effort s made by the Department towards 
promotion of basic, applied & clinical health  research and to ensure infrastructure for 
research work.  The Committee hopes that  all major schemes envisaged by the 
Department would be implemented and translated into action within the next six 
months.  (Para 1.4) 
 
The Committee feels that for ensuring transl ation of research there is a need to 
concentrate on taking research to its logical conclusion in the fiel d of drugs, vaccines 
(both preventive and therapeutic) diagnosis, microbicides, vector and control products 
and platform technologies.  The Committee re commends that the Department should  
make all efforts for achieving the above objectives. (Para 1.5) 
 
The Committee further recommends that there is a need to put in place necessary 
framework and guidelines for research activitie s.  Ethical guidelines should be ensured 
through proper legislation, professional self-regulations and external bodies.  The 
priority areas should be identified and prior ity should be set for various aspects of the 
health research.  A National Health Resear ch Policy should be framed and a National 
Health Research Forum should be created  at the earliest.  Appropriate mechanism 
should be established for mapping and accred itation of Health Research Institutions.  
Besides, Knowledge Management Policy should be framed at the earliest. (Para 1.6) 
 
 
II BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
The Committee expresses its displeasure over the funds management of the 
Department.  Under no circumstances it coul d be possible for the Department to utilize 
66% of the total Plan outlay in the final year of the Eleventh Plan Period. (Para 2.2) 
 
 
 The Committee expresses its dissatisfacti on on such a big gap between the 
required and allocated funds.  The Committee notes that the major programmes likely to 

 38
be affected as a result of the shortfall of Rs.1144.39 crores in plan allocation are 
establishment of network of virus diagnostic laboratories,  facilities for health research 
in medical colleges and model rural health re search units.  Prevalen ce of various virus 
infections like swine flue, dengue, Chikunguny a etc. is a very common feature in the 
country and large number of people suffer every year due to various viral infections.  
Presently there is acute shortage of virus diag nostic laboratories in the country and as a 
result of meagre plan allocation for 2010- 11, the effective control of various virus 
infection-related life threatening ailments wo uld be a distant dream.  Similarly, in the 
absence of adequate facilities for health research in medical colleges, the very purpose of 
coordination between the medical education and health research would be defeated.  
More than 70 per cent populat ion resides in the rural ar eas and as a result of non-
establishment of model rural health research units, the rural population of the country 
would be deprived of the critical health care facilities like disease diagnostics.  (Para 2.6) 
 
 The Committee views with serious concern that such critical areas of health 
research would be affected adversely due to resource crunch.  The Committee observes 
that scientific knowledge generated through h ealth and bio-medical research is used to 
develop drugs, diagnostics, devices and vaccine s that ultimately find place in the health 
system of the country.  The Committee, th erefore, recommends that the funds crunch 
should not be allowed to come  in the way of establishing a network of virus diagnostic 
laboratories, facilities for health research , model rural health research units and 
generation of new knowledge in such a crucial area as health research. (Para 2.7) 
 
 The Committee also notes that the Planni ng Commission had allocated an amount 
of Rs. 800 crore for 2010-11 for the Department, which was subsequently reduced to Rs. 
500 without assigning any reason therefor.   Considering the fact that the Department 
was specifically created to gi ve impetus to bio-medical res earch in the country, which is 
a sector that is very crucial to the health and well-being of the people of the country, the 
Committee is of the considered view that Rs. 500.00 crore will not be su fficient to fulfill 
the mandate of the Department. The Committee, therefore, recommends that allocation 

 39
for the Department for this fiscal should  be increased to Rs. 800.00 crore, initially 
allocated by the Planning Commission. (Para 2.8) 
 
 
 The Committee is constrained to note that funds amounting to Rs. 129.00 crore 
and Rs. 8.00 crore allocated in 2008-9 and 2009-10 respectively remained blocked 
presumably due to delay in approvals and non-finalization of plans/schemes. Rs. 83.00 
crore has been allocated for the above pr ojects for 2010-11. The Committee exhorts the 
Department to secure all mandatory clearances and initiate the implementation of the 
above projects so as to ensure optimum utilization of the allocated funds for 2010-11.  
(Para 2.12) 
 
 
 The Committee notes that there is a huge mismatch between the projected 
demands by the Department and the approved BE for the year 2010-11.  The same was 
the trend in 2008-09 as well, when against the projected demand of Rs. 1613.00 crore on 
the plan side, the Department was allocate d Rs. 531.75 crore and the actual expenditure 
(plan) was Rs. 389.85 crore only. While the Co mmittee is supportive of the Department’s 
demand for higher allocation, it is, also, imperative on the part of the Department to take 
suitable measures to reverse this trend of  unrealistic projection of fund requirements 
and make its estimates only after proper assessment and planning. If the budget 
formulation is reduced to a ritualistic exer cise, it leads to under-utilization/non-
utilization of scare resources which a country like India can ill-afford. The Committee 
would therefore like to be apprised of th e measures taken for objective and realistic 
formulation of the budget requirement of  the Department.  The Committee also 
recommends that the Department prepare a comprehensive action plan for optimal 
utilization of the funds, which should be revi ewed periodically by the Secretary of the 
Department.  (Para 2.13) 
 
 
 
 The Committee welcomes the enhanced allocation for the North Eastern Areas for 
2010-11, which is fully justified in view of the excellent track-record of the Region in the 

 40
matter of utilization of the funds allocated in the past.  However the Committee would 
like to be enlightened as to whether the entire budget allocation was spent for the 
intended purposes during 2008-09 and 2009-10 or some part of it was transferred to the 
non-lapsable pool to be utilized later. (Para 2.15) 
 
 
 
III INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH   
 
 The Committee notes that the shortfall between the amount allocated and the 
amount projected for ICMR is to the tune of Rs. 630.00 crore which is quite large by any 
standards and is certain to have an advers e bearing on the implementation of various 
research projects of ICMR.  The Committee observes that in view of the dynamic 
international health research environment a nd the current and future health challenges, 
the role of ICMR is very crucial and if its projects are plagued with under-funding, it can 
have very serious repercussions and undermine the desired outcomes in the health 
sector.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that more funds be allocated to ICMR.  
Simultaneously, the Committee impresses upon the ICMR, to exercise better fiscal 
discipline and take credible and tangible ac tion to improve the financial administration 
which will ultimately bolster its claims for more funds. (Para 3.7) 
 
 
 The Committee is happy to note the sterli ng achievements of ICMR and places on 
record its appreciation for the endeavors made  by it.   At the same time, the Committee 
would like to highlight two key concerns iden tified in the Eleventh Plan, i.e.(i) bridging 
the “Know-do” gap and (ii) delivery of the products of health research to the people who 
need it most. It has been observed that wh ile health research has made appreciable 
progress, there remains a time lag in translating the research outcome into tangible 
health products or in application of the kn owledge generated through research and that 
there is a need to mobilize research to brid ge the gap between what is known and what 
is done.  Equally important is to ensure that  the products of hea lth research reach and 
are used by the people who need it most.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that 

 41
the specific health products/processes accruing from each of the above 
innovations/achievements of ICMR should be introduced into public health service and 
be made accessible to all sections including th e most deprived sections of the society.  
The Committee would like to be kept apprised of the progress made in this regard. (Para 
3.14) 
 
 
 
 The Committee observes that health research projects funded with public money 
should be assessed in terms of tangible health outcomes for the masses and there should 
also be a mechanism for evaluating the hea lth benefits ensuing from such research 
projects.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that a system be put in place to do 
audit of health research being funded, who lly or partially, with government money, so 
that an assessment could be made as to whethe r or not the health research being done is 
justified and relevant. (Para 3.15) 
 
 The Committee takes special note of the following achievements of ICMR. 
• A phase I HIV vaccine trial using the prime boost approach was initiated in NARI, 
Pune and TRC, Chennai. The enrollment for the trial has been completed and the 
volunteers are now being followed.  
• Draft guidelines on management   of    buccal mucosa  cancer and cervical cancer are 
being finalized on the lines of suggestions of experts. 
• A Web Based Management for Acute Coronary  Events (MACE) Registry network has 
been initiated  
• New proposal on “ICMR- Indian National Diabetes Study-Phase I,” has been 
initiated at three states and one Unio n Territory with the aim to understand 
prevalence of diabetes and pre-diabetes along its association with the genetic aspects. 
(Para 3.16) 
 
 The Committee would like to be apprised of the final outcomes of the above 
research projects. (Para 3.17) 
 
 The Committee also notes that a number of outcomes have been projected for the 
year 2010-11 in respect of ICMR regarding its Regular programme and Translational 
programme, Establishment of new centres, strengthening the international cooperation, 
tribal health in North-East and other under-privileged areas/population, manpower 

 42
development, and health system research.  The Committee recommends that the desired 
outcomes should be achieved within the fixed time frame.  The Committee would also 
like to be apprised of the achievements made in respect of each of the above 
programmes/projects.  (Para 3.18) 
 
 The Committee observes that no single syst em of health care has the capacity to 
solve all of India’s health care needs.  It is in this context that the scientific research in 
the area of traditional medicine assumes added significance. The Committee notes that 
the ICMR is funding 48 projects in tradition al medicine. The Committee is of the view 
that it is more important to focus on health  outcomes rather than health outlays.  The 
Committee, therefore, urges upon the Department not to remain complacent by merely 
funding the 48 projects but to reorient its attention for the health outcomes accruing 
from the above research projects.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
health outcomes of all the research projects under reference.  (Para 3.21) 
  
 The Committee also recommends that the task of validation of traditional AYUSH 
drugs and development of new drugs for identified diseases should be accomplished 
within the stipulated time frame.  Similarly,  the project for validating the safety and 
efficacy of therapeutic practice should be co mpleted well in time.  It would also like to 
be informed of the achievements made so far from the “Golden Triangle Partnership, 
and ICMR’s collaboration with the National  Innovation Foundation” for validating the 
safety and efficacy of therapeutic practices. (Para 3.22) 
 
 
 The Committee notes from the Background Material furnished by the Department 
that as many as 16 research projects concer ning family planning for which a budget of 
Rs. 97,53,940/- was committed during 2008-09, are still pending and no amount has been 
released out of the budgeted allocation.   In the absence of any reasons, the Committee is 
unable to comprehend the non-release of the budgeted allocation.  The Committee 
therefore, recommends that all such research projects should be completed at the earliest 
and bottlenecks, if any, should be removed.  It would also like to be apprised of the 

 43
reasons behind the pendency of the projects  under reference and non-release of the 
committed funds for those projects. (Para 3.23) 
 
 
 The Committee is happy to note that streamlining the process of approval of the 
research proposals is underway.  In this era of fast-paced scientific developments, 
speedy approval of the research projects is critical for generating and unleashing full 
potential of scientific knowledge.  The Co mmittee, accordingly, recommends that the 
process of approval of the research projects should be streamlined in such a way that  
their approval is accorded well within the stipulated time frame. (Para 3.25) 
 
 
IV PROMOTION, COORDINATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF BASIC, APPLIED 
AND CLINICAL RESEARCH. 
 
 
 The Committee notes that the above schemes were targeted to be commenced 
during 2008-09.  However they could not be fi nalized even during 2009-10.  Three years 
of the Eleventh Plan have elapsed and the in ordinate delay witnessed in finalization of 
these ambitious schemes leaves the Comm ittee wondering as to how the envisaged 
objectives under the schemes would be achieved in the next two years of the Plan.  Since 
the Department has not shed any light on the factors responsible for the inordinate 
delay, the Committee can only guess that these schemes got stuck in the quagmire of 
approval delays arising out of  bureaucratic red-tapism, leading to scare resources 
remaining idle during 2008-09 and 2009-10, which could otherwise have been put to 
more productive use.  However, the Committee is of the considered view that lack of 
funding should not be allowed to come in the way of commencement of the above five 
sub-schemes. The Committee notes that due to reduced allocation, the Department 
would not be able to start major activities under this head like Special support  to 
Medical Colleges for medical research, Estab lishment of Model Rural Health Research 
Units, and Establishment of  a Network of Virus Diagnostic Laboratories.  The 
Committee, therefore, lends its full support for enhanced allocation for the above sub-
schemes and recommends that adequate funds be allocated for satisfactory 

 44
operationalization of the 5 schemes mentioned above.  The Committee simultaneously 
exhorts the Department to obtain mandato ry clearances without further loss of time. 
(Para 4.3) 
 
V PROMOTION AND GUID ANCE ON RESEARCH GOVERNANCE  ISSUES. 
 
 
 The Committee is dismayed to note th at the allocations made for 2008-09 and 
2009-10 have been surrendered in toto due to non-finalization of the programmes.  The 
Committee, therefore, feels it imperative for the Department to urgently finalize all the 
projects envisaged under this head so that  it can put a strong case for enhanced 
allocation at RE stage.  The Committee would al so like to be apprised of the progress 
made towards operationalising the above projects. (Para 5.3) 
 
 The Committee welcomes these initiatives for better co-ordination of research-
related activities amongst the major stake-holders. (Para 5.6) 
 
VI INTER-SECTORIAL COORDINATION  IN MEDICAL, BIOMEDICAL AND 
HEALTH RESEARCH 
  
 The Committee is distressed to note that the non-utilization of the allocated plan 
funds during 2009-10 was on account of slippages in finalizing and implementing the 
envisaged projects and if this trend conti nues to persist in 2010-11, the allocated funds 
will again have to be surrendered.  The Committee, therefore, recommends to the 
Department to undertake concerted action for timely finalization and implementation of 
the above projects so that the Department can go ahead for enhanced allocation at RE 
stage.  The Committee would also like to be a pprised of the concrete action initiated and 
the progress made in this direction. (Para 6.3) 
 
VII ADVANCED TRAINING IN RESEA RCH IN MEDICINE AND HEALTH 
 
 The Committee in its 28
th Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) had noted that 
Rs. 5.50 crore had been earmarked under this head in BE 2008-09 and apprehended that 

 45
such an allocation of funds would not be su fficient to meet the requirement of this 
scheme.  However, the Committee is unhappy to note that even Rs. 5.50 crore could not 
be utilized in 2008-09, leading to drastic reduction of the allocation to Rs. 1.00 lakh at the 
RE stage.  Given the above facts,  it is not surprising that the allocation of funds in BE 
2010-11 is substantially lower than the pr ojected demand of the Department. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recomme ndation that the Department should ensure 
proper implementation of all the activities co ntemplated under this Head.  Only then its 
demand for higher allocation at the RE stag e will have credibility.  The Committee also 
notes that mandatory clearances are yet to be obtained for the schemes/projects under 
this head.  While the Committee recommends that lack of funding should not be 
allowed to impact on the schemes under this  head, it also exhort s the Department to 
move forward towards initiating the process of obtaining necessary clearances.  (Para 
7.5) 
 
 The Committee would also like to be appris ed of the findings of the Expert Group 
constituted to identify the areas in which the Department of Health Research will 
complement the efforts of other science agencies. (Para 7.6) 
 
 
 
VIII INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION IN MEDICAL AND HEALTH RESEARCH 
 
 The Committee regrets to note that this is  yet another case of poor planning and 
unrealistic projections for allocation of f unds, leading not only to substantial under-
utilization of funds but also to the above programmes remaining non-starter.  
Notwithstanding substantial under utilization of funds in 2009-10, an enhanced 
allocation of Rs. 8.00 crore has been made in BE 2010-11.  The Committee exhorts the 
Department to prepare an action plan fo r optimum utilization of funds allocated for 
2010-11 under this head and also thrash out lingering issues, if any, expeditiously so as 
to commence the programmes without any further delay. (Para 8.4) 
  

 46
IX MATTERS RELATING TO EPIDE MICS, NATURAL CALAMITIES AND 
DEVELOPMENT OF TOOLS TO PREVENT OUTBREAKS. 
 
 The Committee observes that very important activities have been proposed under 
the above head.  However, merely conceptualizing the schemes on paper will not lead to 
anything if they are not operationalised within a specific time-frame. (Para 9.7) 
 
 The Committee notes that the plan funds to the tune of Rs. 1.00 crore were 
allocated for B.E 2009-10.  However, no expenditure was incurred under this head during 
2009-10 and the entire amount was surrendered.   The Committee expects that at least 
from this year onwards, the funds would be administered in a more diligent manner, 
making disaster management a more mean ingful exercise.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the modalities for the schem es are finalised with fair amount of 
promptitude and mandatory clearances are obtained well in time.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the progress made towards implementation of the above 
programmes. (Para 9.8) 
 
 
X COORDINATION IN THE FIELD  OF HEALTH RESEARCH WITH 
GOVERNMENTS, ORGANIZATIONS AND INSTITUTES. 
 
 The Committee observes that there is huge mismatch between the projected 
demand of the Department and the allocated funds under this head for 2010-11.  The 
Committee also takes note of the submissi on by the Department that since these 
programmes have not commenced, utilizatio n was only Rs. 15.00 lakhs in 2009-10.  The 
Committee is constrained to observe that th e Department was not very prudent in its 
budget formulation. The Committee theref ore recommends that henceforth the 
Department should make its estimates only after proper assessment of actual 
requirement of funds under this head. (Para 10.3) 
 

 47
 The Committee notes the submission of the Department that it proposes to 
establish a mechanism for coordination and jo int funding of projects.  However, the 
only forward movement in this direction is the setting up of an apex Committee of 
Secretaries.  The Committee observes that there are a number of government 
organizations conducting research in various specific areas and therefore, creation of an 
institutional coordination mechanism is must for synergizing the core competencies of 
the different research organizations/agencies.  The Committee, therefore, recommends to 
the Department to urgently institutionalize the coordination mechanism. (Para 10.4) 
 
 The Committee would also like to be a pprised of the progress made towards 
developing the Guidelines for Coordination with other 
Departments/organisations/agencies. (Para 10.5) 
 
  The Committee also observes that very important activities are envisaged to be 
undertaken under this head.  However, the Committee is not aware of the roadmap for 
meaningful realization of the goals set under this head.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends to the Department to draw up an  action plan in coordination with other 
organizations/agencies concerned to implemen t the projects envisaged under this head 
in a time-bound manner.  (Para 10.6) 
XI MATTERS RELATING TO SCIENTIF IC SOCIETIES AND ASSOCIATIONS, 
CHARITABLE AND RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS IN MEDICINE AND 
HEALTH RESEARCH AREAS. 
 
 The Committee deprecates the Department  for its inability to implement one 
project after another on time and projecting budgetary demands in an unrealistic 
manner.  This calls for serious introspectio n.  The Committee genuinely hopes that the 
projects envisaged under this head would commence during the current fiscal and 
exhorts the Department with all the power at its command to start the ground work for 
implementation of the programmes under this head in right earnest. (Para 11.3) 
  
XII PROVISION FOR PROJECTS/SCHEMES OF NORTH EASTERN AREAS AND 
SIKKIM 

 48
 
 The Committee notes that the ICMR’s Regional Medical Research Centre, 
Dibrugarh has been conducting research on various health issues/areas of special 
significance to the North Eastern Region, wh ich have provided significant leads.  The 
Committee also notes that during 2009-10, close to 90 studies were continued and several 
new studies have been initiated to address the major health concerns of North Eastern 
Region.  The Committee would like to be  apprised of the specific health 
products/processes that have been generated through the research activities/studies 
undertaken in the North Eastern Region and us ed for treatment of ailments specific to 
the people of the region. (Para 12.5) 
 
 
 
 The Committee is happy to note that there are two Committees, one each for 
review of extramural research and intramural research, in order to ensure that research 
projects are conducted in a timely fashion.  However, the Committee would like to be 
apprised of all the research projects sanctioned during 2008-09 and 2009-10 and the 
designated time-line for their implementation. The Committee would also like to be 
informed of the physical achievements of th e various on-going and new projects under 
this head during 2010-11. (Para.12.7) 
 
XIII       HPV VACCINE 
 
Taking serious view of proc edural and ethical lapses on  the part of the Ministry, 
the Committee sought the matter of allowing trial of the vaccine as also the approval for 
its marketing in the country to be enquired into by a premier investigating agency and 
to take further appropriate follow-up action in  the matter.  It also asked that findings of 
the investigating agency and the follow-up ac tion taken in this regard may be furnished 
to the Committee at the earliest .  The Committee took a serious view in the matter and 
recommends the Department of Health Research  that in future all guidelines and norms 
should be adhered to before allowing trials of any drug including vaccines on Indian 

 49
population.  The Committee also recommends th at the Drug Controller General of India 
should observe optimum precautions and follow all norms and guidelines while 
allowing marketing of any drug including the vaccines in the Indian market. (Para 13.2) 
 
XIV MANPOWER REQUIREMENTS FOR DHR AND ICMR 
 
 The Committee is surprised to note that  our premier institute in the field of 
medical research has been working with the minimum staff for all these years.  The very 
fact that not a single post has been created during the last 25 years confirms Committee’s 
concerns in this regard.  Not only this, a larg e number of posts, that too, in scientific and 
technical grade are lying vacant.  The Co mmittee is not aware since when such a 
situation has been continuing.  The Comm ittee can imagine the kind of work stress 
being faced by our scientists, specially dur ing the time of epidemic outbreaks.  The 
Committee recommends that all the existing va cant posts in ICMR should be filled up 
without any further delay.  All 500 posts of scientists and 1000 matching posts of 
research fellows and technical posts should be created at the earliest and filled up. This 
exercise needs to be carried out in a time- bound manner. It should be ensured that 
unduly long time is not taken in getting the posts created, followed by a protracted 
exercise of getting them filled up.  Similar concerted efforts would also be required for 
creation and filling up of 210 posts of scientis ts and 400 posts of technical staff required 
for the Department of Health Research.  The Department will have to play a proactive 
role so that lack of specialized manpower does not hamper the crucial research activities, 
both ongoing and proposed. (Para 14.8) 
 
 
 
 