PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 56
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE  ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELF ARE
FIFTY-SIXTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2012-13 (DEMAND NO. 48) OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 26 APRIL, 2012)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 25 APRIL, 2012)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 26 APRIL, 2012)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 25 APRIL, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2012/VAISHAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)APRIL, 2012/VAISHAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs- chfw@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
FIFTY-SIXTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2012-13 (DEMAND NO. 48) OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 26 TH APRIL, 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 25 TH APRIL, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2012/VAISHAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................ (ii i)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—16
4. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A G LANCE ............................................................ 17—21
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................ 23—27

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2011-12)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
#2. Shri Janardhan Dwivedi
*3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
5. Shri Balbir Punj
6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
7. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
@8. Shri Rasheed Masood
9. Shrimati B. Jayashree
10. Shri Derek O’Brien
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Ashok Argal
12. Shrimati Harsimrat Kaur Badal
13. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
14. Shrimati Raj Kumari Chauhan
15. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali
16. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
17. Dr. Monazir Hassan
18. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
19. Shri S. R. Jeyadurai
20. Shri P. Lingam
21. Shri Datta Meghe
22. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
23. Dr. Chinta Mohan
24. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
25. Shrimati Jayshreeben Kanubhai Patel
26. Shri M. K. Raghavan
27. Shri J. M. Aaron Rashid
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh
30. Shri Ratan Singh
31. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
# Ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 27 th January, 2011 and re-nominated to the Committee on 2 nd February, 2012.
* Ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 2 nd April, 2012.
@ Ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 9 th March, 2012.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
do hereby present this Fifty-Sixth Report of the Committee on the Demand for Grants (Demand
No. 48) of the Department of Health Research, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the year
2012-13.
2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from the
Department of Health Research, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and also heard the Secretary
and other officials of the Department on the said Demand for Grants (2012-13) in its meeting held
on 10
h April, 2012.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on
23rd April, 2012.
BRAJESH PATHAK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
23rd April, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary
Vaishakha 3, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare.

1
REPORT
I. Introduction
1.1 The Department of Health Research was created in the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare in 2007 and became functional in November, 2008 with appointment of the first Secretary,
who is also the DG, Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR).
1.2 The following work has been allocated to the Department of Health Research:
1. Promotion and co-ordination of basic, applied and clinical research including clinical
trials and operational research in areas related to medical, health, biomedical and
medical profession and education through development of infrastructure, manpower
and skills in cutting edge areas and management of related information thereto.
2. Promote and provide guidance on research governance issues, including ethical issues
in medical and health research.
3. Inter-sectoral coordination and promotion of public-private-partnership in medical,
biomedical and health research related areas.
4. Advanced training in research areas concerning medicine and health, including grant of
fellowships for such training in India and abroad.
5. International co-operation in medical and health research, including work related to
international conferences in related areas in India and abroad.
6. Technical support for dealing with epidemics and natural calamities.
7. Investigation of outbreaks due to new and exotic agents and development of tools for
prevention.
8. Matters relating to scientific societies and associations, charitable and religious
endowments in medicine and health research areas.
9. Coordination between organizations and institutes under the Central and State
Governments in areas related to the subjects entrusted to the Department and for the
promotion of special studies in medicine and health.
10. Administering and monitoring of Indian Council of Medical Research.
1.3 The Department has informed that the work allocated to it have been converted into the
following four new schemes:
• Development of Infrastructure for Promotion of Health Research:  This programme
essentially covers the establishment of modern biology laboratories and animal house facilities in
medical colleges and institutions, which form the backbone of medical research. This is especially
aimed at those States and regions which are underserved, so that medical research can become
more broad based. Apart from the above, the scheme includes the Development of Model Rural
Health Research Units. These units will function as an interface between the new technologies
developers (Researchers in the Medical Institutions; State or Centre), health systems operators
(Centre/ state health services) and the beneficiaries (community).
• Human Resources Development for health research:  This programme essentially aims
to increase the availability of personnel for health research through scholarships, fellowships and

2
career advancement scheme etc. thereby providing an incentive for people to take up medical and
health research and to assist in the creation of a cadre of skilful researchers in fields such as
clinical trials; Toxicology; Good Clinical Practices (GCP); Genomics; Proteomics; Geriatrics; Stem
cells; Genetics etc. and to create and support multidisciplinary and multi-sectoral teams of
researchers working in medical colleges, universities, research institutes and NGOs
• Scheme for managing epidemics and national calamities:  This includes the
establishment of a network of virology laboratories at the National State and local levels and
developing tools for prevention and managing the epidemics and national calamities/outbreaks due
to infectious diseases: Create infrastructures for timely identification of viruses and other agents
and specifically agents causing epidemics and/or potential agents for bioterrorism; to develop
capacity for identification of novel and unknown viruses and other organisms & emerging-
reemerging viral strains and develop diagnostic kits. This scheme also envisages the establishment
of a revolving fund for facilitating a rapid mobilization of out-breaks/ disaster response (technology
component) to infectious disease out-breaks or natural or man-made disaster.
• Grant in aid scheme for inter sectoral convergence & Promotion and guidance on
research governance issues  in medical, biomedical & health research: This programme essentially
seeks to assist institutions to forge an integrative academic home for Clinical and Translational
Science that can synergize multi-disciplinary and inter-disciplinary clinical and translational research
and researchers. It provides for coordination mechanisms and grant in aid to key players in
translational research, that is related Government Departments & institutions, industry, academia,
scientific societies and associations etc. to provide the impetus to take processes, diagnostics and
drugs to their logical conclusion through product development and testing
1.4 All four schemes have been accorded in principle approval from the Planning Commission.
After receiving in principle approval from the Planning Commission, the schemes were drafted. The
EFC memos were then circulated for comments. Two schemes have been approved for
implementation, after the scope was reduced to include only the period of the 11th Plan, as
mentioned below:
• Grant in Aid Scheme for Inter- Sectoral Convergence & Promotion and Guidance on
Research Governance Issues; and
• Scheme for Development of Human Resources
1.5 Approval for the other two schemes is still awaited.
II. Budgetary Allocation
2.1 The total Eleventh Plan outlay earmarked for the Department of Health Research (including
ICMR) was Rs.4496.08 crore out of which Rs.2116.65 crore was budgeted and the Actual
Expenditure was Rs.1933.00 crore during the period.
2.2 As per the written information furnished by the Department, Since the Department was created
after the commencement of the 11
th Plan, the only work relating to Health Research was ICMR.
This is the only schemel organisation, which was transferred to the Department. The Plan
allocation made for rCMR was as follows:
ICMR Rs. 4296.08 crare
ICMR & IRR Rs. 200.00 crore
2.3 Out of the above Plan Outlay, the actual BE and RE allocations made and AE incurred
during the Plan period were as follows:

3
(Rs. in crore )
Financial year BE RE AE
2007-08 176.65 144.15 144.15
2008-09 420.00 390.56 350.18
2009-10 420.00 400.00 359.50
2010-11 500.00 530.00 515.12
2011-12 600.00 588.00 564.05
T
OTAL 2116.65 2052.71 1933.00
2.4 The Department has further informed that the slight under-utilisation of the allocated funds
was attributable to (i) Non execution to the fullest extent of the planned expansion of the ICMR
infrastructure to cover all the States in the North Eastern Region, and (ii) Non sanction of the
schemes prepared by the Department to achieve its mandate.
2.5 For the Schemes including ICMR the Department has informed that, although allocations were
made, the schemes had to be drafted. Thereafter in-principle approval of the Planning Commission
was required for processing of the schemes. The approval process for the schemes was also
hampered by the fact that there were objections to full fledged schemes towards the end of the 11
th
Five Year Plan from the appraising agencies, and the schemes had to be revised accordingly.
2.6 The Committee is constrained to observe that there is a huge mismatch to the tune
of Rs.2379.43 crore between the Eleventh Plan outlay and the Plan allocations made for the
Department of Health Research. The Committee feels that the financial outlay earmarked
for the Eleventh Plan was based more on theoretical anticipation rather than factors like
past trends of expenditure, stages of formulation/implementation of various projects, the
status of pre-project approvals etc. The Committee would, therefore, strongly recommend
that all possible measures should be put in place to exercise greater financial prudence for
the purpose of earmarking realistic outlays for the 12
th Plan Period.
2.7 The Committee also finds that there has been persistent and huge shortfall in
utilization of the allocated expenditure under various heads of the Department during the
last three years. The shortfall witnessed in utilization of funds allocated under the various
heads for 2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12 is given below:
(Rs. in crore )
Sl. Sub Component
No. 2009-10 2009-10 2010-11 2010-11 2011-12 2011-12
BE Exp BE Exp BE AE
1 2 3 4 5 6789
a. Secretariat-Social Services 2 0 4 0 2 3.74
b. Medical & Public Health
1 Advanced training 3 0.05 8 0 15 4.02
Human in research in
Resources medicine and
Develop- health
ment for
health
research

4
1 2 3 4 5 6789
Inter-sectoral co- 25 5 0 15 13.24
ordination in
medical,
biomedical and
health research
Promotion & 10 3 0 0.5
Grant in guidance on
aid research
scheme governance issues
2 for inter Matters relating to 1 5 0 1
sectoral scientific societies
and associations,
converge charitable and
nce & religious
Promotion endowments in
and medicine and
guidance health research
on areas.
research
Coordination with 3 0 0.5
governance Government/
Issues organisations/
institutions
3 ICMR 260 +40 399.5 360 +50 510 500 533
4 Managing Matter relating to 5 5 5 20 10
epidemics epidemics, natural
and calamities and
national development of
calamities tools to prevent
outbreaks
5 Develop- Promotion, co- 66 49 40 0
ment of ordination and
Infrastruc- development of
ture for basic, applied and
Promotion clinical research
of International 5 0.25 8 0.12 6 0.05
Health cooperation in
Research medical and
health research
Grand 420 399.8 500 515.12 600 564.05
Total
2.8 It is evident from the above Table that except for ICMR, all other schemes allocations
for 2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12. witnessed massive under/nil financial performance in
terms of utilization of BE The Department has attributed the reasons for under/nil
utilization of BE allocations to the non approvals of various schemes/projects for
implementation. The Committee deprecates the Department for its failure in obtaining
necessary approvals fmdmplementation of the above schemes/projects and making projection
of fund requirements in an unrealistic manner.
2.9 The Committee notes that the Department of Health Research was created in September
2007 and became functional in November, 2008 with appointment of the first Secretary who is

5
also the DG, ICMR. More than three years have elapsed since then and therefore the reasons
for delay in obtaining the necessary approvals for implementation of various schemes/projects
are beyond the comprehension of the Committee. Now that the in-principle approval of the
Planning Commission for all four Schemes has been obtained, the Committee would expect the
Department to expedite the approvals for the remaining two Schemes and ensure that the
Schemes are operationalized within the shortest possible time, the allocations made for the
purpose are utilized optimally, huge variations in the Budget Estimates and the Actual
Expenditure do not recur, and the scarce resources are not kept locked up and surrendered
later. The Committee desires to be apprised of the measures taken in this regard.
2.10 In reply to a query, the Committee has been informed that against the projected requirement
of funds to the tune of Rs.3120 crore for 2012-13 under the plan component, Rs.660 crore only
has been allocated to the Department.
2.11 The details regarding projected demand for funds and allocations made are given below:–
ACTIVITY BUDGET HEAD Amount
Rs. in crore
PLAN Projected Allocated
Human Resources Advanced training in research 200 23
Development for health in medicine and health
research
Grant in aid scheme for Coordination with 200 34
inter sectoral convergence Government/organisations/
& Promotion and institutions
guidance on research Inter-sectoral co-ordination in medical,
governance Issues biomedical and health research
Matters relating to scientific societies
and associations, charitable and
religious endowments in medicine and
health research areas
Promotion & guidance on
research governance issues
Scheme for managing Matter relating to epidemics, natural 400 34
epidemics and national calamities and development of tools to
calamities prevent outbreaks
Development of Promotion, co-ordination and 600 44
Infrastructure for development of basic, applied
promotion of Health and clinical research
Research
International cooperation International cooperation in 15
medical and health research
Secretariat 5 8
ICMR 1700 518
PLAN 3120 660
(Total including amount earmarked for the North East areas)
NON PLAN 312 248

6
2.12 The Committee notes that in-principle approval of the Planning Commission has
already been obtained for most of the Schemes which could not take off during the 11 th Plan
due to lack of necessary approvals. The Schemes or sub-components of the Schemes, which
have received Planning Commission’s in-principle approval, include Promotion and Guidance
on Research Governance Issues, Inter-sectoral Coordination in Medical, Biomedical and
Health Research, Advanced Training in Research in Medicine and Health, Matters relating
to Epidemics, Natural Calamities and Development of Tools; Coordination in the field of
Health Research with Governments, Organisations and Institutes; Matters relating to
Scientific Societies and Associations; Charitable and Religious Endowments in Medicine and
Health Research areas etc. The Committee takes note of the submission of the Department
of Health Research that the allocated funds for the year 2012-13 would be able to meet only
part of the cost of the new activities and this resource crunch from the beginning would
seriously affect the goals of Department, especially new activities. The Committee,
therefore, views with serious concern the considerably reduced BE allocation vis-a-vis
projected outlay for 2012-13.
2.13 Considering the fact that scientific knowledge generated through health and bio-
medical research is used to develop drugs, diagnostics, vaccines, and devices that ultimately
find place in the health care delivery systems of the country as also the fact that health
research has a vital role to play in discovery and development of indigenous health
products, the Committee recommends that the allocation for the Department for 2012-13 be
suitably enhanced at RE stage. The Committee would simultaneously recommend that the
Department should deploy its resources in a more efficient manner and ensure optimal
utilization of the allocated funds.
2.14 The Committee understands that the 12
th Plan outlay of the Department is yet to be
approved. The Committee observes that the delay in formal approval of the 12 th Plan outlay
has a direct bearing on the process of EFC/CCEA approvals of various schemes/ programmes
of the Department and their implementation. The Committee observes that the 11
th Plan has
already concluded in March, 2012 and the process of approval of the 12 th Plan should have
been completed much before so as to obviate procrastination. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends to the Government to quickly complete all the formalities related to planning
process and approve the 12
th Plan outlay in right earnest so that the implementation of
various schemes/programmes of the Department is not hampered by lack of approvals.
III. Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR)
3.1 The ICMR is the main technical wing of Department of Health Research and is responsible
for formulation, coordination and pfomotion of bio-medical research in the country.
3.2 The Council has accepted a twin-track approach to meet its objectives -intramural research
through its 32 institutes/centres and extramural research (through grants-in-aid in non-ICMR
institutions). The Research priorities of ICMR coincide with health policy and priorities of the
country. The Department has informed that among the on-going/spill-over activities, following are
the most important and will receive priority for expansion:–
Translational Programmes of ICMR
3.3 “ICMR will continue to be focused on developing and/ or adapting/evaluating new generation
diagnostics, therapeutics and protective measures applicable at public health level by following up
on leads in the area of vector borne diseases (malaria, filarial, dengue, Japanese encephalitis, kalazar
etc), hepatitis, diarrheal diseases (caused by different bacteria, viruses, parasites), tuberculosis,
leprosy, HIV-AIDS, other sexually transmitted diseases etc. Information about epidemiological

7
aspects of non-communicable diseases (hypertension, diabetes, cancer etc) has been analysed to
focus on research to improve their diagnosis and management. Development of affordable
diagnostics for diabetes is among the most ambitious programmes.”
3.4 “Out of the 75 new products/technologies identified from the work carried over in ICMR
Institutes/Centres it is planned to complete the process in at least 20 so that they could move into
production/implementation stage.”
3.5 “Programmes on Health Systems Research and Social & Behavioural Research initiated to
address implementation issues about various programmes with a focus on access to needy
vulnerable groups and marginalized sections will be continued.”
3.6 “Programmes on burning problems like JE/AES, other water borne diseases, drug
resistance, maternal and child morality, environmental and occupational health etc will be
strengthened and expanded.”
3.7 “Research programmes on non-communicable diseases specially diabetes, cardiovascular
diseases, stroke, cancer, reproductive health, maternal and child health, nutrition; newer areas like
genomic and proteomic applications; molecular medicine, stem cell therapy, gender health etc will
be further scaled up.”
3.8 “Special programme for medical colleges in the periphery will be expanded by giving more
grants for initiation of programmes and research so that ICMR complements the infrastructural and
human resource development programmes of DHR”
3.9 “New research programmes will be initiated in areas such as mental health, oral health, bone
health, transplantation immunology, allergies as well as immune deficiency disorders etc which are
currently lagging behind. Further, disease burden studies on diseases where vaccine can be a
potential strategy will also be initiated. New task force based projects will also be taken up on
above areas where leads have emerged and need to be taken forward.”
3.10 “Specialized centres on Zoonosis, Pesticides; food safety, clinical research, mental health
and other gap areas are proposed to be started in project mode.”
Upgradation of existing infrastructure/Establishment of new Centres
3.11 “Laboratory/Institute buildings in Delhi (NIMR, NIMS, NIP & ICMR Hqs); Agra (NJILOMD
- diagnostic and animal research complex); Noida (hospital complex, Science Centre, building for
NIMS); Jabalpur (Animal House); Mumbai (NIRRH-Primate Centre; NIIH-Building, ERC-Building);
Pune (NIV -Seminar-cum-Hostel complex); Madurai (CRME-Building); Belgaum (RMRC-Lab and
Institute building); Allapuza (Lab Building); Kolkata (ICMR Virus Unit-Regional Viral Lab, building);
Patna (RMRIMS-Tropical Disease Hospital); Bhopal (NIREH, building).”
3.12 “W ork will be initiated to establish the following six centres: Centre for Policy Research for
Non Communicable Diseases; National Centre for Cardiovascular Diseases, Diabetes and Stroke;
ICMR Schools of Public Health; National Animal Resource Facility for Biomedical Research;
Institute for Research on Ageing; and Institute to cater to Regional health problems of Kerala and
adjoining area.”
3.13 “New Referral Centres are proposed in the areas like Vaccine Preventable diseases, Drug
resistance, Policy Research on Non Communicable Diseases, Health Economics; Health Systems;
Social and Behavioural Research etc.”
Outbreak/Disaster Response Fund :
3.14 “This fund will be set up to assist ICMR (for developing, acquiring materials and

8
mobilization) to meet requests to provide support leadership when confronted with outbreaks and
other disasters.”
3.15 “Strengthening international cooperation: Participation in conferences: As a part of this
activity financial assistance will be provided for presenting research papers, chairing the session
or delivering a keynote address in international scientific event (conferences/seminars/symposia/
workshop) to bio-medical scientists both young as well as senior scientists.
• Organising international conferences in India – supporting international conferences in India.
• Supporting delegations to various bilateral/multilateral discussions and Joint Working
Groups (JWGs)
• Supporting Indian component of research studies under bilateral programmes.
• Support to research activities under various bilateral/multilateral programmes such as,
German Research Foundation (DFG), European Union (EU), India, Brazil, and South
Africa (IBSA) for development of global strategy. Other important collaboration are
with NIH and CDC USA; with CIHR, Canada; with MRC UK and London school of
Medicine UK as well with France under ICMR-INSERM initiatives.”
Programmes for North Eastern Region
3.16 “DHR/ICMR has plans to oversee the promotion, co-ordination and development of health
research in and including specific projects relating to the North-Eastern Areas;
(a) Through development of infrastructure;
(b) Support to research through Intramural and extramural projects;
(c) Undertake specific studies and projects specific to and in these areas.”
3.17 As per the information furnished by the Department in the Background Material actual
expenditure vis-a-vis BE and RE for 2009-10 and 2010-11 is as follows:–
(Rs in crore )
2009-10 2009-10 2009-10 2010-11 2010-11 2010-11 2011-12 2011-12 2011-12
BE RE Exp BE RE Exp BE RE AE
260 364 399.5 360 390 510 500 500 533
ICMR +40 +40 +50 +53
3.18. The Department has submitted that the amounts spent under the Head of ICMR has
consistently been more than the Budget Estimates and the reason for this is that although the
Department has been asking for a larger allocation in line with the Plan outlay for ICMR, the
Annual Plan allocations have consistently been lower than the requirement.
3.19 In reply to a query, the Department has informed that against the projected demand of
Rs.1700 crore for 2012-13, only Rs.518.00 crore has been allocated.
3.20 The Committee observes that the shortfall between the projected demand and the
Budget Estimate for ICMR for 2012-13 is to  the tune of Rs.1183.00 crore, which is massive
by any standards and is certain to  have an adverse bearing on the implementation of
various intramural and extramural research projects of ICMR. Given the excellent track-
record of ICMR in utilizing the budgeted funds, the Committee wonders as to what financial
yardstick was applied leading to substantially reduced allocation of funds in BE 2012-13

9
vis-a-vis  the projected demand. In view of the dynamic international health research
environment and the current and future health challenges of the country, the role of ICMR
is very crucial in generating new knowledge in frontier areas of research on health and
related issues and if its projects are allowed to be plagued with under-funding to such a
large extent, it can have very serious repercussions for generation of new scientific
knowledge and undermine the desired outcomes in health sector. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that more funds be allocated to ICMR. The Committee simultaneously
impresses upon the Department to deploy its financial resources in a more efficient manner.
3.21 On being asked to apprise about the updated status of the programmes/projects under the
Golden Triangle Partnership and ICMR’s collaboration with the National Innovation Foundation and
the progress made towards translating 53 leads identified during 2009-10 under Translational
Research into health products/processes/systems, the Department has stated in a written submission
that under Golden Triangle Partnership scheme (GTP) for validation of the traditional formulations,
ICMR has completed all pre-trial related activities including, identification of trial sites, GCP training
of the investigators, assessing other requirements for clinical trials, time frame, manpower for
conducting and completing the clinical trial for each of the diseases for which protocols have been
prepared through extensive discussion with clinicians of both the systems of medicine and other
experts. Clinical trials will commence on receipt of standardized formulations from CCRAS/
AYUSH. As per the clinical trial protocol with respect to four identified diseases developed by
ICMR, the time frame will vary from 3 – 5 years depending upon the disease and the product
when received.
3.22 The Department has also informed that ICMR-NIF joint collaboration has been extended for
a further period of 5 years (2011-2016). ICMR has so far provided funding to NIF in project
mode:
• “For establishment of non codified plant mini repository of medicinal value practiced
by traditional healers.”
• “For Augmenting the facilities at SRISTI laboratory to enable them for undertaking in
vitro screening.”
3.23 “Joint implementation committee has been constituted to coordinate and steer the
programme. The collaboration will be monitored once in six months.”
3.24 “The larger proposal to put in place a mechanism for validation of 800 practices over a
period of two years is awaiting expenditure sanction of the Government.”
3.25 “The development and evaluation of 75 identified leads, including 52 leads identified during
phase I (09-10) as referred to in the question, under Translational years.” Research has been
progressing as planned. 28 of these are likely to be ready within 1-2 years.
3.26 The Committee observes that in a resource-constrained country like India judicious
utilization of funds is of paramount importance. Equally important is the fact that the
attention should be focused on health outcomes rather than health outlays. The Committee
would, therefore, like the Department to get all on-going research projects, being funded,
wholly or partially with government money, evaluated by an independent agency and place
the findings in the public domain.
3.27 In reply to a query regarding the main achievements of ICMR during the 11
th Plan, the
Department has inter-alia furnished the following information:
• “Translational Research that envisages harvesting the innovations/leads identified into
products/processes/methodologies with a portfolio of over 100 potential leads for a

10
wide spectrum of disease conditions and for varied application as diagnostics, methods
that have application in disease control programmes. About 50 leads are in advanced
stages of validation and refinement for converting them to products, processes and
methods for public good.
• Detection of JE virus antigen in desiccated vector mosquitoes.
• Indigenous production of monoclonal antibodies PfHRPII and plDH achieved for
improved diagnostics for malaria.
• Climate based model developed for impact of climate change on malaria.
• Species-specific PCR developed for detecting Leishmania donovani tested in the
endemic area and widely utilized in referral labs as a confirmatory test.
• Camp approach was found with higher case yield than house-to house survey for
surveillance of Kala-azar.
• A real time RT-PCR useful for early diagnosis was developed for detection of dengue
viral RNA.
• A kit for JE developed and supplied for national programme.
• DNA chips developed for studying the survival of TB and lepra bacilli in host and
several useful candidates for translation identified.
• New rapid molecular methods for detection of rifampicin, isoniazid and ethambutol
resistance in TB developed.
• Developed a new DNA fingerprinting method useful for diagnosis of TB and other
mycobacterial infections.
• Luciferase reporter phage assay developed using recombinant mycobacteriophages for
both rapid diagnosis and drug susceptibility testing.
• Study of genomic diversity of leprosy.bacillus and expression of its genes in human
host has led to identification of genetic markers with potential to elicit diversity among
M. leprae strains.
• Developed an immune-chromatographic dipstick kit for the rapid diagnosis of cholera
with sensitivity and specificity of 92% and 73% respectively.
• Monoclonal antibody based indigenous diagnostic assay developed for diagnosing
patients with Chlamydia trachomatis infection.
• Rapid IgM ELISA and Latex Agglutination Tests for Leptospirosis developed.
• Technology developed for the production of mosquito larvicide, Bacillus thuringiensis
var. israelensis was transferred to industry.
• Multiplex PCR for detection of An. annularis species complex and their vectorial
attributes developed.
• Bivalent rapid diagnostic malaria kits tested, approved and successfully inducted into
the National programme.
• Real-time PCR assay developed to diagnose and simultaneously estimate parasite load
in clinical samples of visceral leishmaniasis (VL) and Post Kala-azar Dermal
Leishmaniasis (PKDL).

11
• Developed a ELISA kit for identification of paragonimiasis (lung fluke) after
characterization of Paragonimus species in NE India.
• Non-invasive prenatal diagnostic technique developed for hemoglobinopathy shown to
be suitable detection in the 10 to 15 week pregnancy.
• Simple and inexpensive screening test for Fragile X syndrome, a common cause of
mental retardation in males, developed.
• Established an inexpensive, fast and accurate flow cytometric technique for evaluation
of osmliotic fragility in hemolytic anemias.
• Technology for estimation of vitamin A in blood samples using Dried Blood Spot (DBS)
developed.
• Technologies of double fortified salt (DFS) and fortification of wheat atta with iron
and other essential nutrients transferred to the industry.”
3.28 The Committee appreciates the achievements made by ICMR. However, for the sake
of greater clarity, the Committee would like to recommend to the Department to introduce
the above achievements into the public health systems of the country at the earliest
opportunity. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this
direction.
IV. Development of Infrastructure for Promotion of Health Research
4.1 As per the information furnished by the Department, this programme essentially covers the
establishmnent of modern bio-laboratories and animal house facilities in medical colleges and
institutions which form the backbone of medical research. This is especially aimed at those States
and regions which are underserved so that medical research can become broad-based.
4.2 During 2012-13, it is proposed to establish about 60 Multidisciplinary Research Units
(MRUs) in Government Medical Colleges and 20 Model Rural Health Research Units (MRHRUs);
specialized centres/units; 10-15 specialized research laboratories in culting-edge areas as well as
transdisciplinary aspects involving AYUSH, NKN etc.
A. Special support to the Medical Colleges :
The Department has informed that:
4.3 (i) Medical colleges are the backbone of both teaching as well as providing specialized services
to patients in India. It is also expected that medical colleges will also set the trends in thinking
process and innovation to improve our understanding of the disease(s) and their management.
(ii) Over the years it has been seen that majority of our medical colleges have ended up just
confining to routine patient care and also teaching based on conventional methods. This is thought
to be basically because of lack of appropriate facilities and even lack of adequate attempt to create
such new facilities e.g. modern biology units in the medical colleges. As a result medical colleges
even do not think of including the new methods of investigation for understanding the patho-
biology, diagnosis, treatment and/or monitoring the progress of cases for better management
practices.
(iii) The Department of Health Research plans to pay special attention to development of
infrastructure in medical colleges by establishing multi-disciplinary research units (around 250 units
in 5 years) at least in all the government medical colleges. These units will provide the modern
technology infrastructure which will improve the quality of the specialized care, training of doctors

12
and other health care professionals and then research as per the needs of the population. More than
sixty medical colleges have applied/ been identified by State Governments and these Units are
planned to be established in 2012-13.
(B) Establishment of model rural health research units (MRHRU)
4.4 The Department has informed that there is a wide gap between the available specialized
health care technology and the technology being developed vis-a-vis their utilization in the State
health systems. This is particularly true for rural health settings. It is generally felt that technology
application needs specialized infra-structure and can be done only in urban settings. In order to
develop models for transfer of such technology to the end care users, the Department has planned
to establish model rural health research units in all the States (about 50);  more than one in larger
states where technology transfer and the research targeting health interventions will be done in
partnership with the States. It has been planned to establish 20  units by  the end of 2012-2013.
(C) Establishment of other specialized research units including labs
4.5 The Department has informed that as a emerging developing country, India has plans and
ambitions to be in the forefront in the creation of new knowledge/technology and making the
technology available to our population through appropriate interventions. For this purpose, modern
clinical/public health oriented set-ups are needed to work on cutting edge science like stem cells,
molecular medicine, nano medicine etc.,  and specialized centres/Institutes for mental health, oral
health, health systems, health economics, policy related to research on implementation, molecular
& transplant immunology etc.  The Department plans to establish/develop 15 such centres for
service, education and research with a focus on trans-disciplinary research during 2012-13.
4.6 Five States have sent concurrence and detailed proposals for establishing MRHRU in their
States (Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Bihar and Tripura).
4.7 The Committee welcomes the initiatives taken by the Department for establishment
of MRUs and MRHRUs. The Committee observes that while there is clarity about the fact
that the government medical colleges would be given support for development of
infrastructure in terms of establishment of multidisciplinary research units, there is lack
of clarity on the policy stance of the Development about the model ( i.e. government, private
or PPP) to be adopted for establishing the MRHRU. The Committee expects the Department
to remove this ambiguity.
4.8 The Committee notes that the above initiatives are targeted to bridge the gap in the
availability of infrastructure for research in medical colleges and create infrastructure for
transfer of technology to the beneficiaries in rural areas. From the information furnished
by the Department, the Committee gathers that EFC for this scheme is yet to be approved
whereas the Planning Commission has accorded its in-principle approval to it. For enabling
operationalization of the Scheme at the earliest, the Committee would expect the
Department to make vigorous efforts to get the clearance of EFC at the earliest and obviate
further delays. The Committee desires to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department
to get the EFC approval expedited.
4.9 As per the submissions made by the Secretary, Department of Health Research during the
course of his oral evidence before the Committee on 10th April, 2012, a demand of Rs. 605
crore was projected for the above scheme, but the Planning Commission approved an outlay of
only Rs. 44.00 crore for 2012-13 under the head of Development of Infrastructure for Promotion
of Health Research, presumably on the ground that all the necessary approvals were yet to be
obtained.

13
4.10 The Committee apprehends that meagre outlay of Rs.44 crore would not be sufficient
to meet the requirement of funds under this head, specially in view of the fact that
development of infrastructure is a capital-intensive activity and 60 proposals for
establishment of MRUs and detailed proposals for establishment of MRHRUs from five
States have already been received. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Planning Commission have a re-Iook at the allocations made under the above head and
revise it upwardly at RE stage.
V. Grant-in-Aid Scheme for Inter-Sectoral Convergence and Promotion and Guidance on
Research Governance Issues.
5.1 The Committee has been informed that the work relating to (i) Promotion and Guidance of
Research Governance (ii) Matters relating to Scientific Societies and Associations, Charitable and
Religious Endowments in Medicine and Health Research Areas and (iii) Coordination with
Governments/Organisations/lnstitutions and (iv) Inter-sectoral Coordination in Medical, Biomedical
and Health Research has been included as part of a New Scheme, i.e. Grant-in-Aid Scheme for
Inter-sectoral Convergence and Promotion and Guidance on Research Governance Issues.
5.2 The Department has informed that under promotion and guidance on Research Governance
Issues, the following activities are being undertaken:
PROMOTION AND GUIDANCE ON RESEARCH GOVERNANCE ISSUES
• A proposal for the enactment of an Ethics Bill and the establishment of the National
Bioethics Authority is under processing. The bill has been drafted and placed in the
public domain for comments.
• A Bill for Regulation of Assisted Reproductive Technology has been drafted.
• A bill on alternate systems of medicine has been drafted and is being processed for
introduction in Parliament.
• Systems for establishing mechanisms for mapping of health research institutions,
accreditation etc are being finalised.
A. Grant in Aid scheme for projects requiring inter-sectoral coordination, translation
specially in PPP mode and IT enabled governance, trans-disciplinary as well as
implementation research.
5.3 As per the information given in the Outcome Budget 2012-13, while several science
departments are significantly contributing to innovation related to different aspects of biomedical
research, it is recognized that translation process and further implementation research is not as
strong as is needed. In order to strengthen research effort in which the partnership of different
government agencies, NGOs and Industry is required, the Department has planned to provide
support in the form of grant-in-aid to selected projects; create awards, dedicated funding for
translation of innovations and their implementation and support to professional associations etc. for
developing guidelines and priority setting. Thus there will be special focus on encouraging
innovation, their translation and implementation by collaboration and cooperation with other
agencies by laying special stress on implementation research so that there is a better utilization of
available knowledge.
5.4 mission of biomedical and health research around medical/health priorities such as
Department of Health Research (DHR) proposes to launch Inter-departmental tuberculosis; Viral
infections with potential for outbreaks; Zoonotic diseases; Maternal and Child health including

14
gender issues in health; Nutrition and Food safety; Diseases preventable through measures like
vaccines, environmental interventions, public health education etc.; Diabetes, cardiovascular, mental
and chronic neurological disorders; Affordable health care technologies (diagnostics, therapeutics,
devices etc.); Innovation in health care delivery; Rural health care; mental health and ageing-related
diseases such as dementia, Parkinson’s Disease, etc.; Urban health; especially the emerging triple
disease burden due to communicable and non-communicable diseases and trauma; mechanisms to
provide information/guidance on healthy life style; Gender issues in the provision of health services,
setting up of district research stations, etc. Projects will be identified and supported in partnerships
with among various science agencies/departments – those mainly involved in basic science and/or
innovation on  one hand ( e.g., DST, DBT, CSIR/DSIR, DRDO etc.) to those with major application
on epidemiology, public health ( e.g., ICMR). Thus, the effort should be on (i) establishing
mechanisms to evaluate technologies for improving health care at individual & public health level;
(ii) fostering academia-Industry link: creating processes and cell to link developers with industry
for translation of  leads into products/processes; and (iii) establishment of  a rapid clearing house
mechanism for evaluation of  health research technologies including the commercial applications. In
addition agencies/departments having complementary activities with DHR such as, DIT, ICAR/
DARE, Social Justice, Environment and Forests, Women and Children; Water resources; other user
departments of MOH&FW etc.  are proposed to be engaged in the process. International
collaborations of scientific and strategic mutual interest will be a priority.
5.5 DHR plans to focus on schemes aimed at making health care affordable for the poor/
marginalized groups/communities. The DHR should set up Technology Assessment Board/
Department consisting of economists, social scientists, public health professionals and other
specialists (similar to the Offices of Technology Assessment in some countries) whereby new
technologies can be scientifically assessed for promotion and also before introduction/procurement.
Schemes to promote development of indigenous products by the Indian pharma industry would be
established on the lines of DST/CSIR model in areas where there are public health implications. But
there is also need to set up strict regulatory mechanisms systems and mechanisms for quality
control of drugs and other health products. To address this need, the DHR has been advised to
set up apex drug testing laboratories and related regulatory infrastructure in every state in synergy/
coordination with DCGI and other appropriate mechanisms. DHR has also been advised to set up
a Medical Technology Development Board to promote development of indigenous medical
technologies.
5.6 Against the Revised Estimates of Rs.26.00 crore for 2011-12, the actual expenditure under
this head was Rs.13.24 crore. The Department has informed that the New Scheme has been
approved by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) and the activities envisaged under the New
Scheme are targeted to be initiated during 2012-13. As per the information furnished by the
Department, against the projected demand of Rs.200.00 crore for 2012-13 under the head, only
Rs.34.00 crore has been allocated.
5.7 Highlighting the achievements under this head, the Secretary, Department of Health
Research, during the course of his oral evidence before the Committee on 10
th April, 2012 inter-
alia stated the following:
• “An exercise for mapping of Health Research Institutions has been completed;
• Mechanisms for recognition of Health Research institutions established;
• National Health Research Policy has been drafted and National Health Research Forum
is being established;
• National Knowledge Management Policy document has been drafted;

15
• Bill on Ethics – The Biomedical and Health Research involving human participation
Regulation Bill, 2012 has been drafted;
• Bills for Recognition of Alternate systems of medicine; Assisted Reproductive
technologies drafted;
• A Group of Secretaries constituted for coordination between Departments has identified
common/complementary areas; and
• Development of Health Technology assessment as well Technology Development
Boards – concept papers developed.”
5.8 The Committee is not privy to the reasons adduced by the Planning Commission for
pegging the BE 2012-13 at Rs.34.00 crore vis-a-vis the projected demand of Rs.200.00 crore
under the above head. However, considering the fact that the EFC approval has already been
accorded to the Scheme, the Committee feels that meagre allocation of Rs.34.00 crore would
not be adequate to meet the fund requirements. The Committee, therefore, recommends to
the Department to move the Planning Commission once again for allocation of more funds
at RE Stage and apprise the Committee of their response thereto, indicating the reasons for
not acceding to the request for enhanced allocation under the head.
5.9 The Committee observes that accomplishment of the targets set under the New
Scheme would require involvement of a number of agencies/organizations. Anticipating this,
the Committee in its 40
th Report presented to Parliament on the 28 th April 2010, had inter-
alia recommended to the Department to create an institutional coordination mechanism for
synergizing the core competencies of the different research organizations/agencies. In
pursuance of the Committee’s recommendation, the Department has constituted a Group of
Secretaries for the purpose of coordination. However, it is not clear as to whether it is an
institutionalized mechanism or a stop-gap arrangement. The Committee would, therefore,
like the Department to shed more light on the issue as also apprise it of the updated
development in this direction.
5.10 The Committee observes that the activities envisaged under this head are of very
vital importance. However, the real challenge would be witnessed in taking them to their
logical conclusion in a time-bound manner. The fact that a number of activities under the
above Scheme, which were targeted to be finalized during 2008-09, but could not be finalised
even after lapse of 4 years, is indicative of the challenges ahead. The Committee, would
therefore, like the Department to lay greater emphasis on the completion of the pre-project
activities within a specific time-line.
5.11 The Committee takes note of the fact that the Scheme inter-alia , aims at making
affordable health care available to the poor/marginalized groups/communities. The
Committee observes that in the post Trade-related Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) era,
development of indigenous pharma products and medical devices are of momentous
importance without which making affordable healthcare a reality to the marginalized
sections of the society would remain a chimera. The Committee, would therefore, like the
Department to sufficiently prioritize research activities which are oriented towards
developing indigenous pharma products and medical devices.
VI. Human Resource Development for Health Research
6.1 Advanced Training in Research in Medicine and Health was converted into a new scheme
for Human Resources Development for Health Research. The scheme has been accorded in
principle approval from the Planning Commission. After receiving in principle approval from the

16
Planning Commission, the scheme was drafted and was approved for implementation during
last two months of 2011-12. For the year 2011-12, the budgetary expenditure is approximately
Rs.4.263 crore.
6.2 As per the information furnished by the Department, a major constraint in the current
scenario is the lack of adequate and properly trained human resources for the health research. As
a result, the output does not match the input as the investment is concentrated in few places only.
The Department plans to strengthen human resource base of the country by organizing focused
training programs within and outside India, for mid-career professionals in medical colleges and
other academic establishments. Over 3000 personnel are proposed to be trained (in 5 years) in
various programmes mentioned below. Improving the career path for young researchers, expanding
the number of specialized researchers and then providing good initial support in the form of start
up grants are planned as a part of this programme. Activities proposed in this regard are:–
(a) Fellowships for training: Researchers in identified advanced fields
(b) Scholarships at PG level: Support for producing human resources in newer areas
(c) Young researcher program: To encourage young students for research
(d) Special training programs: In specified areas, this also includes support to selected
institutions for training
(e) Mid-career research fellowships: Faculty development for medical colleges
6.3 During 2012-13, it is planned to train 200 mid-career/other seniors and 500 young
investigators; 2/3 from medical colleges and provide start-up grants for faculty training.
6.4 Apart from these schemes, it is also proposed to establish an online teaching and learning
facility for the promotion of bio-medical research, with components for supporting workshops.
Much of the biomedical research being carried out in the country today is confined to selected
institutions of the country. It is important that this research is encouraged in all parts of the
country, especially rural and remote areas. One of the reasons for the limited reach has been the
lack of knowledge and support for research. This programme will help prospective institutions and
individuals to access resources both financial and technical on research and promote research
across the country.
6.5 The Secretary, Department of Health Research informed the Committee during his deposition
before the Committee on 10
th April, 2012 that 33 Fellowships (Long-term Foreign=10, Long Term
Indian=5 and Short-term Indian=18) were awarded and 22 Institutions were supported for
providing training in Toxicology, Clinical Trials, Genomics and Stem Cell Research.
6.6 The Committee is supportive of the Programme and observes that without a strong
human resource development base all other health research programmes would be rendered
ineffective. The Committee therefore, recommends that the resource crunch should not be
allowed to come in the way of implementation of this important Scheme.

17
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Committee is constrained to observe that there is a huge mismatch to the tune
of Rs. 2379.43 crore between the Eleventh Plan outlay and the Plan allocations made for the
Department of Health Research. The Committee feels that the financial outlay earmarked
for the Eleventh Plan was based more on theoretical anticipation rather than factors like
past trends of expenditure, stages of formulation/implementation of various projects, the
status of pre-project approvals etc. The Committee would, therefore, strongly recommend
that all possible measures should be put in place to exercise greater financial prudence for
the purpose of earmarking realistic outlays for the 12
th Plan Period. (Para 2.6)
The Committee also finds that there has been persistent and huge shortfall in
utilization of the allocated expenditure under various heads of the Department during the
last three years. The shortfall witnessed in utilization of funds allocated under the various
heads for 2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12 is given below:
(Rs. in crore )
Sl. Sub Component
No. 2009-10 2009-10 2010-11 2010-11 2011-12 2011-12
BE Exp BE Exp BE AE
1 2 3 4 5 6789
a. Secretariat-Social Services 2 0 4 0 2 3.74
b. Medical & Public Health
1 Advanced training 3 0.05 8 0 15 4.02
Human in research in
Resources medicine and
Develop health
ment for
health
research
Inter-sectoral co- 25 5 0 15 13.24
ordination in
medical,
biomedical and
health research
Promotion & 10 3 0 0.5
Grant in guidance on
aid research
scheme governance issues
2 for inter Matters relating to 1 5 0 1
sectoral scientific societies
convergence and associations,
& charitable and
Promotion religious
endowments in
17

18
1 2 3 4 5 6789
and medicine and
guidance health research
on areas.
research
governance Coordination with 3 0 0.5
Issues Government/
organisations/
institutions
3 ICMR 260 +40 399.5 360 +50 510 500 533
4 Managing Matter relating to 5 5 5 20 10
epidemics epidemics, natural
and calamities and
national development of
calamities tools to prevent
outbreaks
5 Develop Promotion, co- 66 49 40 0
ment of ordination and
Infrastruc- development of
ture for basic, applied and
Promotion clinical research
of International 5 0.25 8 0.12 6 0.05
Health cooperation in
Research medical and
health research
Grand 420 399.8 500 515.12 600 564.05
Total
(Para 2.7)
It is evident from the above Table that except for ICMR, all other schemes witnessed
massive under/nil financial performance in terms of utilization of BE allocations for
2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12. The Department has attributed the reasons for under/nil
utilization of BE allocations to the non approvals of various schemes/projects for
implementation. The Committee deprecates the Department for its failure in obtaining
necessary approvals for implementation of the above schemes/projects and making
projection of fund requirements in an unrealistic manner. (Para 2.8)
The Committee notes that the Department of Health Research was created in
September, 2007 and became functional in November, 2008 with appointment of the first
Secretary who is also the DG, ICMR. More than three years have elapsed since then and
therefore the reasons for delay in obtaining the necessary approvals for implementation of
various schemes/projects are beyond the comprehension of the Committee. Now that the in-
principle approval of the Planning Commission for all four Schemes has been obtained, the
Committee would expect the Department to expedite the approvals for the remaining two
Schemes and ensure that the Schemes are operationalized within the shortest possible time,
the allocations made for the purpose are utilized optimally, huge variations in the Budget
Estimates and the Actual Expenditure do not recur, and the scarce resources are not kept
locked up and surrendered later. The Committee desires to be apprised of the measures
taken in this regard. (Para 2.9)
The Committee notes that in-principle approval of the Planning Commission has
already been obtained for most of the Schemes which could not take off during the 11
th Plan

19
due to lack of necessary approvals. The Schemes or sub-components of the Schemes, which
have received Planning Commission’s in-principle approval, include Promotion and Guidance
on Research Governance Issues, Inter-sectoral Coordination in Medical, Biomedical and
Health Research, Advanced Training in Research in Medicine and Health, Matters relating
to Epidemics, Natural Calamities and Development of Tools; Coordination in the field of
Health Research with Governments, Organisations and Institutes; Matters relating to
Scientific Societies and Associations; Charitable and Religious Endowments in Medicine and
Health Research areas etc. The Committee takes note of the submission of the Department
of Health Research that the allocated funds for the year 2012-13 would be able to meet only
part of the cost of the new activities and this resource crunch from the beginning would
seriously affect the goals of Department, especially new activities. The Committee,
therefore, views with serious concern the considerably reduced BE allocation vis-a-vis
projected outlay for 2012-13. (Para 2.12)
Considering the fact that scientific knowledge generated through health and bio-
medical research is used to develop drugs, diagnostics, vaccines, and devices that ultimately
find place in the health care delivery systems of the country as also the fact that health
research has a vital role to play in discovery and development of indigenous health
products, the Committee recommends that the allocation for the Department for 2012-13 be
suitably enhanced at RE stage. The Committee would simultaneously recommend that the
Department should deploy its resources in a more efficient manner and ensure optimal
utilization of the allocated funds. (Para 2.13)
The Committee understands that the 12 th Plan outlay of the Department is yet to be
approved. The Committee observes that the delay in formal approval of the 12 th Plan outlay
has a direct bearing on the process of EFC/CCEA approvals of various schemes/programmes
of the Department and their implementation. The Committee observes that the 11 th Plan has
already concluded in March, 2012 and the process of approval of the 12 th Plan should have
been completed much before so as to obviate procrastination. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends to the Government to quickly complete all the formalities related to planning
process and approve the 12 th Plan outlay in right earnest so that the implementation of
various schemes/programmes of the Department is not hampered by lack of approvals.
(Para 2.14)
III. INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH (lCMR)
The Committee observes that the shortfall between the projected demand and the
Budget Estimate for ICMR for 2012-13 is to the tune of Rs.1183.00 crore, which is massive
by any standards and is certain to have an adverse bearing on the implementation of
various intramural and extramural research projects of ICMR. Given the excellent track-
record of ICMR in utilizing the budgeted funds, the Committee wonders as to  what financial
yardstick was applied leading to  substantially reduced allocation of funds in BE 2012-13
vis-a-vis the projected demand. In view of the dynamic international health research
environment and the current and future health challenges of the country, the role of ICMR
is very crucial in generating new knowledge in frontier areas of research on health and
related issues and if its projects are allowed to  be plagued with under-funding to  such a
large extent, it can have very serious repercussions for generation of new scientific
knowledge and undermine the desired outcomes in health sector. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that more funds be allocated to  ICMR. The Committee simultaneously
impresses upon the Department to  deploy its financial resources in a more efficient manner.
(Para 3.20)

20
The Committee observes that in a resource-constrained country like India judicious
utilization of funds is of paramount importance. Equally important is the fact that the
attention should be focused on health outcomes rather than health outlays. The Committee
would, therefore, like the Department to  get all on-going research projects, being funded,
wholly or partially with government money, evaluated by an independent agency and place
the findings in the public domain. (Para 3.26)
The Committee appreciates the achievements made by ICMR. However, for the sake
of greater clarity, the Committee would like to  recommend to  the Department to  introduce
the above achievements into the public health systems of the country at the earliest
opportunity. The Committee would like to  be apprised of the progress made in this
direction. (Para 3.28)
IV. DEVELOPMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE FOR PROMOTION OF HEALTH RESEARCH
The Committee welcomes the initiatives taken by the Department for establishment
of MRUs and MRHRUs. The Committee observes that while there is clarity about the fact
that the government medical colleges would be given support for development of
infrastructure in terms of establishment of multidisciplinary research units, there is lack
of clarity on the policy stance of the Development about the model ( i.e. government, private
or PPP) to be adopted for establishing the MRHRU. The Committee expects the Department
to remove this ambiguity. (Para 4.7)
The Committee notes that the above initiatives are targeted to bridge the gap In the
availability of infrastructure for research in medical colleges and create infrastructure for
transfer of technology to the beneficiaries in rural areas. From the information furnished
by the Department, the Committee gathers that EFC for this scheme is yet to be approved
whereas the Planning Commission has accorded its in-principle approval to it. For enabling
operationalization of the Scheme at the earliest, the Committee would expect the
Department to make vigorous efforts to get the clearance of EFC at the earliest and obviate
further delays. The Committee desires to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department
to get the EFC approval expedited. (Para 4.8)
The Committee apprehends that meagre outlay of Rs. 44 crore would not be
sufficient to meet the requirement of funds under this head, specially in view of the fact
that development of infrastructure is a capital-intensive activity and 60 proposals for
establishment of MRUs and detailed proposals for establishment of MRHRUs from five
States have already been received. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Planning Commission have a re-look at the allocations made under the above head and
revise it upwardly at RE stage. (Para 4.10)
V . GRANT-IN-AID SCHEME FOR INTER-SECTORAL CONVERGENCE AND
PROMOTION AND GUIDANCE ON RESEARCH GOVERNANCE ISSUES
The Committee is not privy to the reasons adduced by the Planning Commission for
pegging the BE 2012-13 at Rs.34.00 crore vis-a-vis the projected demand of Rs.200.00 crore
under the above head. However, considering the fact that the EFC approval has already been
accorded to the Scheme, the Committee feels that meagre allocation of Rs.34.00 crore would
not be adequate to meet the fund requirements. The Committee, therefore, recommends to
the Department to move the Planning Commission once again for allocation of more funds
at RE Stage and apprise the Committee of their response thereto, indicating the reasons for
not acceding to the request for enhanced allocation under the head. (Para 5.8)

21
The Committee observes that accomplishment of the targets set under the New
Scheme would require involvement of a number of agencies/organizations. Anticipating this,
the Committee in its 40
th Report presented to Parliament on the 28 th April, 2010, had inter-
alia recommended to the Department to create an institutional coordination mechanism for
synergizing the core competencies of the different research organizations/agencies. In
pursuance of the Committee’s recommendation, the Department has constituted a Group of
Secretaries for the purpose of coordination. However, it is not clear as to whether it is an
institutionalized mechanism or a stop-gap arrangement. The Committee would, therefore,
like the Department to shed more light on the issue as also apprise it of the updated
development in this direction. (Para 5.9)
The Committee observes that the activities envisaged under this head are of very
vital importance. However, the real challenge would be witnessed in taking them to their
logical conclusion in a time-bound manner. The fact that a number of activities under the
above Scheme, which were targeted to be finalized during 2008-09, but could not be finalised
even after lapse of 4 years, is indicative of the challenges ahead. The Committee, would
therefore, like the Department to lay greater emphasis on the completion of the pre-project
activities within a specific time-line. (Para 5.10)
The Committee takes note of the fact that the Scheme inter-alia , aims at making
affordable health care available to the poor/marginalized groups/communities. The
Committee observes that in the post Trade-related Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) era,
development of indigenous pharma products and medical devices are of momentous
importance without which making affordable healthcare a reality to the marginalized
sections of the society would remain a chimera. The Committee, would therefore, like the
Department to sufficiently prioritize research activities which are oriented towards
developing indigenous pharma products and medical devices. (Para 5.11)
VI. HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT FOR HEALTH RESEARCH
The Committee is supportive of the Programme and observes that without a strong
human resource development base all other health research programmes would be rendered
ineffective. The Committee therefore, recommends that the resource crunch should not be
allowed to come in the way of implementation of this important Scheme. (Para 6.6)

MINUTES

25
IX
NINTH MEETING
(2011-12)
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 10 th April, 2012 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardhan Dwivedi
3. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
4. Shri Balbir Punj
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Monazir Hassan
8. Shri Ashok Argal
9. Shri Datta Meghe
10. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
11. Shrimati Jayshreeben Kanubhai Patel
12. Shri M.K. Raghavan
13. Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid
14. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
WITNESSES
Department of Health Research
1. Dr. V .M. Katoch, Secretary (DHR) & DG, ICMR
2. Shri S.K. Rao, Joint Secretary (DHR)
3. Shri Sanjiv Datta, Financial Advisor
***
2. In the absence of the Chairman of the Committee, Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal, Member of the
Committee was elected to the Chair. At the outset, he welcomed Members of the Committee and
*** Relate to other matters.

26
apprised them about the agenda of the meeting i.e., taking of oral evidence of the Secretaries of
the Departments of Health Research ** * in connection with examination of Demands for
Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
3. Thereafter, the Committee first took oral evidence of Secretary and other officials of the
Department of Health Research (DHR) on Demands for Grants 2012-13 of the Department.
4 The Secretary, Department of Health Research made a power-point presentation and
acquainted the Committee with the various Schemes of the Department such as (i) Scheme for
Human Resources Development (ii) Inter-sectoral Convergence and Promotion and Guidance on
Research Governance Issues (iii) Development of Infrastructure for Promotion of Health Research;
and (iv) Scheme for managing epidemics and national calamities. The Secretary also informed the
Committee that the Grant-in-aid scheme for Inter-sectoral Convergence and Promotion and
Guidance on Research Governance Issues, and Scheme for Development of Human Resources had
been approved for implementation. However, approval for the remaining two schemes is still
awaited. He also highlighted major achievements made by the Department during the last year and
plans for the current year relating to research concerning diseases/drugs/methods and therapies/
working of research institutes, ongoing programmes of ICMR, clinical trials for National Health
Programmes and various activities falling under its purview. The Members sought clarifications on
the activities and achievements of the Department and deliberated on the adequacy or otherwise of
the budgetary allocation under different heads of the Department, reasons of under-utilization of
funds, main achievements of the Eleventh Plan vis-a-vis the targets set, Tribal Health Research
Forum, etc. The Secretary and other officers of the Department replied to the queries raised by
the Members and assured to furnish detailed written replies to the remaining queries, which
remained unanswered.
(The Committee then adjourned at 3.39 
P.M. for tea break to meet again at 4.00 P.M.)
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The Committee adjourned at 5.10 P.M. to meet again on the 11 th April, 2012.
*** Relate to other matters.

27
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
(2011-12)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 23 rd April, 2012 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
2. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
3. Shri Balbir Punj
LOK SABHA
4. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
5. Shri M.K. Raghavan
6. Shri Ashok Argal
7. Shrimati Harsimrat Kaur Badal
8. Dr. Monazir Hassan
9. Shri P. Lingam
10. Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid
11. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them
of the agenda of the meeting, i.e., consideration and adoption of draft 54
th, 55 th, 56 th and 57 th
Reports on Demands for Grants (2012-13) pertaining to Departments of Health and Family Welfare,
AYUSH, Health Research and AIDS Control, respectively. He invited Members to share their
specific suggestions for improvements and incorporation in the Draft Reports.
3. The Committee then discussed the four draft Reports. A few changes were suggested by
Members for incorporation in the Reports. After some discussion, the Committee adopted all the
four Reports with some modifications. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the Reports may be
presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Wednesday, the 25
th April,
2012. The Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence, Shri Balbir Punj and
Dr. Prabhakar Kore to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha, and Dr. Jyoti Mirdha, and in her
absence, Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid to lay the Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
4. The Committee adjourned at 3.30 
P.M.
27

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.