 
 
                          
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2024/Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT NO.  
155 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY-FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
FUNCTIONING OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH 
SCHEME (CGHS) 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th February, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8thFebruary, 2024) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://sansad.in/rs   
E-mail: rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF  INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2024/Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY-FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
FUNCTIONING OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH 
SCHEME (CGHS) 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th February, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th February, 2024) 
 
 
 

 
CONTENTS 
 
 
1. Composition of the Committee (i) 
2. Preface (ii) 
3. Acronyms (iii) 
  
Chapter-I 
Introduction: Overview and objectives of 
public healthcare schemes 
 
 
1-7 
 
 
8-25 
 
 
Chapter-II 
Initiatives, Assessment and Way Forward 
4. Recommendations/Observations —At a Glance 26-35 
5. Minutes* 36-43 
6. Annexure and Tables  44-49 
 *Minutes of the meeting held on 05.02.2024 to be appended at later stage 

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2023-24) 
 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
3. Shri Sanjeev Arora 
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
5. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel 
6. Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
7. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy 
8. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
9. Dr. Santanu Sen 
10. Shri A. D. Singh 
LOKSABHA 
11. Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
12. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
13. Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
14. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
15. Shri K. Navas Kani 
16. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
17. Shri C. Lalrosanga 
18. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
19. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
20. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
21. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Rao Munde 
22. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
23. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
24. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
25. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
26. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S. 
27. Dr. Jadon Chandra Sen 
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
31. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sumant Narain   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Director 
3.      Dr. Saket Kumar   Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Noyaline Vinitha F.C.  Joint Director 
5.   Shri Roshan Lal   Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 

ii 
 
PREFACE 
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Health and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report 
on its behalf, present this One Hundred Fifty -fifth Report on the subject ―Functioning of 
Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS)‖ which was adopted by the Committee in its 
meeting held on the 5th February, 2024. 
2. The Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) is a comprehensive contributory 
health scheme that provides healthcare facilities to serving and retired Central Government 
employees, their dependents, and other beneficiaries as notified by the Government under  the 
scheme. The Scheme offers a wide range of medical services through a network of 
dispensaries, wellness centers, and empanelled hospitals and diagnostic centers across the 
country. While commendable progress has been made in the large -scale utilisation  of the 
scheme over the years, it is also burdened with several challenges. Some areas requiring 
attention include accessibility, geographical reach, inadequate infrastructure, overcrowding in 
dispensaries and hospitals, staff shortages, quality and availa bility of medicines, payment and 
settlement of bills, and revision of rates for consultations and procedures. Addressing these 
issues requires comprehensive reforms, improved governance, transparency measures, and 
periodic revisions of health coverage to a lign with evolving healthcare needs. The 
Committee's primary objective in identifying this subject was to examine the current 
functioning of the CGHS.  
3. The Committee held deliberations with the representatives of the Ministry of Health 
& Family Welfare and the Director-General of the Central Government Health Scheme during 
its meetings held on the 31st August 2023 and 3rd November 2023 for holistic examination of 
the subject.   
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report and reproduced at 
the end of the Report at ‗Observations/Recommendations-at a Glance‘. 
5. On behalf of the Committee, I extend special thanks to the Secretary of the 
Department of He alth and Family Welfare, and the Director-General of the  Central 
Government Health Scheme. I also acknowledge the contribution of the stakeholders for their 
deep insight and valuable suggestions during interactions. I further extend special 
appreciation of the officers of the Committee Section for their valuable efforts in assimilating 
all relevant information and enabling the Committee to produce this quality Report. 
 
 
New Delhi              BHUBANESWAR KALITA 
5th February, 2024           Chairman, 
Magha, 1945 (Saka)              Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
                   Committee on Health and Family Welfare 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
AB-PMJAY  Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana 
ALC    Authorised Local Chemist  
AMA    Authorised Medical Attendant  
CAPF    Central Armed Police Force 
C-DAC   Centre for Development of Advanced Computing  
CGHS   Central Government Health Scheme 
CISF    Central Industrial Security Force 
CMO   Chief Medical Officer 
CPAO    Central Pension Accounting Office  
CPGRAMS   Centralised Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System  
ESIC   Employees State Insurance Corporation 
ESIS   Employees State Insurance Scheme 
GDMO   General Duty Medical Officer  
GeM   Government e-Marketplace  
GMP   Good Manufacturing Practice  
HCO   Health Care Organisation  
JNV   Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya  
KV   Kendriya Vidyalaya 
LAC    Local Advisory Committee  
MSO   Medical Stores Organisation  
NABH    National Accreditation Board for Hospitals 
NHP   National Health Policy  
NHA   National Health Authority  
NITI    National Institution for Transforming India 
NQAS   National Quality Assurance Standards 
OOPE   Out-of-Pocket Expenditure 
OPD   Out Patient Department 
PPO    Pension Payment Order  
PVHI   Private Voluntary Health Insurance  
RSBY   Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana 
RML   Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital 
SIU   Staff Inspection Unit 
TMS   Transaction Management System  
UHC   Universal Health Coverage 
WHO    World Health Organisation  
ZAC   Zonal Advisory Committee 
 

1 
 
Chapter- I 
Introduction 
 
1.1 Overview and objectives of public healthcare schemes  
1.1.1 The Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) is a healthcare facility provided by 
the Central Government for its employees and pensioners including their family members and 
some other class of individuals in the governance structure. It aims to ensure comprehensive 
medical care with an emphasis on preventive healthcare. CGHS  provides a wide range of 
medical services through a network of dispensaries, hospitals, and diagnostic centres across 
the country. 
1.1.2 Despite the large -scale utili sation of the Scheme by lacs of government employees, 
Members of Parliament, Judges of Hi gh Courts/Supreme Court etc., the CGHS has faced 
several challenges over the years. The inadequate infrastructure and resources, overcrowding 
in dispensaries and hospitals, insufficient staff, quality and availability of medicines and 
medical equipment and  overall governance of the Scheme are some of the pain areas which 
often hinder the effective delivery of healthcare services. 
1.1.3 Addressing various issues associated with CGHS requires comprehensive reforms, 
including streamlining the administrative pr ocesses and periodic revisions of health coverage 
to align with evolving healthcare needs. The Committee feels that improved governance and 
transparency measures are essential for restoring trust and enhancing the effectiveness of the 
CGHS. Keeping this in  view, the Committee decided to examine the current situation in the 
functioning of the Scheme. 
1.1.4 Healthcare policies in India have evolved  over the years to address the country ‘s 
healthcare challenges and provide access to affordable and quality healt hcare services for its 
vast and diverse population. The National Health Policy , 2017 (NHP 2017) envisages 
attaining the highest possible level of health and well -being for all ages through a preventive 
and promotive healthcare orientation in all developmental policies and universal access to 
good quality healthcare services without anyone having to face financial hardship. The policy 
aims to increase access, improve quality and lower the cost of healthcare delivery.  
1.1.5 The increasing cost of quality healthcare combined with greater need and demand for 
health with increasing incomes, higher life expectancy, and epidemiological transition 
towards non -communicable diseases have made  health coverage imperative. Expansion of 
health insurance coverage is a vital mechanism to safeguard individuals against catastrophic 
and unpredictable health expenditures and to achieve UHC  (Universal Health Coverage) . 
Health insurance is a mechanism of pooling the high level of OOPE  (Out Of Pocket 
Expenditure) to provide greater financial protection against health shocks  and improve 
efficiency in the organisation and delivery of healthcare for better health outcomes. NITI 
Aayog, in its report on ―Health Insurance for India‘s Missing Middle‖ (2021),  stated that 
India has multiple types of health insurance schemes. They can broadly be divided into three 

2 
 
categories based on financing source (Government tax revenue or contribution -based), target 
group (e.g., formal sector workers), and compulsory versus voluntary nature of the Scheme.  
(i) Government-subsidised health insurance schemes: Government -
subsidised health insurance schemes provide fully or partially subsidi sed insurance 
coverage to specific targeted segments of the population. These schemes 
predominantly target the poor and the informal sector. Ayushman Bharat Pradhan 
Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (AB -PMJAY), launched in September 2018,  is the single 
largest health insurance scheme. It builds on t he erstwhile RSBY. AB -PMJAY 
provides subsidised and comprehensive secondary and tertiary healthcare packages 
with annual coverage of Rs. 5 lakhs per family on a floater basis. In addition to the 
Centrally Sponsored AB -PMJAY scheme, States have their own he alth insurance 
schemes – also known as extension schemes. The focus of most State schemes is on 
the poor, though some schemes include the non-poor unorganised sector employees.  
(ii) Social health insurance s chemes: These are compulsory, contributory heal th 
insurance schemes for organis ed sector employees. Both employees and employers 
(the Government or private enterprises) pay premiums towards government -mandated 
health insurance coverage. These schemes assure a comprehensive package of 
services, including outpatient and in -patient care to employees, pensioners, and their 
families. The Employee State Insurance Scheme (ESIS) , run by Employee State 
Insurance Corporation (ESIC),  is the largest such Scheme provid ing coverage to 
private establishment workers an d their families. It covers workers earning less than 
Rs. 21,000 per month in most industries with ten or more employees. Another social 
health insurance scheme is the Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) , which is 
run by the Union Government for its em ployees. Further, some Government 
departments, such as Railways and Defence, have separate schemes for their 
employees. They directly provide healthcare services through self -owned and 
operated dispensaries and hospitals for their employees, veterans, and pensioners , 
covering both in-patient and outpatient services.  
(iii) Private voluntary health insurance (PVHI) schemes: PVHI are contributory 
and voluntary schemes. These are retail insurance products and are broadly of two 
types — individual/family or group business (excluding Government). Group 
insurance schemes target corporates and private enterprises where employee 
compensation is higher than the Rs 21,000 ceiling under the ESIC.  
1.1.6 These schemes, among others, play a crucial role in addressing the healthcare needs 
of India‘s diverse population and are part of the Government‘s efforts to achieve the goal of 
universal health coverage and improve overall health outcomes in the country. The 
contributory public healthcare schemes also play  a significant role in providing healthcare 
coverage to specific segments of the population, ensuring that they have access to essential 
healthcare services and financial protection against healthcare expenses. 
 

3 
 
1.2 CGHS Background and Scheme Overview 
 
1.2.1 The Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) is a comprehensive 
contributory health scheme providing primary health care facilities to the s erving/retired 
Central Government employees, their dependents, sitting and former Members of Parliament, 
freedom fighters, and such other beneficiaries as notified by the Government under the 
Scheme (Annexure A). The Scheme was started in 1954 in Delhi. The Scheme expanded the 
scope of services as well as coverage across the country over a period of time.  Specialist 
consultation and in -patient treatment can be used by the beneficiaries from government 
hospitals and private hospitals empanelled under CGHS. 
 
1.2.2 The salient features of CGHS f acilities available to CGHS beneficiaries  are as 
follows: - 
 
a) CGHS provides comprehensive OPD facilities and medicines through its large 
network of Wellness Centres, polyclinics, and labs . CGHS provides health care 
through the Allopathic, Homoeopathic, and Indian systems of medicine (Ayurveda, 
Unani, Siddha and Yoga).  
b) CGHS has empanelled 1735 private hospitals and 2 09 laboratories in different cities 
for carrying out investigations and indoor treatment facilities.  
c) CGHS Wellness Centres refer the beneficiaries to Government hospitals/specialists of 
empanelled hospitals for expert consultation , and based on their recommendation, the 
patients are referred to private empanelled hospitals as per their choice for indoor 
medical treatment. 
d) CGHS beneficiaries are permitted to seek OPD consultation from specialists at private 
hospitals empanelled under CGHS after being referred by any Medical Officer/CMO 
of the CGHS Wellness Centre. 
e) Direct consultation from specialists at empanelled hospitals concerning elderly CGHS 
beneficiaries aged 75 years and above. 
f) Medicines are issued against the prescription of CGHS doctors and other Government 
doctors and as per the prescribed formulary and are supplied from the dispensary 
store.  The medicines not available in the dispensary are procured through an 
Authorized Local Chemist (ALC) and provided to patients. 
g) CGHS provides specialist consultation through CGHS Specialists at Poly clinics, 
Central Government Hospitals and also from Specialists of empanelled hospitals af ter 
referral from CGHS.  In addition, GDMOs with Specialist qualifications also provide 
specialist advice. 
  
1.2.3 The Committee was  informed that the s ubscription rates for CGHS membership  
depend upon the level of pay of the serving/pensioner beneficiary . The amount of 
contribution for CGHS subscription at different levels of pay, as informed by the Ministry, is 
furnished in Table 1. 
 

4 
 
1.2.4 As regards the procedure for taking treatment by CGHS beneficiaries, the Ministry 
furnished the following information to the Committee: - 
 
a) If a Government Specialist/CGHS Medical Officer advises the listed 
investigation/treatment procedure to t he CGHS beneficiary, then no other permission 
is required. The investigation/treatment may be undertaken by beneficiaries from an y 
of the empanelled Health Care Organisations (HCOs).   
b) CGHS beneficiaries requiring specialist consultation/investigations/ hospitalisation at 
empanelled hospitals are referred by the CMO of CGHS Wellness Centre to the 
CGHS empanelled HCOs.  
c) If a CGHS beneficiary has been referred to an empanelled hospital and an 
investigation/treatment procedure is advised by the specialist of the empanelled 
hospital, the same is required to be endorsed by the CGHS Medical Officer before 
undergoing the same at empanelled HCOs.  
d) In case a beneficiary has been referred to a private empanelled  hospital for a 
consultation, and the specialist of that hospital has advised for unlisted 
investigations/treatment procedures, the CMO of CGHS Wellness Centre shall submit 
the prescription to the competent authority for consideration in case of pensioner 
beneficiaries. In case the beneficiary is s erving, he/she  shall seek permission from 
his/her Department for the same. 
e) In the case of CGHS beneficiaries aged 75 years and abo ve, no referral is required,  
and if any listed treatment or investigation is advised, the same may be undertaken 
from private empanelled HCOs without endorsement by CGHS.  
f) In the case of all CGHS beneficiaries, no endorsement/permission is required for 
treatment in emergency conditions.  
g) There is a restriction on the number of consultations to three visits and consultation 
with three specialists on each visit as part of checks and balances in the system. The 
validity of advice of a specialist for investigations is 30 days, and for treatment 
procedures, it is 90 days.  
h) The areas not covered by CGHS facilities , are served by appointing Authorized 
Medical Attendants  (AMA) under the Civil Services (Medical Attendan ce) Rules, 
1944. The AMAs, both  Specialists and  undergraduate Medical Licentiates, give 
consultations in their clini cs, refer the  patients to Government empanelled 
hospitals/diagnostic centres, if required . The AMAs  charge the prescribed  
consultation fee which is reimbursable to the beneficiary, including the cost of 
medicines and diagnostic tests. 
 
1.2.5 For planned surgeries, the serving CGHS beneficiaries have to pay upfront at the time 
of treatment and obtain medical reimbursement from their respective Departments. As per the 
terms and conditions of empanelment in vogue, the empanelled HCOs are required to provide 
cashless treatment facilities to the following categories of beneficiaries  in non -emergency 
cases also: - 
 
a) Members of Parliament. 

5 
 
b) Pensioners of the Central Government drawing pension from Central Civil estimates. 
c) Ex-Members of Parliament , Former Judges of the Supreme Court of India, and High 
Courts. 
d) Freedom Fighters.  
e) Serving employees of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare  (including attached/ 
subordinate offices under the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare); and 
f) Such other categories of CGHS cardholders as notified by the Government. 
 
 
1.3 Organisational Set-up in CGHS 
 
1.3.1 The Directorate of CGHS (CGHS) is headed by the Additional Secretary &  Director 
General (AS&DG), who functions directly under the Ministry. The AS&DG at the apex level 
is assisted by Joint Secretary and Director, CGHS and Director, EHS. The Director CGHS is 
assisted by the Additional Director (HQ), Additional Dy. Director General (HQ) and Deputy 
Secretary (Admin). 
 
1.3.2 In Delhi, Additional Director s (ADs) of respective zones and Medical Store Depot 
functions under the administrative control of AD (HQ). ADs of zones exercise overall 
administrative control over CGHS wellness centres , and the AD  Medical Store Depot is the 
nodal officer for procuring and storing  drugs for all CGHS wellness centres in Delhi NCR. 
There are four AD zones in Delhi and 23 AD zones outside Delhi in different states of the 
country. In zones outside Delhi, ADs of respective zones function under Addl. DDG. The 
Director General (HQ) exercise overall administrative control over CGHS wellness centres 
and is responsible for the procurement of drugs for the  wellness centres under their 
jurisdiction. 
 

6 
 
 
 
 
 
1.4 Budget Allocation for CGHS 
 
1.4.1 The details with regard to the increase in budget allocation/revised estimate for CGHS 
during the period 2017-18 to 2021-22 have been furnished by the Ministry (Table 2). Further, 
the Committee has noted the total expenditure on CGHS from the Annual Report 2022 -23 
of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Table 3).  
 


7 
 
  
 
1.4.2 The Committee observed that the allocation of budget to CGHS has continuously 
increased from 2017-18 to 2021-22 as the network of CGHS coverage has expanded  to 
new cities. From an allocation of Rs. 2890.82 crores in 2017-18, the allocation has 
raised to Rs. 4463 crores in  2021-22. The Committee further note s that the pattern of 
utilisation o f funds highlights that a good percentage of funds allocated are utilised 
under CGHS. However, there is still a widening gap between the lines of the Revised 
Estimate and the Total Expenditure, particularly in 2021 -22, which needs to be 
narrowed with 100% optimal utilisation of funds allocated.  
 
1.4.3 The Committee recommends the Ministry implement measures aimed at 
maximising the utilisation of funds allocated to the CGHS. Furthermore, the Ministry 
should establish a robust mechanism to ensure optimal utilisation of these funds and 
curb any instances of wasteful expenditure. This proactive approach will ensure the 
judicious use of resources and enhance the overall efficiency of the CGHS. 
 
1.4.4 The Committee believes that there is a need to expand the coverage network 
of CGHS in existing and new cities, for which  separate allocation needs to be made. 
These special funds may be utilised to open new wellness centres, polyclinics, and 
separate CGHS wings in g overnment hospitals . The Committee feels that such a 
step will enable the Ministry to set a time -bound date and target s to complete the 
opening of new CGHS facilities. 
 
 
 
    
 


8 
 
Chapter-II 
Initiatives, Assessment and Way Forward 
 
2.1 Initiatives and achievements under CGHS during 2014-2023 
 
2.1.1 The Committee was informed about the following initiatives and achievements under 
CGHS during the period 2014-2023: -  
 
a) Opening new wellness centres and related infrastructure - CGHS has witnessed a 
significant leap in the last nine years. In August 2023, the Ministry informed the Committee 
that the Scheme had been extended from 25 cities in 2014 to 80 cities in 2023  (Table 4). 
Healthcare facilities are now being provided  through 340 Allopathic Wellness Centres, 18 
polyclinics, 03 CGHS hospitals and 107 AYUSH Centres/Units. It serves 43.56 lakh 
beneficiaries, expanding from 34 lakh beneficiaries in 2014.  
 
 
 


9 
 
b) Governance & IT related - The Ministry has informed the Committee of the 
following recent initiatives taken for improvement of CGHS: - 
 
i) CGHS beneficiaries can take advantage of the online appointment system to 
book a slot to consult a general OPD doctor or specialist at any Wellness Centre 
across the country.  
 
ii) Beneficiaries can download and print their CGHS Cards as soon as CGHS 
authorities verify their application forms.  
 
iii) Online transfer of same CGHS card on  account of  transfer from one 
CGHS-covered city to another CGHS -covered city in respect of serving employees 
also. 
 
iv) For elderly CGHS beneficiaries aged 75 years and above, direct consultation 
from specialists is provided at empanelled hospitals. 
 
v) Preventive health check-ups for CGHS pensioner beneficiaries aged 75 
years and above (Primary cardholders). 
 
vi) Post-operative treatment for critically ill beneficiaries is simplified and one -
time permission without the need for revalidation from time to time. 
 
vii) CGHS facilities have been extended to retired employees of A utonomous 
Bodies/Statutory Bodies whose serving employees are already covered under CGHS 
in all CGHS-covered cities. 
 
viii) Guidelines for consideration of reimbursement in excess of the approved 
rates pertaining to medical claims have been revised and simplified. 
 
ix) For pensioners, the payment of a one-time subscription for a lifetime CGHS 
has been made online through the Bharat Kosh Portal. CGHS database has been 
linked to the Ce ntral Pension Accounting Office (CPAO)  portal, and the Pension 
Payment Orders ( PPOs) are generated online. It enabled the CGHS authorities to 
verify the PPO of pensioner applicants online and spared the pensioners the physical 
visit to the CPAO office.   
 
x) Provision of online submission and settlement of grievances through the 
CGHS website introduced. 
 
xi) The paperless settlement of hospital bills by CGHS through the NHA -IT 
Platform was initiated on 01.06.2021. 
 

10 
 
xii) CGHS – ‘Panchayat’ is held in every CGHS city for as sessment of the 
functioning of CGHS- under which senior officers of the Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare /CGHS will interact with various stakeholder groups like CGHS 
beneficiaries, HCOs, Pensioners Association, etc. 
 
xiii) Fortnightly webinars  on relevant health topics  and ailments by specialist 
doctors, with 25% of the topics drawn from th e AYUSH stream of medicine  for 
health education for CGHS beneficiaries , started on 28th October 2020 . All the 
recorded webinars are also available on the ‘cghsindia’ YouTube channel.   
 
xiv) Electronic Health Records  are created and maintained by healthcare 
providers such as doctors, nurses and other medical professionals and can be accessed 
securely.  
 
xv) The initiative of end-to-end online processing of CGHS card applications 
is in the pipeline.  
 
xvi) Introduction of a teleconsultation facility with Government specialists 
through the e-Sanjeevani portal  developed by the Centre for Development of 
Advanced Computing (C -DAC). CGHS specialists are available for Internal 
Medicine, Psychiatry, Orthopedics, Op hthalmology and ENT from 9.30 am to 6.00 
pm from Monday to Friday and 7.30 am to 2.00 pm on Saturdays.  
 
xvii) Earlier, only the female primary cardholders could choose or include either 
their parents or the parents -in-law as their dependents . This option has been 
extended to the male primary cardholders vide OM dated 26th July 2023. 
 
c) Staff Centric 
 
i) E-office implementation- CGHS is completely in online mode regarding the 
e-office movement of files. There is no physical handling of files in CGHS. 
 
ii) E-HRMS implementation - The Service Books of all the employees have 
been digitised. The E-HRMS is under implementation for all the zones of Delhi.  
 
iii) The efforts to establish a capacity-building unit and a dedicated programme 
management unit for different cadres of CGHS are in the process.  
 
iv) There is continued medical education for doctors. The training for inductees 
in batches of 50 has been started, which will be done every quarter.  
 
v) The Staff Inspection Unit (SIU) report has been submitted for consideration 
by the Government to fill up the gap as far as the shortage of manpower is concerned. 
 
 
 
 

11 
 
d) 24x7 National CGHS Helpline  
 
i) A 24x7 National CGHS Helpline service is available on a toll-free number 
18002088900. It is a bilingual (Hindi and English) service that is universally 
accessible (through landline or mobile of any service provider). The beneficiaries can 
seek all CGHS service-related information through this Helpline.  The Helpline 
provides information on queries in areas like General information on CGHS, Facilities 
of CGHS, CGHS eligibility, CGHS entitlement, Related to Plastic card, issue of 
medicines including Life Saving medicines, Permissions for 
investigations/procedures, Hospitalization, Medical Reimb ursement Claims, Health 
Care Organization (HCO) empanelment, Guidance on grievance redressal mechanism 
and RTI issues and Any other CGHS related information.  
2.2 Need for Augmenting Wellness Centres 
 
2.2.1 The Ministry informed that as of August 2023, the CGHS had a presence in 80 cities 
with 340 CGHS Allopathic wellness centres. The Committee has noted that out of these 
340 allopathic wellness centres, 26% are concentrated in the Delhi  NCR region. 
Further, on ly six states (excluding the Delhi NCR region) have more than 10 CGHS 
centres. This highlights that the distribution and accessibility of CGHS services across 
different regions of the country are not equitable and need  to be addressed. The 
Committee noted that the state of Arunachal Pradesh and the UTs of Ladakh, A & N 
islands and Lakshadweep have no CGHS wellness centre. 
 

12 
 
 
 
2.2.2 The Committee is aware that there are many cities and towns where there are a 
sizeable number of Central Government employees, pensioners, and their dependents, 
but no CGHS wellness centre exists there. As a result, the beneficiaries, particularly the 
retired beneficiaries, are required to travel long distances to get medical  treatments, 
causing inconvenience to them. The Committee opines that this scenario, apart from 
being financially draining on the beneficiaries, also causes various other hardships to 
the beneficiaries.  
 
2.2.3 The Committee was  informed that there are 18 CGHS polyclinics across the 
country. The Committee is of the view that 18 polyclinics against 43 lakh beneficiaries 
across the country are insufficient. The Committee would like the Ministry to take 


13 
 
proactive steps for setting up new CGHS centres and consider exploring setting up 
wellness centres and polyclinics  at a rapid pace in underserved areas , especially the 
suburbs of large cities where a considerable population of serving and pensioner 
beneficiaries reside. The Ministry should ensure that all aspirational districts in the 
country have CGHS centres and empanelled hospitals. The number of CGHS  centres 
and their geographical reach are the main facets. The Committee feels that the 
Government needs to consider relaxing existing norms or creating new norms for 
opening new wellness centres, particularly for beneficiaries of rural, hilly, remote,  and 
Northeastern parts of the country.   
 
2.3 Infrastructure in a CGHS WC 
 
2.3.1 The Committee has learned about the poor infrastructure of some wellness 
centres, viz. shabby buildings, lack of proper sitting arrangements, lack of proper 
lighting, cleanliness, availability of basic amenities, etc. The Committee is of the opinion 
that the Ministry should periodically review the condition of available infrastructure at 
wellness centres, and necessary renovation or maintenance work should be carried out 
in a planned manner. The Ministry should allocate separate and sufficient funds for 
periodic upkeep and up-gradation of the wellness centres.  
 
2.3.2   There is a lack of Ambulance service at many of the Wellness Centres. This is 
required in critical cases of referrals and emergencies. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry also consider allocating separate funds for arranging at least one 
ambulance in each Wellness Centre so that the patient can be taken to the higher 
medical centre promptly for emergency treatment . The Ministry should also prepare a 
model list of essential services and equipments that all CGHS wellness centres should 
have available.  
 
2.3.3 The Committee further recommends the Ministry conduct a survey and collect 
data on the number of beneficiaries referred to higher centres and the reasons for such 
referrals. This would help in examining the lack of facility because of which the patient 
was required to be referred , and based on that report, the Ministry should consider 
developing infrastructure and facilities in the CGHS wellness centres  and engaging 
specialist doctors and other allied staff.  
 
2.4 Staffing under CGHS 
 
2.4.1 The Ministry deposed before the Committee that over a period of time, with the 
increase in the number of wellness centres, there has not been a commensurate increase in the 
workforce like doctors, nursing staff, pharmacy cadre, and multi -tasking staff, cre ating a 
significant load on the existing human resources . Further, there has been an exponential 
increase in clientele, which has led to increased aspiration. The Government had constituted a 
Staff Inspection Unit (SIU) Committee to study the staffing patt ern at CGHS wellness 

14 
 
centres. The SIU had recommended the creation of additional posts in CGHS across all levels 
of staff.   
 
 
 
 
2.4.2 The Ministry further informed that the earlier staffing pattern was based on 01 
Medical Officer per 75 patients in a day. Now, due to the increase in workload , the SIU 
recommended 01 Medical Officer per 55 patients in a day. The  annual expenditure for the 
Salaries and allowances  of staff as per actual strength is Rs. 663.38 crores. The additional 
staff recommended for the smooth functioning of CGHS Wellness Centres would result in a  
further annual expenditure of Rs. 145.33 crores.  
 
2.4.3 The Committee note d an additional requirement of about 20 to 30 % of the 
sanctioned strength of doctors, paramedical and administrative staff, over and above 
the sanctioned strength, in all CGHS set -ups across the country. The additional 
requirement for a Junior Health Administrative Assistant is around 70% of the present 
sanctioned strength. Further, during the deliberation, the Ministry informed the 
Committee that a considerable percentage of the sanctioned strength of medical and 
administrative staff is also lying vacant. This leads to a poor doctor-to-beneficiary ratio, 
long waiting times for patients in CGHS dispensaries, and a decrease in the quality of 
patient care.  
 
1539
1113
446 547
1777
2105
1405
493
932
2183
566
292
47
385
406
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000
GDMOs Pharmacy 
Officer
Nursing Officer Junior Health 
Admn Assistant
Multi-tasking 
staff
Sanctioned Strength
Recommended strength as per Staff inspection Report
Additional manpower requirement

15 
 
2.4.4 The Committee is of the view that opening or operating CGHS centres without 
sufficient doctors and staff has no meaning and causes inconvenience to beneficiaries. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry expedite the recruitment 
process and fill up all vacant positions. To ensure an adequate doctor-to-patient ratio in 
all CGHS wellness centres, the recommendations of SIU may be implemented 
expeditiously. Based on the total number of beneficiaries being served by a Wellness 
centre, minimum criteria  for doctors to see  the patients per day may be fixed  and 
strictly adhered to.  On being enquired, the Ministry informed that around 500 
contractual doctors have been engaged in addition to regular doctors  to improve the 
doctor-to-beneficiary ratio. 
 
2.5 Availability and Quality of Medicines Supplied at Wellness Centres 
 
2.5.1 The Ministry informed that after visiting the Medical Officer at the wellness centre, 
the beneficiaries are issued medicines at the pharmacy counter. If the medicines are available, 
they are issued right away. The medicines not readily available at the centre are indented and 
procured through an Authorized Local Chemist (ALC) within 48 hours. The beneficiary or 
the authorised representative can collect the medicines from the counter.  It has come to the 
Committee’s notice that the medicines are often  not procured promptly, causing 
inconvenience to the beneficiaries. In many cases, the bid/contract of the ALC is not 
renewed well in time, and the dispensary is not in a position to supply the medicines.  
 
2.5.2 The Committee recommends the Ministry investigate the issues of delay in 
procurement and subsequent distribution of medicines. The Ministry may bring 
necessary changes in the guidelines and simplify the procedure for the local purchase of 
medicines to ensure an uninterrupted supply of medicines. The Committee also 
recommends that the Ministry establish a mechanism to ensure the continuous 
availability of basic/essential medicines at CGHS dispensaries  so that the need for local 
purchase does not a rise. The Ministry should take necessary steps towards course 
correction, including making the required funds available for regular supply of 
medicines.   
 
2.5.3 The Committee is further of the view that the course of some of the medicines, like 
antibiotics, is required to be started by the patients on the same day or immediately, as 
prescribed by the medical officer of the dispensary or by the doctor of the empanelled HCOs 
(visited after a referral from the dispensary). In case such medicine is not readily  available in 
the dispensary, the same is indented. A patient cannot wait for two days to receive that 
indented medicine, and the procedure of buying directly from the ALC and getting the same 
reimbursed later causes inconvenience to the patient, who shoul d rest to recover early instead 
of running from pillar to post. The Committee, therefore, feels that the turnaround time 
to receive indented medicine should be reduced to less than 24 hours. The Ministry 
should make necessary course corrections to ensure t hat the indented medicines are 
available by the very next day morning.   
 

16 
 
2.5.4 On the issue of the quality of drugs supplied at CGHS wellness centres, the Ministry 
informed the Committee that there are the following three sources for procurement of 
medicines for CGHS dispensaries: - 
 
i) Bulk procurement through Medical Stores Organisation (MSO) - 
medicines in bulk for CGHS are procured by MSO by generic name. These medicines 
are pre-tested at two NABL-accredited laboratories before being accepted by MSO. 
  
ii) Procurement through Jan Aushadhi Pariyojana (JAP) - Medicines, which 
are advised by specialists frequently and are not supplied by MSO, are procured 
through JAP. JAP procures quality generic medicines after testing at NABL -
accredited laboratories.  
 
iii) Procurement through ALCs - Drugs prescribed by specialists which are not 
available in wellness centres through MSO or JAP are indented for individual CGHS 
beneficiaries on a case -to-case basis through ALC appointed through  Government e-
Marketplace (GeM). As per the terms of the contract, the ALCs are required to supply 
quality medicines.  
 
In addition to the above three regular ways, the anti -cancer and other  restricted medicines 
(especially in those cases where the disease is life-threatening) are procured by Medical Store 
Depot (MSD) for individual CGHS beneficiaries on a case -to-case basis, and generally,  they 
are supplied by reputed companies. 
 
2.5.5 The Committee has come to know that there are complaints regarding the quality of 
medicines disbursed at the pharmacy counter of the dispensary. Questions have been raised 
regarding the effectiveness of medicines procured through MSO and JAP. The quality of 
medicines is of paramount importance while providing healthcare services, and complaints 
regarding the quality should be taken seriously . This is also essential to ensure compliance 
with the Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) standards of the World Health Organization 
(WHO). The Committee, therefore, recommends the Minis try establish a mechanism 
ensuring rigorous testing of medicines. The Ministry may inspect these laboratories and 
surprise test any random batch of medicines through any third independent NABL -
accredited laboratory. The Ministry may also consider testing random batches of 
medicines from a reputed international laboratory. 
 
2.6 Clearance of bills of empanelled hospitals 
 
2.6.1 With respect to the payment/settlement of bills of empanelled hospitals, the Ministry 
deposed before the Committee that they h ad huge liabilities  of pending bills . On average, 
bills amounting to Rs. 10 to 12 crores per day are received by CGHS authorities acro ss the 
country.   However, in the last financial year, 2022-23, they cleared the bills to the tune of Rs. 
3100 crores, including the pendency carried forward from the year 2021 -22. In the financial 
year 2023 -24, from April to July 2023, bills worth Rs. 146 8 crores (approx.) have been 

17 
 
received by CGHS, out of which payment to the tune of Rs. 1672 crores (approx., including 
the carried forward pending amount) has been made to the hospitals till the 24th August 2023.  
 
2.6.2 The Ministry further informed that the credit hospital bills of CGHS are now being 
uploaded on the Transaction Management System (TMS) module of the National Health 
Authority (NHA) for online processing and payment in a paperless and transparent mode. 
Multiple training sessions have been co nducted to hone the skills of CGHS employees in 
using the NHA platform to settle bills. The number of sanctioning authorities has also been 
enhanced from 35 to 390 by engaging all CMOs in charge in CGHS wellness centres  to clear 
the entire backlog of pending bills and for regular clearance.  
 
2.6.3 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry to ensure timely settlement of 
bills despite functioning under different kinds of constraints. However, the Committee 
observed that many bills due for payment are carried over to the next financial year owing to 
various reasons, which is affecting the credibility of CGHS. It is one of the major reasons for 
refusal of treatment to CGHS beneficiaries by some of the empanelled hospitals. The 
Committee simultaneously observes that the empanelled hospitals are in financial distress 
because of outstanding dues from CGHS. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry establishes a mechanism for daily review of pending bills to ensure that the 
processing of bills gets smoother and disbursements are made seamlessly. The Ministry 
should fix a turnaround time for the settlement of bills.  
 
2.6.4 The Ministry may consider periodic mee tings of CGHS authorities with the 
HCOs at the regional level to deliberate upon the regularly raised objections,  which 
HCOs can correct  in future. The Government may also consider payment to HCOs 
using predictive statistical analysis/tools about the cost of treatment. This can enable the 
system to determine the percentage of the amount to be deducted and thereafter, release 
the balance amount automati cally. Such a step will be in the interest of both the 
beneficiaries and HCOs and will also, to some extent, address the grievances related to 
denial of treatment by hospitals.      
 
2.7 Consultation and Diagnostic Rates 
 
2.7.1 The Ministry apprised the Committee that the rates of procedures/diagnosis in CGHS 
were last revised in 2014. After about a decade, the rates of consultation, ICU charges and 
room rent were revised on 12th April 2023. Later, the CGHS rates for 36 radiological/imaging 
tests were revised on 19 th June 2023. The revision of rates of other procedures and packages 
is being processed promptly.  
 
2.7.2 The Committee observes that the rates for treatment or diagnosis under CGHS are 
very low as compared to the prevailing rates of hospitals in general. Apart from the delay in 
the settlement of bills, the low rates of procedures appear to be one of the major reasons for 
the reluctance of some empanelled hospitals to provide treatment to CGHS beneficiaries. The 
Committee has come to know that many empanelled HCOs are less interested in the renewal 

18 
 
or extension of the agreement for empanelment due to these two reasons. The Committee is 
of the view that the beneficiaries of CGHS must not suffer any undue delay on the part of the 
Government concerning the settlement of bills or revision of rates. The recommendations of 
the Committee to address the delay in the settlement of bills have been stated in para 2.6.  
 
2.7.3 As part of the revision of rates, the Committee recommends the Ministry review 
the rates of all the remaining procedures and diagnoses in CGHS in a time -bound 
manner. While revising the rates, the Ministry should consult the HCOs and other 
stakeholders extensively. The Ministry may also get the rates au dited by a professional 
agency and should clearly state the basis on which the rates of different procedures are 
revised. The Committee further recommends the Ministry put in place a mechanism to 
review the rates of procedures/diagnosis under CGHS every third year periodically and 
to keep the rates reasonable enough to attract the interest of a large number of HCOs.  
 
2.7.4 The Committee observed that some procedures related to physiotherapy, mental 
disorders, psychological counselling, therapies, etc., are either not covered under CGHS 
or their categorisation is not well defined. This area needs the attention of the Ministry. 
Particularly after the COVID -19 pandemic, mental health issues are on the rise and 
should be seriously taken by the Ministry.   In view of the serious concerns expressed by 
the Committee in its 148 th Report on Mental Health Care and its Management in 
Contemporary Times, the Committee would recommend the Government to review and 
expand the coverage of mental health ailments and treatment procedures.  
 
2.8 Integrative Medicine 
 
2.8.1 The Ministry informed the Committee that pursuing the direction of promoting 
integrative medicine, till August 2023, 106 AYUSH units spread across 33 cities and 01 
CGHS Ayurveda  hospital in Delhi have been established . Apart from those, 19 more 
ayurvedic units (4 in Delhi -NCR and 15 in other cities ) and 13 more CGHS Homeopathic 
units (4 in Delhi -NCR and 9 in other cities) are proposed . The Ministry also apprised the 
Committee that 17 private AYUSH hospitals and 30 day -care centres have been empanelled 
in the last three months. 
 
2.8.2 The Committee appreciates the Ministry‘s initiative to integrate the Indian system of 
medicine with the network of CGHS wellness centres. However, from the information 
received from the Ministry, it is evident that the number of AYUSH centres expanded to 107 
in August 2023 from 85 in March 2014, which tran slates to about a 25% increase over nine 
years. The Committee is of the view that such a meagre increase in the number of AYUSH 
centres does not align  with the Government‘s vision to popularise the indigenous system of 
healthcare in the country.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
consider setting up more AYUSH centres across the country and taking initiatives to 
popularise the Indian system of medicine among the beneficiaries of the CGHS.        
 
    

19 
 
 
 
 
 
2.8.3 The Committee also observes that out of the 107 AYUSH units , 84% of the units 
pertain to Ayurveda and homoeopathy . The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry consider setting up more AYUSH centres pertaining to Yoga, Siddha,  and 
Unani alternative systems of medicine across the country  
 
 
 
2.8.4 The Committee has learned that about 36% of CGHS AYUSH centres are in the 
Delhi-NCR region. Further, about 60% of AYUSH centres are located in the cities of 
Delhi-NCR, Bengaluru, Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad and Kolkata. The Committee 
has seen  that the distribution of AYUSH centres is concentrated in these six major 
cities. The Co mmittee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should take proactive 
steps to set up more AYUSH centres in newer cities.  
254
340
85
107
March 2014 August 2023 
No of Allopathy 
Wellness Centres
No of AYUSH Wellness 
Centres/Units 
41
104
49
3
CGHS AYUSH units across the country
Ayurveda
Unani
Yoga
Homeopathic
Siddha

20 
 
2.9 Separate facility for CGHS beneficiaries at Government Hospitals 
 
2.9.1 The Ministry apprised the Committee of the steps taken to cater to the aspirations of 
the CGHS beneficiaries for quality  secondary and tertiary treatment . In this direction, the 
Ministry has entered into an agreement with s even AIIMS ( Delhi, Raipur, Patna, 
Bhubaneswar, Bhopal , Jodhpur and Rishikesh), JIPMER, Puducherry and the PGIMER, 
Chandigarh to provide cashless treatment to the beneficiaries of the CGHS . The treatment on 
a cashless basis is also provided in two dedicated cancer hospitals,  namely, Chittaranjan 
National Cancer Institute in Kolkata and Tata M emorial Hospital in Mumbai. Dedicated 
CGHS OPD wings cater to m edicines and some specialties at Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital 
and Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi.  
 
2.9.2 The Committee has also been informed that t he Ministry is exploring the feasibility 
(in the primary stage of discussion) of taking  on board partner organisations like Railways, 
ESIC and ECHS to increase the inter -operability in functionality and expand the cashless 
treatment facility.  
 
2.9.3 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry  in extending cashless 
treatment (including secondary and tertiary treatment) to the beneficiaries of CGHS. 
The Ministry should enter into agreements with more AIIMS, Institutes of National 
Importance and eminent Government and Autonomous hospitals across the country to 
extend cashless facilities to CGHS beneficiaries. The Committee also feels that the 
proposal to collaborate  with partner health organisations like Railways, ESIC, and 
ECHS should be pursued generously . The Ministry should also consider collaborating 
with State Government health centres and hospitals. Such collaborations would 
encourage the sharing of infrastructure and interoperability. This would also help 
increase the accessibility of health care ser vices to remote areas across the country with 
less burden on the government exchequer.  
 
2.9.4 Apart from agreeing with eminent public medical institutions, the Committee 
feels that the Ministry should also consider constructing secondary  and tertiary CGHS 
hospitals (at least ten hospitals across the country) with cutti ng-edge facilities and 
research on which the beneficiaries can have the belief, particularly for the treatment of 
some serious diseases like cancer, cardiovascular, renal failure, etc.  
 
2.10 Grievance Redressal 
 
2.10.1 During deliberations with the Committee, the Ministry informed  that various 
mechanisms are available under CGHS to redress grievances like the CGHS grievance 
portal with timelines for redressal  (cghs.nic.in or cghs.gov.in) , Local Advisory 
Committee (LAC) and Zonal Advisory Committee (ZAC), Centralized Public Grievance 
Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS) , e -mail and helpdesk operated by NIC  
(cghs-helpdesk@lsmgr.nic.in), complaint box in wellness centres, and toll -free helpline 
No. 1800 208 8900.  

21 
 
 
2.10.2 The Committee was apprised that as of August 2023, in the financial year 2023 -
24 (including the carried forward from the financial year 2022 -23), a total of 1526 
grievances had been received on CPGRAMS, out of which 1271 (about 83%) had been 
disposed of with total 255 grievances pending. The Committee appreciates the actions 
of the Ministry to redress the grievances of the CGHS beneficiaries. However, the 
Committee would like to see 100% redressal of beneficiaries ’ grievances. This 
would enhance the trust of beneficiaries and the credibility of the institution. The 
Ministry should further strengthen the grievance redressal mechanism to deal with 
grievances proactively and fix the timeline to redress them with regular monito ring 
at the Joint Secretary level. The Committee also believes that the complaint 
registration mechanism should be as simple as possible, particularly for senior 
citizens and beneficiaries who are not techno-savvy.  
 
2.10.3 During the meeting with the Committee, the Ministry presented a pie chart providing 
the distribution of different kinds of grievances that come  across different CGHS wellness 
centres and zones. The Committee noted that most of the grievances were related to 
medicine and the wellness centre. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
thoroughly study the grievances about these two areas and take proactive measures 
rather than reactive actions to reduce these grievances. 
 
 
 
2.10.4 The Committee has  also been informed of the unsympathetic and indifferent 
approach towards patients by the doctors and other staff of the CGHS dispensaries. 
There are also complaints regarding the difference in treatment given to the serving 
and retired beneficiaries. The Committee expresses its dismay over such a state of 
affairs and recommends that the Ministry implement communication skills and 
sensitisation workshops to instill soft skills and professionalism in the CGHS 
workforce and improve their attitude towards patients, particularly the senior 
citizens.  


22 
 
 
2.10.5 The Committee is aware of the complaints of the beneficiaries on the denial 
of empanelled private hospitals to admit CGHS beneficiaries for in -patient 
treatment because of the non-availability of beds.  There are also instances of some 
empanelled hospitals/diagnostic centres charging exorbitantly and collecting more 
fees than CGHS rates. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to deal with 
such grievances in a deterrent manner and initiate prompt penal action against the 
erring hospital if any irregularity is observed.  
 
2.10.6 The Committee observes that patient satisf action is essential for measuring 
healthcare quality . The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry put in 
place a mechanism measuring and evaluating CGHS beneficiaries ’ experiences in 
CGHS wellness centres and the empanelled private hospitals. Such an exercise may 
help the Ministry determine critical drivers of beneficiaries ’ dissatisfaction with 
health care delivery. This would also help to develop and implement improvement 
strategies across the healthcare sector under CGHS.   
 
2.11 Referral System under CGHS 
 
2.11.1 The Committee noted that CGHS aims to provide primary health care to its 
beneficiaries through its dispensaries and secondary and tertiary care through Government 
hospitals or empanelled private HCOs. After obtaining a referral from the CGHS dispensary, 
a beneficiary  can avail of treatment in a CGHS -empanelled private hospital. However, in 
emergency health care needs, a CGHS beneficiary can directly approach any Government or 
private hospital to avail treatment without any referral . Further, beneficiaries aged 75 years 
and above can go directly to any CGHS-empanelled private hospital and get  consultations 
from the doctor for any ailment.  
 
2.11.2 The Committee has, however, learnt that as per present practice,  even after 
obtaining a referral in the first instance, if the consultant in the private hospital 
prescribes any tests/investigation/treatment, the beneficiary is required to report back 
to the dispensary and get that prescribed tests/investigation/treatment endorsed from 
the CGHS doctor. The Committee feels that the present referral system is cumbersome , 
which only inconveniences the beneficiaries and adds to the woes of a patient with poor 
health. The Committee  recommends the Ministry devise appropriate solutions to 
simplify the referral system so that a beneficiary is not required to visit the CGHS 
dispensary multiple times just to get the prescribed tests done following a referral in the 
first instance.  
 
2.11.3 The Committee appreciates the existing guidelines of direct consultation for 
beneficiaries aged 75 years and above. It would further recommend the Ministry review 
the guidelines to bring all CGHS pensioners/beneficiaries aged 60 years and above into  
the ambit of direct private consultation from empanelled hospitals. This would align 

23 
 
with the existing set-up as pensioners/beneficiaries aged 60 years and above receive 
cashless treatment from private empanelled hospitals.  
 
2.12 Increase in the empanelment of big hospitals under CGHS 
 
2.12.1 The Committee has come to know that on the one side, many small hospitals 
approach the authorities for empanelment under CGHS , but the beneficiaries do not want to 
visit these hospitals due to lack of facilities whereas, on the other side, some good hospitals, 
where the beneficiaries would like to visit, are not willing to get empanelled under CGHS. 
The Committee acknowledges the efforts of the Ministry to persuade big hospitals to 
empanelment under CGHS by improving the processing system, like taking steps to 
make the bill settlement quick and raisi ng the rates of consultation  and procedures 
under CGHS.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry examine the grading 
system by NABH and, if required, may suggest a more ef ficient grading system based 
on a point system . Such grading of NABH may be used for grading the hospitals like 
Grade ‘A’, ‘B’, etc. and fix the CGHS rates for hospitals as per the grading of the 
hospitals. Even now , the Ministry is doing the same for NABH  and non -NABH 
hospitals. This may be extended further as per the grading of NABH -accredited 
hospitals. The Ministry may also study the NQAS scoring of public sector hospitals to 
make changes in NABH grading.      
 
2.12.2 Further, to increase  the empanelment of better hospitals under CGHS, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry ask the CGHS authorities at a zonal level to 
search for hospitals doing good in their areas and make result -oriented efforts to bring 
them under CGHS empanelment. The Committee feels that the empanelment process 
needs to be simplified for non -CGHS-covered cities a nd brought at par, like that for 
CGHS-covered cities. Many of these cities also have considerable CGHS beneficiaries.   
 
2.12.3 The Committee recommends that  the Ministry may also consider enforcing 
mandatory empanelment of health care facilities in the private sector falling under the 
following categories:  
i) health facilities availing tax benefits.  
ii) those receiving land grants/ concessions from the Centr e/ State 
Governments for their establishment.  
iii) facilities affiliated with medical colleges; and  
iv) any other category deemed fit by the Government. 
 
2.13 Need to improve the functioning of LAC and ZAC 
 
2.13.1 The Committee was apprised of the  Local Advisory Committee (LAC) 
constitution at the Wellness Centre level and Zonal Advisory Committee (ZAC)  in 
each of the Zone of Additional Directors in CGHS wellness centres. The Committee 
underlines the need for regular interaction between public representatives and 
government organisations/departments with regard to monitoring and effectively 

24 
 
delivering public services. The LAC and ZAC are effective platforms for interaction 
between the CGHS officia ls and local Members of Parliament ( MPs) of the area. 
The Committee feels that such platforms help strengthen the services delivered by 
CGHS, as Members of Parliament , apart from being public representatives, are 
also beneficiaries themselves. Hence, their feedback in such interactions will greatly 
benefit CGHS. However, the Committee has come to know that many M Ps have 
never received a call from anybody regarding the schedule of such Committee 
meetings. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Minist ry to take up this issue 
and give necessary directions to CGHS authorities to ensure  that the local MPs in 
the area of CGHS dispensary are informed well in time about the conduct of LAC 
and ZAC meetings. The Ministry should also monitor the compliance of s uch 
directions by the CGHS authorities.  
 
2.14 Expansion of coverage of cashless treatment 
 
2.14.1 The Committee has been informed that certain categories of beneficiaries are 
provided treatment on a cashless basis. The Committee feels that it is not appropriate 
that the CGHS services are cashless for some people and others have to take 
reimbursement. It is informed that the processing and payment of hospital bills 
pertaining to CGHS  are being complete d on the IT platform of NHA. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Ministry consider expanding the ambit of cashless treatment 
to all beneficiaries. The Ministry may consider using NHA’s IT platform or explore the 
possibility of developing new software for the common use of all Ministries and 
Departments to streamline the process for payment/reimbursement of cashless 
treatment.   
   
2.15 Employees of Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas (JNVs) and Kendriya Vidyalayas 
 (KVs)  under CGHS 
 
2.15.1 During the meeting with the Committee, the Ministry informed that all autonomous 
bodies are not covered under CGHS. JNVs and KVs are autonomous bodies under the 
Central Government. While there are about 450 autonomous bodies in India, only 60 are 
covered u nder CGHS, out of which only 13 are covered for their serving employees and 
pensioners. The rest of the autonomous bodies are covered only for their serving employees. 
CGHS facilities have not been extended to any new organisation since 2008. However, orders 
were issued in 2014 and 2018 to consider an extension of CGHS facilities to the pensioners 
of autonomous bodies, whose serving employees were already covered under CGHS, if such 
a request is received through the concerned Ministry. Presently, the employ ees/pensioners of 
JNVs are not covered under CGHS. KVs are covered under CGHS in Delhi, Bengaluru, 
Hyderabad, Chennai, Kolkata and Mumbai. The concerned autonomous body is responsible 
for providing health facilities  to their employees/pensioners. The Minis try of Health & 
Family Welfare informed that they are  not receiving a request from KVs to extend  CGHS 
facilities in other cities.  
 

25 
 
2.15.2 The Committee is of the view that the participation of autonomous bodies with 
CGHS is abysmal. Out of about 450 such bodies, only 60 are covered under CGHS. 
Most autonomous bodies, particularly the KVs and JNVs, have employees with all India 
transfer liability. The coverage under CGHS would benefit the employees of these 
organisations in providing  health care facilities across the country. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to take up this issue with the Ministries and 
Departments concerned.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

26 
 
RECOMMENDATONS/OBSERVATIONS- AT A GLANCE 
Budget Allocation for CGHS 
 
The Committee recommends the Ministry implement measures aimed at maximising 
the utilisation of funds allocated to the CGHS. Furthermore, the Ministry should 
establish a robust mechanism to ensure optimal utilisation of these funds and curb any 
instances of wasteful expenditure. This proactive approach will ensure the judicious use 
of resources and enhance the overall efficiency of the CGHS. 
(Para 1.4.3) 
 
The Committee believes that there is a need to expand the coverage network of 
CGHS in existing and new cities, for which separate allocation needs to be made. 
These special funds may be utilised to open new wellness centres, polyclinics, and 
separate CGHS wings in government hospitals. The Committee feels that such a 
step will enable the Ministry to set a time -bound date and targets to complete the 
opening of new CGHS facilities. 
(Para 1.4.4) 
 
Need for Augmenting Wellness Centres 
 
The Ministry informed that as of August 2023, the CGHS had a presence in 80 cities with 
340 CGHS Allopathi c wellness centres. The Committee has noted that out of these 340 
allopathic wellness centres, 26% are concentrated in the Delhi NCR region. Further, 
only six states (excluding the Delhi NCR region) have more than 10 CGHS centres. This 
highlights that the distribution and accessibility of CGHS services across different 
regions of the country are not equitable and need to be addressed. The Committee noted 
that the state of Arunachal Pradesh and the UTs of Ladakh, A & N islands and 
Lakshadweep have no CGHS wellness centre. 
(Para 2.2.1) 
 
The Committee is aware that there are many cities and towns where there are a sizeable 
number of Central Government employees, pensioners, and their dependents, but no 
CGHS wellness centre exists there. As a result, the beneficiaries, particularly the reti red 
beneficiaries, are required to travel long distances to get medical treatments, causing 
inconvenience to them. The Committee opines that this scenario, apart from being 
financially draining on the beneficiaries, also causes various other hardships to t he 
beneficiaries.  
(Para 2.2.2) 
 
The Committee was informed that there are 18 CGHS polyclinics across the country. 
The Committee is of the view that 18 polyclinics against 43 lakh  beneficiaries across the 
country are insufficient. The Committee would like the Ministry to take proactive steps 
for setting up new CGHS centres and consider exploring setting up wellness centres and 

27 
 
polyclinics at a rapid pace in underserved areas, espec ially the suburbs of large cities 
where a considerable population of serving and pensioner beneficiaries reside. The 
Ministry should ensure that all aspirational districts in the country have CGHS centres 
and empanelled hospitals. The number of CGHS centre s and their geographical reach 
are the main facets. The Committee feels that the Government needs to consider 
relaxing existing norms or creating new norms for opening new wellness centres, 
particularly for beneficiaries of rural, hilly, remote, and Northe astern parts of the 
country.   
(Para 2.2.3) 
 
Infrastructure in a CGHS WC 
 
The Committee has learned about the poor infrastructure of some wellness centres, viz. 
shabby buildings, lack of proper sitting arrangements, lack of proper lighting, 
cleanliness, availability of basic amenities, etc. The Committee is of the opinion that the 
Ministry should periodically review the condition of available infrastructure at wellness 
centres, and necessary renovation or maintenance work should be carried out in a 
planned manner. The Ministry should allocate separate and sufficient funds for 
periodic upkeep and up-gradation of the wellness centres.  
(Para 2.3.1) 
 
There is a lack of Ambulance service at many of the Wellness Centres. This is required 
in critical cases of referrals and emergencies . The Committee recommends t hat the 
Ministry also consider allocating separate funds for arranging at least one ambulance in 
each Wellness Centre so that the patient can be taken to the higher medical centre 
promptly for e mergency treatment.  The Ministry should also prepare a model list of 
essential services and equipments that all CGHS wellness centres should have available.  
(Para 2.3.2) 
 
The Committee further recommends the Ministry conduct a survey and collect data on 
the number of beneficiaries referred to higher centres and the reasons for such 
referrals. This would help in examining the lack of facility because of which the patient 
was required to be referred, and based on that report, the Ministry should consider 
developing infrastructure and facilities in the CGHS wellness centres and engaging 
specialist doctors and other allied staff.  
(Para 2.3.3) 
 
Staffing under CGHS 
 
The Committee noted an additional requirement of about 20 to 30 % of the sanctioned 
strength of doctors, paramedical and administrative staff, over and above the 
sanctioned strength, in all CGHS set -ups across the country. The additional 
requirement for a Junior Health Administrative Assistant is around 70% of the present 
sanctioned strength. Fu rther, during the deliberation, the Ministry informed the 

28 
 
Committee that a considerable percentage of the sanctioned strength of medical and 
administrative staff is also lying vacant. This leads to a poor doctor -to-beneficiary ratio, 
long waiting times for  patients in CGHS dispensaries, and a decrease in the quality of 
patient care.  
(Para 2.4.3) 
 
The Committee is of the view that opening or operating CGHS centres without 
sufficient doctors and staff  has no meaning and causes inconvenience to beneficiaries. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry expedite the recruitment 
process and fill up all vacant positions. To ensure an adequate doctor -to-patient ratio in 
all CGHS wellness centres,  the recommendations of SIU may be implemented 
expeditiously. Based on the total number of beneficiaries being served by a Wellness 
centre, minimum criteria for doctors to see the patients per day may be fixed and 
strictly adhered to. On being enquired, th e Ministry informed that around 500 
contractual doctors have been engaged in addition to regular doctors to improve the 
doctor-to-beneficiary ratio. 
(Para 2.4.4) 
 
Availability and Quality of Medicines Supplied at Wellness Centres 
 
The Ministry informed that after visiting the Medical Officer at the wellness centre, the 
beneficiaries are issued medicines at the pharmacy counter. If the medicines are available, 
they are issued right away. The medicines not readily available at the cen tre are indented and 
procured through an Authorized Local Chemist (ALC) within 48 hours. The beneficiary or 
the authorised representative can collect the medicines from the counter. It has come to the 
Committee’s notice that the medicines are often not pro cured promptly, causing 
inconvenience to the beneficiaries. In many cases, the bid/contract of the ALC is not 
renewed well in time, and the dispensary is not in a position to supply the medicines.  
 
(Para 2.5.1) 
 
The Committee recommends the Ministry investigate the issues of delay in procurement 
and subsequent distribution of medicines. The Ministry may bring necessary changes in 
the guidelines and simplify the procedure for the local purchase of medicines to ensure 
an uninterrupted supply of medicines. Th e Committee also recommends that the 
Ministry establish a mechanism to ensure the continuous availability of basic /essential 
medicines at CGHS dispensaries  so that the need for local purchase does not arise . The 
Ministry should take necessary steps t owards course correction, including making the 
required funds available for regular supply of medicines.   
(Para 2.5.2) 
 
The Committee is further of the view that the course of some of the medicines, like 
antibiotics, is required to be started by the patients on the same day or immediately, as 
prescribed by the medical officer of the dispensary or by the doctor of the empane lled HCOs 

29 
 
(visited after a referral from the dispensary). In case such medicine is not readily available in 
the dispensary, the same is indented. A patient cannot wait for two days to receive that 
indented medicine, and the procedure of buying directly fro m the ALC and getting the same 
reimbursed later causes inconvenience to the patient, who should rest to recover early instead 
of running from pillar to post. The Committee, therefore, feels that the turnaround time 
to receive indented medicine should be re duced to less than 24 hours. The Ministry 
should make necessary course corrections to ensure that the indented medicines are 
available by the very next day morning.   
(Para 2.5.3) 
 
The Committee has come to know that there are complaints regarding the qual ity of 
medicines disbursed at the pharmacy counter of the dispensary. Questions have been raised 
regarding the effectiveness of medicines procured through MSO and JAP. The quality of 
medicines is of paramount importance while providing healthcare services,  and complaints 
regarding the quality should be taken seriously. This is also essential to ensure compliance 
with the Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) standards of the World Health Organization 
(WHO). The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry esta blish a mechanism 
ensuring rigorous testing of medicines. The Ministry may inspect these laboratories and 
surprise test any random batch of medicines through any third independent NABL -
accredited laboratory. The Ministry may also consider testing random ba tches of 
medicines from a reputed international laboratory. 
(Para 2.5.5) 
 
Clearance of bills of empanelled hospitals 
 
The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry to ensure timely settlement of bills 
despite functioning under different kinds of co nstraints. However, the Committee observed 
that many bills due for payment are carried over to the next financial year owing to various 
reasons, which is affecting the credibility of CGHS. It is one of the major reasons for refusal 
of treatment to CGHS ben eficiaries by some of the empanelled hospitals. The Committee 
simultaneously observes that the empanelled hospitals are in financial distress because of 
outstanding dues from CGHS. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
establishes a mechan ism for daily review of pending bills to ensure that the processing 
of bills gets smoother and disbursements are made seamlessly. The Ministry should fix a 
turnaround time for the settlement of bills.  
(Para 2.6.3) 
 
The Ministry may consider periodic meeti ngs of CGHS authorities with the HCOs at 
the regional level to deliberate upon the regularly raised objections, which HCOs can 
correct in future. The Government may also consider payment to HCOs using 
predictive statistical analysis/tools about the cost of treatment. This can enable the 
system to determine the percentage of the amount to be deducted and thereafter, release 
the balance amount automati cally. Such a step will be in the interest of both the 

30 
 
beneficiaries and HCOs and will also, to some extent, address the grievances related to 
denial of treatment by hospitals.      
(Para 2.6.4) 
 
Consultation and Diagnostic Rates 
 
As part of the revision of rates, the Committee recommends the Ministry review the 
rates of all the remaining procedures and diagnoses in CGHS in a time -bound manner. 
While revising the rates, the Ministry should consult the HCOs and other stakeholders 
extensively. The Ministry m ay also get the rates audited by a professional agency and 
should clearly state the basis on which the rates of different procedures are revised. The 
Committee further recommends the Ministry put in place a mechanism to review the 
rates of procedures/diagnosis under CGHS every third year periodically and to keep the 
rates reasonable enough to attract the interest of a large number of HCOs.  
 
(Para 2.7.3) 
 
The Committee observed that some procedures related to physiotherapy, mental 
disorders, psychological counselling, therapies, etc., are either not covered under CGHS 
or their categorisation is not well defined. This area needs the attention of the Ministry. 
Particularly after the COVID -19 pandemic, mental health issues are on the rise and 
should be seriously taken by the Ministry.  In view of the serious concerns expressed by 
the Committee in its 148 th Report on Mental Health Care and its Management in 
Contemporary Times, the Committee would recommend the Government to review and 
expand the coverage of mental health ailments and treatment procedures.  
 
(Para 2.7.4) 
 
Integrative Medicine 
 
The Committee a ppreciates the Ministry‘s initiative to integrate the Indian system of 
medicine with the network of CGHS wellness centres. However, from the information 
received from the Ministry, it is evident that the number of AYUSH centres expanded to 107 
in August 20 23 from 85 in March 2014, which translates to about a 25% increase over nine 
years. The Committee is of the view that such a meagre increase in the number of AYUSH 
centres does not align with the Government‘s vision to popularise the indigenous system of 
healthcare in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
consider setting up more AYUSH centres across the country and taking initiatives to 
popularise the Indian system of medicine among the beneficiaries of the CGHS.        
 
(Para 2.8.2) 
 
    
 

31 
 
The Committee also observes that out of the 107 AYUSH units, 84% of the units pertain to 
Ayurveda and homoeopathy. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
consider setting up more AYUSH centres pertaining to Yoga, Siddha , and Unani 
alternative systems of medicine across the country  
(Para 2.8.3) 
 
The Committee has learned that about 36% of CGHS AYUSH centres are in the Delhi -
NCR region. Further, about 60% of AYUSH centres are located in the cities of Delhi -
NCR, Bengaluru, Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad and Kolkata. The Committee has seen 
that the distribution of AYUSH centres is concentrated in these six major cities. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should take proactive steps to set 
up more AYUSH centres in newer cities.  
(Para 2.8.4) 
 
Separate facility for CGHS beneficiaries at Government Hospitals 
 
The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry in extending cashless treatment 
(including secondary and tertiary treatment) to the beneficiaries of CGHS. The 
Ministry should enter into agreements with more AIIMS, Institutes of National 
Importance and eminent Government and Autonomous hospitals across the country to 
extend cashless facilities to CGHS beneficiaries. The Committee also feels that the 
proposal to collaborate with partner health organisations like Railways, ESIC, and 
ECHS should be pursued generously. The Ministry should also consider collaborating 
with State Government health centres and hospitals. Such collaborations would 
encourage the s haring of infrastructure and interoperability. This would also help 
increase the accessibility of health care services to remote areas across the country with 
less burden on the government exchequer.  
(Para 2.9.3) 
 
Apart from agreeing with eminent public m edical institutions, the Committee feels that 
the Ministry should also consider constructing secondary and tertiary CGHS hospitals 
(at least ten hospitals across the country) with cutting -edge facilities and research on 
which the beneficiaries can have the  belief, particularly for the treatment of some 
serious diseases like cancer, cardiovascular, renal failure, etc.  
(Para 2.9.4) 
 
Grievance Redressal 
 
The Committee was apprised that as of August 2023, in the financial year 2023 -24 
(including the carried forward from the financial year 2022 -23), a total of 1526 
grievances had been received on CPGRAMS, out of which 1271 (about 83%) had been 
disposed of with total 255 grievances pending. The Committee appreciates the actions 
of the Ministry to redress the grievances of the CGHS beneficiaries. However, the 
Committee would like to see 100% redressal of beneficiaries’ grievances. This 

32 
 
would enhance the trust o f beneficiaries and the credibility of the institution. The 
Ministry should further strengthen the grievance redressal mechanism to deal with 
grievances proactively and fix the timeline to redress them with regular monitoring 
at the Joint Secretary level. The Committee also believes that the complaint 
registration mechanism should be as simple as possible, particularly for senior 
citizens and beneficiaries who are not techno-savvy.  
(Para 2.10.2) 
 
During the meeting with the Committee, the Ministry presente d a pie chart providing the 
distribution of different kinds of grievances that come across different CGHS wellness 
centres and zones. The Committee noted that most of the grievances were related to 
medicine and the wellness centre. The Committee recommends  that the Ministry 
thoroughly study the grievances about these two areas and take proactive measures 
rather than reactive actions to reduce these grievances. 
(Para 2.10.3) 
 
The Committee has also been informed of the unsympathetic and indifferent approach 
towards patients by the doctors and other staff of the CGHS dispensaries. There are 
also complaints regarding the difference in treatment given to the serving and 
retired be neficiaries. The Committee expresses its dismay over such a state of 
affairs and recommends that the Ministry implement communication skills and 
sensitisation workshops to instil l soft skills and professionalism in the CGHS 
workforce and improve their atti tude towards patients, particularly the senior 
citizens.  
(Para 2.10.4) 
 
The Committee is aware of the complaints of the beneficiaries on the denial of 
empanelled private hospitals to admit CGHS beneficiaries for in -patient treatment 
because of the non-availability of beds. There are also instances of some empanelled 
hospitals/diagnostic centres charging exorbitantly and collecting more fees than 
CGHS rates. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to deal with such 
grievances in a deterrent manner and ini tiate prompt penal action against the 
erring hospital if any irregularity is observed.  
(Para 2.10.5) 
 
The Committee observes that patient satisfaction is essential for measuring 
healthcare quality. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry put in 
place a mechanism measuring and evaluating CGHS beneficiaries’ experiences in 
CGHS wellness centres and  the empanelled private hospitals. Such an exercise may 
help the Ministry determine critical drivers of beneficiaries’ dissatisfaction with 
health care delivery. This would also help to develop and implement improvement 
strategies across the healthcare sector under CGHS.   
(Para 2.10.6) 
 

33 
 
Referral System under CGHS 
 
The Committee has, however, learnt that as per present practice, even after obtaining a 
referral in the first instance, if the consultant in the private hospital prescribes any 
tests/investigation/treatment, the beneficiary is required to report back to th e 
dispensary and get that prescribed tests/investigation/treatment endorsed from the 
CGHS doctor. The Committee feels that the present referral system is cumbersome, 
which only inconveniences the beneficiaries and adds to the woes of a patient with poor 
health. The Committee recommends the Ministry devise appropriate solutions to 
simplify the referral system so that a beneficiary is not required to visit the CGHS 
dispensary multiple times just to get the prescribed tests done following a referral in the 
first instance.  
(Para 2.11.2) 
 
The Committee appreciates the existing guidelines of direct consultation for 
beneficiaries aged 75 years and above. It would further recommend the Ministry review 
the guidelines to bring all CGHS pensioners/beneficiaries aged 6 0 years and above into 
the ambit of direct private consultation from empanelled hospitals. This would align 
with the existing set -up as pensioners/beneficiaries aged 60 years and above receive 
cashless treatment from private empanelled hospitals.  
(Para 2.11.3) 
 
Increase in the empanelment of big hospitals under CGHS 
 
The Committee has come to know that on the one side, many small hospitals approach the 
authorities for empanelment under CGHS, but the beneficiaries do not want to visit these 
hospitals due to lack of facilities whereas, on the other side, some good hospitals, where the 
beneficiaries would like to visit, are not willing to get empanelled under CGHS . The 
Committee acknowledges the efforts of the Ministry to persuade big hospitals to 
empanelment under CGHS by improving the processing system, like taking steps to 
make the bill settlement quick and raising the rates of consultation and procedures 
under CGHS. The Committee recommends that the Ministry examine the grading 
system by NABH and, if required, may suggest a more efficient grading system based 
on a point system. Such grading of NABH may be used for grading the hospitals like 
Grade ‘A’, ‘B’, etc. and fi x the CGHS rates for hospitals as per the grading of the 
hospitals. Even now, the Ministry is doing the same for NABH and non -NABH 
hospitals. This may be extended further as per the grading of NABH -accredited 
hospitals. The Ministry may also study the NQAS  scoring of public sector hospitals to 
make changes in NABH grading.     
(Para 2.12.1) 
 
Further, to increase the empanelment of better hospitals under CGHS, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry ask the CGHS authorities at a zonal level to search for 
hospitals doing good in their areas and make result-oriented efforts to bring them under 

34 
 
CGHS empanelment. The Committee feels that the empanelment process needs to be 
simplified for non-CGHS-covered cities and brought at par, like that for CGHS-covered 
cities. Many of these cities also have considerable CGHS beneficiaries.   
(Para 2.12.2) 
 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may also consider enforcing mandatory 
empanelment of healthcare facilities in the private sector falling under the following 
categories:  
i) health facilities availing tax benefits.  
ii) those receiving land grants/ concessions from the Centre/ State Governments for 
their establishment.  
iii) facilities affiliated with medical colleges; and  
iv) any other category deemed fit by the Government. 
(Para 2.12.3) 
 
 
Need to improve the functioning of LAC and ZAC 
 
The Committee was apprised of the Local Advisory Committee (LAC) constitution  at 
the Wellness Centre level and Zonal Advisory Committee (ZAC) in each of the 
Zone of Additional Directors in CGHS wellness centres. The Committee underlines 
the need for regular interaction between public representatives and government 
organisations/departments with regard to monitoring and effectively delivering 
public services. The LAC and ZAC are effective platforms for interaction between 
the CGHS officials and local Members of Parliament (MPs) of the area. The 
Committee feels that such platforms help strengthen the services delivered by 
CGHS, as Members of Parliament, apart from being public representatives, are 
also beneficiaries themselves. Hence, their feedback in such interactions will greatly 
benefit CGHS. However, the Committee has come to know that many MPs have 
never received a call from anybody regarding the schedule of such Committee 
meetings. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to take up this issue 
and give necessary directions  to CGHS authorities to ensure that the local MPs in 
the area of CGHS dispensary are informed well in time about the conduct of LAC 
and ZAC meetings. The Ministry should also monitor the compliance of such 
directions by the CGHS authorities.  
(Para 2.13.1) 
 
Expansion of coverage of cashless treatment 
 
The Committee has been informed that certain categories of beneficiaries are provided 
treatment on a cashless basis. The Committee feels that it is not appropriate that the 
CGHS services are cashless for some people and others have to take reimbursement. It 
is informed that the processing and payment of hospital bills pertaining to CGHS are 
being completed on the IT platform of NHA. The Committee, therefore, recommends 

35 
 
the Ministry consider expanding the ambit of cashless treatment to all beneficiaries. The 
Ministry may consider using NHA’s IT platform or explore the possibility of developing 
new software for the common use of all Ministries and Departments to streamline the 
process for payment/reimbursement of cashless treatment.   
  (Para 2.14.1) 
 
Employees of Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas (JNVs) and Kendriya Vidyalayas (KVs) 
under CGHS 
 
The Committee is of the view that the participation of autonomous bodies with CGHS is 
abysmal. Out of about 450 such bodies, on ly 60 are covered under CGHS. Most 
autonomous bodies, particularly the KVs and JNVs, have employees with all India 
transfer liability. The coverage under CGHS would benefit the employees of these 
organisations in providing health care facilities across the  country. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to take up this issue with the Ministries and 
Departments concerned.    
 
(Para 2.15.2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

37 
 
XV 
FIFTEENTH MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 31 st August, 2023 in Committee 
Room-A, Ground Floor, PHA, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
3. Shri Sanjeev Arora 
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
5. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
6. Shri A. D. Singh  
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri C. Lalrosanga 
8. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
9. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S.  
10. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
11. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Sumant Narain  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri  Shashi Bhusan  Director 
3. Shri Rajendra Tiwari  Director 
4. Dr. Saket Kumar  Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Gunjan Parashar Deputy Director  
WITNESSES 
I. Representatives of Department of Health & Family Welfare  
 
1. Shri Sudhansh Pant, Secretary 
2. Ms. Roli Singh, Additional Secretary & DG, CGHS 
3. Dr. Manashvi Kumar, Joint Secretary 
4. Dr. Manoj Jain, Director, CGHS 
5. Dr. Leisha Dharan, Nodal Officer for MCTC, CGHS 
 
II. *****  
III. ***** 
IV. ***** 
V. ***** 
VI. ***** 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed 
them about the agenda for the day, i.e. (i) *****; (ii) to hear the vie ws of Secretary, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare along with Director -General, CGHS and other senior Officers 
of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on the subject "Functioning of CGHS"; and 
(iii) *****. 

38 
 
3. ***** 
4.  The Chairman apprised the Me mbers about the next agenda of the meeting, which 
involved receiving insights from the witnesses on the subject "Functioning of CGHS‖. The 
Chairman stated that over the years, the scheme has expanded its scope and coverage. While 
the achievements and progress of the CGHS are commendable, acknowledging the challenges 
and shortcomings of the scheme was also important. The scheme faces several hurdles, 
including the need for improved referral systems, streamlined processes for availing 
healthcare services and effective management of healthcare infrastructure. To examine the 
subject in detail, the Committee invited Secretary, Department of Health & Family Welfare 
and Director General, CGHS to present their views on the subject ―Functioning of CGHS‖.  
 
5. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare 
and Director General, CGHS and other officials to the meeting. The Chairman then asked the 
witnesses to apprise the Committee on various on efforts taken by the Ministry to furthe r 
expand the reach of the scheme to the uncovered and under -served regions of the country. He 
further asked the Secretary to apprise the Committee of steps taken by the Ministry to 
streamline the referral process further, reduce the unnecessary hassle in a vailability of 
emergent medicines and ensure streamlined reimbursement process/cashless treatment.  
 
6. The Department of Health and Family Welfare apprised the Committee that it is the 
endeavour of the Ministry to provide the best possible services to the  beneficiaries. Then 
further stated that the number of claim settlement has increased two and a half times between 
April to August of 2022 and between April to August, 2023. 
 
7. The Department of Health and Family Welfare made a presentation and highlighted 
following key points on the subject:- 
i. CGHS has 43 lakh beneficiaries; 340 wellness centres spread across 80 cities 
across the country; 18 polyclinics; three CGHS hospitals; 1,944 empanelled 
hospitals and 106 Ayush centres; 
ii. Every beneficiary up to 75 years of age is entitled to on a single visit, three 
referrals in a CGHS empanelled private hospital; the provision for getting 
referral for treatment for beneficiaries of age 75 years and above have been 
done away with; 
iii. Serving CGHS beneficiaries ar e entitled for cashless treatment in case of 
emergency however, for planned surgeries, serving beneficiaries need to pay 
upfront and then they can claim reimbursement; 
iv. Members of Parliament, serving employees of the CGHS, serving employees 
of the Directora te General of Health Services and staff working the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare are entitled for complete cashless facility; 
v. Bulk procurement of drugs is done through the Medical Supplies Depot 
(MSD) where NABL -accredited labs provide 100 per cen t pre -tested drugs 
after batch testing, another mechanism for procurement of drugs is through 
Government e-market (GeM) approved authorized local  chemist;  

39 
 
vi. Restricted medicines for life -saving are procured against individual 
prescriptions and supplied to MSD through our different ADs (Additional 
Directors) across Delhi and the country; 
vii. The sanctioned strength of CGHS staff has been revised, now there are 2,105 
General Duty Medical Officers, 1,405 Pharmacy officers, 493 Nursing 
Officers, 930 Junior Health A dministrative Assistants and 2,183 multi -tasking 
staff; 
viii. The first point of contact of beneficiary in the CGHS Wellness Centre is the 
registration counter; after which the patient goes to waiting room, after that the 
beneficiary goes to the CMO in -charge or consulting GDMO, afterwards he 
goes to the pharmacy counter, if medicines are available, they are issued right 
away otherwise they are to be indented, and medicines are made available 
within 48 hours;  
ix. Additional Directors in the CGHS have been instructed  to proactively 
encourage hospitals and diagnostic centres to come on board with the CGHS, 
due to this, in the last six months, 90 healthcare service providers have been 
empanelled across the country in CGHS; 
x. Those cities that are not covered by the CGHS, they are governed by the 
Central Services Medical Attendants Rules of 1944; 
xi. In the Financial Year 2022 -23; bills to the tune of  3,100 crores have been 
cleared including the pendency of the year 2021-22; 
xii. Now even male CGHS beneficiaries can avail the optio n to choose or include 
the parents or the parent-in-laws, as their primary dependents;  
xiii. Webinar on systems of modern medicine, common ailments and their 
treatment, AYUSH and digital initiatives in CGHS are organised on every 
second, third and fourth Tuesda ys of every month to increase awareness 
amongst CGHS beneficiaries; 
xiv. CGHS app includes facilities like DigiLocker, the beneficiaries can see all the 
appointments, list of Wellness Centres, learn about the referral mechanisms, 
nearest healthcare facility, pr ocess to generate plastic card,  and how to log in 
and use the function of the Wellness Centre etc; and 
xv.  Full-fledged tele -consultation module under e-Sanjeevani portal is also 
operational wherein one dedicated GDMO has been provided for consultation. 
 
8. During the course of the meeting, the members raised certain queries/issues and also 
gave suggestions on the subject, which are indicated as under:  
i. Specific strategies may be employed to ensure equitable distribution and 
accessibility of CGHS services across different regions of the country; 
ii. Measures may be taken by the Government to streamline the process of 
admission of patients in CGHS -empanelled hospitals, both private and public, 
for scheduled procedures as well as emergency cases; 
iii. Hesitation or reluc tance on the part of the private hospitals empanelled with 
CGHS for providing treatment to CGHS beneficiaries may be looked into; 

40 
 
iv. Steps may be taken by the Ministry to ensure that empanelled hospitals and 
healthcare providers maintain a high standard of ca re and adhere to medical 
guidelines; 
v. Details of bills received and cleared in the last five years may be provided; 
vi. There is need to empanel good hospitals in CGHS and atleast 2 -3 hospitals 
should be empanelled in each district; 
vii. There is need for revision o f consultation fees of doctors and rates of CGHS 
packages as per standard of the empanelled hospital; 
viii. Members of Parliament may be included in the Zonal Advisory Committee; 
ix. There is need to provide cashless treatment to all the beneficiaries of CGHS; 
x. Empanelment  process of hospitals in non -CGHS cities should also be made 
online; 
xi. Actual strength and sanctioned strength of GDMOs, Pharmacy Officers, 
Nursing Officers and Junior Health Administrative Assistants in CGHS may 
be provided to the Committee; 
xii. There is need for mandatory NABH accreditation for empanelled hospital;  
xiii. There is need for establishment of at least 10 full -fledged CGHS hospitals 
across the country for treatment of disease like cancer, cardio vascular 
diseases, renal failure etc; 
xiv. There is need for consultation with empanelled hospitals for revision of rates 
of CGHS treatment packages; 
xv. Criterion for the hospital to get empanelled under CGHS may be informed to 
the Committee; 
xvi. Non-availability of medicines, shortage of ambulances in the CGHS 
dispensaries;  
xvii. Details of number of CGHS/ empanelled hospitals in the Aspirational Districts 
and rural areas may be provided to the Committee; 
xviii. Reasons for empanelled hospitals withdrawing from CGHS; 
xix. Ayurvedic and Naturopathy treatment may also be provided under CGHS; 
xx. Cashless treatment facility in AIIMS, Guwahati may also be initiated; 
xxi. Quality of medicines provided through CGHS wellness centres should be 
checked; 
xxii. There is need for inclusion of teachers and other staff of JNVs and KVs as 
CGHS beneficiaries; and 
xxiii. Steps may be taken by the Ministry to reduce the times spent on admission and 
discharge of patients from the hospital. 
 
9.  The Department of Health and Family Welfare assured the Committee that in about 
fifteen days, the Department would be responding i n detail to each of the queries raised and 
observations made by the Members.  
 
10. The Chairman asked the witnesses to submit a written response to the queries raised 
by the Members and to the list of questions asked by the Chairman within 15 days. *****  
(The witnesses withdrew and the Committee adjourned to meet again at 2.30 pm) 

41 
 
(*****) 
11. *****  
12. *****  
13. ***** 
14. *****   
15. ***** 
16. *****    
17. ***** 
18. ***** 
19. ***** 
20. ***** 
21. ***** 
22. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
23. The meeting then adjourned at 04:21 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*****pertains to other matter 

42 
 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
  
           The Committee met at 03:00 PM on Friday, the 3 rd November, 2023, in Committee 
Room-A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita             -   Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
3. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4. Shri A.D. Singh 
 
LOK SABHA 
5. Shri K. Navas Kani 
6. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
7. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
8. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S. 
9. Shri Anurag Sharma 
10. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sumant Narain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan   - Director  
3. Dr Saket Kumar    - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Noyaline Vinitha F.C.    -        Joint Director 
 
WITNESSES 
(i) *****  
(ii) Representatives of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare  
 
1. Shri Sudhansh Pant, Secretary 
2. Ms. Roli Singh, Additional Secretary & DG, CGHS 
3. Dr. Manoj Jain, Director, CGHS 
4. Dr. Manashvi Kumar, Joint Secretary, CGHS 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed 
that ***** and (ii) the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare along with the 
Director-General and other senior Officers of the CGHS on the subject "Functioning of 
CGHS".   
3. ***** 
4. ***** 
5. ***** 
6. ***** 
7.  *****  

43 
 
8. ***** 
(***** the Committee invited the  Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare along 
with Director-General and other senior Officers of the CGHS on the subject "Functioning 
of CGHS" ) 
9. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and 
the members raised certain queries/issues and also gave suggestions on the subject, which are 
indicated as under:– 
(i) Need to revise the rates of  packages in CGHS and empanelled hospi tals 
often refuse to admit patients due to lower rates; 
(ii) Quality of medicines provided in CGHS not appropriate; 
(iii) Delays in clearing of bills ;  
(iv) Need to provide cashless facility to all; 
(v) Inclusion of post -operation requirement of physiotherapy sessions in the  
CGHS rate list; and 
(vi) Coverge of Mental health issues post- Covid in CGHS. 
10.  The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  assured the Committee that in about 
fifteen days, the Minsitry would be responding in detail to each of the queries raised and 
observations made by the Members.  
11. The Chairman asked the witnesses to submit a written response to the queries raised 
by the Members and to the list of questions asked by the Chairman within 15 days. 
12.      Verbatim Records of the meeting was kept. 
13. The Committee adjourned at 05:10 PM. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*****pertains to other matter 

44 
 
Annexure A 
Eligibility for Joining CGHS 
Persons Eligible under the Central Government Health Scheme 
1. All Central Government employees paid from the Central Civil Estimates (except 
Railways and Delhi Administration), including their families. 
2. Pensioners of Central Government (except pensioners belonging to Railways and the 
Armed Forces) and their families. 
3. Central Government Pensioners retiring with Contributory Provident Fun d benefits 
and their families. 
4. Widows of Central Government pensioners in receipt of family pension. 
5. Delhi Police personnel and their families, in Delhi only. 
6. Railway Board employees. 
7. Civilian employees of Defence are paid from Defence Service Estimates (e xcept in 
Mumbai, where the Scheme is in operation). 
8. Child drawing pension on death of a Central Government employee , including minor 
brothers and sisters of such child. 
9. Ex-Governors and Lt. Governors and their families. 
10. Ex-Vice Presidents and their families. 
11. Central Government servants who are deputed to semi -government and autonomous 
bodies receiving substantial grants from or financed by the Central Government. 
12. Central Govt. employees on deputation to statutory/autonomous during the period of 
deputation. 
13. Military Officers while on deputation to civil departments and getting their 
emoluments from Central Civil Estimates. 
14. Families of Government servants transferred to a non -CGHS area, for a maximum 
period of six months on deposit of CGHS contribution (for th e period of 6 months) in 
advance. 
15. Families of IAS Officers on the North-Eastern Cadre, who continue to stay back in 
Delhi even after repatriation of the IAS Officer to the North Eastern Cadre, provided 
that they continue to occupy Government accommodation in Delhi/New Delhi, on 
deposit of CGHS contribution in advance (one to three years). The same also applies 
to families of IAS Officers of J&K Cadre. 
16. Parliamentary Secretaries of the Central Government and their families. 
17. Members of Parliament and their families. 
18. Ex-Members of Parliament. 
19. Sitting Judges of Supreme Court and High Court of Delhi and former Judges of 
Supreme Court and High Courts. 
20. Work Charged and Industrial Staff working in establishments run by various 
Ministries/Departments of Central Govern ment, immediately from the date of their 
joining the service. 
21. Employees of Kendriya Vidyalays Sangathan stationed at Delhi & NCR, Kolkata, 
Chennai, Hyderabad, Mumbai, and Bengaluru. 
22. Employees of Ordnance Factory Board Headquarters, Kolkata and Ordnance 
Equipment Factories Headquarters, Kanpur. 

45 
 
23. All India Service pensioners who retire while serving under the State at their option. 
24. Freedom Fighters and members of their family receiving Central Pension under the 
Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension Scheme. 
25. Family members of the Deceased Ex-Members of Parliament. 
26. Pensioners of Ordnance factories. 
27. Members of Staff Side of the National Council of the Joint consultative Machinery, 
even though not serving as Central Government employees. 
28. Persons employed in semi -government and autonomous bodies who are permitted to 
join the CGHS Scheme. 
29. An Accredited Journalist who produces a certificate from the Press Council of India 
stating that he is a member of the Press Association, New Delhi (for OPD and at RML 
Hospital). 
30. Retired Divisional Accountants of the Indian Audit and Accounts Department and 
those whose pay, and pension are entirely borne by the State governments. 
31. PSU absorbees who had commuted 100% of their pension and have been restored 
1/3rd portion of their pension after 15 years. 
32. Employees of Statutory Bodies/Autonomous Bodies of Central Govt. (including those 
who proceeded on deputation initially or were on deemed deputation and then 
absorbed), who are in receipt of Central Civil Pension. 
33. Serving and retired Railway Audit Staff. 
34. Retired Divisional Accounts Officers and Divisional Accountants of the Office of 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
35. CISF personnel (and their families) and CAPF (Central Armed Police Forces) 
personnel posted in CGHS cities. 
36. Employees of Supreme Court Legal Services Committee Employees of India 
Pharmacopoeia Commission, and their families. 
37. Family and dependent members of a Central Govt. employee (a CGHS beneficiary) 
who stay back in CGHS covered area after posting of the employee to  N.E. region 
(including Sikkim), Andaman & Nicobar Lakshadweep or Ladakh region and CAPF 
personnel posted in Left Wing Extremist areas, on payment of annual CGHS 
contribution in advance. 
38. Defence Industrial Employees of Naval Dockyard Central Ordnance Depot  and 
AFMSD, in Mumbai. 
Eligibility Criterion 
―Residence‖ alone (and not the Headquarters) is the criterion for determining eligibility of a 
Central Government servant for availing medical facilities under the Central Government 
Health Scheme. Thus, Central Government employees and their family members etc. residing 
in any of the notified cities (list given at Serial Number 4 of FAQs) are covered under the 
Scheme. 
 
 
 
 
 

46 
 
Table 1 
 
 Level Contribution 
per month 
Contribution per 
year (pensioner) 
Contribution for lifetime 
(pensioner) 
Level 1 To 5 250/- 3000/- 30,000/- 
Level 6 450/- 5400/- 54,000/- 
Level 7 To 11 650/- 7800/- 78,000/- 
Level12 & above 1000/- 12,000/- 1,20,000/- 
 
 
 
Table 2 
Year Revised Estimate (Rs. in crores) 
2017-18 2890.82 
2018-19 3108.41 
2019-20 4036.08 
2020-21 4324.20 
2021-22 4463.00 
 
 
 
Table 3 
Year Total Expenditure (Rs. in 
crores) 
2017-18 2843 
2018-19 2983 
2019-20 3966 
2020-21 4204 
2021-22 4334 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

47 
 
Table 4 
 
 
Sr.No Name of CGHS Covered 
City 
1 Agra 
2 Agartala 
3 Ahmedabad 
4 Aizwal 
5 Ajmer 
6 Aligarh 
 
7 
Allahabad 
(Prayagraj) 
8 Ambala 
9 Amritsar 
10 Baghpat 
11 Bengaluru 
12 Bareilly 
13 Behrampur 
14 Bhopal 
15 Bhubaneshwar 
16 Chandrapur 
17 Chandigarh 
 
 
18 
Chhatrapati 
Sambhaji Nagar 
(Aurangabad) 
19 Chennai 
20 Chhapra 
21 Coimbatore 
22 Cuttack 
23 Darbhanga 
24 Dhanbad 
25 Dehradun 
 
 
 
Delhi & NCR: Delhi, 
Faridabad, Ghaziabad, Greater 
Noida, Noida, Gurgaon, 

48 
 
 
26 
Indirapuram, Sahibabad 
27 Dibrugarh 
28 Gandhinagar 
29 Gangtok 
30 Gaya 
31 Gorakhpur 
32 Guwahati 
33 Guntur 
34 Gwalior 
35 Hyderabad 
36 Imphal 
37 Indore 
38 Jabalpur 
39 Jaipur 
40 Jalandhar 
41 Jammu 
42 Jodhpur 
43 Kannur 
44 Kanpur 
45 Kohima 
 
46 
Kolkata (including Ishapore) 
47 Kochi 
48 Kota 
49 Kozhikode 
50 Lucknow 
51 Meerut 
52 Moradabad 
53 Mumbai 
54 Muzaffarpur 
55 Mysuru 
56 Nagpur 
57 Nashik 

49 
 
58 Nellore 
59 Panaji 
60 Panchkula 
61 Patna 
62 Puducherry 
63 Pune 
64 Raipur 
65 Ranchi 
66 Rajahmundry 
67 Saharanpur 
68 Shillong 
69 Shimla 
70 Silchar 
 
71 
Siliguri (including Jalpaiguri) 
72 Sonipat 
73 Srinagar 
74 Thiruvananthapuram 
75 Varanasi (Benaras) 
 
76 
Tiruchirapalli (Trichy) 
77 Tirunelveli 
78 Vadodara 
79 Vijayawada 
80 Vishakhapatnam 
 