 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2025/ Pausha, 1947 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO. 
   168 
 
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE 165TH REPORT ON “DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2025-26 
(DEMAND NO. 4) OF THE MINISTRY OF AYUSH” 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 11 December, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 11 December, 2025) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2025/ Pausha, 1947 (Saka) 
 
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
165TH REPORT ON “DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2025-26 (DEMAND 
NO. 4) OF THE MINISTRY OF AYUSH” 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 11 December, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 11 December, 2025) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)-(ii) 
2. PREFACE (iii) 
3. ACRONYMS (iv) - (vii) 
4. REPORT (viii) 
 Chapter–I  Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Ministry 1-44 
 
Chapter–II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
does not desire to pursue in view of replies of the 
Ministry 
45 
 
Chapter–III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Ministry have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
46-124 
 Chapter–IV – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Ministry are still awaited 125-135 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   - AT   A GLANCE 135-150 
6. ANNEXURE 151-175 
7. MINUTES* -- 
* To be appended at later stage

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Rajib Bhattacharjee  
3. Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade 
4. Dr. Sikander Kumar  
5. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel  
6. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy  
7. Shri Ashok Singh  
8. Shri Rameswar Teli  
9. Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai  
10. Shri C. Sadanandan Master 
LOK SABHA  
11. Shri Ramvir Singh Bidhuri 
12. Dr. Vinod Kumar Bind  
13. Ms Iqra Choudhary  
14. Shri Mukeshkumar Chandrakaant Dalal  
15. Shri Sanjay Uttamrao Deshmukh  
16. Dr. Bachhav Shobha Dinesh  
17. Dr. Dharamvira Gandhi  
18. Dr. Kadiyam Kavya  
19. Dr. Prabha Mallikarjun  
20. Dr. C. N. Manjunath  
21. Shri Balya Mama Suresh Gopinath Mhatre 
22. Dr. Rajesh Mishra 
23. Shrimati Aparajita Sarangi  
24. Dr. Sharmila Sarkar  
25. Dr. Hemant Vishnu Savara  
26. Dr. Byreddy Shabari  
27. Dr. Mahesh Sharma  
28. Dr. Rani Srikumar  
29. Shri  Parimal Suklabaidya  
30. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman  
31. Mrs. Ruchi Vira  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri K.S. Somashekhar  Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar  Director 
4. Shri Vivek Chandra  Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Renu Sreekanth  Under Secretary 
6. Shri Jagannath Sahoo     Secretariat Assistant 
 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Rajib Bhattacharjee   
3. Shri Niranjan Bishi 
4. Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai 
5. Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade  
6. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel  
7. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy  
8. Shri Ashok Singh  
9. Shri Harbhajan Singh 
10. Shri Rameswar Teli 
 
LOK SABHA  
11. Shri Ramvir Singh Bidhuri 
12. Dr. Vinod Kumar Bind  
13. Ms Iqra Choudhary  
14. Shri MukeshkumarChandrakaant Dalal  
15. Shri Sanjay Uttamrao Deshmukh  
16. Dr. Bachhav Shobha Dinesh  
17. Dr. Dharamvira Gandhi  
18. Dr. Kadiyam Kavya  
19. Dr. Prabha Mallikarjun  
20. Dr. C. N. Manjunath  
21. Shri Balya Mama Suresh Gopinath Mhatre 
22. Dr. Rajesh Mishra 
23. Shrimati Aparajita Sarangi  
24. Dr. Sharmila Sarkar  
25. Dr. Hemant Vishnu Savara 
26. Dr. Byreddy Shabari  
27. Dr. Mahesh Sharma  
28. Dr. Rani Srikumar  
29. Shri  Parimal Suklabaidya 
30. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman  
31. Mrs. Ruchi Vira  
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri K.S. Somashekhar     Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhasker Director 
4. Shri Vivek Chandra Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Renu Sreekanth Under Secretary 

iii 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committ ee to present the Report on its 
behalf, present this  168th Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 165 th Report on Demands for Grants 2025-26 
(DEMAND NO. 4) of the Ministry of Ayush. 
2. The 165th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha on 12 th March 2025 and laid on the Table of 
Lok Sabha on 12 th March 2025. The Action Taken Notes of the Government on th e 
recommendations contained in the Report was received from the Department in the month of 
June 2025.   
3.  The Committee made a total of 83 recommendations/observations in the 165 th Report, out 
of which 30 recommendations have been accepted by the Committ ee and have been categorized 
under Chapter -I. There is 1 recommendation that the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the Department‘s replies that have been categorized under Chapter -II. There are 42 
recommendations/ observations, in respect of which replies of the Department have not been 
accepted by the Committee and the Committee has made further recommendations thereon and 
have been categorized under Chapter -III. While 10 recommendations/observations in respect of 
which final replies of the Ministry have not been received, have been categorized under Chapter - 
IV. 
4. The Committee, in its meeting held on 24th September, 2025, considered the Draft Report 
and adopted the same. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                        PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
24th September, 2025          CHAIRMAN 
Ashwin, 1947 (Saka)                   Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
                  Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
 

iv 
 
ACRONYM 
 
AAM Ayushman Arogya Mandir 
ABC Always Better Control 
ABDM Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission 
ABIHR Ayurveda Biology Integrated Health Research 
AE Actual Expenditure 
AHWC Ayush Health and Wellness Centre 
AI Artificial Intelligence 
AIIA All India Institute of Ayurveda 
AIIMS All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
AOGUSY Ayush Oushadi Gunvatta Evam Uttapadan Samvardhan Yojana 
API Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India 
ASEAN Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
ASU&H Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani, and Homeopathy 
ASUDCC Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative Committee 
ASUDTAB Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board 
ATAB Ayurveda Training Accreditation Board 
AUS&SR Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha, and Sowa-Rigpa 
AYUSH Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, and Homeopathy 
AYUSHEXCIL Ayush Export Promotion Council 
BE Budget Estimate 
BIMSTEC 
Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic 
Cooperation 
BIS Bureau of Indian Standards 
BMC Biodiversity Management Committee 
BRICS Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa 
CARI Central Ayurveda Research Institute 
CCA Chief Controller of Accounts 
CCIM Central Council of Indian Medicine 
CCRAS Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences 
CCRH Central Council for Research in Homeopathy 
CCRS Central Council for Research in Siddha 
CCRUM Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine 
CCRYN Central Council for Research in Yoga & Naturopathy 
CHC Community Health Centre 
CICA Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia 
CME Continuing Medical Education 
CNA Central Nodal Agency 
CoE Centre of Excellence 
CPSE Central Public Sector Enterprise 
CPWD Central Public Works Department 
CRIUM Central Research Institute of Unani Medicine 

v 
 
CSMCARI Captain Srinivasa Murthy Central Ayurveda Research Institute 
CTMS Clinical Trial Management System 
CTRI Clinical Trials Registry-India 
DDDU Drug Development and Discovery Unit 
DFGT Directorate General of Foreign Trade 
DGHS Directorate General of Health Services 
DH District Hospital 
DTL Drug Testing Laboratory 
ECG Electrocardiogram 
EDC Electronic Data Capture 
EMR Extra Mural Research 
ERMS Eklavya Model Residential Schools 
FTA Free Trade Agreement 
G20 Group of Twenty 
GAP Good Agricultural Practice 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GFCP Good Field Collection Practices 
GIA Grant-in-Aid 
GMP Good Manufacturing Practices 
GTMC Global Traditional Medicine Centre 
HS Code Harmonized System Code 
IBSA India, Brazil, and South Africa 
IC International Cooperation 
i-CAINE Ayurveda Innovation & Entrepreneurship Incubation Centre 
ICCR Indian Council for Cultural Relations 
ICD-11 TM2 International Classification of Diseases-11 Traditional Medicine Chapter 2 
ICDS Integrated Child Development Services 
ICMR Indian Council of Medical Research 
ICU Intensive Care Unit 
IEC Information, Education, and Communication 
IMPCL Indian Medicines Pharmaceutical Corporation Limited 
IMR Intramural Research 
IPC Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission 
IPHS Indian Public Health Standards 
IPvC Intermediary Pharmacovigilance Centre 
ISM Indian System of Medicine 
ISM&H Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy 
ISO International Organization for Standardization 
IT Information Technology 
ITRA Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda 
JFMC Joint Forest Management Committee 
MoA Ministry of Ayush 
MoF Ministry of Finance 

vi 
 
MoTA Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MoWCD Ministry of Women and Child Development 
MPCDA Medicinal Plants Conservation and Development Areas 
MVT Medical Value Travel 
NAAC National Assessment and Accreditation Council 
NABH National Accreditation Board for Hospitals & Healthcare Providers 
NABL National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories 
NAM National Ayush Mission 
NARIP National Ayurveda Research Institute For Panchakarma 
NCH National Commission for Homoeopathy 
NCISM National Commission for Indian System of Medicine 
NCT National Capital Territory 
NER North Eastern Region 
NHM National Health Mission 
NHP National Health Policy 
NIA National Institute of Ayurveda 
NICU Neonatal Intensive Care Unit 
NIH National Institute of Homoeopathy 
NIPER National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research 
NMC National Medical Commission 
NMPB National Medicinal Plants Board 
NPvCC National Pharmacovigilance Coordination Centre 
NRDR National Raw Drug Repository 
NRIUMSD National Research Institute of Unani Medicine for Skin Disorders 
NSSO National Sample Survey Office 
OHOS One Herb One Standard 
OPD Outpatient Department 
PCIM&H Pharmacopoeia Commission for Indian Medicine & Homoeopathy 
PCOD Polycystic Ovarian Disease 
PG Postgraduate 
PGT Postgraduate Teacher 
PHC Primary Health Centre 
PHI Public Health Initiative 
PMC Project Management Consultant 
PMU Project Management Unit 
PPvC Peripheral Pharmacovigilance Centre 
QCI Quality Council of India 
R&D Research and Development 
RARI Regional Ayurveda Research Institute 
RBI Reserve Bank of India 
RCFC Regional-cum-Facilitation Centre 
RCT Randomized Controlled Trial 

vii 
 
RE Revised Estimate 
RIS Research and Information System for Developing Countries 
RRDR Regional Raw Drug Repository 
RRI(H) Regional Research Institute (Homeopathy) 
RRIUM Regional Research Institute of Unani Medicine 
SAP Special Assistance Programme 
SCO Shanghai Cooperation Organization 
SCO-TM Shanghai Cooperation Organisation-Traditional Medicine 
SCSP Scheduled Caste Sub Plan 
SDG Sustainable Development Goal 
SLA State Licensing Authority 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
TSP Tribal Sub Plan 
UC Utilization Certificate 
UG Undergraduate 
UT Union Territory 
VCSMPP Voluntary Certification Scheme for Medicinal Plant Produce 
WHD World Homeopathy Day 
WHO World Health Organization 
WHO GTMC World Health Organization Global Traditional Medicine Centre 
WIPO World Intellectual Property Organization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

viii 
 
REPORT  
The Report  of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 165 th Report Demands for Grants 2025 - 2026 
(Demand No. 4) about Ministry of Ayush.  
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Mini stry of Health and Family Welfare 
in respect of the recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as 
follows:  
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 1.3.3, 
1.8, 3.2.6, 3.5.5, 3.5.6, 3.5.7, 3.6.3,  3.6.4, 3.8.3, 3.9.7, 3.10.6, 3.11.4, 3.12.4, 3.14.5, 
3.14.6, 3.15.3, 3.15.8, 3.18.6, 3.19.8, 3.21.4, 3.21.5, 3.22.4, 3.22.5, 4.4.2, 4.5.2, 4.6.5,  
4.7.1, 4.10, 4.11, 5.1.2 
       Total–30 (Chapter-I)  
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies: 5.1.3  
         Total–1(Chapter-II)  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee  and where the Commit tee makes further 
recommendation: 1.4.1, 2.1.2, 2.3, 2.3.1, 2.4.1, 2.6.1,  2.7.1, 2.7.2, 2.7.3,  3.2.7, 3.2.8, 
3.3.5,  3.6.5, 3.8.4, 3.9.8, 3.9.9, 3.13.4, 3.16.6, 3.18.5, 3.20.2, 3.20.3, 3.21.6, 3.22.6, 
3.22.7, 3.22.8, 4.1, 4.1.1, 4.2.2,  4.3.3, 4.3.4, 4.4 .1, 4.6.3, 4.6.4, 4.6.6, 4.12, 4.13, 4.14,  
4.15, 5.1.4, 5.1.5, 5.2.1, 5.2.2  
       Total–42(Chapter-III)  
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry are still awaited: 
3.4.4, 3.11.5, 3.12.2, 3.15.4, 3.17.3, 3.20.1,   4.6.7, 4.8.1, 4.9.1,  5.1.1 
Total– 10 (Chapter-IV)  
3.   The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding part of the 
Report.

1 
 
CHAPTER- I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
FUNCTIONAL AREAS OF THE MINISTRY 
 
1.1. The Committee takes into account the thematic areas of Ayush activities and the institutional 
framework to achieve the objectives of those activities. The Committee desires that each and 
every institution must strive towards achievin g the Mission Objective of the Ministry of Ayush 
within the specified time framework. The Committee further observes that the broad thematic 
area of Ayush activities is the key to accomplish the mission objectives of the Ministry i.e., 
improve access to hi gh quality and affordable Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa 
(AUS&SR) & Homeopathy medical education, availability of adequate and high quality 
AUS&SR & Homeopathy medical professionals in all parts of the country, promote equitable and 
universal healt hcare that encourages community health perspective. The thematic area of 
Quality research in Ayush is undertaken through pioneer research councils under MoA such as 
CCRAS, CCRUM, CCRS, CCRH and CCRYN. The Committee, however, feels that in order to 
address emerging challenges of healthcare, there is a need for functional integration of Ayurveda 
and conventional medicine with its affordable and evidence based use to boost Ayurveda in the 
paradigm of contemporary scientific, technological and medical parameters. 
(Para 1.3.3 of 165th Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.1.1 AEP – III Section 
 NCH 
The measures to integrate Homeopathy with conventional medicine has been taken by 
prescribing a comprehensives content about knowledge of Medicine, psychology, emergency and 
Modern Pharmacology in the under graduate Curriculum by regulation. 
Also, to meet with the challenges of the constantly changing and evolving field of medicine with 
new technologies, practices, and innovations, the Commission has decided to introduce 
Continuing M edical Education (CMEs) essentially for upgradation registered practitioners of 
Homoeopathy by regulation. For the same the Autonomous Board of Ethics and Registration for 
Homoeopathy (BERH) of the Commission has placed the draft amendment on website to seek for 
comments/opinion/advice/suggestions/ objection for from the stake holders and general public. 
L&P Section (PCIM&H)  
 Pharmacopoeial Publications:  The commission develops and amend the 
Pharmacopoeias and Formularies of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homo eopathy System 
of Medicines at regular intervals to ascertain the identity, purity and strength of ASU&H 
medicines. Further, the development of quality standards in respect of Sowa -Rigpa 

2 
 
medicines are under progress.   
 Act as a Central Drug cum Testing Laboratory 
PCIM&H also act as an appellate drug testing laboratory receives the samples from Govt. 
agencies as per Drugs & Cosmetics Act & Rules there under for ascertaining their quality. 
 Capacity Building Training Programs:  PCIM&H regularly conducts capacit y-building 
training sessions for stakeholders, including drug regulators, enforcement authorities, and 
technical staff from ASU&H drug testing laboratories. 
 PCIM&H also entered in MoU with National and International bodies to promote the 
research and development in area of traditional medicines.  
Scheme Section 
Under Ayurgyan Scheme, a new component namely ABIHR has been added from FY 2023 -24 
with the aim to integrate Ayurveda and Conventional Medicine by supporting high end research 
in the field of Ayush.   Further, under Centre of Excellence component of AyurswasthyaYojana, 
09 projects were supported to National reputed Institutes/Organizations to integrate the Ayurveda 
with Modern Medicine. 
Ayurveda Section 
 ITRA 
ITRA is conducting many research works in co llaboration with contemporary medical system. 
(Table 1 as detailed below :-) 
 
Sr. 
No. 
Title and investigators of Research 
1 Efficacy of Gayatriadi Yoga Vatias an add on intervention in the management of 
JatajaPramehaw.s.r. to Juvenile Diabetes- An open labelled randomized placebo 
controlled clinical trial. Scholar: DrMeera T.   Guide: Prof. (Dr) V.K. Kori   Co-
guide: Prof. Bhadresh Vyas (MD Pediatrics) 
2 Efficacy of Gandhakadi Yoga and SharpunkhaVati as add on to contemporary 
standard care in the management of Beejadushtijanya Pandu (Thalassemia Major) in 
Children- An open labelled randomized controlled clinical trial. Scholar: Dr Naresh 
Chaudhary   Guide: Dr. V.K. Kori   Co-guide: Prof. Sonal Shah (MD Pediatrics) 
3 Efficacy of Nityavirechanawith NarachaChoorna, SahacharadiTailaMatraBasthiand 
Shatapushpadi Yoga in the management of Artavadushti W.S.R. to Non-Obese 
Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome: A Single Arm Open Labelled Clinical Trial. Scholar: 
Arya Shaji Guide: Dr. Shilpa. B. Donga Co-guide: Dr. TejalPatalia (Radiologist) 
4 Efficacy of Nagabala - Arjunadi Yoga in the management of Post-myocardial 

3 
 
infarction (Hridroga) as an add-on to the conventional treatment - A randomized 
standard controlled clinical trial.  Scholar: Dr. SushyaSurendran; Guide: Dr. Mandip 
Goyal; Co-guide: 
5 Clinical efficacy of Bramhyadi tablet in pre-operative anxiety- A single blind 
randomized controlled trial. Scholar: Dr. SnehalSonani. Guide:Prof. (Dr.) T.S. 
Dudhamal.Co-guide: Dr. J. P. Mehta (Anesthetist) 
6 Efficacy of Madhuchistadi Tulle in the management of non-healing wounds- A 
Randomized Controlled Clinical Trial. Scholar: Dr. RiddhiGanatra. Guide: Prof. 
(Dr.) T.S. Dudhamal. Co-guide. Dr. K.D. Mehta (General Surgeon) 
To establish the safety and efficacy of Ayurveda drugs, ITRA  has also conducted many research 
studies with the help of contemporary scientific technology. (Table 2 as detailed below :-) 
 
Sr. 
No. 
Title and investigators of Research 
1 Evaluation of Triphala powder by using iso-bestic point as a measurement factor. 
Scholar: UrvibaJadeja 
2 Differentiation between Samanya and VichitraPratyarabdhata using 2D UV 
spectroscopy. Scholar: Arjun Pandya 
3 Disease prediction by help of Image J software in medicinal plants Scholar: 
ChintanRavrani 
4 Network pharmacology and evaluation of Blepharismaderaspatensis (L.) B. Heyne ex 
Roth. Scholar: Devang Joshi  
5 Pharmacological evaluation of Lactuca sativa Linn. -an experimental study with 
correlation of network pharmacology. Scholar: Bansari Jade 
6 Assessment of Acute toxicity and Antacid and Anti-ulcer activity of Entasil liquid.
 PI: Dr. M.B. Nariya 
 CCRAS 
CCRAS has undertaken various research studies to examine the benefits and feasibility of 
integration of Ayurveda with modern system of medicine. 

4 
 
The details are as follows: 
1. Operational study to explore the feasibility of integrating Ayurveda with modern system of 
medicine in a tertiary care hospital (Safdarjung Hospital New Delhi) for the management of 
Osteoarthritis (Knee)- Completed 
2. Feasibility of introducing the Indian  System of Medicine (Ayurveda) in the National 
Reproductive and Child Health services at the Primary Health Care (PHC) level‖ in Himachal 
Pradesh- Completed  
3. Integration of AYUSH systems in the National Programme for Prevention and Control of 
Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases &amp; Stroke (NPCDCS)- Completed 
4. Feasibility of introducing Ayurveda Intervention in Reproductive and Child Health 
(RCH) in PHCs of the Selected district (Gadchiroli) of Maharashtra (Effectiveness of Ayurvedic 
intervention for Ante -Natal care (GarbhiniParicharya) at Primary Health Care level: A Multi 
Centre Operational Study)- Completed  
Further, Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and Central Council for Research in 
Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS) under Ministry of Ayush  has taken and initiative to set up Ayush -
ICMR Advanced Centre for Integrative Health Research (AI -ACIHR), at AIIMS to conduct 
research on identified areas focusing on integrative healthcare under Extra Mural research 
Scheme   of ICMR . Under this program four research areas in four AIIMS have been identified, 
which are as follows: 
i. AIIMS Delhi: 
a) Advanced Centre for Integrative Health Research in Gastro-intestinal Disorders 
b) Advanced Centre for Integrative Health Research in Women and Child Health 
ii. AIIMS- Jodhpur: Advanced Centre for Integrative Health Research in Geriatric Health  
iii. AIIMS Nagpur: Advanced Centre for Integrative Health Research in Cancer Care  
iv. AIIMS Rishikesh: Advanced Centre for Integrative Health Research in Geriatric Health. 
 AIIA 
The integration of All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA)  with premier institutions such as 
AIIMS Delhi, Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences (ILBS), CSIR -Institute of Genomics and 
Integrative Biology (IGIB), and Indian Institutes of Technology (IIT)-Delhi, alongside 
establishment of satellite centres of AIIA at Safdarjung Hospital and CAIO at NCI -AIIMS 
Jhajjar—represents a strategic convergence of traditional wisdom and modern science to address 
emerging healthcare challenges. This multidiscipli nary partnership aims to establish a functional 
model of integrative medicine that combines the strengths of Ayurveda and conventional 
biomedicine through joint research, clinical trials, advanced diagnostics, and technology -driven 
innovations. By fosterin g evidence -based, affordable, and patient -centric healthcare solutions, 
this initiative seeks to position Ayurveda within the contemporary scientific paradigm, enhancing 
its global credibility and utility in managing complex diseases such as cancer, liver disorders, 
metabolic syndromes, and chronic inflammatory conditions. 

5 
 
 NIA 
The Institute produces 125 graduates, 130 post -graduates, 12 post -graduates in inter -disciplines, 
28 post-doctoral fellows, 30 diploma holders and 30 trained panchakarma technicians e very year.  
The Institute imparts high quality of affordable education in the field of Ayurveda at all levels.  
The Institute produces more than 200 varieties of quality drugs for dispensing to its patients in 
IPD, OPD and also for research purposes.  The Institute also undertakes research activities of 
various topics by its teachers as well as by undertaking research projects with Government and 
non-governmental organizations including industries and so far 35 MoUs are in progress. 
 NEIAH 
The Institute has actively been integrating AYUSH  with modern medicines through various 
research initiatives and institutional collaborations. Here are some notable development on 
research activities: 
Ongoing Research Project entitle: The title of the project is  ―Promoting the Ayurveda 
interventions for Iron Deficiency Anemia (IDA) among tribal females (18 to 45 year of age)  in 
Mawpat and Mylliem Block of East Khasi Hills district of Meghalaya under component of 
AyurswasthyaYojana. 
An ongoing project of NEIAH collaborating with Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy 
(CCRH) for a Research project in the Implementation of Homoeopathy for Menstrual Health of 
Adolescent School Going Girl‘s - A Public Health Research Program at East Khasi Hill District, 
Meghalaya. 
 Moreover, North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homeopathy, (NEIAH) Shillong has 
integrated modern practices in physiotherapy, dentistry and dietary etc. in its hospital to provide a 
comprehensive health care for patients' benefit.  
Moreover, laboratory and radiol ogy procedures are routinely conducted to supplement the 
Ayurvedic diagnosis of patients.  
NEIAH has also ensured high quality and affordable Ayush facilities through its two hospitals 
and a peripheral OPD at Smit Village.  
 NISR 
Along with Ayurveda Sowa-Rigpa systems may also include to implement the program. 
Siddha & Unani Section 
 CCRS 
 The Central Council for Research in Siddha (CCRS), an apex organization for the 
formulation, co-ordination, development, and promotion of research on scientific lines in 
Siddha has research program to explore avenues for research and Development of safe, 
effective Siddha medicines and therapeutic techniquesfor the treatment of diseases of 
national and global importance.  
 The Council is engaged in multifaceted research activit ies. Clinical research, pre -clinical 
Pharmacological / Toxicological studies, Open label trials, multi -centric Randomized 

6 
 
Controlled Trials (RCT‘s) are being conducted for acute and chronic diseases. 
Strengthening Research and Innovation through aligning S iddha Research with diseases 
of National priorities through IMR schemes 
 CCRS has been granting Research project grants to UG, PG siddha students to inculcate 
the scientific temper in the young minds. 
 CCRS organises oral and poster scientific competitions f or the medical students to 
motivate and impart scientific knowledge. In addition to this workshop, training 
programmes, symposium are being organised by CCRS for the Siddha medical students/ 
teachers to develop quality education and professionals  
 To stren gthen research in Siddha among students and researchers, the following have 
been initiated:  
1. Student Academic Initiative for Research in Siddha (STAIRS) 
2. CCRS Post-Doctoral Fellowship Scheme (PDF)  
3. Ph.DScheme for Siddha and inter-disciplinary life sciences 
4. Siddha Training Accreditation Board (STAB)  
 CCRS has taken initiatives for integrating Siddha practices with the mainstream 
healthcare system. Integration of Siddha therapies in primary healthcare systems through 
collaborative activities. The integration o f the Siddha system with modern medicine 
through its holistic wellness and comprehensive treatment will provide new horizons of 
health care.  
 Steps have been initiated for integration with Allopathic care to offer synergistic care. 
Integration with Mainstr eam Healthcare ensuring its availability and accessibility to the 
Public. Integrated OPD for Diabetes in 3 peripheral Institutes / Units have been started at 
SCRI, Chennai, SRRI Puducherry and Thiruvananthapuram of CCRS.  
 Integrative Health Research throug h developing evidence-based integrative practices that 
combine traditional Ayush knowledge with modern scientific research. Integration of 
Siddha therapies in primary healthcare systems through collaborative activities through 
the institutions like AIIMS R ishikesh (for Cancer Management, Reproductive & 
Childcare and Regenerative Medicine), Adyar Cancer institute, Chennai (for Cancer 
Management) have been initiated by CCRS. 
 Hence, to address emerging challenges of healthcare, there is a need for functional 
integration of Siddha Medicine and Conventional medicine with its affordable and 
evidence based use to boost Siddha System of Medicine in the paradigm of contemporary 
scientific, technological and medical parameters. 
 NIS 
NIS actively pursues the Ministry of  Ayush‘s mission objectives, focusing on high -quality 
Siddha medical education, research excellence, and equitable healthcare delivery. Collaborative 
initiatives with research councils and integration of Siddha with contemporary medical practices 
are emphasized to address current healthcare challenges effectively. 

7 
 
 CCRUM 
Noted 
 NIUM 
Besides Ayurveda, the same is applicable to Unani medicine. The functional integrity will be fast 
paced using classical formulations in situations where a conventional system does  not have 
satisfactory treatment, as they may be adequate with minimum efforts because of the WHO 
window for classical pharmacopeial drugs. 
Homoeopathy Section 
In agreement with the recommendations of the committee that in order to address emerging 
challenges of healthcare, there is a need for functional integration of homoeopathy and 
conventional medicine with its affordable and evidence based use to boost homoeopathy in the 
paradigm of contemporary scientific, technological and medical parameters. 
In this  regard, CCRH has undertaken studies in collaboration with various institutes where 
homoeopathy has been used as adjunct/integration with standard care in diseases like substance 
abuse, diabetes, multimorbidity, tuberculosis or as comparator with standard care. 
Studies to assess the safety and efficacy of homoeopathic medicines on preclinical models like 
laboratory /animal based studies; mechanistic models/ signalling pathways/nanoscience domain 
have been undertaken in integrative manner with institutes of allied sciences. 
 
PROPOSED INITIATIVES TO BE TAKEN DURING THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2025-26 
 
1.2 The Committee appreciates the milestones achieved by the Ministry in year 2023 -24 & 2024-
25 and takes note of initiatives proposed for the coming FY 2025 -26. Given th e operational 
efficiency, professional pursuit and proper & adequate institutional support for research 
councils, educational institutes, regulatory bodies, etc., the Committee observes that the Ayush 
system is striving towards establishing itself as an alternative system of medicine. The Committee 
desires that the Ministry should make concerted efforts for optimal utilization of the potential of 
available AYUSH resources and establish the Ayush system within a pluralistic system of 
Integrative healthcare a nd re -emphasizing the need for integrating AYUSH in the National 
Health Mission/National Health Priorities, research and education in convergence with the 
objectives of National Health Policy (NHP) 2017. The Committee recommends the Ministry to 
lay focus o n the implementation of its schemes, maintaining high standards of education and 
research and strengthen its monitoring mechanism vide its institutional statutory and regulatory 
bodies to have Always Better Control (ABC) over quality and safety of AYUSH dr ugs. The 
Committee appreciates the new initiatives for the coming year and is of the view that Ayurveda 
and Yoga should reach every household for a Healthy and Fit India.    
    
(Para 1.8 ibid) 
 

8 
 
Action Taken  
1.2.1 AEP – III Section 
 NCH 
 
The Commission is continuously in negotiation with health authorities to utilize the available 
manpower of Homoeopathy practitioners in various public health programme/acti vities with 
suitable training. Also, the regulatory provisions in the under -graduate and post-graduate courses 
of Homoeopathy by the introduction of multi/inter disciplinary knowledge content (electives) and 
training enhance skill (skill lab and advance clinical training).  Further Commission has decided 
to introduce Continuing Medical Education (CMEs) esse ntially for upgradation registered 
practitioners of Homoeopathy by regulation. 
 
L&P Section (PCIM&H) 
 PCIM&H is actively engaged in development and amend   Pharmacopoeias and 
Formularies of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy System of Medicines at 
regular intervals to ascertain the identity, purity and strength of ASU&H medicines.  
Also, PCIM&H act as an appellate drug testing laboratory for ASU&H Systems of 
medicine.  
 PCIM&H is actively engaged in conducting Capacity Building Training Programs ( for 
stakeholders, including drug regulators, enforcement authorities, and technical staff from 
ASU&H drug testing laboratories ), maintenance of Herbal garden for drugs of 
Pharmacopoeial species, seed bank, Botanical reference standards, Phytochemical 
reference Standards etc.  
 Also, PCIM&H conducts Student Exposure Visitsfor UG and PG students / Faculty of 
ASU&H medical colleges of India to educate them the techniques and methods used in 
the Standardization and Quality Control of ASU&H drugs. 
 
Ayurveda Section 
 ITRA 
ITRA is constantly working in line with National policies and will keep working in convergence 
with the objectives of National Health Policy (NHP) 2017.  PoshanaPakhwada, PoshanaMaaha, 
TB elimination program, International Yoga Day, World Meditation Day, B reast feeding week 
celebration etc are the national programs which ITRA is celebrating to achieve the national 
Goals. 
 
 CCRAS 
In pursuit of establishing Ayurveda as a scientifically validated system within the broader 
framework of integrative healthcare, th e Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences 
(CCRAS) has undertaken a wide range of clinical, pre -clinical, and public health research 
initiatives. These include studies on the feasibility, safety, and therapeutic benefits of integrative 
protocols combining Ayurveda with modern systems of medicine. The Council is also engaged in 
generating evidence to support the mainstreaming of Ayurveda within national health programs 

9 
 
and disease management strategies.  In a significant step towards fostering conve rgence between 
traditional and modern systems of medicine, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) 
and CCRAS have collaboratively initiated the establishment of the Ayush -ICMR Advanced 
Centre for Integrative Health Research (AI -ACIHR) at AIIMS. This centre is mandated to 
undertake high -impact, transdisciplinary research in identified priority areas of integrative 
healthcare under the Extra-Mural Research Scheme of ICMR. The AI -ACIHR is envisioned as a 
model of institutional collaboration that will fac ilitate scientific validation and policy integration 
of AYUSH interventions.  To ensure scientific rigor and regulatory compliance, all CCRAS -
funded research proposals undergo structured appraisal through the Internal Scrutiny Committee 
(ISC), Project Evalu ation and Monitoring Committee (PEMC), and the Scientific Advisory 
Group (SAG) and also reviewed by Institutional Ethics Committees and Data and Safety 
Monitoring Boards, as appropriate. These mechanisms ensure that research proposals align with 
Good Clinical Practice (GCP) guidelines and the ICMR National Guidelines for Biomedical and 
Health Research involving Human Participants. Furthermore, a robust monitoring framework has 
been instituted wherein projects are routinely monitored centrally by concerned t eam at CCRAS. 
In addition, periodic field visits and independent audits by monitoring teams are carried out to 
verify adherence to protocols, timelines, and quality benchmarks.  CCRAS has also undertaken a 
project to explore the impact of Ayurveda -based lif estyle, including Yoga and other 
interventionsin the community across five cities of India, with a sample size of 1200. 
 
 AIIA 
The International Day of Yoga and Ayurveda Day are observed every year by the institute and as 
per the directions received from Mi nistry from time to time. The AIIA was made nodal agency 
for 09th International Ayurveda Day observed on 29 th Oct., 2025.   A total of 4816 activities, 18 
ideas and 55,05,829 supported Ayurveda registered in the website 
https://ayurvedaday.in/index.php dedicatedly made to display all activities of Ayurveda day. 
These activities collectively reached millions, promoting Ayurveda‘s role in holistic health and 
wellness. AIIA is running two campuses in Delhi and Goa  covering UG, PG and PhD 
programmes in Ayurveda duly affiliated by the Universities of Delhi and Goa.  Both campuses 
follow the r ules and regulations of NCISM. The trans -disciplinary researches are conducted 
which are firstly approved by the various intern al research committees including external experts 
of Ayush and modern medicine.  Similarly, all clinical research studies are registered under 
Clinical Trial Registry India (CTRI). 
 
 NIA 
The Institute is implementing its schemes of providing education in al l levels, providing 
treatment to general public including treatments through speciality clinics by organizing topic 
specific medical campus in and out of the Institute and providing the best quality ayurvedic 
medicines to general public all efforts are mad e to propagate and demonstrate yoga therapies by 
organizing camps and actively participating in all the yoga ceremonies at State and National 
levels. 
 

10 
 
 NEIAH 
The North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy under the Ministry of AYUSH has 
undertaken several initiatives, focusing on integrating AYUSH into the national healthcare 
framework, enhancing education and research standards, and promoting Ayurveda and Yoga for 
a healthier India by way of expansion of health care service through it Peripheral OP D at Smit 
areas has opened a Peripheral OPD in  Ayurveda and Homoeopathy OPD at Smit areas, East 
Khasi Hills district of the State of Meghalaya to promote Ayurveda and Homoeopathy.  The 
Institute also conducted a Health camps under the Pradhan MantriJanjati  Adivasi Nyaya 
MahaAbhiyan (PM-JANMAN) programmes. The Institute regularly gives free consultation in the 
Institute Hospitals (both OPD & IPD) and conducting free Medical & Awareness Camps at 
villages, schools, Govt. Deptt., Military personnel and at  comm unity levels. Organized National 
Seminars/ workshops, Panel discussions, Doctor se Mileye in All India Radio, Shillong in 
English, Hindi and Regional Language (Khasi), TV Talks shows on Ayurveda in Doordarshan 
Kendra, Shillong etc,.  Regularly conducted the  CME program of teacher in Ayurveda and 
Homoeopathy. Apart the above,a One -year Panchakarma Technician Certificate course and 
Conducted Panchakarma Therapy Training to Medical Officers (Ayurveda) of neighbouring 
States. Promote  of Yoga for a daily healthc are and holistic well being.  These actions reflect the 
Institute commitment to integrating AYUSH into the national healthcare system, enhancing the 
quality of education and research, and promoting traditional practices for a healthier and fitter 
India. 
 
 NISR 
Along with Ayurveda Sowa-Rigpa systems may also include to implement the program. 
 
Scheme Section 
 
For better implementation & monitoring of the scheme, the proposals and progress reports are 
being reviewed by the experts of concerned Research Councils/  Autonomous Bodies under this 
Ministry on regular basis.  Further, on-site monitoring in being conducted by the subject experts 
on regular basis. 
 
Siddha & Unani Section 
 CCRS 
 The research programme of Central Council for Research in Siddha (CCRS) mainly 
focuses on clinical research including safety and efficacy studies of Siddha drugs, 
validation of the fundamental principles, drug standardization and quality control, survey 
and cultivation of medicinal plants and literary research. Central Council for Rese arch in 
Siddha has granted 103 IMR projects and out of this 25 IMR projects have been 
completed and 78 IMR projects are in progress.  
 Monitoring mechanism are being implemented systematically through institutional 
statutory and regulatory bodies of CCRS in cluding IAEC (Institutional Animal Ethics 
Committee), IHEC (Institutional Human Ethics Committee) followed by ISC (Internal 

11 
 
Scrutinizing Committee) SAB (Scientific Advisory Board), PEMC (Project Evaluation 
Monitoring Committee) by having the periodical review on the ongoing research projects 
 CCRS has taken initiatives to Strengthen Research and Innovation through aligning 
Siddha Research with diseases of National priorities through IMR schemes. 
 CCRS has entered MoU with government organizations/ colleges, p rivate institutions, 
like ICMR, AIIMS, NCISM for carrying out collaborative IMR research studies. CCRS 
has undertaken 8 collaborative IMR research studies. The collaborative outcomes will 
render promulgating rational use, clinical application & mainstreaming of AYUSH. 
 CCRS though its Peripheral Pharmacovigilance Centre (PPVC) is actively monitoring the 
Adverse Drug reactions (ADR) and Misleading advertisements (MLA) and documenting 
the same. Identification of misleading advertisements and proper reporting t o respective 
drug licensing authorities aids in ensuring the safety & quality of drugs 
 Standardization and Quality Control for establishing standardized protocols for Ayush 
medicines and therapies to ensure consistency and quality. 
 SiddharYogam OPD functio ns at all the peripheral institutes/units of CCRS and being 
recommended along with internal medications for treatment & management of diseases. 
 With the support of Ministry of Ayush, CCRS will take up necessary initiatives to spread 
the benefit of Siddha S ystem of Medicine to reach each and every household of India by 
establishing more Siddha Clinical Research Institutes/Unit across the Country for a 
Healthy and Fit India. 
 
 NIS 
 
NIS acknowledges the Committee‘s observations and is fully committed to effecti vely utilizing 
available AYUSH resources through focused initiatives and robust institutional mechanisms.  The 
Institute prioritizes  integrative healthcare in alignment with the National Health Policy 2017, and 
actively contributes towards making Siddha ac cessible to communities, thereby supporting the 
vision of a Healthy and Fit India. 
 
 CCRUM 
As far as CCRUM is concerned, the Council is following all the Guidelines to ensure that high 
standard research in Unani Medicine is conducted i.e. rigorous scientifi c methodology, 
transparency, and accountability to enhance its global acceptance and credibility. The Research 
Drug is manufactured by the Councils Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) certified Pharmacy 
at Hyderabad and Chennai. Considering the philosophy an d basic principles of the Unani 
medicine, the protocols are developed and finalized in consultation of the multi -disciplinary 
experts as per Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), Ayush and Good Clinical Practice 
(GCP) guidelines. The Protocols are presented before the respective research -subcommittees and 
Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC). Ethical Issues are seen by the IEC and onsite monitoring 
is done by Institutional Multi Disciplinary Research Advisory Committee (IMRAC) regularly. 
 
 

12 
 
 NIUM 
The health promotion approaches of Unani medicine may also be included.  The CCRUM and the 
educational institutions of Unani are committed to standard practices in Research and education. 
The syllabus has been prepared in tune with NEP as a dynamic curriculum. 
 
IEC Section 
The Observation of the committee is noted. 
 
Drug Policy Section 
For better implementation & monitoring of the scheme, the proposals and progress reports are 
being reviewed on regular basis.  Further, on -site monitoring is being conducted by the 
monitoring committees formed under AOGUSY Scheme. 
 
NMPB Section 
Recommendation Noted.  
 
Homoeopathy Section 
CCRH is undertaking research studies and generating research evidence on enhancing overall 
health and well being of people using homoeopathy. As an a ctive participant in the FIT India 
movement, CCRH can undertake specific research studies on:  
o Providing preventive care using constitutional homoeopathic medicines on 
immune strengthening.  
o Use of homeopathy to treat common sports -related conditions such as Sprains and 
strains, Muscle soreness, Fatigue and exhaustion, sports specific injuries, etc.  
o Undertake studies on building mental health and motivation along with other 
mental health modalities to provide support to individuals in dealing with stress, 
anxiety, binge eating, obesity, and lack of motivation, and other barriers to regular 
physical activity. 
 Also, CCRH through its centers and outreach programs can undertake IEC events to raise 
Awareness on Holistic Wellness in general population. These even ts would be held to 
encourage fitness among patients to motivate them to adopt a balanced lifestyle by 
combining homeopathy with regular exercise, a healthy diet, and mental relaxation 
techniques. 
 CCRH would also undertake annual event under FIT India for sports and physical fitness 
promoting activities and competitions amongst its officers and staff at all of its institutes 
and units. 
 
NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANTS BOARD 
1.3 The medicinal plants form the major resource base of our indigenous health care tradit ions. 
The Committee takes note of the export of Medicinal plants as recorded under Ch -12 of HS -
Code 1211 valued around US $ 486.78 million in the year 2023 -24. The Committee appreciates 
the performance achieved in regard to digital platform namely e -CHARAK. The Committee 

13 
 
suggests to further enhance the reach of the online portal cum android based application “e -
CHARAK 2.0” for trading of medicinal plants amongst various stakeholders involved. The 
Committee further recommends NMPB to organize frequent „Buyer -Seller Meet among the 
Farmer Bodies, Industries and State/UT Government. The stakeholders should be encouraged to 
engage in conclusive buying selling business exchanges, discussion on challenges faced in the 
sector of Medicinal Plants Cultivation and Supp ly Chain Management and the way forward 
thereon. 
(Para 3.2.6 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
1.3.1 NMPB Section 
NMPB is already working towards this suggestion made by committee. 
  
NMPB, M/o Ayush has supports projects under Information Education and Communication 
(IEC) activities to promote the medicinal plants sector and training programmes on Good 
Agricultural Practices (GAP) and Good Field Collection Practices (GFCP) to the farmers. 
  
NMPB, M/o Ayush also supports the workshop/ Seminar/ Conferences/ buyer seller m eets to 
aware the farmers, stakeholders, cultivators, collectors etc.  
  
Under the Aushadhi Vanaspati Mitra Programme, the projects supports to recognize initiatives of 
individuals /community/institutions involved in conservation/cultivation, post -harvest 
management, R&D, marketing etc. of MAPs. 
 
 
INFORMATION, EDUCATION & COMMUNICATION (IEC) 
 
1.4 The Committee takes note of financial and physical performance made under International 
co-operation Scheme vis -à-vis budgetary allocation and set objectives. The Committee 
recommends that going forward communication should be made with first world countries like 
UK and USA for promoting AYUSH among the Indian diaspora as well as their native citizens. 
The Committee realizes the potential in promoting AYUSH related healthcare travel to India, 
accordingly, the Ministry has to chalk out strategies to vigorously promote AYUSH system of 
medicine in international markets support investment, exchange of exports to boost Ayush 
products in global market. The Ministry should keep the consideration that Ayush Vision@2047 
has target to enhance contribution of Ayush Sector upto 7.7% of GDP. The Committee feels that 
the strategic course of action viz. Road shows abroad, CMEs for foreign audience, 
Familiarization trips, Strategic M arketing-Communication through a professional agency, 
Collateral, Audio Video Content, Social Media Marketing can further be taken up by the Ministry 
for achievement of the Mission Objective of the Scheme. 
 (Para 3.5.5 ibid) 
 

14 
 
Action Taken  
1.4.1  IC Section 
The Central Sector Scheme for Promotion of International Co -operation in Ayush aims to 
promote and strengthen awareness and interest in Ayush Systems of Medicine at the international 
level. The scheme has specific objectives to facilitate the internation al promotion, development, 
and recognition of Ayurveda, Yoga, Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, Sowa -Rigpa, and 
Homoeopathy. The overarching goals include fostering interaction among stakeholders, 
supporting the international exchange of experts and information,  boosting global trade in Ayush 
products and services, and promoting academics and research through the establishment of Ayush 
Academic Chairs in foreign countries. The recommendation of the Committee has noted. 
 
PROMOTION OF INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION 
 
1.5 The Committee is pleased to note and welcomes the laying of the foundation of a WHO -
Global Traditional Medicine Centre (GTMC) at Jamnagar, Gujarat. The Committee feels that 
increasing collaboration with WHO in the Ayush Sector is significant in global ac ceptance of 
traditional medicine and Ayush healthcare. Such events will certainly help with the rapid growth 
of traditional medicine and healthcare. The Committee desires to be appraised for the budget 
allocated for the development of the GTMC and the time line for its completion. The Committee 
further recommends that steps may be taken on priority to complete the project early and make 
the GTMC functional. 
(Para 3.5.6 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
1.5.1 The budget allocated for the development of Global Traditional M edicine Centre (GTMC) 
is 73.37 Crore. The expected timeline for the completion of the project is 31.12.2025. 
 
1.6 The Committee notes the outputs in the OOMF and Annual Action plan 2025 -26 in regard to 
this scheme and urges the Ministry to scrupulously imp lement the scheme with budgetary 
allocation of Rs.136.00 crore as per set target in output -outcome framework during 2025 -26 to 
achieve set outcomes.  
(Para 3.5.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.6.1 IC Section 
The recommendation of the Committee is noted. The set targ et in output-outcome framework for 
FY 2025-26 is as under:- 
 

15 
 
S. No Indicators 2025-26 
Outputs 2024-25 
1 Number of experts deputed (Short -Term & Long -Term) at Foreign Countries 
as well as International Organizations e.g. WHO) 
25 
2 Number of Indian Ayush Experts supported for presenting Ayush related 
Papers at International conferences etc. 
10 
3 Number of Indian Ayush Manufacturers/ Ayush Service providers supported 
for participating in International Trade Fair, Conferences, Expos etc. to 
display their Ayush related products and services. 
40 
4 Number of National/ International organizations supported for holding 
International Conferences on Ayush. 
20 
5 Participation in International Conferences and International Forums like 
BRICS, SCO, IBSA, G20, BIMSTEC, ASEAN, CICA etc. 
30 
6 Number of Indian Ayush Manufacturers/ Ayush Exporters supported for 
Market Authorization/ registration of AYUSH products at abroad. 
5 
7 Number of Information Cells to be formed in abroad 03 
8 Number of students allotted with international fellowships 104 
Outcomes 2025-26 
1 Number of international bilateral/ multilateral agreements signed with foreign 
countries/ organizations. 
10 
2 Number of AYUSH Chairs deputed at foreign Universities/Colleges etc. 04 
3 Number of Foreign Authorities sensitized about Ayush System 1600 
4 Number of Academic programmes to be held 05 
5 Number of engagements with UN Agencies like WHO, UNESCO 15 
 
AYURGYAN 
 
1.7 The Committee understands the significance of the addition of a research component namely  
AYURVEDA-BIOLOGY INTEGRATED HEALTH RESEARCH (ABIHR) under AYURGYAN, 
however, the Committee is at pains to note that the status of implementation of scheme has 
suffered due to financial issues viz. CNA procedure. The Committee recommends the Ministry to 
take necessary action for ensuring that funds are utilized under the ABIHR scheme. 
 
(Para 3.6.3 ibid) 
Action Taken  
1.7.1 Scheme Section 
This Ministry has provided necessary guidance to the Sub -Agencies funded under the ABIHR 
component to ensure the timely u tilization of sanctioned funds, leading to a substantial reduction 
in the CNA balance. 
 
1.8 The Committee understands that the overall structure of the Ayurgyan Scheme aims to 
encourage Ayush personnel to undergo need -based professional training and bridge  the 
knowledge gaps. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to give equitable impetus to 
all sub-component of the Capacity Building and Continuing Medical Education (CME) in Ayush. 
Underlining the vital role of Research and innovation in Ayush D rugs for prioritized diseases, 
the Committee, recommends to collect data on safety, standardization and quality control for 
Ayush products and practices in order to develop evidence -based support on the efficacy of 
Ayush drugs and therapies. In order to in culcate scientific aptitude and expertise relating to 

16 
 
Ayush systems, the Ministry should chalk out the strategy for development of potential human 
resource and its management in Ayush system. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that 
the outcome of the Research Scheme should successfully demonstrate the effectiveness of Ayush 
systems and the novel technology successfully developed out of such R&D must harness the 
potential of Ayush in the interest of public health delivery. 
(Para 3.6.4 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
1.8.1 Scheme Section 
Proposals under all sub-components are being supported under Capacity Building and Continuing 
Medical Education (CME) in Ayush component of Ayurgyan Scheme.Under the scheme, 
Research Projects are supported to collect data on safe ty, standardization, quality control for 
Ayush drugs and therapies through pre-clinical and clinical studies.   The data are being collected 
to develop evidence-based support on the efficacy of Ayush system and the outcome/result of the 
studies are also published in National/ International peer reviewed journals. 
 
AYURSWASTHAY YOJANA 
 
1.9 The Committee expresses its concern over the variations in the budget allocation at BE and 
RE stage during 2024 -25 in regard to AyurswasthyaYojana. The Committee is of the  view that 
since the AyurswasthyaYojana aims to promote Ayush intervention for community health care for 
achieving Sustainable Development Goal 2 (SDG-2) and Sustainable Development Goal 3 (SDG-
3) and documentation of the efficacy of the Ayush System. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to implement the Yojana on priority basis with added impetus. The 
Committee desires that the Ministry should engage adequate manpower for successful 
implementation of the scheme to achieve its cherished objecti ves. The Committee observes with 
concern that the CoE scheme has suffered in the year 2024 -25, therefore the Committee 
recommends the Ministry to create awareness among stakeholders, establishing a digital 
platform for application entry, examinations and reviews of proposals, and ensuring smooth fund 
flow as per government guidelines. The Committee believes that regular discussions with 
organizations, diligent monitoring in this regard will be beneficial for the propagation and 
popularization of the Yojana.  The Committee expects the Ministry to strictly follow the Annual 
action plan and OOMF in respect of AyurswasthyaYojana so that targets set therein viz. 
sustainable development goals 2 & 3 are achieved within set timeframe. 
 
(Para 3.8.3 ibid) 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 
 
Action Taken  
 
1.9.1 Scheme Section  
To streamline the process, this Ministry has developed an online portal for the submission and 
review of proposals. Further, as suggested by the Committee, that regular discussions with 
organizations, diligent monitoring will be beneficial for the propagation and popularization of the 
Yojana, regular discussion are being held with the Grantee Organizations for smooth 
implementation of the projects including the fund utilization trainings through CNA/PFMS 
process. 
 
AYUSH OUSHADI GUNVATTA EVAM UTTAPADAN SAMVARDHAN YOJANA 
(AOGUSY) 
 
1.10 The Committee acknowledges the importance of the AOGUSY that aims at enhancing 
India's manufacturing capabilities and exports of traditional medicines and health promotion 
products under the initiat ive of Atmanirbhar Bharat. The Committee, however, takes a serious 
view of the variation of budget allocation at BE and RE stage and is given to understand that 
budget was reduced at RE 2024 -25 because of less expenditure of Rs. 8.37 crore as on 30 -09-
2024. The Committee believes that non -utilization of the funds in a timely manner affects the 
efficiency of the Yojana. The Ministry is suggested to take necessary steps to support proposals 
received from State Government and Private Pharmacies/DTL thereby uti lizing the fund 
optimally in a timely manner. 
(Para 3.9.7  ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
1.10.1 Drug Policy Section 
Necessary steps at evaluation stage of received proposals are being taken to utilize the funds 
appropriately in timely manner. Further, the monitoring  committees are formed for the physical 
verification of the projects being implemented under the AOGUSY Scheme.  Regular discussions 
are being held with the Grantee Organizations for smooth implementation of the projects 
including the fund utilization trainings through CNA/PFMS process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
CONSERVATION, DEVELOPMENT AND SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF 
MEDICINAL PLANTS 
1.11 The Committee notes the mission objective of „Conservation, Development and Sustainable 
Management of Medicinal Plants‟. The Committee is of the considered view that Ministry 
should continue to take concrete steps to ensure Quality Assurance, Supply chain and 
creating/optimizing market linkages and value addition in the scheme for Conservation, 
Development and Sustainable Management of Medic inal Plants. There is already a provision 
for supporting the projects on quality assurance for maintaining good standards while 
collecting, cultivating and post -harvest handling of the raw material. In this regard, the 
Committee desires that the Ministry s hould ensure effective implementation of Voluntary 
Certification Schemes for Medicinal Plants produce (VCSMPP) to encourage Good 
Agricultural Practice (GAP) and Good Field Collection Practices (GFCP) in medicinal plants 
and enhance quality and safety of th ese plants. Although, the Committee appreciates the 
achievements of NMPB in field of conservation, development and sustainable management of 
medicinal plants, however, the Committee recommends the Ministry to give fresh further 
impetus to promote India on Global Medical Tourism encouraging foreign nationals to seek an 
alternative mode of treatment through Ayush. 
(Para 3.10.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.11.1 NMPB Section 
In this regard, it is to inform that National Medicinal Plants Board, Ministry of AYUSH 
sanctioned project entitled ―Capacity Building cum Sensitization proposal for Voluntary 
Certification Scheme for Medicinal Plant Produce (VCSMPP)‖ with project no. 
Z.18017/187/CSS/VCSMPP/DEL-02/2018-19-NMPB-VI with the following objectives to the 
Quality Council of India (QCI) under Ministry of Commerce and Industry, New Delhi:- 
1. Design and operationalize capacity building programme in the form of 100 workshops to 
disseminate the VCSMPP Scheme amongst various stakeholders.  
2. To develop the PoP of select 140 species as indicated by the National Ayush Mission and 
come with a compilation of the Guidebook. 
3. To establish demonstration areas of selected 140 species in various agro -ecological zones 
of the country that will be selected form the list. For this total 30 demo pl ots (20 GAP and 
10 GFCPs) will be formed. 
4. Certification of atleast 30 farms cultivating medicinal plants as per scheme requirements 
etc. 
 In this regard, it is to inform that as per the information received from the organization.  it 
has been observed that  the activities such as Sensitization workshops –stakeholders, GAP 

19 
 
Training Workshops-Farmer, Consultation meets and GFCP Training Workshops -Collector. The 
detail is given below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INSTITUTE OF TEACHING AND RESEARCH IN AYURVEDA (ITRA) 
1.12 The Committee believes that the budgetary allocation so made during 2024-25 and 2025-26 
would suffice ITRA to undertake collaborative research to revalidate traditional claim and, 
principles enriching pharmacopoeia through evidence based research, mainstream Ayurveda in 
the public health and support and enrich National Health Mission . The Committee further 
recommends ITRA for advancement of Global Traditional Medicine Centre (GTMC) for making 
awareness and globalization for Ayurvedic products, services and system of treatment. 
(Para 3.11.4 ibid) 
 
Action Taken  
1.12.1 ITRA is planning to have collaborative researches with IIT -Gn, NIPER –A in near future. 
ITRA team is currently working with GTMC team to develop TMGL (Traditional medicine 
Global Library). 
NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HOMEOPATHY 
1.13 The Committee observes overtime that the Nat ional Commission for Homeopathy (NCH) is 
asking for budget for engaging more manpower, however, the same does not appear to be 
materialized resulting into reduction of Budget at RE stage. The Committee would appreciate if 
the Commission takes a firm assess ment of manpower requirements and accordingly, forward 
the same to the Ministry for approval to avail itself the required human resource. The Committee 
recommends NCH to make SWOT Analysis of working and take remedial measures. Homeopathy 
should be promoted for equitable and universal healthcare on ground level as on date, however, 
to increase faith of the public in Homeopathy the Commission should take necessary steps to 
assess the efficacy of Homeopathy treatment. The Committee also recommends NCH to impr ove 
S. 
No. 
Activities  Phy. target Target achieved 
up to March, 31 st 
2024 
1 Training activities -CBs-
Consultants & MT 
10          7    
2 Sensitization workshops –
stakeholders 
10 10 
3 GAP Training Workshops -
Farmer, Consultants 
50 50 
4 GFCP Training Workshops -
Collector, Consultants 
30 26 
5 Package of Practices 140 80 
6 Demonstration areas 30 15 
7 Pilot Certification 30 15 
8 SAARC visit 6 1 
9 Total number of farmers trained   5699 

20 
 
training modules and licensing qualified Homeopathy practitioners to provide and promote 
healthcare service in private and government sector. The Committee desires NCH to take 
initiative to and ensures availability of adequate and high quality homoeopa thy medical 
professionals across the country to fill up the gaps of requirements of allopathic doctors as per 
WHO norms especially in rural areas and generate efficacy of Homeopathy amongst common 
masses and bringforth scientifically validated mode of Home opathy treatment like the Allopathic 
system. 
(Para 3.12.4 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
1.13.1 In addition to 33 posts sanctioned on regular basis and 60 posts on contractual basis, 
Commission has requested Ministry of Ayush to sanction some additional post vide letter No. 30-
11/2023/NCH dated 30 -5-2024 keeping in view of the provisions of Regulations of NCH, 
RajbhashaVibhag directions and requirement of Accounts and Finance and Information 
Technology. These are very essential for smooth functioning of a regulatory and statutory 
organization. These posts are as under:- 
S.No Name of posts Pay level No. of post 
1 Controller of Examination 12 1 
2 Deputy Secretary  12 1 
3 Deputy Controller of Examination 11 1 
4 Assistant Controller of Examination 10 2 
5 Hindi Officer 10 1 
6 System Analyst 10 1 
7 Accounts Officer 10 1 
8 Programmer 8 2 
9 Junior Librarian 7 1 
 Total -- 11 
 
This process is under way in the Ministry of Ayush.  In order to assess the efficacy or 
Homoeopathy treatment like the allopathic system the col legiate hospitals are being encouraged 
to conduct homoeopathic medical camps at their hospitals and surrounding areas. The concept of 
peripheral homoeopathic OPDs has been introduced to promote and access the efficacy of 
homoeopathic treatment.  The medical  field is constantly changing and evolving with new 
technologies, practices, and innovations. The Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy 
drafted Continuing Medical Education (CMEs) for Homoeopathic practitioners for updating of 
knowledge and acco rdingly placed the draft amendment on the website of NCH for seeking 
opinion/advice/suggestions from the stake holders under section 23 sub -section (d) of G.S.R 772 
(E), Ministry of Ayush, Government of India notification dated 18.12.20, for a period of 30  
days.The steps taken by National Commission for improving education standards in 
Homoeopathy, which in turn enhances the quality of clinical aptitude benefiting the public 
through quality health care are as follows:- 

21 
 
● The Commission has notified the Homoeo pathy Graduate Degree Course -B.H.M.S 
regulation on 7.12.22 wherein Research Methodology subject is introduced at undergraduate 
level to promote young researchers and it has taken various new initiatives like early clinical 
exposure, introduction of electiv es, faculty development programme, foundation programme, 
finishing programme at end of internship, inclusion of new subjects like pharmacology, 
psychology and yoga. 
● It has developed competency based dynamic curriculum as per recommendation of 
national Education policy 2020.  
● It has envisioned raising competencies and skills of teaching faculties in alignment with 
modern understanding with a regular update. 
● For each department in Homoeopathy Medical College, methodology for supplementing 
modern advancement, research and technology in homoeopathy (SMART -Hom) is included in 
regulation.  
● The Commission has conducted research methodology training for post graduate students 
and teachers in association with scientist of Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy. 
In order to Promote benefits of Homoeopathic Treatment among public including the rural areas 
all Homoeopathic Medical Colleges are directed to create awareness among school students, 
about Ayush systems of medicine, run peripheral OPDs within the radius o f 25 kms from the 
collegiate hospital and conduct medical camps. 
CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN AYURVEDIC SCIENCES 
 
1.14 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by CCRAS for internal revenue generation. The 
Committee takes note of the revenue generated through user charges collection from patients 
availing healthcare service in OPDs, IPDs etc and expects that the charges are kept affordable 
for the general public. The Committee also suggests that strong proposals be made towards 
getting CSR funding and i ts rationale and optimal utilization. Corporate Social Responsibility 
(CSR) presents a significant opportunity to bridge funding gaps and support innovative 
initiatives in the Ayush sector. By engaging with corporates and aligning projects with their 
CSR o bjectives, substantial financial and infrastructural support can be secured. The role of 
CSR extends beyond mere funding on CSR; it fosters strategic partnerships, enhances 
community outreach, and promotes sustainable development. Effective utilization of CSR funds 
can help in capacity building, infrastructure enhancement, research, and large -scale public 
health interventions, ensuring a greater impact on society. 
(Para 3.14.5 ibid) 
 
 

22 
 
Action Taken  
1.14.1 CCRAS has drafted Guidelines for utilization of CSR Funds which have been duly 
approved by the CCRAS Executive Committee (EC) and the Chairman (MoS I/c), Governing 
Body. CCRAS is proactively reaching out to various industries, organizations, and PSUs for CSR 
funding and has received a positive response from several entities. 
 
1.15 The Committee notes that nearly 271 research projects have been completed during the last 
5 years. The Committee observes that it is essential to document findings in a comprehensive 
final report and publish results in peer -reviewed journals and conferences to disseminate 
knowledge. Practical applications should be identified, with collaborations established to 
implement solutions. Post -project evaluations and stakeholder feedback help assess the 
research's impact and areas for improvement. Intellectual property opportunities, such as patents 
and commercialization, should be explored while ensuring legal compliance. Research data must 
be securely archived and shared through openaccess platforms wherever appropriate. Future 
research d irections should be identified, leveraging collaborative opportunities and funding 
sources to be rationally utilized in development of scientific evidence in Ayurvedic principle 
drugs therapies by way of integrating ancient wisdom with modern technology th rough scientific 
innovation pertaining to diagnostics, prevention, promoting as well as treatment method and 
translating all into public health system. The Committee recommends to the Ministry to ensure 
compliance with ethical, regulatory, and funding requ irements, including proper 
acknowledgments that are crucial for maintaining accountability and credibility in Ayurvedic 
System of Medicine 
(Para 3.14.6 ibid) 
Action Taken  
1.15.1 The Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences systematically documen ts the 
outcomes of all completed research projects and to ensure wider dissemination and stakeholder 
engagement, research findings are regularly published in peer -reviewed journals, made available 
in the Ayush Research Portal and presented at national and international conferences, and 
compiled in CCRAS News bulletins.  Post-project evaluations are routinely conducted to assess 
the translational potential, societal relevance, and scientific merit of completed projects. 
Feedback from stakeholders,is factored into this review. Where applicable, findings with 
potential for innovation and application are forwarded to the Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) 
Cell of CCRAS for further assessment. This cell is mandated to explore patentability, facilitate 
filing processes, and guide commercialization strategies, in full compliance with national legal 
and regulatory frameworks. Research data generated by is securely archived in project-specific e-
formats with controlled access. Efforts are underway to enhance data shari ng through open -
access platforms, ensuring transparency.  CCRAS actively identifies and prioritizes future 
research directions that align with national health priorities and emerging public health needs. 

23 
 
The Council is committed to leveraging collaborative opportunities with academic institutions, 
research organizations, and industry partners to pool expertise and resources.CCRAS ensures full 
adherence to ethical norms, regulatory frameworks, and funding protocols in all research 
activities. Each project is conducted following the Good Clinical Practice (GCP) guidelines and 
the ICMR National Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical and Health Research involving Human 
Participants (2017). Institutional Ethics Committees (IECs) oversee approvals and periodic 
review. P roper acknowledgment of financial and institutional support is emphasized in all 
publications and outputs to maintain transparency, accountability, and scientific integrity in the 
Ayurvedic system of medicine. 
CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN HOMEOPATHY 
 1.16 The Committee observes that against actual expenditure of Rs. 140.25 crore in BE 2023 -24 
an amount to the tune of Rs. 144.00 crore has been allocated in BE 2024 -25 to CCRH which has 
been enhanced to Rs. 150.5 crore at RE stage. In BE 2025 -26, CCRH has b een allocated to an 
amount of Rs. 165.00 crore. The Committee recommends that the research activities of CCRH 
that include clinical research, drug standardization, verification and proving research etc. would 
promote safe, quality assured and effective tre atment of diseases ensuring global acceptance of 
homeopathy. 
(Para 3.15.3 ibid) 
Action Taken  
1.16.1 The research activities of CCRH includes clinical research, drug standardization, 
verification and proving research etc. promoting safe, quality assured an d effective treatment of 
diseases ensuring global acceptance of homeopathy. Council has been allocated budget estimate 
of Rs. 165 crore and focusing for 190 crore in the RE stage. This variation is due to 60 (approx.) 
new research projects under domains of  research activities are proposed to be initiated in this FY 
2025-26 
1.17 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by CCRH for internal revenue generation. The 
Committee takes note of the revenue generated through user charges collection from patients 
availing healthcare service in OPDs, IPDs etc. and expects that the charges are kept affordable 
for the general public. The Committee expresses concern over takes note of the budgetary 
constraints/delays faced by the council and expects the ministry to take n ecessary steps towards 
it. The Committee also recommends that the research outcomes should be independently verified 
and published widely to promote Homeopathy among general public. 
(Para 3.15.8 ibid) 
Action Taken  
1.17.1 The recommendation of the committe e is noted. The research outcomes are being 
independently verified by the Special committees and SAB where the members are experts in 

24 
 
relevant field outside the Council. Council widely disseminates the research findings through its 
social media channels an d in health melas through translates/IEC material/ documentaries etc. to 
promote Homeopathy among the public. 
 
1.18 The Committee desires that AIIA may enhance Mobile Ayurveda Clinics and Telemedicine 
services, subsidized treatment for economically disadva ntaged individuals, community health 
workers and public awareness campaigns, affordable medicines through Jan Aushadhi Kendras. 
The Committee expects more satellite centres be opened up in near future. 
(Para 3.18.6 ibid) 
Action Taken  
1.18.1 All India Inst itute of Ayurveda, New Delhi has established satellite centre at various 
localities: 
1. VMMC &Safdarjung Hospital,  
2. ⁠AIIMS Jhajjar 
3. ⁠IIT Delhi  
4. ⁠LBSNAA Mussorie 
5. ⁠ SoUADTGAKevadia Gujarat  
- Medicines and treatment provided free for economically weak BPL population,  
- Amrit Aushadhi Center inside campus  
Telemedicine consultation through e Sanjeevani app at LBSNAA, Mussorie. 
 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HOMOEOPATHY 
1.19 The Committee has taken note of the financial and physical performance of NIH. The 
Committee observes that variation in budgetary allocation during last three years is due to 
construction, renovation a nd upgrading of facilities. The Committee, however, notes with 
concern that under-utilization of funds are due to unfilled posts, pending bills for outsourced staff 
and partial functioning of NIH, Narela which casts aspersion on efficient working of NIH. T he 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend for optimal utilization of allocated funds to avoid time 
and cost overruns over undertaken projects. The Committee observes that the patient footfall in 
Narelacentre has not been upto the expected level since its inception. The Committee accordingly 
suggests the Ministry to carry out awareness programmes in the NCT Region and adjoining 

25 
 
states to promote this centre and encouraging the patient to get quality homeopathy treatment 
from this centre. 
(Para 3.19.8 ibid) 
Action Taken  
1.19.1 NIH has undertaken the following measures to fill up the vacant posts: 
i. The recruitment process for regular posts for NIH, Kolkata and Delhi is at its final stage, 
and till date, all Gr. B & C incumbents and few Gr. A incumbents have j oined the 
Institute. 
ii. Offer letters have been issued to the candidates selected for Gr. 'A' posts at NIH, Delhi.  
iii. Interviews for the posts of Joint Director (Administration) and Administrative Officer, 
NIH, Delhi (on deputation basis), have been conducted o n 06.05.2025 at the Ministry of 
Ayush. 
iv. Presently, NIH, Delhi employs 127 outsourced manpower through two agencies and 16 
contractual employees. Further, Walk -in interviews have been conducted for 24 
categories of contractual positions and 23 offer letters have been issued. 
v. NIH is actively taking steps to fill up the remaining vacant posts.  
Patient Care Service at NIH, Delhi: 
The National Institute of Homoeopathy (NIH), Delhi, has experienced a consistent increase in 
patient footfall since its inception, su ccessfully providing quality Homoeopathic treatment to all 
visiting individuals. From June 2024 to May 2025, a total of 116,207 patients sought treatment at 
NIH, Delhi, comprising 41,978 new patients and 74,229 follow-up patients. 
In addition to its clinic al services, NIH, Delhi, has actively engaged in community outreach. The 
institute has conducted numerous awareness programs for students and staff at institutions such 
as PM Shri KendriyaVidyalaya, Narela, Delhi, and Govt. Sarvodaya Bal Vidyalaya, Lampur 
Road, Bankner. Furthermore, many schools, NGOs, and other organizations have visited NIH, 
Delhi, to gain a comprehensive understanding of Homoeopathic treatment options. 
Committed to a holistic approach to patient well -being, the Institute is operating a d edicated 
Yoga and Physiotherapy Centre on its campus. To ensure equitable access to Homoeopathic care, 
NIH, Delhi, also runs specialized Outpatient Departments (OPDs) tailored for senior citizens and 
Armed Forces personnel. 
 
NATIONAL AYUSH MISSION 

26 
 
1.20 The Committee is given to understand that NAM is centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) with 
Centre and State share in ratio of 60:40. Grant-in-aid is released to those States/Uts who have in 
compliance with the guidelines of Ministry of Finance, Department of Exp enditure as per their 
requirements. The Committee notes with appreciation that 12273 AyushArogyaMandirs have 
been operationalised, however, the remaining 227 AAMs out of target of 12500 is expected to be 
fully operationalised by 31st March, 2025. The Commi ttee, accordingly, recommends the 
Ministry to expedite the process. The Committee desires that the Ministry should encourage 
State/ UT Governments to monitor the process, so that operationalization of AAM (Ayush) may 
be achieved in time bound manner. 
(Para 3.21.4 ibid) 
Action Taken  
1.20.1 As reported by States/UTs, 12500 AAMs (Ayush) is now fully operationalized. 
 
1.21 The Committee has taken note of the key concerns that the Ministry has submitted before the 
Committee and recommends change in institutiona l mechanism by incorporating a position of 
Mission Director with relevant seniority and experience to lead NAM implementation in each 
State/UT with exclusive assignment of NAM activities in state(s) concerned. The Committee 
further suggests appointment of dedicated District Ayush Officers responsible solely for NAM 
activities and conduct of regular orientation and capacity -building programs to ensure that the 
District Ayush Officers understand NAM objectives and implementation guidelines. The NAM is 
in last year of 5 year plan, the Ministry should take proactive steps for extending the Mission in 
ensuing financial years and secure appropriate funds for the effective implementation of the 
Mission objective. 
(Para 3.21.5) 
Action Taken  
1.21.1 Under NAM, there is a provision of District Ayush Society (DAS) and District Ayush 
Officer has been designated as Chief Executive Officer in its Governing Body and Executive 
body. The States/UTs shall make necessary arrangements for forming the District Ayush Society 
and e stablishment of District Programme Management Unit (DPMU - Ayush), recruitment and 
posting of required staff. Being a legal entity, the DAS can set up its own office which has 
adequate staff and experts and can evolve its own rules and procedures for hiring  the staff and 
experts both from the open market as well as on deputation from the Government.  Further, time 
to time different training programmes, orientation programmes, Training of Trainers (ToT) for 
manpower like Nodal Officers, Community Health Office rs, ASHAs, Yoga Instructors etc. are 
being conducted for capacity building. Mid Term Evaluation by third party of Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes including NAM is being undertaken by NITI Aayog. On the basis of 
recommendation of Mid Term Evaluation, proposal o f continuation of NAM scheme will be 

27 
 
taken up with Department of Expenditure, Government of India as flagship scheme with adequate 
fund allocation. 
NORTH EASTERN AREAS 
1.22 The Committee has been given to understand that NER is facing hurdles in effective AYUSH 
implementation due to cultural, ethnic and linguistic diversity. The geography of the NER also 
adds to the issue. Accordingly the Committee recommends that some kind of diversity training be 
conceived for the healthcare professionals and staff alike for better communication with 
patience. Modern technology may be utilized for effective communication through video 
conferencing, collaborative tools, and project management platforms. 
(Para 3.22.4 ibid) 
Action Taken  
1.22.1 P&E Division 
● NEIAH 
The North Ea stern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy (NEIAH), Shillong plans to engage 
with local leaders, traditional healers, and community -based organizations to further bridge the 
communication gap and promote trust and cooperation.  
The Institute regularly conducts Health/Medical Camps for Ayurvedic, Homoeopathic systems of 
medicine along with Yoga sessions to bridge the cultural gap and popularize the AYUSH system 
of medicines 
It has established a peripheral OPD at Smit Village to enhance the availability of A YUSH 
healthcare facilities. 
NEIAH is in the process of setting up a herbal garden, which will not only serve as a resource 
center but also foster collaboration between academia, local knowledge holders to promote the 
rich ethnobotanical heritage of the NER 
NISR 
Sowa-Rigpa system of medicine is prevalent in Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Darjeeling -
Kiligpong and some other North Eastern States. So effective use of Sowa -Rigpa will help for 
better out reach in NER. 
CCRUM 
Noted. 
CCRS 

28 
 
● CCRS has taken initiatives for the establishment of Integrated Ayush Wellness Clinic 
(IAWC) at Guwahati, Assam is in progress with respect to Siddha stream. 
● In addition to this, CCRS has been participating in the Arogya fair/exhibition for 
popularization and dissemination of benefits of Siddha medicine in NER. 
● As suggested, CCRS will provide diversity training for the healthcare professionals and 
staff for effective communication. Capacity Building for strengthening human resources, 
research infrastructure and Institutional capacity in Siddha will be provided through video 
conferencing, collaborative tools, and project management platforms. 
NIUM 
The NER has Flora that resembles the alpine/sub -alpine forests like those of NER. Unani 
Medicine has mentions of a large number of plants and ani mals that have such habitats. The 
training may include Unani inputs about the Flora of NER. 
CCRH 
There are Homoeopathic Clinics functioning under CCRH which are supplemental to the main 
research activities of CCRH. Council has 06 Institutes/ Units in North  East Region (NER) viz, 
Regional Research institute at Agartala, Imphal and Guwahati and three Clinical Research units 
viz. Dimapur, Aizawl and Gangtok. The research projects being undertaken are: -  
Ongoing research projects/survey: 
1. Clinical Verification of drugs. 
2. The Folklore survey of local medicinal plants. 
3. Patient Reported Outcome Measure Study. 
4. Efficacy of Homeopathy intervention –Nano curcumin preventing malaria fever –A cluster 
randomized double blind placebo controlled trial. 
5. Patient satisfaction survey at Rural Outreach Medical Camps OPD-A cross Sectional survey. 
6. Research projects on Allergic Rhinitis, Hypothyroidism and Hemorrhoids.  
Ongoing Health programs: 
1. Public Health Program to assess the prevalence of VITAMIN D deficienc y and its 
management with homoeopathic medicine. 
2. Schedule Cast Special Component Plan (SCSP) 
3. Homoeopathy for school health program. 
NAM Section  
Time to time Ministry is organizing different training programmes, orientation programmes, 
Training of Tr ainers for Ayush manpower like Nodal Officers, Community Health Officers, 
ASHAs, Yoga Instructors etc. in the States/UTs including NER. Further, autonomous bodies of 
Ministry have been also engaged to provide their active support to State/UT Governments fo r 
effective implementation of activities/programmes under NAM: 
● Capacity building and training of State Programme Management Unit (SPMU)/ Community 
Health Officer (CHO). 
● Telemedicine- hub and spoke model. 

29 
 
● Sharing of the best practices of the Public Health Programmes  
● IEC 
● Monitoring and field visit 
 
The Ministry of Ayush has also conducted Master Trainer Trainings on Musculoskeletal disease. 
There is also provision of teleconsultation through Ayushman Arogya Mandirs as a Hub and 
Spoke model. Under NAM, there is provision of Ayush Mobile Medial Unit to provide door step 
service of population in unserved and underserved areas. 
1.23 The Committee observes with concern that the North East Region (NER) faces several 
challenges in the AYUSH sector, including the non -availability of AYUSH medicines, a limited 
number of AYUSH colleges (one in Assam, two in Meghalaya, and one in Arunachal Pradesh), 
and a shortage of specialized doctors. The Committee wants to highlight that NER despite the 
home ground of numerous herbals and rare Medicinal Plants, there is a lack of awareness about 
the AYUSH system of medicine, further hindering its acceptance and accessibility. The region 
also suffers from a shortage of technical human resources, impacting the effective 
implementation and expansion of AYUSH healthcare services. The Committee therefore, strongly 
recommends the Ministry to work upon all these issues. 
(Para 3.22.5 ibid) 
Action Taken  
1.23.1 P&E Division 
NEIAH 
NEIAH has conducted community outreach programs, health camps, an d AYUSH awareness 
drives in collaboration with local bodies, educational institutions, and NGOs in order to address 
the lack of awareness about the AYUSH system. IEC (Information, Education & 
Communication) materials in local languages are being developed and distributed. 
The Institute has opened a Peripheral OPD in Ayurveda and Homoeopathy OPD at Smit areas, 
East Khasi Hills district of Meghalaya to promote Ayurveda and Homoeopathy. 
The Institute also conducted  Health camps under the Pradhan MantriJanjati  Adivasi Nyaya 
MahaAbhiyan (PM-JANMAN) programmes.  
The Institute regularly gives free consultation in the Institute Hospitals (both OPD & IPD) and 
conducting free Medical & Awareness Camps at villages, schools, Govt. Deptt., Military 
personnel and at comm unity levels. Panel discussions, Doctor se Mileye in All India Radio, 
Shillong in English, Hindi and Regional Language (Khasi), TV Talks shows on Ayurveda in 
Doordarshan Kendra, Shillong etc. 
In regard to capacity Building and Human Resource Development, t he Institute has started One 
Year Panchakarma Technician Certificate Course since 2018-2019. 5th batch course is ongoing. 

30 
 
The Institute conducted Panchakarma Therapy Training to Medical Officers (Ayurveda) of 
neighbouring States.  
The Institute conducted internship and CME (Continuing Medical Education) programs regularly 
to enhance the clinical capabilities of AYUSH practitioners. 
The Institute initiated the process for support in increasing student intake capacity and faculty 
recruitment with the Ministry of Ayush 
NISR 
Sowa-Rigpa system of medicine is traditional medicine of several North -Eastern States. So 
effective use of Sowa -Rigpa by opening Sowa -Rigpa Research and Education Centers will help 
for better Ayush services in NER. 
CCRUM 
The Council is takin g various initiatives for creating awareness about Unani Medicine in NER 
e.g. providing treatment through General OPD, RCH OPD, Geriatric OPD, NCD Clinic etc. 
conducted by two Institutes namely Regional Research Institute of Unani Medicine, Silchar 
(Assam) and Clinical Research Unit, Imphal (Manipur) of the Council. 
CCRH 
There are Homoeopathic Clinics functioning under CCRH which are supplemental to the main 
research activities of CCRH. Council has 06 Institutes/ Units in North East Region (NER) viz, 
Regional Research institute at Agartala, Imphal and Guwahati and three Clinical Research units 
viz. Dimapur, Aizawl and Gangtok. The research projects being undertaken are: -  
Ongoing research projects/survey: 
1. Clinical Verification of drugs. 
2. The Folklore survey of local medicinal plants. 
3. Patient Reported Outcome Measure Study. 
4. Efficacy of Homeopathy intervention –Nano curcumin preventing malaria fever –A cluster 
randomized double blind placebo controlled trial. 
5. Patient satisfaction survey at Rural Outreach Medical Camps OPD-A cross Sectional survey. 
6. Research projects on Allergic Rhinitis, Hypothyroidism and Hemorrhoids.  
Ongoing Health programs: 
1. Public Health Program to assess the prevalence of VITAMIN D deficiency and its 
management with homoeopathic medicine. 
2. Schedule Cast Special Component Plan (SCSP) 
3. Homoeopathy for school health program. 
 
NAM 
Ministry of Ayush is implementing Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National Ayush Mission 
(NAM) in the country through State and UT Governments fo r promotion and development of 
Ayush system. NAM envisages better access to Ayush services by infrastructure development, 
supply of essential Ayush drugs, deployment of manpower and IEC in the States/UTs including 
NER.  

31 
 
Public Health being a State subject, engagement of manpower comes under purview of respective 
State Government. However, under NAM, there is provision of deployment of contractual 
manpower under upgradation of Ayush hospitals, setting up of integrated Ayush hospitals and 
Ayushman Arogya Mandir (Ayush). 
Clinical Trials Registry- India (CTRI) 
1.24 The Committee further desires that information on reported claims regarding Ayush 
treatment for controlling cholesterol levels using tablets or injections, supported by research -
based evidence, if available, may be provided. 
(Para 4.4.2 ibid) 
Action Taken  
1.24.1  
Ayurveda Section 
CCRAS 
The CCRAS has undertaken clinical study titled ―Evaluation of VyoshadiGuggulu and 
HaritakiChurnain the Management of Dyslipidemia: A Multicenter Prospective Clinical St udy‖ 
the study demonstrated significant result on total cholesterol. The research article has been 
published in Journal of Research in Ayurvedic Sciences  2(1):p 12 -19, Jan –Mar 
2018.https://www.google.com/search?q=Evaluation+of+Vyoshadi+Guggulu+and+Haritaki+Chur
na+in+the+Management+of+Dyslipidemia%3A+A+Multicenter+Prospective+Clinical+Study&rl
z=1C1YTUH_enIN1037IN1037&oq=Evaluation+of+Vyoshadi+Guggulu+and+Haritaki+Churna
+in+the+Management+of+Dyslipidemia%3A+A+Multicenter+Prospective+Clinical+Study&gs_l
crp=EgZjaHJvbWUyBggAEEUYOTIGCAEQRRg80gEIMTE5OGowajeoAgCwAgA&sourceid
=chrome&ie=UTF-8 
Siddha & Unani Section 
CCRS 
● A research study on Anti -hyperlipidemic activity of siddha formulation (D5 choornam) has 
been completed. 
● In continuation, In-vitro and in -vivo studies to explore the benefici al effect of D5 chooranam 
on mice model of obesity is going on. 
NIUM 
Papers are published as below.  

32 
 
1. Hamiduddin and ArifAnees, ―Anti -Hyperlipidaemic Activity in Unani drugs containing 
Saponin‖ Holistic Health Care and Research (An international quarterly peer-reviewed journal 
of health sciences) Vol. II, No. 002. April–June 2012, pp.31-40, ISSN: 2250-2262.  
2. Irshad Ahmed Wani, Bushra Husain, MohdNayab, Mehmooda Begum. Unveiling Siman -i-
Mufrit (Obesity): Unani Perspective and Role of Hammam -i-Bukhari in its m anagement. 
Journal of Drug Delivery & Therapeutics. 2024; 14(12):151 -155. DOI: 
10.22270/jddt.v14i12.6880 
3. Fatima S, Ahmad T, Shahid M, Sofi G. Comparative study of kundur (Boswelliaserrata) and 
tareeq (diaphoresis) in the management of samnemufrit (obesity) : a randomised clinical trial. 
Int J Health Sci Res. 2017; 7:186-96. 
4. S Kausar H, Jahan N, Ahmed K. Evaluation of Anti-Obesity and Hypolipidaemic effect of 
Sandroos 
5. (Trachylobiumhornemannaianum Hayne) in Diet-Induced Obesity in Rats. International 
Journal of Medical & Health Research, March 2017, 3(3): 13-20 
 
POSHAN ABHIYAN 
1.25 The Committee is of considered view that PoshanAbhiyaan can be further strengthened 
through AYUSH research activities aimed at identifying challenges and gaps in the 
implementation of nutrition services in rural, semi -urban, and tribal areas. The Committee also 
considers that ayurvedic interventions in curbing specific issues like malnutrition, sickle cell 
anemia etc., should be implemented to address a wider class of beneficiaries es pecially in rural 
and tribal area. The results of such nutritional intervention may be monitored over 2 -3 years, to 
generate a specific database of efficacy of such interventions. Moreover, POSHAN ABHIYAN 
through AYUSH interventions will certainly provide an alternative approach to tackle issues 
affecting children and adolescents on a larger scale, the Committee feels so. 
(Para 4.5.2 ibid) 
Action Taken  
1.25.1 Scheme Section 
Noted. 
Ayurveda Section 
 CCRAS 
 CCRAS implemented POSHAN ABBHIYAN through its 31 peri pheral institutes since 
inception of the program.  
 In POSHAN ABBHIYAN, Institutes of CCRAS distribute Nutritional Kits, Nutritional 
Supplements, Fruits and development of Kitchen gardens/Nutri gardens. 

33 
 
 Apart from that 5 studies are being executed by CCRAS on malnutrition.  
 A study in collaboration with ICMR -National Institute for Research in Tribal Health 
(NIRTH), Jabalpur focused on Screening of students 57 Ekalavya Model residential 
schools (EMRS) for Malnutrition and management of Malnutrition with Arvin asava, and 
Drakshavaleha 
 A collaborative project with 4 Ayurveda academic institutes is being conducted on 
malnutrition with classical formulation KushmandakRasaayana.   
 3 intra mural research projects are being conducted on Ayush B R Leham 
Siddha & Unani Section 
 CCRS 
 Central Council for Research in Siddha with the support of Ministry of Ayush has 
undertaken Programmes like PoshanAbhiyaan&PoshanMaa for creating awareness to 
improve nutrition and lifestyle among Children, Adolescents and Women through Siddha  
System of diet – Siddha Aahar. Health camps, awareness programmes, diet exhibition and 
herbal diet competition have been organized to create awareness about the malnutrition, 
anaemia, low birth weight, women and child healthcare.  
 Research projects will b e initiated in underserved/ remote/rural/tribal areas focusing on 
malnutrition, sickle cell anemia with Siddha diets along with Siddha medicine 
intervention to generate specific database and benefitting large population. 
 NIS 
NIS will design and implement A YUSH-based nutritional intervention studies, particularly in 
rural and tribal areas, focusing on issues like malnutrition and sickle cell anemia. These 
initiatives will be monitored over a 2 –3 year period to generate data on their effectiveness and 
support the objectives of POSHAN Abhiyaan through evidence-based Siddha solutions. 
 CCRUM 
The Council is actively participating in PoshanAbhiyaan through intervention of Unani Medicine.  
Some MoUs have also been done with the Institutes engage in food or nutrition  related research. 
So that evidence based documentation of the diet (Ghiza) mentioned in Unani classical literature 
may be done. 
The Council is also creating awareness about the healthy diet and nutrition through General OPD, 
RCH OPD, Geriatric OPD, NCD Cl inic etc. conducted by 21 clinical Institutes / Units of the 
Council. The Council is also creating awareness through  Mobile Clinical Research programme, 
School health programme and mobile healthcare programme under SCSP/TSP. Under this 

34 
 
programme, villages  predominately having SC/ST population have been selected to create 
awareness for preventive aspects of different diseases and and healthy diet. 
 NIUM 
The Pilot trials are needed to standardize and prioritize nutritional services in rural, semi urban 
and tr ibal areas. Unani Medical literature mention elaborately about various GhizaDawi 
(Functional Foods) and DawaGhizi (Nutraceuticals) in tune with the region specificity. It may be 
included. 
Ayurveda Section 
 ITRA 
Kaumarbhritya department of ITRA has developed  herbal Paushtik biscuits to manage the 
malnutrition. This is being distributed to needy children free of cost during PoshanaAbhiyan. 
(Table 6 – Report of PoshanaPakhwada 2025 as detailed below) The same is being evaluated 
through clinical studies as well :- 
Sr. 
No.  
Date Center / place Activities Beneficiary  
1 9.4.2025 Gandhinagar 
Aaganwadi 
Awareness lecture on prevention of obesity Role 
Play on importance of balanced nutrition 
Distribution of SarivadiPanak 
100 
2 10.4.2025 PawanChakkiAa
ganwadi area 
Awareness lecture on Screen Addiction and Right 
Lifestyle 
Exercise Session 
Distribution of Paushtika Biscuits 
50 mothers 
and 
children 
3 10.4.2025 HapaJalaramMan
dir 
SankalpaSampurnaSwasthya in collaboration 
with IAP 
40 
4 11.4.2025 MiyanawasAaga
nwadi area 
 
Awareness lecture on Screen Addiction and Right 
Lifestyle 
Exercise Session 
Distribution of Paushtika Biscuits 
45 mothers 
and 
children 
5 12.4.2025 Maruti Nagar 
Aaganwadi 
Awareness lecture on Importance of 1st 1000 
Days 
Exercise Session 
55 mothers 
and 
children 

35 
 
Distribution of Paushtika Biscuits 
6 13.4.2025 HapaJalaramMan
dir 
SankalpaSampurnaSwasthya in collaboration 
with IAP 
45 
7 14.4.2025 Gulabnagar Ravi 
park Aaganwadi 
Awareness lecture on Importance of 1 st 1000 
Days 
Exercise Session; Distribution of Paushtik a 
Biscuits 
48 mothers 
and 
children 
8 15.4.2025 Jawaharnagar, 
udyognagarAaga
nwadi 
Awareness lecture on Importance of 1 st 1000 
Days 
Exercise Session; Distribution of Paushtika 
Biscuits 
52 mothers 
and 
children 
9 16.4.2025 Shatrinagar, 
Military area, 
Aaganwadi 
Awareness lecture on Importance of 1 st 1000 
Days; and Anemia prevention 
Exercise Session; Distribution of Paushtika 
Biscuits 
28 children 
8 mothers 
10 17.4.2025 KB IPD A drawing competition 8 
11 17.4.2025 Sharda Mandir 
School, Patrakar 
Colony 
Awareness lecture on Importance of 1 st 1000 
Days; and Anemia prevention 
Exercise Session 
Distribution of Paushtika Biscuits 
67 children 
and 8 
mothers 
12 17.4.2025 HapaJalaramMan
dir 
SankalpaSampurnaSwasthya in collaboration 
with IAP 
30 
13 18.4.2025 AnapurnaYogesh
warAaganwadi 
Awareness lecture on Importance of 1 st 1000 
Days; and Anemia prevention; Exercise Session 
Distribution of Paushtika Biscuits 
40 children 
and 12 
mothers 
14 19.4.2025 Sri Satya Sai 
vidyalaya, 
Jamnagar 
Awareness lecture on paediatric nutrition an d 
adolescents nutrition specifically anemia and 
vitamin deficiencies 
100 
students of 
8th and 9th 
standard 
15 20.4.2025 HapaJalaramMan
dir 
SankalpaSampurnaSwasthya in collaboration 
with IAP 
25 
16 21-04-
2025 
Jagruti colony 
Anganwadi, 
Awareness lect ure on Importance of 1 st 1000 
Days; and Anemia prevention 
35 children 
and 12 

36 
 
Jamnagar Exercise Session 
Distribution of Paushtika Biscuits 
mothers 
17 22-04-
2025 
 
Bharat singh 
community hall, 
Shastri Nagar -2, 
Jamnagar 
Joint activity with ICDS, Jamnagar Municipal 
Corporation - 
Awareness lecture on Importance of 1 st 1000 
Days; and Anemia prevention; Exercise Session; 
Distribution of Paushtika Biscuits 
25children, 
40 
Adolescent 
girls and 23 
mothers 
 
 AIIA 
The POSHAN Maah activities of AIIA led by the Department of Swast havritta, was officially 
inaugurated by Smt. Smriti Zubin Irani, Honorable Minister of Women and Child Development, 
Govt. of India on 1st of September, 2021. The acivities includes: 
 Daily lectures based on the weekly themes wereconducted at the OPD premises. 
 The academic programs involved online guest lectures by eminent scientists in the field of 
nutrition. The topics were chosen based on POSHAN maah theme and areas of 
contemporary relevance.  
 Workshops were organised by on ‗Nutrient analysis of food artic les‘ in collaboration with 
the NIFTEM (National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management), 
Sonipat, Haryana followed by hands-on training. 
 NIA 
The Institute is organizing PoshanAhiyan in the  in the Department of Prasuti Tantra as well as 
Kaumarbhritya catering to the nutritious requirements of women especially pregnant and 
lactating women and children particularly in remote and down -trodden areas.  This is a regular 
feature of organizing such camps and activities in the camps as well as  in villages, anganwadis, 
and schools and at panchayat level. These activities help in the benefit of curbing specific issues 
like malnutrition and help in the growth of infants, children and adolescents to a large extent. 
Regular monitoring is also done by teachers of the Institute. 
 NEIAH 
The Institute is   regularly  celebrated the  PoshanMaah and PoshanPakhwada as an integrated 
nutrition support program focussing the importance of Ayurvedic nutrition  on Ayurvedic millets 
and Ayurvedic Aahar  in achievin g balanced health among  mothers of young children, 
adolescent girls, pregnant and lactating women. 

37 
 
Awareness programme by way of conduction of free Medical camps, Lecture on Ayurveda and 
Homoeopathy in all related programme time to time. 
 NISR 
Point Noted. 
 RAV 
Under PoshanAbhiyanPakhawada, RAV distributed Poshak Cookies among women and children 
as a measure to tackle malnutrition.    
NMPB Section 
Recommendation Noted  
ADS Section 
Ministry of Ayush is one of the key stakeholders in the PoshanAbhiyaan. Minist ry of Ayush had 
participated in the celebration of PoshanPakhwada 2025 organized by the Ministry of Women 
and Child Development through its National Institutes/Research Councils/ National Commission 
for Indian System of Medicine (NCISM)/ National Commissio n for Homoeopathy (NCH) and 
National Ayush Mission (NAM) section of this Ministry. This Pakhwada was celebrated from 
08.04.2025 to 22.04.2025.  According to the data available on the PoshanAbhiyan Jan Andolan 
Dashboard, a total of 18,87,762 activities related to PoshanPakhwada have been carried out under 
the Ministry of Ayush. 
Homoeopathy Section 
NIH has recently celebrated 7th Edition of PoshanPakhwada from 8th April 2025 – 23rd April 
2025 as a part of Jan Andolan under POSHAN Abhiyan. The following activit ies are being 
carried out at NIH. 
Sl. 
No. Activities Place Date Target 
1 Exclusive Anemia 
camp/Sensitization Sessions 
about Ayush Practices for 
Adolescence girls PW&LMs 
Patient Waiting Area 
NIH 
22.04.2025 
12 pm 
Patient attending 
NIH OPD 
2 Awareness of He althy Dietary 
practices for adolescence girls 
and School children. 
Vivekananda 
AdarshaVidyamandir 
25.04.2025 Adolescence girls 
and School children 
3 Yoga Sessions for all NIH 23.04.2025 All Faculties Staff 
Students 

38 
 
4 Drive to populate POSHAN 
Vatikas with medicinal plants/ 
Saplings 
Near Hahnemann 
Statue 
&PoshanVatika 
23.04.2025 All Faculties Staff 
Students 
5 Promotion of Beneficiary / 
Citizen 
Patient Waiting Area/ 
Pediatric OPD 
23.04.2025 Children attending 
NIH OPD 
 
CCRH has been conducting activities un der PoshanAbhiyan as per the directions received from 
Ministry of Ayush. During the program, awareness sessions are being organized for sensitization 
about health food and local foods which can be included in diet for good health.  Regarding 
malnutrition an d Sickle cell Anaemia, Council has undertaken a public health program for 
assessment of prevalence of malnutrion in rural areas and a study on Sickle cell anemia is being 
initiated at Jahbua district, Madhya Pradesh. 
STATUS OF AYUSH EDUCATION 
1.26 The Mini stry also proposed before the Committee that pay parity be maintained between 
allopathy doctors and Ayush practitioners. The Committee is of considered view that the AYUSH 
system of medicine is still in nascent stage. Despite all the work being done in las t decade the 
system is still not a household name as it is for the conventional system of medicine. Thus 
Committee is of view that the matter may be considered by the Govt. Of India once the AYUSH 
system has come at a appreciable footing in comparison to a llopathy. The Committee, however, 
recommends putting in a thought -through incentivisation schemes at different verticals to 
encourage the manpower to put in more effort to excel in this field, therein ensuring accelerated 
growth of AYUSH system. Further so me form of mechanism like incentivisation, mandatory 
service etc to ensure that doctors consider serving in rural areas villages etc as an opportunity to 
explore fresh vistas for Ayush Sector. 
 (Para 4.6.5 ibid) 
Action Taken  
1.26.1 AEP – III Section 
● NCH 
The provision has been made in the regulation for the pay - parity with other conventional system 
of medicine. 
Scheme Section 
Noted. 
Ayurveda Section 
● NIA 
The Institute is having excellent ayurvedic professionals of doctors and a paramedical staff for 
serving the general public in the regular manners that helps the beneficiaries of its medical 
services and health -care services in much satisfaction.  The services being provided by the 
Institute and its staff is received in good sense and appreciation by the beneficiaries. 

39 
 
● NEIAH 
Ministry may like to form a mechanism for incentivisation by ensuring prompt and timely 
promotions to all Ayush Practitioners. 
● NISR 
Point Noted. 
 
Siddha & Unani Section 
● NIS 
NIS will propose well -structured incentive schemes to encourage p erformance and service in 
rural areas, especially among young AYUSH professionals. Efforts will also be made to create 
enabling environments that motivate practitioners to contribute actively to the growth and 
visibility of the Siddha system across the country. 
● NIUM 
Pay parity of Ayush Allopathic doctors will help and will also act as an incentive. Carrier 
Advancement Schemes for National Institutes, including NIUM, Bangalore, may be 
implemented. Rural areas will benefit better by employing persons for the local population as 
DavaSaaz, Medical Officers, etc. 
NAM Section 
Under Ayushman Arogya Mandir (Ayush), there is provision of Team based incentives for HWC 
team, ASHA incentives and Performance linked Incentives for regular Medical Officer posted at 
Ayush D ispensaries acting as CHO. 12500 Ayushman Arogya Mandirs (Ayush) have been 
approved by upgrading Ayush dispensaries and Sub Health Centres for operationalization in the 
States/UTs. As reported by State/UT Governments, all 12500 AAM (Ayush) are functional. 
These AAM (Ayush) are mostly situated in rural areas. 
 
ONE NATION ONE HERB ONE STANDARD 
1.27 The Committee has taken into account the progress in the One Herb One Standard initiative 
and recommends the Ministry to further take the initiative at accelerated  rate to publish the 
standards under One Herbs One Standard by adopting and upgrading the available standard for 
Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy. The Committee is of the considered view that MoU signed 
and exchanged between IPC and the PCIM&H would certain ly provide and facilitate the one 
herb and one standard by setting unified standard for herbal medicine which would improve drug 
quality and safety across the country. 
(Para 4.7.1 ibid) 

40 
 
Action Taken  
1.27.1 PCIM&H, in collaboration with Indian Pharmacopoei a Commission (IPC) is continuously 
developing harmonized monographs under One Herb One Standard initiative. So far, 50 
monographs have been developed, and are in the process of publication.   
 
Medical Value Travel (MVT) 
1.28 The Committee notes that as a p art of Heal-in-India Campaign, the Government, keeping in 
view the fact that the cost of medical treatment in India is very low as compared to many 
developed countries, introduced of a special Visa category, Ayush Visa in 2023. The 
announcement was made at  the Global Ayush Investment and Innovation Summit (GAIIS) in 
Gandhinagar, Gujarat back in April 2022 to facilitate foreign nationals travels to India seeking 
Ayush Therapy. The Ministry of Ayush has also signed an MoU with the Tourism Ministry in this 
regard. Considering that the Ayush based healthcare and wellness economy is growing fast, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Ayush may develop state of the art Ayush healthcare 
and wellbeing centers at strategic tourist places in India. The Committ ee is of the view that MVT 
and Ayush Visa scheme is a great opportunity for growth of Ayush healthcare globally. The 
Committee further recommends that to make India as a medical tourism destination of the world, 
the Ministry may develop a one stop portal f or Heal in India and explore collaboration with 
private sector in healthcare and tourism industry in this regard. The Committee would also like 
to be appraised of the details of healthcare availed and the feedback of travelers in respect of 
1646 Ayush Visas issued between 1.1.2024 to 4.2.2025. 
(Para 4.10 ibid) 
Action Taken  
1.28.1  ADS Section 
The Ministry of Ayush organized the first Ayush -based Medical Value Travel (MVT) Summit 
2024 on 30.09.2024 in Mumbai for the Western region, themed ―Global Synergy in  Ayush: 
Transforming Health and Wellness through Medical Value Travel.‖ Subsequently, the second 
Ayush-based MVT Summit 2024 was held on 26.05.2025 in Chennai for the Southern region, 
with the theme ―Ayush Medical Value Travel – Promoting Wellness, Strengthening Global Ties.‖ 
These summits were aimed at strengthening India‘s position in the global Medical Value Travel 
(MVT) sector by promoting the integration of traditional Indian systems of medicine with 
modern healthcare frameworks. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) launched 
India‘s official portal for Medical Value Travel (MVT), titled the Advantage Healthcare India 
Portal, on 17th August 2023 during the G -20 Health Ministers‘ Meeting held in Gandhinagar, 
under India‘s G -20 Presidency. Thi s "one -stop" digital platform has been developed and is 
maintained by MoHFW with the objective of simplifying and enhancing the experience of 

41 
 
international medical travellers by providing credible, comprehensive, and streamlined 
information related to healthcare services in India. 
A total of 1,507 Ayush Visas (excluding Ayush Attendant Visas) have been availed by foreign 
nationals from various countries. Of these, 149 were issued as Regular Ayush Visas ( Annexure- 
I), while 1,358 were availed through the e -Ayush Visa facility ( Annexure- II). The details of e -
Ayush Visas, including treatment -wise, country -wise ( Annexure- III), and state -wise 
(Annexure- IV) distribution, are enclosed for reference.  Further, Ministry of Home Affairs has 
intimated that they do no t have any existing mechanism for collection of the sought information 
feedback from the travelers we have awaited Ayush Visa services in India. Hence NIL inputs 
may be treated on part of MHA in this context. 
 
1.29 The Committee has come across complaints regarding unregistered persons doing illegal 
medical practice in the name of Ayush and Ayush Doctors prescribing scheduled allopathic 
drugs maligning the reputation of Ayush healthcare in the country. The Committee believes there 
are provisions under the N ational Commission for Indian System of Medicine Act, the National 
Commission for Homeopathy Act and the Drugs and Cosmetics Act to check such malpractices. 
(Para 4.11 ibid) 
Action Taken  
1.29.1 As per Section 34 of NCISM Act, 2020, NCH Act, 2020 and NMC A ct, 2019, only 
practitioners registered in the respective medical systems are legally permitted to practice that 
system. These Acts clearly prohibit cross -practice and authorize the respective commissions to 
take action against unregistered or unauthorized  practitioners. Accordingly, NCISM and NCH 
can act against unregistered individuals practicing in the name of Ayush, similarly in cases where 
persons prescribing scheduled allopathic drugs without having the required recognized 
qualification fall under the jurisdiction of the NMC and NMC can take action as per section 34 of 
NMC Act, 2019. 
Ayush Vision @2047 
1.30 The Committee takes note of various components of Ayush Vision@2047 that interalia cover 
Strategic Areas (Research, Education & Capacity Building, Healthcare, Manufacturing& 
Services) opportunities (Governance & Innovation Governance, Global Value Chain) that would 
pave the way of maximum promotion and popularization of Ayush Sector in domestic market and 
global fora. The Committee is of the consider ed view that application of Ayush in Clinical 
healthcare, biochemistry, lifestyle illness would lead to standardization of Ayush research & 
medicine system and thus contributing to evidence based solution, thereby boosting the new 
paradigm shift in Ayush s phere. The Committee believes that identification of strategic course of 
action education & capacity building healthcare and manufacturing & services would go a long 
in furtherance of Ayush Sector. The Committee strongly visualize that a lot of opportuniti es are 

42 
 
awaiting in areas of governance of tariff lines, formulation and standardization & quality of 
Ayush Sector. Needless to say, quality certification and labs & healthcare NABL Accreditation of 
all labs would stamp Ayush Sector is the global market. 
(Para 5.1.2 ibid) 
 
 
Action Taken  
1.30.1 CDN Section 
CCRAS 
• In an effort to establish Ayurveda scientifically, the Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic 
Sciences (CCRAS) has undertaken a wide range of clinical, pre -clinical and public health 
research in itiatives. These include principles of AYUSH in clinical healthcare, biochemistry, 
chemo-pathology. Ayurveda has been incorporated in the Council's national health programmes 
and disease management. • CCRISC has taken the following steps to promote educati on and skill 
development in Ayurveda: 
1. Education- 
• For courses with Panchakarma/Senior School Theory Examination (Class 12) - Panchakarma 
Annual Course (PTC) 
• Arrangements - 
• Nasal Course in Panchakarma Therapy (CCPT) 
• Ashram Course on Marma Therapy (CCMC) 
• 2. Research- 
• Scholarship Programme for Graduate Students-Ayurveda Research (SPARK) 
• Ayurveda Research Training Scheme for University Students-PG-STAR (PG-STAR) 
• Facility-AYUVAS Fellowship Programme 
• Strawberry Stoker (Both Ayurveda and Non -Ayurveda) - CCRAS Post -Doctoral Fellowship 
Scheme (PDF) 
• 3. Skill Development: 

43 
 
• The Council has launched a training programme on "Ayurveda Research Methodology and 
Panel (ITEMS)" for the convenience of students pursuing MD/MS in Ayurveda 2. PRAYAS 
(Initiative to Promote Scientific Writing Skills in Ayurveda) 
Propagation of Ayurveda through National level Central Council for Research in Ayurveda 
Sciences (CCRAS) Information Education and Communication (AIEC) CAC is engaged in 
popular formulation of Ayurveda among the common people through electronic and print media 
in English, Hindi and regional Asiads in the form of advertisements by Ayurveda institutions 
including National level Council for Research in Ayurveda Sciences (CCRAS) Ayurveda Day, 
International Yoga Day, Doctors, Expo, various institutions and CCR outreach programmes like 
Major Caste Sub Plan (SCSP) Research Institutes, Council for Research in Ayurveda Sciences (T 
Franchisee), etc. are widely nurtured through its strong 30 regional portfolio in va rious states of 
the country. The Council website also contains hyperlinks with AIEC students and other 
important websites which provide information for wider review.  The Council has made available 
three Journals namely Journal of Research in Ayurvedic Scie nces (JDRAS), Journal of Research 
in Ayurvedic Sciences (JRAS), and Journal of Indian Medical Heritage (JIMH) electronically 
available free of cost in the public domain.  At the international level, CCRAS under Ministry of 
AYUSH has signed MoUs/Memorandum o f Intent/Agreement with various countries/foreign 
industries/institutions/organizations for promotion of Ayurveda through R&D and establishment 
of Academic Chairs.  Presently 4 MoUs are active in the field of R&D in various countries viz. 
Charite University & Lutheran Hospital Germany, NCNPR USA, TSMC Israel and OCC AIIMS . 
4 MoUs are active for establishment of Academic Chairs in various countries viz. Latvia, 
Mauritius, Mexico and Argentina, - - 1 MoU is in process of being signed with Research Fellows 
for Academic Institutions. Out of the 30 focused peripheral tests conducted by the Council, 16 
laboratories for clinical work and 5 laboratories for drug testing are certified by NABL standards, 
apart from this 12 institutes are certified by NABH, 16 institute s by FSSAI and 03 institutes by 
DTL. 
Drug Policy Section 
Taken into consideration. 08 Medical Laboratories and 02 Drug Testing Laboratories of CCRUM 
have been accredited by NABL at Entry Level. 16 Medical Laboratories of CCRAS have been 
accredited by NABL-M(EL)T and 05 Laboratories have been accredited by NABL for Testing & 
Calibration. 03 NABL Medical (Entry Level) Testing Laboratories {NABL M(EL)T Labs} of 
CCRH have been accredited and 01 Laboratory has been accredited by NABL under ISO/IEC 
17025:2017 for  Drug Standardization Laboratory. Central Sector Scheme — AYUSH Drugs 
Quality and Production Augmentation Scheme (AOGUSY) — has been implemented. The first 
component of the scheme is: 
Strengthening and upgradation of AYUSH pharmacies and drug testing labor atories to achieve 
higher standards. This component aims to bring Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homeopathy 
(ASU&H) pharmacies and Drug Testing Laboratories (DTL) up to World Health Organization 

44 
 
(WHO) Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) and National Accreditat ion Board for Testing and 
Calibration Laboratories (NABL) accreditation. 
ITRA 
For this purpose, ITRA has done NABL accreditation of laboratories and NABH accreditation of 
hospitals. 
  

45 
 
CHAPTER–II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY'S REPLIES 
 
Ayush Vision@2047 
2.1 The Committee, however, cautions the Ministry of Ayush against any dilly dallying approach 
and reluctance over its strategic & proactive course of action, otherwise achievement of se t 
targets under Vision Ayush@2047 would remain a distant dream. 
 (Para 5.1.3 ibid) 
Action Taken  
2.1.1 CDN Section 
Taken into consideration. 
 
 
  

46 
 
CHAPTER–III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
Staff strength of the Ministry 
3.1 The Committee observes that against the sanctioned strength of 78 posts in various levels a 
total of 53 officers are in -position thereby there is a vacan cy in 25 posts, especially at middle 
and lower level, which must be hampering the operational efficiency of the Ministry. The 
Committee, therefore, desires that recruitment process should be expedited to fill up the vacant 
posts at the earliest for efficient working of the Ministry. 
 (Para 1.4.1 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.1.1 Establishment – II Section 
It is informed that Officers/Officials from the Level of Assistant Section Officer to Secretary in 
the Ministry are posted by DoPT. The recruitment process in this  regard is carried out by 
SSC/UPSC etc. At present, the sanctioned strength of CSCS cadre in the Ministry  is to be 
clarified by DoPT for further course of action. The Ministry is actively taking up the matter with 
DoPT for filling up of the vacant positions in the Ministry. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.1.2 The Committee notes that the appointment of officers/officials from the Level of 
Assistant Section Officer to Secretary in the Ministry is being done by DoPT and the 
recruitment process is carried out by SSC/UPSC. Given that the sanctioned strength staff is 
short of a vacancy of 25 posts which must have been affecting the operati onal efficiency of 
the Ministry, the Committee, therefore, reiterates that the Ministry of Ayush must take up 
the matter with DoPT to fill up the vacant posts, the sooner the better. 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION  
3.2 The Committee takes note of the variations between projected demand and allocated BE and 
the budget utilization trend of the Ministry of Ayush. Given the Ministry‟s larger vision  to 
position Ayush systems as a preferred system of attaining a healthy India the Committee expects 
the Ministry to fully utilize the RE in actual expenditure and make necessary plans/policies that 
should justify for getting a higher share of the Projected  Demand in the forth -coming financial 
years. 
(Para 2.1.2 ibid) 

47 
 
 
Action  Taken 
3.2.1  
Budget Section 
 
The recommendation of the committee has been noted for future compliance. Further, the 
allocation and utilization status of Ministry of Ayush for the year 2024-25 is as under :- 
 
(Rs. In Crore) 
BE RE AE % of AE w.r.t RE 
3712.49 3497.64 3468.64 99.17% 
 
 
3.3 The Committee observes that there is a recurrent occurrence of reduction of budget 
allocation at RE stage. The Committee recommends that the Ministry make necessary to oversee 
the execution and implementation of plans as per Annual Action Plan and Output/Outcome 
Framework each year. The Committee suggests that an appropriate number of staff should be 
present to meet the needs of the Govt. work, thereby meeting the short-term goals and long-term 
vision of the Ministry. 
(Para 2.3 ibid) 
Action Taken  
3.3.1 AEP – III Section 
 NCH 
The Commission noted the suggestion and has decided for regular monitoring for the timely 
execution and implementation with completion as per the annual action plan. 
 
L&P Section (PCIM&H) 
 Budget will be optimally utilized in quarterly target based.  
 Further, Realignment, restructuring and framing of RRs of posts of reestablished 
PCIM&H (as subordinate office) is under progress. 
Siddha & Unani Section 
 CCRS 
 As far as CCRS is concerned, there is no reduction of budget at the RE stage. Further, 
there is an absolute need for revival of abolished posts and the creation of new posts of 
CCRS.  
 A comprehensive proposal for the creation / reviva l / up gradation of posts are under 
submission to the Ministry to attain the short -term goal as well as long -term vision of the 
Ministry of Ayush. 
 
 NIS 

48 
 
NIS is closely monitoring the implementation of activities in line with the Annual Action Plan 
and Outpu t/Outcome Framework to ensure effective fund utilisation. Measures are also being 
taken to address staff shortages through timely recruitment to support both immediate and long -
term institutional objectives. 
 
 CCRUM 
Noted. 
 
 NIUM 
The institute budget shows a steady increase from the year 2023-24. The increment is as expected 
by the committee (10%) from the year 2023-24 to 2025-26.  
 
Ayurveda Section 
 ITRA 
ITRA is currently recruiting contractual staff and will recruit further staff time to time to meet the 
needs of the Govt. work, thereby meeting the short -term goals and long -term vision of the 
Ministry. 
 
 CCRAS 
No Shortall in utilization of funds. 
 
 AIIA 
In comparison to BE of last three FY, the RE has increased and it has been fully utilized by AIIA.   
(Rs. In Crore) 
FY BE RE 
2022-23 227.10 231.10 
2023-24 235.15 280.18 
2024-25 227.20 243.00 
 
 NIA 
The Institute is scrupulously maintaining and undertaking all its projected plans for proper 
execution and implementation and there is no difficulty in these activities. 
 
 NEIAH 
Effort  is being made by the Institute to strengthening implementation through Annual Action 
Plan framework to emphasizing the execution in accordance with the Annual Action Plan  
framework to ensure alignment that activities are strategically planned and outcomes are 
measurable facilitating  better monitoring and evaluation 
 
 NEIAFMR 
Strategies may be prepared to meet up the requirement. 

49 
 
 
 NISR 
Point Noted. 
 
 RAV 
No shortfall in utilization.  
 
IEC Section 
The Observation of the committee is noted. 
 
Drug Policy Section 
Noted 
 
NMPB Section 
Lack of receipt of eligible  project proposals, pending UC's and continuous changes in fund flow 
mechanism during last 2 years resulting to reduction of budget allocation at RE stage.  
  
However, recommendation Noted. 
 
Homoeopathy Section 
The recommendation of the committee is noted. NIH and CCRH are making efforts to comply 
with the short-term goals and long-term vision of the Ministry. 
 
NAM Section 
Under NAM, Ministry is approving the State Annual Action Plans (SAA Ps) as received from 
States/UTs for implementation of different activities/programmes within the provision of NAM 
guidelines and also monitoring the progress of the activities as per existing provisions of 
output/outcome indicators of NAM guideline by obta ining physical & financial progress as well 
as different types of reports time to time. In addition to it, time to time different regional review 
meetings and field visits are also being conducted to monitor the progress of implementation of 
activities at the ground level.  With regard to effective implementation of NAM Scheme, the 
State/UT Governments have been requested time to time for strengthening of administrative 
setup with appropriate manpower at the level of State headquarter as well as District lev el. It is 
also pertinent to mention here that there is a dedicated provision under NAM Guideline for 
support of SPMU/DPMU to assist States/UT Governments for smooth & effective 
implementation of NAM Scheme and they have been supported for the same as per t he proposals 
received in SAAPs.  Ministry of Ayush has recently issued Indian Public Health Standard (IPHS) 
guidelines for Ayush hospitals and Ayushman Arogya Mandir (Ayush) to all States/UTs and 
requested for compliance of the same to maintain the standar d of Infrastructure &Human 
Resource in the Ayush health facilities for its better functioning and quality services.  As far as 
Ministry is concerned, a Central Programme Management Unit is also functioning having 
qualified and skilled manpower of different nature like Programme Manager, Finance Manager, 

50 
 
Account Manager, HMIS Manager, data assistant, Domain Experts etc. for doing the needful 
coordination with officials of the States/UTs including SPMU/DPMU for effective 
implementation of the Scheme. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.3.2 The Committee observes that many of the Action Taken Replies largely reflects the  
essence of   the Committee‟s original recommendations without providing concrete 
implementation strategies, specific timelines, or achievement of measura ble targets. While 
the recognition of issues such as staffing shortages and budgetary adjustments is just noted 
by the Ministry with out entailing concrete action taken or the absence of detailed action 
plans which severely undermines effective monitoring. The Committee, therefore, reiterates 
that the Ministry must ensure submission of comprehensive implementation frameworks, 
clearly outlining timelines, recruitment strategies, and monitoring mechanisms aligned with 
the Annual Action Plan and Output/Outcome Framework. Future submissions should 
reflect substantive progress and accountability rather than general assurances or 
reiteration of the recommendations made by the Committee. The Ministry has just 
mentioned that time to time different regional review mee tings and field visits are being 
conducted to monitor the progress of implementation of activities under NAM at the 
ground level, however no substantive fact is furnished in compliance with the Committee‟s 
recommendations. While the Committee reposes its f aith in the Ministry, therefore, the 
Committee expects the Ministry to furnish the details of actual development activities as 
envisaged under NAM with absolute transparency. The Committee, herefore recommends 
that the Ministry provide comprehensive measur able implementation statistics going 
forward. 
 
3.4 The Committee observes that the projected demand of the Ministry for the year 2025 -26 is 
Rs. 5408.48 crore against which an amount of Rs. 3992.90 crore has been allocated in BE 2025 -
26 thus there is a shor tfall of Rs. 1415.58 crore. The Committee expresses its concern that 
reduced budgetary allocation to the Ministry of Ayush in comparison to the projected demand 
would have an adverse impact on the implementation of originally conceived 
projects/schemes/programmes. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry of Ayush 
to approach the Ministry of Finance to seek higher budgetary allocation at the supplementary 
demand stage to ensure that no undertaken project/scheme gets suffered for want of requisite 
fund.                    (Para 2.3.1 ibid) 
 
Action Taken  
3.4.1 Budget Section  
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. 
 

51 
 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.4.2 The Committee notes that the Ministry was able to utilize 99.17% of the BE for t he 
year 2024-25, however, the Committee observes that there has been significant gap/shortfall 
of Rs. 1414.16 crores in BE 2025 -26 between Projected Demand and Allocated fund to the 
Ministry. The Committee expresses concern that the Ministry of Finance is either not 
allocating adequate budget to the Ministry of Ayush or the proposals placed  by the 
Ministry of Ayush before the Ministry of Finance for higher allocation is not sufficiently 
convincing. Further, such variations recurring oftentimes affect the ac hievement of set 
targets in cherished schemes of the Ministry  of Ayush . The Committee, therefore, desires 
that the Ministry of Finance should take cognizance of such financial gap between 
Projected Demand and Allocated fund, and look into the matter with d ue consideration at 
RE stage. The Committee reiterates that reduced budgetary allocation to the Ministry of 
Ayush, in comparison to the projected demand, would have an adverse impact on the 
implementation of originally conceived projects/schemes/programmes . The Committee, 
therefore, again recommends the Ministry of Ayush to approach the Ministry of Finance to 
seek higher budgetary allocation at the supplementary demand stage to ensure that no 
undertaken project/scheme gets suffered for want of requisite fund.  
 
3.5 The Committee in its 108th Report and 128th Report has recommended allocation of 5% and 
10% of total health budget, yet the budget allocation is been slowly reduced from year 2023 -24, 
2024-25 and 2025 -26 in comparison to that of Dept. of Health an d Family Welfare. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to place strong proposals before the Ministry of Finance 
backed by visionary schemes/programmes that would warrant a higher budgetary allocation. 
The Committee expects the Ministry to reach the 10% mark in the ensuing financial years.  
                   (Para 2.4.1 ibid) 
Action Taken  
3.5.1 Budget Section 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. 
 
Further Recommendation  
3.5.2 The Committee expresses deep concern that despite the Committee's considered 
recommendation for allocation of atleast 10% of total health budget to the Ministry of 
Ayush, however, the actual budget allocation to the Ministry has not been increased 
adequately. The Ministry has just furnished, in its Action  Taken Note, that 
recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance  which reflects the 
reluctant approach of the Ministry of Ayush . The Committee expects that the Ministry 
would furnish the response of the Ministry of Finance to the proposal of  the Ministry of 
Ayush for higher budgetary allocation.  
 
 

52 
 
 
OUTPUT-OUTCOME MONITORING FRAMEWORK (2025-26) 
 
3.6 The Committee takes notes of the various details of Output -Outcome Framework of the 
schemes of Ministry of Ayush to be executed during 2025 -26. The Committee recommends the 
Ministry of Ayush to have resilient and alert mode of monitoring mechanism to oversee the 
execution of the Schemes/Projects to ensure that the physical targets as set in the Output -
Outcome Framework is achieved without time and cost overruns. The Committee, in this regard, 
recommends the Ministry to undertake midterm performance evaluation of each scheme and 
projects through Cost Benefit Analysis, targets set vs targets achieved. The ministry may publish 
such analysis in public d omain to increase the faith of public in the Ministry‟s on ground 
performance. The Committee strongly believes that the Output -Outcome Framework will enrich 
the enabling environment of the Ministry of Ayush and bring forth the catalytic changes in 
providing Ayurvedic and Homeopathic mode of treatment to all. 
(Para 2.6.1 ibid) 
 
 
Action Taken 
3.6.1 Ministry  of Ayush is actively monitoring the physical progress of the CS/CSS Schemes of  
Ministry of Ayush and updating the same on the OOMF dashboard  on quarterly basis. Further, 
DMEO NITI Aayog also  reviews the  OOMF progress  and expenditure 
annually Ministry of Ayush as also  initiated the third party Evaluation process  of 
Central Sector Schemes of the Ministry. In addition, there are various Committees of the Centr al 
sector schemes such as Project Approval Committee who regularly monitors the functioning and 
performance of the scheme. 
 
Further Recommendation  
3.6.2 The Committee notes the Ministry‟s response regarding ongoing monitoring 
mechanisms and third -party ev aluations mechanism to oversee the execution of the 
Schemes/Projects to ensure that the physical targets as set in the Output -Outcome 
Framework is achieved without time and cost overruns . However, the Committee observes 
that the Action Taken Reply , as furnished by the Ministry of Ayush , does not sufficiently 
address the Committee‟s specific recommendation in its letter and spirit for want of  
assurance of conducting structured midterm performance evaluations , incorporating cost-
benefit analysis and a compar ative assessment of targets achieved against targets set. 
Additionally, no action taken has been reflected in regard to the publication of such 
evaluations in the public domain to promote transparency and public confidence. The 
Committee, therefore, reiter ates the need for comprehensive mid -term evaluations, 
inclusion of financial efficiency metrics, and proactive disclosure of outcomes to ensure 
timely course correction and enhanced accountability to bring forth the catalytic changes in 
providing Ayurvedic and Homeopathic mode of treatment to all. 
 

53 
 
3.7 The Committee notes the Ministry aims to enhance AYUSH services, particularly in 
underserved and remote areas, but lacks the resources to do so effectively. The need to establish 
integrated AYUSH hospitals in  many districts has a high financial requirement. The Committee 
also observes that the Ministry is not fully utilizing the funds allocated to it. It's crucial to 
optimize resource utilization by implementing strategies that improve the efficiency and 
effectiveness of existing programs, focusing on high -impact interventions in priority areas, and 
establishing robust tracking systems to monitor spending and identify the most effective resource 
allocation. Simultaneously, a strategic approach to infrastructure  expansion is necessary, 
prioritizing the establishment of integrated AYUSH hospitals in underserved districts through a 
phased approach that aligns with available resources, while also exploring cost -effective models 
for hospital establishment and operation. 
(Para 2.7.1 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.7.1 NAM Section 
Public Health being a State Subject, the primary responsibility to bridge infrastructure gaps with 
respect to Ayush system in the country including rural and underserved regions  lies with the 
respective State/UT Governments. However, under National Ayush Mission (NAM) there is 
provision for establishment of integrated Ayush hospitals and State/UT Governments may project 
their demand as per the felt need through State Annual Action Plans (SAAPs) to cover r ural and 
underserved regions of the country. 
Further, the monthly/quarterly reports on various parameters are also being obtained from the 
States/UTs to access the physical/ financial progress of different approved activities of NAM. 
Regional Review Meetin gs, Field visits and One to one meetings have also been conducted to 
analyze the progress of NAM scheme and to facilitate State/UT for effective implementation of 
the activities in the field.  
 
Further Recommendation  
 
3.7.2 The Committee has been apprised  by the Ministry that Public Health, being a State 
Subject, the primary responsibility to bridge infrastructure gaps with respect to Ayush 
system in the country, including rural and underserved regions,  lies with the respective 
State/UT Governments.  The Committee finds the response of the Ministry evasive  which 
appears that the Ministry is shrugging of its responsibi lity. The Committee understands 
that the Ministry has a goal to enhance AYUSH services, particularly, in underserved and 
remote areas, but Sta tes/UTs lacks the requisite resources to do so, effectively. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should undertake steps for 
encouraging States/UTs to propose under State Annual Action Plans (SAAP) for 
establishment of integrated Ayush Ho spitals in backward regions of the Country 
specifically districts with low human development index in the State of Orissa, Jharkhand, 
Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Bihar (particularly in Koshi/Simanchal Region covering 
Purnia, Kathiar, Saharsa, Madipura, F orbesganj, Araria, Kishanganj). The Committee, 

54 
 
therefore, desires that the Ministry take a systematic, analytical approach in assessing 
parameters and identification of sites in underserved districts for establishing of Ayush 
Medical College and Hospital i n a time bound manner to effectively implement its 
cherished goals of placing AYUSH system of healthcare in the remotest parts of the 
country, even if it needs handholding the states in creating SAAPs in regard to AYUSH. 
 
3.8 The National Ayush Mission (NA M), being a centrally sponsored scheme where Center and 
States have fund share like 60% and 40%. The Committee was apprised that some States/ UTs 
express their inability to contribute their share. Due to the resource crunch, the Mission is not 
effective in  achieving goals. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to provide 
financial assistance schemes for on -boarding the States/UTs on NAM. The Ministry may also 
explore the possibility with the MoF to change the contribution ratio of the Centre and  State to 
70:30 for encouraging the states to get onboard NAM.  
(Para 2.7.2 ibid) 
Action Taken  
3.8.1 NAM Section 
As far as contribution ratio of the Center and State (70:30) is concerned, it falls under the 
purview of MoF as it is based on overall scheme structure approved for Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes across Central Government Ministries/Department. 
 
Further Recommendation  
3.8.2 The Committee understands that the contribution ratio of Centre and State in a 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme falls under the pur view of the Ministry of Finance. The 
Ministry of Ayush may take the matter of modification in existing ratio of 60% and 40% to 
70% and 30%  of Centre and State , so that economically weaker States may become part 
and parcel of the National Ayush Mission (NAM ). Since, the implementation of the NAM 
Scheme is mandated under Ministry of Ayush, it is imperative on the part of the Ministry of 
Ayush that no stone is left unturned by the Ministry in convincing a change in the 
contribution ratio. The Committee, strong ly recommends the Ministry of Ayush to intiate 
communication with Ministry of Finance for increased allocation and the change in the 
contribution ratio to achieve cherished objective of the scheme. The Committee further 
recommends the Ministry to explore t he possibility of providing financial assistance and 
other forms of incentives so as to bring onboard the States/UTs that are unable to 
contribute their share into NAM scheme. 
 
 

55 
 
MINISTRY‟S PROPOSAL TO 15TH FINANCE COMMISSION 
 
3.9 The 15th Finance Commissio n is till the 31.3.2026. The Committee observes that the M/o 
Ayush must strive hard to integrate Ayush into mainstream healthcare. Besides providing Ayush 
services through PHCs, CHCs and DHs, significant efforts are required in quality improvement, 
research and regulatory framework in Ayush healthcare, global collaboration, AYUSH market 
expansion, sustainable development of medicinal plants etc. All this would not be possible 
without adequate development of skilled Health Human Resource in the Ayush sector.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should come up with mega schemes in 
mission mode. The Committee recommends that the Ministry take proactive steps for 
correspondence with 16th Finance Commission and accordingly chalk out plan for ade quate 
fund allocation and timely release of the same for the five years thence for accelerated growth of 
AYUSH. 
(Para 2.7.3 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.9.1  
Budget Section 
A meeting with 16 th Finance Commission was held on 11 th June, 2025 at 11:00 AM for 
Strengthening Ayush for National Health. A team led by Hon‘ble Minister of State (I/C) of 
Ministry of Ayushrepresented Ministry of Ayush.  
 IC Section 
The Central Sector Scheme for Promotion of International Co -operation in Ayush aims to 
promote and strengthen awareness and interest in Ayush Systems of Medicine at the international 
level. The scheme has specific objectives to facilitate the international promotion, development, 
and recognition of Ayurveda, Yoga, Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, Sowa -Rigpa, and 
Homoeopathy. The overarching goals include fostering interaction among stakeholders, 
supporting the international exchange of experts and information, boosting global trade in Ayush 
products and services, and promoting academics and research through the establishment of Ayush 
Academic Chairs in foreign countries. 
L&P Section (PCIM&H) 
● In a significant global collaboration aimed at advancing the field of Traditional Medicine, 
PCIM&H and the Food and Drug Authority of the Republic of Indonesia entered into a 
MoU on ' Cooperation in the field of Traditional Medicine (TM) Quality Assurance' 
during the State visit of the Hon‘ble President of Indonesia to India (23 rd -26th January, 
2025).  

56 
 
● The MoU has been exchanged in the presence of Hon‘ble Prime Minister of India and 
Hon‘ble President of Indonesia by the Minister of External Affairs, Government of India 
and Minister of External Affairs, Government of Indonesia. 
● Also, PCIM&H imparted the International Training Programme for the officials of 
Philippine Institute of Traditi onal and Alternative Health Care (PITAHC) and Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) Philippines during 25th-29th November, 2024. 
Ayurveda Section 
● ITRA 
ITRA has started short term courses to develop skilled Health Human Resource in the Ayush 
sector. (Table 4 as detailed below :-) 
Executive Diploma Courses (One year duration): 
1 Executive Diploma in Yoga Therapy (E.D.Y.T.)  
2 Executive Diploma in Nature Cure (E.D.N.C)  
3 Executive Diploma in Creative Arts Therapy (E.D.C.A.T.) 
4 Executive Diploma in Ayurvedic Nutrition and Dietetics (E.D.A.N.D.) 
5 Executive Diploma in Wellness and Rehabilitation (E.D.W.R.) 
6 Executive Diploma in Mental health and Psychotherapy (E.D.M.H.P.) 
Post Graduate Diploma (One year duration): 
7 Post Graduate Diploma in Yoga Education (P.G.D.Y.Ed.) 
8 Post Graduate Diploma in Natural Therapeutics (P.G.D.N.T.) 
9 Post Graduate Diploma in Creative Arts Therapy (P.G.D.C.A.T.) 
10 Post Graduate Diploma in Ayurveda Aahara (P.G.D.A.A.) 
Short term courses (200 hrs. duration) 
11 Foundation Course in Yoga Science and Wellness (F.C.Y.Sc.W.) 
12 Foundation Course in Yoga Education and Therapy Assistant (F.C.Y.Ed.T.A.)  
13 Foundation Course in Ayurveda and Lifestyle Management (F.C.A.L.M.)  
14 Foundation Course on Dietetics in Ayurveda (F.C.D.A) 
15 Foundation Course in Yoga and Mental Wellness (F.C.Y.M.W) 
16 Foundation Course in Spiritual Wellness and Yoga (F.C.S.W.Y.) 
17 Foundation Course in Nature cure (F.C.N.C)  
18 Foundation Course on Creative Arts and Health (F.C.C.A.H) 
ITRA is also working to develop Ayurveda related contents for iGOTKarmayogi. 
 CCRAS 
● For encouraging the conduct and publication of quality research activities in Ayush 
Academic institutions, CCRAS is executing the scholarship and training programs for 
various levels like undergraduates, postgraduates, PhD and post-doctoral research. 
● CCRAS is already conducting large-scale population-based projects like ―Anemia control 
among adolescent girls through Ayurveda interventions in the five districts under Mission 
Utkarsh‖ with a total cost of Rs 24,95,88,650/- funded equally by MoA and MWCD. The 
project is committed to benefiting more than 77000 adolescent girls in five Mission 

57 
 
Utkarsh districts across India by enhancing the nutritional status to improve the state of 
anaemia prevalence in the target population. 
AIIA 
All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA) is an autonomous institution under the Ministry of Ayush, 
Govt of India and affiliated to Delhi University for academic purposes. AIIA is providing 
following services and activities to the communities of the country: 
1. Healthcare Services: AIIA serving as a tertiary care hospital (200 beds in New Delhi and 250 
beds in Goa), offering OPD and IPD services. It has provided holistic healthcare to millions, 
integrating Ayurvedic princi ples with modern diagnostics and treatment. Since inception, the 
institute has provided holistic health care to more than 27 lakh patients on OPD basis and nearly 
14,300 patients on IPD basis through 45 specialized OPDs on strength areas of Ayurveda. For 
excellence in health care services, AIIA Hospital is accredited with NABH consecutively for 3 
term. 
2. Research and Innovation: AIIA is committed to advancing Ayurvedic research and has 
collaborated with national and international institutes. It has establi shed labs for drug testing, 
pharmacology, informatics and molecular biology, facilitating cutting-edge research.  
3. Education and Training: AIIA offers postgraduate and PhD programs, skilling courses, and 
entrepreneurship initiatives, fostering interdisciplinary learning and human resource development 
in Ayurveda. Nearly 617 and 144 scholars were offered post graduate and PhD degrees 
respectively across 12 specialties in Delhi campus. AIIA Goa enrolled 300 students for under 
graduation program and recently  started PG programs in 5 subjects. Nearly 301 skilled in 
Ayurveda therapy etc have been awarded and about 300 are enrolled under DAKSHYA skill 
training programs. 
4. Public Health Initiatives: AIIA has undertaken six public health projects for benefitting the 
community at large in Delhi NCR region on Management of musculo -skeletal pain through 
Ayurvedic intervention; Promotion of physical and mental health in elderly population; Ayurveda 
care for healthy progeny; Promotion of Ayurvedic medicine &Rasayana th erapy for management 
of Latent tuberculosis etc.  
5. Global Recognition and Collaboration: AIIA has garnered international acclaim, hosting 
dignitaries like the Director -General of the World Health Organization. It has signed numerous 
82 MOUs (18 international) with premier institutions worldwide, fostering collaborative research 
and exchange programs.  
6. Infrastructure Development: AIIA is expanding its infrastructure spanning over 22 acres, with 
ongoing construction projects in three phases (first phase completed) including hospital, Covid 
Centre, residential quarters, auditoriums, sports complex, and hostels to accommodate growing 
demands and public health.  

58 
 
7. Extension Services: AIIA has extended its services through satellite centre at Goa and 
collaborations with institutions across India, ensuring broader access to holistic Ayurvedic 
healthcare at Kevadia, Gujarat, Supreme Court of India, National Cancer Institute, Indian 
Institute of Technology-Delhi and Safdarjung Hospital etc.  
8. Academic Excellen ce: AIIA's commitment to academic excellence is recognized through its 
NAAC accreditation obtaining A++ and contributing to the advancement of Ayurvedic 
knowledge in more than 1600 publication in esteemed journals. 
9. Service excellence: AIIA is accredited  with ISO 9001:2015 Certification for its service 
excellence. 
NIA 
As far as NIA is concerned, it is organizing training programs in various skilled health -care 
resources and producing skilled personnel for utilization of their services in the organization 
NEIAH 
The Institute has actively been integrating AYUSH  with modern medicines through various 
research initiatives and institutional collaborations. Here are some notable development on 
research activities: 
Ongoing Research Project entitle: The title of t he project is  ―Promoting the Ayurveda 
interventions for Iron Deficiency Anemia (IDA) among tribal females (18 to 45 year of age)  in 
Mawpat and Mylliem Block of East Khasi Hills district of Meghalaya under component of 
AyurswasthyaYojana. 
An ongoing project of NEIAH collaborating with Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy 
(CCRH) for a Research project in the Implementation of Homoeopathy for Menstrual Health of 
Adolescent School Going Girl‘s - A Public Health Research Program at East Khasi Hill District , 
Meghalaya. 
 Moreover, North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homeopathy, (NEIAH) Shillong has 
integrated modern practices in physiotherapy, dentistry and dietary etc. in its hospital to provide a 
comprehensive health care for patients' benefit.  
Moreover, laboratory and radiology procedures are routinely conducted to supplement the 
Ayurvedic diagnosis of patients.  
NEIAH has also ensured high quality and affordable Ayush facilities through its two hospitals 
and a peripheral OPD at Smit Village. 
NEIAFMR 

59 
 
Starting of Panchakarma Technician Course and Post Graduate Diploma in Yoga along with the 
already ongoing BAMS Course at NEIAFMR will help in achieving adequate development of 
skilled Health Human Resource in the Ayush sector especially in NER. 
NISR 
Point to be noted. 
Siddha & Unani Section 
 CCRS 
The following initiatives are being taken by CCRS for quality improvement, research and 
regulatory framework in Ayush healthcare, global collaboration, Ayush market expansion, 
sustainable development of medicinal plants:  
          Quality improvement, research & regulatory framework in Ayush healthcare 
● R&D initiatives of conducting clinical/ pre -clinical/ standardization/ literary/ medicinal 
plants research studies for testing and validation of efficacy and safety of Siddha 
medicines. Fostering innovation and research in Ayush to enhance its scientific validity 
and global acceptance. 
● Clinical Trials and Validation by conducting rigorous clinical trials to validate the 
efficacy and safety of Siddha treatments. 
● Ensuring consistent quality of raw materials and standardization of Siddha Classical 
formulations. 
● Development of new formulations/dosage forms with creating new, cost -effective 
formulations/dosage forms using modern technologies. 
● Standardization and Quality Con trol for establishing standardized protocols for Ayush 
medicines and therapies to ensure consistency and quality. 
● Collaborating with industry, academia and government to share resources, expertise, and 
costs as Public-Private Partnerships. 
● CCRS have set-up the incubatory cell namelyAcademia -industry Research Incubation for 
Value-chain Up -gradation (ARIVU) to promote innovation and entrepreneurship by 
translating novel ideas and innovation in various disciplines of Siddha Research, into 
products, processes and services for commercial exploitation and the benefit of society 
 Global collaboration: 
● WHO Benchmark documents for Practice and training in Siddha have been submitted to 
WHO 

60 
 
● Translation of Siddha literatures into Indian / Foreign languages 
● Establishment of Siddha Chairs, to start with in Countries like Sri Lanka, Singapore, 
Malaysia & Mauritius 
● Promoting Siddha medicines as one of the globally recognized traditional medicine 
system as envisioned by Government of India capitalizing on the increasing deman d for 
alternative and complementary medicine 
Ayush market expansion: 
          Expansion of GMP certified pharmacy of CCRS for provision of quality and cost -effective 
Siddha medicine across the nation and for the promotion of Siddha herbal medicines throug h e-
commerce platforms and incentivize exports through GMP certified pharmacy of CCRS for 
global reach.  
 Sustainable development of medicinal plants: 
          Sustainability of raw materials through cultivation of feasible raw materials through 
Siddha Medicinal Plants Garden, Mettur Dam, CCRS and sourcing of raw materials locally to 
reduce procurement costs. More focus will be given for Siddha System of Medicine towards 
global collaboration and Ayush market expansion into mainstream healthcare in Internat ional 
arena. 
NIS 
NIS will work towards developing mission -mode proposals focused on quality care, skilled 
workforce, research, and market growth in AYUSH. 
 CCRUM 
Noted. 
NIUM 
The institute may be opted for the skill development of the personnel dealing with  the source 
materials of the Unani drugs. 
Drug Policy Section 
Noted. Necessary steps are being taken at evaluation stage of received proposals to utilize the 
funds appropriately in timely manner. 
NMPB Section 
Recommendation Noted.  
Homoeopathy Section 

61 
 
The recommendation of the committee is noted. 
 NAM Section 
Mid Term Evaluation by third party of different Centrally Sponsored Schemes including NAM is 
being undertaken by NITI Aayog. On the basis of recommendation of Mid Term Evaluation, 
proposal of continuat ion of NAM scheme will be taken up with Department of Expenditure, 
Government of India as flagship scheme for 16 th Finance Commission cycle along with adequate 
fund allocation for accelerated growth of Ayush. 
 
Further Recommendation  
 
3.9.2 The Committee commends the Ministry of AYUSH for its proactive engagement with 
the 16th Finance Commission and the significant strides made by various constituent bodies 
in advancing AYUSH integration into mainstream healthcare. Notable  achievements 
include international  collaborations such as the MoU with Indonesia on Traditional 
Medicine quality assurance, large -scale research initiatives addressing public health 
concerns like anemia, Academia -industry Research Incubation for Value Up -gradation by 
CCRS and capacity -building efforts through international training programs. These 
initiatives reflect a strong commitment to enhancing AYUSH‟s role in health promotion, 
research, and global outreach. The Committee, however, recommends that the Ministry 
expedite the finalization  and implementation of a comprehensive mission -mode scheme, 
ensuring timely and adequate fund allocation under the 16th Finance Commission to 
sustain and accelerate AYUSH‟s growth trajectory over the coming five years. Further, the 
Committee observes that some of the institutes under AYUSH has just informed “noted” in 
their ATN which is against the Parliamentary etiquettes and dignity. The Committee 
expects all the bodies under AYUSH to be equally and proactively involved in the 
furtherment of the objectives of Ayush systems and the Ministry of Ayush must ensure that 
all autonomous bodies and research councils play its pivotal role in providing exceptional 
ayush service to the country. 
 
NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANTS BOARD 
3.10 The Committee, in view of the cruci al role played by the medicinal plants in the overall 
growth of the Ayush Sector, recommends the Ministry to explore the possibility of setting up 
Special Export Zones and more Regional Centers to optimize the strategic reach of the Ayush 
Systems. The Comm ittee further recommends that the NMPB may focus more on R&D in all 
aspects of medicinal plants, development of Agro -techniques, post-harvest management, storage 
and processing, developing molecular characterization tools etc. 
(Para 3.2.7 ibid) 
Action Taken  
3.10.1 NMPB Section 
R&D section has already been covered their aspects for funding the projects. In the part a number 
of the projects were funded and also ongoing. 

62 
 
Further Recommendation  
3.10.2 The Committee is not satisfied with the response of the Mi nistry in regard to its 
recommendation for optimizing the strategic reach of the Ayush System. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterates that the Ministry should explore the possibility of setting up of Special 
Export Zones and more Regional Centers to optimize  the strategic reach of the Ayush 
Systems. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to promote medicinal plant 
cultivation and invest in R&D to demonstrate the effectiveness of Ayush Systems to 
potentially attracting more funding and support . In this reg ard, NMPB is expected to 
emphasise on R&D on medicinal plants, development of Agro -technologies, post -harvest 
management for expanding the horizon of Ayush System in underserved region as well as 
global market. The Ministry of Ayush must direct - NMPB manag ement to strive in this 
direction. 
3.11 The Committee feels that the role of NMPB in overall growth of Ayush market and economic 
development is very crucial. The Committee therefore recommends the NMPB to formulate 
innovative schemes to attract the cultiva tors and entrepreneurs in the medicinal plants industry 
and devise ways to enhance the livelihood systems based on medicinal plants for farmers, 
collectors and other stakeholders. 
 (Para 3.2.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.11.1 NMPB Section 
National Medicinal Plants Board, Ministry of AYUSH also supports projects under integrated component 
namely ―Forward and backward linkage in supply chain of medicinal plants in the existing   Central Sector 
Scheme on Conservation, Development and Sustainable Management of Medici nal Plants to encourage 
the farmers by providing the facilities like nursery to raise the quality planting material/seeds, 
infrastructure for post -harvest management units (storage, drying sheds), value addition, marketing, 
sensitization  programs for skil l development, certification for quality raw material in a synergistic 
manner. Besides this, NMPB supports establishment of nurseries to raise the planting material among the 
farmers. NMPB also supports project for IEC activities to promote the medicinal plants sector. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.11.2 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the National Medicinal Plants Board 
(NMPB) in supporting farmers and stakeholders through infrastructure, skill development, 
and quality certification. However, to fully realize the potential of the medicinal plants 
sector as a catalyst of economic growth and livelihood enhancement, the Committee 
recommends that NMPB further strengthen its initiatives by promoting entrepreneurship 
and innovation. This includes launching in cubation programs, facilitating market access 
through digital platforms, and piloting cluster -based and community -owned models. 
Special focus should be given to tribal and marginalized communities to integrate 
traditional knowledge into formal value chains . Additionally, a robust monitoring and 
evaluation framework should be established to assess the impact of these initiatives, 

63 
 
ensuring sustainable and inclusive growth of all stakeholders. The Committee firmly 
believes that effective implementation of Cent ral Sector Scheme in Conservation, 
Development and Sustainable Management of Medicinal Plants would go a long way in 
promoting medicinal plant sector. Therefore, NMPB must formulate innovative schemes so 
that farmers engaged in cultivation of medicinal pla nts would enhance their livelihood 
system.  
 
PHARMACOPOEIA COMMISSION FOR INDIAN MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY 
3.12 The Committee strongly recommends the consolidation of all AYUSH drug -related 
standard-setting processes under a single authoritative body viz. a n independent drug controller 
of AYUSH, in alignment with the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, and its associated rules. To 
achieve this, the Ministry should establish a streamlined and inclusive mechanism that actively 
involves stakeholders in the developme nt of pharmacopoeial standards, ensuring greater 
efficiency and uniformity. Additionally, the Committee emphasizes that PCIM&H and CCRAS 
may come together to coordinate and collaborate in this initiative to enhance the scientific 
testing and evaluation of a larger number of ASU&H drug samples to ensure safety, efficacy, and 
quality strengthening the foundation of research and standardization in the sector. 
(Para 3.3.5 ibid) 
Action Taken  
3.12.1 L&P Section (PCIM&H) 
● For development of Pharmacopoeia and Formu laries the technical support from the 
research councils namely CCRAS, CCRUM, CCRS and CCRH has been taken.  
● A formal entering into MoU with these Research Councils namely CCRAS, CCRUM, 
CCRS, CCRH are under progress. 
 
Ayurveda Section 
● CCRAS 
● The CCRAS and PC IM&H coordinated and collaborated in developing quality standards 
for single drugs and compound formulations of ASU&H, which were published in the 
Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India, Part -I and Part -II volumes and further similarly 
CCRAS sharing the data of 22 single drug monographs and 3 compound formulations for 
publication of Pharmacopoeial monographs.  
● The CCRAS and PCIM&H laboratories are accredited by NABL (ISO/IEC 17025:2017) 
and carry out inter -laboratory comparisons to ensure competence in providing testing 
services of excellence to the stakeholders of  ASU&H drugs.  
 
 
 

64 
 
Further recommendation 
 
3.12.2 The Committee is dismayed to observe that the Committee‟s recommendation for a 
single independent drug controller for Ayush hasn‟t been complied with yet . The 
Committee thus reiterates its recommendation for consolidating all AYUSH drug -related 
standard-setting processes under a single authoritative body viz. an independent drug 
controller of AYUSH, in alignment with the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, and its 
associated rules. To achieve this, the Ministry should establish a streamlined and inclusive 
mechanism that actively involves stakeholders in the  development of pharmacopoeial 
standards uniformly, ensuring enhanced safety, quality and efficacy of Ayush  medicines 
nationwide. For that sake and also for strengthening the foundation of research and 
uniform standardization in Ayush Sector, PCIM&H & various research councils of Ayush 
viz. CCRAS, CCRUM, CCRS and CCRH work together with due co -ordination and 
collaboration.  
 
 
 
AYURGYAN 
 
3.13 The Committee notes that the AYURGYAN Scheme is approved upto the FY 2025 - 26 i.e. the 
scheme will remain in operation upto 31.3.2026 only. The aims of the Ayugyan Scheme is to 
support Education, Research & Innovation in Ayu sh by providing academic activities, training, 
Capacity Building etc. The Committee, therefore, is of considered view that the Scheme is one of 
the most significant Schemes under AYUSH and accordingly, recommends the Ministry to extend 
the scheme in ensuing financial years beyond 2025-26 with adequate budgetary allocation. 
 
(Para 3.6.5 ibid) 
 
Action Taken  
3.13.1 Scheme Section 
Noted. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.13.2 The Committee expresses concern that the Action Taken Reply merely states 
"Noted" without providing any assurance or indication of action taken so far regarding the 
proposed extension of the AYURGYAN Scheme beyond 2025 –26. Considering the 
Scheme‟s critical role in promoting education, research, training, and capacity building  in 
the Ayush sector,  the Committee reiterates its recommendation for extending the scheme 
beyond its current timeline i.e. 31st March, 2026. The Ministry is advised to initiate a timely 
review of the scheme's impact and utility, and to formulate a proposal for its continuatio n 
with enhanced scope and adequate budgetary allocation. The Committee would like to 
know whether the Ministry has approached the Ministry of Finance for approval of the 
Scheme‟s extension. A detailed response indicating steps taken in this regard along wi th the 
response of the Ministry of Finance thereto, if any, may be furnished to the Committee for 
consideration. 

65 
 
AYURSWASTHYA YOJANA 
 
3.14 The Committee notes that the AyurswasthyaYojana is approved until FY 2025 -26 
(31.03.2026). The Committee recognizes the importance of the PHI (Public Health Initiative) and 
CoE (Centre of Excellence) components for strengthening Ayush -based healthcare interventions, 
research, and education in India. These schemes play a crucial role in integrating Ayush systems 
with publ ic health initiatives, addressing national health priorities, and fostering excellence in 
education and research. Considering its importance, the Committee recommends extending the 
Yojana in financial years beyond 2025-26. 
 
(Para 3.8.4 ibid) 
 
Action Taken  
3.14.1 Scheme Section 
Noted. 
 
Further Recommendation  
3.14.2 The Committee expresses concern that the Action Taken Reply merely contains 
"Noted" in compliance of its recommendation without providing any substantive response 
or assurance regarding the prop osed extension of the Ayurswasthya Yojana beyond FY 
2025–26. Considering the vital role played by the scheme, particularly its components that 
include Public Health Initiative (PHI) and Centre of Excellence (CoE) in strengthening 
Ayush-based healthcare del ivery, promoting research, and supporting integration with 
national public health priorities, the Committee reiterates its recommendation for the 
continuation of the Yojana in the ensuing financial  years. The Ministry is urged to conduct 
a comprehensive im pact assessment and initiate timely steps for extension with adequate 
budgetary provisions for the Scheme. The Committee would like to know whether the 
Ministry has approached the Ministry of Finance for approval of the Scheme‟s extension 
and what has been  the response thereto. A detailed and time -bound action plan may be 
submitted to the Committee for further review. 
 
AYUSH OUSHADI GUNVATTA EVAM UTTAPADAN SAMVARDHAN YOJANA 
(AOGUSY) 
 
3.15The Committee is of considered view that a separate body be created to  implement and 
oversee the Pharmacovigilance of ASU&H drugs including surveillance of misleading 
advertisements etc. countrywide. The Committee feels the need for strengthening of Central and 
State regulatory frameworks including Technical Human Resource &  Capacity Building 
programs for Ayush drugs for Manufacturing of quality medicine from state and private 
pharmacies and NABL accreditation of DTL. The Committee observes that Ministry should make 
concerted efforts for improved surveillance of adverse drug reactions through NPvCC, IPvCs 
and PPvCs. The Committee understands that in order to get the support for development of 
standards and accreditation/ certification of Ayush products & materials, the collaboration with 
BIS, QCI and other relevant scientific institutions and industrial R&D centres is all the more 

66 
 
necessary to achieve the cherished objectives of the Yojana. The Committee desires that the 
Ministry should strive in this direction. 
 
(Para 3.9.8 ibid) 
 
Action Taken  
 
3.15.1  L&P Section (PCIM&H) 
● The commission develops and amend the Pharmacopoeias and Formularies of Ayurveda, 
Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy System of Medicines at regular intervals to ascertain the 
identity, purity and strength of ASU&H medicines.  
● Act as a Central Drug cum Testing Laboratory 
PCIM&H also act as an appellate drug testing laboratory receives the samples from Govt. 
agencies as per Drugs & Cosmetics Act & Rules there under for ascertaining their quality. 
● Capacity Building Training Programs:  PCIM&H regularly conducts capacit y-building 
training sessions for stakeholders, including drug regulators, enforcement authorities, and 
technical staff from ASU&H drug testing laboratories. 
● The labs of PCIM&H are NABL accreditated for chemical and biological testing 
● PCIM&H is also supporting the various Ayush sectional committees of BIS  
Drug Policy Section 
Considering the current growing demands and concerns towards traditional systems of medicine 
(Ayush in Indian context), across the globe; creation of a separate platform to exclusively 
implement, facilitate, and monitor the Pharmacovigilance is highly essential. A functional 
working module may be planned in such a way to include all states and union territories of the 
country and manned with qualified, and trained exclusive manpower with  specific objectives to 
achieve in a time bound manner. 
Taking the experience of previous pharmacovigilance programs for Ayush drugs (during 2007 
and 2017), a robust system with determined objective of generating skilled human resources and 
capacity buildi ng of various stakeholders in association with the Indian Pharmacopoeia 
Commission (a WHO Collaborating Center for Pharmacovigilance). 
Besides the objectives of having surveillance of suspected ADRs, and objectionable 
advertisements; an additional componen t of financial support may be earmarked for possible 
research component exclusively to evaluate herb -drug interactions and further to evaluate safety 
aspect of Ayush drugs. 
 

67 
 
Further recommendation 
 
3.15.2 The Committee appreciates the role of a Pharmacopoe ia Commission in developing 
and amending Pharmacopoeia and formularies for Ayush system and thus setting 
standards for Ayush drugs ensuring their quality, safety and efficacy and surveillance of 
misleading advertisement. However, the Committee reiterates t he creation of a separate 
platform/body to exclusively implement, facilitate and monitor the Pharmcoviligilance of 
Ayush Drugs. The Committee feels that surveillance of ADRs is crucial for ensuring the 
safety of drugs including those from traditional syste ms like ASU&H, IPvCs and PPvCs 
which may contribute to these efforts. The Committee recommends the Ministry to 
strengthen Pharmacovigilance systems and promote ADR reporting for protecting the 
public health through NPC -ISM, IPvCs and PPvCs which plays a vi tal role in ensuring the 
safe use of ASU&H drugs. Adequate financial support may be earmarked for research 
components exclusively to evaluate herb drug interaction and further to assess the quality 
and safety aspects of AYUSH drugs.   
 
3.16 The Committee s trongly recommends that the Ministry must chalk out strategic action plan 
to control misleading/ objectionable advertisements that have been arisen to 15,873 incidents 
during 2023-24 and 2024-25(upto December 2024). If required penal provisions may be made  to 
check/combat misleading advertisements that claim to cure lethal diseases within a short span of 
time. 
(Para 3.9.9 ibid) 
Action Taken  
3.16.1 Drug Policy Section 
The Ministry is in the process of creating Online portal for reporting of misleading/ obje ctionable 
advertisements and also track the action taken by various authorities on such reports through the 
portal. 
Further Recommendation 
3.16.2 The Committee acknowledges the Ministry‟s initiative to create an online portal for 
reporting and tracking mis leading or objectionable AYUSH advertisements. However, the 
Committee emphasizes that an online reporting mechanism alone is insufficient to address 
the growing number of violations, which reached 15,873 incidents in 2023 -24 and 2024 -25 
(up to December 202 4). The Ministry must clearly identify and empower the authorities 
responsible for investigating and taking timely action against offenders. Moreover, the 
Committee is of the considered view that strict penal provisions should be incorporated into 
the relevant laws or regulations to deter and penalize those making false and misleading  
advertisement/claims, particularly, those asserting quick cures for serious and life -
threatening diseases. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry establish a 

68 
 
transparent monitoring and reporting framework, through which it regularly updates on 
enforcement actions taken, including the number of investigations, prosecutions, penalties 
imposed, and cases resolved. This will ensure accountability, strengthen deterrence,  and 
enhance public trust in AYUSH healthcare system. 
 
NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR INDIAN SYSTEM OF MEDICINE 
3.17 The Committee welcomes the launch of national awareness programme 
“DeshkaPrakritiParikshan” which has covered around 1.43 crore people and hopes that the said 
programme would prove a milestone in promotion of Ayurveda across the country. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to direct NCISM to undertake necessary steps for rationale 
utilization of allocated funds, acquirement of equipment& technolog y to provide quality service 
and appointment of Members and regular staff for ensuring effective and efficient working of 
NCISM to achieve cherished objectives & goals and translate its vision and mission into actual 
action on ground level. 
(Para 3.13.4) 
Action Taken  
3.17.1 AEP – III 
Noted for Compliance. 
Further Recommendation  
3.17.2 The Committee notes that the national awareness programme, 
“DeshkaPrakritiParikshan,” aims to promote Ayurveda across the country by reaching a 
wide population base, with ov er 1.43 crore people covered so far. However, the Committee 
expresses concern that the Action Taken Reply merely states "Noted for Compliance" 
without providing details on concrete steps taken by NCISM to ensure rational utilization 
of funds, acquisition o f necessary equipment and technology, and appointment of members 
and regular staff. The Ministry is urged to direct NCISM to formulate and implement a 
comprehensive action plan addressing these critical areas and submit a detailed progress 
report to the Committee at the earliest. 
CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN UNANI MEDICINE 
3.18 The Committee takes into account that CCRUM has commenced the primary research 
activities that include Clinical research in the priority areas including new drug development 
and c linical Validation of pharmacopoeial drugs and Validation of various modes of „Ilaj bit 
Tadbeer‟ and Important Unani Treatments, Experimental Pharmacology of Important Unani 
Drugs, Phytochemical studies, drug standardization, and Pharmacognostic Studies of  Important 
Unani Drugs and outcome, thereof would provide treatment of diseases to needy persons in time 

69 
 
at affordable cost. The CCRUM must take a firm reassessment of its short -term and long -term 
goals and accordingly chalk -out plans to address the aforem entioned issues. The Committee 
further recommends that the council may associate with international bodies in the field of Unani 
treatment to learn and incorporate global practices for betterment of the council. 
(Para 3.16.6) 
Action Taken 
3.18.1 Siddha & Unani Section 
● CCRUM 
Noted. 
Further Recommendation 
3.18.2 The Committee is dismayed at the response of the Ministry in regard to the 
Committee's recommendation to CCRUM, in taking firm reassessment of its short term and 
long term goals in regard to primary r esearch activities. The Ministry has just expressed 
noted in its ATN which is against the letter and spirit of the recommendation of the 
Committee. The Committee, in this regard, desires that the Ministry must guide CCRUM in 
taking a firm reassessment of i ts short-term and long -term goals and accordingly chalked 
out plans to address the issues pertaining to experimental Pharmacology of Important 
Unani Drugs, Phytochemical studies, drug standardization, and Pharmacognostic Studies of 
Important Unani Drugs and outcome, thereof would provide treatment of diseases to needy 
persons in time at affordable cost. CCRUM must strengthen the Clinical research in the 
priority areas including new drug development and clinical Validation of pharmacopoeial 
drugs.  
ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA 
3.19 The Committee takes into account the steps undertaken by AIIA during last three years 
towards its vision. The Committee hopes that the institute keeps up with the pace. The Committee 
expects AIIA be treated in line with ITRA in terms of importance at a national level. The 
Committee recommends that the institute move strongly in the direction of Ayurveda Innovation 
& Entrepreneurship Incubation Centre (i-CAINE) and seek additional financial support from the 
Ministry, if needed.The  Committee endorses the view that higher budget allocation be provided 
to AIIA for effective functioning of the institute. The Committee therefore recommends the 
Ministry of Finance to consider the projected demand to the tune of 315.20 at RE 2025-26 so that 
AIIA can achieve the originally conceived goals to ensure accessible and affordable Ayurveda 
healthcare of the highest standards across the country, especially in rural, urban, slum, and 
tribal regions. 
(Para 3.18.5) 

70 
 
Action Taken  
3.19.1 Ayurveda Section 
● AIIA 
Incubation Centre for Ayurveda Innovation and Entrepreneurship (AIIA-iCAINE) 
Funding and Mentoring winners of Smart India Hackathon 
Facilitating for Start-up for product display at exhibitions 
Mentoring support to Startups 
Awareness of Entrepreneurship  
Networking of Startups 
No. of Startups supported – 52 
Mentored – 14 startup ideas 
Funded seed money of Rs 3 lakhs for 4 Startups 
 
Further Recommendation  
 
3.19.2 The Committee is perplexed to observe the evasive and incomplete reply as received 
from the Ministry, in its ATN, on Committee‟s recommendation steps undertaken by AIIA 
during last three years towards its vision. The Committee fails to understand the 
implication of the response of the Ministry in regard to the Committee's recommendation 
that displays a casual approach of the Ministry towards furnishing ATN on Committee‟s 
recommendation. The Committee notes the Ministry‟s half-hearted efforts in advancing the 
objectives of AIIA, particularly through the establishment of iCAINE and limited startu p 
support; however, the scale and depth of these actions fall short of the Committee‟s 
expectation. The Committee, therefore, reiterates the need for a focused, well -funded, and 
time-bound roadmap to fully operationalize iCAINE and support Ayurveda innovat ion at a 
national level. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry of Ayush prioritize 
AIIA‟s development and ensure enhanced budget ary allocation to AIIA with the intention  
to bring AIIA at par with ITRA in terms of national importance. 
 
3.20 Th e Committee is given to understand that The National Institute of Sowa -Rigpa is an 
autonomous Institute under the Ministry of AYUSH for preservation, promotion and development 
of Sowa-Rigpa as a model Institute for evolving high standards of teaching, training, research and 
patient care and also to invoke scientific outlook to the knowledge of Sowa -Rigpa System of 
Medicine. The Committee is of considered view that the SowaRigpa system should flourish in the 
Himalayan Region, accordingly the Committee recomm ends to enhance the effectiveness and 
public reach of the National Institute of Sowa -Rigpa, therefore, a multi -faceted approach should 

71 
 
be adopted for integrating digital outreach, research expansion, community healthcare initiatives 
like clinic on wheels e tc. The Ministry should also ensure that adequate infrastructure and 
manpower is made available in the sparsely population Himalayan Region to provide healthcare 
to the public under Sowa-Rigpa system of medicine.  
(Para 3.20.2) 
Action Taken  
3.20.1 Ayurveda Section 
● NISR 
Point Noted. 
Further Recommendation  
3.20.2 The Committee is anguished to observe that in regard to its recommendation to the 
Ministry of Ayush for ensuring adequate infrastructure and manpower to the National 
Institute of Sowa-Rigpa (NISR) in the Himalayan region to provide healthcare to the public 
under Sowa -Rigpa system of medicine, the Ministry, in its Action Taken Notes has just 
responded „Point Noted‟.  The Committee desires that since NISR is a model institute for 
evolving high standard s of teaching,  training, research and patient care and also to invoke 
scientific outlook to the knowledge of Sowa -Rigpa System of Medicine, the Committee 
considers that the Sowa -Rigpa system should flourish in the Himalayan Region. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to take a multi -faceted approach 
viz. integrating digital outreach, research expansion, community healthcare initiatives like 
clinic on wheels etc. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to guide NISR for 
assured p reservation, promotion and development of Sowa -Rigpa for patient care and 
treatment under Sowa-Rigpa system of medicine.     
3.21 The Committee also came across the details of the number of posts sanctioned, in -position 
strength of the staff and vacant pos ts in different autonomous bodies, including the Ayush 
institutes and 5 Research Councils. The Committee is amazed to see that there are more than 2600 
posts lying vacant pertaining to all categories. Majority of these vacant posts pertain to 
Academics, Re search Officers, Paramedical Staff, Pharmacists, Staff Nurses and Laboratory 
Technicians. With futuristic development plans in Ayush healthcare, such a large backlog of 
vacancies in core areas would prove to be serious obstacle. The Committee therefore rec ommends 
that recruitment drives may be undertaken on a war footing to fill up the vacant posts in all the 
institutions, including the Research Councils by the Ministry. 
(Para 3.20.3) 
 
 

72 
 
Action Taken  
3.21.1 Ayurveda Section 
● NIA 
Out of the 329 regular sancti oned strength of various categories, 270 posts stand filled.  Out of 
the 59 vacant posts recruitment processs in in progress in respect of 49 posts these posts will be 
filled in a month time.  7 Posts are deemed to be advertised very soon. There is no incu mbent 
with qualifying service for consideration to the remaining 3 promotion posts. 
● NEIAH 
55 nos of sanctioned post are laying vacant at NEIAH, Shillong Meghalaya. 
 The posts were advertised 4 times on the dates 20/11/2015, 17/03/2018,11/8/2019, 02.08.2023  
and 24.08.2023  However, no eligible candidate was found. Therefore, the RR are being 
modified.  
Modification of  Recruitment Rules for the posts of   Professor and   Associate Professor of 
Ayurveda and   Professor,  Associate Professor and Lecturer of Homoeo pathy notification is 
published in institute‘s website for seeking comment on the revised draft RR.  
3. For Nursing Officers, short listing is completed and approval will be sought for revival of 
posts. 
● NISR 
Point Noted. 
Siddha & Unani Section 
● CCRS 
● CCRS will take up recruitment drive on priority basis to fill up the vacant posts to ensure 
futuristic development plans in Siddha healthcare 
● Comprehensive proposal for the creation / revival / up gradation of posts are under 
submission to the Ministry to attain the short-term goal as well as long -term vision of the 
Ministry of Ayush. 
● NIS 
NIS will prioritise recruitment to fill vacant posts across key categories such as academics, 
research, and paramedical staff. 
● CCRUM 

73 
 
Noted and recruitment process is initiated 
● NIUM 
The institute is in the process of filling up of the vacant posts.  
Advertised and scrutiny of applications for posts at the Ghaziabad campus have been completed. 
For NIUM, Bangalore, the advertisement has been finalized. 
Homoeopathy Section 
The recommendation of the committee is noted. 
● CCRH 
The vacancies have arisen due to superannuation/ promotion/resignation of officers/ officials and 
for filling up these vacancies the matter for the finalization of the recruitment agency has been 
under consideration for filling up the vacant posts.  
● NIH 
NIH has undertaken the following measures to fill up the vacant posts: 
i. The recruitment process for regular posts for NIH, Kolkata and Delhi is at its final stage, 
and till date, all Gr. B & C incumbents and few Gr. A i ncumbents have joined the 
Institute. 
ii. Offer letters have been issued to the candidates selected for Gr. 'A' posts at NIH, Delhi.  
iii. Interviews for the posts of Joint Director (Administration) and Administrative Officer, 
NIH, Delhi (on deputation basis), have been conducted on 06.05.2025 at the Ministry of 
Ayush. 
iv. Presently, NIH, Delhi employs 127 outsourced manpower through two agencies and 16 
contractual employees. Further, Walk -in interviews have been conducted for 24 
categories of contractual positions and 23 offer letters have been issued. 
NIH is actively taking steps to fill up the remaining vacant posts. 
Further Recommendation  
3.21.2 The Committee is not satisfied with the response of various autonomous bodies and 
institutes/councils of the Ministry, in r egard to number of posts sanctioned, in -position 
strength of the staff and vacant posts in different autonomous  bodies including the Ayush 
Institutes and Research Councils where the Committee had found more than 2600 posts 
lying vacant. The Committee finds  that in lieu of the Ministry, various autonomous bodies 
and councils are furnishing their response in compliance of the Committee‟s 
recommendation. 59 vacant posts are lying in NIA while 55 number of sanctioned posts are 
lying vacant in NEIAH. NISR has sh own the casual approach stating the recommendation 
of the Committee has „Point Noted‟. While other institutes like CCRS, NIS, CCRUM, 

74 
 
NIUM, CCRH and NIH are seen making efforts time and again to fill up the vacant posts. 
Under the circumstances, the Committ ee is of the considered view that the Ministry should 
assess the vacant post/position in various autonomous and research councils and take 
centralized course of action for filling up the vacant position  (estimated at more than 2600 
posts) at the accelerate d pace taking  into consideration the futuristic development plans of 
Ayush Healthcare, Ayush@2047.    
 
NATIONAL AYUSH MISSION 
3.22 The NAM is playing crucial role in providing Ayush healthcare facilities all over the 
Country. The Committee recognizes the a chievements envisaged through the scheme in number 
of beneficiaries enrolled for NCDs, Osteoarthritis, SUPRAJA for maternal and neonatal care, 
VAYO MITRA for geriatric healthcare and KARUNYA for palliative care. The Committee 
therefore recommends that the targets set for such activities under NAM may be enhanced to 
cover a wider section of the population, especially in rural and tribal areas. 
(Para 3.21.6 ibid) 
Action Taken  
3.22.1 While Union Cabinet approving continuation of the National Ayush Mission fro m 
1.04.2021 to 31.03.2026, eight dedicated Ayush Public Health programmes has been also 
approved as a new activity i.e. (1) National Program for Prevention and Management of 
Musculoskeletal Disorders, (2) Integration of Ayush with National Programme for Pr evention 
and Control of Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke (NPCDCS), (3) Supraja, 
(4) VayoMitra, (5) Ayurvidya, (6) Ayush Mobile Medial Unit, (7) Karunya and (8) National 
Program on Ayush for morbidity management and Disability Prevention  (MMDP) of Lymphatic 
Filariasis (lymphoedema).  
State/UT Government may avail financial assistance by submitting suitable proposals through 
State Annual Action Plans (SAAPs) as per their felt need. However, Ministry has emphasize 
State/UT Governments to propose the Ayush Public Health programmes. 
Further Recommendation  
3.22.2 The Committee observes that the action taken note speaks of union cabinet‟s 
approving of National Ayush Mission (NAM) from 1.04.2021 to 31.03.2026 and under that 
eight Ayush Public He alth programmes has been also approved as a new activity i.e. (1) 
National Program for Prevention and Management of Musculoskeletal Disorders, (2) 
Integration of Ayush with National Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer, 
Diabetes, Cardiovascular D iseases and Stroke (NPCDCS), (3) Supraja, (4) VayoMitra, (5) 
Ayurvidya, (6) Ayush Mobile Medial Unit, (7) Karunya and (8) National Program on Ayush 
for morbidity management and Disability Prevention (MMDP) of Lymphatic Filariasis 

75 
 
(lymphoedema). Keeping in view the ensuing the third quarter of 2025, just few months 
away from the end date of the Mission, yet the Ministry is reiterating the old trope of 
initiation of 8 Ayush Public Health Programmes appearing oblivious of the upcoming 
closure of the Mission, the Committee recommends the Ministry to approach the Ministry 
of Finance for seeking extension of NAM for another 5 years  (01.04.2026 to 31.03.2031) . 
The Ministry of Ayush must ensure that the States/UTs are encouraged to come under the 
umbrella of NAM. Th e Committee feels that the given 8 schemes represent a solid 
foundation addressing several key public health areas through  AYUSH systems  but the 
country may benefit from expansion or supplementary schemes to comprehensively cover 
infectious diseases, mental health, and broader preventive health strategies. The Ministry of 
Ayush is suggested to expand the scope of the Mission to cover the aforementioned areas of 
healthcare.  
 
NORTH EASTERN AREAS 
3.23 The Committee observes that North East States, except Mani pur, lack a dedicated AYUSH 
Directorate, therefore, the Health Department officers managing AYUSH matters alongside other 
responsibilities which diminishes focused attention on AYUSH issues. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends dedicated AYUSH Directorate for each State in NER. 
(Para 3.22.6 ibid) 
Action Taken  
3.23.1 P&E Division 
● NAM 
North East State has been requested time to time for formation of dedicated Ayush Directorate, 
so that different issues pertaining to Ayush may be addressed in appropriate way including 
implementation of NAM scheme. Accordingly, State Government of Sikkim has formed Ayush 
Directorate in their State.  
Further Recommendation  
3.23.2 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry and State Government of 
Sikkim for setting up  of Ayush Directorate for promotion of traditional medicines in their 
State. The Committee hopes that Ministry must play a vital role in supporting North 
Eastern States in establishing dedicated AYUSH Directorates in all NER  States. The 
Committee urges the  Ministry to  encourage the States and provide all the necessary 
handholding required by the State Governments for converting this vision a ground reality. 
This will pave the way to harness the potential of Ayush Systems, promoting holistic 
healthcare and well-being in the region. 
 

76 
 
NORTH EASTERN AREAS 
3.24 The Committee also feels that for the effective implementation of the NAM Scheme in NER, 
there is a need to establish a Project Management Unit (PMU) with sufficient manpower, a 
requirement that remains un met. States in the region have been repeatedly urged to form 
dedicated AYUSH Directorates to ensure appropriate handling of AYUSH related matters, 
including NAM implementation. The Committee takes into account that under NAM guidelines, 
states are encourag ed to establish integrated AYUSH hospitals and dispensaries, as well as 
dedicated AYUSH Public Health Programmes, with support available to address the healthcare 
needs of remote communities through the SAAPs. The Committee desires that the Ministry should  
persuade the states to establish a Project Management Unit (PMU) and take other necessary 
actions in the matter. 
(Para 3.22.7) 
Action Taken  
3.24.1  P&E Division 
● NAM 
North East States have been requested time to time for establishment of Project Managemen t 
Unit (PMU), so that their active support may be obtained for effective implementation of 
Scheme. Accordingly, Manipur, Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram have 
established PMU as per provision of NAM guidelines. However, Arunachal Pradesh and  Sikkim 
have established PMU but not having full strength of manpower. 
Further Recommendation 
3.24.2 The Committee is of the considered view that the effective implementation of NAM 
scheme in NER is concomitant to establishement of Project Management Unit (PMU) with 
sufficient manpower and dedicated Ayush Directorate to ensure adequate monitoring and 
positioning of Ayush related issues. The Committee notes that although Manipur, Assam, 
Nagaland, Meghalaya, Tripura, Mizoram have established PMU as per provis ion of NAM 
guidelines. While Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim have although established PMU but 
without having full strength of manpower. This is really a sorry state of affairs for effective 
implementation of NAM Scheme in these two States. The Committee, the refore, strongly 
recommends the Ministry of Ayush to effectively persuade North -Eastern States for 
dedicated Ayush Directorate and PMU in Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim must be 
equipped with adequate manpower. 
 
 
 

77 
 
3.25 The Committee takes note of the infrastr uctural projects being carried out in NER for 
AYUSH hospitals supported under NAM in NER and expects the same to be completed and 
functional within the estimated time line. The Ministry may look into projects that have been 
approved before three years or earlier and yet not functional. 
(Para 3.22.8) 
 
Action Taken  
3.25.1 P&E Division 
● NAM 
Public Health being a State Subject, the implementation of NAM Scheme comes under purview 
of respective State Government. As the proposals received from NER through SAAP, Ministry of 
Ayush has approved 16 integrated Ayush hospitals from 2014-15 to 2021-22.  
          The progress of construction of hospitals is being carried out in a phased manner, however 
there is slow progress in completing construction work in some cases are due to following facts:- 
a) In few cases construction work held up because of land disputes/ court cases.  
b) Construction work in hilly States cannot be carried out in throughout the year because of 
seasonal effects. 
c) Due to law and order conditions. 
Further, to complete the construction work of hospital, the Ministry is in regular touch with NER 
States and the central field visit teams are being sent to monitor the same. The status of progress 
of NAM activities are being regularly followed at the hi ghest level in different progress review 
meetings with States/UTs including NER. 
Resultantly, 10 integrated Ayush hospitals are functional, 03 hospitals construction completed 
and 03 under construction as reported by NER State Governments.  
Further Recommendation  
3.25.2 The Committee expresses its concern over the delay in completion of infrastructure 
projects viz. 16 integrated Ayush Hospitals approved during 2014 -15 to 2021 -22 under 
NAM Scheme through SAAP due to slow progress in completing construction work. 
However, the Committee notes that 10 integrated Ayush Hospitals are functional, 03 
Hospitals construction completed but not functional and remaining 03 are still under 
construction. The Committee, therefore, desires that three hospitals construction that have 
been completed but not functional must be made functional without further delay and 
accelerated progress must be made for completing the remaining three infrastructure 
projects so that the same is also made functional without much procrastination.  
 

78 
 
Issues Raised By Members 
3.26 During the course of the examination of Demand for Grants of the M/o Ayush on 17th 
February, 2025, the Members of the Committee raised the following issues, seeking the 
intervention of the M/o Ayush for strengthening, awar eness, promotion of Ayush Sector in the 
country and consolidation, propagation & expansion and globalization of Ayush mode of 
treatment in the foreign countries that have got expression in various parts of the Report:- 
i. Documentation of Ayush knowledge and outcome of its research & dissemination, thereof, 
in the remote and far flung regions of the country and foreign countries;  
ii. Public awareness campaigns about the benefits of Ayurveda but bulwark against 
quackery, claiming cancer treatment and cure chronic kidney disease patients on dialysis 
without kidney transplantation within a week and regulation over misleading 
advertisement claiming quick treatment of critical illnesses under Ayurveda that has 
erased the overall credibility of Ayurveda to large extent.  The rise in the deceptive 
promotion highlights enforcement gaps and inefficiencies in tackling misleading claims in 
the Ayush Sector as a whole. There should be penal provision for misleading 
advertisement;  
iii. India being Vishwa -Guru and celebrating World Y oga Day should expand Yoga 
Awareness at the Rural and Block Level throughout the year instead of only on World 
Yoga Diwas;  
iv. Avoiding competition between Allopathy and Ayurveda and adoption of cooperative & 
collaborative approach between the two systems of healthcare and Ayush system of 
healthcare should be emphasized in preventive and palliative healthcare;  
v. Joint meetings of NMC, NCISM, NCH, CCRYN etc. to resolve difference of opinion 
between modern medicine and traditional medicine and promote harmony bet ween the 
two branches of healthcare;  
vi. Keeping in view the accelerated growth rate of medical tourism vis -à-vis general tourism, 
opportunity to promote medical tourism in the region with higher medicinal plants viz. 
Kerala, Karnataka and NER;  
vii. Greater impetus to Government‟s Vision to „Go to the Villages and Rural India‟ and for 
setting up of Smart Villages, there is need to promote the momentum of medical tourism 
towards Rural India where organic food, cow dung etc. are available in plenty, thereby 
promoting PanchgavyaChikitsa (Cowpathy) which is a traditional system of Ayurvedic 
medicine that utilizes five products derived from cows for therapeutic purposes. 
viii. All out efforts be made to eliminate sickle cell anemia in tribal region and strategy to 
overcome malnutrition through medicinal plants and research thereon;  

79 
 
ix. Adequate fund allocation under the Special Component Plan for Scheduled Castes and 
Tribal Areas sub-plan for Siddha System;  
x. In the Medical Education Training and Research, adequate budgetary alloc ation be made 
to Siddha System vis-à-vis other components of Ayush;  
xi. Impetus to training and skill development of Ayush Doctors and Staff;  
xii. Establishment of Ayush Hospitals in each district and tier -2 cities may be implemented at 
an accelerated pace;  
xiii. Formulation of strategy and provision of adequate budget for setting up of Ayush 
Institutes/Yoga Ashrams in under -developed States like Bihar, Jharkhand, UttarPradesh 
and likewise;  
xiv. Facilities that can be provided to investor who wants to open Yoga Institute o r Ayurveda 
companies;  
xv. In order to promote Ayush, especially Yoga and Naturopathy, the M/o Ayush expedite the 
legislation on Yoga and Naturopathy;  
xvi. Expediting establishment of Central Research Institutes for Homeopathy in Bhubaneswar;  
xvii. Compliance of Standa rd Operating Procedures (SOPs) & procedural 
formalities/guidelines as issued by M/o Finance for seeking higher budgetary allocation 
for Ayush;  
xviii. Keeping in view the number of 7,36,000 Ayush practitioners in 2014 and 7,39,000 after 
10 years in 2024 needs to be improved by taking concrete steps;  
xix. Chalking out strategy to seek higher allocation to Ayush during the period of 16th 
Finance Commission;  
xx. Accelerated implementation of Programme on upgradation of Ayush Health Centres and 
Integrated Ayush Hospitals and  setting up of Ayush Hospital in Maharashtra and Punjab 
and other places where there is no Ayush Hospitals in order to remove inequalities in 
geographical distribution;  
xxi. Adequate fund for clinical trials and scientific validation centres of Ayush Products to 
propagate their credibility and impetus to enhance the testing capacity of these 
institutions for scientific validation and evident based research;  
xxii. Extensive research in Ayush Sector for „going back to the nature‟ correlation and 
avoidance of pesticide s, fertilizers and adulteration and exploring the scope for better 
nature human kind environmental balance;  

80 
 
xxiii. Impetus to export promotion and supply chain management of herbal and medicinal 
plants so as to increase its production;  
xxiv. Strategic steps to complete Global Traditional Medicine Centre in Jamnagar, Gujarat;  
xxv. Conduct of Yoga practice regularly in each primary school and there should be Yoga 
teacher in each primary school; and  
xxvi. Availability of testing facilities to measure the occurrence of reported st eroids/metal 
content in Ayush products. 
(Para 4.1 ibid) 
Action Taken  
3.26.1  
Budget Section 
A meeting with 16 th Finance Commission was held on 11 th June, 2025 at 11:00 AM for 
Strengthening Ayush for National Health. A team led by Hon‘ble Minister of State  (I/C) of 
Ministry of Ayush represented Ministry of Ayush.  
AEP – III Section 
NCH 
The measures to integrate integrated Homeopathy with conventional medicine has been taken by 
prescribing a comprehensives content about knowledge of Medicine, psychology, eme rgency and 
Modern Pharmacology in the under-graduate Curriculum by regulation. 
 
(ii) The Commission has notified Regulation with penal provisions for misleading advertisement, 
for Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Code of Ethics for Practitioners of Homo eopathy and has 
been meeting continuously with the state homoeopathy council for implementation of the same. 
 
Further, the autonomous Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy (BERH) of the 
Commission is in process to publish the Public Notice over the Do‘s and Don‘ts for 
advertisement by Homoeopathic practitioners. 
 
(xi) The autonomous Homoeopathy Education Board (HEB) of the Commission is conducting 
regular training program for the research methodology and Competency Based Development 

81 
 
Curriculum Tr aining for under -graduate and post -graduate courses as part of the faculty 
development program. 
The BERH is also conducting training for Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM) for wider 
use of information technology tools by the practitioners of Homoeopathy. 
 
(xii) The National Commission for Homoeopathy invites application for establishment of new 
homoeopathic medical colleges every year which include collegiate hospital also. Any applicant 
may apply. 
Scheme Section 
i. The outcome/results of the research s tudies funded under Ayurgyan Scheme are published in 
National/International peer reviewed journals. 
x& xi.    Under Capacity Building and CME in Ayush component of Ayurgyan Scheme, funds 
are being provided for training to Ayush personnel in all streams including Siddha. 
Ayurveda Section 
ITRA 
i. ITRA is constantly working to propagate Ayurveda in foreign country. (Table 5 as detailed 
below :-) 
ITRA is running a ICAS (International Center of Ayurveda Studies) center to promote 
Ayurveda as a key component of global healthcare systems 
ITRA being a WHO CC for SEAR to support WHO‘s - Ongoing activities, below mentioned 
activities are being conducted time to time.  
1. Efforts in developing safety monitoring capacity for traditional medicine  through 
pharmacovigilance system. 
2. In building research capacity for traditional medicine through training  and  guideline 
development. 
3. In implementing the WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy 2014 -2023 by providing 
technical inputs on Ayurveda and Panchakarma at the request of WHO. 
4. In building and strengthening traditional medicine performance monitoring system at the 
facility level.   
Under WHO activity, A two days conclave entitled ― WHO Conclave on Traditional 
Medicine in South -East Asia Region ‖ was held on 8th and 9th December 2022  at Panjim, 
Goa, India 

82 
 
ITRA organizes various public participatory programs on regular bases to increase public 
awareness and acceptance of Ayurveda in the remote and far flung region of the country. Few 
examples are as mentioned below –  
1. Ayurveda day celebration  
2. PoshanaAbhiyana 
3. Free health checkup and treatment camps at various interior parts of Jamnagar district 
4. Weekly OPDs at old age home, orphan house, base camps of armed forces, district jail etc. 
(Table 1) 
5. Awareness lectures 
ITRA has signed agreeme nt with below mentioned agencies to disseminate knowledge and 
outcome of Ayurveda researches to foreign countries. 
1. National Institute of Health, Peru 
2. Southern California University of Health Sciences, USA 
3. Faculdade Escola de Ayurveda (FAESDA), Brazil 
4. Fundacion De Salud, Ayurveda PREMA, Argentina 
5. The NPO Japan Ayurveda Institute, Japan 
6. Western Sydney University, Australia 
7. Ayurvastu -EscuelaClinica Indo-Americana De Medicina Ayurveda, Chile 
 
iii. Swasthvritta Department of ITRA is working throughout the year  to spread awareness about 
Yoga and also celebrates World Yoga Day every year.  
xi. ITRA encourages the staff and Scholars to attain the faculty development programs and CMEs 
CCRAS 
CCRAS is documenting the local health traditions, oral health traditions ar e collected through its 
peripheral institutes under MEBS and THCRP programmes. Validated claims are published in 
the form of research papers and books.  
 
i. Through its Information Education and Communication (IEC) Activities, Central Council for 
Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS) has been engaged in popularizing the Ayurveda 
system among the masses through electronic and print media for common people in English, 
Hindi, and regional languages, which are widely distributed through National/State level 
Arogya melas, Health camps, Ayurveda Day, International Day of Yoga, exhibitions, expos, 
various activities and also through CCRAS outreach programs viz. Schedule Caste Sub Plan 
(SCSP) Research Program, Tribal Health Care Research Program (THCRP), etc., in diff erent 
states of the country through its robust 30 peripheral institutes. The Council website is also 
generally embodied with IEC materials and hyperlinked with other important websites that 
provide information for wider utility 
. 
The Council has three journals named Journal of Drug Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (JDRAS), 
Journal of Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (JRAS), and Journal of Indian Medical Heritage 

83 
 
(JIMH) which are also available electronically in the public domain free of cost to enable 
dissemination of the outcomes of research among the public. So far, the Council has published 
about 417 books, monographs, and technical reports, and they are being sold or distributed to 
disseminate research outcomes and merits of Ayurveda at large. 
 
CCRAS under the Ministry of Ayush has signed MoU/LoI/Agreements with different countries / 
foreign Universities/ Institutions/organizations for Research and Development and for the 
propagation of Ayurveda through the establishment of Academic Chair. 
4 MoU‘s are currently active in the field of Research and Development in different countries viz. 
Germany Charite University & Lutheran Hospital, NCNPR USA, TASMC Israel and OCCAM 
4 MoU‘s are active for establishment of Academic Chair in different countries viz. Latvia , 
Mauritius, Mexico and Argentina, - - 1 MoU is in the process of signing with Latvia for research 
studies. 
ii. In line with the public campaign through IEC activities, CCRAS peripheral Institutes are also 
functioning as Peripheral Pharmacovigilance Centers, an d they will report the misleading 
advertisements to the National Pharmacovigilance Coordination Centre (NPVCC). 
iv&v . 
● CCRAS has proactively undertaken various research initiatives to evaluate the benefits, 
safety, and feasibility of integrative approaches , particularly the use of Ayurveda either as a 
standalone intervention or as an adjunct to standard modern care in the management of 
diverse health conditions.  
● CCRAS has also undertaken collaborative clinical research studies in partnership with 
reputed m edical institutions, including AIIMS, ICMR institutions, NIMHANS, ILBS, and 
such other tertiary care centers, thereby fostering mutual respect and scientific exchange 
between systems. 
● Furthering this integrative mandate, the Indian Council of Medical Resea rch and CCRAS 
have jointly launched the Ayush -ICMR Advanced Centre for Integrative Health Research 
(AI-ACIHR) at AIIMS, New Delhi to conduct high -quality, evidence -based research on 
identified health priorities using integrative methodologies. 
vi. 
● CCRAS ha s developed five demonstrative medicinal plant gardens to educate students, 
academicians, scholars, and others. 
● CCRAS peripheral institutes also serve as centers for training in herbarium techniques, 
taxonomic identification, and raw drug authentication. 

84 
 
● The peripheral institutes of CCRAS are engaged in research on traditional Agro -techniques, 
including Vriksha Ayurveda to improve the yield. 
● In NER, RARI, Itanagar is maintaining medicinal plant garden of Himalayan and other 
regional plants. 
viii. CCRAS, an apex body for Research in Ayurveda, has undertaken significant initiatives in 
the are malnutrition and Sickle cell anaemia. Council has developed coded formulation Ayush RP 
for management of Sickle Cell Anaemia. Various classical formulations also being us ed along 
with AYUSH RP for management Sickle cell Anaemia. Clinical studies have been carried out on 
malnutrition with classical formulations like Drakshavaleha, KushmandakRasaayana, 
Arvindasava and coded formulation of CCRAS, Ayush B R Leham.  
Work undertaken by CCRAS on sickle cell anemia 
a) An efficacy study has been carried out on AYUSH RP and Cap SC 3. Significant result has 
been observed on pain crisis and pallor. Episodes of Pain crisis reduced. No requirement of 
Blood transfusion has been observed.    
b) 2 collaborative studies are being executed by CCRAS in collaboration with AIIMS Bhopal 
and DMIHER, Wardha. 
c) A collaborative study with ICMR -National Institute for Research in Tribal Health (NIRTH), 
Jabalpur is being conducted in the 57 Ekalavya Model residen tial schools (EMRS) across 14 
state of India with the in the aim of Screening of EMRS students for Sickle Cell Anaemia.  
Work undertaken by CCRAS on Malnutrition 
5 studies are being executed by CCRAS on malnutrition.  
a) A study in collaboration with ICMR -National Institute for Research in Tribal Health 
(NIRTH), Jabalpur focused on Screening of students of 57 Ekalavya Model residential 
schools (EMRS) for Malnutrition and management of Malnutrition with Arvinasava, and 
Drakshavaleha.  
b) A collaborative project wi th 4 Ayurveda academic institutes is being conducted on 
malnutrition with classical formulation KushmandakRasaayana.   
3 intra mural research projects are being conducted.  
CCRAS has also undertaken a project on malnutrition titled ―A Randomized Double Bli nd 
Placebo control clinical study to evaluate the immunomodulatory effect of Swarnprashan in 
Moderately Malnourished Children‖ at Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh in children between 5-10 yrs.  
 
xi. CCRAS has taken the following steps for promoting Ayurveda: 

85 
 
1. Education– 
Candidates with Intermediate/ Senior School Certificate Examination (Class XII) – 
Panchakarma Technician Course (PTC) 
Under Graduates – 
Certificate Course in Panchakarma Therapy (CCPT) 
Certificate Course on MarmaChikitsa (CCMC) 
2. Research- 
Under Graduate Students– Studentship Programme for Ayurveda Research Ken (SPARK) 
Post Graduate Students – Scheme for Training in Ayurveda Research for PG Scholars (PG -
STAR) 
Post Graduates- Ayush Ph.D. Fellowship programme 
Ph.D. Holders (both Ayurveda and non Ayurveda) - CCRAS Post -Doctoral Fellowship Scheme 
(PDF) 
3. Capacity Building: 
1. The Council has initiated a training programme on ―Ayurveda  Research Methodology and 
Statistics (ARMS)‖ in order to facilitate the students pursuing their MD/MS in Ayurveda.  
2. PRAYATNA (Initiative for fostering Scientific Writing skills in Ayurveda) 
 
xxii. CCRAS peripheral institutes are involved in development of conventional agro -techniques 
like Vrikshayurveda, organic forming,  etc., and market survey through IMR projects 
 
xxiii. CCRAS through its peripheral institutes carrying out the development of in -vitro 
propagation technics, agro-technics, Aushadaranyam, etc., to improve the yield.  
AIIA 
AIIA plays a pivotal role in enhancing India's global economic standing through its multifaceted 
approach, and significantly contributes to India's economic growth by promoting Ayurveda. 
These efforts align with the nation's broader objectives of sustainable development, innovation, 
and economic diversification. 

86 
 
• AIIA‘s integrated holistic health care model through 200 bedded hospital with 45 
specialty OPDs, and producing skilled professionals, helps reducing the healthcare costs for all 
and the burden on conventional healthcare infrastructure covering the large rural population. 
• AIIA established one satellite centre at Goa which has 100 bedded hospital and it is 
promoting medical tourism as per one of its mandate, with the support of Ministry of Ayush. 
• AIIA extended its OPD servic es by establishing 6 extension centres at various places 
including LBSNAA-Mussoorie; Supreme court, Safdarjung Hospital, NCI Jhajjar, IIT Delhi in 
New Delhi and Ekta Nagar -Gujarat covering the highest level of govt officers, judges, as well as 
cancer patie nts etc. AIIA also expanded from phase I to phase II and generate economy by 
recruiting faculties, medical staff, nursing staff, researchers, hospital staff, other technicians and 
other support staff.  
• Through organizing regular medical camps, Public Hea lth Initiatives (PHI) projects and 
DhanvantariRath, help in improving health in rural areas, and front -line workers like Police 
personals and covering their families too. 
• AIIA organises regular CMEs for the doctors and other training programs for the 
faculties, scholars and hospital staff for their advancements and upgradation of skills, in 
Ayurveda, yoga therapy, and wellness tourism. This, ultimately reflects in their services as time 
bound manner and more efficiencies towards duties.  
• AIIA fosters in ternational collaborations through MoUs with foreign universities) for 
research and Ayurveda trainings, AIIA helps in promoting and establishing Ayurveda, export of 
medicines, therapies, and wellness tourism across the globe. Till date 18 MoUs in 12 countr ies 
have been signed by AIIA under the directions of Minsitry of Ayush. Two international Research 
projects are under process on Ashwagandha in long covid with LSHTM, Uk and Understanding 
molecular mechanism of Guduchyadi yoga in Covid with Fiz, Germany. S everal other projects 
are in pipelines covering Insomnia, oral cancer, mental disorders etc.  
• AIIA promotes standardized Ayurvedic products, enabling Indian companies to tap into 
the global wellness and herbal medicine market. Indirectly, also helps in p romoting cultivation of 
medicinal plants and AYUSH -integrated farming, giving farmers higher incomes and linking 
agriculture with pharma and wellness industries. 
• AIIA-iCAINE supports the development of AYUSH -based startups through incubation 
and R&D supp ort. Focus areas include Ayurvedic nutraceuticals, herbal textiles, and point -of-
care health devices, which can become high -growth sectors and generate job -rich economic 
activity. 
To track the misleading/ objectionable advertisements, an objective has been  framed under the 
Pharmacovigilance program of ASU & H Drugs under the AOGUSY Scheme, Ministry of 
Ayush, New Delhi. The program is working through a three -tier network of a National 
Pharmacovigilance Centre (NPvCC), Five Intermediary Pharmacovigilance Cent res (IPvCs) and 

87 
 
99 Peripheral Pharmacovigilance Centres (PPvCs) established across the country. Through this 
channel of Pharmacovigilance centres objectionable/misleading advertisements are regularly 
reported concern authorities for initiating action again st the defaulters. However, more stringent 
action needs to be taken against the defaulters. 
 
Ayurveda is becoming popular in many countries and AIIA is contributing to the promotion of 
the traditional Ayurvedic system of medicine globally by signing MoUs a nd agreements with 
reputed foreign organisations 
● AIIA is publishing three journals wherein research articles are published, which also help 
in popularizing Ayurveda globally.  
● Development of Benchmarks, viz; WHO benchmarks for the practice of Ayurveda 
● Associating WHO in various programs and strategies development related to WHO - 
Global Traditional Medicine Centre and Digital Health 
● Research Database development 
● Protocol development 
● Treatment guidelines development 
● Course curriculum development for foreign Ayurveda academic programs 
● Contribute in achieving sustainable development goals. 
● Contributing global health by international clinical research studies 
 
NIA 
(i) The Institute organizes propagation ayurvedic knowledge by organizing medical camps in 
remote a reas of the State of Rajasthan and also whenever chances are made available to visit 
foreign countries by its staff.  Such opportunities are utilized to project ayurvedic education 
research exchange of faculty etc with foreign organizations and countries. 
(ii) The Institute is having various speciality clinics for cancer and de -addiction etc. in its OPD 
and treatments and management are provided through OPD and IPD only 
(iii) Apart from International Day of Yoga, the Institute is organizing Yoga exercises a nd 
demonstration daily early in the morning for the benefit of patients as well as general public 
which gathered in good numbers every day in the Campus. Such yoga demonstrations are 
exercises are also arrangements on demands by Government and provide organizations in the city 
for the benefit  of general public. 

88 
 
(ix) The Institute is organizing medical camps, medical check -up and free dispensing of 
medicines under SCP and TSP schemes for which separate funds are made available by the 
Ministry 
(xi) Various skill development programmes are arranged for Ayurveda doctors and para -medicals 
on some topics so that they are trained in the field for utilization in general 
NEIAH 
The North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy under the Ministry of AYUSH has 
undertaken several initiatives, focusing on integrating AYUSH into the national healthcare 
framework, enhancing education and research standards, and promoting Ayurveda and Yoga for 
a healthier India by way of expansion of health care service through it Peri pheral OPD at Smit 
areas has opened a Peripheral OPD in  Ayurveda and Homoeopathy OPD at Smit areas, East 
Khasi Hills district of the State of Meghalaya to promote Ayurveda and Homoeopathy. 
The Institute also conducted a Health camps under the Pradhan Mant riJanjati Adivasi Nyaya 
MahaAbhiyan (PM-JANMAN) programmes.  
The Institute regularly gives free consultation in the Institute Hospitals (both OPD & IPD) and 
conducting free Medical & Awareness Camps at villages, schools, Govt. Deptt., Military 
personnel and at  community levels. Organized National Seminars/ workshops, Panel discussions, 
Doctor se Mileye in All India Radio, Shillong in English, Hindi and Regional Language (Khasi), 
TV Talks shows on Ayurveda in Doordarshan Kendra, Shillong etc,. 
Regularly conducted the CME program of teacher in Ayurveda and Homoeopathy. 
Apart the above,a One -year Panchakarma Technician Certificate course and Conducted 
Panchakarma Therapy Training to Medical Officers (Ayurveda) of neighbouring States. 
Promote  of Yoga for a daily healthcare and holistic well being. 
These actions reflect the Institute commitment to integrating AYUSH into the national healthcare 
system, enhancing the quality of education and research, and promoting traditional practices for a 
healthier and fitter India. 
The other instructions/observations are noted for compliance. 
NEIAFMR 
ii) a.) NEIAFMR being An Autonomous Institute under ministry of Ayush has applied for 
Peripheral Pharmacological Centre 
 b) Awareness building among the public in the internationa l border areas  shared by the North 
Eastern Region should be carried out for the greater publicity of Ayush system of medicine. 
 

89 
 
NISR 
Points Noted. 
Siddha & Unani Section 
CCRS 
i. CCRS has now rigorously initiated several Siddha fundamental and literature re search works 
such as Mission P2P (Palm to Paper) aims Collection, Transcription, Decoding, Digitization and 
Publication of old Palm Leaf Siddha Manuscripts / Paper Manuscripts / Siddha books for 
strengthening the Clinical trials of R&D in Ayush Healthcare System. 
To strengthen and document the traditional Siddha knowledge, a dedicated Siddha 
Literature Research Institute (SLRI) will be established under CCRS for preservation, 
conservation, and continued dissemination Siddha Medical knowledge. 
ii. CCRS though its Peripheral Pharmacovigilance Centre (PPVC) is actively monitoring Adverse 
Drug reactions (ADR) and Misleading advertisements (MLA) and documenting the same. 
Awareness Programmes, Webinar, Seminars related to Pharmacovigilance are regularly being 
conducted for the Ayush and professionals and public for sensitization. 
iii. SiddharYogam practice are being routinely prescribed to the public as a lifestyle modification 
/ recommendation for the prevention and management of the chronic diseases at OPD and IP D 
levels in all the Peripheral Institutes/Units of CCRS. 
iv. Efforts have been putforth for Integrative Health Research through developing evidence -
based integrative practices that combine traditional Siddha knowledge with modern scientific 
research. Integ ration of Siddha therapies in primary healthcare systems through collaborative 
activities through the institutions like AIIMS and Adyar Cancer institute, Chennai have been 
initiated for holistic wellness and comprehensive treatment to improve safe and effe ctive health 
care for all. 
Special efforts will be taken for preventive and palliative healthcare through integrated 
approaches of Siddha and Modern Medicine. 
v. CCRS will pursue the matter vigorously. 
vi. The existing Siddha Research Institutes/Units of C CRS viz. SRRI Puducherry & SRRI 
Thiruvanthapuram, and SCRU Goa will be up scaled to boost Medical Tourism. 
To attract medical tourism, Siddha Medicinal Plants Research Centre at Kolli hills in Tamil Nadu 
due to its rich flora with supreme therapeutic benefits, climatic conditions and landscapes. 
In the famous tourist places in India, Siddha Varmam and External therapy and 
Rejuvenation Centres will be established with the support of Ministry of Ayush to improve 
the Medical tourism. 

90 
 
vii. CCRS will pursue the matter vigorously through Siddha System of Medicine. 
viii. Efforts will be taken for conducting research to manage sickle cell anemia, malnutrition in 
tribal region with Siddha intervention and Siddha Aahaar 
ix. Since CCRS is committed to serve the downtro dden and marginalized population, 
special component plans for Scheduled Castes and Tribal area Sub Plan will be submitted 
to Ministry of Ayush. 
x. CCRS putforth constant efforts to seek sufficient budgetary requirements to conduct various 
Research and Development activities related to Siddha System of Medicine.  
A dedicated Siddha Training Institute will be established to improve the capacity building, 
knowledge dissemination in research, professional updates and promoting export of  Siddha 
medicines and Medical tourism. 
xi. Capacity Building training programme for strengthening human resources, research 
infrastructure and Institutional capacity is being conducted by CCRS and also offered through 
other institutional programme like i-GOT Karmayogi platform, etc. 
A dedicated Siddha Training Institute will be established to improve the capacity building, 
knowledge dissemination in research, professional updates and promoting export of Siddha 
medicines and Medical tourism. 
xii. Expansion of Siddha establishments under CCRS in all the State & U.T. Headquarters across 
India along with Siddha wings at Railways / Public Sector Undertakings / CGHS / State & U.T. 
Capitals with the support of Ministry of Ayush and State Ayush Departments is being constantly 
pursued. 
Steps will be taken to establish Siddha Clinical Research Units in tier -2 cities to cater the 
healthcare needs of the public and research expansion. 
xiii. CCRS will pursue the matter vigorously. 
xiv. CCRS will pursue the matter vigorously to provide facilities  to investor open 
SiddharYogam Institutes and Siddha Companies in PAN India 
xvii. CCRS will pursue the matter vigorously 
xviii. Concrete Steps will be taken to improve the Ayush practitioners especially Siddha. 
xix. Strategy will be chalked out to seek higher budgetary allocation  for Siddha. 
xx. Establishment of Siddha Hospitals and Integrated Ayush Hospitals in Maharashtra and 
Punjab and other places to provide the traditional healing therapies of Siddha System of Medicine 
and to address the health care issues. 

91 
 
xxi. This would be addressed by seeking adequate budget from Ministry of Ayush to carry out 
clinical trials and establishment of scientific validation centres for Ayush Products. 
xxii. Healthy farming by adopting Good Agricultural and Collection Pra ctices (GACP) is being 
practiced and propagated to the needy farmers and  botany interns through one of our major 
CCRS institute by viz. Siddha Medicinal Plants Garden (SMPG) located at Mettur, Tamil Nadu. 
Research will be undertaken to identify the effect s of pesticide usage defects and explore the 
benefits of organic farming by CCRS. 
xxiii. The nuisances of export promotion and supply chain management of herbal and medicinal 
plants will be studied by CCRS for increase the production. 
CCRS is having one Si ddha Medicinal Plants Garden (SMPG) located at Mettur, Tamil Nadu. 
more number of SMPGs will be developed all over India to achieve the above goal. 
xxiv. Inclusion of Siddha in GTMC will be ensured. 
xxv. Siddha medical graduates could also be adequately en gaged for conducting Yoga practice in 
Primary Schools. 
xxvi. Presently such testing facilities are available at Siddha Central Research Institute, Chennai 
of CCRS. Similarly the same would be extended to all other peripheral Institutes of CCRS in 
such a way to benefit the nationwide stakeholders. 
More number of such facilities will be introduced in other institutes/units of CCRS. 
NIS 
NIS will take focused steps to address the issues raised by the Committee, including 
strengthening documentation and outreach  of Siddha research, raising public awareness while 
curbing misleading claims, enhancing collaboration with modern medicine, and expanding access 
to Siddha services in underserved regions. 
CCRUM 
i. The Council is publishing research outcomes in various pee r reviewed national / international 
journals for dissemination the knowledge in India and abroad. These research outcomes have also 
been presented in international / national conferences / seminars / workshop etc. Technical 
reports have also been published  for dissemination of knowledge.  IEC material related to the 
prevention of diseases through Unani Medicine has also been distributed by the Council in the 
remote and far flung regions of the country under Clinical Mobile Research Programme, School 
Health Programme, Healthcare programme through SCSP/TSP. For the promotion and 
dissemination of Unani Medicine outside the country, the council has entered into following 
agreements with International Organization. 
● Establishment of Unani Chair at University of Western Cape, Cape Town, South Africa. 

92 
 
● MoU with Hamdard University, Bangladesh for establishment of Unani Chair 
● MoU with Tajikistan for Research and Development of Unani Medicine 
● MoU with Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Iran 
Unani morbidity codes has been included in the International Classification of Disease (ICD -11) 
TM2 by WHO which is being used by the researchers globally for uniformity in the commonly 
occurring disorders / patterns. 
iv. To adopt the cooperative & collaborative approach,  the Coun cil has signed MoUs  with State 
of Art academic / research institution e.g. CSIR Institutes (CCMB -Hyderabad, NIPER -
Hyderabad, NEIST -Jorhat,  IIIM -Jammu etc), ICMR Institutes (NIN - Hyderabad, NIRT - 
Chennai, NITM – Belgavi etc.), Universities and other rep uted Institutes (IIT Mumbai, 
University of Kashmir-Srinagar, Aligarh Muslim University -Aligarh, Anna University- Chennai, 
SKIMS-Srinagar, NI-MSME, NIUM Bengaluru etc.) 
xi. The Council periodically nominate its officer for training and skill development org anized by 
different scientific organizations for the updation of the knowledge of the officers and staff. 
xvii. Noted 
xix. Noted 
xxi. The Council has received adequate funds for clinical trials and scientific validation of Unani 
Medicine and continuously w idening and strengthening research by upgrading research 
laboratories for quality control on Unani drugs. The Councils research centres have been well 
equipped with state-of-Art facilities, like GC-MS-MS, HPTLC, HPLC, AAS, ICP-OES, Research 
Microscopes etc. 
xxii. Noted 
xxvi. The Council has drug testing laboratories at Chennai, Srinagar, Hyderabad and Ghaziabad. 
NIUM 
i.  NIUM, Bangalore participates in every National Arogya Mela with audio, video, print material 
for dissemination. 
ii.  NIUM, is IPvCC for Un ani Medicine, however centers are needed to cater the India 
population as there are only center peripheral units which give their input in this regard. 
iii.  Yes, Yoga must be a regular daily practice. 
 iv.  NIUM, Bangalore is committed to give treatment i n preventive palliative as well as curative 
healthcare. 
 

93 
 
v.   Yes, Periodical meeting will help in resolving the conflict of interests. 
vi.   NIUM, Bangalore has the requisite infrastructure with Ilaj -Bit- Tadbeer. 12 health  huts are 
in place to provide medical tourism. 
viii.  Yes, Unani Nutraceuticals and functional food with region -specific need promotion in 
Tribal and rural areas. 
xi.   Yes, TOT, CME, workshop are carried out. Further capacity building programmes in specific 
research areas is needed. 
xii.   Yes, Ayush hospital in each district may be established. 
xiii.  Yes, region like Kashmir, Punjab and NE may also be included. 
xvii.  NIUM, Bangalore, complies with SOP and Procedures as issued by the Ministry of Ayush 
& Finance from time to time. 
xviii.  The number is fairly inadequate in respect of the population. The number of seats 
/Institutions of each system of Medicine should be increased. 
xix: 
- NAM may be pursued vigorously.  
- New Institutions/hospitals need to be    
created. 
- Ayush personnel need to be included in public health schemes, especially in rural and semi -
urban places. 
xx. There needs to be an equitable distribution of Ayush healthcare system across the country. 
xxi.  Yes, the funds are needed for better research and product develop ment at NIUM Bangalore. 
PG scholars are given a contingency amount of 40,000/ - for pursuing the research, 50,000/ - for 
Ph.D. scholars, which is Inadequate. 
xxii. The Go green initiative is needed of the hour, along with vermicomposting skills to be 
implemented among the people. 
xxiii.  It is in place through NMPB but needs to be determined for small farmers. 
xxv. Yes, it should be tied up. 
xxvi. Facilities are there, and they are inadequate. The centers need to be increased. 
 

94 
 
Drug Policy Section 
ii. Pharmacovigilance Program for Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani, and Homoeopathy (ASU & H) 
Drugs has been established under the Central Sector Scheme of Ministry of Ayush (AOGUSY 
Scheme).  A three tier structure functional since 2018 comprising of a National 
Pharmacovigilance Co -ordination Centre (NPvCC), Five Intermediary Pharmacovigilance 
Centres (IPvCs) and Ninety -nine Peripheral Pharmacovigilance Centres (PPvCs) is established 
across the country. All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA), New Delhi under Ministry of Ayush is 
the National Pharmacovigilance Co -ordination Centre (NPvCC) for the implementation of the 
National Pharmacovigilance program for Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani & Homoeopathy drugs. The 
vision of the program is to improve patient safety in Indian population by monitoring the drug 
safety in ASU & H drugs by inculcating the reporting culture of Suspected Adverse Drug 
Reactions, keeping surveillance of misleading advertisements appearing in print and electronic 
media also the awareness events are being regularly or ganized across the country to generate 
awareness regarding the AYUSH therapeutic approaches and educate about the systematic use of 
AYUSH drugs in healthcare professionals. 
 
● Ministry of Ayush issued an advisory in accordance with letter no. K -11023/01/2012-
DCC (Ayush) dated December 8, 2023, which clarifies that the permissible limits of 
heavy metals do not apply to Ayurvedic, Siddha, or Unani formulations where such 
metals are utilized as ingredients or in the processing of the formulation. This advisory i s 
pertinent and clarifies the regulatory framework in accordance with Section 3(a) of the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.  
As prescribed in Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rules made thereunder, enforcement of the 
legal provisions pertaining to Quality Co ntrol and issuance of drug license of Ayurveda, Siddha, 
Unani and Homoeopathy drugs, is vested with the State Drug Controllers/ State Licensing 
Authorities appointed by the concerned State/ Union Territory Government. Rule 158 -B in the 
Drugs Rules, 1945 pr ovides the regulatory guidelines for issue of license to manufacture 
Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani medicines and Rule 85 (A to I) in the Drugs Rules, 1945 provides the 
regulatory guidelines for issue of license to manufacture Homoeopathy medicines. It is 
mandatory for the manufacturers to adhere to the prescribed requirements for licensing of 
manufacturing units & medicines including proof of safety & effectiveness, compliance with the 
Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) as per Schedule T & Schedule M -I for Ayurveda, Siddha, 
Unani drugs and Homoeopathy drugs respectively of the Drugs Rules, 1945 and quality standards 
of drugs given in the respective pharmacopoeia.  
Moreover, Drug Inspectors collect medicine samples regularly from manufacturing firms or sale 
shops with in their jurisdiction and sent it to Drug Testing Laboratory under Drug Control 
department for quality testing and if any sample found to be Not of Standard Quality, appropriate 
action initiates such as preventing the sale of the products from the mar ket and appropriate legal 
actions as per Drugs and Cosmetics Act 1940 and Rules made thereunder. 

95 
 
Homoeopathy Section 
The recommendations made by the committee are noted.  
NAM Section 
(xi)  One to one meeting was conducted 6th May, 2024 to 7 th June, 2024 wi th State/UT 
Governments and respective autonomous bodies to sensitize the strategies for effective 
implementation of National Ayush Mission including capacity building and training. During 
review meeting, major States/UTs have confirmed that they are condu cting trainings.  The 
Ministry of Ayush has also conducted Master Trainer Trainings on Musculoskeletal disease. 
Further, during different meetings, field visits conducted from August, 2024 to March, 2025, 16 th 
Common Review Mission (CRM) conducted in 19 St ates/UTs from 18 -23 November, 2024 
under National Health Mission, NAM Conclaves held on 1 -2 May, 2025 at Lonavala, Pune, 
Maharashtra chaired by Hon‘ble Minister of State(IC), Ministry of Ayush, States/UTs have been 
sensitize regarding Capacity building and training of HR for success outcome of the Scheme.  
(xii) Under NAM, there is provision of financial assistance for setting up of integrated Ayush 
hospitals. State/UT Governments may avail financial assistance by submitting suitable proposals 
through SAAPs as per NAM guidelines.     
(xx) Public health being State subject, primary responsibility of establishment of Ayush health 
facilities comes under the purview of respective State Government. However, under NAM, there 
is provision of financial assistance fo r setting up of 50/30/10 bedded Integrated Ayush Hospitals, 
construction of new Ayush Dispensaries and upgradation of Ayush existing standalone 
Government Ayush Hospitals & Dispensaries. 
State/UT Governments including Maharashtra and Punjab are being reque sted to project their 
demand through SAAP as per NAM guidelines by appropriate mapping of availability of 
facilities in the field and priority should be given to unserved areas. 
Further Recommendation  
3.26.2 The Committee appreciates the work being carrie d out by various autonomous 
bodies and research councils under AYUSH in response to the concerns raised by the 
Members of the Committee. The Committee, however, recommends that the Ministry of 
AYUSH undertake comprehensive public awareness campaigns to elu cidate the authentic 
benefits of Ayurveda, while simultaneously implementing stringent measures to address 
quackery and misleading advertisements, particularly those purporting rapid cures for 
critical ailments such as cancer and chronic kidney disease. Th e introduction of robust 
penal provisions is imperative to deter deceptive claims that compromise the credibility of 
AYUSH systems. Furthermore, the Committee emphasizes the need to extend Yoga 
awareness initiatives beyond the observance of World Yoga Day,  ensuring sustained 
outreach at rural and block levels throughout the year. Priority should also be accorded to 
the establishment of AYUSH institutes  and Yoga Ashrams in underdeveloped states 

96 
 
including Bihar, Jharkhand, and Uttar Pradesh. Adequate budgetar y provisions must be 
allocated for clinical trials and scientific validation centers to bolster evidence -based 
research and promote medical tourism in regions abundant in medicinal plants, such as 
Kerala, Karnataka, and the Northeast. 
 
3.27 The Committee, however, desires that the M/o Ayush should undertake concrete steps in 
compliance of the said suggestions in tandem with Observations/Recommendation made in 
various parts of the Report.  
 (Para 4.1.1 ibid) 
Action Taken  
3.27.1 Scheme Section 
Noted. 
Siddha & Unani Section 
CCRS 
Noted for necessary action 
NIS 
NIS will take concrete and time -bound steps to implement the Committee‘s recommendations in 
coordination with the Ministry, ensuring alignment with the observations made across the Report 
CCRUM 
Noted 
NIUM 
Yes, NIUM Bangalore will comply the observations made in various parts of the reports. 
Ayurveda Section 
NEIAH 
Noted for Compliance. 
CCRAS 
Efforts will also be made to monitor and review the implementation of these recommendations. 
 

97 
 
AIIA 
AIIA plays a pivot al role in enhancing India's global economic standing through its multifaceted 
approach, and significantly contributes to India's economic growth by promoting Ayurveda. 
These efforts align with the nation's broader objectives of sustainable development, in novation, 
and economic diversification. 
• AIIA‘s integrated holistic health care model through 200 bedded hospital with 45 
specialty OPDs, and producing skilled professionals, helps reducing the healthcare costs for all 
and the burden on conventional healthcare infrastructure covering the large rural population. 
• AIIA established one satellite centre at Goa which has 100 bedded hospital and it is 
promoting medical tourism as per one of its mandate, with the support of Ministry of Ayush. 
• AIIA extended its  OPD services by establishing 6 extension centres at various places 
including LBSNAA-Mussoorie; Supreme court, Safdarjung Hospital, NCI Jhajjar, IIT Delhi in 
New Delhi and Ekta Nagar -Gujarat covering the highest level of govt officers, judges, as well as 
cancer patients etc. AIIA also expanded from phase I to phase II and generate economy by 
recruiting faculties, medical staff, nursing staff, researchers, hospital staff, other technicians and 
other support staff.  
• Through organizing regular medical camps,  Public Health Initiatives (PHI) projects and 
DhanvantariRath, help in improving health in rural areas, and front -line workers like Police 
personals and covering their families too. 
• AIIA organises regular CMEs for the doctors and other training programs for the 
faculties, scholars and hospital staff for their advancements and upgradation of skills, in 
Ayurveda, yoga therapy, and wellness tourism. This, ultimately reflects in their services as time 
bound manner and more efficiencies towards duties.  
• AIIA fosters international collaborations through MoUs with foreign universities) for 
research and Ayurveda trainings, AIIA helps in promoting and establishing Ayurveda, export of 
medicines, therapies, and wellness tourism across the globe. Till date 18 MoUs i n 12 countries 
have been signed by AIIA under the directions of Minsitry of Ayush. Two international Research 
projects are under process on Ashwagandha in long covid with LSHTM, Uk and Understanding 
molecular mechanism of Guduchyadi yoga in Covid with Fiz,  Germany. Several other projects 
are in pipelines covering Insomnia, oral cancer, mental disorders etc.  
• AIIA promotes standardized Ayurvedic products, enabling Indian companies to tap into 
the global wellness and herbal medicine market. Indirectly, also  helps in promoting cultivation of 
medicinal plants and AYUSH -integrated farming, giving farmers higher incomes and linking 
agriculture with pharma and wellness industries. 
• AIIA-iCAINE supports the development of AYUSH -based startups through incubation 
and R&D support. Focus areas include Ayurvedic nutraceuticals, herbal textiles, and point -of-

98 
 
care health devices, which can become high -growth sectors and generate job -rich economic 
activity. 
To track the misleading/ objectionable advertisements, an objecti ve has been framed under the 
Pharmacovigilance program of ASU & H Drugs under the AOGUSY Scheme, Ministry of 
Ayush, New Delhi. The program is working through a three -tier network of a National 
Pharmacovigilance Centre (NPvCC), Five Intermediary Pharmacovig ilance Centres (IPvCs) and 
99 Peripheral Pharmacovigilance Centres (PPvCs) established across the country. Through this 
channel of Pharmacovigilance centres objectionable/misleading advertisements are regularly 
reported concern authorities for initiating a ction against the defaulters. However, more stringent 
action needs to be taken against the defaulters. 
Ayurveda is becoming popular in many countries and AIIA is contributing to the promotion of 
the traditional Ayurvedic system of medicine globally by sign ing MoUs and agreements with 
reputed foreign organisations 
● AIIA is publishing three journals wherein research articles are published, which also help 
in popularizing Ayurveda globally.  
● Development of Benchmarks, viz; WHO benchmarks for the practice of Ayurveda 
● Associating WHO in various programs and strategies development related to WHO - 
Global Traditional Medicine Centre and Digital Health 
● Research Database development 
● Protocol development 
● Treatment guidelines development 
● Course curriculum development for foreign Ayurveda academic programs 
● Contribute in achieving sustainable development goals. 
Contributing global health by international clinical research studies 
NISR 
Points Noted. 
NIA 
(i) The Institute organizes propagation ayurvedic knowledge by organizi ng medical camps in 
remote areas of the State of Rajasthan and also whenever chances are made available to visit 
foreign countries by its staff.  Such opportunities are utilized to project ayurvedic education 
research exchange of faculty etc with foreign organizations and countries. 

99 
 
(ii) The Institute is having various speciality clinics for cancer and de -addiction etc. in its OPD 
and treatments and management are provided through OPD and IPD only 
(iii) Apart from International Day of Yoga, the Institute is  organizing Yoga exercises and 
demonstration daily early in the morning for the benefit of patients as well as general public 
which gathered in good numbers every day in the Campus. Such yoga demonstrations are 
exercises are also arrangements on demands by Government and provide organizations in the city 
for the benefit  of general public. 
(ix) The Institute is organizing medical camps, medical check -up and free dispensing of 
medicines under SCP and TSP schemes for which separate funds are made available by  the 
Ministry 
(xi) Various skill development programmes are arranged for Ayurveda doctors and para-medicals 
on some topics so that they are trained in the field for utilization in general 
RAV 
Necessary suggestions have been noted.  
Drug Policy Section 
Noted 
NMPB Section 
Recommendation Noted  
Homoeopathy Section 
The recommendations made by the committee are noted.  
NAM Section 
(xi)  One to one meeting was conducted 6th May, 2024 to 7 th June, 2024 with State/UT 
Governments and respective autonomous bodies to sensitize the strategies for effective 
implementation of National Ayush Mission including capacity building and training. During 
review meeting, major States/UTs have confirmed that they are conducting trainings.  The 
Ministry of Ayush has also conducted M aster Trainer Trainings on Musculoskeletal disease. 
Further, during different meetings, field visits conducted from August, 2024 to March, 2025, 16 th 
Common Review Mission (CRM) conducted in 19 States/UTs from 18 -23 November, 2024 
under National Health Mis sion, NAM Conclaves held on 1 -2 May, 2025 at Lonavala, Pune, 
Maharashtra chaired by Hon‘ble Minister of State(IC), Ministry of Ayush, States/UTs have been 
sensitize regarding Capacity building and training of HR for success outcome of the Scheme.  

100 
 
(xii) Under NAM, there is provision of financial assistance for setting up of integrated Ayush 
hospitals. State/UT Governments may avail financial assistance by submitting suitable proposals 
through SAAPs as per NAM guidelines.     
(xx) Public health being State s ubject, primary responsibility of establishment of Ayush health 
facilities comes under the purview of respective State Government. However, under NAM, there 
is provision of financial assistance for setting up of 50/30/10 bedded Integrated Ayush Hospitals, 
construction of new Ayush Dispensaries and upgradation of Ayush existing standalone 
Government Ayush Hospitals & Dispensaries. 
State/UT Governments including Maharashtra and Punjab are being requested to project their 
demand through SAAP as per NAM guideli nes by appropriate mapping of availability of 
facilities in the field and priority should be given to unserved areas. 
 
Further Recommendation  
3.27.2 The Committee reiterates that the M/o Ayush should undertake concrete steps in 
compliance of the suggestions/issues raised by Members of the Committee in Para 4.1 in the 
165th Report of the Committee.  
 
STATUS OF UTILIZATION CERTIFICATES 
3.28 The Committee understands that Utilization Certificate (UC) in government systems is a 
crucial document that verifies h ow funds allocated for a specific project or scheme have been 
spent. Moreover, UC ensures transparency and accountability by demonstrating that the fund 
allocation has been used for its intended purpose and not misappropriated, and that the project 
achieved its desired outcomes. In this light the Committee has observed and recommended time 
and again regarding the delay in clearing pending UCs. The Committee expresses concern over 
pending UCs to number of 1549 involving Rs. 1608.29 during 2023 -24 and a total  number of 
1521 pending UCs involving an amount to the tune of Rs. 1765.85 in 2024 -25. The Committee 
observes that the largest share in pending UCs is that of NAM with 897 UCs worth Rs 1592.09 
crores. Timely submission of UCs is very crucial in scheme moni toring, subsequent release of 
funds and successful implementation of the scheme. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends that the Ministry must expedite its efforts in liquidating UCs as per standard 
timeline set for the activity. States/UTs may be p ersuaded and encouraged to use the NAM portal 
efficiently for the submitting UCs, SAAPs etc. 
(Para 4.2.2 ibid)  
Action Taken 
3.28.1 Budget Section 

101 
 
The various efforts to liquidate the outstanding UCs are going on continuously in the Ministry. 
The status of Pending UCs is being reviewed on weekly basis by Secretary (Ayush) in the Senior 
Officers‘ Meeting. The status is also being reviewed/ monitored by CCA by conducting the 
meetings with the concerned Pay & Accounts offices and programme divisions of Ministr y of 
Ayush. 
Scheme Section 
Noted. 
NMPB Section 
NMPB, Ministry of Ayush has taken following efforts to expedite Pending UC‘s:  
● For early liquidation of pending UC‘s, the programme divisions of NMPB are regularly 
following up with the project implementing ag encies (State Forest Departments) and also 
hand holding of PI‘s of the projects to submit the correct UC related documents. 
● Time to time D.O. letters from CEO NMPB level are also sent to Head of concerned 
departments (PCCF) / project implementing agencies. 
● Review Meetings were conducted with PI/ Co-PI for the project for liquidation of pending 
Utilization Certificate (UC) in virtual mode (VC). 
NAM Section 
UCs submitted by State/UT Governments is examined by Ministry very thoroughly in all 
respects, specifically whether it is utilized for the same purpose for which it was sanctioned.   
Further, to obtain/liquidate UCs, the Ministry is in regular touch with States/UTs and even 
officials are also being sent to States/UTs for the same. The Central team visiting the States for 
reviewing NAM activities or other purpose are also flagging any issues of UCs invariably in all 
the meetings.  
As per conditions of Dept. of Expenditure funds are released each States/UTs only after receiving 
of 75% of their UCs. 
Due to the efforts of Ministry, UCs for an amount of Rs. 474.53 Crore has been liquidated in 
2024-25.  
Further, Ministry is continuously encouraging States/UTs to submit UCs through NAM portal. 
Further Recommendation  
3.28.2 The Committee is deeply concerned that onl y Rs. 475.00 crore worth of Utilization 
Certificates (UCs) have been liquidated in 2024 -25, which is grossly insufficient given the 
backlog of over 1,500 pending UCs under the National AYUSH Mission (NAM). Given the 

102 
 
critical role UCs play in ensuring trans parency, accountability, and effective scheme 
implementation, the mounting issue of pending liquidation of UCs should be a matter of 
concern for the Ministry. This shortcoming hampers timely monitoring and subsequent 
fund releases, adversely affecting proj ect outcomes. The Committee, therefore, urges the 
Ministry to intensify efforts to expedite the clearance of pending UCs, particularly under 
the National AYUSH Mission, to meet prescribed timelines. The Committee also 
recommends that the Ministry set a target to limit pending UCs below 10% of the total UCs 
at any given time and eventually it shall move towards nil pendency.   The Ministry should 
strengthen coordination with States and UTs, incentivize timely submissions, and promote 
optimal use of the NAM p ortal to ensure prompt and complete liquidation of UCs, thereby 
safeguarding the integrity and success of AYUSH schemes. The Committee may be 
apprised of the updated status of UCs for the year 2023-24 and 2024-25. 
 
UNIFORM &STANDARD LICENSING 
3.29 The Committee is of view that the Ministry must have a standard licensing process based on 
uniform parameters across all the States so that drug formulations do not vary from State to 
State. A standardized approach will eliminate variations in drug formulations fr om state to state, 
thereby enhancing the quality, safety, and efficacy of AYUSH medicines. This will prevent 
discrepancies in ingredient composition, dosage, and therapeutic claims, ensuring that AYUSH 
drugs meet the same regulatory and scientific benchmar ks nationwide. It will also strengthen 
consumer confidence by guaranteeing that all licensed AYUSH drugs adhere to nationally 
recognized quality standards, ultimately fostering wider acceptance and integration of AYUSH 
medicines in mainstream healthcare. 
(Para 4.3.3 ibid)  
Action Taken  
3.29.1 Drug Policy Section 
Noted. Ministry of Ayush is working further in coordination with Ayush Grid and state licensing 
Authority, Gujrat to make e -AUSHADHI portal more user friendly and robust for online 
licensing of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy drugs. 
Further Recommendation 
3.29.2 The Committee appreciates the role of Ministry of Ayush in pushing e -AUSHADHI 
Portal more user friendly and robust for online licensing of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and 
Homeopathy Drugs, however, the action so take would ensure transparency in issuance of 
licencing process. The Committee‟s main emphasis is on evolving a standard licensing 
process based on uniform parameters across all states so that drug formulations do not 
vary from St ate to State, thereby enhancing the quality, safety and efficacy of Ayush 

103 
 
Medicine. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry  to strive for a nationally 
recognized quality standard that will entail consumer confidence and ultimately foster 
weather acceptance and integration of Ayush medicine in mainstream healthcare.  
3.30 The Committee, keeping in view the obscure and diverse pattern of licensing that creates 
hurdles for the manufactures for seeking license for production of Ayush products. The 
Committee therefore recommends that arrangement be made to have simplified procedure for 
seeking uniform and standard license that will ensure ease of doing business for Ayush 
manufacturers thereby seeking the objective of AtmaNirbhar Bharat and Make in India  mission. 
Moreover, the manufacturers will be encouraged to setup AYUSH industry in the country for 
production of AYUSH products that will ultimately promote AYUSH sector in domestic as well as 
the global market. 
 (Para 4.3.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.30.1 Drug Policy Section 
Noted. Ministry of Ayush is working further in coordination with Ayush Grid and state licensing 
Authority, Gujrat to make e -AUSHADHI portal more user friendly and robust for online 
licensing of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy drugs. 
Further Recommendation 
3.30.2 The Committee wanted to drive home the fact that a simplified procedure for seeking 
uniform and standard license would ensure ease of doing business for Ayush 
manufacturers, thus having an eye on achieving the core objective of „Atmanirbhar Bharat‟ 
and „Make in India‟ Mission. The Committee  recommends the Ministry to facilitate the 
manufactures willing to seek license for production of Ayush products by setting up Ayush 
industry in the country so that manufacturers of Ayush pr oducts can promote Ayush 
products in domestic as well as the international markets.   
  
Clinical Trials Registry- India (CTRI) 
3.31 The Committee is of considered view that implementing a robust Clinical Trial Management 
System (CTMS) will significantly im prove documentation, efficiency, and compliance in AYUSH 
clinical research. All the research councils, institutes and other autonomous bodies engaged in 
R&D, clinic trials and related activities should be brought onto to this single platform. 
Automation of  key trial processes, including patient recruitment, randomization, monitoring, 
adverse event reporting, and regulatory submissions, will enhance efficiency. By automating 
workflows, it will reduce manual errors, enhance regulatory transparency, and accele rate trial 
approvals. Standardizing research protocols with ICMR/GCP guidelines will ensure uniformity 
across AYUSH disciplines, strengthening the scientific validation of traditional medicine. AI -

104 
 
driven analytics will support data -driven decision -making, enabling better tracking of adverse 
events and treatment outcomes. Furthermore, a well -integrated CTMS will allow multicenter 
trials, facilitating global acceptance of AYUSH -based interventions and positioning India as a 
leader in integrative medicine research. 
 (Para 4.4.1 ibid) 
Action Taken  
3.31.1 Ayurveda Section 
● NISR 
Point noted. 
● CCRAS 
The Council acknowledges the Committee‘s recommendation regarding the implementation of a 
robust Clinical Trial Management System (CTMS) and concurs with its potential t o strengthen 
the clinical research ecosystem in the Ayush sector. 
At present, the data of clinical research projects conducted by CCRAS are recorded in structured 
Case Record Forms (CRFs) and, e -CRFs. These mechanisms enable systematic data capture and 
provide restricted access to safeguard patient confidentiality and data integrity, but does not 
support advanced automation or analytics capabilities. 
Institutes can develop project -specific CTMS, adaptable to the specific needs of each type of 
project 
Siddha & Unani Section 
● CCRS 
● A robust Clinical Trial Management System (CTMS) for Ayush (Ayurveda, Yoga & 
Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, and Homeopathy) systems is essential for improving R&D 
outcomes. An effective CTMS in Ayush will be of importance for integrating  traditional 
knowledge to current scientific validation, increasing research outcomes and making Ayush -
based interventions universally acceptable and scalable. A CTMS assures systematic 
documentation, protocol compliance, and data integrity in preparation for regulatory 
clearances. A CTMS ensures real -time data capture, validation and safe storage while 
decreasing human error and bias. It aids in automating critical trial processes such as patient 
recruiting, randomization, monitoring, and reporting in successful manner. 
● Hence well -integrated CTMS research approaches and vibrant ecosystem for multi -
organizational collaborations, to expand the horizons of research in Ayush through strategic, 
coherent, and coordinated research and evidence-based translation. 

105 
 
● Recently CCRS has signed MoU with AIIMS Rishikesh for Cancer Management, 
Reproductive & Childcare and Regenerative Medicine. 
● AI-driven analytics in Siddha for supporting data -driven decision -making, ancient 
Siddha literature content analysis, better trackin g of adverse events and treatment 
outcomes will be undertaken. 
● CCRUM 
Noted 
● NIUM 
NIUM, Bangalore, follows the practices to register every trial in CTRI. 
However, it is willing to participate inImplementing CTMS. 
Homoeopathy Section 
The Committee‘s suggestio n has been noted.  Further, Indian Council of Medical Research 
(ICMR) has published an addendum to the ICMR National Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical 
and Health Research Involving Human Participants (2017) to provide a structured ethical 
framework for Rese arch in Integrative Medicine (RIM). As per the addendum, RIM refers to 
research involving multimodal interventions, wherein one or more Ayush practices, approaches, 
or modalities are integrated alongside those of modern/ conventional medicine to address th e 
health needs of individual(s). 
Further Recommendation 
3.31.2 The Committee is in agreement with the submission of CCRS that an effective CTMS 
in Ayush will be of importance for integrating traditional knowledge to current scientific 
validation, increasin g research outcomes and making Ayush -based interventions 
universally acceptable and scalable. A CTMS assures systematic documentation, protocol 
compliance, and data integrity in preparation for regulatory clearances. A CTMS ensures 
real-time data capture, validation and safe storage while decreasing human error and bias. 
It aids in automating critical trial processes such as patient recruiting, randomization, 
monitoring, and reporting in a successful manner. Since, a well -integrated CTMS will allow 
multicenter trials, facilitating global acceptance of AYUSH -based interventions and 
positioning India as a leader in integrative medicine research, the Committee recommends 
the Ministry of Ayush to encourage all its autonomous bodies and research councils to 
bring-forth clinical trials and related activities onto single platform i.e. Clinical Trial 
Management System (CTMS) which would significantly improve documentation efficiency 
and mandatory compliance in Ayush clinical research.     
 

106 
 
 
 
STATUS OF AYUSH EDUCATION 
3.32 The Committee notes the submission of the Ministry regarding the physical performance in 
field of AYUSH education, however, the Committee feels that the Ayush Education System has 
still require miles to march to play a level playing performance with allopathic system of 
medicine. The Committee recommends that soft skills among Ayush practitioners should be 
incorporated into the syllabus of all components of AYUSH. This should aim at instilling highest 
degree of responsibility discipline and virtue in delivering healthcare to the masses. This would 
in turn lead to increased in the Indian Systems of Medicine and would slowly and surely do away 
with the skepticism towards the alternative medicines. The Committee also recommends 
Integration of technology i n the Ayush curriculum for modernization and creating technology 
enabled work force. 
(Para 4.6.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.32.1 The autonomous Homoeopathy Education Board (HEB) of the Commission has notified 
the under-graduate and post -graduate degree course re gulation with the provision for multi/inter 
disciplinary knowledge content (electives), research methodology and training enhance skill (skill 
lab and advance clinical training). This knowledge has been incorporated in the syllabus which 
will give him conf idence and a sense of responsibility and discipline in delivering healthcare to 
the masses.  
Further Recommendation  
3.32.2 The Committee notes the Ministry‟s response regarding updates by the 
Homoeopathy Education Board on incorporating interdisciplinary knowledge, research 
methodology, and skill enhancement in the syllabus. However, the Action Taken lacks 
clarity on how soft skills such as communication, ethical responsibility, discipline, and 
professionalism are explicitly integrated across all AYUSH dis ciplines. Further, the 
Committee expresses its concern that a comprehensive response hasn‟t been submitted 
covering all the autonomous bodies/institute and research councils under AYUSH. The 
Committee, therefore, may be apprised about the actions that have  been taken by all the 
bodies concerned with that matter under AYUSH.  Additionally, the recommendation to 
modernize the curriculum through technology integration and creation of a technology -
enabled workforce remains unaddressed. The Committee urges the M inistry to ensure a 
comprehensive revision of curricula across all AYUSH streams that systematically 
incorporates soft skills training and modern technological competencies. A detailed 
implementation plan with timelines and measurable outcomes should be su bmitted for the 
Committee‟s review. 

107 
 
 
 
3.33 The Committee appreciates the Ministry for the steps taken regarding education in 
integrative healthcare and considers that the mandatory one week internship in Ayush MBBS 
curriculum be enhanced to atleast 15 days  so that a more comprehensive knowledge sharing can 
take place between conventional and alternative system of medicine. Furthermore the Committee 
is of considered view that one -year nursing course that has been proposed and started within 
Ayush be adopted on a wider scale in line with the requirement of manpower in healthcare 
sector. 
 (Para 4.6.4 ibid) 
Action Taken  
3.33.1 Noted 
Further Recommendation  
3.33.2 The Committee expresses concern that the Ministry has simply mentioned “Noted” 
in its ATN in compli ance of the Committee‟s recommendation on education in integrated 
healthcare. The Committee expects the Ministry to provide comprehensive details of the 
Action Taken on the given recommendation that internship in Ayush MBBS curriculum be 
enhanced to atleast 15 days. The Committee is of firm view that such a step would ensure a 
holistic knowledge sharing  between conventional and alternative system of medicine. 
Furthermore, the Ministry has not addressed the recommendation that one -year nursing 
course started  within Ayush be adopted on a wider scale. The Committee desires to be 
apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry so far to propagate the nursing course across 
India as per healthcare requirements.   
 
3.34 The Committee has been apprised that the All Indi a Institute of Ayurveda, which is in Delhi, 
has a wellness center in LBSNAA, Mussoorie, one in the Supreme Court, one in Arogya Van, 
Ekta Nagar, which is the Statue of Unity, and there are others. Like Ayush wings, all AIIMS, and 
the Department of Ayush ar e proposed in all upcoming AIIMS. The Ministry has decided that all 
AIIMS should have an academic department of Ayush. The Committee appreciates setting up of 
Ayush Wellness Centres within the complex of government institutions and recommends that 
more such centres may be opened up in coming years. The Committee desires that a separate 
centre of Ayush may also be set up in Parliament Complex for treatment of MPs, Ex -MPs and 
Employees and Ex -Employees of Sansad that would not only ensure treatment of Members  of 
Parliament through Ayush System but would ensure the popularization/awareness of Ayush to 
each constituency as the Member of Parliament would prove a harbinger to awareness of 
common masses across the country. The Committee strongly recommends that ded icated 

108 
 
Department of Ayush be setup in all AIIMS across the country in a quick time bound manner. The 
Committee also expects that the departments so instituted be supplied with adequate manpower 
and resources as necessary for the smooth running of the depa rtment for better service of the 
public.  
(Para 4.6.6 ibid) 
Action Taken  
3.34.1 Siddha & Unani Section 
● CCRS 
● Currently Siddha departments functions at AIIMS - Raipur, Jodhpur, Rishikesh, Bhopal 
only. Setting up of Siddha centers in other AIIMS across the Country will be initiated. 
● Expanding Siddha Establishments in all the State & U.T. headquarters across India. 
● Expanding more Siddha wings at Railways / Public Sector Undertakings / CGHS / State 
& U.T. Capitals. 
● Ayush Wellness Clinics (AWC) at Holy Pilgrim Ce ntres across India (Ayodhya, Ujjain, 
Velankanni, Nagore, Prayagraj and Katra-Jammu) will be established. 
● Siddha Wellness Centres (SWC) will be established in Parliamentary and all State 
Assembly premises to cater the healthcare needs of the policy makers and officials. 
 
Further Recommendation  
3.34.2 The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction with the half hearted approach of the 
Ministry to opening up more Ayush Centre in AIIMS and other Government Institutes of 
the country. The Committee thus reiterates that Department of Ayush be setup in all 
AIIMS across the country in a time bound manner with adequate manpower and resources 
as necessary for the smooth running of the department for better service of the public. The 
Committee further recommends that a co llaborative effort between the Ministry of Ayush 
and Union Ministry of Health to establish a pluralistic healthcare system to enhance 
healthcare delivery, promote well-being and preserve traditional knowledge of medicine.  
3.34.3 The Committee reiterates t hat a separate centre of Ayush may also be set up in 
Parliament Complex for treatment of MPs, Ex -MPs and Employees and Ex -Employees of 
Sansad that would not only ensure treatment of Members of Parliament through Ayush 
System but would ensure the popularization/awareness of Ayush to each constituency as the 
Member of Parliament would prove a harbinger to awareness of common masses across the 
county.  
 
MEDICAL VALUE TOURISM (MVT) 
3.35 The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry is working on 20,000 stu dents at Eklavya 
Residential Model Schools to focus on TB, Anemia, Haemoglobinopathies and malnutrition 

109 
 
among those children, in collaboration with M/o Tribal Affairs. The Committee is of the opinion 
that the Ministry must explore such activities including  Sickel Cell Anemia in the Tribal areas 
and in the northeastern regions and widen the scope of collaboration with M/o Tribal Affairs. 
(Para 4.12 ibid) 
Action Taken  
3.35.1 ADS Section 
Noted for compliance 
Further Recommendation  
3.35.2 The Committee expres ses concern that the recommendation on expanding the scope 
of treatment of Sickle Cell Anemia in the Tribal areas and in northeast regions with 
Collaboration with M/o Tribal Affairs has been responded  with a single clause “Noted for 
compliance”. The Commit tee understands that India has a significant young population 
affected by Sickle Cell Disease (SCD). The global share of India in SCD is also high. 
Therefore, it is imperative that the Ministry takes all the steps necessary to effectively treat 
such diseas es. The Committee wants to know the exact action taken by the Ministry to 
implement the Committee‟s recommendation on ground level with details of plans. The 
Committee also wants to know the positive impacts that have been created via Eklavya 
Residential Model Schools in quantitave terms. 
 
Cooperative and Collaborative Approach between Ayush and Allopathy 
3.36 The issues relating to integrative approaches and differences of opinion on public health, 
medical education and research, policy formulation and imp lementation etc. between traditional 
medicine and modern medicine have come up before the Committee time and again. The 
Committee is of the view that these differences affect the implementation of health welfare 
schemes and policies. The Committee therefor e feels that there should be an institutional 
mechanism to bring the two systems of medicines on a common platform. The Committee desires 
that through this institutional mechanism, regular joint meetings between the M/o Ayush and M/o 
Health & Family Welfare, NMC and NCISM, NCH and Ayush Research Councils may be held to 
settle the grey areas and resolve the issues affecting health policy formulation and 
implementation strategies. The Committee strongly recommends that instead of antagonistic 
relationship, there should be cooperative and collaborative approach and cohesive equilibrium 
between the Ayush and Allopathy so that integrated and coordinated efforts may be made for 
treatment of various diseases. 
(Para 4.13 ibid) 
 

110 
 
Action Taken 
3.36.1 AEP-III Section 
● NCH 
NCH has proactively made modifications in the Curriculum of BHMS and MD courses to have 
an integrative approach towards all systems of treatment  
● Draft of National Commission for Homoeopathy (Homoeopathy Super Specialty -
Doctorate  of Medicine in Homoeopa thy) Regulations, 2025 has been published in public 
domain to introduce superspeciality in 06 subjects  
● Electives with certification: Mandatory elective courses include Orientation of Different 
Health Systems in India for BHMS 1 st CBDC and Ethics on Medica l Jurisprudence for 
BHMS 2 nd CBDC while optional electives include Personality Development & 
Teamwork, Physiological Basis of Action of Homoeopathic Medicine, Fundamentals of 
Anthropometry, Teratology, Understanding Lifestyle from various perspectives, Spo rts 
Medicine have already been recorded for students. 
Modern Pharmacolgy has already been introduced as a subject at undergraduate level 
Ayurveda Section 
● ITRA 
ITRA is doing many researches by add -on Ayurveda intervention with ongoing modern medicine 
and sh owed synergistic effect for the betterment of treatment of various diseases. Even during 
Covid-19, we conducted few researches in collaboration to modern medicine counterpart. 
● CCRAS 
● CCRAS has proactively undertaken various research initiatives to evaluate the benefits, 
safety, and feasibility of integrative approaches, particularly the use of Ayurveda either as 
a standalone intervention or as an adjunct to standard modern care in the management of 
diverse health conditions.  
● CCRAS has also undertaken collab orative clinical research studies in partnership with 
reputed medical institutions, including AIIMS, ICMR institutions, NIMHANS, ILBS, and 
such other tertiary care centers, thereby fostering mutual respect and scientific exchange 
between systems. 
Furthering this integrative mandate, the Indian Council of Medical Research and CCRAS have 
jointly launched the Ayush-ICMR Advanced Centre for Integrative Health Research (AI-ACIHR) 
at AIIMS, New Delhi to conduct high -quality, evidence -based research on identified health 
priorities using integrative methodologies. 

111 
 
● AIIA 
AIIA was established as an integrated holistic health care model hospital and obtained ISO 
9001:2015 certification, continuation of NABH accreditation. Since inception of its patient care 
services, th e institute has provided holistic health care to more than 24 lakh patients on OPD 
basis and nearly 14000 patients on IPD basis through 45 specialized OPDs on strength areas of 
Ayurveda. AIIA, New Delhi is a 200 bedded hospital and caters to 1500 - 2000 OPD patients per 
day for consultation while AIIA Goa is a 250 bedded hospital with > 800 OPD foot falls. This 
helps reducing the healthcare costs for all and the burden on conventional healthcare 
infrastructure covering the large rural population. AIIA  
AIIA is bringing synergy between the traditional wisdom of Ayurveda and modern diagnostic 
tools and technology. AIIA's commitment to academic excellence is recognized through its 
NAAC accreditation obtaining A++ and contributing to the advancement of Ayurvedic  
knowledge in more than 1600 publication in esteemed journals. ○ AIIA has a strength of nearly 
617 PG and 144 PhD scholars being offered post graduate and PhD degrees across 12 specialties. 
○ Established Bioinformatics (AyurInformatics) Centre. 
Integrative Health facilities include Integrative AYUSH Clinics, Integrated Clinical Service Unit, 
Centre for Integrative Oncology (CIO), Center for Integrative Dentistry, Integrative Orthopedic 
Clinic, Center for Integrative Critical Care & Emergency Medicine, Cente r for Integrative 
Dietetics & Nutrition 
Central Laboratory Facilities includes Pathology, Biochemistry, Microbiology, Radiology, Blood 
Bank and Central Oxygen Facility. Nearly 4 lakhs lab tests and 60000 ECG & Radiology tests 
have been performed till date. 
AIIA extended its OPD services by establishing 6 extension centres at various places including 
Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration (LBSNAA), Mussoorie; Supreme 
court of India, Safdarjung Hospital, NCI-AIIMS Jhajjar, IIT Delhi in New Delhi and Ekta Nagar-
Gujarat covering the highest level of govt officers, judges, as well as cancer patients etc. 
AIIA organises regular CMEs for the doctors and other training programs for the faculties, 
scholars and hospital staff for their advancements and  upgradation of skills, in Ayurveda, 
integration, yoga therapy, and wellness tourism. This, ultimately reflects in their services as time 
bound manner and more efficiencies towards duties. 
COVID-related services and Public Health Initiative 
○ Established COVID Health Centre (CHC) along with Covid Vaccination Centre, COVID 
Testing Centre as well COVID Call center for integrated care of COVID patients 
○  Zero mortality was reported in COVID cases at AIIA. AYURAKSHA kit distributed to 
80000 Delhi Police person nel, helped protect against COVID, study published in ―Frontiers of 
Public Health‖ (6.1 impact factor). 

112 
 
○ Various initiatives like DhanvantariRath - Outreach activity for Delhi police colony and 
11 research studies done on COVID-19 
○ Developed Bal Raksha Ki t for protection of COVID among children, widely accepted 
among public 
Research and publication 
○ First ever studies on Ashwagandha (clinical) and Guduchyadi Yoga (molecular) as 
medicine have been conducted in England in collaboration with LSHTM, UK and in  Germany 
with FIZ - Frankfurt Innovation, Germany. 
○ 721 research work conducted (including PG -PhD thesis, IMR, EMR, PHI, International 
etc) and till date, a total of 1621 publications by (including scientific papers, books, chapters etc.) 
○ Developed Ayurveda Ahar category with FSSAI 
○ AIIA has also established a Central Drug Testing laboratory.  
○ AIIA has been allotted with 10 ISBN for internal publications. 
○ The library at AIIA has a comprehensive collection of 15376 books, 300 e -books and 
subscription to 10 renowned journals and publications as a learning resource. 
● NIA 
The Institute undertakes research activities with IITs and modern medical colleges and this will 
benefit in the creation of Ayurveda and modern medicine for the benefit of general public. 
● NEIAH 
The Institute has actively been integrating AYUSH with modern medicines through various 
research initiatives and institutional collaborations. Here are some notable development on 
research activities: 
Ongoing Research Project entitle: The title of the project is  ―Promoting the Ayurveda 
interventions for Iron Deficiency Anemia (IDA) among tribal females (18 to 45 year of age)  in 
Mawpat and Mylliem Block of East Khasi Hills district of Meghalaya under component of 
AyurswasthyaYojana. 
An ongoing project of NEIAH collaborating with Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy 
(CCRH) for a Research project in the Implementation of Homoeopathy for Menstrual Health of 
Adolescent School Going Girl‘s - A Public Health Research Program at East Khasi Hill Distric t, 
Meghalaya. 

113 
 
 Moreover, North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homeopathy, (NEIAH) Shillong has 
integrated modern practices in physiotherapy, dentistry and dietary etc. in its hospital to provide a 
comprehensive health care for patients' benefit.  
Moreover, laboratory and radiology procedures are routinely conducted to supplement the 
Ayurvedic diagnosis of patients.  
NEIAH has also ensured high quality and affordable Ayush facilities through its two hospitals 
and a peripheral OPD at Smit Village.  
Siddha & Unani Section 
● CCRS 
● Conduction of integrative clinical trials to validate the efficacy and safety of Siddha 
medicines and various therapeutic procedures.  Besides, Treatment Protocols are to be 
developed and published by Ministry of Ayush and Ministry of Health & Family welfare. 
● Foster collaborations with National & International Institutions / Organizations of repute 
to utilize the expertise of respective domains for mutual benefit 
● Integration with Mainstream Healthcare ensuring its availability and acces sibility to the 
Public 
● More initiatives have been undertaken by Ministry of Health & Family welfare through 
Ayush vertical DGHS 
● NIS 
NIS will take necessary action resolve policy differences, promote mutual understanding, and 
strengthen integrated, patient -centric healthcare through collaboration between AYUSH and 
modern medicine systems. 
● CCRUM 
Noted. 
● NIUM 
Yes, in tune with the observations NIUM, Bangalore is of the Opinion that NMC be proposed for 
establishing an optional area of research/PG in Allopathic c olleges for evidence generation in 
Ayush systems that will lead to having personnel integrated background of the two systems. 
Further Recommendation  
3.36.2 The Committee appreciates the action taken by various bodies under AYUSH in 
implementation of its r ecommendation to bring into existence a cooperative and 
collaborative synthesis between allopathy and Ayush system of medicine. However , the 

114 
 
Committee expresses concern that still some of the institutes/bodies under Ayush has in 
their action taken just men tioned “noted” or just expressed agreement with Committee‟s 
recommendation or speaking in future tense without mentioning any steps that has actually 
been taken on their end to implement the Committee‟s recommendation at present. The 
Committee is of the co nsidered view, keeping in consideration the cherished goals of the 
Ministry to have integrated healthcare wherein Ayush and Allopathy go hand in hand to 
put Indian Healthcare at a commanding position in the world.  
 
Promotion of Yoga and Naturopathy 
3.37 The role of Yoga and Naturopathy in health promotion and preventive health is undeniable. 
Awareness of Yoga and its significance has reached international dimensions as evident in the 
celebrations of International Day of Yoga and Yoga parvs/camps being orga nized everywhere in 
the country. The Committee, however, observes that there is an unequal distribution of national 
institutes of Yoga and Naturopathy across the States and UTs, particularly in rural and 
backward areas. The Committee, therefore, recommends  that national institutes for Yoga and 
Naturopathy may be opened in states like Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand and in NER. The 
Committee further recommends that Yoga camps may be organized not just for jubilation but be 
organized regularly at Block and vi llage levels with the real intention to imbibe attitude and 
commitment to Yoga and Naturopathy by heart. The Committee also desires that Yoga classes 
may be held mandatorily in all primary schools and Yoga instructors in each school may also be 
appointed for this purpose. 
(Para 4.14 ibid) 
Action Taken  
3.37.1 Yoga & Naturopathy Section 
The Ministry of Ayush appreciates the recommendations of the Committee regarding the 
promotion of Yoga and Naturopathy for preventive and promotive health. The Ministry is 
actively engaged in promoting Yoga and Naturopathy through various initiatives and 
programmes across the country. 
The suggestion for establishment of National Institutes of Yoga and Naturopathy in States such 
as Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, and the North  Eastern Region may be carried out 
by respective State Governments, subject to availability of resources and other relevant 
considerations. 
Further, the recommendations regarding the inclusion of Yoga classes in primary schools and 
appointment of Yoga inst ructors pertain to the Department of School Education & Literacy, 
Ministry of Education, and State Governments under whose purview primary schools function. 
 

115 
 
Further Recommendation  
 
3.37.2 The Committee is concerned that the Ministry of Ayush has only sta ted that  it is 
promoting Yoga and Naturopathy nationwide  through various initiatives and programmes 
across the country. However, the response reveals significant shortcomings as the Ministry 
of Ayush hasn‟t mentioned the details of such initiatives and p rogrammes specifically in 
regard to naturopathy. The establishment of National  Ayush Institutes in underserved 
states such as Bihar,  Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand and the North Eastern Region has 
been deferred to State Governments without a concrete central plan or support mechanism, 
risking continued regional disparities. Similarly, the integration of Yoga classes and 
instructors in primary schools is delegated to the Ministry of Education and State 
Governments, with no clear inter -ministerial coordination outlined. To address these gaps, 
the Committee recommends that the Ministry of AYUSH to actively collaborate with 
Department of School Education and relevant stakeholders in various states to facilitate 
and support the establishment of institutes and t he mandatory inclusion of Yoga education 
in schools, particularly in underserved areas. 
 
Equitable distribution of Ayush Centres 
3.38 The Committee has been apprised that there is unequal distribution of Ayush healthcare in 
the country. There are states li ke Punjab and Maharashtra where there is relatively less 
development of integrated Ayush hospitals and functional Ayush Centres. The Committee would 
like to know how many Ayush Centres and Ayush Grams are functional in all states/UTs and 
recommends that th e Ministry of Ayush must ensure equitable development of Ayush healthcare 
and ecosystem across the geographical area of the country, including setting up of Ayush Centre 
at the places where these centres are in scarce, keeping in view the region -specific requirements 
and potential in Ayush industry. The Committee has also been apprised of the coming proposals 
for 50 bedded hospitals in every district and 100 bedded hospitals in all tier -2 cities. The 
Committee expects the Ministry to expedite the process en suring priority is given to areas where 
the AYUSH healthcare is less developed. 
(Para 4.15 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.38.1 NAM Section 
Under NAM, there is provision of financial assistance for setting up of integrated Ayush 
hospitals. State/UT Governments may av ail financial assistance as per felt need by submitting 
suitable proposals through SAAPs as per NAM guidelines. 167 Integrated Ayush hospitals and 
1055 Ayush Gram have been approved as per the proposals received from State/UT Governments 
through SAAPs. Suggestions noted. 
 
 

116 
 
Further Recommendation  
3.38.2 Keeping in view the fact of unequal distribution of Ayush healthcare in the country, 
the Committee is of the considered view that the Ministry of Ayush must ensure equitable 
development of Ayush healthcare a nd eco -system across the geographical area of the 
country. In this regard, the Committee appreciates the role of the Ministry of Ayush for 
granting approval of setting up of 167 integrated Ayush Hospitals and 1055 Ayush Grams 
as per the proposals received from States/UTs Government through SAAPs under NAM. 
The Committee has been given to understand that under NAM there is provision of 
financial assistance for setting up of integraed Ayush Hospitals, therefore, the Committee 
recommends the Ministry to expedi te the process ensuring  priority to areas where the 
Ayush healthcare has not progressed to the expected level. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry should encourage States/UTs with lesser economic 
development viz. Jharkhand, Odisha, Madhya Pr adesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and 
Bihar (especially Seemanchal/koshi region) to seek proposals through SAAPs for setting up 
of integrated Ayush hospitals and Ayush Grams. The Committee further recommends the 
Ministry to implement the proposal for 50 bedd ed Ayush hospitals in every district and 100 
bedded hospitals in all tier-2 cities.  
3.39 The Committee is also of the considered view that since Ayush Vision@2047 is a long 
distant drawn Roadmap, it is but natural that the Ministry should draw short -term plan for 
certain achievement of set target and must have provision of mid progress made and if required 
modify the course of action to achieve the target set. The Committee reposes faith in Ministry of 
Ayush for Ayush@2047 provided there are adequate budge tary allocation of each of its 
scheme/project, optimum utilization of fund under a resilient monitoring mechanism &co -
ordinating and controlling the factors of deviance. 
(Para 5.1.4 ibid) 
Action Taken  
3.39.1 CDN Section 
 
International Cooperation 
The Mini stry has a Central Sectoral Scheme for Promotion of International Cooperation in 
Ayurveda, Yoga Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, Homeopathy (AYUSH) (IC Scheme) under which 
the Ministry of AYUSH provides assistance to Indian AYUSH drug manufacturers/AYUSH 
service providers to promote export of AYUSH products and services; facilitate international 
promotion, development and recognition of AYUSH systems of medicine; promote interaction 
among stakeholders and develop AYUSH market at international level; promote acad emics and 
research through establishment of AYUSH Academic Chairs abroad; organize training 
workshops/seminars to promote and strengthen awareness and interest in AYUSH systems of 
medicine at international level. 
 

117 
 
Drug Policy Section 
Necessary steps are be ing taken to ensure appropriate and timely utilisation of funds at the 
evaluation stage of the proposals received. Further, monitoring committees have been constituted 
for physical verification of the projects being implemented under AOGUSY scheme. To ensu re 
smooth implementation of the projects, regular interactions are being held with the grantee 
organisations, including training on utilisation of funds through CNA/PFMS process. 
 
CCRAS 
The grants allocated by the Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences are used in a 
timely manner. For the optimal use of the grants, the Council prepares an annual action plan and 
ensures the proper use of the funds as per the rules. 
 
 Further Recommendation  
3.39.2 The Committee notes that only some  of the bodies  under AYUSH has provideds its 
Action Taken Notes in compliance with the Committee‟s recommendation. The Committee 
therefore, recommends the Ministry that a comprehensive Action Taken be provided at the 
earliest to assess the on -ground situation in respect  of Committee‟s recommendation. The 
Committee appreaciates the larger vision of Ayush@2047 however, to effectively address 
the Committee's recommendations, the Ministry of AYUSH should develop a 
comprehensive short -term action plan, clearly delineating mea surable targets and 
timelines, with provisions for mid -term evaluations to assess progress. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that the Annual Action Plans of each organ of AYUSH be strictly 
monitored and outcome thereof be vetted properly ensuring that t he year plans are 
executed fully. The Budgetary allocations must be aligned with both long -term objectives 
and immediate priorities, ensuring optimal fund utilization through a robust and adaptive 
monitoring mechanism. Immediate actions should include the initiation of pilot projects 
and awareness campaigns at the regional level, aiming for measurable outcomes within 6-12 
months. To mitigate deviations, the Ministry should establish real -time monitoring systems 
and mechanisms for timely course correction. F urthermore, research initiatives should be 
expedited, particularly focusing on the clinical validation of AYUSH practices. Enhanced 
inter-departmental coordination is crucial for integrating AYUSH into broader national 
health strategies and fostering international collaboration. 
3.40 As deposed by the Secretary, M/o Ayush before the Committee, the Ayush manufacturing 
and services command about US$ 50 billion market size at present and the ambitious plan is to 
reach US$ 200 billion market size in the next 5 years. While the Committee is delighted to note 
the rapid increase in the size of the Indian Ayush industry, with budgetary allocation of 0.012 
percent of GDP, the Committee is quite apprehensive of the ambitions of the ministry to grow 
and develop Ayush a s per its expectations. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of 
Ayush needs to come up with more new schemes and strategies for growth and development of 

118 
 
Ayush activities and claim for a much more enhanced budgetary allocation in comparison to th e 
Department of Health & Family Welfare. 
(Para 5.1.5 ibid) 
Action Taken  
3.40.1 CDN Section 
 
All India Institute of Ayurveda 
AIIA plays a pivotal role in enhancing India's global economic standing through its multifaceted 
approach, and significantly contri butes to India's economic growth by promoting Ayurveda. 
These efforts align with the nation's broader objectives of sustainable development, innovation, 
and economic diversification. 
• AIIA‘s integrated holistic health care model through 200 bedded hospita l with 45 
specialty OPDs, and producing skilled professionals, helps reducing the healthcare costs for all 
and the burden on conventional healthcare infrastructure covering the large rural population. 
• AIIA established one satellite centre at Goa which ha s 100 bedded hospital and it is 
promoting medical tourism as per one of its mandate, with the support of Ministry of Ayush. 
• AIIA extended its OPD services by establishing 6 extension centres at various places 
including LBSNAA-Mussoorie; Supreme court, Sa fdarjung Hospital, NCI Jhajjar, IIT Delhi in 
New Delhi and Ekta Nagar -Gujarat covering the highest level of govt officers, judges, as well as 
cancer patients etc. AIIA also expanded from phase I to phase II and generate economy by 
recruiting faculties, med ical staff, nursing staff, researchers, hospital staff, other technicians and 
other support staff.  
• Through organizing regular medical camps, Public Health Initiatives (PHI) projects and 
DhanvantariRath, help in improving health in rural areas, and front -line workers like Police 
personals and covering their families too. 
• AIIA organises regular CMEs for the doctors and other training programs for the 
faculties, scholars and hospital staff for their advancements and upgradation of skills, in 
Ayurveda, yoga therapy, and wellness tourism. This, ultimately reflects in their services as time 
bound manner and more efficiencies towards duties.  
• AIIA fosters international collaborations through MoUs with foreign universities) for 
research and Ayurveda trainings , AIIA helps in promoting and establishing Ayurveda, export of 
medicines, therapies, and wellness tourism across the globe. Till date 18 MoUs in 12 countries 
have been signed by AIIA under the directions of Minsitry of Ayush. Two international Research 
projects are under process on Ashwagandha in long covid with LSHTM, Uk and Understanding 
molecular mechanism of Guduchyadi yoga in Covid with Fiz, Germany. Several other projects 
are in pipelines covering Insomnia, oral cancer, mental disorders etc.  

119 
 
• AIIA promotes standardized Ayurvedic products, enabling Indian companies to tap into 
the global wellness and herbal medicine market. Indirectly, also helps in promoting cultivation of 
medicinal plants and AYUSH -integrated farming, giving farmers higher incomes a nd linking 
agriculture with pharma and wellness industries. 
• AIIA-iCAINE supports the development of AYUSH -based startups through incubation 
and R&D support. Focus areas include Ayurvedic nutraceuticals, herbal textiles, and point -of-
care health devices, which can become high -growth sectors and generate job -rich economic 
activity. 
To track the misleading/ objectionable advertisements, an objective has been framed under the 
Pharmacovigilance program of ASU & H Drugs under the AOGUSY Scheme, Ministry of 
Ayush, New Delhi. The program is working through a three -tier network of a National 
Pharmacovigilance Centre (NPvCC), Five Intermediary Pharmacovigilance Centres (IPvCs) and 
99 Peripheral Pharmacovigilance Centres (PPvCs) established across the country. Throug h this 
channel of Pharmacovigilance centres objectionable/misleading advertisements are regularly 
reported concern authorities for initiating action against the defaulters. However, more stringent 
action needs to be taken against the defaulters. 
Ayurveda is becoming popular in many countries and AIIA is contributing to the promotion of 
the traditional Ayurvedic system of medicine globally by signing MoUs and agreements with 
reputed foreign organisations 
1. AIIA is publishing three journals wherein research art icles are published, which also help 
in popularizing Ayurveda globally.  
2. Development of Benchmarks, viz; WHO benchmarks for the practice of Ayurveda 
3. Associating WHO in various programs and strategies development related to WHO - 
Global Traditional Medicine Centre and Digital Health 
4. Research Database development 
5. Protocol development 
6. Treatment guidelines development 
7. Course curriculum development for foreign Ayurveda academic programs 
8. Contribute in achieving sustainable development goals 
 
Contributing global health by international clinical research studies 
CCRAS 
Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences - is carrying out evidence based research by 
carrying out AYUSH research and standardization of medical system through application of 
AYUSH in clinica l health care, biochemistry, lifestyle diseases. The council is also involved in 
promotion and propagation of Ayurveda at national and international level. There are plans to 
expand the field of research in future by making full use of the funds and additi onal budget 
allocated to the council in the past years. This indicates working towards more increased 
budgetary allocation in future as compared to the Department of Health and Family Welfare. 

120 
 
Further Recommendation  
3.40.2 The Committee acknowledges and a ppreciates the commendable efforts of AIIA and 
CCRAS in advancing AYUSH through clinical services, international collaborations, 
research initiatives, capacity building, and public health programs. However, considering 
the Ministry of AYUSH encompasses mul tiple institutions and autonomous bodies, the 
Committee seeks clarification on whether the onus of these initiatives will rest exclusively 
with AIIA and CCRAS. Additionally, while the Ministry has articulated an ambition to 
realize a market capitalization of USD 200 billion for AYUSH within next five years, the 
Committee urges the submission of a detailed, year -wise strategic plan outlining 
implementation frameworks, institutional responsibilities, and resource allocation. A 
comprehensive response with deta ils of schemes and plans for growth and development of 
Ayush activities and the Ministry should project a much more enhanced budgetary 
allocation. 
 
FUTURE PLANS 
3.41 The Committee appreciates the larger vision of Ayush @2047 and the future plans of 
making AYUSH a multi -billion dollar market, yet the Committee is wary about the present 
situation of the healthcare in the country and observes that yearly short term goals be given a 
priority and direction to provide best AYUSH healthcare to the public by establ ishing 
PHCs/CHCs at district level etc. The Committee is in agreement of the Ministry of Ayush that the 
target of 30 lakh Ayush professionals in country by 2047, setting up one Ayush HQ in every 
district with at least one Ayush College, creation of over 50  lakh new jobs, increasing 
contribution of Ayush to up to 7.7% of GDP etc. by the 2047 is achievable by converting the long 
duration ambitious targets into short -term plan with smaller objective & goals and having co -
ordinating and controlling monitoring m echanism over the implementation progress of 
projects/schemes/programmes ensuring achievement of set targets/goals/objectives. The 
Committee, in this regard, recommends the Ministry to make concerted efforts to implement the 
projects/schemes/programme through development of botanical drugs, entering into Free Trade 
Agreements (FTA) with favourable countries for enlarging global markets & enhancing exports 
level to a new height, establishing global hub of traditional medicine alongside WHO GTMC, 
production &  promotion standard & quality drugs, ensuring widespread availability of 
AyushAushadi Kendra etc. 
(Para 5.2.1 ibid) 
Action Taken  
3.41.1 IC Section 
The recommendation of the committee has noted and Ministry of Ayush requested to Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry to include Ayush product related matter in bilateral agreement. 

121 
 
CDN Section 
Drug Policy Section 
Taken into consideration. A Central Sector Scheme — AYUSH Drugs Quality and Productivity 
Enhancement Scheme (AOGUSY) — has been implemented. The first co mponent of the scheme 
is: 
Strengthening and upgradation of AYUSH pharmacies and drug testing laboratories to achieve 
higher standards. The objective of this component is to bring Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and 
Homeopathy (ASU&H) pharmacies and drug testing la boratories (DTL) up to World Health 
Organisation (WHO) Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) and National Accreditation Board 
for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) standards. 
CCRAS 
In consonance with the AYUSH @ 2047 vision of the Ministry of AYUSH,  CCRAS is carrying 
out the work mentioned in the answer to number 5.2 in the field of plant development. The work 
of promotion and dissemination of the medical system is also being done by promoting research 
in the field of evidence based medicine through standardization and clinical use of Ayurvedic 
medicines. 
AIIA 
However, AIIA extended its OPD services by establishing 6 extension centres at various places 
including LBSNAA-Mussoorie; Supreme court, Safdarjung Hospital, NCI Jhajjar, IIT Delhi in 
New Delhi and Ekta Nagar-Gujarat covering the highest level of govt officers, judges, as well as 
cancer patients etc. AIIA also expanded from phase I to phase II and generate economy by 
recruiting faculties, medical staff, nursing staff, researchers, hospital staff,  other technicians and 
other support staff. 
AIIA promotes standardized Ayurvedic products, enabling Indian companies to tap into the 
global wellness and herbal medicine market. Indirectly, also helps in promoting cultivation of 
medicinal plants and AYUSH -integrated farming, giving farmers higher incomes and linking 
agriculture with pharma and wellness industries. 
• AIIA-iCAINE supports the development of AYUSH -based startups through incubation 
and R&D support. Focus areas include Ayurvedic nutraceuticals, h erbal textiles, and point -of-
care health devices, which can become high -growth sectors and generate job -rich economic 
activity. 
NISR 
It is welcome step to acknowledge the current state of healthcare in the country and observes that 
the annualshort -term goa ls should be given priority and direction to provide best AYUSH 
healthcare to the masses bysetting up PHCs/CHCs at district level. But to cater health in the 

122 
 
remote areas and to provide health to all it is suggested to strengthen the local health tradition s 
and train the traditional healer in primary health care in remote areas. 
Further Recommendation  
3.41.2 The Committee appreciates the bilateral agreement of the Ministry of Ayush with the 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry to include Ayush products. The C ommittee however 
wants to know the steps taken by the Ministry of Ayush to establish Ayush specific 
healthcare centres in PHCs/CHCs at district level in all the states across India. The 
Committee appreciates the larger goal of the Ministry of Ayush to have  30 lakh ayush 
professionals in the country by 2047. However, to effectively realize the goal it is imperative 
on the part of the Ministry to split it into short term goals. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry of Ayush come up with compr ehensive yearly plans of 
producing a minimum number of say 1 lakh Ayush Professionals each year. In extension, 
the Ministry must chalk out the plan for absorption of these professionals in appropriate 
jobs. Hence job creation is a must in Ayush Healthcare to achieve the cherished goals of 
Ayush@2047. Further, as suggested by NISR, the Committee endorses the opinion that to 
provide health to all it is suggested to strengthen the local health traditions and train the 
traditional healer in primary health care in remote areas. The Committee recommends the 
Ministry of Ayush to find out the traditional health practitioners in remotest areas of the 
country and archive their knowledge in traditional healing which can be utilized for a 
larger population of this country and beyond.  
3.42 The Committee understand that the Global Footprint of Yoga needs to be further enhanced 
to tap into the global market and globalization of Yoga and Ayurveda training under Yoga 
Certification Board, Ayurveda Training Accreditation Board (ATAB) may be promoted 
internationally for highest global participation in receiving and propagating the ancient form of 
knowledge rechristened in Ayush System i.e. Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, 
Rigpa-Sowa and Homeopathy for alternative mode of treatment of diseases and healthy living.. 
(Para 5.2.2) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.42.1 CDN Section 
International Cooperation 
The Ministry has a Central Sectoral Scheme for Promotion of International Cooperation in 
Ayurveda, Yoga Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, Home opathy (AYUSH) (IC Scheme) under which 
the Ministry of AYUSH provides assistance to Indian AYUSH drug manufacturers/ AYUSH 
service providers to promote export of AYUSH products and services; facilitate international 
promotion, development and recognition o f AYUSH systems of medicine; promote interaction 
among stakeholders and develop AYUSH market at international level; promote academics and 
research through establishment of AYUSH Academic Chairs abroad; organize training 

123 
 
workshops/seminars to promote and s trengthen awareness and interest in AYUSH systems of 
medicine at international level. 
AIIA 
The Ayurveda Training Accreditation Board (ATAB) does not come under the All India Institute 
of Ayurveda (AIIA). However, AIIA is actively contributing in publicizin g the activities of 
ATAB among the scholars and technical staff of the AYUSH community as widely as possible.  
However, AIIA received Certificate of Accreditation from Ayurveda Training Accreditation 
Board (ATAB) for the several training programs under DAKS HYA scheme i.e. Panchakarma 
Technician, Ayurveda Dietician and Kshara Karma Technician. Yoga Foundation course is 
running by AIIA is also accredited by the Yoga Accreditation Board (YCB). 
CCRAS 
CCRAS conducts Certificate Course in Panchakarma Therapy (CCPT ) and Certificate Course on 
Marma Therapy (CCMC) recognized by the Ayurveda Training Accreditation Board (ATAB). 
ITRA 
ITRA has launched several short courses on yoga (Annexure-I) 
Table 1: Short courses on Yoga 
Executive Diploma Courses (One year duration): 
1 Executive Diploma in Yoga Therapy (E.D.Y.T.)  
2 Executive Diploma in Nature Cure (E.D.N.C)  
3 Executive Diploma in Creative Arts Therapy (E.D.C.A.T.) 
4 Executive Diploma in Ayurvedic Nutrition and Dietetics (E.D.A.N.D.) 
5 Executive Diploma in Wellness and Rehabilitation (E.D.W.R.) 
6 Executive Diploma in Mental health and Psychotherapy (E.D.M.H.P.) 
Post Graduate Diploma (One year duration): 
7 Post Graduate Diploma in Yoga Education (P.G.D.Y.Ed.) 
8 Post Graduate Diploma in Natural Therapeutics (P.G.D.N.T.) 
9 Post Graduate Diploma in Creative Arts Therapy (P.G.D.C.A.T.) 
10 Post Graduate Diploma in Ayurveda Aahara (P.G.D.A.A.) 
Short term courses (200 hrs. duration) 
11 Foundation Course in Yoga Science and Wellness (F.C.Y.Sc.W.) 
12 Foundation Course in Yoga Education and Therapy Assistant (F.C.Y.Ed.T.A.) 
13 Foundation Course in Ayurveda and Lifestyle Management (F.C.A.L.M.) 
14 Foundation Course on Dietetics in Ayurveda (F.C.D.A) 

124 
 
15 Foundation Course in Yoga and Mental Wellness (F.C.Y.M.W) 
16 Foundation Course in Spiritual Wellness and Yoga (F.C.S.W.Y.) 
17 Foundation Course in Nature cure (F.C.N.C)  
18 Foundation Course on Creative Arts and Health (F.C.C.A.H) 
 
NISR 
It is stated that there is a need to further enhance the presence of Yoga in  the global market and 
globalizationof Yoga and Ayurveda training should be promoted at the international level under 
the Yoga CertificationBoard, Ayurveda Training Accreditation Board (ATAB) to have the 
highest global participation. It is suggested that i nstead of only Yoga and Ayurveda entire Ayush 
systems should be promoted on global level based on unique strengths of Ayurveda, Yoga and 
Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, Rigpa-Sowa and Homeopathy. 
 
Further Recommendation  
3.42.2 The Committee observes that the Ministry of AYUSH has undertaken commendable 
initiatives to promote AYUSH systems globally, notably through the International 
Cooperation Scheme, academic collaborations, and the implementation of accredited 
training programs under the Ayurveda Training Ac creditation Board (ATAB) and Yoga 
Certification Board (YCB). The contributions of institutions such as AIIA, CCRAS and 
ITRA in disseminating and operationalizing these programs are noteworthy. However, the 
action taken does not fully align with the Committ ee‟s recommendation in letter and spirit 
to significantly enhance global participation in Yoga and Ayurveda training. However, the 
current measures appear to remain largely domestic in scope and lack a comprehensive 
international outreach framework. The Co mmittee strongly feels that there is an immense 
potential in Ayush systems on the global stage and it must be promoted on a global level 
based on unique strengths of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, Rigpa -
Sowa and Homeopathy. It is recommende d that the Ministry develop a cohesive global 
strategy encompassing international partnerships, welcoming  international students to get 
Yoga Certification in India under aforementioned schemes. The Ministry of Ayush should 
strive to make the ayurveda insti tutes of highest international repute, that all over the 
world people would want to get education in traditional system of medicine especially in 
Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy to begin with.  
 
 
 
 
 

125 
 
CHAPTER–IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
INFORMATION, EDUCATION AND COMMUNICATION (IEC) 
4.1 The Committee observes that the State -wise reach of Arogya Fair/Ayurveda Parv is less 
compared the size of India comprising of 28 states and 8 UTs. The  Committee recommends that 
the reach should cover 50% of the Indian states in coming year and eventually should cover all 
over India in near future to propagate the potentiality of Ayush System in prevention and 
treatment of common ailments. The Committee,  therefore, recommends the Ministry to leave no 
stone unturned in efficiently and effectively implementing IEC Scheme, thus generating 
awareness amongst the common masses especially in rural, urban slums, hilly & tribal area. 
 
 (Para 3.4.4 ibid) 
 
Action Taken   
4.1.1 IEC Section 
The Observation of the committee is noted. 
INSTITUTE OF TEACHING AND RESEARCH IN AYURVEDA (ITRA) 
 
4.2 The Committee after reviewing the performance of the Institute is of considered view that it is 
living upto the status of “Institute of National Importance” (INI). The institute should promote its 
potential on national and international level to further increase the interest of public to the 
Ayurveda. The Committee believes that ITRA can have new innovative experiments in Ayurveda 
syllabi and once such innovation proves to be successful in generation of more confident 
Ayurveda vaidyas, then that model can be implemented throughout the nation via NCISM. 
Ayurveda can further be improved by implementing newer teaching and research method ology. 
The Committee reviewed the performance of the institute in terms of students enrolled vs. 
students passed and is of the view that the pass percentage is an area that needs focus and 
institute may take necessary steps like focused group classes etc f or enhancing the pass 
percentage of students in various courses. The Committee further recommends digitizing the 
Ayurveda clinical training the Ayurveda scholars that would enhance the learning of Ayurveda 
based diagnosis treatments to a new height. 
(Para 3.11.5 ibid)  
 
Action Taken  
4.2.1 Ayurveda Section 
● ITRA 
Recently ITRA has conducted a national level meeting to reform Ayurveda pharmacy (DPharm, 
B Pharm, MPharm) syllabi.  

126 
 
ITRA will start some innovative course in Ayurveda in future as well. 
ITRA will conduct special classes for such students to improve pass percentage.  
ITRA has also developed simulation based clinical teaching (AyurSim) in collaboration with 
Amrutha school of Ayurveda. 
 
 
NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HOMEOPATHY 
 
4.3 The Committee observes that against the actual expenditure of Rs. 13.37 crore in 2023 -24 an 
amount of Rs. 20.00 crore was allocated in BE 2024 -25 to NCH which was reduced to Rs. 16.50 
crore at RE stage. The allocation reduced at RE stage because of non -hiring of contractual staff 
and non -appointment of members of commission. The Committee takes into account that the 
enhancement in expenses/estimated expenses was to meet the additional requirement for hiring of 
contractual staff, new building and appointment of new members of commiss ion, creation/filling 
up of 45 regular posts. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry that due 
diligence must be shown for hiring of requisite staff. Construction of new building, appointment 
of new Members of Commission and creation/fil ling up of 45 regular posts for enabling NCH to 
work to fullest capacity and achieving its set objectives and goals. 
 
(Para 3.12.2 ibid) 
Action Taken  
4.3.1 AEP – III Section 
● NCH 
The National Commission for Homoeopathy has 45 sanctioned posts to be filled on deputation 
basis.  Of which 12 posts are statutory posts including Chairman of the Commission and 
Presidents/Members of its Autonomous Boards as well as of Commission.  At present only 5 
posts are filled and for the remaining 7 posts, the process is goi ng on to be filled up by the 
Ministry of Ayush.  
For the 33 sanctioned posts of regular officers and employees, Recruitment Rules have been 
finalized for 24 posts. Commission has advertised 11 posts in ―Employment News‖ for filling up 
these on deputation b asis. Applications are being scrutinized. Further process has been initiated 
to fill the posts on Direct Recruitment basis. 
To run the Commission on a smooth basis, all the contractual staff are engaged through 
outsourced.  
NCH has explored the availabilit y of two floors in Dhanwantari Bhawan, Punjabi Bagh, New 
Delhi owned by All India Ayurvedic Congress on lease basis. Approval of the Commission has 
been obtained for signing of MoU subject to further certain conditions. 
 

127 
 
CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN HOMEOPATHY 
4.4 The Committee has been informed that a proposal of estimated amount worth Rs 100 crores 
for establishing a Central Research Institute for Homeopathy in Bhubaneswar, Odisha, is 
pending clearance. The Committee recommends that a firm proposal following all the procedural 
requirements for the project be sent to the Finance Ministry for early clearance and the work 
may be started without any further delay. 
(Para 3.15.4 ibid) 
Action Taken  
4.4.1 Homoeopathy Section 
The said proposal was examined by t he Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry of  Finance. 
DoE vide its OM dated 30.04.2025 has mentioned that the current Finance Commission Cycle i.e. 
15th FCC enters its last year, the Ministry of Ayush has been advised to review existing scheme 
through t hird party evaluation and based on findings formulate a comprehensive Umbrella 
Scheme for long term infrastructure growth across all verticals for continuation in the next 
Finance Commission Cycle. The Committee may be apprised of the status. 
 
CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN SIDDHA 
4.5 The Committee is given to understand that CCRS is an apex body for conducting research in 
Siddha system of medicine and provides healthcare facilities, however, CCRS has been allocated 
the lowest budget as compared to other A YUSH systems in field of Medical Education Training 
and Research. The Committee views Siddha system of Medicine as an integral part of AYUSH 
and accordingly observes that siddha should be further strengthened to carry out more research 
and promote Siddha system of medicine across the country to deliver the advantages of evidence -
based Siddha medicine to the public. The Committee finds that no funds have been allocated 
under the Special Component Plan for Scheduled Castes and Tribal Area Sub -Plan for Siddha 
system, whereas for other systems of AYUSH, significant funds have been allocated. Therefore 
the Committee desires to know the reasons thereof and recommends that Special Component 
Plan for Scheduled Castes and Tribal Area Sub-Plan may also be allocated for Siddha system. 
(Para 3.17.3 ibid) 
Action Taken  
4.5.1 Siddha & Unani Section 
● CCRS 
● The research programme of Central Council for Research in Siddha (CCRS) mainly 
focuses on clinical research including safety and efficacy studies of Siddha drugs, 

128 
 
validation of the fundamental principles, drug standardization and quality control, survey 
and cultivation of medicinal plants and literary research. Central Council for Research in 
Siddha has granted 103 IMR projects and out of this 25 IMR projects have been 
completed and 78 IMR projects are in progress 
● 54 Siddha books and 793 scientific research articles related to Siddha system of medicine 
have been published by CCRS for wider dissemination and promotion of the Siddha 
system. 
● In the last two years, 27 new IMR projects has been initiated by CCRS 
● CCRS has planned for Setting up of Tribal health revitalization and Siddha Medicinal 
Plants Research Centre at Kolli hills (Tribal areas) in Tamil Nadu. 
● More number of research Institute/Units will be established under the CCRS for 
expanding the clinical, preclinical research and healthcare delivery through Siddha 
System of Medicine to PAN India. Since there is only nine Institutes/Units are 
functioning under CCRS across the country. 
Since CCRS is committed to serve the down trodden and marginalized population, special 
component plans for Scheduled Castes and Tribal area Sub Plan will be submitted to Ministry of 
Ayush seeking funds. 
 
OTHER AUTONOMOUS BODIES 
4.6 The Committee takes note that amount to the tune of Rs. 578.01 was  earmarked for BE 2024-25 which 
was enhanced to Rs. 770.26 crore at RE 2024 -25 for autonomous bodies. An amount of Rs. 783.94 crore 
has been earmarked in BE 2025 -26 for autonomous bodies. The Committee observes that besides salary 
payment, operational cost  etc., the higher allocation to autonomous bodies are mainly on account of 
infrastructure development, including the construction of new buildings such as the BSMS College 
Building, Phase IV building at NIUM Bangalore, Pharmacy Building, Boundary Wall, Adm inistrative 
Building, and Girls Hostel. It also covers the development of the NISARG GRAM project, the 
establishment of CRIY&N at Dibrugarh, Assam, boundary walls at multiple locations, and renting 
accommodations for research centers like SCRI Chennai and SCRU Goa. The Committee recommends 
that all the undertaken construction activities at various institutes must be completed without time and 
cost overrun. 
(Para 3.20.1 ibid) 
Action Taken  
4.6.1 Ayurveda Section 
● NEIAH 
Noted for Compliance. 

129 
 
● NEIAFMR 
Noted. 
● NISR 
The NISR construction projects may also incorporated. 
Siddha & Unani Section 
● CCRS 
● CCRS is actively pursuing for acquisition of lands with the support of Ministry of Ayush. 
● Details of Office Space available with CCRS and Peripheral Institutes/Units are as  under 
:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Institutes 
/ Units 
Area occupied 
in Sq.mtrs./acres 
Own / Lease/ 
Free of Cost 
Remarks 
1 CCRS Headquarters, 
Chennai. 
1685 Sq.mtrs Owned Own Building at Tambaram 
Sanatorium. 
2 SCRI, Chennai. 4116 Sq.mtrs Lease Leased from State Govt. 
At present in a dilapidated 
condition. Alternative building is 
being searched. 
3 SRRI, Puducherry. 1226 Sq.mtrs Owned Land available 2640 sq.mtrs. 
4 SRRI, 
Thiruvananthapuram. 
1217 Sq.mtrs Owned Co-located with CCRAS Unit. 
5 SMPG, Mettur Dam. 18.14 acres Lease Herbal Garden under Lease from 
State Govt. 
6 SCRU, Palayamkottai. 250 Sq.mtrs Lease/Free Co-located with GSMC 
Palayamkottai. 
7 SCRU, New Delhi. 60 Sq.mtrs Free of cost Located in Safdarjung Hospital. 
8 Siddha Clinic at AWC, 
New Delhi. 
45 Sq.mtrs. Free of cost Located in the premises of 
RashtrapathiBhavan. 
9 SCRU, Bengaluru. 205 Sq.mtrs Free of cost Space allocated in Sri 
Jayachamarajendra Institute of 
Indian Medicine, Dhanvanthri. 
10 SCRU, Tirupati. 110 Sq.mtrs Free of cost Space allocate d in SVIMS 
Hospital Campus, Tirupati. 
11 SCRU, Goa. 80 Sq.mtrs Free of cost Allocated space in old Goa 
Institute of Management. 
 
● The observations are noted and speedy action will be taken by CCRS with the view to 
avoid time and cost overrun. Lands are to  be acquired for establishing self -sufficient 
standard infrastructures to strengthen and disseminate the objectives of the Council by 
widening its network for promoting research and providing better healthcare services to 
humanity.   
● NIS 

130 
 
NIS will ensure th at all ongoing infrastructure projects, including the BSMS College Building, 
are completed within the approved timelines and budget. Strict monitoring mechanisms will be 
followed to avoid delays or cost overruns, while maintaining quality and compliance wi th 
government norms. 
● NIUM 
Construction under phase IV is in progress; enhancement was mainly on account of 
infrastructure, and we are trying to complete the construction within a time limit.    
 
 
4.7 The Committee is of the considered view that the UGs& PG s number of seats be increased in 
Ayush Colleges having adequate infrastructure & manpower so that Ayush professionals are 
available in rural areas where there is severe gap between the requirement of Allopathic doctors 
and strength -in-position. The Commit tee feels that Ayush professional so produced from well -
equipped Ayush colleges would be in a position to fill up the gap of Allopathic doctors in rural 
areas and thus connect their position and contributing to the human kind even at the remotest 
region across the country with benefits of Ayush Sector of treatment. 
(Para 4.6.7 ibid) 
Action Taken  
4.7.1 AEP – I Section 
● NCISM 
Comparison data of UG & PG seats of ASU&SR colleges from 2014 to 2024. 
S. 
No. 
Streams UG seats Increas
e in 
UG 
seats 
PG seats Increas
e in PG 
seats 
2014 2024 2014 2024 
1. Ayurved
a 
1439
4 
3954
7 
25153 3022 5126 2104 
2. Siddha 549 1090 541 139 152 13 
3. Unani 2296 2746 450 160 434 274 
4. Sowa-
Rigpa 
Nil 85 85 Nil Nil Nil 
 
AEP – III Section 
● NCH 

131 
 
The autonomous Homoeopathy Education Board of the Commission has provisioned for opening 
of new under -graduate homoeopathy colleges with minimum of 100 seat intake capacity as 
compared to the old regulations which has provision for 60 seats. This shall increase the 
practitioners of Homoeopathy to fill up the gap. 
Total Number of seats available in Homoeopathic Medical Colleges all over India are given 
below:  
The number of Homoeopathic professionals have substantially increased in last 05 years. As the 
Homoeopathic education system  has undergone significant enhancements  with 
advanced Competency Based Dynamic Curriculum (CBDC), incorporation of skill laboratories 
and hands-on training, enabling students to gain exposure to critical care scenarios, emergency 
management, burn and trauma care, and other essential procedures.  By integrating these 
advanced training, the Homoeopathic education syste m aims to bridge the gap in healthcare 
provision so that Graduates are well equipped to serve effectively alongside allopathic doctors, 
particularly in underserved and remote areas across the country.  
Siddha & Unani Section 
● CCRS 
Siddha academic Institutio ns will be established under CCRS to fill up the gap of Allopathic 
doctors in rural areas and thus connect their position and contributing to the human kind even at 
the remotest region across the country with benefits of Ayush Sector of treatment. 
● NIS 
NIS will take steps to increase UG and PG seats in Siddha courses, based on available 
infrastructure and faculty strength. This will help produce more qualified AYUSH professionals, 
especially to serve in rural and underserved areas, bridging critical healthcare gaps. 
● CCRUM 
Noted. 
● NIUM 
Before establishment of Commission 
Years UG Seats PG Seats 
2019-20 18537 1406 
After establishment of Commission 
Years UG Seats PG Seats 
2024-25 23048 2112 

132 
 
If the lecture student ratio as desired by NCISM 3:2:1 for PG is slightly altered to 3:2:2 will help 
in increasing the number of seats in PG. 
Ayurveda Section 
● ITRA 
ITRA is thriving for the same through its best quality academics,  health care services and 
researches. 
● AIIA 
With reference to the committee‘s suggestion concerning the increase in the number of 
undergraduates (UG) in Goa & postgraduate (PG) seats in Goa & Delhi, please find below the 
year-wise details of PG seat allocations: 
S.No Year PG seats in Delhi PG seats in Goa UG seats in Goa 
1. 2016 56 - - 
2. 2017 55 - - 
3.  2018 48 - - 
4. 2019 58 - - 
5. 2020 78 - - 
6. 2021 78 - - 
7. 2022 76 - 100 
8. 2023 84 - 100 
9. 2024 92 20 99 
 
Further, every year number of student s are upgraded due to faculty recruitment. The ratio of PG 
seats depends on number of permanent Teaching faculties and as per NCISM norms. 
● NIA 
The Institute has an intake capacity of 125 in UG in Jaipur and another 100 seats in its extension 
Centre of NIA, Panchkula along with 130 seats for post -graduation. Every year equal number of 
graduates and post-graduates pass out from NIA and they are utilized by Government or provide 
colleges as well as hospitals and many of them also practice in rural areas also t hereby providing 
the services of these professionals pass out from NIA for the benefit of the country in its Ayush 
curricular treatment activities. 
● NEIAH 
NEIAH, Shillong is running BAMS and BHMS programmes started from the Academic Session 
2016 -2017 onwards along with its attached hospitals at Mawdiangdiang, Shillong Meghalaya. 
NEIAH has also admitted  PG  Scholars  in Homoeopathy subjects in  the Academic 2023-2024. 

133 
 
At present internship for fourth Batch BAMS and BHMS (Academic session 2019 -2020) is 
ongoing. 
Apart from running BAMS,  BHMS and PG  programmes,a One -year Panchakarma Technician 
Certificate course with intake capacity of 20 students annually started from the academic session 
2018-2019. So far, four batches of panchakarma trainees from different North Eastern (NE) states 
have successfully completed their training. Among the trainees, three women were offered 
employment within the Institute itself, while one woman was employed by the Health 
Department of Meghalaya. 
● NISR 
Point Noted. 
Homoeopathy Section 
The National Institute of Homoeopathy (NIH) has an approved intake capacity of 126 students 
for undergraduate (UG) programs and 47 students for postgraduate (PG) programs, in accordance 
with the maximum infrastructure capacity provided. 
 
Gyan Bharatam 
4.8 The Committee takes into account that announcement of GyanBhartam Mission in Budget 
Speech- 2025 and its objectives of the Mission and hopes that the Mission will march to a 
milestone in documentation and conservation of the manuscript heritage with various resources 
that may inter -alia include academic institutions, museums, libraries and private collectors 
across the country. The Committee is of the considered view that setting up of National Digital 
Repository of Indian Knowledge System would pave the way for dissemination of hidden treasury 
of Indian past knowledge of Indian System of Medicine to the global forefront and world would 
know about the past glory of alternate mode of medicine for treatment of diseases through Shalya 
and Shalakya, Sushruta and Patanjali. 
(Para 4.8.1 ibid) 
Action Taken  
4.8.1 Ayush Grid Section 
So far as the Ayush Grid Section is concerned, Under the PM Gatishakti project, a layer for 
Ayush Heritage, including details of Ayush Heritage Sites as well as Ayush manuscripts 
repositories and libraries, is available and is being mapped using an Asset Mapping Tool. 
(Further, information may be collected from the Research Councils in this regard.) 
 

134 
 
Ayush Grid 
4.9 The Committee feels that the Ayush GRID can be a game changer in maki ng available the 
HarGharAyuryog and other schemes and initiatives of AYUSH to larger public. The Committee 
welcomes the AI chatbots etc. as envisaged under Ayush GRID and suggests that chatbot 
interactions regarding medication etc. should be moderated to p reliminary checks and basic 
prescriptions. Moreover, Ayush Grid, being the IT backbone of entire Ayush Sector would lead to 
integration of all stakeholders entailing the benefits of co -operation and collaboration amongst 
all stakeholders, thereby generatin g professional pursuit and thus accelerating promotion of 
Ayush Sector as a whole. 
(Para 4.9.1 ibid) 
Action Taken  
4.9.1 
Ayush Grid Section 
The Ayush Grid is in the process of the development of various utility and assistance chatbots 
under the emerging te chnology component. The interactions regarding medication would be 
guided by the experts/physicians and basic details on the consultations will be provided by the AI 
system that the physician can get guidance from. The Ayush Grid applications shall help pr omote 
the Ayush sector as a whole in a transparent and holistic manner using the emerging 
technologies. 
 
Ayush Vision @2047 
 4.10 The Committee, after perusal of the goals, strategies and roadmap of the Ministry for 
reaching the goal of Ayush@2047, the Com mittee observes that the Ministry is on the right 
course of action. The setting up of GTMC, increase in export of medicinal plants, setting up of 
12273 plus AAMs etc. would enrich Ayush Eco -system. The Committee desires that the Ministry 
of Ayush should leave no stone unturned in achieving the set targets set in Ayush Vision @2047. 
The Committee desires the work done so far by the Ministry in line with the larger vision of the 
Ministry. The Committee, however, observes with concern a general trend in under -utilization of 
the allocated funds to the Ministry for various schemes that may halt progress of Ayush Mission. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry enhance the monitoring mechanism in place for 
overseeing the optimal utilization of the funds allocat ed. The Committee desires the Ministry to 
be more effective in timely utilization of budgetary allocation. The Committee is of considered 
view that timely development of infrastructure and capital assets will put in place a strong 
foundation for the growth of AYUSH. 
(Para 5.1.1 ibid) 

135 
 
Action Taken 
4.10.1 CDN Section 
 
International Cooperation 
The Government of India signed the Host Country Agreement for the establishment of the WHO 
World Centre for Traditional Medicine in Jamnagar, Gujarat on March 25, 2022.  It is the first 
such centre in a developing country. The Prime Minister of India, Shri Narendra Modi, laid the 
foundation stone of the WHO -GTMC in the presence of DrTedrosAdhanom Ghebreyesus, 
Director-General of WHO. The Centre is a collaborative project of the Ministry of AYUSH, 
India and the World Health Organization (WHO) and is the world‘s first and only global centre 
for traditional medicine. The Donor Agreement has been signed between WHO and the 
Government of India (Ministry of AYUSH) in July 2024 t o determine the financial terms for the 
implementation of the activities of the WHO World Centre for Traditional Medicine in Jamnagar, 
Gujarat. The WHO GTMC was established with the vision to accelerate the convergence of 
ancient wisdom and modern science towards the holistic health and well -being of people and the 
planet. 
 
Drug Policy Section 
Taken into consideration. Necessary steps are being taken at the evaluation stage of the proposals 
received to ensure appropriate and timely utilisation of funds. 
 
CCRAS 
The Central Council for Research in Ayurveda Sciences was given a benefit of Rs 469.72 crore 
under the additional budget group for the year 2024 -2025, in which 100% of the amount was 
used by the Council through the eligibility plan point. The grant is used by the Council in a 
timely manner. 
 
ITRA 
Every time ITRA has fully utilized the allocated funds. In future also ITRA will utilize the 
allocated funds in actual expenditure and formulate such schemes/policies which will lay a strong 
foundation for the development of AYUSH. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

136 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE – AT A GLANCE 
 
Staff strength of the Ministry 
1. The Committee notes that the appointment of officers/officials from the Level of 
Assistant Section Officer to Secretary in the Minis try is being done by DoPT and the 
recruitment process is carried out by SSC/UPSC. Given that the sanctioned strength staff is 
short of a vacancy of 25 posts which must have been affecting the operational efficiency of 
the Ministry, the Committee, therefore , reiterates that the Ministry of Ayush must take up 
the matter with DoPT to fill up the vacant posts, the sooner the better. 
(Para 3.1.2 of the ATR) 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION  
2. The Committee observes that many of the Action Taken Replies largely reflects the  
essence of the Committee‟s original recommendations without providing concrete 
implementation strategies, specific timelines, or achievement of measurable targets. While 
the recognition of issues such as staffing shortages and budgetary adjustments is jus t noted 
by the Ministry without entailing concrete action taken or the absence of detailed action 
plans which severely undermines effective monitoring. The Committee, therefore, reiterates 
that the Ministry must ensure submission of comprehensive implement ation frameworks, 
clearly outlining timelines, recruitment strategies, and monitoring mechanisms aligned with 
the Annual Action Plan and Output/Outcome Framework. Future submissions should 
reflect substantive progress and accountability rather than general  assurances or 
reiteration of the recommendations made by the Committee. The Ministry has just 
mentioned that time to time different regional review meetings and field visits are being 
conducted to monitor the progress of implementation of activities under  NAM at the 
ground level, however no substantive fact is furnished in compliance with the Committee‟s 
recommendations. While the Committee reposes its faith in the Ministry, therefore, the 
Committee expects the Ministry to furnish the details of actual dev elopment activities as 
envisaged under NAM with absolute transparency. The Committee, herefore recommends 
that the Ministry provide comprehensive measurable implementation statistics going 
forward. 
(Para 3.3.2 of the ATR) 
3. The Committee notes that the Mi nistry was able to utilize 99.17% of the BE for the 
year 2024-25, however, the Committee observes that there has been significant gap/shortfall 
of Rs. 1414.16 crores in BE 2025 -26 between Projected Demand and Allocated fund to the 
Ministry. The Committee e xpresses concern that the Ministry of Finance is either not 
allocating adequate budget to the Ministry of Ayush or the proposals placed by the 
Ministry of Ayush before the Ministry of Finance for higher allocation is not sufficiently 
convincing. Further, s uch variations recurring oftentimes affect the achievement of set 
targets in cherished schemes of the Ministry of Ayush. The Committee, therefore, desires 
that the Ministry of Finance should take cognizance of such financial gap between 

137 
 
Projected Demand an d Allocated fund, and look into the matter with due consideration at 
RE stage. The Committee reiterates that reduced budgetary allocation to the Ministry of 
Ayush, in comparison to the projected demand, would have an adverse impact on the 
implementation of  originally conceived projects/schemes/programmes. The Committee, 
therefore, again recommends the Ministry of Ayush to approach the Ministry of Finance to 
seek higher budgetary allocation at the supplementary demand stage to ensure that no 
undertaken project/scheme gets suffered for want of requisite fund.  
(Para 3.4.2 of the ATR) 
4. The Committee expresses deep concern that despite the Committee's considered 
recommendation for allocation of atleast 10% of total health budget to the Ministry of 
Ayush, howev er, the actual budget allocation to the Ministry has not been increased 
adequately. The Ministry has just furnished, in its Action Taken Note, that 
recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance which reflects the 
reluctant approach of the M inistry of Ayush. The Committee expects that the Ministry 
would furnish the response of the Ministry of Finance to the proposal of the Ministry of 
Ayush for higher budgetary allocation.  
(Para 3.5.2 of the ATR) 
5. The Committee notes the Ministry‟s respons e regarding ongoing monitoring 
mechanisms and third -party evaluations mechanism to oversee the execution of the 
Schemes/Projects to ensure that the physical targets as set in the Output -Outcome 
Framework is achieved without time and cost overruns. However,  the Committee observes 
that the Action Taken Reply, as furnished by the Ministry of Ayush, does not sufficiently 
address the Committee‟s specific recommendation in its letter and spirit for want of  
assurance of conducting structured midterm performance e valuations, incorporating cost -
benefit analysis and a comparative assessment of targets achieved against targets set. 
Additionally, no action taken has been reflected in regard to the publication of such 
evaluations in the public domain to promote transpar ency and public confidence. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates the need for comprehensive mid -term evaluations, 
inclusion of financial efficiency metrics, and proactive disclosure of outcomes to ensure 
timely course correction and enhanced accountability to bring forth the catalytic changes in 
providing Ayurvedic and Homeopathic mode of treatment to all. 
(Para 3.6.2 of the ATR) 
6. The Committee has been apprised by the Ministry that Public Health, being a State 
Subject, the primary responsibility to bridge infrastructure gaps with respect to Ayush 
system in the country, including rural and underserved regions,  lies with the respective 
State/UT Governments.  The Committee finds the response of the Ministry evasive which 
appears that the Ministry is shruggin g of its responsibility. The Committee understands 
that the Ministry has a goal to enhance AYUSH services, particularly, in underserved and 
remote areas, but States/UTs lacks the requisite resources to do so, effectively. The 
Committee, therefore, recommen ds that the Ministry should undertake steps for 
encouraging States/UTs to propose under State Annual Action Plans (SAAP) for 
establishment of integrated Ayush Hospitals in backward regions of the Country 

138 
 
specifically districts with low human development in dex in the State of Orissa, Jharkhand, 
Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Bihar (particularly in Koshi/Simanchal Region covering 
Purnia, Kathiar, Saharsa, Madipura, Forbesganj, Araria, Kishanganj). The Committee, 
therefore, desires that the Ministry take a syst ematic, analytical approach in assessing 
parameters and identification of sites in underserved districts for establishing of Ayush 
Medical College and Hospital in a time bound manner to effectively implement its 
cherished goals of placing AYUSH system of h ealthcare in the remotest parts of the 
country, even if it needs handholding the states in creating SAAPs in regard to AYUSH. 
(Para 3.7.2 of the ATR) 
7. The Committee understands that the contribution ratio of Centre and State in a 
Centrally Sponsored Sche me falls under the purview of the Ministry of Finance. The 
Ministry of Ayush may take the matter of modification in existing ratio of 60% and 40% to 
70% and 30% of Centre and State, so that economically weaker States may become part 
and parcel of the Natio nal Ayush Mission (NAM). Since, the implementation of the NAM 
Scheme is mandated under Ministry of Ayush, it is imperative on the part of the Ministry of 
Ayush that no stone is left unturned by the Ministry in convincing a change in the 
contribution ratio. The Committee, strongly recommends the Ministry of Ayush to intiate 
communication with Ministry of Finance for increased allocation and the change in the 
contribution ratio to achieve cherished objective of the scheme. The Committee further 
recommends the  Ministry to explore the possibility of providing financial assistance and 
other forms of incentives so as to bring onboard the States/UTs that are unable to 
contribute their share into NAM scheme. 
(Para 3.8.2 of the ATR) 
8. The Committee commends the Mini stry of AYUSH for its proactive engagement 
with the 16th Finance Commission and the significant strides made by various constituent 
bodies in advancing AYUSH integration into mainstream healthcare. Notable achievements 
include international collaborations such as the MoU with Indonesia on Traditional 
Medicine quality assurance, large -scale research initiatives addressing public health 
concerns like anemia, Academia -industry Research Incubation for Value Up -gradation by 
CCRS and capacity -building efforts thr ough international training programs. These 
initiatives reflect a strong commitment to enhancing AYUSH‟s role in health promotion, 
research, and global outreach . The Committee, however, recommends that the Ministry 
expedite the finalization and implementat ion of a comprehensive mission -mode scheme, 
ensuring timely and adequate fund allocation under the 16th Finance Commission to 
sustain and accelerate AYUSH‟s growth trajectory over the coming five years. Further, the 
Committee observes that some of the inst itutes under AYUSH has just informed “noted” in 
their ATN which is against the Parliamentary etiquettes and dignity. The Committee 
expects all the bodies under AYUSH to be equally and proactively involved in the 
furtherment of the objectives of Ayush systems and the Ministry of Ayush must ensure that 
all autonomous bodies and research councils play its pivotal role in providing exceptional 
ayush service to the country. 
(Para 3.9.2 of the ATR) 

139 
 
9. The Committee is not satisfied with the response of the Minist ry in regard to its 
recommendation for optimizing the strategic reach of the Ayush System. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterates that the Ministry should explore the possibility of setting up of Special 
Export Zones and more Regional Centers to optimize the  strategic reach of the Ayush 
Systems. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to promote medicinal plant 
cultivation and invest in R&D to demonstrate the effectiveness of Ayush Systems to 
potentially attracting more funding and support. In this regard,  NMPB is expected to 
emphasise on R&D on medicinal plants, development of Agro -technologies, post -harvest 
management for expanding the horizon of Ayush System in underserved region as well as 
global market. The Ministry of Ayush must direct - NMPB managemen t to strive in this 
direction. 
(Para 3.10.2 of the ATR) 
10. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the National Medicinal Plants Board 
(NMPB) in supporting farmers and stakeholders through infrastructure, skill development, 
and quality certification. How ever, to fully realize the potential of the medicinal plants 
sector as a catalyst of economic growth and livelihood enhancement, the Committee 
recommends that NMPB further strengthen its initiatives by promoting entrepreneurship 
and innovation. This includ es launching incubation programs, facilitating market access 
through digital platforms, and piloting cluster -based and community -owned models. 
Special focus should be given to tribal and marginalized communities to integrate 
traditional knowledge into form al value chains. Additionally, a robust monitoring and 
evaluation framework should be established to assess the impact of these initiatives, 
ensuring sustainable and inclusive growth of all stakeholders. The Committee firmly 
believes that effective impleme ntation of Central Sector Scheme in Conservation, 
Development and Sustainable Management of Medicinal Plants would go a long way in 
promoting medicinal plant sector. Therefore, NMPB must formulate innovative schemes so 
that farmers engaged in cultivation o f medicinal plants would enhance their livelihood 
system.  
(Para 3.11.2 of the ATR) 
 
11. The Committee is dismayed to observe that the Committee‟s recommendation for a 
single independent drug controller for Ayush hasn‟t been complied with yet. The 
Committee thus reiterates its recommendation for consolidating all AYUSH drug -related 
standard-setting processes under a single authoritative body viz. an independent drug 
controller of AYUSH, in alignment with the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, and its 
associated rules. To achieve this, the Ministry should establish a streamlined and inclusive 
mechanism that actively involves stakeholders in the development of pharmacopoeial 
standards uniformly, ensuring enhanced safety, quality and efficacy of Ayush medicines 
nationwide. For that sake and also for strengthening the foundation of research and 
uniform standardization in Ayush Sector, PCIM&H & various research councils of Ayush 

140 
 
viz. CCRAS, CCRUM, CCRS and CCRH work together with due co -ordination and 
collaboration.  
 
(Para 3.12.2 of the ATR) 
 
12. The Committee expresses concern that the Action Taken Reply merely states 
"Noted" without providing any assurance or indication of action taken so far regarding the 
proposed extension of the AYURGYAN Scheme beyond 2025 –26. Co nsidering the 
Scheme‟s critical role in promoting education, research, training, and capacity building in 
the Ayush sector, the Committee reiterates its recommendation for extending the scheme 
beyond its current timeline i.e. 31 st March, 2026. The Ministry is advised to initiate a timely 
review of the scheme's impact and utility, and to formulate a proposal for its continuation 
with enhanced scope and adequate budgetary allocation. The Committee would like to 
know whether the Ministry has approached the Min istry of Finance for approval of the 
Scheme‟s extension. A detailed response indicating steps taken in this regard along with the 
response of the Ministry of Finance thereto, if any, may be furnished to the Committee for 
consideration. 
(Para 3.13.2 of the ATR) 
13. The Committee expresses concern that the Action Taken Reply merely contains 
"Noted" in compliance of its recommendation without providing any substantive response 
or assurance regarding the proposed extension of the Ayurswasthya Yojana beyond FY 
2025–26. Considering the vital role played by the scheme, particularly its components that 
include Public Health Initiative (PHI) and Centre of Excellence (CoE) in strengthening Ayush-
based healthcare delivery, promoting research, and supporting integration  with national 
public health priorities, the Committee reiterates its recommendation for the continuation 
of the Yojana in the ensuing financial years. The Ministry is urged to conduct a 
comprehensive impact assessment and initiate timely steps for extensi on with adequate 
budgetary provisions for the Scheme. The Committee would like to know whether the 
Ministry has approached the Ministry of Finance for approval of the Scheme‟s extension 
and what has been the response thereto. A detailed and time -bound acti on plan may be 
submitted to the Committee for further review. 
(Para 3.14.2 of the ATR) 
 
14. The Committee appreciates the role of a Pharmacopoeia Commission in developing 
and amending Pharmacopoeia and formularies for Ayush system and thus setting 
standards for Ayush drugs ensuring their quality, safety and efficacy and surveillance of 
misleading advertisement. However, the Committee reiterates the creation of a separate 
platform/body to exclusively implement, facilitate and monitor the Pharmcoviligilance o f 
Ayush Drugs. The Committee feels that surveillance of ADRs is crucial for ensuring the 
safety of drugs including those from traditional systems like ASU&H, IPvCs and PPvCs 
which may contribute to these efforts. The Committee recommends the Ministry to 
strengthen Pharmacovigilance systems and promote ADR reporting for protecting the 
public health through NPC -ISM, IPvCs and PPvCs which plays a vital role in ensuring the 

141 
 
safe use of ASU&H drugs. Adequate financial support may be earmarked for research 
components exclusively to evaluate herb drug interaction and further to assess the quality 
and safety aspects of AYUSH drugs. 
(Para 3.15.2 of the ATR) 
15. The Committee acknowledges the Ministry‟s initiative to create an online portal for 
reporting and tracking misleading or objectionable AYUSH advertisements. However, the 
Committee emphasizes that an online reporting mechanism alone is insufficient to address 
the growing number of violations, which reached 15,873 incidents in 2023 -24 and 2024 -25 
(up to December 2024). The Ministry must clearly identify and empower the authorities 
responsible for investigating and taking timely action against offenders. Moreover, the 
Committee is of the considered view that strict penal provisions should be incorporated into 
the relevant laws or regulations to deter and penalize those making false and misleading 
advertisement/claims, particularly, those asserting quick cures for serious and life -
threatening diseases. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry establish a 
transparent monitoring and reporting framework, through which it regularly updates on 
enforcement actions taken, including the number of investigations, prosecutions, penalties 
imposed, and cases resolved. This will ensure accountability, strengthen deterren ce, and 
enhance public trust in AYUSH healthcare system. 
(Para 3.16.2 of the ATR) 
16. The Committee notes that the national awareness programme, 
“DeshkaPrakritiParikshan,” aims to promote Ayurveda across the country by reaching a 
wide population base, with  over 1.43 crore people covered so far. However, the Committee 
expresses concern that the Action Taken Reply merely states "Noted for Compliance" 
without providing details on concrete steps taken by NCISM to ensure rational utilization 
of funds, acquisition of necessary equipment and technology, and appointment of members 
and regular staff. The Ministry is urged to direct NCISM to formulate and implement a 
comprehensive action plan addressing these critical areas and submit a detailed progress 
report to the Committee at the earliest. 
(Para 3.17.2 of the ATR) 
17. The Committee is dismayed at the response of the Ministry in regard to the 
Committee's recommendation to CCRUM, in taking firm reassessment of its short term and 
long term goals in regard to primary research activities. The Ministry has just expressed 
noted in its ATN which is against the letter and spirit of the recommendation of the 
Committee. The Committee, in this regard, desires that the Ministry must guide CCRUM in 
taking a firm reassessment of its short-term and long -term goals and accordingly chalked 
out plans to address the issues pertaining to experimental Pharmacology of Important 
Unani Drugs, Phytochemical studies, drug standardization, and Pharmacognostic Studies of 
Important Unani Drugs and outcome, thereof would provide treatment of diseases to needy 

142 
 
persons in time at affordable cost. CCRUM must strengthen the Clinical research in the 
priority areas including new drug development and clinical Validation of pharmacopoeial 
drugs.  
(Para 3.18.2 of the ATR) 
18. The Committee is perplexed to observe the evasive and incomplete reply as received 
from the Ministry, in its ATN, on Committee‟s recommendation steps undertaken by AIIA 
during last three years towards its vision. The Committee fails to  understand the 
implication of the response of the Ministry in regard to the Committee's recommendation 
that displays a casual approach of the Ministry towards furnishing ATN on Committee‟s 
recommendation. The Committee notes the Ministry‟s half -hearted efforts in advancing the 
objectives of AIIA, particularly through the establishment of iCAINE and limited startup 
support; however, the scale and depth of these actions fall short of the Committee‟s 
expectation. The Committee, therefore, reiterates the need for a focused, well -funded, and 
time-bound roadmap to fully operationalize iCAINE and support Ayurveda innovation at a 
national level. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry of Ayush prioritize 
AIIA‟s development and ensure enhanced budgetary allocation to AIIA with the intention 
to bring AIIA at par with ITRA in terms of national importance. 
(Para 3.19.2 of the ATR) 
19. The Committee is anguished to observe that in regard to its recommendation to the 
Ministry of Ayush for ensuring adequate inf rastructure and manpower to the National 
Institute of Sowa-Rigpa (NISR) in the Himalayan region to provide healthcare to the public 
under Sowa -Rigpa system of medicine, the Ministry, in its Action Taken Notes has just 
responded „Point Noted‟. The Committee  desires that since NISR is a model institute for 
evolving high standards of teaching, training, research and patient care and also to invoke 
scientific outlook to the knowledge of Sowa -Rigpa System of Medicine, the Committee 
considers that the Sowa -Rigpa system should flourish in the Himalayan Region. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to take a multi -faceted approach 
viz. integrating digital outreach, research expansion, community healthcare initiatives like 
clinic on wheels etc. T he Committee further recommends the Ministry to guide NISR for 
assured preservation, promotion and development of Sowa -Rigpa for patient care and 
treatment under Sowa-Rigpa system of medicine.    
(Para 3.20.2 of the ATR) 
20. The Committee is not satisfied with the response of various autonomous bodies and 
institutes/councils of the Ministry, in regard to number of posts sanctioned, in -position 
strength of the staff and vacant posts in different autonomous bodies including the Ayush 
Institutes and Research C ouncils where the Committee had found more than 2600 posts 
lying vacant. The Committee finds that in lieu of the Ministry, various autonomous bodies 
and councils are furnishing their response in compliance of the Committee‟s 
recommendation. 59 vacant posts are lying in NIA while 55 number of sanctioned posts are 
lying vacant in NEIAH. NISR has shown the casual approach stating the recommendation 

143 
 
of the Committee has „Point Noted‟. While other institutes like CCRS, NIS, CCRUM, 
NIUM, CCRH and NIH are seen mak ing efforts time and again to fill up the vacant posts. 
Under the circumstances, the Committee is of the considered view that the Ministry should 
assess the vacant post/position in various autonomous and research councils and take 
centralized course of act ion for filling up the vacant position (estimated at more than 2600 
posts) at the accelerated pace taking into consideration the futuristic development plans of 
Ayush Healthcare, Ayush@2047.    
(Para 3.21.2 of the ATR) 
21. The Committee observes that the a ction taken note speaks of union cabinet‟s 
approving of National Ayush Mission (NAM) from 1.04.2021 to 31.03.2026 and under that 
eight Ayush Public Health programmes has been also approved as a new activity i.e. (1) 
National Program for Prevention and Mana gement of Musculoskeletal Disorders, (2) 
Integration of Ayush with National Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer, 
Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke (NPCDCS), (3) Supraja, (4) VayoMitra, (5) 
Ayurvidya, (6) Ayush Mobile Medial Unit, (7) Karunya and (8) National Program on Ayush 
for morbidity management and Disability Prevention (MMDP) of Lymphatic Filariasis 
(lymphoedema). Keeping in view the ensuing the third quarter of 2025, just few months 
away from the end date of the Mission, yet the  Ministry is reiterating the old trope of 
initiation of 8 Ayush Public Health Programmes appearing oblivious of the upcoming 
closure of the Mission, the Committee recommends the Ministry to approach the Ministry 
of Finance for seeking extension of NAM for another 5 years (01.04.2026 to 31.03.2031). 
The Ministry of Ayush must ensure that the States/UTs are encouraged to come under the 
umbrella of NAM. The Committee feels that the given 8 schemes represent a solid 
foundation addressing several key public heal th areas through  AYUSH systems  but the 
country may benefit from expansion or supplementary schemes to comprehensively cover 
infectious diseases, mental health, and broader preventive health strategies. The Ministry of 
Ayush is suggested to expand the scope  of the Mission to cover the aforementioned areas of 
healthcare.  
(Para 3.22.2 of the ATR) 
22. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry and State Government of 
Sikkim for setting up of Ayush Directorate for promotion of traditional medicines i n their 
State. The Committee hopes that Ministry must play a vital role in supporting North 
Eastern States in establishing dedicated AYUSH Directorates in all NER States. The 
Committee urges the Ministry to encourage the States and provide all the necessar y 
handholding required by the State Governments for converting this vision a ground reality. 
This will pave the way to harness the potential of Ayush Systems, promoting holistic 
healthcare and well-being in the region. 
(Para 3.23.2 of the ATR) 

144 
 
23. The Committee is of the considered view that the effective implementation of NAM 
scheme in NER is concomitant to establishement of Project Management Unit (PMU) with 
sufficient manpower and dedicated Ayush Directorate to ensure adequate monitoring and 
positioning of Ayush related issues. The Committee notes that although Manipur, Assam, 
Nagaland, Meghalaya, Tripura, Mizoram have established PMU as per provision of NAM 
guidelines. While Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim have although established PMU but 
without having full strength of manpower. This is really a sorry state of affairs for effective 
implementation of NAM Scheme in these two States. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends the Ministry of Ayush to effectively persuade North -Eastern States for 
dedicated Ayush Directorate and PMU in Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim must be 
equipped with adequate manpower. 
(Para 3.24.2 of the ATR) 
24. The Committee expresses its concern over the delay in completion of infrastructure 
projects viz. 16 integrated Ayush Hospitals a pproved during 2014 -15 to 2021 -22 under 
NAM Scheme through SAAP due to slow progress in completing construction work. 
However, the Committee notes that 10 integrated Ayush Hospitals are functional, 03 
Hospitals construction completed but not functional and  remaining 03 are still under 
construction. The Committee, therefore, desires that three hospitals construction that have 
been completed but not functional must be made functional without further delay and 
accelerated progress must be made for completing t he remaining three infrastructure 
projects so that the same is also made functional without much procrastination.  
(Para 3.25.2 of the ATR) 
25. The Committee appreciates the work being carried out by various autonomous 
bodies and research councils under AY USH in response to the concerns raised by the 
Members of the Committee. The Committee, however, recommends that the Ministry of 
AYUSH undertake comprehensive public awareness campaigns to elucidate the authentic 
benefits of Ayurveda, while simultaneously i mplementing stringent measures to address 
quackery and misleading advertisements, particularly those purporting rapid cures for 
critical ailments such as cancer and chronic kidney disease. The introduction of robust 
penal provisions is imperative to deter deceptive claims that compromise the credibility of 
AYUSH systems. Furthermore, the Committee emphasizes the need to extend Yoga 
awareness initiatives beyond the observance of World Yoga Day, ensuring sustained 
outreach at rural and block levels throughout  the year. Priority should also be accorded to 
the establishment of AYUSH institutes and Yoga Ashrams in underdeveloped states 
including Bihar, Jharkhand, and Uttar Pradesh. Adequate budgetary provisions must be 
allocated for clinical trials and scientific  validation centers to bolster evidence -based 
research and promote medical tourism in regions abundant in medicinal plants, such as 
Kerala, Karnataka, and the Northeast. 
(Para 3.26.2 of the ATR) 

145 
 
26. The Committee reiterates that the M/o Ayush should undert ake concrete steps in 
compliance of the suggestions/issues raised by Members of the Committee in Para 4.1 in the 
165th Report of the Committee.  
(Para 3.27.2 of the ATR) 
27. The Committee is deeply concerned that only Rs. 475.00 crore worth of Utilization 
Certificates (UCs) have been liquidated in 2024 -25, which is grossly insufficient given the 
backlog of over 1,500 pending UCs under the National AYUSH Mission (NAM). Given the 
critical role UCs play in ensuring transparency, accountability, and effective s cheme 
implementation, the mounting issue of pending liquidation of UCs should be a matter of 
concern for the Ministry. This shortcoming hampers timely monitoring and subsequent 
fund releases, adversely affecting project outcomes. The Committee, therefore, urges the 
Ministry to intensify efforts to expedite the clearance of pending UCs, particularly under 
the National AYUSH Mission, to meet prescribed timelines. The Committee also 
recommends that the Ministry set a target to limit pending UCs below 10% of th e total UCs 
at any given time and eventually it shall move towards nil pendency.   The Ministry should 
strengthen coordination with States and UTs, incentivize timely submissions, and promote 
optimal use of the NAM portal to ensure prompt and complete liqu idation of UCs, thereby 
safeguarding the integrity and success of AYUSH schemes. The Committee may be 
apprised of the updated status of UCs for the year 2023-24 and 2024-25. 
(Para 3.28.2 of the ATR) 
28. The Committee appreciates the role of Ministry of Ayu sh in pushing e -AUSHADHI 
Portal more user friendly and robust for online licensing of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and 
Homeopathy Drugs, however, the action so take would ensure transparency in issuance of 
licencing process. The Committee‟s main emphasis is on evolving a standard licensing 
process based on uniform parameters across all states so that drug formulations do not 
vary from State to State, thereby enhancing the quality, safety and efficacy of Ayush 
Medicine. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Mi nistry to strive for a nationally 
recognized quality standard that will entail consumer confidence and ultimately foster 
weather acceptance and integration of Ayush medicine in mainstream healthcare.  
(Para 3.29.2 of the ATR) 
 
29. The Committee wanted to d rive home the fact that a simplified procedure for 
seeking uniform and standard license would ensure ease of doing business for Ayush 
manufacturers, thus having an eye on achieving the core objective of „Atmanirbhar Bharat‟ 
and „Make in India‟ Mission. The  Committee recommends the Ministry to facilitate the 
manufactures willing to seek license for production of Ayush products by setting up Ayush 

146 
 
industry in the country so that manufacturers of Ayush products can promote Ayush 
products in domestic as well as the international markets.   
(Para 3.30.2 of the ATR) 
30. The Committee is in agreement with the submission of CCRS that an effective 
CTMS in Ayush will be of importance for integrating traditional knowledge to current 
scientific validation, increasing re search outcomes and making Ayush -based interventions 
universally acceptable and scalable. A CTMS assures systematic documentation, protocol 
compliance, and data integrity in preparation for regulatory clearances. A CTMS ensures 
real-time data capture, vali dation and safe storage while decreasing human error and bias. 
It aids in automating critical trial processes such as patient recruiting, randomization, 
monitoring, and reporting in a successful manner. Since, a well -integrated CTMS will allow 
multicenter trials, facilitating global acceptance of AYUSH -based interventions and 
positioning India as a leader in integrative medicine research, the Committee recommends 
the Ministry of Ayush to encourage all its autonomous bodies and research councils to 
bring-forth clinical trials and related activities onto single platform i.e. Clinical Trial 
Management System (CTMS) which would significantly improve documentation efficiency 
and mandatory compliance in Ayush clinical research.     
(Para 3.31.2 of the ATR) 
31. The Committee notes the Ministry‟s response regarding updates by the 
Homoeopathy Education Board on incorporating interdisciplinary knowledge, research 
methodology, and skill enhancement in the syllabus. However, the Action Taken lacks 
clarity on how soft ski lls such as communication, ethical responsibility, discipline, and 
professionalism are explicitly integrated across all AYUSH disciplines. Further, the 
Committee expresses its concern that a comprehensive response hasn‟t been submitted 
covering all the aut onomous bodies/institute and research councils under AYUSH. The 
Committee, therefore, may be apprised about the actions that have been taken by all the 
bodies concerned with that matter under AYUSH.  Additionally, the recommendation to 
modernize the curric ulum through technology integration and creation of a technology -
enabled workforce remains unaddressed. The Committee urges the Ministry to ensure a 
comprehensive revision of curricula across all AYUSH streams that systematically 
incorporates soft skills t raining and modern technological competencies. A detailed 
implementation plan with timelines and measurable outcomes should be submitted for the 
Committee‟s review. 
(Para 3.32.2 of the ATR) 
32. The Committee expresses concern that the Ministry has simply m entioned “Noted” 
in its ATN in compliance of the Committee‟s recommendation on education in integrated 
healthcare. The Committee expects the Ministry to provide comprehensive details of the 
Action Taken on the given recommendation that internship in Ayush MBBS curriculum be 

147 
 
enhanced to atleast 15 days. The Committee is of firm view that such a step would ensure a 
holistic knowledge sharing between conventional and alternative system of medicine. 
Furthermore, the Ministry has not addressed the recommendation  that one -year nursing 
course started within Ayush be adopted on a wider scale. The Committee desires to be 
apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry so far to propagate the nursing course across 
India as per healthcare requirements.   
(Para 3.33.2 of the ATR) 
33. The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction with the half hearted approach of the 
Ministry to opening up more Ayush Centre in AIIMS and other Government Institutes of 
the country. The Committee thus reiterates that Department of Ayush be setup i n all 
AIIMS across the country in a time bound manner with adequate manpower and resources 
as necessary for the smooth running of the department for better service of the public. The 
Committee further recommends that a collaborative effort between the Mini stry of Ayush 
and Union Ministry of Health to establish a pluralistic healthcare system to enhance 
healthcare delivery, promote well-being and preserve traditional knowledge of medicine.  
(Para 3.34.2 of the ATR) 
 
34. The Committee reiterates that a separa te centre of Ayush may also be set up in 
Parliament Complex for treatment of MPs, Ex -MPs and Employees and Ex -Employees of 
Sansad that would not only ensure treatment of Members of Parliament through Ayush 
System but would ensure the popularization/awareness of Ayush to each constituency as the 
Member of Parliament would prove a harbinger to awareness of common masses across the 
county.  
(Para 3.34.3 of the ATR) 
35. The Committee expresses concern that the recommendation on expanding the scope 
of treatment of Sickle Cell Anemia in the Tribal areas and in northeast regions with 
Collaboration with M/o Tribal Affairs has been responded with a single clause “Noted for 
compliance”. The Committee understands that India has a significant young population 
affected b y Sickle Cell Disease (SCD). The global share of India in SCD is also high. 
Therefore, it is imperative that the Ministry takes all the steps necessary to effectively treat 
such diseases. The Committee wants to know the exact action taken by the Ministry t o 
implement the Committee‟s recommendation on ground level with details of plans. The 
Committee also wants to know the positive impacts that have been created via Eklavya 
Residential Model Schools in quantitave terms. 
(Para 3.35.2 of the ATR) 
 

148 
 
36. The Comm ittee appreciates the action taken by various bodies under AYUSH in 
implementation of its recommendation to bring into existence a cooperative and 
collaborative synthesis between allopathy and Ayush system of medicine. However, the 
Committee expresses conc ern that still some of the institutes/bodies under Ayush has in 
their action taken just mentioned “noted” or just expressed agreement with Committee‟s 
recommendation or speaking in future tense without mentioning any steps that has actually 
been taken on t heir end to implement the Committee‟s recommendation at present. The 
Committee is of the considered view, keeping in consideration the cherished goals of the 
Ministry to have integrated healthcare wherein Ayush and Allopathy go hand in hand to 
put Indian Healthcare at a commanding position in the world.  
(Para 3.36.2 of the ATR) 
 
37. The Committee is concerned that the Ministry of Ayush has only stated that  it is 
promoting Yoga and Naturopathy nationwide  through various initiatives and programmes 
across the country. However, the response reveals significant shortcomings as the Ministry 
of Ayush hasn‟t mentioned the details of such initiatives and programmes specifically in 
regard to naturopathy. The establishment of National Ayush Institutes in underserved  
states such as Bihar, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand and the North Eastern Region has 
been deferred to State Governments without a concrete central plan or support mechanism, 
risking continued regional disparities. Similarly, the integration of Yoga cla sses and 
instructors in primary schools is delegated to the Ministry of Education and State 
Governments, with no clear inter -ministerial coordination outlined. To address these gaps, 
the Committee recommends that the Ministry of AYUSH to actively collabora te with 
Department of School Education and relevant stakeholders in various states to facilitate 
and support the establishment of institutes and the mandatory inclusion of Yoga education 
in schools, particularly in underserved areas. 
(Para 3.37.2 of the ATR) 
38. Keeping in view the fact of unequal distribution of Ayush healthcare in the country, 
the Committee is of the considered view that the Ministry of Ayush must ensure equitable 
development of Ayush healthcare and eco -system across the geographical area  of the 
country. In this regard, the Committee appreciates the role of the Ministry of Ayush for 
granting approval of setting up of 167 integrated Ayush Hospitals and 1055 Ayush Grams 
as per the proposals received from States/UTs Government through SAAPs u nder NAM. 
The Committee has been given to understand that under NAM there is provision of 
financial assistance for setting up of integraed Ayush Hospitals, therefore, the Committee 
recommends the Ministry to expedite the process ensuring priority to areas where the 
Ayush healthcare has not progressed to the expected level. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry should encourage States/UTs with lesser economic 
development viz. Jharkhand, Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and 
Bihar (especially Seemanchal/koshi region) to seek proposals through SAAPs for setting up 
of integrated Ayush hospitals and Ayush Grams. The Committee further recommends the 

149 
 
Ministry to implement the proposal for 50 bedded Ayush hospitals in every district and 1 00 
bedded hospitals in all tier-2 cities.  
(Para 3.38.2 of the ATR) 
39. The Committee notes that only some  of the bodies under AYUSH has provideds its 
Action Taken Notes in compliance with the Committee‟s recommendation. The Committee 
therefore, recommends the Ministry that a comprehensive Action Taken be provided at the 
earliest to assess the on -ground situation in respect of Committee‟s recommendation. The 
Committee appreaciates the larger vision of Ayush@2047 however, to effectively address 
the Committe e's recommendations, the Ministry of AYUSH should develop a 
comprehensive short -term action plan, clearly delineating measurable targets and 
timelines, with provisions for mid -term evaluations to assess progress. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that th e Annual Action Plans of each organ of AYUSH be strictly 
monitored and outcome thereof be vetted properly ensuring that the year plans are 
executed fully. The Budgetary allocations must be aligned with both long -term objectives 
and immediate priorities, en suring optimal fund utilization through a robust and adaptive 
monitoring mechanism. Immediate actions should include the initiation of pilot projects 
and awareness campaigns at the regional level, aiming for measurable outcomes within 6-12 
months. To mitigate deviations, the Ministry should establish real -time monitoring systems 
and mechanisms for timely course correction. Furthermore, research initiatives should be 
expedited, particularly focusing on the clinical validation of AYUSH practices. Enhanced 
inter-departmental coordination is crucial for integrating AYUSH into broader national 
health strategies and fostering international collaboration. 
(Para 3.39.2 of the ATR) 
40. The Committee acknowledges and appreciates the commendable efforts of AIIA and 
CCRAS in advancing AYUSH through clinical services, international collaborations, 
research initiatives, capacity building, and public health programs. However, considering 
the Ministry of AYUSH encompasses multiple institutions and autonomous bodies, the 
Committee seeks clarification on whether the onus of these initiatives will rest exclusively 
with AIIA and CCRAS. Additionally, while the Ministry has articulated an ambition to 
realize a market capitalization of USD 200 billion for AYUSH within next five year s, the 
Committee urges the submission of a detailed, year -wise strategic plan outlining 
implementation frameworks, institutional responsibilities, and resource allocation. A 
comprehensive response with details of schemes and plans for growth and developmen t of 
Ayush activities and the Ministry should project a much more enhanced budgetary 
allocation. 
(Para 3.40.2 of the ATR) 
 

150 
 
41. The Committee appreciates the bilateral agreement of the Ministry of Ayush with 
the Ministry of Commerce and Industry to include Ayush products. The Committee 
however wants to know the steps taken by the Ministry of Ayush to establish Ayush specific 
healthcare centres in PHCs/CHCs at district level in all the states across India. The 
Committee appreciates the larger goal of the Mini stry of Ayush to have 30 lakh ayush 
professionals in the country by 2047. However, to effectively realize the goal it is imperative 
on the part of the Ministry to split it into short term goals. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry of Ayu sh come up with comprehensive yearly plans of 
producing a minimum number of say 1 lakh Ayush Professionals each year. In extension, 
the Ministry must chalk out the plan for absorption of these professionals in appropriate 
jobs. Hence job creation is a must  in Ayush Healthcare to achieve the cherished goals of 
Ayush@2047. Further, as suggested by NISR, the Committee endorses the opinion that to 
provide health to all it is suggested to strengthen the local health traditions and train the 
traditional healer in primary health care in remote areas. The Committee recommends the 
Ministry of Ayush to find out the traditional health practitioners in remotest areas of the 
country and archive their knowledge in traditional healing which can be utilized for a 
larger population of this country and beyond.  
(Para 3.41.2 of the ATR) 
42. The Committee observes that the Ministry of AYUSH has undertaken commendable 
initiatives to promote AYUSH systems globally, notably through the International 
Cooperation Scheme, academic col laborations, and the implementation of accredited 
training programs under the Ayurveda Training Accreditation Board (ATAB) and Yoga 
Certification Board (YCB). The contributions of institutions such as AIIA, CCRAS and 
ITRA in disseminating and operationaliz ing these programs are noteworthy. However, the 
action taken does not fully align with the Committee‟s recommendation in letter and spirit 
to significantly enhance global participation in Yoga and Ayurveda training. However, the 
current measures appear to remain largely domestic in scope and lack a comprehensive 
international outreach framework. The Committee strongly feels that there is an immense 
potential in Ayush systems on the global stage and it must be promoted on a global level 
based on unique stren gths of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, Rigpa -
Sowa and Homeopathy. It is recommended that the Ministry develop a cohesive global 
strategy encompassing international partnerships, welcoming international students to get 
Yoga Certification in India under aforementioned schemes. The Ministry of Ayush should 
strive to make the ayurveda institutes of highest international repute, that all over the 
world people would want to get education in traditional system of medicine especially in 
Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy to begin with.  
(Para 3.42.2 of the ATR) 
 
 

151 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
(Para 4.10 of 165th Report) 
AYUSH DEVELOPMENT SECTION 
(Country Wise Regular Ayush Visa) 
Nationality 2024 2025 Grand Total 
SAUDI ARABIA 21 3 24 
TURKEY 18 1 19 
KUWAIT 13 4 17 
YEMEN 13 2 15 
SRI LANKA 8 3 11 
BULGARIA 10 1 11 
LEBANON 7 2 9 
OMAN 7  7 
SERBIA 5  5 
KENYA 4  4 
ZIMBABWE 2  2 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 2  2 
TANZANIA 2  2 
SEYCHELLES 2  2 
MOROCCO 2  2 
MAURITIUS 2  2 
MALAWI 2  2 
DJIBOUTI 2  2 
ZAMBIA 1  1 
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO 1  1 
SYRIA 1  1 
SWEDEN 1  1 
SUDAN 1  1 
JORDAN 1  1 
JAPAN 1  1 
HONG KONG 1  1 
GERMANY 1  1 
FRANCE  1 1 
CANADA 1  1 
Grand Total 132 17 149 
Annexure-II 
(para 4.10 of 165th Report) 
AYUSH DEVELOPMENT SECTION 
(Country Wise e-Ayush Visa) 
Country Name 2024 2025 
AUSTRALIA 16 4 
AUSTRIA 9 0 
AZERBAIJAN 0 2 
BELGIUM 10 5 
BRAZIL 2 0 

152 
 
BULGARIA 11 1 
CANADA 10 2 
CYPRUS 0 2 
CZECH 14 0 
DENMARK 6 0 
ESTONIA 1 0 
FINLAND 3 1 
FRANCE 181 85 
GERMANY 148 37 
HUNGURY 2 0 
IRELAND 5 0 
ISRAEL 40 5 
ITALY 18 3 
JAPAN 5 2 
KAZAKHSTAN 2 2 
KENYA 2 8 
LATVIA 1 0 
LIECHTENSTEIN 1 0 
LUXEMBOURG 0 1 
MALAYSIA 3 1 
MAURITIUS 2 0 
MEXICO 1 0 
MONACO 0 2 
NETHERLANDS 6 6 
NEW ZEALAND 3 0 
NIGER 1 0 
NORWAY 6 1 
OMAN 16 5 
PHILLIPPINES 1 0 
POLAND 5 0 
PORTUGAL 12 3 
REPUBLIC OF CROATIA 1 0 
REPUBLIC OF SLOVENIA 2 1 
ROMANIA 5 0 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION 4 0 
SAUDI ARABIA 70 8 
SENEGAL 1 0 
SINGAPORE 2 0 
SPAIN 4 0 
SWEDEN 6 3 
SWITZERLAND 409 46 
TANZANIA 2 1 
UKRAINE 2 0 

153 
 
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES 5 0 
UNITED KINGDOM 17 5 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 27 10 
URUGUAY 1 0 
UZBEKISTAN 3 0 
ZIMBABWE 2 0 
Total 1106 252 
1358 
 
  

154 
 
Annexure-III 
(para 4.10 of 165th Report) 
AYUSH DEVELOPMENT SECTION 
(Country Wise Medical Treatment in Issued Ayush Visa) 
 
Country Name TREATMENT Name COUNT 
AUSTRALIA YOGA TREATMENT 1 
AUSTRALIA THE HEALTH ARC PANCHAKARMA 1 
AUSTRALIA RETREAT 1 
AUSTRALIA 
PANCHKARMA AYURVEDA HEALTH RESTORATION 
PROGRAM 1 
AUSTRALIA PANCHAKARMA 3 
AUSTRALIA PANCAKARMA 1 
AUSTRALIA KSHARASUTRA FOR FISTULA 1 
AUSTRALIA GENERAL HEALTH CHECK AND CLEANSE 1 
AUSTRALIA EYE TREATMENT 1 
AUSTRALIA CLEANSE AND REJUVENATION 1 
AUSTRALIA AYUSH 1 
AUSTRALIA AYURVEDIC TREATMENT 1 
AUSTRALIA AYURVEDIC MEDICAL TREATMENT 2 
AUSTRALIA AYURVEDIC 1 
AUSTRALIA AYUREVEDA 1 
AUSTRALIA ANAL FISTULA 1 
AUSTRALIA 14 DAYS 1 
AUSTRIA URETHRAL STRICTURE / UTTARBASTI 1 
AUSTRIA POLYNEUROPATHY 1 
AUSTRIA PANCHAKARMA 2 
AUSTRIA KSHARASUTRA 1 
AUSTRIA AYURVEDIC TREATMENT 1 
AUSTRIA AYURVEDIC MEDICAL TREATMENT 2 
AUSTRIA AYURVEDA 1 
AZERBAIJAN NEUROGEN 1 
AZERBAIJAN NEURO REGENERATIVE REHABILITATION THERAPY 1 
BELGIUM WELLNESS TREATMENT 5 
BELGIUM TREATMENT AGAINST MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS 1 
BELGIUM PIAN OVER NECK, LOWER BACK PAIN 1 
BELGIUM D C O GASTRITIS 1 
BELGIUM D C O BRAIN TUMOUR 1 
BELGIUM AYURVEDIC TREATMENT 5 
BELGIUM AYURVEDA RETREAT 1 
BRAZIL AYURVEDA PANCHAKARMA 1 
BRAZIL AYURVEDA 1 
BULGARIA TREATMENT FOR MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS 1 
BULGARIA TREATMENT FOR MS 1 
BULGARIA MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS TREATMENT PROCEDURES 1 
BULGARIA MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS TREATMENT 2 
BULGARIA MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS 3 
BULGARIA MS TREATMENT 1 

155 
 
BULGARIA CHRONIC FATIGUE SYNDROME 1 
BULGARIA AYURVEDA AND PANCHAKARMA 1 
BULGARIA AURVEDIC 1 
CANADA WELLNESS 1 
CANADA PSORIASIS TREATMENT 1 
CANADA ORTHOPAEDIC INTERVENTION 1 
CANADA GENERAL MEDICINE 1 
CANADA CLEANSING 1 
CANADA 
AYURVEDIC PANCHAKARMA HOSPITALIZATION 
TREATMENT 1 
CANADA AYURVEDIC 1 
CANADA AYURVEDA REJUVENATION 1 
CANADA AYURVEDA - DETOXIFICATION 1 
CANADA AYURVEDA 2 
CANADA AUTISM 1 
CYPRUS PANCHAKARMA 2 
CZECH WELLNSS TREATMENT 1 
CZECH WELLNESS TRETMENT 1 
CZECH WELLNESS TREATMENT 11 
CZECH AYUVERDIC TREATMENT 1 
DENMARK GENERAL 2 
DENMARK AYURVEDIC 1 
DENMARK AYURVEDA 3 
ESTONIA AYURVEDA TREATMENT PROGRAMM 1 
FINLAND YIN YOGA THERAPY TEACHER TRAINING 1 
FINLAND PANCHAKARMA 1 
FINLAND GUT DISTURBANCES WITH COLONPOLIS 1 
FINLAND AYURVEDA, CANCER TREATMENTS 1 
FRANCE WELLNESS TREATMENT 9 
FRANCE WELLNESS TRAITEMENT 1 
FRANCE WELLNESS 2 
FRANCE VATA VYADHI 1 
FRANCE TREATMENT TO RECOVER FROM OSTEOARTHRITIS 1 
FRANCE 
TREATMENT FOR FIBMYALGIA NARCOLEPSY SLEEP 
APNEA 1 
FRANCE TREATMENT FOR ANAL FISTULA 1 
FRANCE TREATMENT COURSE 1 
FRANCE TRAITEMENT MEDICAL AYURVEDIQUE 1 
FRANCE TRAITEMENT COURSE 2 
FRANCE TINNITUS 1 
FRANCE THYROIDITIS ARTHRITIS 1 
FRANCE THYROID CANCER 1 
FRANCE 
THE PROPOSED TREATMENT COURSE IS FOR 20 DAYS 
WITH 1 
FRANCE TENDONITIS 2 
FRANCE SYMPTOMS OF GENERAL TIREDNESS 1 
FRANCE SUBSIDE THE PRESENTIG SYMPTOMS 1 
FRANCE SUBSIDE PRESENTING SYMPTOMS 1 

156 
 
FRANCE SANDHIGATAVATA 1 
FRANCE RESIDENTIAL PANCHAKARMA REJUVENATION 1 
FRANCE 
RECURRENT EAR INFECTIONS AND BENIGN 
HEMETOMA 1 
FRANCE PSORIATIC ARTHRITIS 1 
FRANCE PANDCHAKARMA 1 
FRANCE PANCHAKARMA TREATMENTS 1 
FRANCE 
PANCHAKARMA TREATMENT FOR VATA 
MANAGEMENT 1 
FRANCE PANCHAKARMA TREATMENT 1 
FRANCE PANCHAKARMA 19 
FRANCE PANCAKARMA 1 
FRANCE PAIN AND SWELLINGON KNEE, FINGERS, ANKLEPAIN 1 
FRANCE PAIN AND STIFFNESS 1 
FRANCE PAEDIATRIC NEURO MEDICINE 1 
FRANCE OSTEOPOROSIS 2 
FRANCE OSTEOARTHRITIS AND DEPRESSION 1 
FRANCE OSTEOARTHRITIS 8 
FRANCE OSTEO ARTHRITIS 2 
FRANCE 
NARROW LUMBAR CANAL, DISC PROLAPSE,HYPER 
CHOLESTER 1 
FRANCE MENIERE DISEASE 1 
FRANCE LYME DISEASE AND KNEE ARTHROSIS 1 
FRANCE LBA 1 
FRANCE KAPHAVRUTA 1 
FRANCE INTER SPINOUS OSTEOARTHRITIS IN CERVICAL 1 
FRANCE INSOMNIA PSORIASIS ARTHRITIS 1 
FRANCE HYPOTHYROIDISM 1 
FRANCE HYPERTHYROIDISM AND OSTEOPOROSIS 1 
FRANCE HYPERTENSION 3 
FRANCE 
HYPERCHOLESTERAEMIA AYRVEDIC 
PANCHAKARAMA THERAPIE 1 
FRANCE HIPOTHYROIDISM 1 
FRANCE HASHIMOTO DISEASE 1 
FRANCE GRIDHRASI 1 
FRANCE GLUTEN INTOLERANCE GASTRITIS 1 
FRANCE GENERAL WELLNESS CARE 1 
FRANCE GENERAL WELLNESS AND ARTHRITIS 1 
FRANCE GASTRITIS 5 
FRANCE FRACTURE OF ACETABULUM 1 
FRANCE ECZEMA 2 
FRANCE DIGESTIVE ABNORMALITIES 1 
FRANCE DIGESTION SLEEPLESSNESS 1 
FRANCE DIABETES SINUSITIS 1 
FRANCE DIABETES AND OSTEOARTHRITIS 1 
FRANCE DEPRESSION 1 
FRANCE DEGENERATIVE JOINT DISEASE 1 
FRANCE DCO GASTRISIS 1 

157 
 
FRANCE D/C/O OSTEO ARTHRITIS 1 
FRANCE D/C/O ARTHRITIS 1 
FRANCE D C O TACHYCARDIA ARTHROSIS 1 
FRANCE 
D C O STEOARTHRITIS LUMBAR SCOLIOSIS 
DEGENERATIVE 1 
FRANCE D C O RAYNAUD DISEASE 1 
FRANCE D C O OSTEOARTHRITIS CYSTOCELE SLEEP APNEA 1 
FRANCE D C O OSTEOARTHRITIS 1 
FRANCE D C O OSTEOARTHRITICS 2 
FRANCE D C O LUMBAR SPINAL STENOSIS, OSTEOARTHRITIS 1 
FRANCE D C O HASHIMOTO S DISEASE 1 
FRANCE D C O GASTRITIS 1 
FRANCE D C O DIGESTIVE DISORDERS 1 
FRANCE D C O ARTHRITIS PSORIASIS HYPOTHYROIDISM 2 
FRANCE CURES 1 
FRANCE CURE 5 
FRANCE COMPLAINTS HIGH BLOOD PRESSURE 1 
FRANCE COLITIS 1 
FRANCE CHOLESTEROL SEVERE SLEEP APNOEA 1 
FRANCE CERVICAL PAIN 1 
FRANCE C/O DEPRESSION 1 
FRANCE C O ARTHROSIS 1 
FRANCE BURSITIS OF LEFT ACHILLES TENDON 1 
FRANCE BREAST CANCER,OSTEOARTHRITS 1 
FRANCE AYUVERDIC TREATMENT 1 
FRANCE AYUVERDIC PANCHAKARMA TREATMENT 2 
FRANCE AYUSH TREATMENT 1 
FRANCE AYURVEDIQUE TRAITEMENT 1 
FRANCE AYURVEDIC TREATMENTYS 1 
FRANCE AYURVEDIC TREATMENTS 5 
FRANCE AYURVEDIC TREATMENT. 3 
FRANCE AYURVEDIC TREATMENT 59 
FRANCE AYURVEDIC TREATEMENT 3 
FRANCE AYURVEDIC TRAITMENT FOR ARTHROSIE 1 
FRANCE AYURVEDIC PANCHAKARMA TREATMENT 1 
FRANCE AYURVEDIC PANCHAKARAMA THERAPIES 1 
FRANCE AYURVEDIC MEDICAL TREATMENT 3 
FRANCE AYURVEDIC CURE FOR KNEE JOINTS 1 
FRANCE AYURVEDIC CURE 1 
FRANCE AYURVEDIC 11 
FRANCE AYURVEDA TREATMENTS 2 
FRANCE AYURVEDA TREATMENT 1 
FRANCE AYURVEDA PANCHAKARMA TREATMENT 1 
FRANCE AYURVEDA PANCHAKARMA 2 
FRANCE AYURVEDA 13 
FRANCE AYRVEDIC TREATMENT 1 
FRANCE AUYRVEDA 1 
FRANCE AURVEDIC TREATMENT 1 

158 
 
FRANCE ASTHMA 1 
FRANCE ARTHROSIS HYPERTENSION SLEEP APNOEA 1 
FRANCE ARTHROSIS HYPERTENSION 1 
FRANCE ARTHROSIS 1 
FRANCE ARTHRITIS ANKYLOSIS OF FINGERS 1 
FRANCE ARTHRITIS 1 
FRANCE ANXIETY ATTACK 1 
FRANCE AHYURVEDIC TRATMENT 1 
FRANCE ABNORMALITY IN ROTATOR CUFF RIGHT SHOULDER 1 
FRANCE ABNORMAL CHOLESTEROL LEVEL 1 
FRANCE 21 JOURS 1 
FRANCE 20DAYS TREATMENT FOR OSTEO ARTHRITIS 1 
FRANCE 20 DAYS TREATMENT COURSE 1 
GERMANY   1 
GERMANY WELNESS 1 
GERMANY WELLNESS TREATMENT 12 
GERMANY WELLNESS 10 
GERMANY WELLNES TREATMENT 1 
GERMANY RETREAT 3 
GERMANY POST CANCEROUS TREATMENT 1 
GERMANY PANCHKARMA 2 
GERMANY PANCHAKARMA, YOGA, MASSAGES 1 
GERMANY PANCHAKARMA THERAPY 1 
GERMANY PANCHAKARMA 6 
GERMANY PANCHA KARMA 1 
GERMANY OSTEO ARTHRITIS 1 
GERMANY MULTIPLE JOINT PAIN 6 
GERMANY MULTIPLE JOIN PAIN 1 
GERMANY MEDICAL AYURVEDIC TREATMENT 1 
GERMANY LOWER BACKPAIN 1 
GERMANY LOWER BACK PAIN 1 
GERMANY LOW BACK PAIN 16 DAYS 2 
GERMANY LOW BACK PAIN 11 
GERMANY GENERAL PURIFICATION PANCHAKARMA 1 
GERMANY GENERAL PURIFICATION AND PANCHKARMA CARE 3 
GERMANY GENERAL PURIFICATION AND PANCHARMA CARE 1 
GERMANY GENERAL PURIFICATION -PANCHAKARMA CARE 1 
GERMANY GENERAL PURIFICATION (PANCHAKARMA CARE) 2 
GERMANY 
GENERAL PURIFICATION (PANCHAKARAMA CARE) 16 
DAYS 3 
GERMANY GENERAL PURIFICATION 3 
GERMANY GENERAL MEDICINE, LOW BACK PAIN 1 
GERMANY GENERAL MEDICINE 2 
GERMANY DEEP CLEANSING TREATMENT PROGRAM 1 
GERMANY AYUVEDIC CURE 1 
GERMANY 
AYURVEDIC TREATMENT FOR CHRONIC PAIN AND 
DIABETES 1 
GERMANY AYURVEDIC TREATMENT 3 

159 
 
GERMANY AYURVEDIC TREAMENT 1 
GERMANY AYURVEDIC PANCHAKARMA 1 
GERMANY AYURVEDIC MEDICAL TREATMENT 55 
GERMANY AYURVEDIC KUR 1 
GERMANY AYURVEDIC HEALING RETREAT 1 
GERMANY AYURVEDIC FULL BOARD 1 
GERMANY AYURVEDIC CURE 2 
GERMANY AYURVEDIC 7 
GERMANY AYURVEDA, PANCHAKARMA 1 
GERMANY AYURVEDA TREATMENT 3 
GERMANY AYURVEDA KERELA PANCHAKARMA THERAPY 1 
GERMANY 
AYURVEDA FOR GASTROINTENSTINAL COMPLAINTS 
UNREST 1 
GERMANY AYURVEDA CLEANSING 1 
GERMANY AYURVEDA 16 
GERMANY AYUEVEDA 1 
GERMANY AYUERVEDA 1 
GERMANY AYRUVEDIC TREATMENT 1 
GERMANY 16 DAYS LOW BACK PAIN 1 
GERMANY 16 1 
GERMANY 15 1 
HUNGURY PANCHAKARMA 1 
HUNGURY AYURVEDIC 1 
IRELAND WELLNESS TREATMENT 1 
IRELAND PANCHAKARMA 2 
IRELAND GENERAL WELLNESS CARE 1 
IRELAND AYURVEDA 1 
ISRAEL TREATMENT FOR ANAL FISTULA BY AYURVEDA 1 
ISRAEL POST CA AND REJUVENATION 1 
ISRAEL KSHARASUTRA TREATMENT 3 
ISRAEL KSHARASUTRA 13 
ISRAEL KSHARASTURA TREATMENT 1 
ISRAEL KSHARAKARMA AND AGNIKARMA 1 
ISRAEL KSHARAKARMA 2 
ISRAEL GLAUCOMA 1 
ISRAEL FISTULA SURGERY 1 
ISRAEL FISTULA 1 
ISRAEL FISSURE SURGERY 1 
ISRAEL COMPLEX ANAL FISTULA BY AYURVEDA 1 
ISRAEL AYURVEDIC TREATMENT 1 
ISRAEL AYURVEDA TREATMENT 2 
ISRAEL AYURVEDA TRATMENT 1 
ISRAEL AYURVEDA SURGICAL TREATMENT 2 
ISRAEL AYURVEDA SURGICAL 3 
ISRAEL AYURVEDA 8 
ISRAEL AURVEDA SURGICAL TREATMENT FOR ANAL FISTULA 1 
ITALY POST COVID NEUROPATHY 1 
ITALY POLYARTHRALGIA 1 

160 
 
ITALY PANCHAKARMA TREATMENT 1 
ITALY PANCHAKARMA THERAPY 1 
ITALY CHRONIC FATIGUE SYNDROME 1 
ITALY BACK AND SHOULDER 1 
ITALY 
AYURVEDIC TREATMENT FOR ATOPIC-LIKE 
DERMATITIS 1 
ITALY AYURVEDIC PANCHAKARMA 1 
ITALY AYURVEDIC MEDICAL TREATMENT 8 
ITALY AYURVEDA PANCHKARMA 1 
ITALY AYURVEDA 1 
ITALY AYRUVEDA TREATMENT 1 
ITALY ARTHRITIS 1 
ITALY ALOPECIA, COLESTEROLO 1 
JAPAN PANCHKARMA 1 
JAPAN INFERTILITY AND WOMAN CARE TREATMENT 1 
JAPAN CURATIVE TREATMENT FOR THE PHYSICAL ISSUES 1 
JAPAN AYURVEDA TREATMENTS 1 
JAPAN AYURVEDA TREATMENT 1 
JAPAN AYURVEDA PANCHAKARMA 1 
JAPAN AYURVEDA 1 
KAZAKHSTAN ONCOLOGY 1 
KAZAKHSTAN KIDNEY TREATMENT 1 
KAZAKHSTAN KIDNEY TRANSPLANTATION DONOR 1 
KAZAKHSTAN KIDNEY TRANSPLANT DONOR 1 
KENYA ORTHOPEDIC TREATMENT 1 
KENYA OPTIC ATROPHY 1 
KENYA NEUROLOGY TREATMENT 2 
KENYA GYNECOLOGY TREATMENT 1 
KENYA DETOXIFICATION TREATMENT 1 
KENYA DETOX 1 
KENYA CARDIAC TREATMENT 1 
KENYA BORNE MARROW TRANSPLANT 2 
LATVIA AYURVEDIC PANCHAKARMA TREATMENT 1 
LIECHTENSTEIN AYURVEDIC MEDICAL TREATMENT 1 
LUXEMBOURG MULTI JOINT PAINT INSULIN RESISTANCE 1 
MALAYSIA TREATMENT FOR LYMPHOEDEMA 1 
MALAYSIA REJUVENATION 1 
MALAYSIA POST STROKE PHYSICAL RECOVERY 1 
MALAYSIA PANCHAKARMA 1 
MAURITIUS RADIOACTIVE IODINE THERAPY 1 
MAURITIUS AYURVEDIC 1 
MEXICO FOR ADHIMANDHAM (GLAUCOMA) AND CATARACT 1 
MONACO TEDONITIS BURSITIS OF HIP JOIN 1 
MONACO D C O ABNORMAL DIGESTIVE CONDITION 1 
NETHERLANDS PANCHAKARMA 5 
NETHERLANDS PANCHA KARMA 1 
NETHERLANDS KAYACHIKITSA 1 
NETHERLANDS AYURVEDIC MEDICAL TREATMENT 1 

161 
 
NETHERLANDS AYURVEDIC 2 
NETHERLANDS AYURVEDA TREATMENT 1 
NETHERLANDS AYURVEDA 1 
NEW ZEALAND PANCHAKARMA AND CIKITSA MARMA 1 
NEW ZEALAND CONSULTATION ON BLOCKED CORONARY ARTERIES 1 
NEW ZEALAND AYURVEDIC 1 
NIGER PANCHAKARMA 1 
NORWAY RETREAT 2 
NORWAY CLEANSING 1 
NORWAY AYURVEDA PANCHAKARMA TREATMENT 2 
NORWAY AYURVEDA 2 
OMAN STROKE 4 
OMAN SICKLE CELL ANEMIA AND DIABETIC 1 
OMAN SEQUELE OF STROKE 1 
OMAN SEQUEL OF STRTOKE 2 
OMAN REHAB 1 
OMAN LOW BACK PAIN 1 
OMAN IVF-ICSI 1 
OMAN HEMIPLEGIA/HEART DISEASE 1 
OMAN FIBROUS 1 
OMAN COMPLAINTS OF LOWER BACK PAIN 1 
OMAN CHECK UP 1 
OMAN CEREBRAL PULZY 1 
OMAN BRAIN INJURY DUE TO RTA 1 
OMAN BACK PAIN 1 
OMAN AYURVEDIC 2 
OMAN ADHD 1 
PHILLIPPINES AYURVEDA 1 
POLAND RETREAT 1 
POLAND PANCHAKARMA 2 
POLAND GENERAL PURIFICATION AND PANCHKARMA CARE 1 
POLAND AYURVEDA MEDICAL TREATMENT WITH DETOX 1 
PORTUGAL WELLNESS TREATMENT 4 
PORTUGAL PURIFICATION 1 
PORTUGAL PANCHAKARMA 5 
PORTUGAL MULTIPLE JOINT PAIN 1 
PORTUGAL LOW BACK PAIN 2 
PORTUGAL GENERAL PURIFICATION 1 
PORTUGAL AYURVEDIC TREATMENT 1 
REPUBLIC OF CROATIA AYURVEDIC MEDICAL TREATMENT 1 
REPUBLIC OF SLOVENIA HOLISTIC TREATMENT, AS CUSTOMISED 1 
REPUBLIC OF SLOVENIA DEEP CLEANSING 1 
REPUBLIC OF SLOVENIA AYURVEDA TREATMENT 1 
ROMANIA WELLNESS TREATMENT 1 
ROMANIA PANCHAKARMA 1 
ROMANIA AYURVEDA 1 
ROMANIA 
ABHYANGAM, KATIVASTI, PINDASWEDAM, AND 
PATRASWEDAM 1 

162 
 
ROMANIA 
ABHYANGAM, KATIVASLI, PINDASWEDAM, AND 
PATRASWEDAM 1 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION PANCHAKARMA 2 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION INPATIENT TREATMENT 1 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION AYUSH 1 
SAUDI ARABIA TRAUMATIC SPINAL CORD INJURY 1 
SAUDI ARABIA STROKE 9 
SAUDI ARABIA SPINAL CORD INJURY 2 
SAUDI ARABIA SPASTICITY 1 
SAUDI ARABIA SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 1 
SAUDI ARABIA SEQUELE OF TRAUMATIC POLYFRACTURE 1 
SAUDI ARABIA SEQUELE OF TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY 2 
SAUDI ARABIA SEQUELE OF STROKE-HEMIPLEGIA 2 
SAUDI ARABIA SEQUELE OF STROKE 1 
SAUDI ARABIA SEQUELE OF RTA SPINAL CORD INJURY 1 
SAUDI ARABIA SEQUELE OF RTA INDUCED POLYTRAUMA 1 
SAUDI ARABIA 
SEQUELE OF MULTIPLE INFARCTS/RETINAL 
DETACHMENT 1 
SAUDI ARABIA SEQUELE OF MENINGITIS 1 
SAUDI ARABIA REHABILITATION FOR BACK ACHE 1 
SAUDI ARABIA 
REHABILITATION AYURVDIC AND OTHER SUCH AS 
PHYSIOTH 1 
SAUDI ARABIA QUADRIPLEGIA 1 
SAUDI ARABIA 
POST-MENINGITIS EFFECTS HEMIPLEGIA/SPEECH 
DISORDER 1 
SAUDI ARABIA PLOY TRAUMA 1 
SAUDI ARABIA PHYSIOTHERAPY 4 
SAUDI ARABIA PHYSIO THERAPIC 1 
SAUDI ARABIA PHYSICAL THERAPY 2 
SAUDI ARABIA PHYSICAL MEDICINE AND REHABILITATION 1 
SAUDI ARABIA PARAPLEGIA TRAUMATIC SPINAL CORD INJURY 1 
SAUDI ARABIA MOTOR NEURONE DISEASE -ALS BULBAR VARIENT 1 
SAUDI ARABIA LUMBAR DISC BULGE PAIN 1 
SAUDI ARABIA LUMBAR BACK PAIN 1 
SAUDI ARABIA LOW BACK PAIN 1 
SAUDI ARABIA KNEE/FILARIASIS/OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNEA 1 
SAUDI ARABIA ISCHEMIS STROKE 1 
SAUDI ARABIA INTRACRANIAL HAEMORRHAGE 1 
SAUDI ARABIA HUMERUS FRACTURE POST REPAIR 1 
SAUDI ARABIA FREIDRIECHS ATAXIA 1 
SAUDI ARABIA DIABETIC FOOT POST BELOW KNEE AMPUTATION 1 
SAUDI ARABIA 
CHRONIC SMALL VESSEL ISCHEMIC 
DISEASE/SUBACUTE SMA 1 
SAUDI ARABIA CEREBRAL PALZY 1 
SAUDI ARABIA CEREBRAL PALSY 2 
SAUDI ARABIA BACK PAIN 8 
SAUDI ARABIA AYURVEDIC 10 
SAUDI ARABIA AYURVEDA TREATMENT AND PHYSIO REHABILITAION 1 

163 
 
SAUDI ARABIA AYURVEDA TREATMENT 2 
SAUDI ARABIA AYURVEDA REHABILITATION 1 
SAUDI ARABIA AYURVEDA 1 
SAUDI ARABIA ATAXIA 1 
SAUDI ARABIA ACUTE ISCHEMIC STROKE 1 
SAUDI ARABIA ABNORMAL CEREBRAL MORPHOLOGY 1 
SENEGAL PANCHAKARMA 1 
SINGAPORE PANCHAKARMA 1 
SINGAPORE AYUVEDIC TREATMENT 1 
SPAIN PANCHAKARMA 1 
SPAIN EYE OPERATION 1 
SPAIN AYURVEDIC MEDICAL TREATMENT 1 
SPAIN AYURVEDA TREATMENT 1 
SWEDEN RETREAT AYURVEDA 3 
SWEDEN RETREAT 2 
SWEDEN PANCHAKARMA DETOX TREATMENT FOR RA 1 
SWEDEN AYURVEDIC TREATMENT 1 
SWEDEN AYURVEDAN 1 
SWEDEN AYURVEDA RETREAT 1 
SWITZERLAND TREATMENT FOR REJUVENATION DETOXIFICATION 1 
SWITZERLAND RETREAT 1 
SWITZERLAND REJUVENATION AND DETOXIFICATION TREATMENT 1 
SWITZERLAND PROBLEM ASTHMA 1 
SWITZERLAND PANCHAKARMA 4 
SWITZERLAND PANCHA KARMA 1 
SWITZERLAND OSTEOPENIA AND INSOMNIA 1 
SWITZERLAND MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS 1 
SWITZERLAND 
LOWER BACK PAIN, PAIN AND SWELLING OVER BOTH 
KNEES 1 
SWITZERLAND LOW BACK ACHE AND OCCASSIONAL HEAD ACHES 1 
SWITZERLAND GENERAL WELLNESS CARES 1 
SWITZERLAND GENERAL WELLNESS CARE 1 
SWITZERLAND GENERAL PURIFICATION 1 
SWITZERLAND DIABETES TYPE 1 1 
SWITZERLAND CURE AYURVEDIQUE 1 
SWITZERLAND AYUVEDA MASSAGE 1 
SWITZERLAND AYURVEDIC TREATMENT 4 
SWITZERLAND AYURVEDIC PANCHAKARMA 1 
SWITZERLAND AYURVEDIC MEDICAL TREATMENT 407 
SWITZERLAND AYURVEDIC MEDICAL TREATMEN 1 
SWITZERLAND AYURVEDIC MEDIAL TREATMENT 2 
SWITZERLAND AYURVEDIC MEDCIAL TREATMENT 2 
SWITZERLAND AYURVEDIC DETOX 1 
SWITZERLAND AYURVEDA SURGICAL TREATMENT 1 
SWITZERLAND AYURVEDA PANCHAKARMA TREATMENT 1 
SWITZERLAND AYURVEDA MEDICAL TREATMENT 1 
SWITZERLAND AYURVEDA MASSAGE 1 
SWITZERLAND AYURVEDA (PANCHARMA SHIRODARA ETC) 1 

164 
 
SWITZERLAND AYURVEDA (PANCHAKARMA SHIRODARA) 1 
SWITZERLAND AYURVEDA 7 
SWITZERLAND AYRVEDIC MEDICAL TREATMENT 1 
SWITZERLAND AYRUVEDA PROSTATE CANCER TREATMENT 1 
SWITZERLAND AURVEDIC MEDICAL TREATMENT 1 
SWITZERLAND ARYUVEDIC 1 
SWITZERLAND ARTHRITIS 1 
TANZANIA ONCOLOGY 1 
TANZANIA NEURO FOLLOW UP AND EVALUATION 1 
TANZANIA AYURVEDA 1 
UKRAINE PANCHAKARMA 1 
UKRAINE AYURVEDA BODY PURIFICATION THERAPY 1 
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES STROKE 1 
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES SEQUELE OF TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY/ASTHMA 1 
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES MEDICAL TREATMENT 1 
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES BACK PAIN 1 
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES AYURVEDA TREATMENT 1 
UNITED KINGDOM RETREAT 1 
UNITED KINGDOM PANCHAKARMA TREATMENT 1 
UNITED KINGDOM PANCHAKARMA 3 
UNITED KINGDOM NIRAMAYA 1 
UNITED KINGDOM NEURO 1 
UNITED KINGDOM AYURVEDIC TREATMENT FOR BACK PAIN. 1 
UNITED KINGDOM AYURVEDIC PANCHAKARMA AND HERBAL REMEDIES 1 
UNITED KINGDOM AYURVEDIC MEDICAL TREATMENT 2 
UNITED KINGDOM AYURVEDIC EXTERNAL THERAPY 1 
UNITED KINGDOM AYURVEDIC 4 
UNITED KINGDOM AYURVEDA PANCHAKARMA 1 
UNITED KINGDOM AYURVEDA 3 
UNITED KINGDOM AYRUVEDIC 1 
UNITED KINGDOM AYRUVEDA TREATMENT 1 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA WHOLE BODY HEALTH CHECK-UP 1 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA WEAKNESS WITH NECK AND LEG PAIN 1 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA UTERINE FIRBOIDS 1 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA TBD 1 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA SPINE SHOULDER 1 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA SKIN TREATMENT 1 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA RETINAL ATROPHY 1 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA PARASITE CLEANSE 1 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA PANCHAKARMA 3 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA PANCHA KARMA 1 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA MYOPIA 2 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA METABOLIC N PRE-MENOPAUSAL SYNDROME 1 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA LUMBAR SPINAL STENOSIS 1 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA LOW BACK PAIN 1 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA KSHARASUTRA FOR ANAL FISTULA 1 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA KSHARASUTRA 1 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA INFERTILITY 1 

165 
 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
HYPOTHYROID AUTOIMMUNE AYURVEDIC 
TREATMENT 1 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA GAYENIC TREATMENT 1 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA GASTROENTROLOGY 1 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA EYE TREATMENT 1 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AYURVEDIC TREATMENTS 1 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AYURVEDIC TREATMENT 2 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AYURVEDIC MEDICAL TREATMENT 3 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AYURVEDA TREATMENT FOR VATA VIKARAM 1 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AYURVEDA PANCHAKARMA 2 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AYURVEDA ANTI AGEING TREATMENT 1 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AYURVEDA ANTI AGEING 1 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AYURVEDA 1 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA ARTHRITIS 1 
URUGUAY SHOT TERM 1 
UZBEKISTAN LIVER TRANSPLANT 2 
UZBEKISTAN BACK PAIN RELATED AYURVEDA TREATMENT 1 
ZIMBABWE HEMORRHAGIC CYST 1 
ZIMBABWE AYURVEDA 1 
Total 1358 
 
  

166 
 
Annexure-IV 
(Para 4.10 of 165th Report) 
 
AYUSH DEVELOPMENT SECTION 
(state Wise Medical Treatment under Ayush e-Visa) 
STATE NAME TREATMENT NAME 
COU
NT 
ANDHRA 
PRADESH KSHARASUTRA FOR FISTULA 
1 
DELHI PANCHKARMA 1 
DELHI PANCHAKARMA 1 
DELHI ONCOLOGY 1 
DELHI KIDNEY TREATMENT 1 
DELHI KIDNEY TRANSPLANTATION DONOR 1 
DELHI KIDNEY TRANSPLANT DONOR 1 
DELHI KAPHAVRUTA 1 
DELHI INFERTILITY 1 
DELHI GAYENIC TREATMENT 1 
DELHI DETOXIFICATION TREATMENT 1 
GOA YOGA TREATMENT 1 
GOA YIN YOGA THERAPY TEACHER TRAINING 1 
GOA AYURVEDA 1 
GUJARAT WHOLE BODY HEALTH CHECK-UP 1 
GUJARAT URETHRAL STRICTURE / UTTARBASTI 1 
GUJARAT NEURO FOLLOW UP AND EVALUATION 1 
GUJARAT 
AYURVEDIC TREATMENT FOR CHRONIC PAIN AND 
DIABETES 
1 
GUJARAT AYURVEDIC TREATMENT 3 
GUJARAT AYRUVEDIC TREATMENT 1 
HARYANA SKIN TREATMENT 1 
HARYANA PANCHAKARMA TREATMENTS 1 
HARYANA ONCOLOGY 1 
HARYANA HEMORRHAGIC CYST 1 
HARYANA EYE OPERATION 1 
HARYANA CARDIAC TREATMENT 1 
HIMACHAL 
PRADESH PANCHAKARMA TREATMENT 
1 
HIMACHAL 
PRADESH PANCHAKARMA 
2 
KARNATAKA TREATMENT FOR ANAL FISTULA BY AYURVEDA 1 
KARNATAKA TREATMENT FOR ANAL FISTULA 1 
KARNATAKA THE HEALTH ARC PANCHAKARMA 1 
KARNATAKA SPINE SHOULDER 1 

167 
 
KARNATAKA PANCHAKARMA AND CIKITSA MARMA 1 
KARNATAKA PANCHAKARMA 4 
KARNATAKA PANCHA KARMA 1 
KARNATAKA MEDICAL TREATMENT 1 
KARNATAKA LUMBAR SPINAL STENOSIS 1 
KARNATAKA KSHARASUTRA TREATMENT 3 
KARNATAKA KSHARASUTRA FOR ANAL FISTULA 1 
KARNATAKA KSHARASUTRA 15 
KARNATAKA KSHARASTURA TREATMENT 1 
KARNATAKA KSHARAKARMA AND AGNIKARMA 1 
KARNATAKA KSHARAKARMA 2 
KARNATAKA KAYACHIKITSA 1 
KARNATAKA HOLISTIC TREATMENT, AS CUSTOMISED 1 
KARNATAKA FISTULA SURGERY 1 
KARNATAKA FISTULA 1 
KARNATAKA FISSURE SURGERY 1 
KARNATAKA COMPLEX ANAL FISTULA BY AYURVEDA 1 
KARNATAKA BORNE MARROW TRANSPLANT 2 
KARNATAKA AYURVEDIC TREATMENT 1 
KARNATAKA AYURVEDIC KUR 1 
KARNATAKA AYURVEDIC EXTERNAL THERAPY 1 
KARNATAKA AYURVEDA, CANCER TREATMENTS 1 
KARNATAKA AYURVEDA TREATMENT 3 
KARNATAKA AYURVEDA TRATMENT 1 
KARNATAKA AYURVEDA SURGICAL TREATMENT 3 
KARNATAKA AYURVEDA SURGICAL 3 
KARNATAKA AYURVEDA 9 
KARNATAKA AURVEDA SURGICAL TREATMENT FOR ANAL FISTULA 1 
KARNATAKA ANAL FISTULA 1 
KERALA WELNESS 1 
KERALA WELLNSS TREATMENT 1 
KERALA WELLNESS TRETMENT 1 
KERALA WELLNESS TREATMENT 43 
KERALA WELLNESS TRAITEMENT 1 
KERALA WELLNESS 13 
KERALA WELLNES TREATMENT 1 
KERALA WEAKNESS WITH NECK AND LEG PAIN 1 
KERALA VATA VYADHI 1 
KERALA TREATMENT TO RECOVER FROM OSTEOARTHRITIS 1 
KERALA TREATMENT FOR REJUVENATION DETOXIFICATION 1 
KERALA TREATMENT FOR MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS 1 
KERALA TREATMENT FOR MS 1 
KERALA TREATMENT FOR LYMPHOEDEMA 1 

168 
 
KERALA 
TREATMENT FOR FIBMYALGIA NARCOLEPSY SLEEP 
APNEA 
1 
KERALA TREATMENT COURSE 1 
KERALA TREATMENT AGAINST MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS 1 
KERALA TRAUMATIC SPINAL CORD INJURY 1 
KERALA TRAITEMENT MEDICAL AYURVEDIQUE 1 
KERALA TRAITEMENT COURSE 2 
KERALA TINNITUS 1 
KERALA THYROIDITIS ARTHRITIS 1 
KERALA THYROID CANCER 1 
KERALA 
THE PROPOSED TREATMENT COURSE IS FOR 20 DAYS 
WITH 
1 
KERALA TENDONITIS 2 
KERALA TEDONITIS BURSITIS OF HIP JOIN 1 
KERALA TBD 1 
KERALA SYMPTOMS OF GENERAL TIREDNESS 1 
KERALA SUBSIDE THE PRESENTIG SYMPTOMS 1 
KERALA SUBSIDE PRESENTING SYMPTOMS 1 
KERALA STROKE 14 
KERALA SPINAL CORD INJURY 2 
KERALA SPASTICITY 1 
KERALA SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 1 
KERALA SICKLE CELL ANEMIA AND DIABETIC 1 
KERALA SHOT TERM 1 
KERALA SEQUELE OF TRAUMATIC POLYFRACTURE 1 
KERALA SEQUELE OF TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY/ASTHMA 1 
KERALA SEQUELE OF TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY 2 
KERALA SEQUELE OF STROKE-HEMIPLEGIA 2 
KERALA SEQUELE OF STROKE 2 
KERALA SEQUELE OF RTA SPINAL CORD INJURY 1 
KERALA SEQUELE OF RTA INDUCED POLYTRAUMA 1 
KERALA 
SEQUELE OF MULTIPLE INFARCTS/RETINAL 
DETACHMENT 
1 
KERALA SEQUELE OF MENINGITIS 1 
KERALA SEQUEL OF STRTOKE 2 
KERALA SANDHIGATAVATA 1 
KERALA RETREAT AYURVEDA 3 
KERALA RETREAT 11 
KERALA RETINAL ATROPHY 1 
KERALA RESIDENTIAL PANCHAKARMA REJUVENATION 1 
KERALA REJUVENATION AND DETOXIFICATION TREATMENT 1 
KERALA REJUVENATION 1 
KERALA REHABILITATION FOR BACK ACHE 1 

169 
 
KERALA 
REHABILITATION AYURVDIC AND OTHER SUCH AS 
PHYSIOTH 
1 
KERALA REHAB 1 
KERALA 
RECURRENT EAR INFECTIONS AND BENIGN 
HEMETOMA 
1 
KERALA QUADRIPLEGIA 1 
KERALA PURIFICATION 1 
KERALA PSORIATIC ARTHRITIS 1 
KERALA PROBLEM ASTHMA 1 
KERALA 
POST-MENINGITIS EFFECTS HEMIPLEGIA/SPEECH 
DISORDER 
1 
KERALA POST STROKE PHYSICAL RECOVERY 1 
KERALA POST COVID NEUROPATHY 1 
KERALA POST CANCEROUS TREATMENT 1 
KERALA POST CA AND REJUVENATION 1 
KERALA POLYNEUROPATHY 1 
KERALA POLYARTHRALGIA 1 
KERALA PLOY TRAUMA 1 
KERALA PIAN OVER NECK, LOWER BACK PAIN 1 
KERALA PHYSIOTHERAPY 4 
KERALA PHYSIO THERAPIC 1 
KERALA PHYSICAL THERAPY 2 
KERALA PHYSICAL MEDICINE AND REHABILITATION 1 
KERALA PARASITE CLEANSE 1 
KERALA PARAPLEGIA TRAUMATIC SPINAL CORD INJURY 1 
KERALA PANDCHAKARMA 1 
KERALA 
PANCHKARMA AYURVEDA HEALTH RESTORATION 
PROGRAM 
1 
KERALA PANCHKARMA 2 
KERALA PANCHAKARMA, YOGA, MASSAGES 1 
KERALA PANCHAKARMA TREATMENT 2 
KERALA PANCHAKARMA THERAPY 1 
KERALA PANCHAKARMA DETOX TREATMENT FOR RA 1 
KERALA PANCHAKARMA 53 
KERALA PANCHA KARMA 3 
KERALA PANCAKARMA 2 
KERALA PAIN AND SWELLINGON KNEE, FINGERS, ANKLEPAIN 1 
KERALA PAIN AND STIFFNESS 1 
KERALA PAEDIATRIC NEURO MEDICINE 1 
KERALA OSTEOPOROSIS 2 
KERALA OSTEOPENIA AND INSOMNIA 1 
KERALA OSTEOARTHRITIS AND DEPRESSION 1 
KERALA OSTEOARTHRITIS 8 

170 
 
KERALA OSTEO ARTHRITIS 3 
KERALA ORTHOPAEDIC INTERVENTION 1 
KERALA OPTIC ATROPHY 1 
KERALA 
NARROW LUMBAR CANAL, DISC PROLAPSE,HYPER 
CHOLESTER 
1 
KERALA MYOPIA 2 
KERALA MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS TREATMENT PROCEDURES 1 
KERALA MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS TREATMENT 2 
KERALA MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS 4 
KERALA MULTIPLE JOINT PAIN 7 
KERALA MULTIPLE JOIN PAIN 1 
KERALA MULTI JOINT PAINT INSULIN RESISTANCE 1 
KERALA MS TREATMENT 1 
KERALA MOTOR NEURONE DISEASE -ALS BULBAR VARIENT 1 
KERALA METABOLIC N PRE-MENOPAUSAL SYNDROME 1 
KERALA MENIERE DISEASE 1 
KERALA LYME DISEASE AND KNEE ARTHROSIS 1 
KERALA LUMBAR DISC BULGE PAIN 1 
KERALA LUMBAR BACK PAIN 1 
KERALA LOWER BACKPAIN 1 
KERALA 
LOWER BACK PAIN, PAIN AND SWELLING OVER BOTH 
KNEES 
1 
KERALA LOWER BACK PAIN 1 
KERALA LOW BACK PAIN 16 DAYS 2 
KERALA LOW BACK PAIN 16 
KERALA LOW BACK ACHE AND OCCASSIONAL HEAD ACHES 1 
KERALA LBA 1 
KERALA KNEE/FILARIASIS/OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNEA 1 
KERALA IVF-ICSI 1 
KERALA ISCHEMIS STROKE 1 
KERALA INTRACRANIAL HAEMORRHAGE 1 
KERALA INTER SPINOUS OSTEOARTHRITIS IN CERVICAL 1 
KERALA INSOMNIA PSORIASIS ARTHRITIS 1 
KERALA INPATIENT TREATMENT 1 
KERALA INFERTILITY AND WOMAN CARE TREATMENT 1 
KERALA HYPOTHYROIDISM 1 
KERALA 
HYPOTHYROID AUTOIMMUNE AYURVEDIC 
TREATMENT 
1 
KERALA HYPERTHYROIDISM AND OSTEOPOROSIS 1 
KERALA HYPERTENSION 3 
KERALA 
HYPERCHOLESTERAEMIA AYRVEDIC 
PANCHAKARAMA THERAPIE 
1 
KERALA HUMERUS FRACTURE POST REPAIR 1 

171 
 
KERALA HIPOTHYROIDISM 1 
KERALA HEMIPLEGIA/HEART DISEASE 1 
KERALA HASHIMOTO DISEASE 1 
KERALA GUT DISTURBANCES WITH COLONPOLIS 1 
KERALA GRIDHRASI 1 
KERALA GLUTEN INTOLERANCE GASTRITIS 1 
KERALA GLAUCOMA 1 
KERALA GENERAL WELLNESS CARES 1 
KERALA GENERAL WELLNESS CARE 3 
KERALA GENERAL WELLNESS AND ARTHRITIS 1 
KERALA GENERAL PURIFICATION PANCHAKARMA 1 
KERALA GENERAL PURIFICATION AND PANCHKARMA CARE 4 
KERALA GENERAL PURIFICATION AND PANCHARMA CARE 1 
KERALA GENERAL PURIFICATION -PANCHAKARMA CARE 1 
KERALA GENERAL PURIFICATION (PANCHAKARMA CARE) 2 
KERALA 
GENERAL PURIFICATION (PANCHAKARAMA CARE) 16 
DAYS 
3 
KERALA GENERAL PURIFICATION 5 
KERALA GENERAL MEDICINE, LOW BACK PAIN 1 
KERALA GENERAL MEDICINE 3 
KERALA GENERAL HEALTH CHECK AND CLEANSE 1 
KERALA GENERAL 2 
KERALA GASTRITIS 5 
KERALA FREIDRIECHS ATAXIA 1 
KERALA FRACTURE OF ACETABULUM 1 
KERALA FOR ADHIMANDHAM (GLAUCOMA) AND CATARACT 1 
KERALA FIBROUS 1 
KERALA EYE TREATMENT 1 
KERALA ECZEMA 2 
KERALA DIGESTIVE ABNORMALITIES 1 
KERALA DIGESTION SLEEPLESSNESS 1 
KERALA DIABETIC FOOT POST BELOW KNEE AMPUTATION 1 
KERALA DIABETES TYPE 1 1 
KERALA DIABETES SINUSITIS 1 
KERALA DIABETES AND OSTEOARTHRITIS 1 
KERALA DEPRESSION 1 
KERALA DEGENERATIVE JOINT DISEASE 1 
KERALA DEEP CLEANSING TREATMENT PROGRAM 1 
KERALA DEEP CLEANSING 1 
KERALA DCO GASTRISIS 1 
KERALA D/C/O OSTEO ARTHRITIS 1 
KERALA D/C/O ARTHRITIS 1 
KERALA D C O TACHYCARDIA ARTHROSIS 1 

172 
 
KERALA 
D C O STEOARTHRITIS LUMBAR SCOLIOSIS 
DEGENERATIVE 
1 
KERALA D C O RAYNAUD DISEASE 1 
KERALA D C O OSTEOARTHRITIS CYSTOCELE SLEEP APNEA 1 
KERALA D C O OSTEOARTHRITIS 1 
KERALA D C O OSTEOARTHRITICS 2 
KERALA D C O LUMBAR SPINAL STENOSIS, OSTEOARTHRITIS 1 
KERALA D C O HASHIMOTO S DISEASE 1 
KERALA D C O GASTRITIS 2 
KERALA D C O DIGESTIVE DISORDERS 1 
KERALA D C O BRAIN TUMOUR 1 
KERALA D C O ARTHRITIS PSORIASIS HYPOTHYROIDISM 2 
KERALA D C O ABNORMAL DIGESTIVE CONDITION 1 
KERALA CURES 1 
KERALA CURE AYURVEDIQUE 1 
KERALA CURE 5 
KERALA CURATIVE TREATMENT FOR THE PHYSICAL ISSUES 1 
KERALA COMPLAINTS OF LOWER BACK PAIN 1 
KERALA COMPLAINTS HIGH BLOOD PRESSURE 1 
KERALA COLITIS 1 
KERALA CLEANSING 2 
KERALA CLEANSE AND REJUVENATION 1 
KERALA 
CHRONIC SMALL VESSEL ISCHEMIC 
DISEASE/SUBACUTE SMA 
1 
KERALA CHRONIC FATIGUE SYNDROME 2 
KERALA CHOLESTEROL SEVERE SLEEP APNOEA 1 
KERALA CERVICAL PAIN 1 
KERALA CEREBRAL PULZY 1 
KERALA CEREBRAL PALZY 1 
KERALA CEREBRAL PALSY 2 
KERALA C/O DEPRESSION 1 
KERALA C O ARTHROSIS 1 
KERALA BURSITIS OF LEFT ACHILLES TENDON 1 
KERALA BREAST CANCER,OSTEOARTHRITS 1 
KERALA BRAIN INJURY DUE TO RTA 1 
KERALA BACK PAIN RELATED AYURVEDA TREATMENT 1 
KERALA BACK PAIN 10 
KERALA BACK AND SHOULDER 1 
KERALA AYUVERDIC TREATMENT 2 
KERALA AYUVERDIC PANCHAKARMA TREATMENT 2 
KERALA AYUVEDIC TREATMENT 1 
KERALA AYUVEDIC CURE 1 
KERALA AYUVEDA MASSAGE 1 

173 
 
KERALA AYUSH TREATMENT 1 
KERALA AYUSH 1 
KERALA AYURVEDIQUE TRAITEMENT 1 
KERALA AYURVEDIC TREATMENTYS 1 
KERALA AYURVEDIC TREATMENTS 6 
KERALA AYURVEDIC TREATMENT. 3 
KERALA AYURVEDIC TREATMENT FOR BACK PAIN. 1 
KERALA 
AYURVEDIC TREATMENT FOR ATOPIC-LIKE 
DERMATITIS 
1 
KERALA AYURVEDIC TREATMENT 72 
KERALA AYURVEDIC TREATEMENT 3 
KERALA AYURVEDIC TREAMENT 1 
KERALA AYURVEDIC TRAITMENT FOR ARTHROSIE 1 
KERALA AYURVEDIC PANCHAKARMA TREATMENT 2 
KERALA 
AYURVEDIC PANCHAKARMA HOSPITALIZATION 
TREATMENT 
1 
KERALA AYURVEDIC PANCHAKARMA 2 
KERALA AYURVEDIC PANCHAKARAMA THERAPIES 1 
KERALA AYURVEDIC MEDICAL TREATMENT 486 
KERALA AYURVEDIC MEDICAL TREATMEN 1 
KERALA AYURVEDIC MEDIAL TREATMENT 2 
KERALA AYURVEDIC MEDCIAL TREATMENT 2 
KERALA AYURVEDIC HEALING RETREAT 1 
KERALA AYURVEDIC FULL BOARD 1 
KERALA AYURVEDIC DETOX 1 
KERALA AYURVEDIC CURE FOR KNEE JOINTS 1 
KERALA AYURVEDIC CURE 3 
KERALA AYURVEDIC 41 
KERALA AYURVEDAN 1 
KERALA AYURVEDA, PANCHAKARMA 1 
KERALA AYURVEDA TREATMENTS 3 
KERALA AYURVEDA TREATMENT PROGRAMM 1 
KERALA AYURVEDA TREATMENT AND PHYSIO REHABILITAION 1 
KERALA AYURVEDA TREATMENT 9 
KERALA AYURVEDA RETREAT 2 
KERALA AYURVEDA REHABILITATION 1 
KERALA AYURVEDA PANCHAKARMA TREATMENT 3 
KERALA AYURVEDA PANCHAKARMA 2 
KERALA AYURVEDA MEDICAL TREATMENT 1 
KERALA AYURVEDA MASSAGE 1 
KERALA AYURVEDA KERELA PANCHAKARMA THERAPY 1 
KERALA 
AYURVEDA FOR GASTROINTENSTINAL COMPLAINTS 
UNREST 
1 

174 
 
KERALA AYURVEDA CLEANSING 1 
KERALA AYURVEDA BODY PURIFICATION THERAPY 1 
KERALA AYURVEDA ANTI AGEING TREATMENT 1 
KERALA AYURVEDA ANTI AGEING 1 
KERALA AYURVEDA (PANCHARMA SHIRODARA ETC) 1 
KERALA AYURVEDA (PANCHAKARMA SHIRODARA) 1 
KERALA AYURVEDA 49 
KERALA AYUREVEDA 1 
KERALA AYUEVEDA 1 
KERALA AYUERVEDA 1 
KERALA AYRVEDIC TREATMENT 1 
KERALA AYRVEDIC MEDICAL TREATMENT 2 
KERALA AYRUVEDIC 1 
KERALA AYRUVEDA TREATMENT 2 
KERALA AYRUVEDA PROSTATE CANCER TREATMENT 1 
KERALA AUYRVEDA 1 
KERALA AURVEDIC TREATMENT 1 
KERALA AURVEDIC MEDICAL TREATMENT 1 
KERALA AURVEDIC 1 
KERALA ATAXIA 1 
KERALA ASTHMA 1 
KERALA ARYUVEDIC 1 
KERALA ARTHROSIS HYPERTENSION SLEEP APNOEA 1 
KERALA ARTHROSIS HYPERTENSION 1 
KERALA ARTHROSIS 1 
KERALA ARTHRITIS ANKYLOSIS OF FINGERS 1 
KERALA ARTHRITIS 4 
KERALA ANXIETY ATTACK 1 
KERALA ALOPECIA, COLESTEROLO 1 
KERALA AHYURVEDIC TRATMENT 1 
KERALA ADHD 1 
KERALA ACUTE ISCHEMIC STROKE 1 
KERALA ABNORMALITY IN ROTATOR CUFF RIGHT SHOULDER 1 
KERALA ABNORMAL CHOLESTEROL LEVEL 1 
KERALA ABNORMAL CEREBRAL MORPHOLOGY 1 
KERALA 
ABHYANGAM, KATIVASTI, PINDASWEDAM, AND 
PATRASWEDAM 
1 
KERALA 
ABHYANGAM, KATIVASLI, PINDASWEDAM, AND 
PATRASWEDAM 
1 
KERALA 20DAYS TREATMENT FOR OSTEO ARTHRITIS 1 
KERALA 20 DAYS TREATMENT COURSE 1 
KERALA 16 DAYS LOW BACK PAIN 1 
KERALA   4 

175 
 
MAHARASHTRA PSORIASIS TREATMENT 1 
MAHARASHTRA 
PANCHAKARMA TREATMENT FOR VATA 
MANAGEMENT 
1 
MAHARASHTRA PANCHAKARMA 1 
MAHARASHTRA NIRAMAYA 1 
MAHARASHTRA NEUROGEN 1 
MAHARASHTRA NEURO REGENERATIVE REHABILITATION THERAPY 1 
MAHARASHTRA MEDICAL AYURVEDIC TREATMENT 1 
MAHARASHTRA AYURVEDIC PANCHAKARMA AND HERBAL REMEDIES 1 
MAHARASHTRA AYURVEDIC PANCHAKARMA 1 
MAHARASHTRA AYURVEDA TREATMENT 1 
MAHARASHTRA AYURVEDA PANCHAKARMA 2 
MAHARASHTRA AYURVEDA AND PANCHAKARMA 1 
MAHARASHTRA AYURVEDA - DETOXIFICATION 1 
MAHARASHTRA AYURVEDA 2 
MAHARASHTRA AUTISM 1 
RAJASTHAN AYURVEDA PANCHKARMA 1 
TAMIL NADU RADIOACTIVE IODINE THERAPY 1 
TAMIL NADU PANCHAKARMA 5 
TAMIL NADU CONSULTATION ON BLOCKED CORONARY ARTERIES 1 
TAMIL NADU AYUSH 1 
TAMIL NADU AYURVEDIC TREATMENT 2 
TAMIL NADU AYURVEDA TREATMENT FOR VATA VIKARAM 1 
TAMIL NADU AYURVEDA REJUVENATION 1 
TAMIL NADU AYURVEDA PANCHAKARMA 3 
TAMIL NADU AYURVEDA MEDICAL TREATMENT WITH DETOX 1 
TAMIL NADU AYURVEDA 5 
TELANGANA UTERINE FIRBOIDS 1 
TELANGANA PANCHAKARMA 1 
TELANGANA ORTHOPEDIC TREATMENT 1 
TELANGANA NEUROLOGY TREATMENT 2 
TELANGANA NEURO 1 
TELANGANA GYNECOLOGY TREATMENT 1 
TELANGANA GASTROENTROLOGY 1 
TELANGANA EYE TREATMENT 1 
TELANGANA CHECK UP 1 
UTTAR PRADESH LIVER TRANSPLANT 2 
UTTARAKHAND PANCHAKARMA THERAPY 1 
UTTARAKHAND DETOX 1 
UTTARAKHAND AYURVEDIC 1 
UTTARAKHAND AYURVEDA PANCHAKARMA TREATMENT 1 
Total 1358 

176 
 
A pie-chart depicting the status of action taken by the Ministry of Ayush on the 165th 
Report has been given hereunder: 
 
36%
1%
51%
12%
Status of Action taken by the Ministry in repect 
of 165th Report of the Committee
Recommendations/ Observations 
accepted by the Government
Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of Government's 
replies
Committee has made further 
recommendations
Final replies of the Government 
have not been received