Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
REPORT NO.
114
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on th December, )28 2018
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on th December, )28 2018
ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH REPORT
December, 2018/Pausa, 1940 (Saka)
Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the One Hundred Eighth Report on
Demands for Grants 2018-19 (Demand No. 5)
of the Ministry of AYUSH

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

31
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH REPORT
Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the One Hundred Eighth Report on
Demands for Grants 2018-19 (Demand No. 5)
of the Ministry of AYUSH
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 28th December , 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 28th December , 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2018/Pausa, 1940 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-21
Chapter I : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have been accepted by the committee............................. 2-8
Chapter II : Recommendations/Observations which the committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies........................... 9-11
Chapter III : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have been accepted by the committee............................. 12-20
Chapter IV : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited............................. ........................ 21
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE  AT A G LANCE ............................... 22-24
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 25-28
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................................... 29-39

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2018-19)
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
3. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
4. Shri Jairam Ramesh
5. Dr. Santanu Sen
6. Shri Ashok  Siddharth
7. Shri K. Somaprasad
8. Dr. C. P. Thakur
9. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
10. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey
LOK  SABHA
11. Shri Thangso Baite
12. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
13. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
14. Shri C. P . Joshi
15. Dr. K. Kamaraj
16. Shri Arjunlal Meena
17. Shri Anoop Mishra
18. Advocate Jayasingh Thiyagaraj Natterjee
19. Dr. Mahendra Nath Pandey
20. Shri Chirag Paswan
21. Shri C. R. Patil
22. Shri M.K. Raghavan
23. Shri Janak Ram
24. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
25. Shri Gyan Singh
26. Shri Bharat Singh
27. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
28. Shrimati Rita Tarai
29. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
*30. vacant
31. Shri Akshay Yadav
(i)
*Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  21st December, 2018

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P .K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Under Secretary
Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma, Assistant Committee Officer
Ms. Monika Garbyal, Assistant Committee Officer
Shri Parth Gupta, Assistant Research Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family
Welfare, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, hereby present this
One Hundred Fourteenth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Committee’s One Hundred Eighth Report on Demands for Grants 2018-19
(Demand No.5) of the Ministry of AYUSH for the year 2018-19.
2.  The One Hundred Eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 15
th March,
2018.  Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report, received from the
Ministry of AYUSH were considered by the Committee at its meeting held on the 27 th December, 2018.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on the 27 th
December, 2018.
PROF. RAM GOPAL YADA V
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
27th December , 2018 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Pausa 6,  1940 (Saka) Committee on Health and Family Welfare,
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

ACRONYMS
AYUSH : Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathic
ASCI : Advertising Standards Council of India
AMU : Chemical Research Unit
CRC : Collaborative Research Centre
CRIUM : Central Research Institute of Unani Medicine
CDSCO : Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
CHCs : Community Health Centres
CARIDD : Central Ayurveda Research Institute for Drug Development
DSRI : Drug Standardization Research Institute
DSRU : Drug Standardization Research Unit
DoPT : Department of Personnel and Training
DHs : District Hospitals
GAMA : Grievances Against Misleading Advertisements
ICPO : Institute of Cytology and Preventive Oncology
MoH&FW : Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
NMPB : National Medicinal Plants Board
NITM : National Institute of Traditional Medicine
NIRT : National Institute of Research on Tuberculosis
NIE : National Institute of Epidemiology
NHM : National Health Mission
PPvC : Peripheral Pharmacovigilance Centres
PHCs : Primary Health Centres
RRIUM : Regional Research Institute of Unani Medicine
STGs : Standard Treatment Guidelines
UCs : Utilisation Certificates
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the One hundred Eighth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 5) of
the Ministry of AYUSH for the year 2018-19.
2.  Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the 108 th Report.  They have been categorized as follows:
Chapter I : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have been
accepted by the Committee: 2.4, 2.6, 3.12, 5.6, 5.7
TOTAL – 5
Chapter II : Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies:  2.10, 3.17, 3.18, 5.4, 6.9
TOTAL – 5
Chapter III : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee: 2.16, 3.6, 3.7, 3.9, 3.13, 4.10, 5.8, 6.7, 6.8
TOTAL – 9
Chapter IV : Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still
awaited:
T
OTAL – 0
3.  The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.

CHAPTER I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. BUDGET ALLOCATION
Recommendation
1.1  The Committee is constrained to note that despite the projected requirement of 
` 2797.96 crore for
2018-19, the Ministry of AYUSH has been allocated ` 1626.37 crore leaving a shortfall of ` 1171.59 crores.
The Committee also takes note of the meager increase in allocation for central sector and centrally sponsored
schemes from 2017-18 to 2018-19. The Committee, time and again, has been recommending for increasing
the budgetary allocation for the Ministry keeping in view the scope and reach of AYUSH in the life of the
people. Given the popularity, cost effectiveness and as an alternative to modern system of medicine i.e.
Allopathy, the Ministry of AYUSH through its various schemes/ programmes/ vision can help people through
its various remedies/ cure and emerge as a solid system of medicine in healthcare delivery. Accordingly, the
Committee is of the considered view that there needs to be a quantum jump in the budgetary allocation of the
Ministry of AYUSH so that the very objectives of the Ministry to position AYUSH systems as the preferred
system of living and practice for attaining a healthy India is realized. However, in view of the shortfall of
funds for 2018-19, the Committee recommends to the Ministry to judiciously utilize the allocated funds and
deploy the available resources in an efficient manner. (Para 2.4)
Action Taken
1.2 The Ministry agrees with the view of the Committee that there is a need for a quantum jump in the
budgetary allocations so that it can contribute more effectively for attaining a healthy India. To this end, the
Ministry will make every effort to obtain additional funds at RE stage. Further, the recommendation of the
Committee to judiciously utilize the available resources has been taken note and steps will be taken to
regularly monitor the pace of utilization of funds so that remedial action can be taken, if required.
Recommendation
1.3 The Committee is anguished to see the meager allocation given to Ministry of AYUSH compared to
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Since the year 2013-14, allocation for the Ministry of AYUSH is
between 3% to 4% of the Health Budget. It is 3.08% of the Health Budget for the year 2018-19. The
Committee would like to emphasize that the Department of AYUSH was granted the status of Ministry on
9th November, 2014 as it envisaged development and implementation of programmes and policy formulation
for the growth, development and propagation of AYUSH systems of Healthcare. In view of the fact that
the Ministry is being given a miniscule budgetary allocation compared to Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare, the Committee believes that the Ministry of AYUSH would not be able to realize its objectives
and tap the full potential of the AYUSH systems. The Committee would like to reiterate that adequate
funding is essential for proper development of the AYUSH systems of medicine which has the capacity to
emerge as an alternative system of medicine through quality research, quality AYUSH services,
standardization of AYUSH drugs etc. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that given the vital
importance of the AYUSH systems, atleast 5% of the total Health Budget should be allocated for Ministry
of AYUSH mandatorily to boost up this sector. The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of
AYUSH should chalk out a solid fiscal roadmap for optimal utilisation of budgeted funds and thereafter
2

3
take up with the Ministry of Finance the issue of earmarking atleast 5% of the total Health Budget for
Ministry of AYUSH on priority basis. In the same vein, the Committee would recommend that the Ministry
should exercise due diligence in its budget formulation, so that ambitious budgeting is commensurate with
its ability or capacity to absorb the enhanced funds and scarce resources deployable elsewhere do not
remain idly parked. (Para 2.6)
Action Taken
1.4 The Ministry proposes to convey to the Ministry of Finance the strong reservations of the Committee
over the inadequate allocation of funds for AYUSH and in particular to raise the allocation to at least 5 per
cent of the total Health Budget towards Ministry of AYUSH on priority basis.  As advised by the Committee,
the Ministry will exercise due diligence in budget formulation and for its optimal deployment.
III. QUALITY  CONTROL  OF  AYURVEDA,  SIDDHA,  UNANI  AND  HOMOEOPATHIC  (AYUSH)
DRUGS
Recommendation
1.5 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry of AYUSH for monitoring of AYUSH
advertisements. Due to the monitoring by Advertising Standards Council of India (ASCI) and the Grievances
against Misleading Advertisements (GAMA), 65% of the advertisements found misleading were withdrawn
or rectified and the rest forwarded to State AYUSH Drug Regulators. The Committee is of the view that
collaborative efforts of the Ministry along with Department of Consumer Affairs, Ministry of Information
& Broadcasting and State Governments have certainly given results as misleading advertisements with
respect to ASU&H drugs which have been unregulated so far have been controlled to an extent. The Committee
feels that it is the need of the hour to strictly monitor and regulate the misleading advertisements for
promoting the sale of AYUSH medicine. Hence, the role of the Ministry of AYUSH is pivotal in proactively
pursuing the issue with other Departments/ Ministries/ ASCI on a regular basis for effectively preventing the
publication of inappropriate/misleading advertisements. (Para 3.12)
Action Taken
1.6 Ministry has proactively pursued the matter of controlling the misleading advertisements of AYUSH
with the following steps-
(i) The matter of misleading AYUSH advertisements appearing in print and electronic media has
been taken up with the media regulators like Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
and Ministry of Information & Broadcasting and their suggestions/comments incorporated in
evolving the provisions of rules for prohibition of such advertisements.  The draft rules thus
framed have been subjected to consultation with the Drugs Controller General (India) and
Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board (ASUDTAB) for concurrence and
to enable further action.
(ii) Ministry of Information & Broadcasting issued instructions/guidelines dated 12th July, 2017 to
all media channels to advertise only those AYUSH products which have valid manufacturing
license and to abstain from telecasting such misleading advertisements which are in contravention
of the provisions of the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954
and Rules thereunder.

4
(iii) Ne wly implemented Central Scheme of Pharmacovigilance of ASU&H Drugs also has a
component of monitoring of misleading advertisement by the peripheral centres of the
pharmacovigilance network being developed.
(iv) An Empowered Committee of interdepartmental officers has recently been notified with specific
ToRs of periodic review, monitoring and recommendations for necessary remedial measures
to address the issues and complaints of exaggerated claims and inappropriate advertisements
of AYUSH.
(v) Ministry conducted seven regulatory & quality control training programs of AYUSH across the
country from 22 January, 2018 to 17
thMarch, 2018 for the regulators & manufacturers, in
which intense focus was imparted to the trainees/participants about the technical and regulatory
irregularities of AYUSH advertisements and the provisions of Drugs & Magic Remedies
(Objectionable Advertisements) Act and Rules.
(vi) S tates/UTs have been directed to appoint Gazetted Officers for territorial monitoring of AYUSH
advertisements under the provisions of  Drugs & Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements)
Act and to nominate Nodal Officers for dealing with public complaints of misleading AYUSH
advertisements registered in the GAMA (Grievances Against Misleading Advertisements) Portal
maintained by the Department of Consumer Affairs.
(vii) During the period from 20th January, 2017 to 19th January, 2018, about 456 complaints of
misleading AYUSH advertisements are reported to have been escalated to the State regulators
for appropriate action and 233 advertisers complied with the ASCI’s recommendations either
by modifying or withdrawing the advertisements.
V. CENTRAL RESEARCH COUNCILS
Recommendation
1.7 The Committee observes that many research projects undertaken by these Research Councils have
been completed and many are going to be complete within the next two years. The Committee would like to
emphasize that logical conclusion of any research output is the development and introduction of AYUSH
products/remedies in public healthcare system. (Para 5.6)
Action Taken
CENTRAL  COUNCIL  FOR  RESEARCH  IN  HOMOEOPATHY  (CCRH)
1.8 Council has completed 158 research studies till date.  Based on the evidence generated from clinical
studies undertaken and subsequently published and experiences of other researchers and clinicians on
specific topics, Council has developed Standard Treatment Guidelines (STGs) on 20 disease conditions.
These are Acute otitis media, Alcohol dependence, Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, Benign prostatic
hyperplasia, Bronchial asthma, Cancer, Depression, Diabetes mellitus, Diarrhoea, Hypertension, Irritable
bowel syndrome, Lymphatic filariasis, Menopause, Polycystic ovarian syndrome, Psoriasis, Sinusitis,
Rhinitis, Urolithiasis, Uterine fibroids and Vitiligo. These guidelines will be released on Scientific Convention
on World Homoeopathy Day on 10
th April 2018 for the use of practitioners and will be available on
www.ccrhindia.nic.in.

5
CENTRAL  COUNCIL  FOR  RESEARCH  IN  UNANI  MEDICINE  (CCRUM)
1.9 The Council has completed 125 studies in different disease conditions eg SoolQiniya (Anaemia),
BusoorJild (Skin eruptions), Kasrat-e-Ratubat-e-Hamoozi (Hyperacidity), Bawaseer-e-Damiya
(Hemorrhoids), Surat-e-Inzaal (Premature ejaculation), WajaulMafasil (Rheumatoid Arthritis), Zaheer
(Dysentery), SualYaabis (Dry Cough), Nisyan (Amnesia), Waja-ul-Mafasil (Joint Pain), Nazla-e-H ar
(Common Cold), Sailan-ur-Reham (Leucorrhoea), Khafqan (Palpitation), Su e Hazm (Dypepsia), SualRatab
(Productive Cough), Sud
a
 (Headache), WajaulAsnan (Toothache), Qula(Stomatitis), SharaMuzmin (Chronic
Urticaria), WaramHalaq (Pharyngitis), Zaght al-Dam QawiLazmi (Essential Hypertension) and Ziabetus
SukkariQism Sani (Diabetes mellitus type-II) . The outcomes of these studies have been published in various
peer reviewed journals by the researchers of the council. Besides, the council also publishes the outcomes
of these researches as monographs. So far Monographs have been published on Vitiligo ( Baras), Eczema
(Nar Farsi) and Psoriasis (Da al-Sadaf), Rheumatoid Arthritis (Waja‘ al-Mafäsil), Bronchial Asthma (Zeeq
al-Nafas), Chronic Sinusitis (WaramTajawif al-AnafMuzmin). Research related achievements are disseminated
through the publication of research findings in the form of research paper/article in journals, monographs,
success stories etc. These findings are also presented in different conferences, seminars, training programme,
workshop etc.
CENTRAL  COUNCIL  FOR  RESEARCH  IN  YOGA  &  NATUROPATHY  (CCRYN)
1.10 The outcome of research conducted by CCRYN in the last four decades have encourage the Council
to initiated the following to strengthen and provide Yoga & Naturopathy as healthcare system to the
public:
 As of now the Council has completed three research projects on Yoga & Cancer and one
research project on Yoga & Naturopathy in Cancer care in association with NGOs.
 The CCRYN established Collaborative Research Centre (CRC) to undertake Collaborative
Research with various renowned institutions.
 In addition, one research project entitled ‘Yoga and Diabetes: Multi Centric Research Study’
has been completed in association with Indian Yoga Association.
CENTRAL  COUNCIL  FOR  RESEARCH  IN  SIDHA  (CCRS)
1.11  CCRS has filed a patent for Diabetes Mellitus —A coded drug D5 chooranam for Diabetes Mellitus
and standardized as per AYUSH guidelines. The above patent got published with number 2578/CHE/2015 on
5
th June, 2015. In addition, license has been obtained to manufacture the drug in the GMP certified pharmacy
at Siddha Central Research Institute, Chennai.
Another patent has been applied with the title “Simple and low cost process for the preparation of
synergistic Bio-active compound Jacom for the management of H1N1 influenza virus infection” with the
patent number E-101/10871/2017 – CHE on 15 th May, 2017.
Recently one more patent has been filed entitled “Synergistic natural novel usage of Siddha
formulation – ThiriphalaChooranam as pharmaceutical excipient” with the application number
201841011646.
CENTRAL  COUNCIL  FOR  RESEARCH  IN  AYURVEDIC  SCIENCES  (CCRAS)
1.12 The Council conducts clinical research for validation of classical Ayurvedic formulations already in
the healthcare system to generate evidence based clinical efficacy and safety and coded drugs are undertaken

6
under drug development. The classifical Ayurvedic formulations are already in the healthcare system while
coded Ayurvedic drugs are made available into the healthcare system through systematic process of drug
development viz. drug standardization and quality control, preclinical safety/toxicity studies and biological
activity studies (as appropriate) and clinical trials as per requirement.
1.13 During 2017-18, 4 Intramural clinical research projects on 3 disease conditions viz. Essential
Hypertension, type 2 Diabetes Mellitus and Rheumatoid arthritis have been completed and data analysis is in
progress. The study on 18 Clinical Research Projects pertaining to validation of Ayurvedic drugs/therapies in
15 diseases/conditions are in progress.
The evidence on clinical efficacy and safety of Ayurvedic formulations which are vogue and available
in the market is highly useful to practitioners and consumers for their rational use. The evidence of their
safety and rational use will also strengthen integration of Ayurveda with other systems of medicine and also
help in convincing scientific community across the world which may also improve its market in the country
and world at large.
5 collaborative projects viz. Development of Bio-medical instrumentation for Ksharasutra chamber
for preparation of standardized Kshrasutra with IIT, New Delhi; Clinical study of ‘AYUSH Rasayana A & B’
in Elderly subjects with AIIMS, New Delhi & BHU, Varanasi; C1-Oil for wound health with AIIMS, New
Delhi; Development and validation of Prakriti Assessment Questionnaire/Scale & Evaluation of add on efficacy
& safety of an Ayurvedic formulation in the management of Dengue fever & prevention its complications –
a Double blind clinical study with reputed organizations are ongoing.
Under Medicinal Plant Research, 10 IMR projects are in progress. Under Drug Standardization
Programme, 4 IMR projects are in progress. Under Pharmacology Research, 10 IMR projects are in progress.
Recommendation
1.14 The Committee would also like to highlight the role of these five Research Councils with respect
to quality control and drug standardization. In wake of the actual launch of the scheme of
Pharmacovigilance Initiative for ASU drugs and creation of a dedicated central vertical structure in
CDSCO, it is imperative that these Councils apart from the various research activities undertaken by
them should focus on quality assessment of formulations, evolving Pharmacopeial standards, drug
standardization of finished products etc. (Para 5.7)
Action Taken
CENTRAL  COUNCIL  FOR  RESEARCH  IN  HOMOEOPATHY  (CCRH)
1.15 CCRH contributes in laying down standards of homoeopathic medicines for inclusion in Homoeopathic
Pharmacopoeia of India which is a legal document used for the manufacturing of homoeopathic drugs by
the industry and thereby provide quality drugs for homeopathic system of medicine. Council has nominated
its five institutes namely Central Research Institutes(H), Noida & Kottayam, Regional Research Institutes
(H)at Guwahati, Gudivada, Kolkata and Mumbai to be pharmacovigilance centres and the nominees from
above centre have attended an introduction-training program.
CENTRAL  COUNCIL  FOR  RESEARCH  IN  UNANI  MEDICINE  (CCRUM)
1.16 In order to maintain the quality, efficacy and safety of Unani medicines the CCRUM conducts
programme of drug standardization which is mainly concerned to evolve pharmacopoeial standards of

7
single as well as Unani formulations included in various volume of National Formulary of Unani Medicine
and Essential Drug List. The standardization work is carried out in accordance with the format approved by
Unani Pharmacopoeia Committee of the Government of India through the following research centres of the
Council. These standards are included in Unani Pharmacopoeia of India and National Formulary of Unani
Medicine, which is a legal document used for manufacturing of Unani drugs by the industries. This work is
taken up by the following Institutes -
 Drug Standardization Research Institute (DSRI), Ghaziabad.
 Central Research Institute of Unani Medicine (CRIUM), Hyderabad
 Regional Research Institute of Unani Medicine (RRIUM), Chennai
 Regional Research Institute of Unani Medicine (RRIUM), Srinagar
 Regional Research Institute of Unani Medicine (RRIUM), Aligarh
 Drug Standardization Research Unit (DSRU), New Delhi
 Chemical Research Unit (Grant-in-Aid), AMU, Aligarh
The Council has nominated its six institute namely Central Research Institutes of Unani Medicine at
Hyderabad and Lucknow; Regional Research Institute of Unani Medicine at Mumbai, Chennai, Srinagar and
New Delhi as pharmaco-vigilance centres and the nominees from above centres have attended an introduction-
training programme.
CENTRAL  COUNCIL  FOR  RESEARCH  IN  SIDDHA  (CCRS)
1.17 The Siddha Pharmacopoeia Committee with the mandate of establishing quality parameters for
Siddha drugs and formulations is working under the auspices of the Ministry of AYUSH. It is currently
functioning at CCRS Headquarters, Chennai. The Siddha Pharmacopeia of India, Part-I, V olume – I&II
were published. The Siddha Pharmacopeia of India, Part-I, V olume-III is in progress. The Siddha formulary
of India, Part-I (Tamil & English) and Part-II (Tamil) were published. Revision of the Siddha formulary
of India, Part-I – Tamil, was completed and sent to Pharmacopoeia Commission for Indian Medicine &
Homeopathy (PCIM & H) for printing. The Siddha formulary of India, Part-II - English translation is in
progress. The Siddha formulary of India, Part–III (Tamil) is in progress. 150 Siddha classical formulations
have been identified. PCIMH has approved 4 EOI i.e., 2 projects on “Development of Pharmacopoeial
monographs on single drugs of plants/minerals/metals and animal origin under scheme for outsourcing on
scientific work of PCIMH and 2 projects on “To develop Pharmacopoeial monographs on standard
operational procedures of manufacturing process and quality standards of Siddha formulation (including
stability studies).
PHARMACOVIGILANCE:
1.18  All the units under the Central Council for Research in Siddha are having Pharmacovigilance cells
and Siddha Central Research Institute, Chennai, Siddha Regional Research Institutes in Puducherry and
Thiruvananthapuram are Peripheral Pharmacovigilance Centres (PPvC).
SiddAR app – Siddha initiative for documentation of drug Adverse Reaction. Recently, SiddAR
android mobile app has been developed by CCRS to document the observed and reported side effects of

8
Siddha drugs for the benefit of the public. It is effected not only through the mobile application but also
the web reporting through www.crisiddha.tn.nic.in  and reporting through  toll free landline (1800 599
0828). These three ways of ADR reporting enhances the documentation process rendering benefit to the
society.
CENTRAL  COUNCIL  FOR  RESEARCH  IN  AYURVEDIC  SCIENCE (CCRAS)
1.19 Council’s Institutes are constantly involved in Quality control and drugs standardization studies.
Central Ayurveda Research Institute for Drug Development (CARIDD), Kolkata and Captain Srinivasa Murthy
Regional Ayurveda Drug Development Institute, Chennai are engaged in standardization of single drugs as
well as finished products.  These Institutes have contributed Pharmacopoeial monographs for Ayurvedic
Pharmacopoeia of India.  As a routine activity all the Ayurvedic Classical formulations which are being used
for validation and Drug development, are subjected to strict quality control assessment prior to their use.
Further, the Director General, CCRAS, being the Member Secretary of Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeial Committee,
the Scientists of the Council viz. Ayurveda, Chemistry, Pharmacognosy, Botany etc. are also contributing in
developing and validation of Pharmacopoeial Standards.

CHAPTER  II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
II. BUDGET ALLOCATION
Recommendation
2.1 The Committee has been given to understand that the funds remained unutilised for some schemes
of the Ministry due to non-receipt of suitable project proposals, delay in the construction work and
transfer of money to various institutes for starting extension centres. The Committee perceives the reasons
for under-utilization of funds as procedural hickups which could have been avoided if the Ministry had
proactively pursued the issues concerned and streamlined its monitoring mechanism. The Committee takes
cognizance of the steps taken by the Ministry for optimum utilization of funds but would like to emphasize
that if the Ministry needs more budgetary allocation for proper implementation of its various schemes/
programmes, it should be able to show judicious and full utilization of allocated funds thereby justifying
its demand for additional funds. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Ministry to closely monitor
the utilization of funds for any  scheme and take corrective measures so as to expedite matters where
chances of procedural delay is anticipated. (Para 2.10)
Action Taken
2.2  Keeping in view  under utilisation of funds in some of the Schemes in the previous years, this Ministry
has taken various steps to minimize the bottlenecks for releasing the funds on account of procedural formalities
which resulted in satisfactory expenditure at the RE stage. Due to the satisfactory utilization of funds, an
additional allocation of  ` 129.15 crore over and above BE 2017-18 was received in RE. The actual utilization of
funds during 2017-18 was much higher than that of the previous years and the actual expenditure was
` 1544.49 crore which is 99.15 per cent of the RE. Further, the allocation for 2018-19 also shows a significant
improvement with an additional allocation of  ` 197.72 crore over BE 2017-18.  This Ministry will put its best
efforts and show the similar resolve to achieve higher utilization of funds in the current Financial Year as well.
III. QUALITY CONTROL OF AYURVEDA, SIDDHA, UNANI AND HOMOEOPATHIC (AYUSH)
DRUGS
Recommendation
2.3 The Committee is relieved to finally see that the Central Scheme of Pharmacovigilance of ASU&H
medicines is taking shape as three-tier network of national, intermediary and peripheral centres for
pharmacovigilance. However, the Committee feels that once the required structure is in place, the real work
of pharmacovigilance of AYUSH drugs will initiate. The activities listed out by the Ministry to be carried
out in 2018-19 only seem to be preparatory exercises. The Committee hopes that given the mandate of the
scheme which entails quality control and standardization of AYUSH drugs it will certainly give a big boost
to the AYUSH systems of medicine thereby upholding and increasing their credibility. (Para 3.17)
Action Taken
2.4  In order to achieve the objective of safety monitoring of ASU&H drugs and surveillance of misleading
advertisements under the pharmacovigilance initiative in a time-bound and effective manner, following activities
have been done-
(i) Network of 43 peripheral and 5 intermediary centres under the coordination control of a
9

10
National Pharmacovigilance centre has been created and funds to the tune of `1.66 crore
approved to implement the initiative in 2018-19.
(ii) Induction training program for the coordinators/Nodal Officers of pharmacovigilance centres
has been conducted on 19th March, 2018 at the National Pharmacovigilance Coordination Centre.
(iii) Interdepartmental Empowered Committees have been constituted to oversee the implementation
of drugs quality control, enforcement of standards and pharmacovigilance initiative.
(iv) The process of recruiting staff for the pharmacovigilance management unit in the Ministry has
been taken up.
Recommendation
2.5 The Committee is also of the view that since no objection has been received from the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare for creation of a vertical structure in CDSCO, all out efforts need to be made by
the Ministry to create this structure at the earliest under the CDSCO for regulation and quality control of
ASU&H drugs. The Committee also hopes that the recruitment of Drug Controllers is completed as early as
possible so that incumbents take charge of their duties of pharmacovigilance. (Para 3.18)
Action Taken
2.6 Department of Health & Family Welfare accorded ‘No Objection’ to the proposal of creating AYUSH
Vertical vide order 2
ndFebruary, 2018 and thereafter CDSCO has notified the creation of AYUSH Vertical in
CDSCO w.e.f. 5th February, 2018 with 12 regulatory posts comprising of Deputy Drugs Controllers (02),
Assistant Drugs Controllers (03) and Drug Inspectors (07). For the time being, the Technical Officers of
the Ministry of AYUSH have been given additional charge of these posts and the Recruitment Rules taken up
for approval of the Department of Personnel & Training (DoPT). The DoPT have sought certain clarifications
which have been responded to.
V. CENTRAL  RESEARCH  COUNCILS
Recommendation
2.7 The Committee hopes that these Research Councils are able to utilise the entire amount of allocated
funds till 31
st March, 2018 so that these Research Councils carry out their mandate optimally and contribute
significantly so as to get important research leads and generate objective data required for policy decisions
and quality assurance of AYUSH drugs. The Committee would also like to know whether more funds would
be required by Research Councils for 2018-19 for undertaking activities in their thrust areas of research.
(Para 5.4)
Action Taken
2.8 The Ministry appreciates the concern expressed by the Committee for providing adequate funds to the
Research Councils and for their optimal utilization. During 2017-18, the allocation and utilisation of funds
for Research Councils is given below:
(`  in Crore)
B E RE A E % utilisation w.r.t RE
450.50 521.19 521.13 100

11
It is seen that additional funds were provided to the Research Councils at the RE stage which were
fully utilized. During 2018-19 BE allocation of ` 549.91 crore has been made which is an increase of
` 99.41 crore against the BE allocation for Research Councils during 2017-18. If this allocation is found to
be inadequate during the year, additional funds would be sought at the RE stage.
VI. NATIONAL  MEDICINAL  PLANTS  BOARD
Recommendation
2.9 Attention of the Committee has also been drawn to the issue of creation of 65 new posts for NMPB
where the Ministry has submitted that the matter is under process. The Committee takes serious note of the
fact that nothing has been done further for creation of 65 new posts for strengthening the manpower for the
Board and the situation is similar to that of last year. The Committee would like to highlight the fact that
Expenditure Finance Committee had agreed in principle to increase the sanctioned strength in 2014 but the
creation of 65 new posts has yet not materialized. Despite Committee’s recommendation for finalizing the
creation of posts within 3 months in the 101
st report of the Committee, the Ministry seems to have ignored the
issue at hand totally. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the 65 new posts should be created
and filled up within this financial year itself so that the very mandate of the Board is not affected due to
shortage of adequate manpower. (Para 6.9)
Action Taken
2.10 Acc ording to Ministry of Health & Family Welfare’s O.M. No. I.17012/02/2017-IWSU dated
28
th February, 2018 (copy enclosed), the Work Measurement Study of National Medicinal Plants Board
(NMPB) will be carried out by Internal Work Study Unit (IWSU) of Department of Health & Family Welfare,
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoH&FW) and will be included in the Annual Programme of Work
Measurement Studies for the year 2018-19.  As desired by MoH&FW, NMPB has submitted the basic data
and other related information in the prescribed proforma to the Establishment Section of this Ministry for
onward transmission to IWSU.
E.II
In connection with the work study of the NMPB, the SIU has requested to submit data and other
related information in respect of NMPB in the prescribed proforma. The information is being compiled and
will be sent to IWSU soon.  Once the study is completed by SIU and the recommendations are received,
further action will be taken up for creation of additional posts with the approval of Ministry of Finance.

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. BUDGET  ALLOCATION
Recommendation
3.1 The Committee is constrained to note that the issue of pendency of UCs has become a perennial
problem. Despite recommendations of the Committee to liquidate the pending UCs, there are still 1082
pending UCs amounting to 
` 524.56 crores. Out of 1082 pending UCs, 622 pertain to National Medicinal
Plants Board amounting to ` 94.78 crore and 244 pertain to National AYUSH Mission amounting to `
391.34 crore. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends to the Ministry to liquidate the pending UCs
and sort out this issue especially for the two schemes indicating high pendency. The Ministry should make
concerted efforts to operationalize the portal as early as possible for online transmission of UCs. The
Committee also recommends to the Ministry to have a monitoring mechanism in place to check high pendency
of UCs with respect to certain schemes having pending UCs since 2001-02. (Para 2.16)
Action Taken
3.2 The Ministry is fully committed to liquidating for UCs under these two Schemes.  Following new
remedial actions have been taken by the Ministry to reduce the pendency of Utilization Certificates (UCs) in
respect of erstwhile Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Development of AYUSH Hospitals & Dispensaries and
National AYUSH Mission (NAM):
(a) Time to time letters have also been written to States/UTs Government from Secretary (AYUSH),
Joint Secretary and Director regarding liquidation of Utilization Certificates.
(b) Regional level workshops cum review meeting for various States have been conducted at
various States under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (AYUSH) regarding pendency of
Utilization Certificates.
(c) Relevant supporting documents with respect to Utilization Certificates from States/UTs are
being received through email and the same are being examined as per the GFR provisions for
early settlement of the UCs.
In respect of NMPB, State-wise Nodal Officers are continuously liaising with the respective State
Authorities to take up the matter of liquidation of pending UCs on priority basis.  In addition, Officers are
also deputed to the States/Institutes periodically for liquidating the pending UCs.
Further Recommendation
3.3 The Committee is disappointed to note that although the Ministry is making efforts for
liquidation of pending UCs, the issue of high pendency of UCs is not solved.  The Committee is also
unhappy to note that the Ministry has not apprised the Committee about the operationalization of
the digital portal which may actually help in speedy transmission and liquidation of UCs.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the digital online portal needs to be operationalised at the
earliest so that the matter of pendency of UCs is solved.  The Committee also would like the
Ministry to lay special focus on the two schemes, namely, National Medicinal Plants Board and
National AYUSH Mission where number of pendency of UCs is quite high.
12

13
III. QUALITY CONTROL OF AYURVEDA, SIDDHA, UNANI AND HOMOEOPATHIC (AYUSH)
DRUGS
Recommendation
3.4 The Committee is of the view that a strong and strict regulatory framework is essential for quality
control of ASU&H drugs. Since the States are responsible for quality control and regulation of AYUSH
drugs, they need financial assistance so as to strengthen their regulatory framework. The Committee notes
that the financial assistance given to States is not much and therefore reiterates its recommendation as given
in 101
st Report for significant enhancement of financial assistance to the States. (Para 3.6)
Action Taken
3.5  The funding pattern to support regulatory and quality control activities of AYUSH drugs in the states
has been enhanced significantly in the National AYUSH Mission (NAM) implemented since November,
2014. In comparison to the erstwhile Central Sponsored Scheme, the funding pattern under the National
AYUSH Mission has been enhanced up to ` 5 crores for state pharmacy, up to ` 4 crores for Drug Testing
Laboratory (DTL), up to ` 50 lakhs for strengthening of regulatory framework, up to ` 25 lakhs per year
for technical manpower of the DTL and up to ` 15 lakhs per year for testing of drug samples.  Nevertheless,
it is for the states to project their requirement of financial assistance in the State Annual Action Plan (SAAP)
of National AYUSH Mission inter-alia for the purpose of quality control of ASU&H drugs and accordingly
the funds are released after necessary approval.
Further Recommendation
3.6 India has a rich heritage of AYUSH systems of medicine, which are widely recognized for
their holistic approach to healthcare.  However, one of the greatest challenges to widespread acceptance
of AYUSH drugs remains quality assurance. Strengthening and modernization of regulatory
framework for quality control of ASU&H drugs is, therefore, a pre-requisite for a strong and effective
system of AYUSH remedies for which it is necessary to step up allocation to State AYUSH drug
regulatory mechanisms.  Though the Committee appreciates the fact that the funding pattern to
support regulatory and quality control activities of the AYUSH drugs in the States has witnessed
improvements since the implementation of National AYUSH Mission in November, 2014, it feels
that a lot more remains to be done to bridge the regulatory gaps.  The Committee would therefore
like the Ministry to sensitize the States to the fact that for equipping AYUSH to achieve tangible
health outcomes, it is imperative that the weakness in the regulatory framework are addressed and
a significant proportion of outlay is projected in their Annual Action Plan for supporting quality
assurance activities.  The Committee desires to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Ministry
in this regard.
Recommendation
3.7 The Committee would also like to express concern about the issue of failed samples of ASU drugs and
the consequent action taken in this regard. The Committee is of the firm view that merely issuing show cause
notices, departmental action etc. is not enough to control the menace of spurious drugs of AYUSH. Despite
repeated recommendations of the Committee to have stringent measures to tackle the problem of failed
samples, the Ministry seems not to have done anything in this regard. The Committee takes serious note of
the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry in not taking concrete action against defaulters in order to ensure

14
effective regulation of ASU&H drugs. The Committee would like to emphasize that such erring manufacturers
need to be brought to book and dealt with strictly for misleading and duping innocent patients and playing
with their lives. The Committee, accordingly, recommends to the Ministry to lay down stringent regulations
which can act as a deterrent for erring manufacturers. (Para 3.7)
Action Taken
3.8 Misbranded, Adulterated, Spurious and Sub-standard ASU drugs are defined in the Drugs & Cosmetics
Act, 1940 along with the provisions for prohibition of their manufacturing, sale, stocking and distribution;
and the penalty in the form of confiscation of the concerned batch of the drug and payment of fine and/or
imprisonment of the defaulters. As per statute, the power of enforcing these provisions is vested with the
state governments. The states have reported confiscation of such cases of ASU drugs; suspension/ cancellation
of the manufacturing licenses; and prosecution of the defaulters. The Central Government has in the past
banned/ prohibited the manufacturing and sale of ASU products made from tobacco, certain alcoholic
preparations, injections, etc. In order to enforce the ASU drugs related legal provisions in the effective
manner, following steps have been taken:
(i) Ministry of AYUSH has written to the States and supported them for testing of adequate
number of AYUSH drug samples and initiate legal action against the defaulters;
(ii) During 2017-18, the Ministry conducted seven regulatory and quality control training programs
for the ASU&H drug regulators, pharmacy and laboratory staff including manufacturers of all
the states/ UTs;
(iii) An A YUSH vertical has been created in the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(CDSCO) w.e.f. 5
th February, 2018 with 12 regulatory posts of Inspectors, Assistant Drugs
Controllers and Deputy Drugs Controllers at the Central level;
(iv) Central sector scheme for safety monitoring of AYUSH drugs and surveillance of the misleading
advertisements has been implemented in 2017-18 to develop an institutional network for detection,
assessment, documenting and reporting of the Adverse Drug Reactions of AYUSH drugs for
appropriate regulatory action;
(v) Financial assistance is being provided through National AYUSH Mission for strengthening the
regulatory and quality control system in the states.
Further Recommendation
3.9 The Committee understands that the power of enforcing the provisions of the Drugs &
Cosmetics Act, 1940 is vested with the State Government.  However, the Central Government is
involved through its schemes and initiatives wherein financial assistance for strengthening the
quality control system through NAM, Central Sector Scheme for safety monitoring of AYUSH
drugs, quality control training programmes in States, creation of a vertical structure in CDSCO
etc is given.  The Committee is of the view that the actual work of the newly created vertical
structure in CDSCO in quality control of drugs and work done for safety monitoring of AYUSH
drugs under the Central Sector Scheme are yet to be seen.  Apart from that, as earlier observed
by the Committee itself, merely issuing directions, show cause notices etc is not sufficient to deal
with the alarming issue at hand.  The Committee has been impressing upon the Ministry to carry
out the required amendment to Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940 so that stringent clauses are included

15
in the Act to effectively deter the erring manufacturers. The Committee however, regrets to
observe that no headway has been made in this regard and desires to be apprised of the hindrances
in this regard. The Committee is aware that the power of enforcing quality control provisions
falls within the purview of State Governments. Nonetheless, given the fact that a part of the plan
outlay of the Ministry is allocated for quality assurance activities, the Committee expects the
Ministry to play a more dynamic role and it is therefore, imperative that certain festering issues
afflicting quality assurance of AYUSH drugs are taken up by the Ministry and corrective measures
suggested thereon.
Recommendation
3.10 Attention of the Committee has been drawn to the fact that last year, 29 Drug laboratories and 46
Pharmacies were available in the public sector in the States and 6 States did not have any manufacturing
unit. The Committee in its 101
st report 2017-18 had recommended that there should be atleast one Drug
Testing Laboratory in each State and more ASU&H drug manufacturing units in the country. The Ministry
in its submission has not given any information about the increase in States Drug Testing Laboratories,
Pharmacies and ASU&H drug manufacturing units. The Committee is constrained to note that the progress
of GMP compliance by manufacturing units across the country has also not been furnished by the Ministry.
The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Ministry should strive for increasing the number of State
Drug Testing Laboratories for effective regulation of ASU&H drugs and manufacturing units which should
be GMP compliant for producing quality drugs for the people. The Ministry should also furnish the relevant
information to the Committee properly. (Para 3.9)
Action Taken
3.11 During the year 2017-18, seven pharmacies and nine Drug Testing Laboratories in the states have
been provided grant-in-aid through National AYUSH Mission (NAM). In this regard, attention of the Hon’ble
Committee is kindly drawn to the fact that it is the prerogative of State/UT Governments to submit the
proposals for seeking grant-in-aid for establishment or strengthening of pharmacies and laboratories in their
State Annual Action Plans under National AYUSH Mission.
3.12 Besides the availability of Central and State Drug Testing Laboratories, 55 private laboratories are
approved or licensed as of now under the provisions of Drugs& Cosmetic Rules, 1945 and proposals of
more such laboratories are in the pipeline for grant of approval.
3.13 Schedule ‘T’ and Schedule ‘M-I’ under Drugs & Cosmetics Rules, 1945 contain the provisions
of Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) for ASU and Homoeopathic drugs respectively. GMP for the
manufacturing of ASU drugs was introduced w.e.f. 7.3.2003 and for Homoeopathic drugs w.e.f.
31.10.2006. As per the available information, 8667 licensed manufacturing units of ASU&H drugs exist
in the country, out of which 7488 (86.7%) units are GMP compliant and 1179 (13.6%) units are
reported not to be complying with GMP norms. Detailed information of State-wise progress about the
number of pharmacies,  GMP compliant units and laboratories for ASU&H drugs from 2015 to current
position is annexed as Annexure-I .
Further Recommendation
3.14 The Committee has been given to understand that there are 88 drug testing laboratories
in the country. The States of Goa, Manipur  and the UTs of Andaman and Nicobar, Dadar &

16
Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu, Lakshadweep & Puduchery are not having any labs. There were a
total of 9282 Pharmacies in the 36 States/ UTs of the country as on 1 st April, 2015, out of which
7653 were GMP compliant. Presently, there are 8667 Pharmacies, out of which 7488 only are
GMP compliant. The Committee notes that the number of pharmacies has reduced from 9282 to
8667 with maximum reduction in the State of Tamil Nadu.  Apart from that, the number of GMP
compliant units has also declined from 7653 to 7488. The Committee wonders about such decrease
in numbers and the reasons for such a trend is not clear.  The Committee is constrained to note
such decrease in the total number of pharmacies in 2018 compared to 2015. The Committee,
accordingly, would like the Ministry to have an assessment done so as to ascertain the reasons
for the same in consultation with the State Governments especially Tamil Nadu. The Committee
would also like to emphasize that the Ministry needs to make concerted efforts in co-ordination
with State Governments to make these units GMP complaint. Further, States/ UTs where there
are no labs as of now need to be engaged and prompted to contemplate about having atleast one
lab in the State/ UTs.
Recommendation
3.15 With respect to the new legislation containing the existing and proposed provisions of both Drugs and
Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisement) Act, 1954, the Committee
is dismayed to note that the new legislation is still in the process of being framed by the Department of
Health and Family Welfare. It has been more than two years since the new legislation is being framed and
it speaks volumes about the laid back approach of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and also of
the Ministry of AYUSH in pursuing the matter. The Committee would like to strongly recommend that a
definite time line within which this new legislation will see the light of the day may be indicated and the
Ministry of AYUSH should aggressively pursue the matter with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare so
that relevant provisions are incorporated in the legislation and enacted so as to prohibit misleading
advertisements and strengthen the effective regulation of ASU&H drugs. (Para 3.13)
Action Taken
3.16 Drugs & Cosmetics Act,1940 is under the administrative purview of Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare. Accordingly, on the recommendations of the Group of Ministers, the Department of Health &
Family Welfare did take up the task of framing new legislation for Drugs & Cosmetics including Ayurvedic,
Siddha, Unni, Sowa Rigpa and Homoeopathic drugs. For this purpose, Ministry of AYUSH provided
necessary inputs for framing ASU& H drugs related regulatory provisions including stringent penal provisions
for violation of quality norms and standards. The proposed provisions were conceptualized in accordance
with the emerging regulatory trends for effective quality control of ASU&H drugs. The Ministry is pursuing
the matter of imposing effective quality control of ASU&H drugs and introducing prohibitive measures
for misleading advertisements and has inter alia constituted two Empowered Committees chaired by Joint
Secretary level officers vide office order dated 22.3.2018 to monitor the progress of new regulatory
vertical structure of AYUSH in CDSCO and control of misleading advertisement/exaggerated claims
respectively.
Further Recommendation
3.17 The Committee is relieved to know that the Ministry has provided necessary inputs for framing
ASU&H drugs related regulatory provisions for framing a new legislation regarding violation of

17
quality norms and standards.  The Committee, however, is of the view that given the seriousness of
the situation in wake of sale of spurious/ sub-standard ASU drugs, the matter of bringing in a new
legislation in this regard needs to be taken up with the Department of Health and Family Welfare
on a priority basis.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of the composition of the two
Empowered Committees constituted in March, 2018 and the work done by the two Committees with
respect to the regulatory vertical structure of AYUSH for quality assurance and control of misleading
advertisement/ exaggerated claims.
IV. NATIONAL  AYUSH  MISSION
Recommendation
3.18 The Committee appreciates the Ministry of AYUSH for having co-location of AYUSH facilities
at PHCs, CHCs and District Hospitals, participation of AYUSH doctors in National Health Programme
and Public Health Outreach Activities and research activities undertaken to facilitate integration of
Ayurveda and Allopathic system of medicine. The Committee would, however, like to point out that
it is often seen that practitioners of modern system of medicine do not have much faith in AYUSH
system and often question their credibility and scientific validation. The Committee feels that it is a
known fact that our country has been a repository of knowledge of traditional systems of medicine
since ages. The need of the hour is to streamline the AYUSH systems of medicine by standardisation
and quality control of ASU&H drugs and improving the quality of education and healthcare services
through AYUSH. At the same time, the curricula of both modern systems of medicine and AYUSH
system need to be changed in such a way as to strive for integration in the study of medical education
itself followed by cross system referrals and integrated healthcare services. The Committee is of the
view that such an integrated approach towards both systems of medicine would help in understanding
the strengths of each system of medicine and also increase the credibility of AYUSH systems of
medicine. The Committee, accordingly, recommends to the Ministry to take concrete steps in introducing
modules of modern system of medicine in the curriculum and pursue the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare for introducing similar modules of AYUSH systems of medicines in their MBBS
course. (Para 4.10)
Action Taken
3.19 It may be stated here that the National Policy on Indian Systems of Medicine & Homoeopathy –
2002, envisages integration of AYUSH with the Health Care Delivery System.  Mainstreaming of AYUSH
is one of the strategies in National Health Mission (NHM) as well which seeks to provide accessible,
affordable and quality health care in order to improve the existing health care delivery system.  Government
of India has adopted a strategy of Co-location of AYUSH facilities at Primary Health Centres (PHCs),
Community Health Centres (CHCs) and District Hospitals (DHs), thus enabling choice to the patients for
different systems of medicines under single window.  The engagement of AYUSH Doctors/ paramedics
and their training is supported by the Department of Health & Family Welfare, while the support for
AYUSH infrastructure, equipment/ furniture and medicines are provided by Ministry of AYUSH under
shared responsibilities.
So far as curricula or integrated course and Bridge course is concerned, no such initiatives has been
taken by the Ministry presently.

18
Further Recommendation
3.20 The Committee appreciates the strategy of the National Policy on Indian Systems of Medicine
and Homoeopathy 2002 which envisages integration of AYUSH with health care delivery system
leading to co-location of AYUSH facilities at PHCs, CHCs and District Hospitals. The Committee in
order to bring AYUSH into the mainstream had recommended for change in curriculum which
would include introducing modules of modern medicine in AYUSH system and modules of AYUSH in
the curriculum of modern medicine i.e. MBBS course.  The Committee is of the firm view that the
Ministry of AYUSH needs to take initiative in promoting and integrating Indian systems of medicine
with the modern systems so as to increase its acceptability as a scientific and reliable alternate
system of medicine. The Committee would, however, like to emphasize that the Ministry must lay
focus on increasing the credibility of AYUSH systems by promoting scientific research and upholding
strict quality control of AYUSH drugs.  The Committee, therefore, would like to recommend to the
Ministry to engage with Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for integration of AYUSH systems
with modern medicine.
Recommendation
3.21 The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of AYUSH should earmark a substantial amount of
funds for collaborative research with ICMR for the purposes of standardization and scientific re-validation
of ASU&H drugs. In this way, ASU&H drugs/ remedies will have worldwide acceptance and scientific basis
of AYUSH will be augmented. (Para 5.8)
Action Taken
CENTRAL  COUNCIL  FOR  RESEARCH  IN  AYURVEDIC  SCIENCES  (CCRAS)
3.22 The Council has undertaken CCRAS-ICMR collaborative clinical research project Evaluation of
Add on Efficacy & Safety of An Ayurvedic Formulation in the Management of Dengue Fever & Prevention
of its complications – A double blind clinical study in collaboration with ICMR-NITM, Belagavi, under
DHR, KLEU’s JNMC and Sri BMK Ayurveda Mahgavidyalaya Belagavi to evaluate the efficacy of
Ayurvedic intervention as add on to conventional management for the treatment of dengue and is
ongoing.
CENTRAL  COUNCIL  FOR  RESEARCH  IN  HOMOEOPATHY  (CCRH)
3.23 Council receives grant from Ministry of AYUSH for its intramural research activities. Out of the
budget of the Council, some of the budget is utilised for collaborative research projects, however these
funds are not sufficient and needs to be enhanced.
Council has undertaken three research projects in collaboration with National Institute of Virology,
Pune and National Institute of Cholera & Enteric Diseases, Indian Council of Medical Research(ICMR),
Kolkata, ICMR-National Institute of Traditional Medicine (NITM), Belagavi.
- Council has developed a drug from the four strains of Dengue viruses (Nosode) with National
Institute of Virology, Pune. Further the safety and toxicity study of the said nosode has also
been completed through Department of Pharmacology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
New Delhi.

19
- Council has undertaken a study entitled, “Preparation of Nosode from Rotavirus, Escherichia
coli and Vibrio cholera: their preclinical effectiveness and safety evaluation” with National
Institute of Cholera & Enteric Diseases (ICMR), Kolkata. The study has been initiated.
- Council is actively considering undertaking following studies with National Institute of Traditional
Medicine, Belagavi, Karnataka under ICMR. Joint discussions have been held among the
Scientists of both the organization for protocol preparation.
 Preparation and Evaluation of Dengue Nosode as Homoeopathic Therapy, ICMR-National
Institute of Traditional Medicine, Belagavi, Karnataka.
 Preparation, Standardization and Evaluation of Homoeopathic Nosodes against Human
Influenza Virus  A, ICMR-National Institute of Traditional Medicine, Belagavi, Karnataka
CENTRAL  COUNCIL  FOR  RESEARCH  IN  UNANI  MEDICINE  (CCRUM)
3.24 The CCRUM receives grant from Ministry of AYUSH for its intramural research activities. Out of the
budget of the Council, some of the budget is utilized for collaborative research projects; however these
funds are not sufficient and needs to be enhanced.
Council has undertaken collaborative studies on cervical erosion with Institute of Cytology and
Preventive Oncology (ICPO), Noida (ICMR) and Pulmonary Tuberculosis with National Institute of Research
on Tuberculosis (NIRT), Chennai ICMR. Council is also planning study on Dengue fever in collaboration
with ICMR.
CENTRAL  COUNCIL  FOR  RESEARCH  IN  SIDHA  (CCRS)
3.25 In pursuance to the recommendations made in the joint AYUSH ICMR Mission meeting held on
30.11.2016 at Ministry of AYUSH, a Meeting of Focus Group to identify and short list research areas based
on the leads available with AYUSH research councils for joint collaboration between ICMR and AYUSH was
held on 15
th December, 2016 at CCRS Hqtrs. In this direction, a focused group discussion was held on 13 th
November, 2017 at National Institute of Epidemiology (ICMR) in Chennai followed by another meeting on
proposed multi-disciplinary collaborative studies on Nilavembu Kudineer which was held on 7th March, 2018
at Central Council for Research in Siddha in Chennai. Based on the suggestions received, A joint proposal/
protocol – triple arm clinical trialis being prepared for collaboration with ICMR – National Institute of
Epidemiology (NIE) to establish the efficacy of Siddha formulations in the treatment of Dengue.
Further Recommendation
3.26 The Committee has been given to understand that with respect to CCRH and CCRUM
specifically, the funds allocated to these research institutes were not sufficient and needed to be
enhanced.  The Committee, time and again, has been reiterating on substantial increase in funds
for research in these institutes including collaborative research with ICMR. The Committee would
again like to emphasize that in order to increase the popularity and acceptability of Indian Systems
of Medicine, it is the need of the hour to focus on scientific research including collaborative research
so as to increase the credibility of AYUSH systems by promoting standardization, scientific re-
validation of AYUSH drugs, collaborative research work projects with ICMR etc.  For increasing
such activities which will certainly increase the acceptability of AYUSH, adequate funds need to be
ear-marked for research activities so that the research institutes serve the purpose for which they

20
have been established. The Committee, therefore, recommends substantial increase to ensure
adequate funds for these research institutes for research purposes.
VI. National Medicinal Plants Board
Recommendation
3.27 The Committee finds the utilisation of funds for NMPB to be satisfactory and hopes that the remaining
amount is utilized by the end of the financial year. The Committee, however, has observed in proceeding
paras about the high pendency of UCs of NMPB which is 622 amounting to 
` 94.78 crore. A State-wise list
of details of pending UCs from the year 2001-02 to 2015-16 as on 31.01.2018 indicates high pendency of
UCs with respect to Andhra Pradesh (35), Arunachal Pradesh (21), Chhattisgarh (23), Delhi (31), Gujarat
(35), Karnataka (37), Kerala (34), Maharashtra (37), Orissa (25), Rajasthan (36), Tamil Nadu (42),
Uttarakhand (46), Uttar Pradesh (41) etc. (Para 6.7)
3.28 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should make concerted efforts for liquidation
of pending UCs of NMPB and take the matter with the concerned State Governments on a priority basis.
The Committee would like to emphasize that due to pendency of UCs, further release of funds to the States
would be disrupted which may adversely affect the implementation of an important scheme of conservation,
development and sustainable management of medicinal plants. (Para 6.8)
Action Taken
3.29 The State-wise Nodal Officers appointed by NMPB are continuously liaising with the respective State
Authorities to take up the matter of liquidation of pending UCs on priority basis.  In addition, Officers are
also deputed to the States/Institutes periodically for liquidating the pending UCs.
The current status of pending UCs as on 31
st March, 2018 w.r.t. Central Sector Scheme of NMPB is
613 number of UCs amounting to `93.65 crore. Annexure -II
Further Recommendation
3.30 The Committee is disappointed to note that there are total 613 UCs pending amounting to
````` 93.65 crore.  There are UCs pending since the years 2001-02 (4 UCs), 2002-03 (18 UCs), 2003-04
(33 UCs) 2004-05 (65 UCs), 2005-06 (76 UCs), 2006-07 (35 UCs), 2007-08 (58 UCs), 2008-09 (44 UCs),
2009-(36 UCs), 2010-11 (39 UCs), 2011-12 (19 UCs), 2012-13 (14 UCs), 2013-14 (21 UCs), 2014-15 (68
UCs) and 2015-16 (83 UCs).  The Committee finds it as an unhealthy trend and has been reiterating
on making efforts for liquidation of UCs.  It also observes that maximum number of UCs are
pending with States like Gujarat ( 35 UCs), Karnataka (36 UCs), Maharashtra (36 UCs), Rajasthan
(36 UCs), Tamil Nadu (42 UCs), Uttarakhand (46 UCs), UP (40 UCs) etc. The Committee, therefore,
would like the Ministry to make special efforts for liquidation of pending UCs of NMPB as the very
objective of the scheme would be defeated and conservation, development and sustainable
management of medicinal plants would be hamstrung if pendency is not liquidated.

CHAPTER IV
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited
Nil
21

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS  —  AT A GLANCE
II. BUDGET ALLOCATION
The Committee is disappointed to note that although the Ministry is making efforts for
liquidation of pending UCs, the issue of high pendency of UCs is not solved.  The Committee is also
unhappy to note that the Ministry has not apprised the Committee about the operationalization of
the digital portal which may actually help in speedy transmission and liquidation of UCs.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the digital online portal needs to be operationalised at the
earliest so that the matter of pendency of UCs is solved.  The Committee also would like the
Ministry to lay special focus on the two schemes, namely, National Medicinal Plants Board and
National AYUSH Mission where number of pendency of UCs is quite high. (Para 3.3)
III. QUALITY CONTROL OF AYURVEDA, SIDDHA, UNANI AND HOMOEOPATHIC (AYUSH)
DRUGS
India has a rich heritage of AYUSH systems of medicine, which are widely recognized for
their holistic approach to healthcare.  However, one of the greatest challenges to widespread acceptance
of AYUSH drugs remains quality assurance. Strengthening and modernization of regulatory
framework for quality control of ASU&H drugs is, therefore, a pre-requisite for a strong and effective
system of AYUSH remedies for which it is necessary to step up allocation to State AYUSH drug
regulatory mechanisms.  Though the Committee appreciates the fact that the funding pattern to
support regulatory and quality control activities of the AYUSH drugs in the States has witnessed
improvements since the implementation of National AYUSH Mission in November, 2014, it feels
that a lot more remains to be done to bridge the regulatory gaps.  The Committee would therefore
like the Ministry to sensitize the States to the fact that for equipping AYUSH to achieve tangible
health outcomes, it is imperative that the weakness in the regulatory framework are addressed and
a significant proportion of outlay is projected in their Annual Action Plan for supporting quality
assurance activities.  The Committee desires to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Ministry
in this regard. (Para 3.6)
The Committee understands that the power of enforcing the provisions of the Drugs &
Cosmetics Act, 1940 is vested with the State Government.  However, the Central Government is
involved through its schemes and initiatives wherein financial assistance for strengthening the
quality control system through NAM, Central Sector Scheme for safety monitoring of AYUSH
drugs, quality control training programmes in States, creation of a vertical structure in CDSCO
etc is given.  The Committee is of the view that the actual work of the newly created vertical
structure in CDSCO in quality control of drugs and work done for safety monitoring of AYUSH
drugs under the Central Sector Scheme are yet to be seen.  Apart from that, as earlier observed
by the Committee itself, merely issuing directions, show cause notices etc is not sufficient to deal
with the alarming issue at hand.  The Committee has been impressing upon the Ministry to carry
out the required amendment to Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940 so that stringent clauses are included
in the Act to effectively deter the erring manufacturers. The Committee however, regrets to
observe that no headway has been made in this regard and desires to be apprised of the hindrances
in this regard. The Committee is aware that the power of enforcing quality control provisions
falls within the purview of State Governments. Nonetheless, given the fact that a part of the plan
outlay of the Ministry is allocated for quality assurance activities, the Committee expects the
22

23
Ministry to play a more dynamic role and it is therefore, imperative that certain festering issues
afflicting quality assurance of AYUSH drugs are taken up by the Ministry and corrective measures
suggested thereon. (Para 3.9)
The Committee has been given to understand that there are 88 drug testing laboratories
in the country. The States of Goa, Manip ur and the UTs of Andaman and Nicobar, Dadar &
Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu, Lakshadweep & Puduchery are not having any labs. There were a
total of 9282 Pharmacies in the 36 States/ UTs of the country as on 1
st April, 2015, out of which
7653 were GMP compliant. Presently, there are 8667 Pharmacies, out of which 7488 only are
GMP compliant. The Committee notes that the number of pharmacies has reduced from 9282 to
8667 with maximum reduction in the State of Tamil Nadu.  Apart from that, the number of GMP
compliant units has also declined from 7653 to 7488. The Committee wonders about such decrease
in numbers and the reasons for such a trend is not clear.  The Committee is constrained to note
such decrease in the total number of pharmacies in 2018 compared to 2015. The Committee,
accordingly, would like the Ministry to have an assessment done so as to ascertain the reasons
for the same in consultation with the State Governments especially Tamil Nadu. The Committee
would also like to emphasize that the Ministry needs to make concerted efforts in co-ordination
with State Governments to make these units GMP complaint. Further, States/ UTs where there
are no labs as of now need to be engaged and prompted to contemplate about having atleast one
lab in the State/ UTs. (Para 3.14)
The Committee is relieved to know that the Ministry has provided necessary inputs for framing
ASU&H drugs related regulatory provisions for framing a new legislation regarding violation of
quality norms and standards.  The Committee, however , is of the view that given the seriousness of
the situation in wake of sale of spurious/ sub-standard ASU drugs, the matter of bringing in a new
legislation in this regard needs to be taken up with the Department of Health and Family Welfare
on a priority basis.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of the composition of the two
Empowered Committees constituted in March, 2018 and the work done by the two Committees with
respect to the regulatory vertical structure of AYUSH for quality assurance and control of misleading
advertisement/ exaggerated claims. (Para 3.17)
IV. NATIONAL AYUSH MISSION
The Committee appreciates the strategy of the National Policy on Indian Systems of Medicine
and Homoeopathy 2002 which envisages integration of AYUSH with health care delivery system
leading to co-location of AYUSH facilities at PHCs, CHCs and District Hospitals. The Committee in
order to bring AYUSH into the mainstream had recommended for change in curriculum which
would include introducing modules of modern medicine in AYUSH system and modules of AYUSH in
the curriculum of modern medicine i.e. MBBS course.  The Committee is of the firm view that the
Ministry of AYUSH needs to take initiative in promoting and integrating Indian systems of medicine
with the modern systems so as to increase its acceptability as a scientific and reliable alternate
system of medicine. The Committee would, however, like to emphasize that the Ministry must lay
focus on increasing the credibility of AYUSH systems by promoting scientific research and upholding
strict quality control of AYUSH drugs.  The Committee, therefore, would like to recommend to the
Ministry to engage with Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for integration of AYUSH systems
with modern medicine. (Para 3.20)

24
The Committee has been given to understand that with respect to CCRH and CCRUM
specifically, the funds allocated to these research institutes were not sufficient and needed to be
enhanced.  The Committee, time and again, has been reiterating on substantial increase in funds
for research in these institutes including collaborative research with ICMR. The Committee would
again like to emphasize that in order to increase the popularity and acceptability of Indian Systems
of Medicine, it is the need of the hour to focus on scientific research including collaborative research
so as to increase the credibility of AYUSH systems by promoting standardization, scientific re-
validation of AYUSH drugs, collaborative research work projects with ICMR etc.  For increasing
such activities which will certainly increase the acceptability of AYUSH, adequate funds need to be
ear-marked for research activities so that the research institutes serve the purpose for which they
have been established. The Committee, therefore, recommends substantial increase to ensure
adequate funds for these research institutes for research purposes. (Para 3.26)
VI. NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANTS BOARD
The Committee is disappointed to note that there are total 613 UCs pending amounting to
````` 93.65 crore.  There are UCs pending since the years 2001-02 (4 UCs), 2002-03 (18 UCs), 2003-04
(33 UCs) 2004-05 (65 UCs), 2005-06 (76 UCs), 2006-07 (35 UCs), 2007-08 (58 UCs), 2008-09 (44
UCs), 2009-(36 UCs), 2010-11 (39 UCs), 2011-12 (19 UCs), 2012-13 (14 UCs), 2013-14 (21 UCs),
2014-15 (68 UCs) and 2015-16 (83 UCs).  The Committee finds it as an unhealthy trend and has
been reiterating on making efforts for liquidation of UCs.  It also observes that maximum number
of UCs are pending with States like Gujarat ( 35 UCs), Karnataka (36 UCs), Maharashtra (36
UCs), Rajasthan (36 UCs), Tamil Nadu (42 UCs), Uttarakhand (46 UCs), UP (40 UCs) etc. The
Committee, therefore, would like the Ministry to make special efforts for liquidation of pending
UCs of NMPB as the very objective of the scheme would be defeated and conservation, development
and sustainable management of medicinal plants would be hamstrung if pendency is not liquidated.
(Para 3.30)

MINUTES

*III
THIRD MEETING
2018-19
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 27 th December, 2018 in Room No. ‘67’, First
Floor, Parliament House,  New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  —   Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
3. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
4. Shri Jairam Ramesh
5. Shri Ashok Siddharth
6. Shri K. Somaprasad
7. Dr. C. P. Thakur
8. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey
LOK  SABHA
9. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
10. Shri C. P . Joshi
11. Dr. K. Kamaraj
12. Shri Arjunlal Meena
13. Shri C. R. Patil
14. Shri M. K. Raghavan
15. Shri Janak Ram
16. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
17. Shri Gyan Singh
18. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
SECRETARIAT
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisior
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Under Secretary
Opening Remarks
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed that the meeting
has been convened to consider and adopt draft 
*** and 114th Action Taken Reports based on the Action
* Minutes of I & II meetings relate to other matters.
*** Relate to other matters.
27

28
Taken Notes on three Reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2018-19) furnished by the ***, ***
and Ministry of AYUSH respectively.
2. The Committee then considered the draft *** and ***, *** and 114th Action Taken Reports based on
the Action Taken Notes on three Reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2018-19) furnished by
the ***, *** and Ministry of AYUSH respectively. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the said
Reports ***. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the Reports may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and
simultaneously laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Friday, the 28th December, 2018. The Committee
authorized its Chairman, Shri Jairam Ramesh and Dr. Vikas Mahatme to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha
and Dr. K. Kamaraj and Shri Arjunlal Meena to lay the Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee then adjourned at 10.30 
A.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

ANNEXURES

31
31
ANNEXURE-I
Statement showing progress of State-wise Pharmacies, GMP compliance
and Laboratories for ASU&H drugs
Sl. States PharmaciesGMP ComplianceDrug Number of times
No. Unit Testing Laboratories/
laboratoriesPharmacies
supported through
National AYUSH
Mission
As on Current As on CurrentLaboratoriesPharmacies
01-01-2015 status 01-04-2015 status
1          2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
1. Andhra Pradesh 326 378 326 368 1 3 4
2. Arunachal Pradesh 2 2 - - 1 3 3
3. Assam 44 31 8 10 1 3 3
4. Bihar 287 286 137 143 1 - -
5. Chhattisgarh 31 28 31 28 1 1 1
6. Delhi 84 84 84 84 9 - -
7. Goa 6 6 6 6 - - -
8. Gujarat 506 523 506 523 3 - 3
9. Haryana 357 367 357 367 5 - -
10. Himachal Pradesh 170 160 170 160 4 1 1
11. Jammu & Kashmir 22 22 12 12 1 1 -

32
12. Jharkhand 34 34 - - 1 - -
13. Karnataka 247 246 235 235 8 3 -
14. Kerala 819 727 801 717 7 4 -
15. Madhya Pradesh 588 662 580 659 6 - 2
16. Maharashtra 834 834 443 443 2 2 -
17. Manipur - - - - - - -
18. Meghalaya - - - - 1 - -
19. Mizoram - - - - 1 - -
20. Nagaland - - - - 1 - -
21. Odisha 99 82 76 79 4 4 3
22. Punjab 227 250 227 250 2 3 -
23. Rajasthan 318 318 281 281 4 2 -
24. Sikkim 2 2 2 2 1 1 -
25. Tamil Nadu 723 476 190 403 7 1 2
26. Telangana 465 465 444 444 2 3 3
27. Tripura 1 1 - - 1 4 -
28. Uttar Pradesh2471 2065 2214 177805 (Central 1 -
Laboratory
-02) 05
+ 02 = 07
29. Uttarakhand 234 252 226 252 4 3 -
1          2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

33
30. West Bengal 330 314 242 226 1 3 3
31. A&N Island - - - - - 1 -
32. Chandigarh 2 2 2 2 1 - -
33. D&N Haveli 4 4 4 4 - - -
34. Daman & Diu 8 10 8 10 - - -
35. Lakshadweep - - - - - - -
36. Puduchchery 41 36 41 2 - 2 -
T
OTAL9282 8667 7653 7488 88 49 28

34
ANNEXURE-II
Central Sector Scheme for Conservation, Development and Sustainable Management of Medicinal Plants Board
Yearwise Ucs Pending w.e.f. 2001-02 to 2015-16 as on 31st March 2018
2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07
Sl. State/UT No. Amount No. Amount No.Amount No. Amount No. Amount No. Amount
No.
1. Andhra Pradesh 0 0.00 3 13.95 310.41 1 5.94 3 15.81 1 0.04
2. Arunachal 0 0.00 26.50 2 11.262 7.57 1 2.45 0 0.00
Pradesh
3 Assam 0 0.00 00.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
4 Bihar 0 0.00 00.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 4.00 2 18.76
5 Chhattisgarh 0 0.00 00.00 1 11.702 7.05 5 22.16 1 4.92
6 Delhi 0 0.00 12.00 2 6.00 2 3.00 0 0.00 4 28.49
7 Goa 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
8 Gujarat 1 0.05 15.00 1 1.97 2 0.92 1 4.00 0 0.00
9 Haryana 0 0.00 00.00 1 3.30 3 8.65 2 18.00 0 0.00
10 Himachal 0 0.00 00.00 1 1.50 1 0.24 2 19.25 0 0.00
Pradesh
11 Jammu & 0 0.000 0.00 1 14.67 0 0.00 4 20.55 0 0.00
Kashmir
12 Jharkhand 1 5.00 00.00 2 7.42 0 0.00 2 2.01 0 0.00
13 Karnataka 0 0.00 00.00 1 31.19 4 101.84 3 7.31 1 7.00
14 Kerala 0 0.00 25.00 0 0.00 2 1.52 2 2.47 0 0.00
15 Madhya 0 0.00 214.25 1 15.98 3 58.796 116.12 2 9.21
Pradesh

35
16 Maharashtra 1 440 1 2.00 2 19.76 2 36.558 3 97.92 0 0.00
17 Manipur 00.00 0 0.00 1 9.91 3 136.04 2 42.50 0 0.00
18 Meghalaya 00.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 6.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
19 Mizoram 00.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 15.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
20 Nagaland 00.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 10.22 2 6.32 0 0
21 Orissa 00.00 1 3.00 1 3.69 2 12.03 4 29.78 1 6.26
22 Punjab 00.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 14.72 3 110.58 6 204.65
23 Rajasthan 14.82 0 0.00 2 24.35 7 148.06 9 300.46 1 1.60
24 Sikkim 00.00 0 0.00 1 0.30 1 3.30 2 3.21 0 0.00
25 Tamil Nadu 0 0.00 1 1.00 4 12.10 8 20.05 8 23.20 2 3.05
26 Tripura 00.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 4.22 0 0.00 0 0.00
27 Uttarakhand 00.00 2 2.50 3 10.31 8 30.2 6 24.13 2 2.03
28 Uttar Pradesh 0 0.002 11.00 2 8.00 59.90 3 8.28 8 33.82
29 West Bengal 00.00 0 0.00 1 0.60 2 13.07 2 0.93 3 7.27
30 Andaman & 00.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
Nicobar
31 Chandigarh 00.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
32 D&N Haveli 00.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
33 Daman & Diu 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
34 Lakshadeep 00.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
35 Pondicherry 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 0.56
36 Telangana 00.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
T
OTAL4 14.27 18 66.2 33 204.42 65 644.89 76 881.44 35 327.663

36
Central Sector Scheme for Conservation, Development and Sustainable Management of Medicinal Plants Board
Yearwise Ucs Pending w.e.f. 2001-02 to 2015-16 as on 31st March 2018
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13
Sl. State/UT No. Amount No. Amount No.Amount No. Amount No. Amount No. Amount
No.
1. Andhra Pradesh 3 19.33 3 16.942 8.00 2 9.13 1 40.69 1 2.80
2. Arunachal 0 0.00 25.00 4 58.00 2 6.23 2 58.33 0 0.00
Pradesh
3 Assam 0 0 00.00 0 0.00 1 3.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
4 Bihar 2 1.85 00.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
5 Chhattisgarh 2 7.71 620.74 1 52.52 0 0.00 1 6.76 0 0.00
6 Delhi 215.20 2 2.00 5 16.02 1 9.47 0 0.00 1 20.35
7 Goa 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
8 Gujarat 313.71 0 0.00 1 1.87 3 15.96 3 22.59 1 87.73
9 Haryana 1 2.00 15.00 1 5.00 1 150.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
10 Himachal 0 0.00 2 11.06 2 4.00 2 10.952 6.70 0 0.00
Pradesh
11 Jammu & 2 15.00 00.00 2 3.048 1 0.87 0 0.00 2 20.55
Kashmir
12 Jharkhand 5 20.98 15.00 0 0.00 1 5.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
13 Karnataka 6 95.2 427.02 4 6.15 2 11.000 0.00 0 0.00
14 Kerala 2 5.00 10.002 0 0.00 2 11.841 4.78 0 0.00
15 Madhya 0 0.00 210.00 1 5.00 1 6.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
Pradesh
16 Maharashtra 3 11.30 3 3.90 0 0.00 5 30.35 0 0.00 1 2.10

37
17 Manipur 00.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 3.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
18 Meghalaya 210.00 1 6.00 0 0.00 1 5.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
19 Mizoram 00.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
20 Nagaland 00.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
21 Orissa 27.50 1 0.29 3 26.15 0 0.00 2 55.75 0 0.00
22 Punjab 793.90 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 12.22
23 Rajasthan 118.65 1 7.00 1 8.03 1 5.00 2 214.46 3 220.32
24 Sikkim 00.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
25 Tamil Nadu 1 7.14 6 7.90 1 1.70 5 108.4 1 5.93 0 0.00
26 Tripura 14.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
27 Uttarakhand 317.00 4 22.93 39.00 3 11.00 27.49 3 15.64
28 Uttar Pradesh 5 13.02 2 3.42 214.00 4 68.50 1 8.13 0 0.00
29 West Bengal 29.89 2 23.97 3 23.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 40.79
30 Andaman & 00.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 7.00 0 0.00
Nicobar
31 Chandigarh 00.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
32 D&N Haveli 226.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
33 Daman & Diu 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
34 Lakshadeep 00.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
35 Pondicherry 1 5.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
36 Telangana 00.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
TOTAL58 419.38 44 178.17 36 241.488 39 470.7 19 438.61 14 422.50

38
Central Sector Scheme for Conservation, Development and Sustainable Management of Medicinal Plants Board
Yearwise Ucs Pending w.e.f. 2001-02 to 2015-16 as on 31st March 2018
(Rs. in Lakhs)
2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 Total
Sl. State/UT No. Amount No.Amount No. Amount No. Amount
No.
1. Andhra Pradesh 4 78.53 539.12 1 12.60 33 273.29
2. Arunachal 24.95 0 0.00 2 79.27 21 239.56
Pradesh
3 Assam 00.00 0 0.00 2 145.91 3 148.91
4 Bihar 00.00 0 0.00 0 0 5 24.61
5 Chhattisgarh 162.02 1 88.41 2 171.67 23 455.66
6 Delhi 15.00 4 26 6 17.64 31 151.17
7 Goa 0 0.00 0 0.00 2 15.44 2 15.44
8 Gujarat 264.60 11 199.22 5 117.10 35 534.72
9 Haryana 00.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 10 191.95
10 Himachal 00.00 2 159.31 2 26.00 16 239.01
Pradesh
11 Jammu & 1 4.98 00.00 0 0.00 13 79.668
Kashmir
12 Jharkhand 00.00 2 39.19 1 74.87 15 159.47
13 Karnataka 00.00 7 151.41 4 69.084 36 507.204
14 Kerala 10.00622 9 85.5 12 180.51 34 296.63
15 Madhya 00.00 1 5.00 2 31.25 21 271.60
Pradesh

39
16 Maharashtra 1 12.00 7 130.27 7 362.92 36 713.478
17 Manipur 0 0.00 16.00 3 37.61 11 235.06
18 Meghalaya 0 0.00 00.00 0 0.00 5 27.00
19 Mizoram 0 0.00 00.00 1 8.411 2 23.411
20 Nagaland 0 0.00 233.00 1 15.00 6 64.54
21 Orissa 325.10 1 9.00 4 64.02 25 242.57
22 Punjab 0 0.00 00.00 0 0.00 18 426.07
23 Rajasthan 1 3.00 3201.54 3 205.69 36 1362.98
24 Sikkim 0 0.00 1165.26 2 302.56 7 474.63
25 Tamil Nadu 0 0.00 0 0.00 5 58.25 42 248.72
26 Tripura 0 0.00 2129.91 2 110.42 6 248.55
27 Uttarakhand 1 2.87 243.61 4 78.75 46 277.46
28 Uttar Pradesh 1 136.36 3 22.00 2 9.24 40 345.67
29 West Bengal2 86.00 2 466.45 4 12.50 24 684.47
30 Andaman & 0 0.00 00.00 0 0.00 1 7.00
Nicobar
31 Chandigarh 0 0.00 00.00 1 0.50 1 0.50
32 D&N Haveli 0 0.00 00.00 0 0.00 2 26.00
33 Daman & Diu 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00
34 Lakshadeep 0 0.00 15.00 1 15.00 2 20.00
35 Pondicherry 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 2 5.56
36 Telangana 0 0.00 112.00 2 330.00 3 342.00
T
OTAL21 485.42 68 2017.20 83 2552.22 613 9364.57