       PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA   DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON  HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE   
   Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi December 2024/ Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)   
REPORT NO.    161 
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY FIRST REPORT ON ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 149TH REPORT ON IMPLEMENTATION OF PRADHAN MANTRI TB MUKT BHARAT ABHIYAN (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2024) (Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th February, 2025)   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
  

       PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA   DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON  HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE        Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi December 2024/ Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)  
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY FIRST REPORT ON ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 149TH REPORT ON IMPLEMENTATION OF PRADHAN MANTRI TB MUKT BHARAT ABHIYAN (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2024) (Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th February, 2025)   

CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2. PREFACE (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS (iii)-(iv) 
4. REPORT (v) 
 Chapter–I  Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government 1-19 
 
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
does not desire to pursue in view of replies of the 
Government 
20-29 
 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee 
30-39 
 Chapter–IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited 40 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   - AT   A GLANCE 41-43 
6. MINUTES* -- 
*To be appended at later stage 

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sanjeev Arora 
3. Shri Rajib Bhattacharjee  
4. Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade 
5. Dr. Sikander Kumar  
6. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel  
7. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy  
8. Shri Ashok Singh  
9. Shri Rameswar Teli 
10. Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai 
LOK SABHA  
11. Shri Ramvir Singh Bidhuri 
12. Dr. Vinod Kumar Bind  
13. Ms Iqra Choudhary  
14. Shri Mukeshkumar Chandrakaant Dalal  
15. Shri Sanjay Uttamrao Deshmukh  
16. Dr. Bachhav Shobha Dinesh  
17. Dr. Dharamvira Gandhi  
18. Dr. Kadiyam Kavya  
19. Dr. Prabha Mallikarjun  
20. Dr. C. N. Manjunath  
21. Shri Balya Mama Suresh Gopinath Mhatre 
22. Dr. Rajesh Mishra 
23. Shrimati Aparajita Sarangi  
24. Dr. Sharmila Sarkar  
25. Dr. Hemant Vishnu Savara 
26. Dr. Byreddy Shabari  
27. Dr. Mahesh Sharma  
28. Dr. Rani Srikumar  
29. Shri  Parimal Suklabaidya 
30. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman  
31. Mrs. Ruchi Vira  
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sumant Narain      Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan Joint Secretary 
3. Dr. Saket Kumar Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Renu Sreekanth Under Secretary 
5. Shri Roshan Lal Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 

ii 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and 
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, 
present this 161st Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 149th Report on Implementation of Pradhan 
Mantri TB Mukt Bharat Abhiyan.  
2. The One Hundred Forty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table 
of the Lok Sabha on 21st September 2023. The Action Taken Notes of the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received from the Departments in the Months of 
February and April 2024.   
3.  The Committee made a total of 49 recommendations in the 149th Report, out of which 29 
recommendations have been accepted by the Government and have been categorized under 
Chapter- I. There are 11 recommendations, which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government’s replies that have been categorized under Chapter II. There are 08 
recommendations/ observations, in respect of which replies of the Government, have not been 
accepted by the Committee and the Committee has made further recommendations thereon and 
have been categorized under Chapter III. While 01 recommendation/observation in respect of 
which final reply of the Government has not been received, has been categorized under Chapter-
IV. 
4. The Committee, in its meeting held on the 18th December, 2024 considered the Draft Report 
and adopted the same. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                            PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV  
December, 2024                         CHAIRMAN 
Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)               Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
      Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS  
ABDM  - Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission  
AB-PMJAY  - Ayushman Bharat- Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana 
ACF   - Active Case Finding 
ASHA   - Accredited Social Health Activist 
BCG   - Bacillus Calmette-Guerin 
BEST  - Brihanmumbai Electric Supply and Transport 
BWM   - Biomedical Waste Management 
C&DST  - Culture and Drug Susceptibility Testing 
CBNAAT - Cartridge-Based Nucleic Acid Amplification Testing 
CSR   - Corporate Social Responsibility 
CTD   - Central TB Division  
CVDs   - Cardiovascular Diseases 
DBT  - Direct Benefit Transfer 
DOTS  - Directly Observed Treatment Short-course 
DTOs  - District TB Officers  
EQA   - External Quality Assurance  
FDCs  - Fixed Dose Combinations  
FHIR  - Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources  
FHIR  - Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources 
GFR   - General Financial Rules 
ICF   - Intensified Case Finding  
ICMR   - Indian Council of Medical Research 
ICT   - Information and communication Technology  
IEC   - Information Education and Communication 
IIPH   - Indian Institute of Public Health (IIPH)  
MDR  - Multi-Drug Resistant 
MoUs  - Memorandum of Understandings  
MTS   - Modernised training system   
NAAT  - Nucleic Acid Amplification Test 
NHM   - National Health Mission  
NITRD   - National Institute of Tuberculosis and Respiratory Diseases  
NPCC   - National Programme Coordination Committee  
NP-NCD  - National Programme for Prevention and Control of Non-communicable   
    Diseases 
NPY   - Ni-kshay Poshan Yojana  
NRL   - National Reference Laboratory  
NTEP   - National TB Elimination Programme 
OOPE   - Out of pocket expenditure  
PDSA   - Plan-Do-Study-Act 
PHCs   - Primary Health Centres 
PIPs   - Programme Implementation Plans (PIPs)  
PMTBMBA - Pradhan Mantri TB Mukt Bharat Abhiyaan 

iv 
 
PPSA   - Patient Provider Support Agency 
PTBER - Presumptive TB Examination Rates 
RBSK   - Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram 
RKSK   - Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakram 
ROP   - Record of Proceedings  
SDG  - Sustainable Development Goal  
STOs   - State TB Officers 
TB  - Tuberculosis 
TWG   - Technical Working Group  
UDST  - Universal Drug Susceptibility Testing  
USAID  - United States Agency for International Development 
WHO   - World Health Organization  
XDR   - Extensively Drug Resistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
 
REPORT  
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 149th Report on Implementation of Pradhan 
Mantri TB Mukt Bharat Abhiyan.  
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Department of Health and Family Welfare 
and the Ministry of Ayush in respect of the recommendations contained in the Report. They have 
been categorized as follows:  
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 1.6, 
1.12, 1.22, 1.23, 1.37, 1.45, 1.46, 2.13, 2.14, 2.15, 2.16, 2.17, 2.21, 2.24, 3.31, 3.32, 
3.33, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, 4.10, 4.13, 4.14, 4.16, 4.17, 4.21, 4.22, 4.24 and 4.26.  
       Total–29 (Chapter I)  
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government's replies: 3.17, 3.21, 3.22, 3.23, 3.24, 3.25, 3.26, 3.4, 3.9, 
4.19, and 4.20. 
         Total–11 (Chapter II)  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee: 1.28, 1.29, 3.13, 3.18, 4.3, 4.4, 4.23 and 4.25. 
       Total–08 (Chapter III)  
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited: 4.8. 
       Total–01 (Chapter-IV)  
 
3.  The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding part of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.1 TB BURDEN IN INDIA 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
1.1.1 The Committee appreciates the Government’s effort in achieving the status of being 
the first country to have an in-country model of estimation that gives accurate estimates of TB 
incidence and mortality across the country months before the annual WHO estimates released 
in October. The Committee feels that such state-specific TB burden data will help estimate the 
actual burden of TB cases on a real-time basis in all districts, which would help in need-
based review and revision of the policies and strategies for TB elimination. 
(Para 1.6 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.1.2 The government released the India TB Report – 2023 on 24th March 2023, which 
presented the TB burden estimates for India, thereby becoming the only country in the world 
to estimate its own TB incidence and mortality through a mathematical modelling exercise. 
The technical team in India were able to do so due to the availability of granular data 
collected through the National TB Prevalence Survey (the world’s largest such survey), drug 
sale data from the private sector, Registrar General of India reported mortality data in the 
Sample Registration Survey reports, among several other sources. These estimates of 
incidence and mortality during the Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) period 2015-2022 
were published by the Central TB Division in March 2023 in the Indian Journal of 
Community Medicine (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10353668/). 
 
1.1.3 The programme is already developing the mathematical model to provide State level 
estimates which can help strategize and prioritize high burden geographies for programme 
interventions. In addition, the programme implements Sub-national Certification for TB Free 
State/Districts to measure progress towards SDGs at State & District level. This exercise 
helps the programme to measure State / District level burden. Based on this newer evidence 
presented, the World Health Organization (WHO) has made a downward revision of the TB 
mortality rates from 4.94 lakhs in 2021 to 3.31 lakhs in 2022, a reduction of over 34%.  
 
1.1.4 According to the Global TB Report by the WHO, India has seen a decline of 16% in 
TB incidence (new cases emerging each year) and a 18% reduction in mortality due to TB, 
since 2015. The incidence rate in India has fallen from 237 per 100,000 population in 2015 to 
199 per 100,000 population in 2022. During the same period, the global TB incidence has 
shown a decline of 9% and mortality by 18%.  
 
 

2 
 
1.2 AGE GROUP AND TB DISEASE 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.2.1 From the data provided by the Ministry, it is observed that over the last five years, TB 
disease has been more commonly seen in the Indian population with age groups of 15-24 
years and 25-34 years than in other age groups. The Committee feels that people in these age 
groups are in a critical phase of life. People aged 15-24 have more tendencies to move out of 
their homes to pursue higher education, facing adolescence-related problems and increased 
vulnerability towards lifestyle-related health problems. People aged 25-34 years are busy 
earning and supporting their families. These phases are productive adulthood with significant 
stress and vulnerability towards health problems. With the growing tide of lifestyle-associated 
non-communicable disease burden, it is evident that poor health behaviours and unhealthy 
lifestyles make people more likely to have lower immunity and increased susceptibility to 
acquiring TB infections. The Committee believes that as the health of the young population is 
central to the nation's health, a robust population-based approach should be worked out to 
address their socio-economic conditions, healthy lifestyle and preventive strategies to have a 
holistic approach to the TB elimination drive. 
(Para 1.12 of the report) 
Action Taken 
1.2.2 Government has taken the following proactive measures with a holistic approach to 
TB elimination:  
 
(i) To address the growing challenge of lifestyle-associated non-communicable disease 
burden, the Government is implementing National Programme for Prevention and Control of 
Non-communicable Diseases (NP-NCD) across the country with key strategies as under:  
 
 Health promotion through behavior changes with involvement of community, civil 
society, community-based organizations, media etc.  
 Outreach Camps for screening at all levels in the health care delivery system from 
sub-centre and above for early detection of diabetes, hypertension and common 
cancers. 
 Management of chronic non-communicable diseases, especially Cancer, Diabetes, 
CVDs and Stroke through early diagnosis, treatment and follow up through the setting 
up of NCD clinics.  
 Build capacity at various levels of health care for prevention, early diagnosis, 
treatment, IEC/BCC, operational research and rehabilitation.  
 Provide support for diagnosis and cost-effective treatment at primary, secondary and 
tertiary levels of health care. 
 Provide support for development of databases of NCDs through a robust Surveillance 
System and to monitor NCD morbidity, mortality and risk factors. 
 
(ii) In order to ensure holistic development of adolescent population, the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare implements Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakram (RKSK). 
Under this a core package of services includes preventive, promotive, curative and 

3 
 
counselling services, routine check-ups at primary, secondary and tertiary levels of care is 
provided regularly to adolescents, married and unmarried, girls and boys during the clinic 
sessions.  
 
(iii) Recognizing the importance of the role of schools in helping students establish 
lifelong healthy behaviours, the Government implements the School Health & Wellness 
Programme wherein school-based health promotion activities have been incorporated as a part 
of the Health and Wellness component of the Ayushman Arogya Mandir. This initiative is 
being implemented in government and government aided schools across the country. The key 
objectives of this initiative are as under:   
 provide age-appropriate information about health and nutrition to the children in 
schools.  
 promote healthy behaviours among the children that they will inculcate for life.  
 detect and treat diseases early in children and adolescents including identification of 
malnourished and anaemic children with appropriate referrals to PHCs and hospitals.  
 promote use of safe drinking water in schools  
 promote safe menstrual hygiene practices by girls  
 promote yoga and meditation  
 encourage research on health, wellness and nutrition for children. 
 
(iv) In addition, the Government implements Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram (RBSK) 
to improve the overall quality of life of children and provide comprehensive care to all the 
children in the community. This program involves screening of children from birth to 18 
years of age for four Ds- Defects at birth, Diseases, Deficiencies and Development delays, 
spanning 32 common health conditions including TB for early detection and free treatment 
and management, including surgeries at tertiary level. Children diagnosed with identified 
health conditions are provided early intervention services and follow-up care at the district 
level. District Early Intervention Centres, with multitude of services offering developmentally 
supportive care are made operational at the district level for follow-up management of 
referred and treated cases. These units also link these children with tertiary level health 
services, in case surgical management is required.  
 
(v) Through more than 1.6 lakh Ayushman Arogya Mandir, the government is providing 
comprehensive primary healthcare services. Under this the facilities have dedicated a day 
every month called as “Ni-kshay Diwas” to raise awareness, screen vulnerable population and 
provide saturation of services for persons affected with TB. The Arogya Mandir promote 
healthy lifestyle and conduct wellness sessions where TB patients and their families are 
encouraged to participate.  
 
(vi) In addition, to reduce the out-of-pocket expenditure, the Government provides Rs 
500/month for every TB patient through DBT to fulfil his nutritional requirements during the 
treatment period.  
 

4 
 
(vii) Since 9th Sept 2022, the Government has launched the Pradhan Mantri TB Mukt 
Bharat Abhiyan by encouraging fellow citizens, NGOs and corporates to become Ni-kshay 
Mitra and adopt TB patients and provide additional nutritional, vocational and diagnostic 
support.   
 
(viii) The Government has also introduced the “Family Care Giver” model which identifies 
a family member to become a “Nikshay Saathi” and provide social, psychological support to 
the TB patients by helping them through the course of TB treatment.  
 
(ix) To strengthen prevention of TB, the government has expanded TB Preventive 
Treatment to adolescent and adult household contacts. With the support of the State/UT 
government’s, the programme is implementing large scale IEC activities to improve health 
seeking behaviour of the population and sustain community prevention activities. 
 
1.3 PAEDIATRIC TB NOTIFICATION 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.3.1 The Committee believes that malnourishment is commonly seen among the paediatric 
population, and it is one of the major reasons and risk factors for acquiring TB disease in 
children. Therefore, the Committee feels that efforts should be made to fill the gaps in 
nutrition for this vulnerable population. Community involvement in ensuring the provision of 
proper nutrition among children should be considered in this regard. 
(Para 1.22 of the report) 
 
1.3.2 The Committee believes that creating awareness of the disease and its management 
among the young population would eventually decrease TB incidence. The Committee 
appreciates the integration of TB control activities with child health programs to increase 
awareness about TB among children and would like to impress upon the government to 
monitor these programs regularly to identify the implementation challenges and take 
corrective measures immediately. For this purpose, a robust health delivery system with 
adequate human resources should be made functional on mission mode, and proper 
incentives may be given to these frontline workers who are required to go into the fields to 
track and trace TB cases in remote areas. In addition, collaborations with relevant health 
sectors may be done to tackle the challenges faced in detecting, treating, and preventing 
paediatric TB. 
(Para 1.23 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
1.3.3 Under nutrition is a known risk factor for developing TB disease and malnutrition in 
paediatric population. To address these issues, the following actions have been taken under 
the National TB Elimination Programme (NTEP): 
 
 The Government provides Rs 500/month for every TB patient through DBT to fulfil 
his nutritional requirements for the treatment duration  

5 
 
 Through the Pradhan Mantri TB Mukt Bharat Abhiyan, Ni-kshay Mitras have come 
forward to adopt consenting TB patients and provide additional nutritional support. 
 NTEP also collaborated with the Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram (RBSK), 
Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakram (RKSK) and Nutritional Rehabilitation Centres 
under National Health Mission (NHM) for early screening, diagnosis and treatment of 
paediatric TB. 
 In addition, the NTEP through community & civil society organisations has developed 
a network of TB Champions who proactively work with the community to link TB 
patients to social protection schemes. 
 Through the TB Free Gram Panchayat initiative, in collaboration with the M/o 
Panchayati Raj, the programme is focusing on providing nutritional support to all TB 
patients in the villages which includes paediatric TB cases. 
 Under NTEP, incentives are provided to frontline healthcare workers like ASHAs / 
community volunteers, etc. for identifying presumptive TB cases and getting them 
screened. Also, periodic active case finding is implemented across the country. 
 In addition, to effectively address TB response, State & District TB Cells have been 
established with dedicated programme management and. Service delivery human 
resources. The TB screening and treatment services have been decentralized to the 
Ayushman Arogya Mandir levels with a robust referral mechanism to provide 
secondary & tertiary care services wherever required. The human resources under 
NHM follows a health system approach and adequate service delivery staff have been 
provisioned based on workload. To effectively address the patients seeking care in the 
private sector, innovative models have been established with interface agencies to 
provide linkages to private sector patients for free drugs and diagnostics.    
 
1.3.4 For strengthening paediatric screening, diagnosis and treatment, the following 
activities have been implemented: 
 Capacity building of NTEP field functionaries and paediatricians in collaboration with 
Indian Academy of Paediatricians has been conducted.  
 Collaborative framework with the child health division has been developed and 
orientation of all State/UT has been conducted on the same. 
 Demonstration models of interventions to strengthen paediatric TB diagnosis in public 
/ private sectors has been developed in identified States and the best practices shared 
with all State/UTs. 
 Regular monitoring of the State/UTs is done to review, identify gaps and develop 
strategies for improving paediatric TB case notification. 
 
1.4 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS (SDGs) FOR TB CONTROL AND 
ELIMINATION 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.4.1 The Committee commends the Government for its significant efforts in combating 
tuberculosis, as recognised in the above-mentioned report. Such progress is a testament to 

6 
 
India's dedication and effectiveness in tackling this public health challenge, and it sets a 
positive example for the global community in the fight against tuberculosis. 
(Para 1.37 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
1.4.2 The government acknowledges and appreciates the observations and support of the 
Committee and conveys its commitment to achieving SDGs related to elimination of TB by 
2025 - five years ahead of the global target. India has seen a decline of 16% in TB incidence 
(new cases emerging each year) and a 18% reduction in mortality due to TB, since 2015 
(Global TB Report 2023). The incidence rate in India has fallen from 237 per 100,000 
population in 2015 to 199 per 100,000 population in 2022. During the same period, the global 
TB incidence has shown a decline of 9% and mortality by 18%.  
 
1.5 FINANCIAL IMPACT ON TB PATIENTS 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.5.1 The Committee observes that the most commonly affected age group with TB disease 
is the one who is the earning member of the family. It is also observed that all the steps under 
NTEP are patient-centric and focus on their diagnosis and treatment. The Committee is of the 
view that taking care of TB patients in a family takes a toll on the physical, mental and 
financial health of all family members as they have to accompany the patient to &fro clinics 
or hospitals for treatment purposes. In this scenario, both the patient as well as the family 
loses income/wages, which impacts their health as well as socioeconomic status to a great 
extent. Therefore, the Committee recommends the Government that it is imperative to conduct 
a survey on the financial impact of TB in India which would give a realistic picture of socio-
economic status as well as the financial burden of TB disease on a family. Such surveys can 
also be combined with other health surveys on a national level so as to assess the 
catastrophic costs related to TB disease. The Government may also explore the avenues to 
integrate such surveys with Ni-kshay portal. 
(Para 1.45 of the report) 
 
1.5.2 The Committee is of the opinion that a survey on financial impact of TB disease would 
help to evaluate the impact of existing measures taken under NTEP to reduce catastrophic 
costs on TB patients & their families and would help the Government to review the policies 
strategically and to implement evidence-based interventions as per the district or state-
specific requirements. Such survey would also address the Socio-economic determinants of 
TB disease at an early stage and would aid in tracking the progress towards the goal of 
achieving zero catastrophic costs due to TB. 
(Para 1.46 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
1.5.3 TB is known to affect the productive age group and under the NTEP in 2023 (Jan-
Dec) about 41% of the TB cases were reported in the age group of 15-34 years. To reduce the 

7 
 
out-of-pocket expenditure, the Government provides Rs 500/month to every TB patient 
through DBT for nutritional support during the course of treatment. The Pradhan Mantri TB 
Mukt Bharat Abhiyan encourages fellow citizens, NGOs and corporates to become Ni-kshay 
Mitra and adopt TB patients and provide additional nutritional, vocational and diagnostic 
support. This initiative has seen a tremendous response with over 1.4 lakh Ni-kshayMitras 
coming forward to adopt over 98% of the consenting patients. A third-party assessment of this 
initiative has shown that the Ni-kshay Mitra Abhiyan has contributed to significant reduction 
in out-of-pocket expenditure (OOPE) and was able to reduce adverse outcomes among 
adopted TB patients by half.  
 
1.5.4 The government notes the recommendation of the Committee to conduct a survey for 
assessing the financial burden of TB on patients and their families. Under NTEP annual 
surveys are conducted in the State/Districts as part of the “Sub-national certification for TB 
Free State/Districts” and during these surveys, information on out-of-pocket expenditure has 
been included. The National TB Prevalence Survey conducted by ICMR, financial burden on 
TB patients has been assessed.  
 
1.6 PRADHAN MANTRI TB MUKT BHARAT ABHIYAN (PMTBMBA) AND ITS 
SIGNIFICANCE IN TB ELIMINATION 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.6.1 The Committee appreciates the immense potential of the Ni-kshay Mitra Initiative in 
enhancing TB control efforts in India and alleviating the socio-economic burden of TB 
disease. By actively involving communities in the fight against TB, this initiative has 
demonstrated the power of collective action in addressing the challenges posed by the 
disease. As regards the adoption of TB patients under PMTBMBA, the Committee is of the 
opinion that to eradicate TB by 2025, the Ni-kshay adoption model cannot be considered as 
the mainstay to fight against TB. The Committee further expresses its concerns over a sense of 
complacency within the Ministry and the Government organization responsible for 
implementing the TB elimination programme due to shift in their responsibility to non-
governmental organizations which eventually may impede the overall progress. Therefore, the 
Committee suggests the Government establish a robust selection process for Ni- kshay Mitra 
and implement effective monitoring mechanisms to ensure their diligent fulfilment of 
responsibilities. 
(Para 2.13 of the report) 
 
1.6.2 Further, the Committee also suggests organising some orientation programmes for 
Ni-kshay Mitras to acquaint them about TB disease and its management. The close 
connection between nutrition and TB further reinforced the significance of this program, as it 
not only strengthens the immune system of TB patient to fight against disease, it also 
facilitates community engagement making the TB elimination program a vital part of 
community-driven efforts. 
(Para 2.14 of the report) 
 

8 
 
1.6.3 In order to ensure the proper utilisation of assistance extended by Ni-kshayMitras, the 
Committee is of the view that Government should introduce a monitoring mechanism to track 
the attitude and behaviour of the patients towards the Ni-kshay Mitras, and to provide them 
appropriate counselling, if required. 
(Para 2.15 of the report) 
 
1.6.4 The Committee feels that the global resources and guidelines would lead to more 
effective implementation of PMTBMBA and achieving universal health coverage. Moreover, 
community involvement in TB control efforts, fostering awareness, understanding of TB 
prevention, care-seeking behaviour, and adherence to treatment are imperative steps to 
manage TB disease. Therefore, the Committee suggests that under PMTBMBA program, 
political commitment at all levels of governance through regular meetings, discussions, and 
engagements with key stakeholders, including policymakers, health ministers, and 
government officials should be strengthened. 
(Para 2.16 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
1.6.5 An Independent Assessment by Indian Institute of Public Health (IIPH), Gandhinagar 
during Sept 22 – May 2023 which included secondary data & desk research of countrywide 
data from Ni-kshay. 26 lakh TB patient's cohort data was analysed by IIPH, Gandhinagar. 
Field Survey was conducted in 7 States, 15 districts from Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, 
Bihar, Gujarat, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Meghalaya. This included interviews with 
900+ TB Patients, 120+ Ni-kshay Mitra and 51+ Health Care Professionals. Some of the key 
findings from the assessment are as under: 
 
 >90% interviewed patients reported reduction in out-of-pocket expenditure and were 
satisfied by the additional support. 
 
 TB patients with a Ni-kshay Mitra have a 95% successful treatment outcome, relative 
to 90% for those without one; suggesting a 5-point improvement* which was 
statistically significant. 
 
 Weight gain was 4.2 kg among TB patients with a Ni-kshay Mitra as compared to 3.8 
kg among those who did not have one. 
 
 Higher number of health facility visits resulted in increased follow up & treatment 
adherence 
 
 Higher impact observed among vulnerable population groups Pregnant/lactating 
women (18%) Migrants (48%) and urban slums (15%) 
 
1.6.6 The assessment report has also highlighted certain issues/challenges for which 
recommendations were made as under:  
 
a) Improving uptake of the initiative 
 Focus on corporates / institutes 

9 
 
 Targeted Communication Strategy along with political will and advocacy 
 Dedicated teams to support the States for Ni-kshay Mitra mobilization 
 Engage private sector / NGOs as delivery partners 
 Improve digital platform  
 
b) Improving Service delivery 
 Standardizing nutrition kit at district level and increase awareness of Ni-kshay 
Mitra on standardized nutrition kits 
 Facilitation for mobilizing vocational support as per needs of patients 
 Kit distribution at Ayushman Arogya Mandir. Levels  
 Involve TB champions, self help groups (SHGs0, local volunteers, etc 
 
c) Improving Benefit uptake 
 All patients irrespective of socio-economic status, geography access to be 
supported 
 Intensified support for vulnerable population 
 Community based support complemented by health care nutrition management 
1.6.7 The actionable recommendations of the independent assessment have been 
incorporated in the strategy for further strengthening the Pradhan Mantri TB Mukt Bharat 
Abhiyan initiative.  
 
1.6.8 The Ni-kshay Mitras are voluntary at present with no specific selection process. 
Anybody in the society from an individual to elected representative, NGOs, civil society 
organisations, institutions, corporates, etc are encouraged to become a Ni-kshay Mitra. The 
programme monitors the fulfilment of responsibilities by a Ni-kshay Mitra through Ni-kshay 
portal and periodic reviews at national, state & district levels. The patients are given an 
opportunity to provide their consent for being adopted by a Ni-kshay Mitra, however the 
attitude and behaviour of patients with Ni-kshay Mitra is not done at present. The 
recommendations of the Committee in this aspect are noted for actions.  
 
1.6.9 Orientation & sensitization meetings for engaging potential Ni-kshay Mitras are being 
held regularly at Central and State levels. Eg: SBI Foundation, Steel Association of India, 
Ministry of Skill development, Laadli foundation NGO, Jindal steel, FICCI, ASSOCHAM, 
etc. Through these meetings the potential Ni-kshay Mitra are sensitized on the objectives of 
the initiative and the mechanisms for registering themselves in the Ni-kshay portal, the 
guidance on food baskets and the potential outcome of their support. Regular 
acknowledgement and felicitation of Ni-kshay Mitras is conducted by all State/UTs during 
Ayushman Bhavah campaign across the country and various other appropriate forums at 
State/district level to not only recognize their contribution, but also to motivate other fellow 
citizens, organisations & corporates to come forward and become a Ni-kshay Mitra. SMS is 
being sent to Ni-kshay Mitras at the first month welcoming & thanking them for becoming a 
Ni-kshay Mitra  and second last month of distribution for encouraging them to 
extend/continue their contribution after their period of their existing commitment. 
 

10 
 
1.6.10 Active IEC regarding the initiative is conducted through various social media 
platforms to acknowledge/recognize the commitments of Ni-kshay Mitra and motivate others 
to also become a Ni-kshay Mitra. Advocacy meetings with administrative heads at the State 
and district level are regularly being conducted to monitor progress and ensure effective 
implementation of PMTBMBA activities. This opportunity is also used to assess the 
challenges being faced in implementation of the programme and provide real time solutions. 
Field Visit by Central teams to provide supportive supervision for PMTBMBA activities in 
the low performing States is also conducted. A dedicated web portal Ni-kshay 2.0 is available 
to monitor the progress of PMTBMBA and Ni-kshay also provides analytical features to track 
updates on progress of PMTBMBA key indicators at national, state and district levels. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.6.11 In addition, the Committee also suggests the Government to strengthen the health 
system’s capacity and invest in research collaborations to advance the development of new 
diagnostics, drugs, and vaccines. As the Government is working in mission mode, the 
Committee recommends that robust monitoring and evaluation mechanisms should also be 
put in place to track progress towards TB elimination goals. 
(Para 2.17 of the report) 
Action Taken 
1.6.12 Indian Council for Medical Research under the Department of Health Research has 
established an India TB Research Consortium for working on Research & Development on 
TB drugs, diagnostics, vaccines and implementation research. Under the National TB 
Elimination Programme (NTEP), a task force of medical colleges has been established to 
support programme implementation and operational research. Under NTEP a robust 
mechanism for internal and external monitoring and evaluation is in place. In addition, 
Common Review Mission (CRM) are conducted annually under the National Health Mission 
(NHM) through which multi-disciplinary teams are deployed which reviews all national 
programmes including NTEP. The government conducts annual surveys in the State/Districts 
as part of the “Sub-national certification for TB Free State/Districts” and during which 
decline in TB incidence at State/District levels is measured against the SDG baselines.  
 
1.7 COORDINATION AND COLLABORATION BETWEEN GOVERNMENT 
AND PRIVATE STAKEHOLDERS 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.7.1 The Committee appreciates the success of PMTBMBA’s Ni-kshay initiatives and 
suggests that to foster greater cooperation between Government and private stakeholders, the 
Government may consider developing a comprehensive policy framework emphasising shared 
goals and mutual accountability & establishing formal and structured public- private 
partnerships that will enhance to bring together representatives from both Government and 
private sectors for an open dialogue and would create avenues for pooling resources, joint 
funding and co-investments in research and development efforts. 
 
(Para 2.21 of the report) 

11 
 
Action Taken 
1.7.2 The recommendation of the Committee is duly acknowledged. The government 
implements a robust National Strategic Plan 2017-25 which envisions and articulates the role 
of all relevant stakeholders both within and outside the government for joining hands for a 
common goal to End TB by 2025. The NTEP has a strong partnership developed with the 
private sector including corporates, PSUs & industry which are contributing to achieving the 
national goals. Development partners like WHO, USAID, World Bank, Global Fund, etc are 
also supporting the implementation of NTEP with additional resources and which are aligned 
with the National Strategic Plan 2017-25. 
 
1.8 BUDGET ALLOCATION FOR TB MANAGEMENT AT CENTRAL AND 
STATE LEVEL 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.8.1  The Committee is of the opinion that varied vulnerabilities exist across regions and 
cities. Risk factors responsible for developing TB disease and reasons for increasing TB 
burden in different areas, like the rural-urban divide, may differ. Therefore, the same policy 
may not be effectively applied in all regions. In order to have a need-based assessment and 
cater to the region-specific requirements of TB management, the Committee suggests that 
further decentralization of funds to the states may be considered, with the Centre providing 
clear guidelines, guidance, and program monitoring. This should be harmonised with de-
centralised policy making and tailored strategies suited to regions, cities, and rural areas, 
with targeted initiatives. By doing so, the states would be better equipped to address their 
region-specific challenges and need based requirements related to TB within their respective 
territories. 
(Para 2.24 of the report) 
Action Taken 
1.8.2 The NTEP is being implemented across the country under the aegis of the National 
Health Mission and its framework. The NHM framework gives the flexibility to allocate 
resources based on disease burden and population diversity. The State Programme 
Implementation Plans (PIPs) are prepared by consolidating the District PIPs. These proposals 
are then appraised by the National Programme Coordination Committee (NPCC) wherein the 
respective programme divisions across all national health programmes discuss the key priority 
areas, the proposals, its justifications, etc and after discussions, the Record of Proceedings 
(ROP) along with physical & financial targets are issued to the States. The State specific 
innovative approaches (including for TB) as per local needs & context are discussed and 
accepted for funding during these NPCC meetings. The existing guidelines for NHM already 
provides clear guidelines for NTEP and its related program monitoring. The State/UTs have 
been allocated resources as per their need and the interventions are tailored to regions, cities 
and rural areas. The funds allocated under NTEP for 2019-20, 2020-21, 2021-22, 2022-23 and 
2023-24 are Rs 3333.21 Cr, 3109.93 Cr, 3409.94 Cr, 2656.83 Cr and 2978.26 Cr respectively. 
 
 
 

12 
 
1.9 ROLE OF NUTRITION IN TB TREATMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.9.1 In view of the above, the Committee emphasise the implementation of guidelines of the 
National TB elimination program for nutritional care and support of patients with TB in 
India. Nutritional assessment should be made mandatory for TB patients and their family 
members. 
(Para 3.31 of the report) 
 
1.9.2 The Committee suggests that a community-based model of nutritional care and the 
utilisation of Corporate Social Responsibility under PMTBMBA should be strategically 
promoted. The Government needs to explore strategies to expand the role of nutritional 
counselling and dietary diversity and provide an adequate diet based on calorie, protein and 
micronutrient requirements tailored to TB patients' ideal body weight. Nutritional counselling 
may also play a significant role in raising awareness among community supporters and 
volunteers, ensuring that patients receive optimal nutritional support, specifically in terms of 
protein and micronutrient requirements, balanced diet, clarification of misconceptions 
related to supplements/tonics and promoting food hygiene and healthy cooking practices.  
 
(Para 3.32 of the report) 
 
1.9.3 The Committee further suggests that on a large scale, the Government must take 
action-oriented steps to provide nutritional support to undernourished people who are at a 
much higher risk of developing active TB. For this purpose, the Government must diversify 
the diet provided under various social protection schemes like the Food Security Scheme, 
Mid-day Meal, etc., to ensure adequate calorie, protein and micronutrient requirements are 
fulfilled in the meals. An integrated programme with food kit distribution or through the 
public distribution systems may be considered to tackle malnutrition problems and reduce the 
risk of developing TB disease. Also, post-treatment follow-up of patients, including their 
nutritional status, should be ensured after completion of treatment. 
(Para 3.33 of the report) 
Action Taken 
1.9.4 The suggestions from the Committee are well noted. Nutrition is an important social 
determinant for Tuberculosis, and it exhibits a bi-directional relationship with TB. The 
Government introduced Ni-kshay Poshan Yojana (NPY) in April 2018 for providing Rs 
500/month through DBT to support nutrition of TB patients for the entire duration of 
treatment. Since inception till December 2023, cumulatively Rs 2617.44 Cr have been 
disbursed to 95.93 lakh eligible beneficiaries. Nutritional assessment is a key component of 
the programme implementation.  
 
1.9.5 Pradhan Mantri TB Mukt Bharat Abhiyan (PMTBMBA) was launched by the 
Ministry on 9th September 2022 for community support to TB patients with the objective to 
provide people with TB with additional nutritional, diagnostic and vocational support. Ni-
kshay 2.0 portal has been developed and made available in public domain for facilitating the 

13 
 
community to register as Ni-kshay Mitra. Nutritional food baskets have been developed by 
National Institute for Nutrition, Hyderabad an ICMR Institute on the nutritional requirements 
for TB patients which articulates the nutritional requirements in terms of protein, 
carbohydrates, vitamins, minerals, etc. Guidance document for implementing PMTBMBA has 
been developed and disseminated to all State/UTs for implementation. Periodic reviews are 
done to monitor the progress of the initiative at National and State/UT levels. To address the 
issue of under-nutrition at the population level, the programme is working with the line 
ministries as part of inter-ministerial collaboration. 
 
1.10 ONGOING RESEARCH INITIATIVES AND STUDIES RELATED TO TB IN 
INDIA 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.10.1 TB vaccine research is underway. The Committee recommends the Government 
prioritise the clinical trials of all TB vaccine candidates to assess their efficacy in various 
community settings and for different target groups. For this purpose, the government should 
mobilise the funds to facilitate these clinical trials so that these vaccine platforms can be 
scaled up rapidly. 
(Para 4.5 of the report) 
 
1.10.2 As regards the BCG vaccine, it is noted that it does not provide adequate protection to 
adolescents and adults who are at high risk of developing TB disease. In view thereof, the 
Committee suggests expediting the research programme to study the effectiveness of re- 
vaccination of BCG and based on the result, to consider introducing a booster dose of 
recombinant BCG vaccine in the universal immunisation programme. This could be an 
effective and cheaper option to control TB. 
(Para 4.6 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
1.10.3 ICMR is conducting clinical trials on newer potential vaccine candidates to assess 
their efficacy in various community settings and for difference target groups. Adequate 
resources have been provisioned within ICMR and NTEP for supporting such clinical trials. 
In addition, a study has been approved by the Central Ethics Committee for Human Research 
of ICMR for Adult BCG vaccination across the country under programmatic settings. 24 
State/UTs have consented for the study for which intervention & control districts have been 
identified. National Level Trainings have been completed and States level trainings are under 
implementation. This study is designed to generate evidence and guide the programme for 
introducing Adult BCG vaccination in the universal immunisation programme.    
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.10.4 The Committee suggests the Government procure the indigenously developed Truenat 
diagnostic machine in bulk and supply the same at the minimum block levels across the 
country as quickly as possible, which may be extended to primary health centres also. This 

14 
 
would aid in the earliest realisation of upfront molecular testing across the country, which 
curbs the missing TB cases and simplifies the detection of drug- resistant TB cases. 
(Para 4.7 of the report) 
Action Taken 
1.10.5 The programme has rapidly scaled up the availability of molecular diagnostics across 
the country covering all districts. Procurement procedures and systems have been established 
to ensure regular and uninterrupted supplies for all consumables required for TB screening 
and diagnosis. In addition, adequate resources have been provisioned with the State/UT 
governments for local procurement in emergent situations. Ni-kshay Aushadi has been 
developed to closely monitor the supply chain distribution and consumption of drugs & 
diagnostics on a regular basis. 
 
1.11 ROLE OF AYUSH SYSTEMS OF MEDICINES IN TB MANAGEMENT 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.11.1 The Committee feels that the Ayush system of medicines can play a significant role in 
supporting, educating, guiding and referring TB patients for diagnosis and treatment, 
especially in remote areas. They can facilitate an outreach of National TB Elimination 
programme to remote areas. They can play a critical role in counselling the patients 
regarding nutrition and preventive care as well as importance of treatment adherence to 
complete the course of treatment, regular monitoring and post-treatment recovery. Therefore, 
the Committee impresses upon the Government to promote the integration of the Ayush 
practitioners in TB management programmes. Further, the research in the traditional system 
of medicines should be encouraged promoting the inclusion of evidence- based practices in 
the conventional TB care. The success stories of TB treatment in the Ayush system of 
medicines should be authenticated and publicised for the information of masses. 
 (Para 4.10 of the report) 
 
Action Taken informed by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
1.11.2 The programme has established an MoU with the M/o Ayush for collaboration in the 
National TB Elimination Programme. Multiple research studies are underway on studying the 
Ayush systems of medicine and their role in management of TB patients. Based on the 
recommendations of ICMR, the National Technical Expert Group under the programme 
recommends any new drugs for management of TB. 
 
Action Taken informed by the Ministry of Ayush 
1.11.3 Ministry of Ayush is implementing the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National 
Ayush Mission through State/UT Governments for development and promotion of Ayush 
system in the country. Under NAM, Ministry of Ayush is supporting the efforts of States/UTs 
for development of infrastructure of Ayush health facilities, supply of Ayush medicines, 
BCC/IEC activities for providing treatment of different types of communicable/non-
communicable diseases including TB by different ways of Ayush interventions and   
orientation about referral mechanism for different diseases including TB. State/UT 

15 
 
Government would be requested to conduct awareness activities for prevention of TB and 
also early referral of cases to designated centre for appropriate treatment. 
  
1.11.4 Ministry of Ayush signed a MoU with Central TB division of the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare on 4thJuly, 2019. Two meetings between Ministry of Ayush and Central 
TB division of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) has been done. A 
revision in the composition of Technical Working Group (TWG) is under process. 
Development of a specific Yoga protocol for TB is under process. A proposal to organize 
training for 180 Medical Officers of AYUSH stream at National Institute of Tuberculosis and 
Respiratory Diseases (NITRD), Delhi, is under process. MoU was signed between MoA and 
DBT on dated 25thMay, 2022. As per MoU under heading "area of cooperation" both have to 
mutually undertake Biotechnological R&D and Ayush Interventions to improve quality of life 
as well as life span (Vayahsthaapana Rasayana) and bring down the associated morbidity 
pertaining to chronic diseases such as diabetes, obesity, cardiovascular disease, osteoarthritis, 
cachexia, pain management and infectious diseases for example TB for evidence based 
Biotechnological interventions in Ayush sector.  
 
1.12 BIO-MEDICAL WASTE MANAGEMENT IN TB HEALTH CENTRES 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.12.1 In view of the health hazards of biomedical waste in TB healthcare centres, the 
Committee is of the view that de-contamination of biomedical waste is critical in preventing 
the transmission of TB disease. As in active TB cases, sputum collection is done to diagnose 
TB disease; it is important to handle and dispose of infected sputum as soon as possible. 
However, the current practices of disposing of infected biomedical waste have limitations. 
The Committee is aware that even after biomedical waste treatment of TB bacteria, it should 
not go live in the environment as it can pose health hazards due to its drug-resistant nature. 
In view of this, the Committee recommends that the treatment and proper disposal of 
biomedical waste is of immense importance and is crucial in controlling the increasing 
burden of drug-resistant TB cases. The Committee suggests that the Government should 
monitor compliance towards existing BWM practices at TB health centres and ensure that 
there are requisite equipment, kits and human resources involved in biomedical waste 
treatment at all TB healthcare centres. 
(Para 4.13 of the report) 
 
1.12.2 Further, the Committee believes that research should be conducted to develop safer 
and better disinfection methods to manage BWM that can ensure the safety of people and the 
environment. 
 (Para 4.14 of the report) 
Action Taken 
1.12.3 Guidelines for bio-medical waste management in all settings implementing NTEP has 
been developed and issued to the States. These guidelines articulate the SOPs for sputum 
collection, specimen processing in the laboratories and their safe disposal as per the current 
bio-medical waste management rules. Trainings are regularly conducted on recommended 
SOPs as part of routine cadre specific trainings. The programme monitors implementation of 

16 
 
bio-medical waste management through field visits by national, state & district level 
functionaries and internal & external periodic evaluations. Adequate provisions are made in 
the annual PIPs for biomedical waste treatment at all TB healthcare centres. 
 
1.13 BEST PRACTICES FOR TB CONTROL IN VARIOUS STATES OF INDIA 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.13.1 The Committee is of the view that the above-mentioned practices, which have been 
designed in response to specific problems in various geographies to address health system- 
related challenges, may be emulated in other parts of the country as well. The Committee 
feels that the involvement of Neighbourhood Groups and Self-help Groups in TB control 
activities, as undertaken in Kerala, may also be pioneered in other states with the active 
participation of women to reduce the stigma associated with TB disease. The Committee also 
recommends that an integrated approach through workplace policies similar to the employer-
led model of BEST, Mumbai, must be encouraged in all public and private organisations. This 
approach was also adopted during the COVID-19 pandemic in several organisations 
nationwide. It will lead to earlier diagnosis and curb the transmission of TB. 
(Para 4.16 of the report) 
Action Taken 
1.13.2 The observations of the Committee are appreciated. The programme regularly 
identifies best practices like in Kerala & Mumbai and has disseminated the same to all States 
for adoption as per their local feasibility. The NTEP has established an MoU with M/o Labour 
and Employment. Workplace policies have also been issued to all State/UTs for adoption at 
the local level. The best practices are also identified and disseminated to all State/UTs for 
adoption as per their local feasibility. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.13.3 The Committee believes that the Government may envisage comprehensive utilisation 
of new technologies like drones to aid the transportation of samples and drugs between the 
primary health centres and district hospitals in rugged and hilly terrains. The Committee 
further suggests that the concept of FAST centres as a single window system, as undertaken in 
Tamil Nadu, may be implemented across the country. 
(Para 4.17 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
1.13.4 Under the NTEP, Drones have been utilized by some State/UTs with difficult to reach 
areas / hilly terrain like in Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, some of the NE States, etc. These 
drones are utilized for sample collection & transportation as well as supply of drugs. For 
private sector engagement multiple models are implemented across the country. FAST is 
implemented in Tamil Nadu, STEPS model in Kerala, Karnataka, PPIS model in Rajasthan 
and PPSA model in several States. The programme has held and experience sharing workshop 
with all States to learn from each other and the different models for private sector engagement 
based on the local context and feasibility of implementation. 
 

17 
 
1.14 WAY FORWARD 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.14.1 The Committee also recommends that all clinical data on the Ni-kshay portal be 
recorded in standard form and connected through telemedicine so that each patient can be 
viewed and managed by any health service provider in the country. Further, theCommittee 
proposes regular use of telemedicine and meeting apps like Zoom or Google Meet for real-
time monitoring and follow-up of patients after treatment. 
(Para 4.21 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.14.2 NTEP implements Ni-kshay, a case-based web based application. The data on Ni-
kshay adheres to the FHIR (Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources) data standard as 
mandated by the National Health Authority under Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission 
(ABDM). This helps in interoperability between different digital health portals including E-
Sanjeevani portal which is the Tele-medicine initiative by the MoHFW and with the consent 
of the patient, these details can be viewed by any health service provider across the country.  
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.14.3 During interaction with the stakeholders, the Committee noted that malnutrition is 
significantly related to TB and is one of the main problems for TB infection. India ranks 107 
out of 121 countries in the Global Hunger Index, 2022. Malnutrition is reported more than 
the national average in many States. The Committee believes that addressing malnutrition 
should be of immense importance to win the battle against TB. Therefore, the Committee 
suggests that food and nutrition-related programmes should be strengthened and integrated 
with the PMTBMBA programme through the public distribution system and another system, 
as medicines alone might be insufficient without proper nutrition, and both must be 
integrated. 
(Para 4.22 of the report) 
Action Taken 
1.14.4 The government appreciates the suggestions from the committee and state as follows: 
 Nutrition is an important social determinant for Tuberculosis and it exhibits a bi-
directional relationship with TB. 
 The Government introduced Ni-kshayPoshan Yojana (NPY) in April 2018 for 
providing Rs 500/month through DBT to support nutrition of TB patients for the entire 
duration of treatment. Since inception till December 2023, cumulatively Rs 2617.44 
Cr have been disbursed to 95.93 lakh eligible beneficiaries. 
 Pradhan Mantri TB Mukt Bharat Abhiyan (PMTBMBA) was launched by the 
Ministry on 9th September 2022 for community support to TB patients with the 
objective to provide people with TB with additional nutritional, diagnostic and 
vocational support. 
 Ni-kshay 2.0 portal has been developed and made available in public domain for 
facilitating the community to register as Ni-kshay Mitra. 

18 
 
 Nutritional food baskets have been developed by National Institute for Nutrition, 
Hyderabad an ICMR Institute on the nutritional requirements for TB patients which 
articulates the nutritional requirements in terms of protein, carbohydrates, vitamins, 
minerals, etc. 
 Guidance document for implementing PMTBMBA has been developed and 
disseminated to all State/UTs for implementation. Periodic reviews are done to 
monitor the progress of the initiative at National and State/UT levels. 
 To address the issue of under-nutrition at the population level, the programme is 
working with the line ministries as part of inter-ministerial collaboration. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.14.5 The effective engagement of State Governments is critical for successfully 
implementing centrally sponsored programmes. The Committee believes that State 
Governments should pull up their socks to participate in PMTBMBA on mission mode to 
achieve the target of ending TB by 2025. 
(Para 4.24 of the report) 
Action Taken 
1.14.6 The implementation of Pradhan Mantri TB Mukt Bharat Abhiyaan has shown 
tremendous participation by all the State/UTs. The National TB Elimination Programme at 
the central level has designated an Officer to monitor the implementation and address 
challenges with the State/Districts. The Central TB Division (CTD) is monitoring the progress 
of implementation of the PMTBMBA initiative as under: 
 
(i) At National Level: 
 Periodic (virtual) reviews of the programme at the National level with the States and 
districts 
 Field visits by officials/consultants from CTD to the poor performing States and 
provide supportive supervision and address local challenges 
 Advocacy meetings at the National & State level with business associations, line 
ministries, corporates, NGOs, etc to encourage them to adopt consented TB patients in 
States/Districts 
 
(ii) At State level: 
 State TB Officer regularly reviews the district wise progress of PMTBMBA 
 The office of Hon’ble Governor also promotes and monitor the progress of 
implementation of PMTBMBA in the respective State/UT 
 Regional and State level WHO/other consultants provide technical support to the 
State/UTs 
 Implementing Partners and other NGOs provide need-based support in food basket 
distribution in coordination with STO 
 
(iii) At District level: 
 The district implementation led by the District Magistrate/Collector monitors progress 
periodically. 

19 
 
 The District TB Officer implements, monitors and reviews the progress at sub-district 
levels and ensures the linkage of Ni-Kshay Mitra to the consented TB Patients 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.14.7 The Committee recommends a special emphasis on PMTBMBA under Ayushman 
Bharat PMJAY through dedicated deployment of staff and allocation of budget for 
PMTBMBA under Ayushman Bharat. Ni-kshay portal may also be integrated with Ayushman 
Bharat Digital Mission. This integration would create a synergetic approach towards 
addressing the health care needs of the population, especially in the context of TB 
elimination. By leveraging the resources and benefits of both initiatives, a more 
comprehensive and efficient response to TB would be achieved, enhancing the overall impact 
of the efforts to eliminate TB from the country. 
(Para 4.26 of the report) 
Action Taken 
1.14.8 The recommendation of the Committee is well noted. Ayushman Bharat Jan Arogya 
Yojana provides 5 lakh cover for health insurance to eligible beneficiaries to cover procedures 
/ surgeries / admission to hospitals. States have expanded the scope of services and coverage 
of population with additional budget from State resources. Persons with TB who are eligible 
are linked to AB-PMJAY for availing benefits for identified procedures / in-patient care as 
required on case to case basis. 
 
1.14.9 The Ni-kshay portal integration with Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM) is 
currently being developed. The data on Ni-kshay adheres to the FHIR (Fast Healthcare 
Interoperability Resources) data standard as mandated by Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission 
(ABDM) which helps in interoperability between different digital health portals thereby 
potentially providing comprehensive health care across various national health programmes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
CHAPTER–II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
2.1 ADEQUACY OF HEALTHCARE INFRASTRUCTURE AND MANPOWER 
TO SUPPORT PMTBMBA 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.1.1 The Committee believes that the Government's health expenditure needs to be 
increased on the lines of the recommendations of the Fifteenth Finance Commission. Apart 
from increased public health expenditure, the efficient utilisation of available funds should 
also be emphasised to improve the quality and access of healthcare infrastructure. The active 
collaboration with private stakeholders may also help in strengthening the infrastructure 
significantly. The Committee further suggests that the Government should also consider the 
possibility of utilising private and public pharmacies as potential DOTS centres to improve 
the accessibility of TB drugs. 
(Para 3.17 of the report) 
Action Taken 
2.1.2 The government has increased its allocation from 640 Cr in 2014-15 to 2978.26 Cr in 
2023-24 for the TB programme and regular monitoring is done to ensure optimum utilization 
for available resources. Private sector collaboration by leveraging CSR resources is done at 
the State and District level for boosting the infrastructure. To increase accessibility of drugs 
more than 4 lakh DOTS centres are operational at the community level. Under the programme 
pharmacies are being used as DOTS centres wherever required and as per the patient’s 
convenience. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.1.3 The Committee believes that STOs and DTOs, who are the backbone of implementing 
the TB program at the grassroots level efficiently, may be provided intensive executive 
training to perform administrative and managerial duties efficiently. The Committee was also 
given to note that PDSA or Plan-Do-Study-Act, which is a four-stage problem-solving model 
used for improving a process or carrying out change, may be encouraged by the Government 
to be implemented by DTOs in their strategies and implementation of TB program. Apart 
from the skill training programs, they are also required to be sensitised towards the 
program’s objectives and to encourage significant involvement of non-government resources 
like NGOs in the fight against TB, which will also fill the gap due to lack of manpower. 
(Para 3.21 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
2.1.4 Capacity building is among the core principles of NTEP, and regular induction and 
refresher trainings are provided through National Institutes and State Training and 
Demonstration Centres. Cadre specific and thematic training modules have been developed 
covering all aspects of the programme. Plan-Do-Study-Act (PDSA model) has been a new 
training methodology deployed by the programme in last 2 years, which has been highly 

21 
 
appreciated by the State and District level programme managers. The Partnership Guidance 
document has been developed in 2019 to involve non-government resources like NGOs in the 
fight against TB. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.1.5  Keeping in view the fact that health is a State subject, the Committee feels that the 
Union Government needs to impress on the State Governments to put a greater level of 
priority on TB and to come up with a policy to address shortfalls in the human resources for 
the State Health Sector. The role of allied staff is critical for activities like sputum collection 
and follow-up in treatment, and hence, their shortage should also be addressed. The 
Committee emphasises that all vacant posts may be filled at the earliest. 
 (Para 3.22 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
2.1.6 The NTEP is being implemented in a mission mode under the National Health 
Mission. The programme actively engages with the State Governments to prioritize TB 
programme. During NPCC meeting annually, the State specific plans are discussed and 
financial approvals accorded, TB is one of the highest priority programmes in which key 
performance indicators are reviewed and discussed. The Ministry highlights the gaps, 
challenges and best practices during these meetings. Subsequently, regular reviews of the 
State Governments are conducted at the highest level in the MoHFW to reinforce and impress 
upon the State to achieve national. The programme regularly monitors the vacancy status in 
the States against the vacant sanctioned posts and impresses upon the States to ensure filling 
up all the vacant posts.  
 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.1.7 The Government should also consider training programs and bridge courses for 
ASHA workers, treatment supporters, counsellors, caregivers under the Family Care Model, 
other allied health workers and community volunteers about the TB disease to increase 
management awareness about the disease and its progression and treatment options. 
(Para 3.23 of the report) 
Action Taken 
2.1.8 Cadre specific training programmes are implemented under the NTEP through 
National Institutes and State Training & Demonstration Centres. Modernised training system 
(MTS) which is an updated system for capacity building in NTEP combining traditional and 
modern techniques of creating and delivery of training content has been developed. Seven 
cadre wise NTEP courses including Community Health Officer, pharmacists, Senior 
Treatment Supervisor, health volunteer and treatment supporter, Senior TB Laboratory 
Supervisor, Lab technicians, district program managers have been rolled out across the 
country. Since 2021-22 to date, 4547 persons have been trained using Modernised training 
system (MTS) across 19 States & 4 UTs under these cadres. A newer training module for 
Family Care Giver Model has also been developed and the frontline cadres like ASHAs, 
treatment supporters etc are being trained on the same. These trainings are expected to 

22 
 
capacitate the front-line cadres in better management of the cases and improving treatment 
outcomes. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.1.9  The Committee was given a note that the salary structures of human 
resourcesinvolved in the TB elimination program are not on par with other contractual 
healthcare staff appointed as part of the National Health Mission (NHM). This leads to lower 
motivation of staff and internal friction amongst the staff. The Committee suggests that the 
rationalisation of the salary of the healthcare workforce under the TB program at par with 
other healthcare staff appointed under NHM may be done at the earliest, and all contractual 
NTEP manpower may be regularised. The Government also needs to take positive measures 
such as special allowances, availability of accommodation, etc., to incentivise professional 
clinical and non- clinical staff to get posted to rural/ hilly areas. 
 (Para 3.24 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
2.1.10 The National Health Mission implements a “Health System’s Approach” for human 
resource for health irrespective of the national programme. All service delivery staff are 
integrated at the facility level and provide services for all national programmes. Guidance has 
been given to all State/UTs for rationalisation of the salary of the health workforce and 
necessary additional resources are provided under NHM for the same. So far, 18 states have 
carried out salary rationalization of NHM staff (Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, 
Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Odisha, Tripura, J&K, Ladakh, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat). The 
regularisation of contractual NTEP manpower under NHM and for the matter of fact for all 
national health programmes is a “State Subject”. State/UTs wherever applicable, have also 
provisioned for additional incentives / allowances for posting of medical and para-medical 
staff in hilly/tribal/difficult to reach areas as per State/UT specific context. Such proposals are 
recommended under NHM. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.1.11 The Committee has also been apprised during its interaction with stakeholders that 
many complications during and following the treatment of TB require thoracic surgical 
interventions, the facilities for which are grossly insufficient in the country. In view thereof, 
the Committee feels that the Government must take urgent steps for the recruitment of 
specialists to address the shortage of specialists in health facilities. 
 (Para 3.25 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
2.1.12 Surgical / Specialised interventions for managing complicated cases of TB are made 
available at select centres across the country. Under NTEP, the infrastructure and human 

23 
 
resource including specialists are approved in the PIPs based on State/UT proposals every 
year. 
 
2.2 MAJOR CHALLENGES IN TREATMENT AND TACKLING OF TB 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.2.1 Social stigma: - The stigma associated with the disease is a significant barrier to its 
management. The negative perceptions and misconceptions surrounding TB often lead to 
discrimination, isolation, and reluctance to seek treatment. Stigma also discourages 
individuals from getting tested or adhering to treatment, ultimately impeding efforts to control 
the spread of TB disease. The Committee feels that stigma reduction is among the most 
important aspects that can provide an enabling environment for people with TB to seek care 
and complete their treatment. Addressing this stigma through targeted advocacy, 
communication and social mobilisation activities; structured sensitisation programmes 
specifically for rural areas; publicising success stories of TB survivors and community 
engagement are crucial for effective TB control programs. The Committee recommends that 
the Government should consider screening and active case finding should be called Lung 
Health Screen and not TB screening to reduce stigma. 
 (Para 3.26 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
2.2.2 Stigma at the community level is a persistent challenge being faced by the programme. 
The Ayushman Arogya Mandir centres are actively involved in providing TB services. These 
centres have dedicated a day every month “Ni-kshay Diwas” focused on providing TB care 
for all existing TB patients, IEC & awareness activities in the community and screening of 
vulnerable activities through community outreach. The programme has established a strong 
community engagement programme by identifying TB survivors and building their capacity 
to become TB Champions (Ni-kshay Saathi). These TB champions act as peer counsellors and 
programme advocates for community awareness and addressing stigma related to TB in the 
society. “TB Harega, DeshJeetega Campaign” was initiated by the Government of India in 
2018-19 to accelerate the progress towards elimination of Tuberculosis (TB) from the 
country. The campaign aimed to raise awareness about the disease, increase access to 
diagnostic and treatment services, and engage communities and stakeholders to achieve the 
national goals. All State/UTs are provided with adequate resources to do targeted IEC 
campaigns specific to local context. In addition, the programme conducts awareness 
campaigns during Ayushman Bhavah and Viksit Bharat Sankalp Yatra. 
 
2.3 SCREENING, EARLY DETECTION AND NOTIFICATION OF TB CASES 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.3.1  The Committee observes that early detection is crucial, requiring screening of 
vulnerable populations to break the transmission chain. The Committee was apprised that 
lack of control of TB transmission, particularly in the poor & slum areas, is leading to the 
infection ratio, i.e., the number of individuals infected by a TB patient, greater than or equal 
to one and lack of testing with X-ray & CBNAAT are delaying the TB cases detection. The 

24 
 
Committee believes that the efforts to screen & detect TB at early stages should be made on a 
war footing. Keeping in view the large population of India and the target of achieving TB 
elimination by 2025, the Committee suggests that there is a need to significantly increase the 
rate of TB case finding by making efforts as follows: 
 
i.  Aggressive use of X-ray for faster & confirming TB diagnosis: - The National 
TB Prevalence Survey 2021 shows that out of 100 TB cases, clinical assessment picks 
up only 62 cases while X-ray picks up 95 cases. Also, among those diagnosed during 
the survey, more than 50% did not have typical signs or symptoms suggestive of TB 
but had an abnormality in the chest X-ray, which led to their TB diagnosis. Hence, 
dependence on clinical assessment based on symptoms alone and the non-availability 
of X-ray diagnostic facilities led to about 33% of missed cases. Therefore, the 
Committee would like to suggest that the Government ensure that X- ray facilities are 
available at all public healthcare facilities. Further, to speed up the early detection of 
TB cases, deploying Artificial intelligence-enabled portable and hand-held X-ray units 
for screening at district as well as block levels should be considered. Also, the 
provision of hand-held X-ray machines at registered private centres at discounted 
rates may also be considered.  
 
ii.  Scaling up molecular laboratories to block levels: - The Committee has been 
informed that in the year 2022, the percentage of PTBER-NAAT examinations where 
molecular diagnostic tests were conducted as the first test of diagnosis was 23% of the 
total PTBER tests conducted including microscopy. National TB Prevalence Survey 
shows that among one lakh people, microscopy picks up 152 TB patients while 
molecular tests pick up 285. Hence, considering the efficiency of molecular 
diagnostics is much higher than microscopy, further decentralisation of rapid 
molecular diagnostics, ensuring optimal utilisation of NAAT capacity to peripheral 
levels, at least the Block levels, will lead to a significant decrease in missed TB cases 
per lakh population and curb ongoing transmission of the disease. 
 
iii.  Holistic implementation of intensified case finding in OPDs of all healthcare 
facilities: - This involves systematic screening of all people seeking care in a health 
facility or a clinic for identification of people at risk for TB. Bi- directional screening 
of patients visiting the hospitals for diseases like diabetes must be brought into wide 
practice, which includes simultaneous diagnosis for TB along with other ailments. 
 
iv.  Contact Tracing: - In the National TB Prevalence Survey 2021, it was 
observed that up to 64% of those with presumptive TB symptoms or signs in the 
general population did not seek care. The Committee is of the view that there is a 
requirement for systematic planning and implementation of active case-finding 
campaigns among vulnerable populations in community settings more aggressively to 
minimise the delays in the detection and treatment of TB cases. The Government may 
also consider incentivising anybody in the community for a case referred to and 
diagnosed as TB.  
 

25 
 
v.  Involvement of the private sector: - The National Strategic Plan envisioned 
obtaining 56% of the total notifications from the private sector by 2021, but the 
country has reached only 32%. Effective engagement of the private sector on a scale 
commensurate with their dominant presence in the Indian healthcare system is crucial 
to achieving the TB elimination target. The Committee is of the view that there is a 
need for systematic assessment and a proper strategy to promote engagement of the 
private sector. Various methods like expediting the payment of incentives and any 
treatment cost to the private sector, making the Ni-kshay portal more user-friendly for 
ease of reporting & capacity building programme in Information and communication 
Technology (ICT) for private providers. Apart from this, there should be a robust 
monitoring mechanism in place to ensure the accountability of private players to 
create a sustainable public private partnership in TB elimination.  
 
vi.  Increase in awareness program: - The Committee is of the view that the 
health- seeking behaviour of the population is also a challenge in the TB elimination 
drive that leads to missed cases. This can be overcome by aggressively targeted IEC 
campaigns in the community to raise awareness and improve health-seeking 
behaviour.  
 
vii.  Region-specific detection pattern: - The causes for the spread of TB can vary 
across different regions due to a combination of social, economic, healthcare, and 
geographical factors. The detection and case-finding pattern, along with control 
measures, should be well strategized with an understanding of the differences. 
(Para 3.4 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
2.3.2 The government acknowledges the observations of the Committee. The NTEP has 
been implementing active case finding campaigns in vulnerable and high-risk population 
since 2018. More than 22 Crore population screened for TB symptoms in 2022 which yielded 
about 50,000 additional TB cases (India TB Report 2023). Through more than 1.6 lakh 
Ayushman Arogya Mandir, the government is providing comprehensive primary healthcare 
services. These centres have dedicated a day every month called as “Ni-kshay Diwas” to raise 
awareness, screen vulnerable population and provide saturation of services for persons 
affected with TB. The presumptive TB testing rate is a key performance indicator being 
monitored at all levels under NTEP. The presumptive TB testing rate at the national level has 
improved from 500/lakh population in 2015 to over 1200/lakh population in 2022. 
 
2.3.3 Use of X-ray under NTEP: The availability of X-rays in public health institutions is 
ensured through the “Free Diagnostics Initiative” under NHM. In addition, the X-ray sites are 
linked with tele-radiology to ensure timely reporting of X-rays at sub-district levels. 
Wherever required in-sourcing of X-ray services from the private sector is already 
implemented by the States at district & block levels. The ultra-portable hand-held X-rays have 
already been introduced in some State/UTs and all States have been encouraged to propose 
further additional requirements in their annual plans. To enhance the State/Districts capacity, 

26 
 
398 digital x-ray machines with CR system have already been provided by the Centre to the 
District TB Centres.  
 
2.3.4 Scaling up of Molecular Diagnostic Laboratories: The NTEP has scaled up the 
availability of Nucleic Acid Amplification Tests (NAAT) - molecular diagnostic machines 
The number of NAAT machines across the country has increased from 80 in 2015 to 6197 in 
2023. With the operationalization of these laboratories, NTEP has been able to saturate all 
districts with molecular diagnostic laboratories. Further expansion to saturate block levels is 
envisaged and ongoing. With the existing laboratories, the NTEP has established a robust 
sample collection & transportation mechanism, that ensures all blocks are linked to molecular 
diagnostic laboratories.  
 
2.3.5 Intensified Case Finding (ICF): ICF is an integral part of NTEP’s case finding 
strategy wherein all priority OPDs like HIV, NCDs, Tobacco Cessation Centres, Dialysis, etc 
have established a strong cross referral mechanism with TB laboratories for screening among 
beneficiaries. 
 
2.3.6 Contact Tracing: The policy for contact tracing, ruling out of active TB and TB 
Preventive treatment has been expanded to all age group in contact of pulmonary TB in 2021. 
Active Case Finding (ACF0 is being implemented for the vulnerable populations since 2018. 
Based on the National TB Prevalence Survey, priority groups (household contacts, past 
history of TB, elderly, diabetics, tobacco users and individuals with low BMI) which account 
for over 80% of the new cases. These priority vulnerable groups are line listed at AB-HWC 
levels and actively screened on a periodic basis during Ni-kshay Diwas for early detection of 
TB. Also, these groups are being targeted for TB prevention activities. Under NTEP Rs 500/- 
as an incentive is already provisioned for informants (who could be anybody in the 
community). This incentive is provided to informants, if they refer a presumptive TB case and 
which gets confirmed as TB.  
 
2.3.7 Private Sector Involvement: With a focused and targeted engagement with the 
private sector through interventions like Patient Provider Support Agency (PPSA), gazette 
notification for mandatory notification of TB cases, incentives for notification of cases and 
collaborations with professional bodies like IMA, IAP, FOGSI, etc., there has been an 
increase in private sector notification by more than 7 times over the past 8 years. In 2022, the 
country was able to notify 7.33 lakh TB cases (highest ever) respectively accounting for 30% 
of total notifications. In 2023, till Nov 2023, 7.3 lakh patients were notified from the private 
sector which contributed to 32% of total notifications. While NTEP took steps to engage the 
private sector before 2013-14 as well, these achieved limited success. Between 2013 to 2017, 
the Government with support of development partners implemented pilot projects in Mumbai 
and Patna, that demonstrated role of interface agencies called Public–Private Interface 
Agencies (PPIAs) in engaging the private providers. Subsequently, these pilots were scaled 
up, in the form of Patient Provider Support Agency (PPSA) across other geographies in the 
country. The Ministry has approved PPSAs in 385 districts of which an interface agency has 
been onboarded in 236 districts (2023). These interventions have been assessed from time to 
time and based on the learning’s further scale up is planned. The Ni-kshay portal has evolved 

27 
 
itself over time and has developed a user-friendly interface for the private sector to notify and 
manage cases. In addition, there is a dashboard for monitoring the private sector performance 
at national, state and district levels.  
 
2.3.8 Awareness Programmes: Under NTEP, the government has implemented an 
aggressive IEC strategy in collaboration with the support of State/UT governments. “TB 
Harega, Desh Jeetega Campaign” was initiated by the Government of India in 2018-19 to 
accelerate the progress towards elimination of Tuberculosis (TB) from the country. The 
campaign aimed to raise awareness about the disease, increase access to diagnostic and 
treatment services, and engage communities and stakeholders to achieve the national goals. 
All State/UTs are provided with adequate resources to do targeted IEC campaigns specific to 
local context. In addition, the programme conducts awareness campaigns during Ayushman 
Bhavah and Viksit Sankalp Bharat Yatra. Under Ayushman Bhavah about 2.1 Cr individuals 
were screened for TB while under Viksit Bharat Sankalp Yatra, 3.38 Cr individuals were 
screened for TB. 
 
2.4 DIAGNOSTIC FACILITIES FOR TB DETECTION 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.4.1  The Committee believes that further improvement in the availability and affordability 
of TB diagnostic facilities in India and upgrading the existing ones is critical for the success 
of PMTBMBA as well as achieving the global target for TB elimination by 2025. In this 
respect, the Committee would like to suggest the following way-forward measures: - 
 
i) Implementation of stringent quality measures by strengthening and scaling up 
External Quality Assurance (EQA) for public and private laboratories through an in-
built routine quality assurance system for all diagnostic tests offered. Systematic 
monitoring and coverage expansion of post-EQA follow-up may be emphasised to 
verify the implementation of corrective action. 
 
 ii) NABL accreditation plays a critical role in assessing and monitoring the quality 
and standards of diagnostic facilities available at laboratories. It also enhances the 
confidence of patients in accepting the testing reports. The activities towards 
obtaining NABL accreditation for laboratories may be expedited.  
 
iii) More investment in innovative diagnostic technologies that offer accurate and 
rapid results like GeneXpert and Truenat. Increased procurement of mobile diagnostic 
units with NAAT and hand-held X-rays for reaching out to remote or rural areas and 
other vulnerable areas. This would make it easier for people to access diagnostic 
services without travelling long distances and promoting active case- finding 
campaigns.  
 
iv) Recruitment of healthcare workers and technicians for optimal utilisation of 
diagnostic resources available in health centres and laboratories. Capacity building 
and training of healthcare workers, technicians, and laboratory staff in the latest 

28 
 
diagnostic technologies like Truenat, C&DST and equipment maintenance may be 
given significance.  
 
v) Incollaboration with NGOs and leveraging community engagement, we need to 
run extensive awareness campaigns to educate people about the importance of early 
diagnosis of TB and addressing the stigma associated with TB. 
(Para 3.9 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
2.4.2 Policy of NTEP is to provide quality assured diagnostics both in public as well as 
private sector through an in-built routine quality assurance system at NRLs for all diagnostic 
tests offered. EQA for the NRLs is conducted through WHO Supra-National Reference 
Laboratory (SNRL), NIRT, Chennai and the coordinating WHO SNRL network, Antwerp, 
Belgium. NTEP in coordination with NRL- NTI, Bangalore is conducting EQA for rapid 
NAAT technology. Complete coverage of CBNAAT was achieved in 2022. EQA for Truenat 
was initiated with 841 machines in 2022 and to be expanded to 2000 machines in 2023. Post-
EQA, visits were carried out by the NRL and IRL for intervention. Nineteen laboratories 
obtained NABL accreditation. Further, 13 laboratories are in advanced stages in NABL 
accreditation, and 15 laboratories have initiated their activities. Expansion of diagnostic 
network both for molecular diagnostics and for hand-held X-rays is ongoing. Human 
resources for peripheral sites (Microscopy centre & NAAT facilities) and CDST laboratories 
are supported through NHM via the PIP mechanism. Based on workload, an option for 
increasing HR is made available. The programme has established a strong community 
engagement programme by identifying TB survivors and building their capacity to become 
TB Champions (Ni-kshay Saathi). These TB champions act as peer counsellors and 
programme advocates for community awareness and addressing stigma related to TB in the 
society. 
 
2.5 WAY FORWARD 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.5.1 The Committee is of the view that on the lines of the above-mentioned successful 
programmes, the TB elimination programme can be strengthened regarding surveillance of 
TB cases. As the Ni-kshay portal has the potential for continuous surveillance and monitoring 
of each TB patient from detection to completion of treatment, it can be used to contact and 
track TB patients for early detection and treatment follow-up. In view thereof, the Committee 
suggests making the Ni-kshay portal more user-friendly and a one-stop platform for TB data 
collection. Other technological interventions like mobile applications for continuous 
monitoring of TB patients, district-wise vulnerability mapping, and active case finding may 
also be developed by leveraging digital tools to strengthen the surveillance of TB cases. 
(Para 4.19 of the report) 
 
 

29 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.5.2 The National TB Elimination programme uses Ni-kshay, a case-based web based 
application wherein all TB patients (public & private sectors) are notified and tracked. The 
portal works as a one-stop platform for the programme and is enabled to track individuals 
right from presumptive screening, diagnosis, treatment to post treatment follow up. The Ni-
kshay application has been evolving over time with addition of new features and making it 
user friendly. All the modules in Ni-kshay are available for the health staff to do real-time 
recording of data both on web version as well as the mobile application. The Programme 
Division is currently in the process of devising concepts for integrating the mapping of 
individual vulnerabilities as well as active case finding as part of the Ni-kshay portal. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.5.3 The Committee emphasises that the Government should make efforts to bring inter- 
sectoral convergence for strengthening the community effort in PMTBMBA on similar lines. 
As part of endeavours to improve detection, integrating an active case-finding drive for TB 
with the existing house-to-house survey conducted by ASHA workers twice a year for the 
immunisation programme can be considered. Conducting household visits is essential to 
achieve a complete detection of TB cases. All individuals suspected of having TB, whether 
symptomatic or asymptomatic, should be brought to clinics or diagnostic laboratories for 
testing, ensuring thorough screening for TB positivity, particularly in high- risk areas like 
slum areas and densely populated areas. 
(Para 4.20 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
2.5.4 The recommendations of the Committee for inter-sectoral convergence is well noted. 
 The NTEP has proactively identified priority line ministries with a view to ensure 
inter-sectoral convergence for TB elimination. Memorandum of Understandings 
(MoUs) have been signed with M/o Railways, M/o Defence, M/o Labour & 
Employment, M/o Panchayati Raj, M/o Ayush, etc. to take the converged effort 
forward. 
 The NTEP has been implementing active case finding campaigns in vulnerable and 
high-risk population since 2018. More than 22 Crore population were screened for TB 
symptoms in 2022 which yielded about 50,000 additional TB cases (India TB Report 
2023). These Active Case Finding (ACF) rounds are focused on vulnerable 
populations like urban slums, vulnerable workplace settings, prisons, etc. 
 Through more than 1.6 lakh Ayushman Arogya Mandir, the government is providing 
comprehensive primary healthcare services. These centres have dedicated a day every 
month called as “Ni-kshay Diwas” to raise awareness, screen vulnerable population 
and provide saturation of services for persons affected with TB. 
 The presumptive TB testing rate is a key performance indicator being monitored at all 
levels under NTEP. The presumptive TB testing rate at the national level has 
improved from 500/lakh population in 2015 to over 1,200/lakh population in 2022. 
 

30 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
3.1 DRUG RESISTANT TB CASES 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.1.1 In view of the alarming rise in Drug-resistant TB cases, the Committee suggests to the 
Government that efforts should be made to decentralise healthcare delivery of DR-TB & 
MDR-TB services, thus providing easy access to rapid molecular diagnostics of TB upfront, 
including remote areas or to high-risk patients across the country. 
(Para 1.28 of the report) 
 
3.1.2 Also, the Committee believes that for such cases, an integrated health system 
approach for service delivery, including counselling in the general health system, should be 
implemented for early diagnosis and timely initiation of treatment. Further, the Committee 
suggests that a robust and exclusive surveillance system for drug-resistant TB cases should be 
put in place to track the patients and monitor their adherence to the prescribed treatment. 
(Para 1.29 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
3.1.3 The Government has extended the following efforts for efficient service delivery 
through an integrated health system approach: 
 
 Availability of molecular diagnostics has been scaled up to 6196 Nucleic Acid 
Amplification Test (NAAT) machines covering all districts in the country. In 
addition, 91 Line Probe Assay labs and 69 liquid culture testing laboratories have 
been established in the country for diagnosis of MDR-TB and XDR-TB. 
 
 Universal Drug Susceptibility Testing (UDST) is implemented under the NTEP to 
ensure every diagnosed TB patient is tested to rule out drug resistance before or at 
the time of treatment initiation itself.  
 Newer drugs like Bedaquiline and Delamanid have been made available for 
management of DRTB.  
 
 Decentralized DR TB treatment services are offered through 162 Nodal DR-TB 
Centres and 792 District DR TB centres across the country.   
 
 All DR-TB cases are tracked through Ni-kshay Portal for ensuring their treatment 
adherence and successful treatment outcomes 
 
3.1.4 The incidence of TB in India has reduced by 16% from 237/lakh population in 2015 to 
199/lakh population in 2022. At the same time, the estimates of DRTB in India has reduced 
by 20% from 1.4 lakh in 2015 to 1.1 lakh in 2022 (Global TB Report 2023).  

31 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.1.5 The Committee notes that despite these measures, India remains the largest 
contributor to global TB incidence, approximately one-fourth of the global TB cases. 
Further, the Ministry stated that there are estimates of 1.1 lakh Drug-resistant TB cases 
in India in 2022. As per the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare's guidelines for 
Programmatic management of Drug-resistant TB in India, the management of Drug-
resistant TB is complex. The weak TB services lead to delay in detection and effective 
treatment of Drug-resistant TB.   
 
3.1.6 Given such high burden of TB and drug-resistant TB cases, the Committee feels 
that the availability of molecular diagnostic facilities including NAAT need to be scaled 
up further across the country to increase the proportion of TB patients being screened 
for the presence of drug resistance. The expansion of molecular diagnostics including 
the NAAT ensures upfront access to rapid molecular diagnostics of TB across the 
country. Regarding the availability of drugs for drug-resistant TB, the Committee urges 
the Government to ensure a consistent supply of newer and short regimen drugs 
nationwide. This is essential to ensure uninterrupted treatment of drug-resistant TB and 
adherence to the prescribed treatment.  
 
3.2 AFFORDABLE AND QUALITY TB TREATMENT AND AVAILABILITY OF 
MEDICATIONS 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.2.1 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Government in improving TB 
treatment and making the treatment and the medicines more affordable and accessible. 
However, the Committee is of the view that there is a wide scope for improvement to realise 
the target by 2025 and makes the following suggestions based on its observations: 
 
i.  The Committee noted that even some of the tertiary hospitals in major cities of the 
country lack dedicated TB wards and treatment facilities with adequate capacity, whereas 
some hospitals have TB treatment facilities but have an acute shortage of skilled 
manpower. The Committee suggests that a network of dedicated TB clinics and centres 
equipped with necessary diagnostic and treatment facilities with adequate manpower is 
required to be expanded to all healthcare facilities from tertiary and primary health 
centres, covering remote locations. Further, the Committee suggests that resources 
available under the Ayushman Bharat- Health and Wellness Centres scheme should be 
leveraged effectively to enhance the reach and efficacy of TB treatment services, especially 
in underserved areas. 
 
 ii.  Apart from improving early TB diagnosis and availability of TB treatment, there is a 
significant need to improve the acceptability of TB treatment. Therefore, the Government 
should invest more in nationwide public awareness campaigns in collaboration with 
private healthcare providers, NGOs and other stakeholders to educate the public about 

32 
 
available treatment options, the importance of completing the full treatment course, and 
dispel myths and misconceptions. The counsellors and psychologists should be roped in the 
PMTBMBA program in a big way to provide adequate social and emotional support to all 
TB patients 
 
iii.  In order to make the TB elimination program successful, there is a need to establish a 
continuous and robust data collection and monitoring system, which would help in 
identifying areas of improvement and allocation of resources effectively on a regular basis. 
This would also ensure that quality standards and treatment protocols are followed by all 
providers.  
 
iv.  To improve adherence to TB treatment, the Committee suggests that a daily fixed-dose 
regimen under a directly observed treatment short course should be rolled out throughout 
the country on mission mode. Further, much-needed support, including more fund 
allocation, is to be given to support research and trials to expedite the introduction of 
newer anti-TB drugs providing less toxic and short-duration treatment. 
 
v.  In view of higher prices of anti-TB drugs, the Committee suggests that the Government 
may collaborate with pharmaceutical companies to negotiate prices for TB drugs through 
bulk purchasing or licensing agreements. It has come to the notice of the Committee that 
some of the drugs which are used for treating Drug-Resistant TB are still not available to 
private practitioners. In view thereof, it is also required to establish an arrangement with 
fixed accountability to maintain a regular supply of quality TB medications to all parts of 
the country. Moreover, the government may encourage the domestic production of generic 
TB drugs with infrastructural support, streamlined regulatory processes, and tax 
incentives to reduce dependency on imported medicines.  
 
vi.  The Health Sector of the country has benefited substantially from Corporate Social 
Responsibility, but the same is lacking in organisation and direction to enhance the benefit 
of a specific program. The formulation of policies and systematic efforts are required to be 
made to leverage Corporate Social Responsibility activities with targeted utilisation 
enhancing affordability and accessibility of TB treatment and drugs.  
 
vii.  The effective utilisation of telemedicine and e-health platforms is required to be 
promoted by developing user-friendly and easy-to operate applications to connect patients 
with experienced doctors for remote consultations and diagnosis. This can reduce the need 
for physical visits to diagnostic centres. Moreover, such applications can also be used to 
provide information about TB and offer medication reminders.  
 
viii. The Committee was informed that it was noticed during the National TB Prevalence 
Survey, 2021 that a substantial portion of people with TB do not seek care and remain 
undetected to the system. The community avoids the treatment for various reasons, 
including the stigma associated with the disease, which hinders the successful 
implementation of the TB elimination program. Therefore, TB Prevention Treatment is a 
great initiative to remove the stigma and make PMTBMBA more effective, especially on 

33 
 
the preventive side. TB Prevention Treatment covering all age groups is required to be 
executed extensively across the country by reaching out to communities and asking people, 
even at the infection level, to come and start treatment. 
 
(Para 3.13 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
3.2.2 The comments from the Committee are highly appreciated. Under NTEP, free 
screening, free drugs and free diagnostics are provided free of cost to all TB patients 
including those seeking care in the private. The health system is continuously supported to 
further expand the in-patient care required for TB patients both for drug sensitive and drug-
resistant TB. DR-TB centres have been established in all districts with beds wherever required 
for admission of TB patients. The Ayushman Arogya Mandir centres are actively involved in 
providing TB services. These centres have dedicated a day every month “Ni-kshay Diwas” 
focused on providing TB care for all existing TB patients, IEC & awareness activities in the 
community and screening of vulnerable activities through community outreach. The 
programme has established a strong community engagement programme by identifying TB 
survivors and building their capacity to become TB Champions (Ni-kshay Saathi). These TB 
champions act as peer counsellors and programme advocates for community awareness and 
addressing stigma related to TB in the society.  
 
3.2.3 “TB Harega, Desh Jeetega Campaign” was initiated by the Government of India in 
2018-19 to accelerate the progress towards elimination of Tuberculosis (TB) from the 
country. The campaign aimed to raise awareness about the disease, increase access to 
diagnostic and treatment services, and engage communities and stakeholders to achieve the 
national goals. All State/UTs are provided with adequate resources to do targeted IEC 
campaigns specific to local context. In addition, the programme conducts awareness 
campaigns during Ayushman Bhavah and Viksit Sankalp Bharat Yatra.  
 
3.2.4 For a robust data collection and monitoring system, Ni-kshay web portal has been 
created to track each TB patient notified throughout the entire cascade of care and post 
treatment follow up. To improve treatment adherence fixed dose combinations (FDCs) have 
been introduced under NTEP since 2018 and adherence is monitored through DOTS. In 
addition, patient friendly digital adherence solutions are implemented to monitor treatment 
adherence.  
 
3.2.5 The Department of Health Research and Indian Council for Medical Research has 
established an India TB Research Consortium for working on Research & Development on 
TB drugs, diagnostics, vaccines and implementation research. Under the National TB 
Elimination Programme (NTEP), a task force of medical colleges has been established to 
support programme implementation and operational research.  
 
3.2.6 The ministry continuously engages with the pharmaceutical companies to ensure price 
reduction and the principles of GFR are followed for all public procurements under NTEP. 

34 
 
The Ministry has always encouraged domestic pharmaceutical industry for manufacturing 
Anti TB Drugs. For ensuring access to DR-TB drugs to the patients seeking care in the private 
sector, the programme has laid down SOPs for the State and Districts by which private sector 
can engage with the programme for easy access to the newer drugs free of cost. 
 
3.2.7  The NTEP has developed strong linkages with the corporate sector and business 
associations for increasingly leverage the CSR resources for programme related activities. 
The State governments also engage with corporates and industries at the local level for 
leveraging additional resources. Through the Ayushman Arogya Mandir, tele-medicine 
services are provided for all patients who require it thereby increasing access to specialists 
and reduction in out-of-pocket expenditure. The Arogya Saathi App which is the citizen 
facing application of Ni-kshay has been developed to provide information about TB and offer 
medication reminders as well as self-report the treatment adherence. The NTEP has expanded 
its preventive treatment policy to cover all household contacts and vulnerable population. 
More than 13 lakh contacts and PLHIVs were started to TPT in 2022. The State & Districts 
implement targeted IEC activities to increase patient and public awareness and the need for 
prevention activities at the community level including TB preventive treatment for the eligible 
population. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.2.8 The Committee recognises the Ministry of Health's efforts but highlights the vast 
task ahead and the limited time to reach the End TB target. Improvements needed 
include dedicated TB wards in all hospitals, regular reviews, strict monitoring, adequate 
treatment facilities, skilled manpower, and clear accountability for a steady supply of 
quality TB medications. The government should also support domestic production of 
generic TB drugs to reduce dependency on imports and enhance healthcare 
sustainability. 
3.2.9 The Committee recommends increasing funds for TB research and clinical trials 
and urges the Government to align Corporate Social Responsibility funds with health 
sector guidelines for better TB treatment utilization. The 2021 National TB Prevalence 
Survey found that many TB patients do not seek care and remain undetected. Further, 
the Ministry, in its reply at Para 1.5.3 of this Report, stated that TB is known to affect 
the productive age group and under the NTEP in 2023 (Jan-Dec) about 41% of the TB 
cases were reported in the age group of 15-34 years. Thus, the Committee urges more 
effective promotion and implementation of TB Prevention Treatment across all age 
groups, prioritizing those aged 15-34 who are disproportionately affected. 
 
3.3 ADEQUACY OF HEALTHCARE INFRASTRUCTURE AND MANPOWER 
TO SUPPORT PMTBMBA 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.3.1 During the meeting held with stakeholders, the Committee was apprised of the 
problems faced at health facilities for TB diagnosis. It was submitted that the diagnosis of TB 

35 
 
sometimes gets delayed in various peripheral centres as well as in tertiary institutes because 
of a lack of availability of necessary reagents and kits, as there are delays in procurement at 
various levels. The Committee is of the view that such administrative delays in the 
procurement of requisite resources would weaken the momentum of TB care services and 
would lead to the active spread of TB disease. Therefore, the Committee suggests that there 
should be an uninterrupted supply of CBNAAT & Truenat cartridges and other functional 
diagnostic equipment at every healthcare centre. For this purpose, the Government may take 
steps to streamline the procurement procedures and to make a robust mechanism for 
reporting and monitoring of the availability of cartridges stock and other equipment. Further, 
the Government should engage with manufacturers and suppliers to ensure a regular supply 
of quality kits and equipment. Local manufacturing may be promoted with necessary tax 
rebates and subsidies. 
(Para 3.18 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.3.2 The programme has rapidly scaled up the availability of molecular diagnostics across 
the country covering all districts. Procurement procedures and systems have been established 
to ensure regular and uninterrupted supplies for all consumables required for TB screening 
and diagnosis. In addition, adequate resources have been provisioned with the State/UT 
governments for local procurement in emergent situations. Ni-kshay Aushadi has been 
developed to closely monitor the supply chain distribution and consumption of drugs & 
diagnostics on a regular basis. Further local manufacturing is integral part of the government 
policies as per extant government rules following relevant provisions of GFR. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.3.3 The Committee identified administrative delays in procuring necessary reagents 
and kits, leading to shortages. It stressed the importance of maintaining a steady supply 
of diagnostic equipment like CBNAAT and Truenat cartridges for early TB diagnosis. 
The Ministry reported the development of the Ni-kshay Aushadhi platform to monitor 
drug and diagnostic supplies. However, the Committee urges streamlined procurement 
procedures for consistent supplies. Additionally, promoting local manufacturing with 
special incentives can enhance domestic production capacities and ensure reliable supply 
chains for essential healthcare products.  
 
3.4 ONGOING RESEARCH INITIATIVES AND STUDIES RELATED TO TB IN 
INDIA 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.4.1 The Committee is of the view that research and innovation in TB elimination 
programs are core components that would re-define the diagnostic and treatment measures to 
transform the TB response efforts and develop novel approaches that not only benefit India in 
reducing TB burden but can lead the way for other countries to follow. Keeping in view the 

36 
 
challenges being faced in TB control, the Committee would like to suggest developing a 
diagnostic method that is very simple to use and less time-consuming that frontline workers 
can use to get results within minutes at minimal costs. Such diagnostic methods would add 
new dimensions to the diagnostic services, which are affordable and easily accessible to 
patients. 
(Para 4.3 of the report) 
 
3.4.2 Another priority for research in TB is the development and validation of new drugs 
that are critical for strengthening the treatment regimens in terms of short duration and less 
toxicity to TB patients. It is also noted that evidence on certain drug regimens for Latent TB 
infection, drug-susceptible & drug-resistant TB infections is clear; however, these regimens 
are still not scaled up. The Committee would request the government to expedite the process 
and bring these drug regimens to treat TB cases. 
(Para 4.4 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.4.3 The Department of Health Research and Indian Council for Medical Research has 
established an India TB Research Consortium for working on Research & Development on 
TB drugs, diagnostics, vaccines and implementation research. The ICMR has constituted a 
committee of experts for identifying innovations for conducting feasibility studies based on 
the readiness of the products. Under the National TB Elimination Programme (NTEP), a task 
force of medical colleges has been established to support programme implementation and 
operational research. Newer diagnostic methods as and when recommended by the ICMR are 
incorporated into the programme guidelines based on feasibility of adoption and scalability. 
The newer drugs / drug regimen as recommended by the ICMR are under procurement for 
rapid scale up across the country. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.4.4 Research and innovation within TB elimination programs play a pivotal role in 
revolutionising TB response efforts. This includes the development of simpler, more 
affordable, and less time-consuming diagnostic methods, as well as the creation of 
shorter duration and less toxic medications. To enhance these efforts, the Committee 
recommends a strategic approach to the research work conducted by organisations such 
as the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and the India TB Research 
Consortium. This involves meticulous planning and monitoring of research activities, 
along with increased funding and autonomy for these organizations. Accountability 
should be result-oriented, with clear timelines set for achieving objectives. Further, the 
colleges and universities should be actively engaged in TB research work. Any delays in 
adopting newer diagnostic methods and drug regimens must be promptly reviewed and 
addressed to expedite procurement and implementation. 
 

37 
 
3.4.5 The Government of India has approved the BPaLM regimen for MDR-TB, 
comprising Bedaquiline, Pretomanid, Linezolid, and Moxifloxacin. As per research 
reports*, this treatment has shown promising results and proven to be safer, more 
effective, and faster, curing drug-resistant TB in six months compared to the traditional 
20-month regimen. The roll-out of this regimen is crucial for achieving WHO's TB 
elimination goals. The Committee, therefore, urges the Government to ensure its timely 
implementation nationwide in consultation with States/UTs.  
3.5 WAY FORWARD  
 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.5.1 The Committee suggests that across the country, there are about 5,000 to 6,000 public 
representatives. If they collaborate with officers and NGOs, each representative could 
support around a hundred cases, which is feasible. Public representatives like MPs and MLAs 
can be encouraged to utilise their grants or funds for PMTBMBA in their constituency or 
state to provide medicinesandnutritiousfood.AlongsidetheexistingutilisationofCSRfunds, this 
could significantly expand support under PMTBMBA to cover all TB patients nationwide. 
Further, the Committee believes that another area requiring the attention of the Government 
is efficient resource management and its effective channelisation, which can motivate 
representatives at all levels to assist TB patients. 
 
(Para 4.23 of the report) 
Action Taken 
3.5.2 Since the launch of PMTBMBA, the Ni-kshay Mitra initiative, more than 1.56 lakh 
Ni-kshay Mitras (donors) have come forward and committed to support over 10 lakh TB 
patients and have distributed more than 15 lakh nutrition baskets across the country. There 
has been commitment by the highest level of political leadership in the States with Hon'ble 
Governors of many State/UTs, Hon’ble Union Ministers, Ministers of State, Chief Ministers, 
State Health Ministers of many State/UTs, MPs/MLAs coming forward to adopt TB patients. 
Many young children/students have come forward to register as Ni-kshay Mitras and are 
supporting TB patients from their own pocket money. In addition, Business Associations, 
PSUs like FICCI, ASSOCHAM, CII, IOCL, Coal India are also Ni-kshay Mitras. 21 State 
Branches of Red Cross Societies adopted over 13,000 patients and 122 Universities/Colleges 
of 10 States have adopted over 3500 patients. 
  
3.5.3 The NTEP is working towards sustaining the momentum gained and ensuring the 
actual service delivery at the field level: 
  
 D.O. letter issued from Hon’ble HFM to all Hon'ble MPs to come forward and register 
as Ni-kshay Mitras 
 
___________________________________________________________________________ 
*https://www.who.int/teams/global-tuberculosis-programme/tb-reports/global-tuberculosis-
report-2023/featured-topics/new-treatment-tb?form=MG0AV3 
 

38 
 
 DO Letter from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has been sent to 
Additional Chief Secretary/ Principal Secretary/Secretary (H) of all States/UTs 
regarding active participation in the implementation of PMTBMBA. 
 Cabinet Secretary had written a letter to all Secretaries of Government of India in 
order to encourage participation of various Officers/ Staff Associations in Ministries / 
Departments of Govt. of India in PMTBMBA initiative by adopting TB Patients. The 
Secretary (H&FW) has written to all States and UTs and requested their active 
participation. 
 Functional HR arrangement ensured in the office of Hon’ble Governor/Lt Governors, 
consisting of a medical officer and a support staff, to monitor and accelerate 
PMTBMBA initiative efforts made in 29 State/UTs. 
 The ministry regularly reviews the State/UTs to assess progress and guide the 
State/UTs for effective implementation 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.5.4 The Committee noted the efforts of the Government in engaging public 
representatives through the Ni-kshay Mitra initiative to provide medicines and 
nutritious foods to TB patients. The Committee advocates for further encouragement of 
public representatives to join as Ni-kshay Mitras and utilise their grants/funds to assist 
TB patients, for instance a certain amount from Local Area Development Scheme can be 
utilized for the purpose. 
 
3.5.5 The Ministry further stated that since the launch of PMTBMBA, more than 1.56 
lakh Ni-kshay Mitras (donors) have come forward, distributing more than 15 lakh 
nutrition baskets across the country. However, taking into consideration, the incidence 
rate of 196 patients per one lakh population in 2022 and the overall TB burden in India, 
the Committee suggests that the adoption rate of Ni-kshay Mitra initiative should be 
stimulated and widened.  
 
3.5.6 Additionally, the Committee emphasises the need for efficient resource 
management and effective channelisation to ensure the success of the Ni-kshay Mitra 
initiative. The Committee urges the Ministry to provide updates on measures taken to 
establish and monitor such resource management for optimal fund utilisation. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.5.7 The Committee believes that the success of the programme is dependent upon patients 
completing their treatment in its entirety, which sometimes does not happen. Apart from steps 
like impressing the patient to complete treatment, the patient must also be assured of not 
losing their employment during the treatment period. The Committee suggests the 
Government address the problems related to loss of wage/employment. The Government may 
also consider the training of patients who completed their treatment to develop vocational 
skills through CSR funds. 
(Para 4.25 of the report) 

39 
 
Action Taken 
3.5.8 The government welcomes the suggestions of the Committee regarding vocational 
training for TB patients to help them sustain their livelihood during and after treatment. The 
NTEP has established a strong community engagement strategy not only to support the 
patients and their families in completing their treatment, but also to address stigma & 
discrimination at community levels. TB survivors are identified and trained to become TB 
champions / TB Vijeta, who then act as peer counsellors and community advocates. The 
NTEP in collaboration with M/o Labour & Employment has issued guidelines to the 
State/UTs for working with industries / employers for creating an enabling environment for 
TB patients at the workplace. Also, these guidelines encourage the industries/employers to 
adopt TB Free Workplace policies. Vocational rehabilitation is an important aspect on which 
the State/Districts work upon while linking TB patient or their families with existing social 
protection schemes at the local levels, identifying TB survivors for skill building and linking 
for vocational training / rehabilitation institutes of line ministries. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.5.9 The Committee acknowledges the Government's efforts to address employment 
loss for TB patients and train recovered patients using CSR funds. However, to ensure 
treatment completion, it is crucial to prevent wage loss during treatment. The 
Committee recommends developing targeted vocational training programs for 
recovered TB patients in collaboration with the Ministries of Labour & Employment 
and Skill Development. This could include employer incentives where feasible.   
  
3.5.10 The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Government 
in this direction and further recommends the Ministry to submit a status report 
detailing its efforts to safeguard TB patients' employment and facilitate their vocational 
recovery. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
CHAPTER–IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
 
4.1 BEST PRACTICES FOR TB CONTROL IN VARIOUS STATES OF INDIA 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
4.1.1 The Committee believes that newly developed skin tests may be utilised extensively for 
TB preventive treatment and conducted for close contact with TB patients & risk groups like 
diabetes, alcoholics, etc. The validation of this test for children less than 18 years old may be 
expedited so that the TB preventive treatment may be given at the infection level itself. 
(Para 4.8 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
4.1.2 Newly developed skin text has been validated by ICMR and approved for use in India 
by the regulatory authority. The same is already under procurement under the programme. 
The validation of this test for children less than 18 years old has been completed and 
recommended by ICMR. The same is yet to be approved by the regulatory authorities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

41 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  - AT   A  GLANCE 
 
DRUG RESISTANT TB CASES 
 
 The Committee notes that despite these measures, India remains the largest 
contributor to global TB incidence, approximately one-fourth of the global TB cases. 
Further, the Ministry stated that there are estimates of 1.1 lakh Drug-resistant TB cases 
in India in 2022. As per the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare's guidelines for 
Programmatic management of Drug-resistant TB in India, the management of Drug-
resistant TB is complex. The weak TB services lead to delay in detection and effective 
treatment of Drug-resistant TB.   
 
(Para 3.1.5 of the ATR) 
 
 Given such high burden of TB and drug-resistant TB cases, the Committee feels 
that the availability of molecular diagnostic facilities including NAAT need to be scaled 
up further across the country to increase the proportion of TB patients being screened 
for the presence of drug resistance. The expansion of molecular diagnostics including 
the NAAT ensures upfront access to rapid molecular diagnostics of TB across the 
country. Regarding the availability of drugs for drug-resistant TB, the Committee urges 
the Government to ensure a consistent supply of newer and short regimen drugs 
nationwide. This is essential to ensure uninterrupted treatment of drug-resistant TB and 
adherence to the prescribed treatment.  
 
(Para 3.1.6 of the ATR) 
 
AFFORDABLE AND QUALITY TB TREATMENT AND AVAILABILITY OF 
MEDICATIONS 
 
 The Committee recognises the Ministry of Health's efforts but highlights the vast 
task ahead and the limited time to reach the End TB target. Improvements needed 
include dedicated TB wards in all hospitals, regular reviews, strict monitoring, adequate 
treatment facilities, skilled manpower, and clear accountability for a steady supply of 
quality TB medications. The government should also support domestic production of 
generic TB drugs to reduce dependency on imports and enhance healthcare 
sustainability. 
(Para 3.2.8 of the ATR) 
 
 The Committee recommends increasing funds for TB research and clinical trials 
and urges the Government to align Corporate Social Responsibility funds with health 
sector guidelines for better TB treatment utilization. The 2021 National TB Prevalence 
Survey found that many TB patients do not seek care and remain undetected. Further, 
the Ministry, in its reply at Para 1.5.3 of this Report, stated that TB is known to affect 

42 
 
the productive age group and under the NTEP in 2023 (Jan-Dec) about 41% of the TB 
cases were reported in the age group of 15-34 years. Thus, the Committee urges more 
effective promotion and implementation of TB Prevention Treatment across all age 
groups, prioritizing those aged 15-34 who are disproportionately affected. 
 (Para 3.2.9 of the ATR) 
 
ADEQUACY OF HEALTHCARE INFRASTRUCTURE AND MANPOWER TO 
SUPPORT PMTBMBA 
 
 The Committee identified administrative delays in procuring necessary reagents 
and kits, leading to shortages. It stressed the importance of maintaining a steady supply 
of diagnostic equipment like CBNAAT and Truenat cartridges for early TB diagnosis. 
The Ministry reported the development of the Ni-kshay Aushadhi platform to monitor 
drug and diagnostic supplies. However, the Committee urges streamlined procurement 
procedures for consistent supplies. Additionally, promoting local manufacturing with 
special incentives can enhance domestic production capacities and ensure reliable supply 
chains for essential healthcare products.  
(Para 3.3.3 of the ATR) 
 
ONGOING RESEARCH INITIATIVES AND STUDIES RELATED TO TB IN INDIA 
 
 Research and innovation within TB elimination programs play a pivotal role in 
revolutionising TB response efforts. This includes the development of simpler, more 
affordable, and less time-consuming diagnostic methods, as well as the creation of 
shorter duration and less toxic medications. To enhance these efforts, the Committee 
recommends a strategic approach to the research work conducted by organisations such 
as the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and the India TB Research 
Consortium. This involves meticulous planning and monitoring of research activities, 
along with increased funding and autonomy for these organizations. Accountability 
should be result-oriented, with clear timelines set for achieving objectives. Further, the 
colleges and universities should be actively engaged in TB research work. Any delays in 
adopting newer diagnostic methods and drug regimens must be promptly reviewed and 
addressed to expedite procurement and implementation. 
(Para 3.4.4 of the ATR) 
 
 The Government of India has approved the BPaLM regimen for MDR-TB, 
comprising Bedaquiline, Pretomanid, Linezolid, and Moxifloxacin. As per research 
reports*, this treatment has shown promising results and proven to be safer, more 
effective, and faster, curing drug-resistant TB in six months compared to the traditional 
20-month regimen. The roll-out of this regimen is crucial for achieving WHO's TB 
elimination goals. The Committee, therefore, urges the Government to ensure its timely 
implementation nationwide in consultation with States/UTs.  
 (Para 3.4.5 of the ATR) 

43 
 
WAY FORWARD  
 
 The Committee noted the efforts of the Government in engaging public 
representatives through the Ni-kshay Mitra initiative to provide medicines and 
nutritious foods to TB patients. The Committee advocates for further encouragement of 
public representatives to join as Ni-kshay Mitras and utilise their grants/funds to assist 
TB patients, for instance a certain amount from Local Area Development Scheme can be 
utilized for the purpose. 
(Para 3.5.4 of the ATR) 
 
 The Ministry further stated that since the launch of PMTBMBA, more than 1.56 
lakh Ni-kshay Mitras (donors) have come forward, distributing more than 15 lakh 
nutrition baskets across the country. However, taking into consideration, the incidence 
rate of 196 patients per one lakh population in 2022 and the overall TB burden in India, 
the Committee suggests that the adoption rate of Ni-kshay Mitra initiative should be 
stimulated and widened.  
(Para 3.5.5 of the ATR) 
 
 Additionally, the Committee emphasises the need for efficient resource 
management and effective channelisation to ensure the success of the Ni-kshay Mitra 
initiative. The Committee urges the Ministry to provide updates on measures taken to 
establish and monitor such resource management for optimal fund utilisation. 
(Para 3.5.6 of the ATR) 
 
 The Committee acknowledges the Government's efforts to address employment 
loss for TB patients and train recovered patients using CSR funds. However, to ensure 
treatment completion, it is crucial to prevent wage loss during treatment. The 
Committee recommends developing targeted vocational training programs for 
recovered TB patients in collaboration with the Ministries of Labour & Employment 
and Skill Development. This could include employer incentives where feasible.   
 (Para 3.5.9 of the ATR) 
  
 The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Government 
in this direction and further recommends the Ministry to submit a status report 
detailing its efforts to safeguard TB patients' employment and facilitate their vocational 
recovery. 
 
(Para 3.5.10 of the ATR) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

A pie-chart depicting the status of action taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare and the Ministry of Ayush   
 
23%16%2%Status of action taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare and the Ministry of Ayush in respect of 149th  Report of the Committee
44 
chart depicting the status of action taken by the Department of Health and Family and the Ministry of Ayush on the 149thReport has been given hereunder:
******* 
59%Status of action taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare and the Ministry of Ayush in respect of 149th  Report of the CommitteeRecommendations/ Observations accepted by the GovernmentCommittee does not desire to pursue in view of Government's repliesCommittee has made further recommendationsFinal replies of the Government have not been received
chart depicting the status of action taken by the Department of Health and Family Report has been given hereunder: 
  
Status of action taken by the Department of Ministry of Ayush in respect of 149th  Recommendations/ Observations accepted by the GovernmentCommittee does not desire to pursue in view of Government's Committee has made further Final replies of the Government 