 
 
      DRAFT/CONFIDENTIAL        
                                                                                       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON ERAFLEW YLIMAF DNA HTLAEH 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (SAKA) 
REPORT NO. 
130 
ONE HUNDRED THIRTIETH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 123rd 
REPORT ON THE OUTBREAK OF PANDEMIC COVID-19 AND ITS 
MANAGEMENT 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd  December,  2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd  December, 2021) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail :  rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
  

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
                                                             
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (SAKA) 
 
ONE HUNDRED THIRTIETH REPORT 
On 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 123rd 
REPORT ON THE OUTBREAK OF PANDEMIC COVID-19 AND ITS 
MANAGEMENT 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd December, 2021) 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(i)  
2. PREFACE 
 
(ii) 
3. ACRONYMS 
 
(iii) - (iv) 
4. REPORT 
 
1 - 92 
 Chapter–I –  Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Ministry 
2 – 44 
 Chapter–II –  Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee does not desire to pursue (far now) in view of 
replies of the Ministry 
 
45 – 58 
 Chapter–III –  Recommendations/Observations in respect 
of which replies of the Ministry have not been accepted by 
the Committee 
 
59 – 89 
 Chapter–IV – Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which final replies of the Ministry are still awaited 
90 - 92 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   - AT   A  
GLANCE 
93 - 99 
6. MINUTES 100 – 102 
7. ANNEXURES 103 - 129 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2021-22) 
 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri A.K. Antony     
3. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
6. Dr. Santanu Sen 
7. Shri A. D. Singh  
8. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
9. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
10. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
12. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
13. Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
14. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
15. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
16. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
17. Shrimati Kavitha Malothu 
18. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
19. Shri Arjun Lal Meena 
20. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
21. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
22. Shri K. Navaskani 
23. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil 
24. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
25. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
26. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
27. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S. 
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
31. Vacant 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri J. Sundriyal   Joint Secretary 
Shri V.S.P.Singh   Director 
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar                                  Additional Director 
Shrimati Harshita Shankar       Under Secretary 
Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma   Assistant Committee Officer 
Ms. Monika Garbyal    Assistant Committee Officer 
(i) 

 
 
PREFACE 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and 
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this 
One Hundred Thirtieth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in One Hundred Twenty Third Report on the "Outbreak of 
Pandemic Covid-19 and its Management".  
2. The One Hundred Twenty Third Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare was presented to the Hon'ble Chairman Rajya Sabha on 21st 
November, 2020 and to both Houses of Parliament on 2 nd February, 2021.  Action  Taken Notes of the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Report was received from the Ministry on July 20, 
2021.   
3.  The Committee has noted that the statement on the status of implementation of the 
recommendations contained in the said Rep ort of the Committee has not been laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha and Lok Sabha in pursuant to the direction of Chairman, Rajya Sabha dated 24th September, 2004 
4.  The Committee made a total of 108 recommendations in its 123 rd Report. Out of the 108  
recommendations, a total number of 52 recommendations accepted by the Ministry has been categorized 
under Chapter -I and there are a total number of 22 recommendations, which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue in view of the Ministry‟s replies, has be en categorized under Chapter-II. A total number 
of 26 recommendations/ observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been accepted 
by the Committee and the Committee has made further recommendations thereon, has been categorized 
under C hapter-III while a total number of 8 recommendations/observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Ministry have not been received, has been categorized under Chapter-IV. 
5. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meet ing held on the 1st 
December, 2021. 
 
NEW DELHI 
1st December, 2021 
Agrahayana, 13,  1943 (Saka) 
PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
CHAIRMAN 
Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary                                                                                           
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
(ii) 

 
 
ACRONYMS 
ABHWCs   Ayushman Bharat Health and Wellness Centres  
AB-PMJAY   Ayushman Bharat/Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana 
ASU&H   Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy  
AYUSH   Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, Sowa Riga and Homeopathy  
CCC     COVID Care Center 
CEPI   Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations 
CFR   Case Fatality Rate  
CGRMS   Central Grievance Redressal Management System  
CHC   Community Health Centers  
CHE    Current Health Expenditure  
CII   Confederation of Indian Industry  
CPHC    Comprehensive Health Care  
CSOs   Civil Society Organizations  
CSU    Central Surveillance Unit  
DBT   Department of Bio Technology  
DCH    Dedicated COVID Hospital  
DCHC   Dedicated COVID Health Centre  
DGHS   Director General of Health Services 
DHR   Department of Health Research 
DLE   Direct Lab Empanelment  
DSOs   Disease Surveillance Officer 
DSU    District Surveillance Units  
EUA    Emergency Use Authorization  
GE   Genus Epidemicus  
GERD   Gross domestic expenditure on R&D  
GHE    Government Health Expenditure  
GHSA   Global Health Security Agenda  
GOI    Government of India 
GoM    Group of Ministers 
HBPs    Health Benefit Packages  
HCQ   Hydroxychloroquine  
HEM   Hospital Empanelment Module  
IAPSM   Indian Association of Preventive and Social Medicine  
IAS   Indian Administrative Service  
ICMR   Indian Council of Medical Research  
ICTV   International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses 
IDSP   Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme 
IDSP   Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme 
IDSP   Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme  
iGOT   Integrated Government Online Training  
IHIP    Integrated Health Information Platform  
IHS   Indian Health Service  
IJMR   Indian Journal of Medical Research  
ILI    Influenza Like Illness 
IPHA   Indian Public Health Association  
 
(iii) 

 
 
IPHS   Indian Public Health Standard  
IST    Indian Standard Time  
JMG   Joint Monitoring Group 
LMWH    Low Molecular Weight Heparin  
MEA   Ministry of External Affairs 
MERS   Middle East Respiratory Syndrome  
MHA    Ministry of Home Affairs 
MoHFW  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  
MRHRUs  Model Rural Health Research Units  
MRUs   Multi Disciplinary Research Units  
MSMEs   Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises  
NAFU   National Anti-Fraud Unit  
NARI    National AIDS Research Institute  
NCDC   National Center for Disease Control  
NDMA   National Disaster Management Authority 
NEC   National Executive Committee  
NHA   National Health Authority 
NIV   National Institute of Virology  
PHC   Primary Health Centers  
PHEIC   Public Health Emergency of International Concern 
PM-ASBY  Prime Minister Atma Nirbhar Swasth Bharat Yojana  
PMGKY   Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana  
PoE   Points of Entry  
PPE   Personal Protective Equipment  
RRTs   Rapid Response Teams  
SAFUs    State Anti-Fraud Units  
SARI    Severe Acute Respiratory Illness  
SARS   Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome 
SDRF   State Disaster Response Fund  
SHA    State Health Agencies  
SII   Serum Institute of India  
SOP   Standard Operating Procedure  
SOPs   Standard Operating Protocols  
SOR    Objects and Reasons 
SSU    State Surveillance Units  
STI   Science, Technology and Innovation  
STWs   Standard Treatment Workflows  
STGs   Standard Treatment Guidelines 
TDABC   Time Driven Activity Based Costing 
THE   Total Health Expenditure  
TMS    Transaction Management System  
UIS data   UNESCO Institute of Statistics data 
VBM   Vande Bharat Mission  
VHSNC   Village Health Sanitation and Nutrition Committee  
VRDLs   Viral Research & Diagnostic Laboratories  
VTMs   Viral Transport Media  
WFH    Work From Home 
(iv) 

1 
 
REPORT  
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the One Twenty Third Report on the "Outbreak of 
Pandemic Covid-19 and its Management".  
2. Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the recommendations 
contained in the Report have been categorized as follows:  
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry : Paras 
1.42, 2.20, 2.26, 2.29, 2.34, 2.35, 2.38, 2.40, 2.67, 2.76,  3.5, 3.14, 3.27, 3.33, 
3.44, 3.46, 3.48, 3.56, 4.13, 4.16, 4.17, 4.26, 4.28 4.34, 4.42,  4.45, 5.13, 5.15, 
5.16, 5.22, 5.29, 5.32, 5.34, 6.5, 6.6, 6.8, 6.9, 7.15, 7.17, 7.22, 7.23, 7.27, 7.32, 
7.43, 7.44, 7.57, 7.58, 7.59, 8.10, 8.12, 8.15, 8.16 
Total– 52 (Chapter-I)  
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of replies of the Ministry: Paras  1.47, 2.17, 2.23, 2.47, 2.51, 2.66, 3.24, 
3.29, 3.57, 3.66, 4.15, 4.43, 5.7, 5.24, 5.25, 5.26, 6.7, 7.7, 7.8, 7.21, 7.33, 8.17 
Total– 22 (Chapter-II)  
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have 
not been ac cepted by the Committee: Paras 1.54, 2.46 , 2.58, 2.61, 2.62, 2.72, 
2.73, 2.79, 2.80, 3.25, 3.45, 3.47 , 3.50 , 3.52, 3.64, 3.65, 4.14, 4.20, 4.29, 5.12, 
5.18, 5.23, 5.36, 7.16, 7.28, 8.19 
Total– 26 (Chapter-III)  
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited: Paras 2.36, 3.53, 3.54, 4.12, 4.30, 4.31, 7.34, 8.11 
     Total- 8 (Chapter-IV) 
  

2 
 
CHAPTER - I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
ADNIMINISTRATIVE MANAGEMENT OF LOCKDOWN & UNLOCKING  
Observation/Recommendation 
1.1 The Committee is of the view that if we had not hit the history books for guidance, the 
reality would have hit us harder. The Government of India learnt from its experience and took 
successful measures like Janta curfew, imposition of 4 months long lockdown and its gradual 
opening, travel restrictions and other social distancing measures to contain the spread of 
Corona virus. The Committee appreciates the measures but also ob serves that there have been 
few glaring lapses in the battle against pandemic like shortage of emergency supplies, red -
tapism, shortage and quality of testing kits, delay in domestic production etc. 
                        (Para 1.42) 
Action Taken 
1.2 Noted. Yes, in the initial phase of the pandemic, there were issues with the indigenous 
capacity in terms of personal protective equipment, N -95 masks, testing kits, ventilators. 
Government of India rose to the occasion and ensured that the local demand fo r the same is met 
through indigenous production as there was global scarcity for all these items.  
1.3 To fast -track informed decision making and to cut down on the procedural delays, 11 
High level Empowered Groups were formed. Based on the evolving needs and scenario in the 
country, on 11th September 2020, these groups were condensed into six larger empowered 
groups (EGs). Four of the EGs are headed by the departmental secretaries and one each by NITI 
Aayog officials. Each EG is tasked with respective func tions: (i) medical infrastructure and 
COVID management plan, (ii) ensuring availability of essential medical equipment and 
augmenting human resources., disease surveillance and testing, (iii) coordinating with the private 
sector, NGOs and international org anizations for response -related activities, (iv) economic and 
welfare measures, (v) information, communication, public awareness, public grievances and data 
management, (vi) strategic issues related to COVID management, and facilitating supply chain 
and lo gistics management. On 8 th January 2021, another Empowered Group on Vaccine 
Administration has been constituted to take all necessary measures for effective implementation 
of CO-WIN platform created for inventory management and delivery of COVID-19 vaccine. 
CONTINGENCY PLAN 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.4 The Committee is of the view that the unprecedented outbreak of Corona  virus required a 
well-planned and coordinated response from the Central as well as State Governments for 
successful containment of the pandemic. There must be an integrated as well as a decentralized 
response to outbreak of pandemic Covid -19 for rescuing t he common masses. The disease trend 
data under IDSP is crucial for generating the required response to contain the outbreak 

3 
 
especially when Inter Sectoral Coordination for zoonotic diseases is one of the main programme 
components of IDSP. The Committee is constrained to observe the failure of National Centre for 
Disease Control -Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (NCDC -IDSP) in generating the 
required response in the wake of the pandemic. The Committee feels that NCDP -IDSP should 
have been utilized in  a more effective manner especially when the sole objective of IDSP is to 
detect and respond to outbreaks in the early rising phase through trained Rapid Response Teams 
(RRTs). The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends for revitalizing the enshrined ro le and 
responsibility of NCDC for effective control of the disease along with strengthening of the 
Central Surveillance Unit (CSU), State Surveillance Units (SSU) and District Surveillance Units 
(DSU). The Committee also recommends the Ministry to effectiv ely implement the various 
programme components under IDSP. The Committee would like the Ministry to launch 
Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme in the remaining States i.e. beyond existing 9 States. 
The Committee observes that there is an urgent need to assess the financial requirement for 
NCDP-IDSP for its revitalization.  
1.5 The Committee, in this connection, strongly recommends the Ministry to chalk out 
strategy and specific course of action to revamp the institutional and Human Resource 
Management structure and further strengthen NCDP -IDSP and pursue with the Ministry of 
Finance for higher budgetary allocation to NCDP-IDSP.  
                                      (Para 2.20) 
Action Taken 
 
1.6 In 2015 Joint Monitoring Mission report of Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme 
(IDSP) recommended review and redesign the IDSP surveillance system, including re -
prioritization of the list of diseases under the IDSP. Subsequently, IDSP, NCDC, re -prioritized 
33 priority health conditions for surveillance. 
1.7 Integrated Health Information Platform (IHIP) is designed & developed by WHO and 
MoHFW in order to have real time data reported under IDSP and different National Health 
Programmes. It is a web -enabled, near -real-time electronic health information syst em that is 
embedded with all applicable  Government of India's e -Governance standards, Information 
Technology (IT), data &meta data standards to provide state -of-the-art single operating picture 
with geospatial information. 
1.8 IHIP implemented currently in 9 States and has now been expanded to all States in April, 
2021. The IHIP is being aligned with the vision document 2035 and roadmap for public health 
surveillance of NITI Aayog. 
1.9 Under the Atmanirbhar Swasth Bharat, the following interventions at an e stimated outlay 
of Rs. 3060 Crores have been made to strengthen NCDC and public health surveillance & 
response: 
 Strengthening of the National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC), its 5 regional 
branches and 20 metropolitan health surveillance units 
 Setting up integrated public health labs in all districts and 3382 block public health units 
in 11 States 
 Expansion of the Integrated Health Information Portal to all States/UTs to connect all 
public health labs.  

4 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.10 The Committee believes that contact tracing, testing and isolating are the crucial 
components for Covid -19 containment strategy. The Committee is of the view that poor contact 
tracing and slow testing in the initial phase of pandemic led to the increased number of 
infections in the country. 
                                      (Para 2.26) 
Action Taken 
 
1.11 Noted. During VC‟s, through formal communications and deployment of multi -
disciplinary Central teams, States have been repeatedly advised to increase efforts on contact 
tracing with the target to track, trace and test 30 contacts per confirmed case to stop the chain of 
disease transmission in the country. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.12 The Committee observes that the Pradhan Mantri Atma Nirbhar Swasth Bharat Yojana is 
an ambitious program of the government that encompasses vital components to consolidate and 
enrich health infrastructure in the country. The Committee recommends that government should 
not leave any stone unturned in implementing its every component to achieve its cherished goal. 
                                     (Para 2.29) 
Action Taken 
 
1.13 Recommendations of the Committee have been noted. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.14 The Committee observes that the total number of Government hospital beds in the  
country was grossly inadequate keeping in view the rising incidence of Covid-19 cases. Attention 
of the Committee has also been brought to Media Reports which highlighted the abysmally low 
number of beds in Government hospitals in the country especially a t the peak of the pandemic. 
Data from National Health Profile –2019 states that there are total 7,13,986 Government 
hospital beds available in India which amounts to 0.55 beds per 1,000 population. As per 
Reports, 12 States stand below the national level fi gure. The Committee notes that lack of 
hospital beds and the inadequate ventilators further complicated the efficacy of the containment 
plan against the pandemic. As the numbers of cases were on the rise, a frantic search for vacant 
hospital beds became qu ite harrowing. Instances of patients being turned away from 
overburdened hospitals due to lack of vacant beds became the new normal. The scenario of 
patients holding oxygen cylinder rushing from pillar to post in search of bed in AIIMS Patna is a 
testimony to fact that tear apart humanity. The Committee is aggrieved at the poor state of 
healthcare system and therefore, recommends the Government to increase the investment in 
public health and take appropriate steps to decentralize the healthcare services/fac ilities in the 
country. 
                             (Para 2.34) 
 

5 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.15 The Committee is pained to observe that in RML hospital out of the 1572 beds, only 242 
beds were dedicated COVID beds whereas in Safdarjung Hospital, out of 2 873 beds, only 289 
were reserved for Covid patients. The Committee fails to understand the rationale behind the 
miniscule number of beds reserved for Covid patients in the Central Government Hospitals 
especially at a time when the number of Covid patients was increasing rapidly in the capital city. 
The Committee, therefore, desires the Ministry to submit a note on the rationale for allocating 
such limited number of beds for COVID patients. The Committee would like to be apprised 
regarding the status of beds  exclusively reserved for COVID patients in the capital of the 
country. 
                             (Para 2.35) 
Action Taken 
1.16 Recommendation of the Committee to increase the investment in public health system is 
acknowledged and agreed upon. In this regard, it is submitted that under National Health 
Mission, support is provided to the States/UTs to strengthen their public healthcare system duly 
adopting a health system approach and as NHM targets to build a network for public health 
facilities with He alth & Wellness Centres at the grassroot level and District Hospitals, with 
robust referral linkage, to offer Comprehensive primary and secondary care services to citizens at 
the District level. For e.g., the increase in the number of public health facilit ies from 2005 to 
2020 is as below; 
o With respect to Sub Health Centres, from 1,46,026 to 1,57,411; w.r.t Primary Health 
Centres, from 23,236 to 24,855; w.r.t Community Health Centres, from 3,346 to 5,335; 
w.r.t District hospitals, from 635 to 756; W.r.t Fir st Referral Units, from 940 to 3,122; 
w.r.t 24x7 Delivery Points, from 2,243 to 15,494. Thus, implementation of NHM has not 
only contributed to increase in the institutional capacities for service delivery but also has 
led to development of capacities for targeted interventions of the various National 
Programmes under the NHM. 
o Further, Under Ayushman Bharat, flagship initiative, it is envisaged to establish 1.5 lakhs 
Health and Wellness Centres by transforming Sub Health Centres and Primary Health 
Centres a cross the country to provide comprehensive primary healthcare closer to the 
people with the focus on preventive and promotive healthcare. 
1.17 Also, under COVID19 India Package support, States/UTs were financially supported and 
all the States/UTs are reque sted that a comprehensive plan may be prepared and steps may be 
taken for augmentation in bed capacities wherever necessary through identification of additional 
hospitals, preparation of field hospital facilities, ensuring sufficient oxygen supported beds,  
oxygen supplies, ICU beds and deployment of requisite HR, training & mentoring of doctors and 
nurses for management of patients, strengthen ambulance services & centralized call centre -
based services for allocation of beds to augment their bed capacities. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.18 The Committee agrees with the Department that the pandemic has led to an 
unprecedented increase in the demand of non-invasive Oxygen Cylinders and instances of lack of 

6 
 
Oxygen Cylinders in the hospitals had also been reporte d. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
advocates National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority to take appropriate measures for capping 
the price of the Oxygen Cylinders so that the availability as well as affordability of the Oxygen 
Cylinders is ensured in all  hospitals for medical consumption. The Committee also recommends 
the Government for encouraging adequate production of Oxygen for ensuring its supply as per 
demand in the hospitals.     
                                                                                                                                       (Para 2.38)  
Action Taken 
1.19 With regard to capping the price of Medical Oxygen, MoHFW vide letter no. Z -
3014/45/2020-RCH dated 15th September 2020 and letter no. Z -33O14/ 45/ 2020-RCH/Pt. File-
3 dated 23rd September 2020 has communicated to Department of Pharmaceuticals and National 
Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) to take all necessary steps to regulate the availability 
& pricing of Liquid Medical Oxygen (LMO) & Medical Oxygen cylinders. 
 In order to encourage adequate production of oxygen for ensuring its supply as per demand: 
o Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is closely monitoring the availability and supply 
of Medical Oxygen and necessary infrastructure available with respecti ve State/UT for 
management of COVID-19 effectively.  
o 1,02,400 oxygen cylinders were procured in April and May of 2020 and distributed to 
states to enable easier access of medical oxygen to end users. Further orders for oxygen 
cylinders have been placed for  additional 1,27,000 cylinders including 54,000 jumbo 
cylinders (D type) as well as 73,000 regular cylinders (B type).  
o Union Health Ministry vide order dated 18.04.2021 has restricted industrial use of 
oxygen. As per the said order, as amended by a furthe r order dated 21.04.2021, supply of 
oxygen to all industrial use was prohibited with effect from 22.04.2021 except for certain 
specified industries.  
o Railways is being used for long distance transport of tankers through Roll on – Roll Off 
(RORO) service. A ir transport of empty tankers to cut the Turn Around Time has also 
been initiated to deal with the emergencies.  
o Defence Ministry is coordinating with oxygen suppliers for air-lifting of tankers.  
o All the States have been advised rational use of oxygen and to prohibit the wasteful usage 
by strict monitoring.  
o States are also advised to undertake oxygen consumption audit in hospitals including 
private hospitals and to undertake facility -wise/hospital-wise oxygen inventory mapping 
and advance planning for timely replenishment so that there is no stock out. 
o Union Health Ministry is in the process of commissioning of 162 PSA plants (154 MT 
capacity) across the country.  
o Further, 500 more PSA plants are planned to be installed in the hospitals in district 
headquarters to enhance oxygen generation in smaller cities and towns.  

7 
 
1.20 Indigenous technology for PSA plants developed by DRDO (individual plant capacity of 
1000 litre/min) and CSIR (individual plant capacity of 500 litre/min) is being explored for ramp -
up of PSA plant availability.   
Observation/Recommendation 
1.21 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry for augmenting the testing 
infrastructure in such a short period of time and believes that testing isolating and treating holds 
the key for containing the virus. 
                             (Para 2.40) 
Action Taken 
1.22     Observation of the Hon‟ble Committee have been taken note of. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.23 The Committee, in its 117th Report on the Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill 2018, 
has exhaustively examined the different clauses of the Bill. The Committee had recommended for 
need of de -medicalisation and bringing forth the Allied and Healthcare Profession to the 
forefront of patient care and safety. With the unprecedented testing times of the current 
pandemic where the health sector world over is struggling with heavy disease burden the allied 
health sector needs to be strengthened. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry that 
along with medical professionals, the  quality management of nursing and allied professionals in 
the country must also be ensured. 
                             (Para 2.67) 
Action Taken 
1.24 Based on the recommendations of the Committee's 117 thReport on the Allied and 
Healthcare Professions Bill 2018, a revised Bill namely the National Commission for Allied and 
Healthcare Professions (NCAHP) Bill, 2020 was prepared and introduced and passed by 
Parliament on 24 th March 2021. The Bill is for maintaining standards of education and practice 
through the constitution of National Commission and corresponding State Councils for Allied 
and Healthcare Professions for more than 50 allied and healthcare professions. 
 For improving the quality of Nursing Services in the country the following steps are being 
taken: 
o In tune with the reforms in medical education sector and Allied Healthcare professionals‟ 
sector, Nursing Education Regulation is also being reformed. A National Nursing and 
Midwifery Commission (NNMC) Bill, 2020 has been drafted by an Expert Committe e 
and Public comments on the Bill have been obtained. The draft Bill proposes to create a 
new institutional framework, in the form of a National Nursing and Midwifery 
Commission and four Autonomous Boards for regulating all aspects relating to education, 
training and services of nursing and midwifery personnel. The draft Bill is under 
examination in the Ministry. 

8 
 
o A Central Sector Scheme called „Development of Nursing Services‟ is being 
implemented by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare which focuses o n the in -
service training of nurses in the field of specialization; infrastructure development by way 
of up -gradation of schools of nursing to colleges of nursing, thereby increasing the 
availability of graduate nurses.  
o Nurse Practitioners Course in Criti cal Care at M.Sc. (N) level has been started and State 
governments are being requested to create such posts in govt. and private hospitals. 
o To ensure that in-service nursing personnel continue to update their technical knowledge 
and clinical skills in the ever-evolving health sector, renewal of license of nursing 
personnel, once every five years, has been linked with 150 hours of Continuing Nursing 
Education. 
1.25 Realizing the need of de -medicalization, both the NCAHP Bill and the proposed NNMC 
Bill provide for strengthening of nursing, allied and healthcare professionals and defining scope 
of practice of nursing / allied healthcare personnel and for task shifting. Task shifting refers to 
moving specific tasks to specialized nursing and allied & healt hcare professionals for better 
reorganization of health workforce and improved healthcare. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.26 The Committee notes the Ministry's initiative to ensure appropriate risk communication 
through SMS and caller tunes. However, the Com mittee feels that information dissemination 
regarding covid-19 in rural areas is still inadequate. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to encourage active participation of self -help groups, the Panchayats and the Gram 
Sabhas for better public health messaging. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to take 
more inclusive measures for bringing a behavioral change regarding handwashing and mask 
wearing among the masses. 
                             (Para 2.76) 
Action Taken 
1.27 To brace up for the Covid -19 pandemic, the Ministry of Health & FW took several 
measures so that the campaigns on do‟s and don‟ts and Covid Appropriate Behaviours (CAB) 
were amplified up to the last mile, on a real time basis.   For this purpose, the Minist ry wrote to 
17 Central line Ministries, State Governments,  and also engaged directly with Development 
Partners to activate their field level networks to reach out to Self Help Groups, Panchayats and 
Gram Sabhas. The Ministry‟s own network of ASHAs and ANMs  was also activated to carry 
messages on CAB to the last mile.   This was over and above consistent messaging through 
mobile caller tunes, Community Radio Stations, LokSabha TV, DD News Channel and lastly 
through the Jan Andolan launched by the Hon‟ble PM on October 8, 2020. 
MANAGING MEDICAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.28 The Committee takes note of the different initiatives taken by ICMR for devising 
treatment protocol for Covid-19. However, the Committee observes that in the initial phase there 
was certain ambiguity in the treatment protocol for Covid -19 which is somehow attributed to the 
mutating strain of Corona virus. The Committee understands that devising a full proof treatment 
plan will have to be substantiated by different p hases of clinical trials and have to be governed 

9 
 
by strict protocols. The Committee, therefore, recommends ICMR to widen the scope of its 
clinical research and studies and keep on updating its database which could prove beneficial in 
containing and mitigat ing Covid -19 as well as such future outbreaks. The Committee also 
recommends ICMR to collaborate with other international institutes and pharmaceutical 
companies to test the safety and effectiveness of different drugs and devices. 
                             (Para 3.5) 
Action Taken 
1.29 The COVID-19 Clinical Management Protocol was prepared by MoHFW in consultation 
with AIIMS, New Delhi; National Task Force under ICMR and the Joint Monitoring Group 
under Directorate General of Heal th Services. Last updated algorithm for clinical management 
protocol was issued on 23.04.2021. Similarly, a protocol for Management of Covid - 19 in the 
pediatric Age Group was issued by MoHFW on 29.04.2021. 
 ICMR conducted the world‟s largest clinical tria l on benefit of using plasma therapy in 
COVID-19 infected patients (PLACID Trial). The trial indicated no significant benefit of 
plasma therapy. Thereafter ICMR has issued an advisory in November 2020 regarding use of 
convalescent plasma in COVID-19 infected patients. 
 ICMR has collaborated with Biological Evans to evaluate the efficacy of the hyper -immune 
horse serum for treating COVID -19 infected patients. Similar studies are underway for 
similar product of Serum Institute of India. 
 Collaborations with man ufacturers like ZydusCadila for evaluating monoclonal antibodies 
for treating COVID-19 are also underway. 
 International partnerships were undertaken in the form of WHO Solidarity Trial. Other 
International collaborations are also underway. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.30 The Committee is of the view that only those drugs whose efficacy for treating COVID -19 
patients have been established should be used for hospitalized patients and the drugs should be 
prescribed only after multicentric trials and detailed study. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to issue clear guidelines for safe use of drugs. The Committee notes 
that there have been instances where certain drugs were prescribed for COVID -19, but clinical 
trials gave unfavorable results. The  Committee, in this connection, strongly recommends the 
Ministry to issue strict guidelines against use of such drugs when the evidence conclusively 
shows that it does not work for Covid treatment. The Committee believes that only drugs with 
reliable data and research should be used among Covid patients, especially for patients with co -
morbidities. 
                             (Para 3.14) 
Action Taken 
1.31 The National Task Force co -chaired by Member (Health) NITI Aayog and DG, ICMR 
and the Joint Monitoring Group under DGHS recommends the drugs for clinical management of 
COVID-19 cases that gets documented in National COVID-19 Clinical Management Protocol.  

10 
 
 National COVID -19 Clinical Management Protocol clearly describes the evidence -based 
drugs to be used routinely and a set of investigational drugs to be used only in a defined sub -
group of patients under close medical supervision. 
 This protocol continues to  be revised from time to time based on emerging scientific 
evidence on therapeutics. 
1.32 The protocol has been widely disseminated and made available on the website of 
Ministry. It has also been discussed in technical sessions organized by Centers of Excellence at 
National and State levels, webinars, etc. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.33 The Committee is of the view that smart vaccination may be used as an immediate 
strategy but subsequently the whole population should be vaccinated. The Committee also 
recommends the Ministry to upgrade its cold -chain storage system so that country wide 
vaccination can be carried out without any hurdles. 
                           (Para 3.27) 
Action Taken 
1.34 The recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee is noted. Regarding cold chain 
equipment, the following cold chain storage systems are being procured to augment the existing 
facility: - 
Name of Electrical  Cold Chain Equipments Quantity in Nos 
Ice Lined Refrigerator (ILR) Large 1097 
Ice Lined Refrigerator (ILR) Small 7670 
Deep Freezer (Large) 3089 
Deep Freezer( Small) 6894 
Solar Direct drive 344 
Walk-in-Cooler (16.5   Cum) 6 
Walk-in-Cooler (32   Cum) 35 
Walk-in-Cooler (40   Cum) 12 
Walk-in-Freezer (20   Cum) 18 
 
 The cold chain equipment is regularly procured to address the replacement of ageing 
equipment, change from CFC refrigerant to non CFC refrigerant, creation of new vaccine 
stores with cold chain equipment and capacity augmentation to accommodate new vaccines 
under the Universal Immunization Program. 
 A gap assessment for Cold Chain Equipment has been carried out across the country and on 
the basis of some orders has been placed of procurement of cold chain equipment by M/s 
HLL (for MoHFW) and UNICEF (under KfW assistance), which will be used for UIP as well 
as the COVID-19 vaccination program. 

11 
 
1.35 A landscape analysis has been conducted and the private cold storage and transportation 
service providers have been assessed for potential use in vaccine storage and transportation. All 
this equipment will be enough to carry out the COVID -19 vaccination program for the entire 
country. Department of public enterprises has assured for supply of cold chain equipment under 
CSR. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.36 The Committee is of the view that letting people  get infected with the virus till they 
develop herd immunity would result in a high mortality rate. The Committee agrees that given 
the poor health infrastructure in the country, the effect could be adverse. The Committee notes 
that the trials of the vacci nes are still underway and providing vaccine dose to a population of 
1.3 billion will take time. The Committee, therefore, believes the best strategy available at 
present is to increase the testing capacity and isolate the affected persons to contain the f urther 
spread of the virus and keep infected persons under appropriate medical observation. 
                          (Para 3.33) 
Action Taken 
1.37 Noted. The Government of India is following the same guidance. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.38 The Committee is of the view that the pandemic Covid -19 has highlighted the need for 
creation of a robust network of laboratories in the country. The Committee observes that though 
in the beginning only ICMR -National Institute of Virology (NIV) was tasked with the initial 
testing of suspected cases but in a short span of time, testing capacity was escalated and other 
viral research and diagnostic laboratories were commissioned. Even then identification of only 
13 VRDLs across 11 states in a country with 1.3  billion population is indicative of the fact that 
the testing capacity was highly inadequate. It is quite disheartening to note that many States did 
not have the required infrastructure for testing facilities. This led to overburdening of the labs 
and cau sed inordinate delays in giving the test results. The Committee is, therefore, of the 
considered view that the laboratory infrastructure in the country needs to be strengthened along 
with the technical workforce required to operate these labs. 
                             (Para 3.44) 
Action Taken 
1.39 Continuous augmentation of COVID -19 testing infrastructure is ongoing. As on date 
(12/5/2020), India has 2535 molecular testing labs. Testing facilities for Rapid Antigen Test are 
available in all 741 districts of the country. A new centrally sponsored sch eme, PM Atma  
Nirbhar Swasth Bharat Yojana , will be launched with an outlay of about Rs. 64,180 crores 
over 6 years. This will develop capacities of primary, secondary, and tertiary care Health 
Systems, strengthen existing national institutions, and create new institutions, to cater to 
detection and cure of new and emerging diseases. This will be in addition to the National Health 
Mission. The initiative includes support for: 

12 
 
(i) strengthening of the National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC), its 5 regional 
branches and 20 metropolitan health surveillance units; and  
(ii) setting up of 9 Bio -Safety Level III laboratories and 4 regional National Institutes for 
Virology. 
(iii) setting up integrated public health labs in all districts and 3382 block public health units 
in 11 states, 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.40 The Committee is of the view that a differentiated approach with aggressive testing in 
containment zones and cities with high level of infection could have arrested the spread of 
infection. However, with unlocking, the infection has now spread to different parts of the 
country. The Committee also believes that Tracing, Tracking, Testing, Treating and Technology 
(5Ts) are the answer to tackling Covid-19 and the Ministry has been working on all the fronts. 
However, the Committee still feels that the coordination between the Centre and the States needs 
further strengthening for better result. The required infrastructure to imbibe the 5Ts c annot be 
established overnight rather it demands adequate financial aid and specialized human resources. 
                             (Para 3.46) 
Action Taken 
1.41 Coordination between Central and State Governments is ensured through regular VC 
meetings at the level of Hon‟ble PM, Hon‟ble HFM, Cabinet Secretary and senior officials from 
MoHFW. A Committee of Secretaries under Cabinet Secretary is reviewing the situation 
regularly. He has also held regular video conferences with States/UTs. Hon‟ble Union Hea lth 
Minister and Senior officers in the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare are constantly 
reviewing the evolving scenario and have held 106 video conferences so far with State Health 
functionaries. 
1.42 On matters related to lockdown, community wide quara ntine, MHA is also coordinating 
with their respective State Disaster Management Authorities. States are being provided with 
requisite guidance under DM Act by MHA.  
1.43 Department of Personnel and Training has identified Central Nodal Officers (at the lev el 
of AS/JS) for all States/UTs to constantly interact with States and act as a bridge between Center 
and State. 
1.44 Technical guidance is facilitated by MoHFW. MoHFW has also established a Facilitation 
Center (011 -23060777) wherein States are provided information on hospital infrastructure 
augmentation, therapeutics, diagnostics, vaccines, guidance documents etc. In addition, Central 
multi-disciplinary teams are being deployed. So far a total of 155 teams have been deployed to 
various States/UTs. 
1.45 The Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme has field outreach through its District 
and State units. Central IDSP coordinates with the State and District units on regular basis at the 
operational level.  ICMR has been closely working with the centre and s tates to devise the most 
effective and feasible methods for testing in containment and non -containment zones. 
Laboratories have been established in difficult terrains and far -flung areas like Ladakh, Sikkim, 

13 
 
Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland as well as other Nor th Eastern states, Lakshadweep and Andaman 
&Nicobar island. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.46 The Committee was given to understand that various diagnostic kits being used in 
carrying out Covid -19 Testing, include kits imported from other countries. The Comm ittee is of 
the view that with an enabling policy framework, the Indian medical device industry could grow 
by leaps and bounds. The Committee strongly advocates providing support to the indigenous 
medical device manufacturing industry to make India self -sufficient and promote local 
production under PM‟s flagship programme of AtmaNirbhar Bharat - that focuses on self -
reliance and local production. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to formulate 
specific schemes for providing financial incentive s as well as infrastructure assistance to the 
industry that would work like „Sanjeevanibooti‟ to already slackening economy growth. The 
Ministry should devise segment specific approach for consumables, implants, diagnostic imaging 
and kits and other medical devices to boost up healthcare industry. 
                             (Para 3.48) 
Action Taken 
1.47 In line with the “Atma Nirbhar Bharat” initiative of the Hon‟ble PM, ICMR has validated 
a total of 1156 diagnostic commodities for COVID-19 of which 568 have been approved: 72% of 
the approved products (407) are indigenous. ICMR continues to hand -hold and support 
indigenous manufacturers.  
1.48 Additionally, ICMR has also supported full development of completely indigenous 
COVID-19 vaccine candidate – COVAXIN which has been developed in partnership between 
ICMR and Bharat Biotech International ltd. 
1.49 Government of India has also initiated the scheme on Promotion of Medical Device Parks 
for financing Common Infrastructure Facilities in 04 Medical Device Parks with financial 
implications of Rs. 400 crore. In addition, a   Production   Linked   Incentive (PLI) Scheme for 
promoting   domestic manufacturing of medical devices with financial implications of Rs. 3,420 
crore has been approved. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.50 The Committee observes with concern that as compared to other Departments involved in 
scientific research, the budgetary allocation of Department of Health Research has been one of 
the lowest in 2019 -20, i.e., Rs. 1900 crores. For the year 2020 -21, the bud get marginally 
increased to Rs. 2100 crores. The Committee, in its 119th Report on the Demands for Grants for 
the year 2020-21 of the Department of Health Research, had expressed its deep concern over the 
lower budgetary allocation during 2020 -21 vis -à-vis projected demands under various 
components of DHR schemes/ICMR. The Committee had highlighted that the shortfall in 
allocations under the schemes would severely impact the establishment of new Viral Research & 
Diagnostic Laboratories; Multi-disciplinary Research Units in Medical Colleges (MRUs), Model 
Rural Health Research Units (MRHRUs) in States and funding of projects under the schemes of 
Human Resource &Capacity Development. The Committee reiterates its recommendations as 

14 
 
made in the 119th Report that the budgetary allocation to Department of Health Research should 
be increased. 
                             (Para 3.56) 
Action Taken 
1.51 The BE allocation  of Rs. 2100 crores of the Department of Health Research has been 
increased to Rs. 4062.30 crores at RE stage. Out of it an amount of Rs. 2100 crores has been 
received from World Bank assisted Covid -19 Emergency Response package. The allocation for 
the year 2021-22 is Rs. 2663.00 crores. Out of this, Rs. 1830 is from Gross Budgetary Support &  
Rs. 528 crores from Externally Aided Project (EAP). 
COVID Management under Ayushman Bharat-PMJAY Scheme 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.52 The Committee is equally appreh ensive about the ground realities. Covid testing and 
treatment may not be available in all public hospitals. Given the fragile network of our public 
hospitals that struggled to deal with the increasing cases of Corona, instances of private 
hospitals chargi ng exorbitant medical fees for Covid treatment are being reported. In such a 
scenario, where only the affluent could afford treatment, the Committee feels that free Covid 
treatment under PMJAY could provide a sigh of relief to the entitled beneficiaries an d the 
economically weaker sections of the society. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry 
to constantly make efforts to minimise the out of pocket expenditure of patients due to Covid and 
update the details of the beneficiaries on the scheme's IT System. 
                           (Para   4.13) 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.53 The Committee also appreciates the helpline services offered by NHA, however, outreach 
of these services in the rural areas needs to be ensured. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
the Ministry to create adequate awareness of these services in the rural areas as well. 
                             (Para 4.16) 
Action Taken 
1.54 A comprehensive media and outreach strategy to spread awareness and empowering the 
beneficiaries about their entitlements under the scheme is being implemented. Due to COVID 
on-ground activities have been affected, however, other media vehicles such as print media, 
radio campaign, telecast of beneficiary testimonials via Doordarshan, mass messaging th rough 
SMS etc. are being implemented. Outreach programme like school contact program, activation 
programs at village level, van campaigns etc. are planned to be undertaken suitably in 
consultation with respective State Health Agencies. NHA is also in the p rocess of streamlining 
PMJAY helpline with State helplines to ensure that patient does not face difficulty at the time of 
emergency. 
 

15 
 
Action Taken 
1.55 For COVID testing and treatment for PMJAY beneficiaries, 64 packages were notified 
under AB-PMJAY across 32 States/UTs. National Health Authority has directed all State Health 
Agencies to ensure that PMJAY beneficiaries are provided COVID testing and treatment free of 
cost. So far, over 13.2 Lakh admissions (testing & treatment) worth Rs.1100 Crore have been  
authorized under the scheme. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.56 The Committee would like the Ministry to ensure that the benefits of the Pradhan Mantri 
Garib Kalyan Yojana actually reach to, healthcare providers, including community health 
workers, fighting COVID-19. The Ministry should also assess the implementation o f the Scheme 
at the ground level.  
                             (Para 4.17) 
Action Taken 
1.57 The implementation of Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Package:  Insurance Scheme for 
Health Workers Fighting COVID -19 is being regularly monitored in coordination with  the State 
Governments and Insurance Company. So far, 208 claims have been processed under the 
scheme. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.58 The Committee understands the crucial situation arising due to pandemic Covid -19 and 
the resultant challenges being faced  with respect to the health infrastructure as well as services. 
Since all the resources stand diverted towards tackling the pandemic, people have been facing 
problems in availing treatment for Covid as well as non -Covid illness. The Committee believes 
that people may not be aware about the grievance redressal system and ways and means of 
registering their complaints. The Committee, however, feels that monitoring of empanelled 
hospitals must be done to ensure that treatment is not denied to anyone because it  will have a 
direct impact on the out of pocket expenditure of the poor patients. The Committee believes that 
it is the moral duty of the Government to take care of its poor citizens especially in critical times 
like these. The Committee recommends to the Ministry as well as NHA that all empanelled 
hospitals must be monitored, fresh directions issued and those found guilty be penalised for 
denying treatment to anyone. 
                             (Para 4.26) 
Action Taken 
1.59 Under the grievance redressal mechanism of scheme, grievances can be lodged on the 
portal, through national call centre 14555 or through mail, letter, fax etc. which are 
acknowledged, recorded, escalated & resolved as per well -defined process. For any comp laint 
regarding denial of treatment by an empanelled hospital, Turn Around Time of 6 hours has been 
defined to resolve the complaint. Such complaints are immediately assigned to respective State 
Grievance Nodal Officer designated at each State Health Agency for necessary action. . Also, the 

16 
 
transaction data generated in empanelled hospitals is monitored on a real -time basis through 
advanced analytics and interactive dynamic dashboards. Based on the monitoring, utilization 
data is analysed for over utilizati on based on different triggers and the results are shared with 
State agencies in real time. Regular joint medical audits are conducted by National Anti -Fraud 
Unit along with State Anti-Fraud Units to identify any wrongdoing. A total of 196 hospitals have 
been de -empanelled as a result of audits undertaken by NAFU and SAFU and total penalties 
worth approximately Rs. 16.55 Crores were levied on the errant entities. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.60 The Committee is quite apprehensive that lack of awareness especially in the rural areas 
may be major reason for ignorance about healthcare benefits under the AB -PMJAY Scheme. As 
a result of such ignorance many entitled beneficiaries still remain outside t he ambit of the 
Scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommends, especially in the remotest and rural areas, to 
utilise the existing community healthcare workforce, community leaders, gram panchayat etc in 
disseminating information about the Scheme. Periodic awareness campaign about the rights of 
the beneficiaries should be conducted.  
1.61 The Ministry needs to make special efforts and sensitize the entitled beneficiaries so that 
instances of patients paying additional amount in case of any additional medical  procedure are 
avoided. 
                             (Para 4.28) 
Action Taken 
1.62 A detailed communication strategy has been developed and implemented at the national 
and regional levels to use various modes of communication such as leaflets, booklets, ho ardings, 
TV, radio spots, interpersonal communication, etc., for creating awareness about the scheme and 
its entitlements in the beneficiaries. Some States like Bihar and Madhya Pradesh are leveraging 
Panchayati Raj Institutions to fast track the generation of e-cards.  
1.63 NHA has also on  boarded leading technology solutions firm UTIITSL to help fast track 
e-card generation and beneficiary identification process.  
1.64 States/UT have been advised to rope in frontline workers like ASHA, Anganwadi 
workers, etc. and PHCs to reach out to the target beneficiaries. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.65 The optimum utilization of the allocated funds has always been advocated by the 
Committee. The Committee, in this connection, recapitulates its recommendation/observati on 
made in its 118th Report on the Demands for Grants (Demand No.42) for the year 2020 -21 of 
the Department of Health and Family Welfare about the gross underutilization of funds under 
the Scheme. It was pointed out that funds to the tune of Rs. 6400 crore  were allotted in BE 2019-
20 under AB -PMJAY which was reduced to Rs. 3200 crore at the RE stage, due to 
underutilization of the budgetary allocation. The Committee reiterates its recommendation as 
made in the 118th Report desiring the Department to periodi cally track the progress of the 
Scheme in the States and ensure that the funds earmarked for the Scheme are optimally utilised. 

17 
 
The Ministry must ensure that no course of action should remain incomplete while combating 
Covid-19 for want of fund. 
                             (Para 4.34) 
Action Taken 
1.66 Under the scheme, a rigorous oversight procedure is being followed in the release and 
utilization of funds. This has ensured appropriate utilization of resources and prevented 
unjustified parking of funds at  the State level. The demand under the scheme was expected to 
pick up during 2020 -21 as scheme would be entering into the third year of implementation. 
However, the advent of COVID -19 pandemic affected the demand for services under AB - 
PMJAY. The uptake of the scheme was reduced significantly due to pandemic. Efforts are being 
made by NHA in coordination with State Health Agencies towards reviving the demand to pre -
COVID levels. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.67 The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should make constant efforts to ensure 
delivery of quality treatment to the entitled beneficiaries under the AB -PMJAY Scheme. For this 
to happen, the Ministry needs to strengthen its monitoring mechanism and coordinate with the 
State Health Agencies (SHA) for effective implementation of the Scheme. Needless to mention, 
periodical review meetings and regular assessment of the quality of treatment under the Scheme 
should become the integral parts of such robust mechanism. NHA should also review the 
outcome audit of different procedure and packages and conduct periodic medical audits. 
                             (Para 4.42) 
Action Taken 
1.68 A strong real -time online MIS is functional at the national level to review Key 
Performance Indicators (KPIs) and achievement of results with respect to the targets defined 
under the domains. The various dashboards developed using business intelligence tools help in 
identifying the gaps and provide an overview of the performance made. To ensure that quality 
services are delivered via EHCPs, a Monthly Quality Audit Checklist has been developed for 
Empanelled Health Care Providers for periodic assessment and monitoring of the quality of 
services provided. NHA has partnered with Quality Council of India (QCI) to develop a  portal 
for online quality certification of empanelled hospitals NHA has issued necessary guidelines for 
the medical audit of 5% of total hospitalizations under AB-PMJAY. 
1.69 Further, beneficiary audit (at either home or hospital) is to be undertaken for 3% of all 
hospital admissions. Additionally, Claims Adjudication Audit has to be undertaken for 5% of all 
approved claims. Further, Regular joint medical audits are conducted by National Anti -Fraud 
Unit along with State Anti-Fraud Units to identify any wrongdoing. A total of 196 hospitals have 
been de -empanelled as a result of audits undertaken by NAFU and SAFU and total penalties 
worth approximately Rs. 16.55 Crores were levied on the errant entities. 
 

18 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.70 The Committee is glad to know that AYUSH packages are being included under AB -
PMJAY. Given the importance of Indian System of Medicines in present times especially during 
pandemic Covid -19, when AYUSH products are being widely used in the country for 
prophylactic use, its inclusion is well timed and warranted for. The Committee hopes that these 
packages are finalized soon and included under the scheme.                                                                                                                                      
                                         (Para 4.45) 
Action Taken 
1.71 Subsequent to consultations with stakeholders and subject matter experts, a set of 
packages shared by the Ministry for AYUSH were mapped with AB PMJAY package s, and the 
entire proposal including feedback from the States/UTs was put up before the Governing Board 
of NHA. The Governing Board decided that Ministry of AYUSH should take the required 
approvals for the proposal. The Governing Board provided NHA in -principle approval for 
providing implementation support to Ministry of AYUSH. Once the proposal is approved, 
Ministry of AYUSH will request NHA to provide the required implementation support. 
Covid Management through AYUSH System 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.72 The Committee opines that the pandemic COVID -19 has highlighted the need for 
mainstreaming Indian system of medicine and employing the alternative and traditional 
medicinal systems. The Committee would like the Government to weigh the relative contributi on 
of both system i.e. system of modern medicine & science and the AYUSH, as complementary to 
each other in the management of diseases. The New Education Policy, 2020 also calls for 
integration of Allopathy with AYUSH Systems of Medicine. The NEP, 2020 exh orts much greater 
emphasis on preventive healthcare and community medicine in all forms of healthcare 
education. The Committee believes that the integration of Indian system with Allopathy would 
not only give medical students better understanding of preven tive healthcare and community 
medicine, as envisioned under NEP, 2020, but at the same time would help the AYUSH 
practitioners to equip themselves to dispense basic medical care at the primary healthcare level. 
The integration of AYUSH with Allopathy is a positive move that would help India move towards 
meeting the goal of universal healthcare by improving access and delivery in remote areas.  
1.73 The Committee, therefore, recommends the Government to make all out efforts for the 
integration of Allopathy with Indian traditional system of medicine. 
                             (Para 5.13) 
Action Taken 
1.74 Mainstreaming of AYUSH is one of the   strategies in National Health Mission (NHM) as 
well which seek to provide   accessible, affordable and quality health care in order to improve the   
existing health care delivery system. Government of India has adopted a   strategy of Co -location 
of AYUSH facilities at Primary Health Cent res (PHCs),   Community Health C entres (CHCs) 

19 
 
and District Hospitals (DHs), th us enabling   choice to the patients for different systems of 
medicines under single   window. 
1.75 The engagement of AYUSH Doctors/ paramedics and their training is supported by the 
Department of Health &   Family Welfare, while support of AYUSH infrastru cture, equipment/ 
furniture   and medicines are provided by Ministry of AYUSH through its Centrally   Sponsored 
Scheme of National AYUSH Mission. 
1.76 In addition to co -location of AYUSH facilities at PHCs, CHC and DHs, Ministry of 
AYUSH is operationalizin g 12,500 AYUSH Health & Wellness Centres through States/UTs 
which will function in a co -ordination with Allopathic Health Services, while focusing the 
AYUSH strength. 
1.77 Central Council for Research in Ayurveda has executed COVID 19 research studies in 
collaboration with the allopathy institutions such as Medanta Hospital, Gurugram and 
Government Medical College, Nagpur, KGMU Lucknow, DMIMS, Nagpur and ICMR- National 
Institute of Nutrition (NIN), Hyderabad. The details are at Annexure I. 
1.78 Central Council for Research in Siddha  has carried out collaborative COVID clinical 
research studies with allopathy institutes like Government Stanley Medical College, Tamilnadu; 
Govt. Theni Medical College, Tamilnadu; Sri R amachandra Institute of Higher Education 
Research, Chennai and Govt. Institute of Medical Sciences, Greater Noida. The details are as 
follows: 
S. 
No. 
Collaborating Allopathy 
Institute 
Project Title 
1. Government Stanley Medical 
College, Chennai, 
Tamil Nadu 
A prospective, single centre, randomized open 
labelled comparative clinical study to evaluate the 
effectiveness of Siddha medicine,   
KabasuraKudineer and vitamin c -zinc 
supplementation in the management of asymptomatic 
COVID 19 patients. 
2. Govt. The ni Medical C ollege, 
Tamil Nadu 
A randomized open labeled clinical study to compare 
the effectiveness of KabasuraKudineer and Vitamin-
C Zinc supplementation in the management of 
asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 patients 
3. Govt. Medical College, ESI 
Hospital, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu 
Retrospective Survival analysis to assess the length 
of stay of novel coronavirus (COVID -19) patients in 
GMC & ESIH Coimbatore who were under - 
Integrated Medicine -Zinc, Vitamin C 
&KabasuraKudineer (ZVcKK) 
 
4. Govt. Institute of Med ical 
Sciences, Greater Noida and 
Siddha Clinical Research Unit, 
New Delhi 
A Double blinded RCT Namely "A Double Blinded 
controlled RCT to evaluate the efficacy 
NilavembuKudineer and KabasuraKudineer in 
Symptomatic COVID 19 Patients" was planned as a 
collaborative study 

20 
 
5. Sri Ramachandra Institute of 
Higher Education and Research, 
Chennai, 
Tamil Nadu 
Clinical validation of the “Immune booster” potential 
of the Siddha medicine drug, KabasuraKudineer 
(KSK) in asymptomatic contacts of COVID -19 
cases: a controlled clinical trial 
 
1.79 Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy  has undertaken 05 studies using 
Homoeopathy as adjuvant intervention to standard of care at reputed allopathic hospitals in 
management of COVID -19.  The studies have been conducted on mild, moderate, and severe 
COVID-19 cases. The results showed that there was early recovery in Homoeopathy as 
compared to those who are on standard of care alone. The death rate also decreased in 
homoeopathy group. The results of studies are encouraging. 
1.80 Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine  (CCRUM) has initiated a study to 
assess the safety and efficacy of add -on Unani regimen in preventing the progression of the 
severity of the diseas e in mild to moderate symptomatic COVID -19 RT-PCR Positive cases in 
collaboration with Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi. 
1.81 Central Council for Research in Yoga & Naturopathy (CCRYN) has taken following 
steps to integrate the modern and traditional Yoga & Naturopathy systems in the country: 
1.82 Establishment of Post Graduate Institutes of Yoga and Naturopathy Education and 
Research (PGIYNER) with 200 -bedded Yoga and  Naturopathy hospital at Jhajjar, Haryana and 
Nagamangla, Karnataka. 
1.83 Establishment of Central Research Institutes of Yoga & Naturopathy  in Odisha, West 
Bengal, Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh along with 100 -bedded 
indoor hospital facilities to carry out in -depth research studies to establish the efficacy of Yog a 
and Naturopathy in various remedies. 
1.84 Collaborative Research Centre to verify the efficacy of Yoga & Naturopathy in various 
diseases. 
1.85 Establishment of Yoga and Naturopathy OPDs/ Wellness Centres: -CCRYN has already 
opened Yoga and Naturopathy OPDs/ Wellness Centres in Govt. allopathy Hospitals/Institutes of 
Delhi, Haryana, Odisha, Tripura, Kerala, U.P., Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh and Jharkhand. 
1.86 Training, Propagation and Promotional Activities: CCRYN participates in Health Melas/ 
exhibition organized by Ministry of AYUSH and other organizations for promotion of the 
system. 
1.87 CCRYN has initiated to start Central for Mind Body Medicine in AIIMS, Rishikesh. 
1.88 All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA)  is a tertiary care Ayurveda hos pital at New 
Delhi with integrated health care facility. The primary approach is Ayurveda and wherever 
required Allopathic medications too are given by qualified Allopathic Medical Officers. In 
addition to integration with Allopathic system of medicine; th ere is state of art diagnostic 
facilities of modern time such as  Pathology, Microbiology, Biochemistry laboratories, state of 
art Radiology diagnostic facility, Ophthalmology examination facility, modern dental OPD, state 

21 
 
of art Operation theatres with CSSD facility, BMW management system etc. to cater the needs of 
efficient patient care. 
1.89 National Institute of Naturopathy, Pune  in association with Naidu Hospital, Pune has 
started Post -COVID care OPD for patients who suffered from Covid 19. AYUSH COVID -19 
protocol of Naturopathy and Yoga has been followed for teaching and training the patients. 
Doctors have been posted to deliver sessions on care through Naturopathy and Yoga for post 
COVID -19.  OPD functions on every Tuesday and Friday of the week. 
1.90 ITRA, Jamnagar  has taken the clinical study entitled “Efficacy of Ayurveda 
Intervention (AYUSH 64) as add -on therapy in COVID 19 patients - An open label randomized 
controlled trial” in collaboration with GG Hospital, Jamnagar by having investigators fro m both 
ITRA and allopathic system. This collaboration may be helpful for bringing mainstreaming of 
AYUSH in health care in such pandemic condition. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.91 The Committee appreciates the contribution of AYUSH doctors in combating COVID 
since the outbreak of the pandemic. The Committee believes that with the virus now spreading 
beyond metros and big cities and to rural and remote areas where an allopathic doctor is not 
always available or COVID centers/ hospitals with shortage of do ctors, AYUSH doctors can be 
the first line of defense in those areas. The Committee is aware that AYUSH doctors have been 
filling up the gaps where there is the scarcity of health human resources. The Committee feels 
that the basic training of the AYUSH do ctors in the modern scientific systems would go a long 
way in the management of COVID -19 especially in rural areas and would reduce burden of the 
allopathic doctors in the management of COVID-19 virus. 
                            (Para 5.15) 
1.92 The Committee notes that out of 2 lakh trained   AYUSH doctors, only 39,555 have been 
deployed by States/UTs. The SOPs for the   deployment of trained AYUSH manpower has been 
prepared and same is under   consideration. The Committee recommends the Ministry to 
expedite deployment   of remaining trained Ayush doctors in the light of increasing number of 
COVID   patients with each passing day.  The Committee also recommends the Government   to 
train more and more AYUSH doctors to overcome the shortage of doctors and   t o achieve the 
goal of universal health coverage. 
                            (Para 5.16) 
Action Taken 
1.93 Public health is a state subject. Various states have trained and deployed AYUSH 
manpower for COVID   duties. Ministry of AYUSH &  MoHFW jointly   have provided training 
to 33,000 AYUSH Master Trainers. Further, all   States/UTs have been advised to train more 
numbers of AYUSH manpower. Total 66045   AYUSH Personnel has also obtained training at 
igot.gov.in platform on   continual basis. Ministry of AYUSH has also advised   States/UTs to 
train AYUSH doctors and do deploy them for combating the menace   of COVID-19. 

22 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.94 The Committee expresses its concern over the reported adverse reactions of number of 
ASU&H drugs introduced in market since January, 2019. The reference to 139 misleading cases 
by Pharmacovigilance centres related to COVID-19 pandemic in last four months is testimony to 
this fact. It appears that the regulatory framework for the quality control of Ayush drugs is not 
stringent to prevent threat of misleading claims/ medications. The Committee believes that these 
cases have put a question mark on the quality of traditional medicines available during outbreak 
of pandemic COVID -19. The Committee cautions the Minist ry of AYUSH that the current 
pandemic should not let the unscrupulous sellers/manufacturers of AYUSH drugs/products to 
increase their profits by misleading the consumer in the name of health immune boosters. The 
Committee strongly recommends the Ministry o f AYUSH to strictly monitor the cases of 
misleading advertisements and protect the consumers of AYUSH products. 
                            (Para 5.22) 
Action Taken 
1.95 An order, dated 1.4.2020 to stop and prevent publicity and advertisement of AYUSH-
related claims for COVID-19 treatment in print, TV and electronic media was issued to all State 
Principal Secretaries/Secretaries Health and AYUSH, State Licensing Authorities AYUSH 
(SLA), Pharmacovigilance  centres, Ministry of Information and Broadc asting, Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology, Press Council of India and Advertising Standards 
Council of India. From all these sectors, misleading advertisements related to COVID -19 
treatment with AYUSH medicines are reported to the Ministry  and which are addressed to 
concerned State Licensing Authorities to take legal action. On this account compliance is also 
reported from the manufacturers. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.96 The Committee appreciates the absorption capacity of all the Research Institutes. 
Research, being an important component for achieving scientific validation of traditional system 
and making it widely accepted, the Committee believes that all research Insti tutes must yield the 
research outcome to achieve the objective of investment on R&D. Effective AYUSH 
products/drugs in the treatment of diseases would revitalize the AYUSH segment on Indian 
system of traditional medicine. The Government must continue its e fforts for mainstreaming 
traditional system of medicine and integrating it with modern system of medicine. Adequate 
allocation of funds for projects would enable research Institutes to undertake research activities 
that help mainstreaming the AYUSH system.  The Committee is of the view that mainstreaming 
traditional system of medicine is a long drawn process that requires continuous efforts from all 
the stakeholders alongwith continued budgetary support. The Committee also believes that there 
is ample scope for research and development within Indian system of medicine and given the 
present scenario of COVID 19, all out efforts need to be made to enhance research and 
development through requisite fund allocation. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry of AYUSH to persuade Ministry of Finance for the higher allocation of budget in 
coming years so that research activities continue in the aftermath of Pandemic COVID-19. 
                            (Para 5.29) 

23 
 
Action Taken 
1.97 The Parliamentary Standing  Committee also raised similar observation earlier. This 
Ministry was projecting requirement every year keeping in view the enhanced scope of AYUSH 
activities. There is an upward trend of allocation to this Ministry since 2018 -19 and the details 
are given below: 
                       (Rs. in crore) 
Year Allocation in BE 
2018-19 1626.37 
2019-20 1939.76 
2020-21 2122.08 
2021-22 2970.30 
 
1.98 The details of allocation of funds under various Research Councils for the year 2018-19 
to 2021-22 are given below: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Name BE 
2018-19 
BE 
2019-20 
BE 
2020-21 
BE 
2021-22 
CCRAS 252.91 292.31 297.00 328.27 
CCRUM 130.00 152.65 157.00 167.79 
CCRH 109.50 118.53 138.50 167.58 
CCRYN 29.00 41.35 40.50 59.70 
CCRS 28.50 36.50 35.00 36.77 
Total 549.91 641.34 668.00 760.11 
 
1.99 It may be seen from the above that the overall allocation under Research Councils are 
increasing every year. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.100 The Committee expresses its displeasure over the fact that the clinical research studies 
that was intended to be taken up by the Ministry of AYUSH in collaboration with CSIR are yet to 
see the light of the day. The Committee opines that on one hand the Gov ernment is determined to 
mainstream AYUSH system and explore scientific validation of AYUSH advocacies and 
measures for the prevention of Covid -19, on the other hand, theses clinical research studies are 
yet to be taken up. The Committee is of the consider ed view that research being an important 
component, the research studies should been taken up with utmost priority without 
procrastination. AYUSH has a major role to play in present pandemic as its main objective is to 
boost the immune system and maintain health so as to prevent the spread of the disease. The 
Committee believes that the outcome of these studies would help understand AYUSH 
interventions during pandemics like COVID -19 through scientific evidence & validation. Delay 
in research actives would n ot only stall the promotion of tradition medicine but also thwart the 

24 
 
efforts for integration and mainstreaming of the Indian systems of medicine and Homeopathy 
into the existing public healthcare system.  
1.101 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend s the Ministry to start clinical research 
studies without further delay so that its outcome could be used to combat the present crisis. 
                             (Para 5.32) 
Action Taken 
1.102 Ministry of AYUSH commenced scientific studies at various Research Councils and 
National Institution as per the recommendations of Interdisciplinary AYUSH Research and 
Development (R & D) Task Force. Accordingly, 112 studies are being conducted at various 
centres. Further, Ministry of AYUSH has constituted core g roup of experts under the 
Chairmanship of Prof. Bhushan  Patwardhan, Vice -Chairman, UGC, to identify and propose 
formulations on COVID -19 which are in line with Classical Ayurveda principles and have 
substantial leads on COVID -19 viz, one for prophylaxis as  immunomodulatory, another for 
management of COVID-19 with antiviral properties and one product for post COVID-19 care. 
1.103 CCRAS has undertaken one multi centre exploratory study on Ayurveda formulation 
AYUSH 64 in collaboration with CSIR at KGMU Luckno w, DMIMS Nagpur and CARIC 
Mumbai on 140 study participants. The Study has been completed and data analysis is under 
process. The other three clinical studies under AYUSH -CSIR have been initiated and are in 
progress. 
1.104 Central Council for Research in Ho moeopathy (CCRH)  has undertaken 02 
prophylactic studies; one study conducted at Delhi with 10180 population and another study 
enrolled total 32,198 individuals  residing in containment zones conducted at 07 Institute/Unit 
located all over India. Results sho wed that Arsenic album 30C was able to protec t 79% to 81% 
of population from COVID/COVID like illness compared to control group. 
1.105 Mass homoeopathy prophylaxis has been provided to 48 lakh population through 
organised activity in collaboration with Hom oeopathy Medical colleges & research Institutes. 
Data of 6.7 lakh population has been collected on predesigned format and is under analysis. 
Analysis shows that 99.23% did not develop any COVID like illness. 
1.106 Treatment Studies by CCRH: CCRH has undert aken 05 studies using Homoeopathy as 
adjuvant intervention to standard of care at reputed allopathic hospitals in management of 
COVID-19. The studies were conducted on mild, moderate, and severe COVID -19 cases. The 
results showed that there was early recov ery in Homoeopathy as compared to those who are on 
standard of care alone. The death rate also decreased in homoeopathy group. The results of 
studies are encouraging. The details are annexed at Annexure II & III .  It is pertinent to 
mention that CCRH has also conducted prophylactic research studies in dengue, chikungunya, 
Influenza like illness in high -risk population like JJ colonies/ urban slums. Results of studies are 
encouraging. 
1.107 CCRH is also collaborating with AIIMS, Jhajjar for developing medic ine (Nosode) in 
COVID-19. 

25 
 
1.108 The following studies were undertaken by NIA, Jaipur  for preventing and managing 
effect of COVID-19 and have been completed in prescribed time schedule:- 
1.109 An Open label, Multi -centric, Randomized, Comparative, Prospective, Interventional 
Community based Clinical Study to Evaluate Safety and Efficacy of Guduchi Ghana Vati as a 
Preventive Remedy on Healthy Individuals in Pandemic of COVID19. 
1.110 Evaluation of Efficacy and Safety of Ayurveda Intervention (Ayush -64) add-on therapy 
for patients with COVID -19 infection (Stage I) - An Open labelled, Parallel Group, Randomized 
controlled clinical trial 
1.111 Clinical evaluation of Dabur  Chyawanprash (DCP) as a preventive remedy in pandemic 
of COVID -19 – An Open label, M ulti centric, Randomized, Comparative, Prospective, 
Interventional Community based Clinical Study on Healthy individuals. 
1.112 A cross -sectional retrospective study on NIA Immunobooster kit (Chyavanprasha, 
Immunity booster capsules and Kwatha) prophylaxis for the prevention of COVID-19. 
1.113 In the completed research works of All India Institute of Ayurveda;  data analysis and 
preparation of draft final report are in progress. Apart from COVID-19 specific area, the Institute 
has provision to conduct extra mural research projects, and already 03 PHI projects are being 
carried out. In collaboration with AIIMS, 02 clinical research projects are being carried out.  
1.114 To promote research activities, the Institute has a separate division namely The Division 
of Translational Research, regular capacity building programs are conducted at the Institute. 
Industry supported research activities are also promoted at the Institute.  
1.115 Supporting the efforts of Ministry of AYUSH in integration within AYUSH systems, the 
Institute has an integrative AYUSH OPD wherein doctors from other areas of AYUSH, i.e. 
Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy offer their services to OPD patients. 
1.116 Central Council for Research in Siddha  has under taken Clinical Research studies 
through Si ddha formulation for the prophylactic and management of COVID pandemic the 
details are enclosed Annexure IV. 
1.117 North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homeopathy, Shillong has undertaken 5 
(five) clinical trials on COVID-19. 
1.118 National Institute of Siddha, Chennai is determined to mainstream of Siddha system 
and explore the scientific validation of Siddha advocacies and measures prevention of COVID19 
and three randomized clinical studies taken up. Research studies taken up by NIS are given 
utmost priority without procrastination. Siddha has a major role to play in present pandemic as 
its main objective is to boost the immune system and maintain health so as to prevent the spread 
of the disease. The therapeutic regimen of integrated KabasuraKudineer/combinational of Siddha 
formulations and standard Allopathy care reduced the duration of viral negative -transforming 
time and length of hospital stay. In this context, it may be postulated that if the integrated 
treatment was intervened in time at the stage of exterior syndrome, COVID-19 can be effectively 
managed in ranging from mild to critical cases, thereby reducing mortality and length of hospital 

26 
 
stay. Outcome of these studies would help understand Siddha interventions during pandemics 
like COVID19 through scientific evidence and validation. 
1.119 NIN, Pune in association with Ozone Forum of India has been involved in a Pilot study 
for treatment of COVID -19 patients in moderate stage using intravenous administration of 
ozonised saline as an adjuvant trea tment. Study completed – submitted for publication and 
waiting for reviewer‟s response. 
1.120 Another study in Yoga and Naturopathy in the management of COVID -19: a registry 
based observation. Study completed, analysing the results is under process. 
1.121 Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda (ITRA), Jamnagar has planned two 
clinical researches at Ph.D level on Post COVID syndrome to evaluate efficacy of Ayurvedic 
preparations. 
1.122 CCRYN is currently carrying out research activities on Yoga in Co vid-19 with AIIMS 
Rishikesh, AIIMS Delhi, AIIMS Jhajjar, PGI Chandigarh and other hospitals in Delhi. Studies 
are also underway in Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh using standalone Yoga and 
Naturopathy intervention and adjuvant intervention with Al lopathy for mild to moderate Covid -
19 patients.  In Tamilnadu more than 30000 patients have been treated. In Delhi, Yoga 
intervention has been given to more than 200 patients in Covid-19 hospitals. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.123  The Committee observes that 59 research studies are being conducted by the Ministry of 
AYUSH at various AYUSH Research Councils and Institutes. Of these, many studies have been 
completed with promising results in preventing the threat of COVID 19. The tri als indicated that 
alternative medicine therapies prevented severe COVID symptoms among people in quarantine. 
One of the primary criticisms levelled against the AYUSH system is the lack of scientific 
evidence for efficacy of AYUSH medicines. The Committee underscores the need of designing 
research studies to generate some tangible evidence in AYUSH against Covid -19. Promising 
results shown by these studies would progressively march ahead in scientifically validating 
traditional medicine. The Committee obser ves that participation of AYUSH medicines in 
addressing the COVID -19 challenge in India should not be restricted and rather seen as the 
extension of healthcare services and support to bio -medical system. The Committee hopes that 
with adequate monitoring and research directions, the Indian System of Medicines would emerge 
as a prominent platform in the management of increasingly frequent and virulent communicable 
diseases. The Committee, while appreciating the efforts of the Ministry, recommends that more 
and more research studies should be conducted by the Ministry of AYUSH. 
                             (Para 5.34) 
Action Taken 
1.124 CCRAS has undertaken total 23 studies on COVID -19. Out of 23 studies, 13 prospective 
studies have been conducted on Ayurveda i ntervention viz. Guduchighan  Vati, Sudarshan Ghan 
Vati, Ashwagandha tablet, AYUSH 64, and Chyavanprashleyham as prophylactic interventions 
in high risk population in identified containment zones across the country while other studies on 
Ayurveda Interventions such as GuduchighanVati/ Shamshamani  Vati, AYUSH 64, Guduchi + 

27 
 
Pippali, Ashwagandha Tablet and Shunthi Capsule have been undertaken as add -on treatment to 
standard care or as standalone treatment in COVID 19 management. The details are at 
Annexure-V. 
1.125 Siddha drugs like Kabasurakudineer, NilavembuKudineer,  BrahmanadaBairavam, 
Amukurrachooranam, Nochikudineer, Nellikailegyiom, Thipplirasayanam, Adathodaimanapagu, 
ThalisathiVadagam, Athimathurachooranam, Seenthilchooranam  are being used in the 
prevention and treatment of COVID - 19. CCRS has undertaken prophylactic, stand alone, add - 
on studies with the above mentioned Siddha formulations. These formulations being anti -viral, 
anti- pyretic, anti –inflammatory, immune modulators with scientifi c rationale aids in the 
mitigation of COVID -19 pandemic. In addition to this, SiddharYogam and external therapies 
like steam inhalation, fumigation through Siddha care have been advised.  
1.126 CCRUM has undertaken following research studies:- 
1.127 A Population based prospective study on effectiveness and outcome of Unani Medicine 
as prophylactic intervention was carried out. Incidence of suspected / confirmed COVID -19 
cases in Control Group (CG) is 1.14%, 1.18% and 1.07%  respectively in 1st follow -up, 2 nd 
follow-up and 3rd follow-up whereas the suspected / confirmed COVID -19 cases in Intervention 
Group (IG) are observed as 0.35%, 0.45% and 0.30%. At the end of the Incidence of suspected / 
confirmed COVID-19 cases in Intervention Group (IG) was less than Control Group (CG). 
1.128 A Prophylactic Interventions of Unani Medicine on High / Moderate risk Population of 
Covid-19 was conducted. Incidence of suspected / confirmed COVID -19 cases in Control Group 
(CG) are 12.20% and 8.33%, whereas the suspected / confirmed COVID-19 cases in Intervention 
Group (IG) are observed as 5% and 2.63%respectively in 1st follow -up and at the end of the 
study. At the end of the study, the signs and symptoms (Fever, Cough, Sore throat and Runny 
Nose) in the intervention group hav e shown a decreasing trend in comparison to the Control 
group.  
1.129 Add-on study for preventing the progression of severity of the disease in hospitalized 
SARS-CoV2 tested positive asymptomatic / mild to moderate symptomatic COVID -19 cases, 
was conducted on a sample size of 60 Complete Cases at A&U Tibbiya College, Karol Bagh, 
New Delhi. Incidence of recovered COVID -19 confirmed cases in Control Group (CG) is 10%, 
67% and 23% respectively in ≤ 7 days, 7 -14 days, and >14 whereas the in Intervention Group 
(IG) observed as 53%, 44%, and 3%. It observed that recovery rate of SARS -CoV2 tested 
positive asymptomatic / mild to moderate symptomatic COVID -19 cases was higher in 
Intervention Group (IG) compared to Control Group (CG). 
1.130 A study to assess the safety and efficacy of add -on Unani regimen in preventing the 
progression of the severity of the disease in mild to moderate symptomatic COVID -19 RT-PCR 
Positive cases. The study is in progress  
1.131 Quality standards of Unani  Joshanda have been developed at RRIUM, Chennai and 
compilation of monographs is in progress. 
1.132 Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy  has designed studies in consultation 
with experts with high scientific rigor. Out of the 11 studies, 10 studies have be en completed 

28 
 
with tangible outcomes. These projects have been monitored by Ethical Committee / Scientific 
Advisory Board and Task Force of Ministry of AYUSH. The details are at Annexure VI. 
1.133 National Institute of Ayurveda undertakes research with the approval regulatory 
authorities like Institutional Ethics Committee (IEC), Institutional Research Review Board 
(IRRB), etc. to generate scientific evidence on safety, efficacy and usage of Ayurvedic drugs. 
1.134 National Institute of Unani Medicine, Bengaluru has published four papers in Impact 
factor journal on COVID-19 and further experimental research is engaged. 
1.135 All India Institute of Ayurveda, New Delhi is  moving the same direction as suggested; 
all the  research proposals are designed to generate quality and tangible evidences. To 
disseminate the research outcomes, especially in the form of case studies, the Institute is 
publishing a quarterly Case Report Journal – JOURNAL OF AYURVEDA CASE REPORTS 
(AyuCaRe). COVID-19 specific case studies are also published in this Journal. 
1.136 National Institute of Siddha, Chennai has completed three clinical trials on the efficacy 
of Siddha formulations in the management of COVID -19, has completed a randomised study 
undertaken at the Government Chengalpattu Medical College and SRM Medical College and 
Research Institute. These studies have been completed and the results of the studies are found to 
be quite impressive that predominantly severe COVID-19 patients treated with integrated Siddha 
management are found to have a lower mortality when compared with the control group which 
received only standard of care. RT -PCR, oxygen saturation and length of hospital stay are also 
better improvement for the Siddha treatment when compared to conventional treatment of 
COVID-19 patients.  Siddha formulations helped to prevent the infection among the front -line 
workers. These were found efficacious as standalone drugs in the management of mild, moderate 
and asymptomatic COVID -19 patien ts. Combinations of the Siddha formulations are 
progressively marching ahead in scientifically validating Siddha medicine. 
1.137 National Institute of Naturopathy, Pune in association with Ozone Forum of India has 
been involved in a pilot study for treatme nt of COVID -19patients in moderate stage using 
intravenous administration of ozonised saline as an adjuvant treatment. Study completed – 
submitted for publication and waiting for reviewer‟s response.  Another study in Yoga and 
Naturopathy in the management of COVID-19: a registry based observation. Study completed, 
analysing the results is under process. 
1.138 Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda (ITRA), Jamnagar has planned two 
clinical researches at Ph.D level on Post COVID syndrome to evaluate e fficacy of Ayurvedic 
preparations. 
1.139 Central Council for Research in Yoga & Naturopathy  (CCRYN) has undertaken a 
research project to verify the efficacy of Yoga in early recovery of COVID – 19 patients in 
collaboration with Rajiv Gandhi Super Speciality Hospital, Delhi. 
1.140 CCRYN is currently carrying out research activities on Yoga in Covid -19 with AIIMS 
Rishikesh, AIIMS Delhi, AIIMS Jhajjar, Haryana, PGI Chandigarh and other hospitals in Delhi. 
Studies are also underway in Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh using standalone Yoga 
and Naturopathy intervention and adjuvant intervention with Allopathy for mild to moderate 

29 
 
Covid-19 patients. In Tamilnadu more than 30000 patients have been treated. In Delhi, Yoga 
intervention has been given to more than 200 patients in Covid-19 hospitals.  
Management of Post-COVID Complications 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.141 The Committee understands that having defeated the virus is just the beginning of an 
unresearched path of recovery for survivors of severe COVID-19 disease, since COVID 19 is a 
new disease. The post -acute phase of SARS -CoV-2 infection depends on the severity of virus 
attack on different patients. Apart from the fear of unknown, the survivors of COVID 19 venture 
into an unchartered territory o f post COVID complications. Not only do they have to deal with 
fatigue, breathlessness and other physical effects of the disease, but also grapple with the 
psychological impact of it. The Committee is relieved to note that the Government has taken 
cognizance of complexities caused by COVID during post recovery phase and identified 
potential post-acute care needs of recovered COVID -19 patients. The Committee notes that the 
Ministry has adopted integrated holistic approach for managing patients who have recov ered 
from COVID and advised to take care at home. The Committee in this regard recommends the 
Government to put in place healthcare services to ensure a holistic follow -up of post COVID 
treatment of the patients who are showing post COVID complications. It  is also necessary to 
address the possibility of SARS -CoV- 2re-infection, the proportion of adverse reactions after 
hospital discharge and the possible development of other viral and/or bacterial infections. 
                               (Para 6.5) 
Action Taken 
1.142 Expert group consultations are ongoing to review emerging evidence on organ system 
specific (respiratory system, renal system, cardiovascular and gastro -intestinal) sequelae of 
COVID. In this regard a meeting has been held under the Chairmanship of Hon‟ble HFM. 
Further two meetings to deliberate on the issue have been held under the Chairmanship of 
DGHS. 
 All AIIMS like institutions have been requested to undertake research to study long term 
impact of COVID.  
 ICMR has established a Na tional Clinical Registry on COVID that will provide insights into 
clinical course of COVID-19 disease, its spectrum and outcome of patients.  
 Central Government hospitals in Delhi (Dr. RML Hospital, LHMC and Safdarjung Hospital) 
have started COVID follow up clinics.  
 A Post-COVID Management Protocol was released by Ministry of Health &Family Welfare 
on 13th September 2020, that followed a holistic approach – a blend of treatment from 
modern medicine as well as AYUSH system of medicine. 
 ICMR has already undertaken an exercise to examine the issue of SARS -CoV-2 re-infection. 
Research results on the same is likely to be available in near future. 
 
 

30 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry of AYUSH 
1.143 Ministry has also released 'National Clinical Management Protocol on Ayurveda and 
Yoga for COVID- 19'on 06.10.2020 wherein guidelines for post-Covid care have been 
mentioned. This protocol is based on: 
i. Knowledge from Ayurveda literature and clinical experience 
ii. Empirical evidences and Biological plausibility 
iii. Emerging trends of ongoing clinical studies. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.144 The Committee is of the view that since COVID is an unknown virus across the world,  
research is going forward to unravel the mystery of the virus constantly mutating itself. It 
remains to be seen how COVID -19 evolves further and what symptoms do the survivors may 
experience. Further, it has been observed that the virus spreads to many di fferent organs of the 
body like the heart, blood vessels, kidneys, lungs, and brain. The Committee believes that there is 
a need for multidisciplinary care service involving several specialists from both the systems i.e., 
Allopathy and AYUSH system of medi cine for the evaluation and the follow -up of patients 
suffered with COVID-19 disease.  
1.145 The Committee therefore recommends the Ministry to set up a multidisciplinary care 
service system as a part of post COVID Management protocol based on research on post-
COVID complications. 
                               (Para 6.6) 
Action Taken 
1.146 Action Taken by the Ministry of H&FW 
 MoHFW has already set up a multi -disciplinary Joint Monitoring Group under Director 
General of Health Services which advises Government on the technical parameters of the 
disease.  
 There are five sub -committees of clinical experts with experts drawn from e minent 
institutions which looks into multi -system involvement of COVID -19 covering respiratory, 
nephrological, neurological, gastrointestinal and pediatrics aspects.  
 Whenever required AYUSH experts are invited to the meetings of Joint Monitoring Group to 
seek their expert opinion. 
Action Taken by the Ministry of AYUSH 
1.147 Ministry has also released 'National   Clinical Management Protocol on Ayurveda and 
Yoga for COVID-19‟ on 06.10.2020 wherein guidelines for post-Covid care has been mentioned.  
This protocol is based on:  
i. Knowledge from   Ayurveda literature and clinical experience  
ii. Empirical evidences and Biological   plausibility  
iii. Emerging trends of ongoing clinical studies  

31 
 
1.148 Studies have been undertaken by the   Research Councils and National Institutes under 
Ministry of AYUSH in  asymptomatic or mild -moderate C ovid-19 patients. Initial 
trends/observations of these   research studies indicate the benefits for traditional me dicines in 
the   management of Covid-19.  
1.149 Ministry of   AYUSH has d ocumented the impact assessment of effectiveness, 
acceptance and   usage of AYUSH advisories & measures in the prevention of COVID -19   
through AYUSH Sanjivani Mobile app in around 1.5 crores population. 89.8 % of population out   
of 85.1% respondents repo rted benefits from the practice of AYUSH advisory. 79.1 % used 
reported overall feeling good health. Total 104 studies comprising prophylactic, add -on, and 
stand-alone, observational and pre - clinical/experimental studies are   undergoing in around 135 
centers in the country. The findings of these   studies are proposed to be published in peer 
reviewed scientific journals   having high impact factor. The initial observations from such 
studies are   highly encouraging. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.150 The Committee observes that a regular and comprehensive follow -up by people having 
recovered from COVID-19 would help define the clinical and care needs. Such information can 
also be used to modify/improvise the post COVID treatment model/protocol and plan.  The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to set up post -COVID clinics, on the lines of AIIMS Delhi, 
to look after the recovered patients who are facing post COVID 19 illness issues like 
breathlessness, body ache, fatigue etc. and provide counselling, yoga, phys iotherapy, 
consultation and medication to boost immunity on case to case basis to ensure their full proof 
treatment including rehabilitation. 
                               (Para 6.8) 
Action Taken 
1.151 The observations / recommendations of the Committee h ave been duly noted. In addition 
to the Central Government hospitals in Delhi, several AIIMS like Bhopal, Bhubaneswar, 
Jodhpur, Patna, Raipur, Rishikesh and Nagpur have set up Post COVID clinics for rehabilitation 
of recovered patients.  
Observation/Recommendation 
1.152 The Committee was apprised by the Secretary that the Ministry is carrying out post -
Covid Sequelae where the number of people who suffer from heart related, respiratory, renal 
problems post recovery from COVID is being docum ented. The Committee appreciates the 
initiative of the Department and believes that such documentation is essential for providing a 
comprehensive treatment and for shaping the post Covid care approach of the healthcare system. 
Not only this, the documentat ion would be of immense help in enriching knowledge proof 
research projects related to Covid -19 for better research outcomes that would be beneficial in 
combating the future pandemic. 
                              (Para 6.9) 
 

32 
 
Action Taken 
1.153 The observations of the Committee have been duly noted.  
 
Combating the Challenges of Pandemic COVID-19  
Observation/Recommendation 
1.154 The Committee observes that the limited healthcare infrastructure in the country has 
further been overburdened while coping up with the rising Covid cases in the country. The 
Committee believes healthcare should never be limited to only those who can afford to pay but 
should move towards the noble vision of Universal Health coverage. For this to happen, the 
government needs to be considerate and support the private healthcare sector. 
                             (Para 7.15) 
Action Taken 
1.155 The observations of the Committee have been duly noted. However, Ministry of Health 
& F amily Welfare  wrote to all the States to engage private sector collaboratively for COVID 
management. It had been the observation of the Central teams that almost all the States have 
engaged private sector with mutually beneficial collaboration in the area of patient ca re, 
diagnostics, and vaccination. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.156 The Committee expresses its deep concern over the shortage of healthcare providers due 
to vacancies in the State -run hospitals in the country. Many hospitals and medical colleges 
across the country are functioning below the sanctioned strength and speciality Departments are 
non-functional due to lack of required faculty. The Committee recommends the Ministry and the 
States/UTs to fill up these vacancies at the earliest. The Committee also fe els that healthcare 
providers from other regions may be deputed to districts with higher burden of Covid cases. 
However, the Committee urges upon the Ministry and the States Government to ensure the safety 
and security of all the healthcare providers. 
                             (Para 7.17) 
Action Taken 
1.157 Substantial reforms have been undertaken in the area of Human Resources, to ensure 
that the investments in infrastructure were leveraged efficiently to ensure population health 
outcomes.   
 To avoid duplication and enable efficient use of human resources, personnel under various 
vertical programmes including for disease control were merged using a systematic integrated 
approach.  
 NHM enabled the augmentation of human resources, with nearly 30% of the NHM budget 
committed to supporting 14.2 lakh personnel ranging from ASHAs to specialists, 
supplementing the HR in states.  

33 
 
 Innovative measures such as “You Quote We Pay” and differential remuneration based on 
the degree of difficulty of place of posting, have also resulted in increased availability of HR 
in difficult and remote areas. 
 Human Resource Information System (HRIS) is a key administrative HR reform for regular 
and contractual staff, that prov ides comprehensive real time information on actual numbers 
of HR posted in facilities and in managerial positions, facilitating salary payments and 
transfer postings.   
 Another key area of focus is investment in capacity building and mentoring for all cadres of 
personnel, with a focus on multi -skilling and task sharing to address HR shortages. 
Developing Ddistrict Hospitals as training hubs for nursing and allied staff, has also been 
undertaken.   
 NHM has supported 50,000 program management staff with skill s in public health, finance, 
planning, management and M&E to plan and implement interventions, freeing up clinical 
staff to undertake their duties.   The use of minimum performance indicators and benchmarks 
were developed and shared with the States. 
 As far  as medical education is concerned, a number of landmark reforms have been 
undertaken in the last six years. The National Medical Commission Act, 2019 for 
constitution of a National Medical Commission in place of Medical Council of India has 
been enacted. This will go in a long way in improving the quality of medical education, 
bringing it at par with the international standards  .A uniform entrance examination namely 
National Eligibility cum Entrance Test (NEET) along with provisions for common 
counseling were introduced for admission to UG / PG medical and dental courses so as to 
promote merit and transparency in admission process. Further, 158 new medical colleges 
have been opened in the last six years. As a result, annual intake for MBBS has increased by 
57% from 51112 in 2014 to 80312 in 2019. Similarly, the PG seats have also increased by 
79% from 30,191 in 2014 to 54,094 in 2020. Besides, under the Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme for establishment of new medical colleges, establishment of 157 new medical 
colleges have been planned, out of which, 43 have become functional. These measures are 
accelerating improved access to tertiary care and expansion of medical education in 
underserved area. 
 With regard to other sectors of health education, the proposal for constituting a regulatory 
body for all the allied and healthcare professionals, ‘The National Commission for Allied 
and Healthcare Professionals Bill ’, is being processed. On the similar li nes, reforms in 
regulatory mechanism of dental and nursing education are being envisaged.  
 MoHFW acknowledges the shortfall in HR and despite the above-mentioned reforms, States 
need to expedite action to filling in regular cadre vacancies and creating new  positions, so 
that the reliance on contractual workforce is minimized.  Progress in adopting and scaling 
up these HR reforms has been uneven across states and needs substantial strengthening and 
accelerated implementation, including infusion of additional funds.   
1.158 As far as safety and security of healthcare personnel is concerned, the Epidemic Diseases 
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2020 was promulgated on 22nd April 2020. Further this ordinance, 
brought before the Parliament has been passed and notified on 29th September 2020. The 
amendment provides for safety and security of He alth care Service Personnel (HSPs) from acts 
of violence. It provides for making  any act of violence against Health Care personnel or causes 

34 
 
damage to any property a cognizable and non -bailable offence punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which shall not be less than three months but extendable up to five years. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.159 The Ministry during the examination of the Demand for Grants 2020 -21 of the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare had submitted that India's Government Health 
Expenditure (GHE) as percent of the Current Health Expenditure (CHE) is only 27.1%. In India, 
Out of Pocket Expenditure in Health is 62.4% and India ranks 15 out of 186 countries in OOPE 
as % of CHE. The Committee apprehends that amidst the pandemic and the uncertainty in the 
treatment protocol, this OOPE may have further driven many families to below poverty line.  
                             (Para 7.22) 
Action Taken 
1.160 The concern of the Hon‟ble Committee has been noted.  
Observation/Recommendation 
1.161 The Committee is of the view that arriving at a sustainable pricing model to treat Covid 
patients could have averted many deaths. The Committee observes that the number of 
Government Hospital beds in the country were not adequate to handle the increasing n umber of 
Covid and non-Covid patients.  
1.162 In the wake of the pandemic and shortage of Government healthcare facilities, the 
Government should have strategized a better partnership with the Private Hospitals under PPP 
model. 
                             (Para 7.23) 
Action Taken 
1.163 Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) has recently notified a revamped scheme and 
Guidelines for Financial Support to infrastructure projects that are to be undertaken through 
PPP.   
1.164 The guidelines of the scheme have been shared by DEA with the States/UTs. 
1.165 As far as partnership with private hospitals is concerned, MoHFW  has written to all 
States/UTs to engage private hospitals through mutually agreeable arrangements. Rates under 
PM-JAY and CGHS packages have been  advised. States have accordingly issued instructions to 
that affect or have evolved models to suit their specific State requirements. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.166 The Committee is concerned over the confinement of the school going children due to 
prolonged closure of education institutions in the wake of outbreak of  pandemic Covid-19. With 
schools closed for long periods, online classes have proved instrumental in maintaining 
students‟ learning level. The Committee is equally concerned at the exist ing digital divide in the 
country which has jeopardised the future of millions of students from the weaker section of the 

35 
 
society. With the shift in education -method from classroom to online medium, the education of 
the students residing in areas with poor  connectivity has been compromised. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Government to strengthen its network for digital and online classes 
and once the normal classes resume, provision for extra special classes should be made 
especially for students from the economically and socially weaker section. 
                            (Para 7.27) 
Action Taken 
1.167 In the backdrop of uncertainty on the one hand, and the multiple innovative interventions 
on the other, the DoSEL had written to all states/UTs to  undertake school -based child -wise 
planning or preparation of Continuous Learning Plans (based on an indicative format prepared by 
DoSEL) for ensuring continued learning for every learner.  
 Continuous Learning Plans or CLP for STATES/UTs has been initiated  in all states/UTs.  In 
the CLP, each school needs to have a Continuous Learning Plan for each grade and each child. 
The Continuous Learning Plan  for the unique requirements of each learner, or groups of 
learners, in the school education system is required to be resilient.  
 The letter issued by this Department to the states/UTs for preparing their Continuous Learning 
Plan of states/UTs states that it would ideally consist of the following: 
 Child-wise mapping of full access, limited access or no access to any  form of digital device 
for continuing learning. 
 Child-wise preparation of learning plans depending upon access or no access to device; his 
would include innovative steps for reaching the last learner. 
 Child-wise tracking and monitoring of progress of lear ning; separately for those who have 
access and for those who have no access to digital devices for learning. 
 Special planning for children of migrant labourers, CWSN, and children in schools in 
aspirational districts. 
 Innovative interventions for mental and physical health and well-being. 
At national level the network connectivity in school has been envisaged through National 
Knowledge Network which is being implemented by MeiTY. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.168 The Committee observes that the restrictive social norms, gender stereotypes, home 
quarantining and diversion of resources to respond to the COVID -19 pandemic can limit 
women‟s ability to access health services which makes them more susceptible to health risks. The 
pandemic has not only adversely af fected women‟s social and mental well -being but also 
disrupted access to healthcare services especially sexual and reproductive healthcare services. 
Access to contraceptives or healthcare services became difficult which led to many unwanted 
pregnancies and  unsafe abortions. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the 
Government to chalk out specific course of action for rescuing the women out of mental trauma 
by resuming the sexual and reproductive healthcare services and allocating the resources to 
improve women health services.       
                             (Para 7.32) 

36 
 
1.169 The Committee endorses the study conducted by PFI and agrees that there has been a 
considerable rise in mental health issues during the lockdown. Sudden loss of employment and 
social isolation aggravated the psychological burden among the masses. The Commi ttee also 
finds that stretched work hours have increased the levels of depression among the frontline 
healthcare workers. There is no denying the fact that staying in touch with friends or family is a 
typical mechanism for coping with stress but during loc kdown in the absence of any coping 
mechanism, working age adults, students etc. who live alone, were more prone to depression. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to increase its investments in mental health 
research and ensure better outreac h of its mental health care services. The Committee would 
also like the Ministry to carry out more awareness campaigns for erasing the stigma attached to 
mental health and focus on the measures for alleviating the depressed out of their prevailing 
mental framework and inject new rays of hope and expectation through social interaction and 
psychological stress emancipation practices viz. yoga and better way of living. 
                              (Para 7.43) 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.170 The Committee is also concerned at the increased risk of suicide during the pandemic 
which may be attributed to social isolation, fear of the pandemic, loss of livelihood and other 
economic and health fallouts. The Committee, therefore, strongly urges the Ministry to make 
suicide prevention and mental health its priority.  
1.171 The Committee also recommends the Ministry to utilize the different means of social and 
press media to generate awareness and provide necessary support  through help lines and by 
counseling to the individuals in distress. 
                             (Para 7.44) 
Action Taken 
1.172 To resume the sexual and reproductive healthcare services following key initiatives have 
been taken for provisioning uninterrupted Reproductive, Maternal , Newborn, Child, Adolescent 
Health Plus Nutrition (RMNCAH+N) services during COVID 19: 
 Guidelines issued: Keeping in view the COVID 19 pandemic and smooth Reproductive, 
Maternal, Newborn, Child, Adolescent Health Plus Nutrition (RMNCAH+N) services, 
Guidance Note on provision of essential RMNCAH+N services during & post COVID -19 
Pandemic shared with States/UTs:  
 
o “Enabling Delivery of Essential Health Services during the COVID 19 Outbreak”, 
released on 14th April 2020 to all States and UTs. 
o “Guidance Note on Provision of Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn, Child, 
Adolescent Health Plus Nutrition (RMNCAH+N) services during & post COVID -19 
Pandemic”, released on 24 th May 2020 to all States and UTs. The guidelines outlined 
the following services as essential: 
 

37 
 
i. Services related to pregnancy care and management  
ii. New-born care and childhood illness management  
iii. Immunization services  
iv. Management of SAM children  
v. Family Planning services 
vi. Comprehensive Abortion Care (CAC) services 
vii. Adolescent Health services 
 
 Regular Review meetings/VCs: Beside issuing of guidelines, the Ministry is also connecting 
with States/UTs Govt. through regular virtual meetings cum review meetings on provisioning 
non COVID essential Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn, Child, Adolescent Hea lth Plus 
Nutrition (RMNCAH+N) services. 
 
o Virtual review meeting held with all States/UTs on “Continuation of Essential Health 
Services during COVID 19” organized with States/UTs under the Chairpersonship of 
Hon‟ble HFM starting from July 2020.  
o Five “Regional Maternal Health Review meetings” with States/UTs during the period 
of September 2020-November 2020.  
o Five Regional virtual review meeting on Family Planning programme held with 
States/UTs to review and sensitive on Family Planning Programme during the period 
of October-November 2020.  
o A total of five webinar organized for Medical Doctor/ Staff Nurses/ State Nodal 
Officer on continuity of Essential Newborn Care Services and to provide guidance for 
improving clinical care services day to day du ring COVID 19 pandemic during the 
period of July-November 2020. 
o On 20 th of November MoHFWcelebrated“National Newborn Week -2020” with the 
commitment of “Ensuring Quality, Equity and Dignity of Newborn Care at Every 
Health Facility and Everywhere” 
o Four Regional review meetings organized with States on to review the progress on 
key RMNCAH+N indicators.  
o Four virtual review meetings on Comprehensive Abortion Care (CAC) organized 
with States/UTs during the period of October-November 2020. 
o Webinar on issue of ado lescent mental health organized to sensitized the state 
officials in the month of September 2020. 
o Psycho-social training of Adolescent Health Counsellor organized during the period 
of October-December 2020.  
o A total of 1800 State resource Group trained und er Ayushman Bharat School Health 
& Wellness Ambassador Initiative in coordination with NCERT and Ministry of 
Education during the period of August to September 2020.  
Mental Health 
1.173 Realizing the impact that COVID -19 and related lockdown may have on the mental 
health of the population; the Government has taken several initiatives to provide psychosocial 
support. These initiatives include:  

38 
 
o Setting up of a  24/7 helpline (no.: 080 -46110007) to provide psychosocial support, by 
mental health professionals, to the entire affected population, divided into different target 
groups viz children, adult, elderly, women and healthcare workers. 
o Issuance of  guidelines/ advisories on management of mental health issues, catering to 
different segments of the society. 
o Advocacy through various media platforms  in the form of creative and audio -visual 
materials on managing stress and anxiety and promoting an environment of support and 
care for all. 
o Issuance of detailed guidelines by the National Institute of Mental Health a nd 
Neurosciences (NIMHANS), Bengaluru - “Mental Health in the times of COVID -19 
Pandemic – “Guidance for General Medical and Specialized Mental Health Care 
Settings”. 
o Issuance of guidance document regarding Caring for Health Care Warriors – Mental 
Health Support During COVID-19  
o Issuance of guidelines on Managing Mental Illness in Hospital Settings during COVID -
19 
o All the guidelines, advisories and advocacy material can be accessed on Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare website under “Behavioural Health – Psychosocial helpline” 
(https://www.mohfw.gov.in/). 
o Online capacity building of health workers  by NIMHANS in providing psychosocial 
support and training through (iGOT)-Diksha platform. 
o To address the challenge of men tal illnesses, the Government is implementing the 
National Mental Health Programme (NMHP) in the country. Under NMHP, 
implementation of the District Mental Health Programme (DMHP) has been approved for 
692 districts of the country for early detection. and management of mental 
disorders/illnesses. The activities covered under the DMHP also include targeted 
interventions like workplace stress management, suicide prevention activities, life skills 
training, counselling in schools and colleges, community awaren ess generation activities 
and imparting short term training to various categories of healthcare workers. 
Information, Education and Communication (IEC) activities are an integral part of 
DMHP to generate awareness among masses towards mental illness. At th e District level, 
funds up to Rs. 4 lakhs are provided to each District under DMHP for IEC and awareness 
generation activities. 
 Extension of suicide prevention services is an integral part of DMHP. The objectives of 
DMHP are as under: 
o Provide mental health services including prevention, promotion and long-term continuing 
care at different levels of district healthcare delivery system. 
o Provide suicide prevention services, workplace stress management, life skills training and 
counselling in schools and colleges. 
o Augment institutional capacity in terms of infrastructure, equipment and human resource 
for mental healthcare. 
o Promote community awareness andparticipation in the delivery of mental healthcare 
services. 

39 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.174 The Committee appreciates the contribution of the frontline warriors who have been 
tirelessly working amidst the pandemic. The Committee also observes that the problem of 
shortage of healthcare workers was deepened during the pandemic crises. Amidst an already 
fragile healthcare system, the healthcare workers were forced to take the brunt of the increasing 
number of  Covid cases. Long working hours and inadequate protection against the virus 
overburdened the healthcare workers. 
(Para 7.57) 
Action Taken 
1.175 The concerns raised by the Hon‟ble Committee have been noted. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.176 The Committee is of the views that the healthcare workers deserve respect and 
recognition for their valuable service. All the healthcare workers need to be given adequate 
remuneration and financial incentives along with insurance coverage. The Committee advocates 
the two -pronged strategy to (i) other incentives to healthcare workers and (ii) redress their 
grievances which will help boosting their morale an d enhancing the performance. The 
Committee, in this regard, recommends the Ministry to ensure every effort to end the stigma and 
violence against the healthcare workers. The Committee would like the Ministry to ensure that 
the healthcare workers should have defined working hours and scheduled off-duty days. 
                             (Para 7.58) 
Action Taken 
1.177 An additional incentive of Rs. 1000/ - per month is being paid to ASHAs in view of their 
significant contribution towards COVID -19 pandemic related work. Besides this, States/UTs 
have been asked to ensure provision of safety measures like masks and sanitizers for ASHAs. 
 Further, the State/UT Governments have also been given flexibility to provide incentive to 
health workers and staff engaged in COVID duties as per their context and policies, from the 
resources made available under the India COVID -19 Emergency Response and Health 
System Preparedness Package. 
 Moreover, under life insurance benefits have been extended to all healthcare workers, un der 
the „Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Package Insurance Scheme for Health Workers Fighting 
COVID-19‟ announced on 30 March 2020. Ministry of Health and Family welfare has 
collaborated with the New India Assurance (NIA) Company Limited for providing the 
insurance amount based on the guidelines prepared for the scheme. 
 This insurance scheme provides a life insurance cover of Rs. 50 lakhs to healthcare 
providers, including community health workers, who may have to be in direct contact and 
care of COVID -19 patie nts and therefore are at risk of being infected. It also includes 
accidental loss of life on account of COVID-19 related duty. 
 The scheme also covers private hospital staff/ retired/volunteer/ local urban 
bodies/contract/daily wage/ ad -hoc/outsourced staff  requisitioned by States/ Central 

40 
 
hospitals/autonomous hospitals of Central/States/UTs, AIIMS & INIs/ hospitals of Central 
Ministries drafted for COVID-19 related responsibilities. 
 In the context of COVID -19, the Epidemic Diseases (Amendment) Ordinance, 2020 was 
promulgated on 22nd April 2020. Further this ordinance brought before the parliament has 
been passed and notified on 29th September 2020.  
 Apart from protecting the Health care Service Personnel (HSPs)from acts of violence the 
ordinance also expan ds the powers of the Central government to regulate the inspection of 
any bus, train, goods vehicle, ship, vessel, or aircraft leaving or arriving at any land port, port 
or aerodrome. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.178 The Committee is of the view that healt h workers at higher risk of infection must be 
advised quarantine and the same period must be treated as „on duty‟. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to provide paid sick leave to the healthcare workers who have been 
infected and advised iso lation. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to ensure that all 
the healthcare workers are given timely salary and allowances and all their grievances must be 
addressed. The doctors, who have laid down their lives in fight against the pandemic, must be 
acknowledged as martyrs and their families be adequately compensated. 
                             (Para 7.59) 
Action Taken 
1.179 EMR: Received 
 Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the Writ Petition(s)(Civil) No(s).759/2020 has directed that   
quarantine  period for healthcare workers should be initially for one week only and thereafter 
taking the profile of the health worker a decision to be taken for further period of one week. 
Accordingly, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare modified its guidelines on 18 -06-
2020. 
 Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in consultation with Department of Personnel   
Training has also directed State Governments to consider quarantine period of healthcare 
workers as „on duty‟.  
 In   the   same Writ   Petition(s)(Civil) No(s).759/20 20, the Hon‟ble Court directed Ministry 
of Health and FW to issue appropriate orders for payment of salary   to the   health   workers   
and   doctors, in exercise of power under the Disaster ManagementAct,2005. Accordingly, 
MOHFW issued order No. COVID -19/60/2020-ME(Pt. I) dated 18th June 2020 and 
compliance report obtained from the State  Governments   and   Union Territories. 
 In view of resurgence of COVID -19 cases in the country and with a view to increase the 
availability of trained human resources to tackle the Covid-19 pandemic situation, the States 
have been advised to explore avenues for utilization of services of Medical Interns, Final 
Year MBBS students, Final Year PG Students (broad as well as super -specialities) as 
residents, B.Sc./GNM Qualified Nurses, Final Year GNM or B.Sc. (Nursing) students under 
appropriate guidance and services of Allied Health Care professionals based on their training 
and certification. 
 For engaging additional manpower, Flexibility is being provided to States to decide o n 
remuneration as in the NHM norms. A suitable honorarium for distinguished Covid Service 

41 
 
may also be considered. The financial incentives/ remuneration shall be available only for 
those who work for atleast 100 days for Covid care. 
 All such professionals who sign up for minimum 100 days of Covid duty and complete it 
successfully   will   be   given   the   Prime   Minister‟s Distinguished Covid National Service 
Samman from Government of India. 
 Central Government recommends to State/UT Governments to consid er giving preference in 
regular Government appointments of Health professionals through the respective Public 
Service Commission/ other recruitment bodies, for those Health  Professionals under this 
special scheme, who complete a minimum of 100 days of Covid related duty. 
 
Financing the Health Sector 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.180 The Committee reiterates its  considered view that the healthcare spending in India is 
abysmally low for an emerging economy with a population of 1.3 billion. Lack of desired level of 
investment in the health infrastructure has so far resulted into fragility of Indian health 
ecosystem which posed a big hurdle in generating an effective response against the pandemic. 
The Committee has time and again recommended the Ministry for increasing its spending in the 
health sector for ensuring better health infrastructure and health services to the needy common 
masses. The Committee expresses its serious displeasure over the Government's reluctance to act 
upon the Committee's recommendations in letter and spirit. The Committee is assured that the 
serious impact of the pandemic could have been min imized had the Government over the years 
increased its investment in the healthcare system. The Committee is pained to note the trauma 
and distress the public had to undergo due to absence of a dedicated healthcare system. The 
Committee, therefore, strongl y recommends the Government to increase its investments in the 
public healthcare system and make consistent efforts to achieve the National Health Policy 
targets of expenditure up to 2.5% of GDP within two years as the set timeframe of year 2025 is 
far away and the public health cannot be jeopardized till that time schedule. 
                             (Para 8.10) 
1.181 The Committee is of the view that pandemic Covid -19 offers a window to revisit the 
country‟s health policy with the purpose of strengthening the health sector, and thus necessitates 
a higher investment in creating permanent basic health infrastructure. The Committee also 
believes that a higher budgetary allocation will also boost the healthcare industry and shift the 
focus to Indi an manufacturers and domestic supply chain of products. The Committee believes 
that it is the opportune time to boost India‟s healthcare infrastructure and push for greater 
technology deepening in the healthcare sector. 
                             (Para 8.12) 
Action Taken 
1.182 MoHFW agrees with the recommendations that Government need to increase 
investments in public health care system. 

42 
 
 Ministry remains committed to pursue the target set out under the NHP through increase 
central allocations and engagement with states to increase their investments in the public 
health. 
 In order to ensure continuous delivery of services during COVID -19 and effective 
management of the pandemic, funds were released under „India COVID -19 Emergency 
Response and Health System Preparedness Package‟.   
1.183 Ayushman Bharat, a flagship scheme of Government of India, has been launched to 
achieve the vision of Universal Health Coverage (UHC). This initiative has been designed to 
meet Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and its underlining commitment, which is to 
"leave no one behind." This scheme aims to undertake interventions to holistically address the 
healthcare system (covering prevention, promotion and ambulatory care) at the primary, 
secondary and tertiary level. Ayus hman Bharat adopts a continuum of care approach, 
comprising of two inter-related components, which are - 
 Health and Wellness Centres (HWCs) 
 Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PM-JAY) 
1.184 Health and Wellness Centres (HWCs) component envisages creation of 1 ,50,000 Health 
and Wellness Centres (HWCs) to deliver Comprehensive Primary Health Care (CPHC) bringing 
healthcare closer to the homes of people to deliver an expanded range of services to address the 
primary health care needs of the entire population in t heir area, expanding access, universality 
and equity close to the community. 
1.185 Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya  Yojana (PM-JAY)Ayushman Bharat PM -JAY is the largest 
health assurance scheme in the world which aims at providing a health cover of Rs. 5 lakhs per  
family per year for secondary and tertiary care hospitalization to over 10.74 crores poor and 
vulnerable families (approximately 50 crore beneficiaries) that form the bottom 40% of the 
Indian population. Since its launch in September 2018, as on 14 th April, 2021, 1,81,33,191 
hospital admission have taken place.  
1.186 In a bid to further improve public health funding, a new centrally sponsored scheme, PM 
Atma Nirbhar Swasth Bharat Yojana, has been announced with an outlay of about Rs. 64,180 
crores over 6 years. This will develop capacities of primary, secondary, and tertiary care Health 
Systems, strengthen existing national institutions, and create new institutions, to cater to 
detection and cure of new and emerging diseases. The main interventions under the scheme are: 
i. Support for 17,788 rural and 11,024 urban Health and Wellness Centers 
ii. Setting up integrated public health labs in all districts and 3382 block public health units 
in 11 states; 
iii. Establishing critical care hospital blocks in 602 districts and 12 central institutions; 
iv. Strengthening of the National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC), its 5 regional 
branches and 20 metropolitan health surveillance units; 
v. Expansion of the Integrated Health Information Portal to all States/UTs to connect all 
public health labs; 
vi. Operationalisation of 17 new Public Health Units and strengthening of 33 existing Public 
Health Units at Points of Entry, that is at 32 Airports, 11 Seaports and 7 land crossings; 
vii. Setting up of 15 Health Emergency Operation Centers and 2 mobile hospitals; and 

43 
 
viii. Setting up of a national institution for One Health, a Regional Research Platform for 
WHO South East Asia Region, 9 Bio -Safety Level III laboratories and 4 regional 
National Institutes for Virology. 
1.187 Further, the Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY) aims at correcting the 
regional imbalances in the availability of affordable tertiary healthcare facilities in different parts 
of the country in general, and augmenting facilities for quality medical education in the 
underserved States in particular. PMSSY, a Central Sector Scheme, is being implemented in a 
phased manner and has two components: 
1.  Setting up of AIIMS Institutions; and 
2.  Up-gradation of existing Government Medical Colleges/Institutions 
 
 So far, construction of 22 new AIIMS and 75 Government Medical Colleges up -gradation 
Projects has been approved under this scheme.  
 The Capital investment approved under PMSSY for setting up of twenty -two (22) new 
AIIMS approved is Rs. 25864.04 Cr., whereas for 75 GMC Up -gradation projects it is Rs 
12380.63 cr.   
 Six AIIMS approved under Phase- I (AIIMS-Bhopal, AIIMS-Bhubaneswar, AIIMS-Jodhpur, 
AIIMS-Patna, AIIMS -Raipur and AIIMS - Rishikesh) are already fully functional.   All key 
hospital fa cilities and services such as Emergency, Trauma, Blood Bank, ICU, Diagnostic 
and Pathology are functioning. Dedicated hospitals block for treatment of CoVID -19 patients 
and Covid test labs made functional in these AIIMS during this year.   
 Setting up of remaining sixteen AIIMS are in progress. In these newer AIIMS, limited OPD 
facility has been started at AIIMS Bibinagar in addition to AIIMS Nagpur,  AIIMS Bathinda, 
AIIMS Raebareli, AIIMS Mangalagiri and AIIMS Gorakhpur where OPD was started earlier. 
1st session of undergraduate MBBS course with 50 seats is staring from the current session 
(2020-21) at four new AIIMS viz. Guwahati, Jammu, Rajkot and Bilaspur. In addition, 
MBBS Classes were already made functional at eight new AIIMS viz. Mangalagiri, Nagpu r, 
Raebareli, Kalyani, Gorakhpur, Bathinda, Deoghar and Bibinagar in previous years. 
 To further strengthen health infrastructure an ambitious programme and is being taken up in 
a phased manner., which broadly envisages improving tertiary health infrastruct ure through 
construction of Super Speciality Blocks /  Trauma Care Centres etc. in existing Government 
Medical College /Institutions (GMCIs) on cost sharing basis between Central and State  
Governments Share basis has been undertaken. Total 75 Govt. Medical Colleges up -
gradation projects have been approved so far. Construction works of Super Speciality Block / 
Trauma Centre has been completed in Two (02) GMCs and Nine (09) are likely to be 
completed within this financial year in addition to 44 Projects alread y completed in previous 
years. 
Observation/Recommendation 
1.188 The Committee notes that the Ministry's projected demand for the five -year period from 
2021-22 to 2025 -26 is 6,16,189.33  crore. This demand has been spread over some very crucial 
aspects of health sector like setting up of medical colleges, NHM, Post Covid health sector 
reforms etc. The Committee strongly believes that the Health sector in India lacks adequate 
investment and health infrastructure as well as human resources deserves high priority. Higher 
public investment in health is significant for fulfilling the goals of Universal Health Coverage 

44 
 
and making the healthcare services accessible. The Committee appreciates the g oal of the 
National Health Policy, 2017 which calls for the attainment of the highest possible level of 
health and well -being for all at all ages, through apreventive and promotive health care 
orientation in all developmental policies, and universal access  to good quality health care 
services without anyone having to face financial hardship as a consequence. The Committee is of 
the opinion that the Government will have to considerably  increase its spending on the health 
sector to achieve this envisaged goal. 
                                                                                                                         (Para 8.15 and 8.16) 
1.189 The Committee understands that coordination and collaboration between the States as 
well as the Central Go vernment is important for fulfilling the commitment to increase the 
Government health expenditure to 2.5 percent of the GDP by 2025. The Committee strongly 
urges the Ministry to lay special emphasis on the provision of primary health care. The 
Committee believes that spending on the public health system can result in important population 
health gains which subsequently translate into financial impacts beyond what was originally 
invested. The Committee urges upon the Government in general and the Ministry of  Finance in 
particular to treat the health infrastructure and healthcare service as a public good and consider 
enhanced allocation for the health sector in the public interest. The Committee accordingly 
pleads the Government to increase the budget of the M inistry of Health and Family Welfare as 
per its projected demand. Here the Committee would like to remind the Government about the 
call given by Hon'ble Prime Minister to treat the corona pandemic (calamity) as an opportunity 
and adequately augment the fin ance of health sector as priority sector in the interest of the 
nation. 
Action Taken 
1.190 The observations of the Hon‟ble Committee has been noted. The modalities for 
considerable increase in public spending on the health sector to achieve the goal of universal 
health coverage and creation of health infrastructure is covered in Department‟s action taken 
report to para 8.10. 
 
 Also, the allocation and expenditure by way of releases to the States/UTs under National 
Health Mission shows a positive increasin g trend. Further, States/UTs are also instructed 
to increase their State sector health spending to >8% of their budget by 2020.  
 
 Expenditure under NHM is continuously maintained at more than 95%. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

45 
 
Chapter–II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY'S REPLIES 
ADNIMINISTRATIVE MANAGEMENT OF LOCKDOWN & UNLOCKING  
Observation/Recommendation 
2.1 The Committee appreciates the PM's call for Jan Andolan against Pandemic. The 
Committee agrees that pa ndemic Covid -19 can be contained and controlled by adhering to 
Covid Appropriate Behavior across the country and therefore, each State Government must 
make their best efforts to live up to the objective of the Jan Andolan. 
                                       (Para 1.47) 
Action Taken 
2.2 Hon‟ble Prime Minister held video conferences with States and communicated with the 
citizens on importance of COVID appropriate behavior. He himself portrayed the necessity of 
adherence to COVID appropriate behavior by appearing on IEC materials. 
2.3 Empowered Group on information, communications and public awareness continuously 
monitored the public awareness campaigns launched. The Jan Andolan was a two -month long 
campaign (October & November 2020). Concerted actions w ere made across Ministries of 
Government of India, subordinate offices, PSUs, Private Sector, NGOs. It also targeted 
beneficiaries of various Government schemes under MGNREGA, PM AWAS, PM -KISAN, 
Ujjwala Yojana etc. and the community through frontline workers in an active collaboration with 
State Governments.  
2.4 The issue of generating public awareness on COVID appropriate behavior has been 
highlighted during various video conferences with States/UTs held under the Chairmanship of 
Hon‟ble HFM, Cabinet Secretary, Secretary (H), Secretary (I&B) and other senior officials. 
2.5 The State Governments involved key institutions (PRIs, Self -Help Groups, farmer 
producer organizations, procurement centers, local media) and initiated key outreach initiatives 
like (i) use of hoardings/wall paintings/ electronic display boards in government premises such 
as collectorate, government hospitals, PHCs, government schools, police stations, courts, 
poojapandals, etc. (ii) Engaging local influencers, experts and religious leade rs, (iii) 
Interpersonal communication through field functionaries, (iv) Running mobile vans for regular 
awareness generation on COVID-19, and (v) Audio messages for COVID -19 awareness through 
Waste collection vans.  
2.6 Some of innovative best practices ob served during Jan Andolan include (i) Promoting 
immunity boosting AYUSH measures (Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Andaman & Nicobar, Delhi), (ii) 
Engagement with NGOs and religious organizations, (iii) Use of Technology like Sanjeevan 
Mobile app (Bihar); Behaviour Ch ange Management app (Meghalaya) and WhatsApp chat bot 
(Kerala). 

46 
 
2.7 The Jan Andolan campaign garnered 10.86 billion impressions during the first month (8th 
October ‟20 to 9 th November „2020. Union Ministers, Governors and Chief Ministers 
participated in th e campaign in addition to around 500 other influencers from various fields. 
Over 1000 bytes were shared across platform. 
CONTINGENCY PLAN 
Observation/Recommendation 
2.8 The Committee however differs from the viewpoint of the Ministry as it feels that all the 
steps taken to contain control and minimize the incidence may appropriately be called the 
Mitigation Plan. 
                                     (Para 2.17) 
Action Taken 
2.9 The definition of „Mitigation‟, as per Disaster Management Act, 2005, includes measures 
aimed at reducing the risk, impact or effects of a disaster or threatening disaster situation. 
However specific to COVID-19 the containment plan intends to break the cycle of transmission, 
whereas a mitigation plan, intends to protect the at-risk population and Vulnerable populations to 
reduce the morbidity and mortality on such populations. Conceptually the two approaches are 
different and hence Ministry of Health & FW continues with its containment plans to 
break/suppress the chain of transmission. 
Observation/Recommendation 
2.10 The Committee observes that plethora of guidelines issued by the Ministry during the 
containment of outbreak of pandemic Covid -19 also caused ambiguity in interpretation of 
multiple guidelines. The contradiction in guidelines and the resultant chaos among the general 
masses could have been averted by making the public aware of the provision of guidelines and 
better implementation of the advisories. Particularly the separate guidelines on the quarantine 
issue by different State Governments created more panic and confusion. 
                                    (Para 2.23) 
Action Taken 
2.11 Union Ministry of Health has issued clear and consistent guidance of various aspects of 
managing COVID -19 pandemic, However, „Health‟  being a State subject, States have the 
flexibility to impose their own guidance/ additional requirements with regards to testing, 
quarantine and isolation as per their risk assessment. 
2.12 However, Ministry of Health & FW has urged the States to do the s ame under timely 
intimation to Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Further, States have also been requested to 
adequately publicize such additional requirements on their official websites well in advance to 
avoid inconvenience to the public. 
 

47 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
2.13 The Committee also underlines the need to encourage domestic medical device 
manufacturing industry so that the import of diagnostic kits from other countries is minimized. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Government to boost investment and innovation in 
the medical device industry in the country. 
                                   (Para 2.47) 
Action Taken 
2.14 There has been a concerted effort by the Government of India to promote development 
and manufacturing of indi genous diagnostic kits, Viral Transport Media (VTM) etc. This also 
has a reflection in the unit cost of the kit, for example the RT -PCR that costed about Rs. 2500 in 
the initial part of pandemic is now available for Rs. 150 only. 
2.15 Validation status of kits/VTM/Antibody/Antigen/ELISA used for Covid analysis (as on 
09-04-2021): 
 Evaluated so 
far 
Recommended Indigenous 
kits 
Under process  
RTPCR Kits 348 162 93 8 
RNA Extraction kits 267 165 106 0 
VTM 234 199 187 3 
Antibody Kits 205 26 19 4 
ELISA/CLIA 100 27 18 4 
Rapid Antigen Kit 
(NP/OP) 
86 28 22 24 
Saliva based Rapid 
Antigen Kit 
8 0 - 1 
Total 1248 607 445 44 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
2.16 The Committee understands that Covid -19 Seroprevalence survey is crucial for studying 
the extent to which the Corona virus had spread among the Indian population. The Committee 
observes that sero-survey tests account for the presence of antibodies amongst the persons who 
might have suffered from SARS-COV-2 virus. The Committee notes that despite limitations due to 
volley of variable factors, the data received from tests and surveys provides useful information 
on the trends in new infections and better understanding of the pandemic. The seroprevalence 
survey would enable the Government to for mulate its strategy and the course of action plan to 
contain the expansion of the COVID-19. 
                                                                                                                                                                       
(Para 2.51) 
Action Taken 
2.17 Observation of the Hon‟ble Committee have been taken note of. 

48 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
2.18  The Committee recognizes the crucial role of Epidemiologists in underlying the 
distribution of disease and the strategy for its control and therefore better trained health workers 
in epidemiology are fundamental for a robust surveillance system. The Commi ttee observes that 
the Workforce Development Action Package under the Global Health Security Agenda (GHSA) 
sets a target of one trained field epidemiologist per 200,000 population. India, being a member 
of GHSA should positively work on capacity building of the frontline epidemiology workforce. 
                             (Para 2.66) 
Action Taken 
2.19 NCDC is involved in field epidemiology training programme for over three decades. 
Currently there is a full -time two-year training programme Epidemic Intelligence Services (EIS) 
Training programme since 2012 for advance field epidemiology: and short -term frontline field 
epidemiology training programmes for medical officers and paramedical staff on outbreak 
investigation, identification of early warning signal and disease surveillance.  
2.20 The EIS training programme is currently funded by CDC Global health Security Agenda 
(GHSA). It is envisaged under PMASBY from 2021 and later through Govt . of India funds 
(tentatively after 2024). It has a target to train 40 field epidemiologists every year in the area of 
advance field epidemiology. 
2.21 There is also a pr oposal for eligibility expansion of public health courses to allied 
professional like veterinary science, nursing, dental sciences and ISM graduates. It will help in 
reducing the crunch of trained public health professionals at State and District levels. 
 
MANAGING MEDICAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
Observation/Recommendation 
2.22 The Committee understands the urgency among the global scientific community for 
development of a vaccine against Covid -19. However, the Committee strongly emphasizes the 
need to ensure highest level of ethical and procedural standards in the vaccine research studies. 
The vaccine should pass the strictly regulated route of all phases of clinical trials and the data 
should be made available in the public domain. The Committee, there fore, strongly recommends 
the Ministry to follow a transparent approach so that any irregularity in the approval/production 
of vaccine is avoided. 
                             (Para 3.24) 
Action Taken 
2.23 The clinical trials of New Drugs including COVID -19 vaccines have to be carried out as 
per the provisions laid down under New Drugs and Clinical Trials (NDCT) Rules, 2019. The 
applicant needs to submit the preclinical study data including animal toxicology, and 

49 
 
pharmacology and other pharmaceuticals information along with clinical trial protocol as per the 
provisions of NDCT Rules, 2019. 
2.24 The clinical trial protocol is evaluated by CDSCO in consultation with Subject Expert 
Committee (SEC) which comprises of vaccine specialist, pharmacologist, microbiol ogist, 
pediatrician, pharmacologist and Internal medicine from reputed Government Medical 
Colleges/Institutions. Before initiation of the clinical trial the vaccine is required to be tested at 
CDL, Kasauli to confirm quality standard. Further, the clinical  trial should be registered at 
Clinical trials Registry of India before enrolling the first patient for the study in order to bring 
transparency in the system. 
2.25 Further, the rights, safety and well beings of study participating are monitored by the 
Principal Investigator and Ethics Committee of the clinical trial site. As a matter of abundant 
caution, all the safety data generated in clinical trial of COVID -19 vaccines is required to be 
evaluated by third party expert body namely Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB). Further, 
the minutes of meetings of Subject Expert Committee reviewing the applications are posted on 
the website of CDSCO from time to time The New Drugs and Clinical Trials Rules, 2019 has 
various provisions to safeguard the rights, safety and well beings of the study participants and the 
entire process is carried out in a transparent manner. Further, the application for clinical trial or 
marketing authorization is made by the applicants through online portal. 
Observation/Recommendation 
2.26 The Committee notes that convalescent plasma therapy has been used against other 
diseases in the past and has shown good results. The Committee recommends ICMR to conduct 
high-quality trials to examine the efficacy of plasma therapy on the mortality ofCOV ID-19 
patients and if the research outcome is favourable, efforts must be made for dissemination of use 
of convalescent plasma therapy. 
                             (Para 3.29) 
Action Taken 
2.27 ICMR conducted an open label phase II multicentre randomised controlled trial across 39 
public and private hospitals on use of convalescent plasma in the management of moderate 
COVID-19 in adults in India (PLACID  Trial). It was concluded that CPT did not lead to 
reduction in progression to severe covid -19 or all -cause mortality in the group that received 
convalescent plasma therapy as compared to the group that did not receive convalescent plasma 
therapy. 
2.28 However, the study had some limitations. Thus National Task Force has recommended 
that convalescent plasma (Off label) may be considered only when following criteria are met: 
 Early moderate disease (preferably within 7 days of symptom onset, no use after 7 days). 
2.29 Availability of high titre donor plasma (Signal to cut -off ratio (S/O) >3.5or equivalent 
depending on the test kit being used). 
 

50 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
2.30 The Committee also emphasizes on the pivotal role played by ICMR in the fight against 
the pandemic. The Committee believes that Department of Health Research and especially ICMR 
are at the forefront in devising a suitable strategy in combating such outbreaks. In view of this, 
this Department and ICMR deserve a consistent budgetary support for its research resources 
activities. The Committee strongly recommends Ministry to increase the budget ary allocation to 
ICMR to broaden its research activities which would in turn help in formulation of better health 
outcomes. 
                                                     (Para 3.57) 
Action Taken 
2.31 ICMR was provided a budgetary support of INR 379 7.71 Crores (Rs. 2100.00 crores  
Covid Package + Rs. 1697.71 crores Regular annual budget for the financial year 2020 -21 (RE). 
An amount of Rs. 2358.00 Crore have been allocated for the financial year 2021-22. 
Observation/Recommendation 
2.32 The Committee expresses concern over the low number of researchers in the country and 
lack of research culture among students. As per the UIS data, there are almost 252 researchers 
per million population in India against 1,370 researchers in China. The Com mittee opines that 
the Ministry should focus on linking research with education and teaching and give incentives 
for increasing the retention rate in Health Research Field. The Committee strongly recommends 
the creation of a pool of talented health researc h personnel with upgraded skills of faculty of 
medical colleges, mid-career scientists, medical students, etc. The Department should also chalk 
out specialized training courses regarding infectious disease epidemiology risk on viral infection 
especially co-morbidities micro behavioral factors and related multi -disciplinary research and 
support the trainees to take up research projects for addressing critical national and local health 
problems. The Committee, in this connection recommends the Ministry to lau nch health specific 
research programs for generation of a research culture in the country and encourage the young 
undergraduates/postgraduates to pursue research in science and technology. The Committee 
desire the Ministry to provide financial assistance t o institutions for conducting research in 
health specific areas. Financial incentive in form of research grants should also be provided to 
young graduates proposing to undertake health research projects. The Ministry should also 
assess the quality and outcome of research projects from time to time by evaluating the research 
outcomes and results. 
                            (Para 3.66) 
Action Taken 
2.33 Creation of Pool of talented health personnel‟s is the main objective of the Human 
Resource Development scheme of DHR Through this scheme, Department of health research 
supports several programmes to create pool of talented health research personnel by upg rading 
skills of faculty of medical colleges, mid -career scientists, medical students and Young 
biomedical researchers.  There are fellowship programs for short and long -term training in 
foreign and Indian institutes for the senior and junior faculties of medical colleges and other 

51 
 
institutes which are involved in health research. There are fellowship programmes for 
unemployed Young scientists and woman scientist with break in career. Department also 
supports a programme wherein the Indian scientists workin g abroad are encouraged to return to 
India and pursue their research in area of biomedical field. Support to institutes is also given by 
the department for providing hands on training to the medical doctors and biomedical researchers 
in various areas of biomedical research 
2.34 Further, the National Medical Commission has been constituted with effect from 25th 
September 2020. The Commission is mandated to lay policies and encourage medical research. 
COVID Management under Ayushman Bharat-PMJAY Scheme 
Observation/Recommendation 
2.35 The Committee appreciates the new Transaction Management System (TMS) that allows 
the State Government to extend treatment to non AB -PMJAY beneficiaries. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry to strengthen its monitoring mechanism  and implement the new 
transaction management system (TMS) in States. The Committee welcomes the Direct Lab 
Empanelment (DLE) module for empanelment of ICMR registered labs and feels that this will go 
a long way in expansion of physical testing infrastructure. 
                            (Para 4.15) 
Action Taken 
2.36 The Transaction Management System (TMS) of NHA has been modified to allow States 
to extend treatment to non -AB PMJAY beneficiaries. Additionally, modifications in TMS to 
implement similar insurance/assurance scheme for other categories of beneficiaries including 
State Government employees. Direct Lab Empanelment (DLE) module for empanelment of 
ICMR registered labs have been implemented on NHA‟s IT platform. Further, State 
Governments have b een asked to identify eligible labs and map with empaneled service 
providers for effective delivery of services under the scheme. 
Observation/Recommendation 
2.37 The Committee feels that undue delay in claims payment of private hospitals empanelled 
under the Scheme is equally a matter of concern. The Committee strongly believes that the 
Ministry and NHA should make special efforts for ensuring timely payment of reimbursement 
claims of empanelled private hospitals to ensure uninterrupted treatment to needy patients. This 
would ensure transparency and good governance of the health domain free from instances of 
exorbitant extraction of money from the patients in the private hospitals. 
                                                                                                                                                                       
(Para 4.43) 
Action Taken 
2.38 Timely settlement of claims is one of the key indicators which is being monitored on a 
constant basis. As on date, nearly 90% of the cl aims submitted by the hospitals have been paid. 
Further, reminders are constantly sent to SHAs with high degree of claim pendency. Where 

52 
 
necessary. A Query and Rejection Dashboard has been developed to monitor adjudication 
efficiency in terms of appropriat eness of the queries raised by processing team to empaneled 
hospitals and to ascertain whether claims were rejected for valid reasons. NHA has also issued 
new guidelines to fast -track the claim settlement, defining the maximum Turn Around Time for 
various stages of claim and preauthorization process. 
 
Covid Management through AYUSH System 
Observation/Recommendation 
2.39 The Committees takes note of the preventive and   prophylactic approaches that help in 
symptom management of COVID -19 like   illnesses as also the lifestyle advocacies to boost 
immunity for prevention   of various kinds of infectious diseases. The Committee recognizes the   
importance of traditional Indian systems of medicine and the pivotal role it   plays in boosting 
immunity and acting as a shield from various diseases. The   Committee desires the people of the 
country to follow these advisories in   their daily lives to protect themselves. The Committee 
would like the   Ministry to create adequate awareness amongst the masses about the va rious   
guidelines relating to the dose of medicines to be taken up by the people.   The Ministry should 
also ensure that the guidelines about the medicines to be   taken up to modulate immunity be 
adequately disseminated so that patients   take dose of me dicine as per prescription of registered 
practitioner. 
                              (Para 5.7) 
Action Taken  
2.40 States/UTs have already been advised to widely   circulate guidelines for immunity 
augmentation and also provide these medicines/AYUSH based products to the public.  
States/UTs have also been asked to project their   requirement for the procurement of medicines 
and IEC campaign under centrally sponsored scheme of National AYUSH Mission (NAM). 
Observation/Recommendation 
2.41 The attention of the  Committee was drawn to the provisions of Drugs and Magic 
Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954 which prohibits advertisements of drugs and 
remedies that directly or indirectly gives a false impression regarding the true character of the 
drug; or (b) makes a false claim for the drug; or (c) is otherwise false or misleading in any 
material particular. The Committee urges upon the Ministry to strictly follow the provisions of 
the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisement) Act, 1954 tha t prevent 
publication of inappropriate/misleading advertisements. The Committee, in this connection, 
recommends the Ministry to monitor advertisements issued regarding usage of AYUSH drugs 
and take actions against reported misleading advertisements and fal se claims in a time bound 
manner.  
2.42 The Committee further recommends the Ministry to direct States/UTs for ensuring strict  
monitoring/vigilance of quality control of ASU&H drugs as also the adherence of general 
guidelines for development of traditional medicine. 
                             (Para 5.24) 

53 
 
Action Taken 
2.43 An order dated 1.4.2020 to stop and prevent publicity and advertisement of AYUSH -
related claims for COVID-19 treatment in print, TV and electronic media was issued to All State 
Principal Secretaries/Secretaries Health and AYUSH, State Licensing Authorities AYUSH 
(SLA), Pharmacovigilance  centres, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology, Press Council of India and Advertising Standards 
Council of India. From all these sectors misleading advertisements related to COVID -19 
treatment with AYUSH medicines are reported to this Ministry and which are addressed to 
concerned State Licensing Authorities to take legal action. On this account complia nce is also 
reported from the manufacturers. 
Observation/Recommendation 
2.44 The Committee understands that since the product approval to AYUSH drugs is given by 
the concerned State Licensing Authority (AYUSH) in accordance with the provisions of Drugs & 
Cosmetics Rule, due precautious needs to be exercised by licensing authorities so that 
unscrupulous manufacturers do not get any corridor for bringing spurious products into the 
Indian market. Even though the power to grant license and legal actions agains t fake claims and 
misleading advertisements is vested with the State Licensing Authorities, the Ministry also owe 
accountability to follow up the matter with the State Governments and instruct the State licensing 
Authority to take suitable action in a transparent and time bound manner. 
                             (Para 5.25) 
Action Taken 
2.45 Ministry of AYUSH issued an order to all State Licensing Authorities on 28.7.2020 to 
forward license applications of any AYUSH formulations claiming to have underwent  Clinical 
trial/research studies for COVID-19 to Ministry of AYUSH for verification. The State Licensing 
Authorities were also directed to grant license to any such formulation only after obtaining 
clearance from the Central Govt. 
Observation/Recommendation 
2.46 The Committee also takes into cognizance the directives issued by Ministry on 2nd April, 
2020 to all States/UTs Licensing Authorities and Drug Controllers of AYUSH to expedite the 
process of granting approval/license/renewal of license for manufacturing of  ASU immunity 
boosting healthcare products and sanitizers. The Committee however, would like to caution that 
Government should instruct the State licensing authorities not to rush through the process of 
granting approvals to new ASU products at the cost of  public health. Despite the growing 
demand in the wake of the COVID -19 pandemic, the usual safety standards and approval 
mechanisms for AYUSH products must be strictly followed and there should be no compromise 
with safety of the people who are using these  products. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
the Ministry to grant approvals/license only after following the due procedure, strict monitoring 
of the products, keeping in mind the rights of consumers and protect lives of the people using the 
AYUSH products. 
(Para 5.26) 

54 
 
Action Taken 
2.47 In the wake of the COVID -19 outbreak, entire mankind across the globe is suffering. 
Enhancing the body‟s natural defense system (immunity) plays an importance role in 
maintaining optimum health. The government has issued guidelines for expediting the process 
for grant of approval/license/renewal of license for manufacturing of Ayurveda, Siddha & Unani 
immunity boosting healthcare products and sanitizers to all states/ UTs licensing authorities and 
drug controllers on 02.04 .2020. Due to the urgent need of meeting the challenge of increased 
demand of ASU health care products; the State Licensing Authorities/ Drug controllers  have 
been directed to  complete the licensing/approval/renewal process expeditiously and dispose of 
the applications of the manufacturers maximum within a week‟s time provided the prescribed 
standards and relevant provisions of the Drugs & Cosmetics Rules, 1945, in terms of use of 
ingredients and permitted excipients in accordance with the authoritative b ooks including 
Pharmacopoeias and Formularies are fulfilled. 
Management of Post-COVID Complications 
Observation/Recommendation 
2.48 Acknowledging the efficacy of AYUSH system in boosting the immunity of the person, the 
Government of India inducted various AYUSH practices of healthcare to facilitate faster 
recuperation of health of recovered COVID 19 patients. With respect to AYUSH, the Ministry 
has advised to take immunity promoting AYUSH medicine as practiced and prescribed by a 
qualified practitioner of A YUSH, daily practice of Yogasana, Pranayama and Meditation, as 
much as health permits or as prescribed. The Committee is of the considered view that post 
COVID follow-up is as important as taking medications while suffering from COVID. 
                               (Para 6.7) 
Action Taken 
Action Taken by the Ministry of H&FW 
2.49 Regarding the observations of the Hon‟ble Standing Committee, apart from the 
administrative and technical actions (as replied to para 6.5 above), all Central Government 
hospitals inform the patients in writing at the time of discharge to follow up in post -COVID 
follow-up clinics. This is a regular practice. 
Action Taken by the Ministry of AYUSH 
2.50 On 06.03.2020 a letter to all Chief Secretaries of States/ Union territories was se nt from 
the Ministry of AYUSH with more specific suggestions on augmentation of General Immunity 
of people and about possible AYUSH interventions.  
2.51 Guidelines for Registered Practitioners of respective system of AYUSH including 
Homoeopathy have been  prepared by Director Generals of Research Councils and Directors of 
National Institutes with their team of experts and after vetting by the Interdisciplinary AYUSH 
Research and Development Task Force of Ministry of AYUSH these guidelines are made 

55 
 
available in public domain for the benefit of registered AYUSH practitioners to help in the 
management of COVID 19 pandemic uniformly.  
2.52 Ministry has also released 'National Clinical Management Protocol on Ayurveda and 
Yoga for COVID -19' on 06.10.2020 wherein Yo ga protocol for post Covid care Yogasana, 
Pranayama and Meditation has been mentioned. 
Combating the Challenges of Pandemic COVID-19  
2.53 The Committee observes that closure of OPD services in government hospitals in the 
wake of outbreak of pandemic Covid-19 crippled the healthcare delivery system in the country. 
Non-Covid patients especially female patients and the patients with chronic and lethal diseases 
were the worst sufferers. The Committee is pained at the reported death of at least 61 pregnant  
women and 877 newborns in Meghalaya in the four months after April 2020. 
                               (Para 7.7) 
2.54 ASHA and ANM workers that play a crucial role in ensuring good maternal health and 
promoting institutional delivery were all engaged in community surveillance and contact tracing. 
The Committee notes that health machinery was diverted to fight the pandemic which left the 
poor public without a  healthcare support system. The Ministry needs to learn from its mistakes 
and work towards establi shing a resilient public health system that does not collapse in view of 
any future outbreaks. 
                               (Para 7.8) 
Action Taken 
2.55 MoHFW developed and communicated a guidance to the States, periodically to ensure 
continuing delivery of essential health services. These essential health services include 
reproductive, maternal, new -born and child health, prevention and management of 
communicable diseases, treatment for chronic diseases to avoid complications, and addressing 
emergencies. These measures were taken to maintain people‟s trust in health system and to 
minimize increase in mortality and morbidity from other conditions. 
2.56 All these measures related to essential health services were undertaken after travel 
restriction/ lockdown was enforced nationally, in end of March 2020. States were 
communicated regarding exemption of all essential health services from lockdown measures 
and need for facilitating movement of patients and healthcare providers. In an order dated 10th 
April 2020, MoHFW re-emphasized the need for continuing essential health services. 
2.57 In order to ensure continuous delivery of services, states were asked to use additional 
funds released under HSS pool an d funds released under „India COVID -19 Emergency 
Response and Health System Preparedness Package‟.  Ministry has supported the States/UTs 
through several mechanisms including by utilizing available resources  and further by 
providing additional resources to manage the pandemic as well as to develop strong and 
resilient public health systems to deal with such situations in future. 
 
 

56 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
2.58 The Committee notes that disruption of medical services for Non -Covid patients during 
lockdown paralyzed the delivery of essential healthcare services. Particularly, the diagnosis and 
treatment of other services did take a backseat which even led to many non -Covid deaths. The 
Committee also agrees that the cost of health service delivery increased d ue to absence of 
specific guidelines for Covid treatment in private hospitals as a result of which patients were 
charged exorbitant fees. 
                            (Para 7.21) 
Action Taken  
2.59 To ensure that essential health services including treatmen t for non -COVID patients 
should not suffer, Union Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has issued guidance early during 
the pandemic for enabling delivery of essential health services, in particular for Immunization; 
Essential Reproductive, Maternal, Newbor n, Child, Adolescent Health Plus Nutrition 
(RMNCAH+N) Services; mental health etc.  
 Realizing the complex relationship between some of the major health problems like HIV, TB, 
vector borne diseases, non-communicable diseases, specific advisories were issued to maintain 
operations so as to retain the advances India has made in tackling these public health 
problems.  
 Standard operating procedures were issued for continuity of the specialized services such as 
ENT, Ophthalmic care and Dental services. 
 The issue of fixing treatment prices for the private hospitals for COVID-19 treatment was sub-
juiced before the Hon‟ble Court in Writ Petition (Civil) No.863 of 2020, wherein on the 
directions of the Hon‟ble Ministry of Health & Family Welfare gave a normative guida nce for 
fixation of treatment cost in private hospitals. 
2.60 Health is a State subject. The responsibility of engaging private hospitals in treating 
COVID cases is that of the State Government. Union Health Secretary has written to all 
States/UTs to engage private hospitals through mutually agreeable arrangements. Rates under 
PM-JAY and CGHS packages have been advised. States have accordingly issued instructions to 
that affect orhave evolved models to suit their specific State requirements. 
Observation/Recommendation 
2.61 The Committee notes that violence against women increased during the lockdown period 
as the perpetrators of violence and susceptible both stayed at home due to compulsion of 
lockdown. The Committee strongly recommends the Go vernment to identify such women who 
have been the victims of sexual and domestic violence during the pandemic and rehabilitate 
them. The Committee would like the Ministry to create specific hotlines, telemedicine services, 
rape crisis centers for women and  the counseling of victims or survivors of violence. The 
Ministry should further ensure that instances of gender -based violence are reported and timely 
actions are taken against the perpetrators. 
                             (Para 7.33) 

57 
 
Action Taken 
2.62 „Police‟ and „Public Order‟ are State subjects under the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution of India. The responsibilities to maintain law and order, protection of life and 
property of the citizens including investigation and prosecution of crime against women rest with 
the respective State Governments. The State Governments are competent to deal with such 
offences under the extant provisions of laws. However, MHA has taken a number of initiatives 
for safety of women across the county, which are given below:- 
o Emergency Response Support System has been operationalised in 33 States/UTs. This 
System provides a pan -India, single internationally recognized number (112) based 
system for all emergencies, with computer aided dispatch of field resources to the 
location of distress.  
o MHA issued a comprehensive advisory to all States and UTs on July 6, 2020, inter -alia, 
advising them to take special measures and initiatives in their jurisdiction in view of the 
situation emerging from Covid -19 pandemic which has made a  large number of women 
and children vulnerable to exploitation and crime. States and UTs were advised to 
strengthen law enforcement response against trafficking of persons and make use of the 
funds to the tune of Rs. 100 crores released to them in March 20 20 for establishing Anti 
Human Trafficking Units in each district of the State/UT. There were also advised to 
evolve special coordination mechanisms amongst States to mitigate the distress to women 
and children and run community awareness programmes at var ious levels to make 
vulnerable people aware of the threat of exploitation by unscrupulous persons. States and 
UTs were advised to make best use of various technological platforms established by 
MHA for disseminating and sharing information about any crime.  They were also 
advised to sensitise police personnel at all levels and suitably brief them in their regional 
language for better understanding of the situation and taking appropriate action in close 
coordination with local Panchayats, Village watch & ward , Neighborhood Committee 
and Shelter for Destitute Women etc. 
o The Criminal Law (Amendment), Act 2013 was enacted for effective deterrence against 
sexual offences. Further, the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2018 was enacted to 
prescribe even more stringent penal provisions including death penalty for rape of girls 
below the age of 12 years. The Act also inter -alia mandates completion of investigation 
nd trials within 2 months each.  
o MHA has launched an online analytic tool “Investigation Tracking System for Sexual 
Offences” to monitor and track time -bound investigation in sexual assault cases in 
accordance with Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2018. 
o In order to improve investigation, MHA has taken steps to strengthen DNA analysis units 
in Central and State Foren sic Science Laboratories. This includes setting up of State -of-
the-Art DNA Analysis Unit in Central Forensic Science Laboratory, Chandigarh MHA 
has also sanctioned setting up and upgrading of DNA Analysis units in State Forensic 
Science Laboratories in 20 States/UTs. 
o MHA has notified guidelines for collection of forensic evidence in sexual assault cases 
and the standard composition in a sexual assault evidence collection kits to facilitate 
adequate capacity in manpower, training and skill building programs for Investigation 
Officers, Prosecution Officers and Medical Officers.  

58 
 
o While the Government had been advising the States/UTs to set up exclusive Women 
Help Desks in Police Stations, and few States had also acted in this regard.  In order to 
fast-track the  exercise, MHA has sanctioned Rs. 100 crores to States/UTs in 2020 for 
setting up Women Help Desks in 10,000 Police Stations. These Desks shall focus on 
making the Police Stations more women friendly and approachable as the first and single 
point of contact for any woman coming to a police station; ensuring a Lady police officer 
is deployed at these held desks; and ensuring police officials to be posted on these Desks 
undergo sensitization programmes.  
o MHA has launched a cyber-crime reporting portal on 20th September 2018 for citizens to 
report obscene content.  
o In addition to the above -mentioned measures, MHA has been issuing advisories from 
time to time to States/UTs to deal with crimes against women, which are available at 
www.mha.gov.in   
Observation/Recommendation 
2.63 The Committee also recommends the Ministry of Health and family Welfare to set 
realistic physical targets and achievable timelines. The Ministry should plan and monitor its 
financial resources so that the goals are achieved, and undue delay is avoided. The Committee 
strongly recommends the Ministry to chalk out a financial plan so that the allocated budget is 
fully and timely utilized. 
                            (Para 8.17) 
Action Taken 
2.64 MoHFW follows a output – outcome framework f or the programmatic activities under 
the Central sector schemes and Central sponsored schemes. The financial resources and 
expenditure is monitored by AS & FA and Secretary (H) against the stringent norms by 
Department of Expenditure.   
 The allocation and expenditure by way of releases to the States/UTs under National Health 
Mission shows a positive increasing trend. Further, States/UTs are also instructed to increase 
their State sector health spending to >8% of their budget by 2020.  
 Expenditure under NHM is continuously maintained at more than 95%. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

59 
 
Chapter–III  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Administrative Management of Lockdown & Unlocking 
Observation/Recommendation 
3.1 The Committee observes that after a steady increase in the number of Covid Cases across 
the country, there has been a downtrend in Covid Cases. However, the Committee strongly feels 
that the threat of Covid -19 is still looming large on the country keeping in view the second and 
third wave in European countries and spike in Delhi. The Secretary, Department of Health and 
Family Welfare also expressed concern over the possible spike in the incidence of the Covid 
cases due to super spreading forthcoming festive events in the country and advent of the winter 
season. The Ministry should, therefore, take effective measures to control the scale of incidence 
of Covid-19 in the country. The Committee also recommends the States with  high case load to 
adopt robust strategy for containment and mitigation of Covid-19. 
                                      (Para 1.54) 
Action Taken 
3.2 MoHFW continues to monitor COVID-19 situation in States, right up to the district level 
on a day-to-day basis. Based on the trajectories, States are being identified where the following 
actions are being taken: 
i. Continuous interactions with States/UTs through Video conferences (VCs) at the level of 
Hon‟ble Prime Minister, Hon‟ble HFM, Cabinet Secretary and Secretary (Health). 
ii. Formal communications sent out to urge States on specific issues like containment 
operations, testing, IEC on COVID appropriate behavior in view of winter months and 
festive season, etc. 
iii. Specific advisories were issued on COVID -19 managem ent in context of festivities, 
marketplaces etc.  
iv. Orders under Disaster Management Act, 2005 were issued by Ministry of Home Affairs 
on 25th November 2020 on strict implementation of MoHFW‟ s COVID -19 surveillance, 
containment and caution to be exercised for the same. 
v. Central teams were deployed to 18 States/UTs from September 2020 to April, 2021 to 
review the ground situation. In April, 2021,  53 teams were deployed to districts of 
Maharashtra (30 teams), Punjab (9 teams), Chhattisgarh (11 teams) and Gujarat (3 
teams). Another Central team was deployed to Jammu and Kashmir in May 2021. 
3.3 In view of detection of mutant variant of SARS -CoV-2 in United Kingdom, all flights 
originating from U.K into India were suspended temporarily from 22 nd December to 7 th January 
2021. Regulated resumption of limited flights originating from United Kingdom (UK) to India 
has been allowed from 8 th January 2021. Government of India has taken a number of steps to 
prevent spread of mutant SARS-CoV-2 variant spread in the country: 

60 
 
i. All flights to UK were banned till from December 23, 2020 to 7th January 2021. 
ii. Resumption of limited international flight s ervices to/from UK was allowed with effect 
from 8th January 2021 in a calibrated manner. SOPs to be followed for such passengers 
was issued by Ministry of Health & Family Welfare.  
iii. On 17 th February 2021, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in consultation with 
Ministry of Civil Aviation issued a revised „Guidelines for international arrivals‟ 
(available at: 
https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/Guidelinesforinternationalarrivals17022021.pdf). 
iv. An advisory has been issued to States to remain vigilant of any rapid outburst of cases 
which may indicate localized and thus manageable transmission of variant strains of 
SARS-CoV-2. 
v. Multi-disciplinary teams were deployed to 10 States/UTs (Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jammu 
& Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Tamil Nadu and 
West Bengal) in February-March 2021 to review the preparedness and response. 
3.4 Due to the whole of Government approach, with specific emphasis  of the Government to 
limit the spread during festivities, contrary to expectations of a spike in number of cases, a 
sustained decline in National trajectory of COVID -19 cases and deaths was observed during the 
period September 2020 to January 2021. 
Further Recommendation 
3.5 In view of the loss of life during the second wave of the Covid -19 pandemic, the 
Committee believes that the measures taken by the Ministry to contain/prevent spread of 
SARS-COV-2 proved to be squarely inadequate. The Committee believes that focus should 
be on strengthening of health infrastructure, ensuring adequate availability of beds, 
adequate supply of oxygen cylinders and essential medicines etc . Besides, the G overnment 
must aggressively keep pushing the vaccination program me in terms of granting approval 
to more vaccines, ramping up vaccines’ production, enhancing delivery capacity and 
increasing the vaccination rate.  
 
3.6 With the incidence of highly mutated Omicron (B.1.1.529) strain of Covid virus, the 
Committee strongly believes that the efficacy of the vaccines must be evaluated. The concerns 
with regards to the new strain developing immunoescape mechanism need to be critically 
addressed. The Committee apprehends that rise in mutations in the virus may lead to reporting 
of more virulent and transmissi ble strain of C ovid virus  in the country . The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to adopt Zero Tolerance C ovid-19 Policy and 
closely track Covid cases across the country.  
 
CONTINGENCY PLAN 
Observation/Recommendation 
3.7 The Committee observes that only 33, 330 and 8,64,517 tests were conducted in the 
month of March and April respectively which increased to 33,878,288 in the month of October. 
The Committee believes that poor contact tracing a nd less testing could have been a factor for 
the exponential growth of COVID cases in the country. The Committee is also worried at the use 

61 
 
of less reliable diagnostic tests which increase the chances of false negatives. Though the Rapid 
Antigen Tests may give faster results but are less reliable than the gold standard RT -PCR tests. 
Large scale use of such tests with low specificity and sensitivity may end up giving false 
negatives and subsequently derail the Covid -19 containment strategy. The Committee is of the 
view that the Government must assess the veracity of Rapid Antigen Test vis -à-vis RT-PCR and 
other diagnostic tests conducted to bring forth the true picture of the testing capacity in the 
country.  
3.8 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to ramp up the testing 
facilities in the country for more accurate tests. The Committee strongly recommends the testing 
rate through the more reliable RT-PCR tests. 
                                    (Para 2.46) 
Action Taken 
3.9 A joint letter has been issued by Secretary, Health & Family Welfare and Secretary, 
Department of Health Research & DG, ICMR to all States on 9th Dec 2020. Following issues 
have been conveyed to the States: 
o RATs should be used for diagnosis of pre -symptomatic or early symptomatic individuals 
where the viral load is expected to be high.  
o Their use in patients who present after 5 - 7 days of onset of symptoms is not 
recommended.  
o RATs must not take precedence over RT -PCR tests. The use of RATs should be 
restricted to < 30 - 40% in the States.  
o Strictly follow the ICMR algorithm for using RATs to avoid missing of cases.  
o States have also been advised to explore mechanisms for batch testing of the RAT kits 
being procured by them.  
o Additionally, a parallel mechanism is a lso being set up by CDSCO/DCG(I) for batches 
testing.  
3.10 Besides, ICMR has also written to the RAT kit vendors to ensure consistency among 
different batches and improve the quality of kits wherever possible. 
Further Recommendation 
3.11 The Committee bel ieves that timely  detection and isolation of potentially infectious 
people is very crucial in reducing the impact of the pandemic  Covid-19. The importance of 
diagnostic testing therefore, cannot be overlooked. An efficient and widely  deployed testing 
mechanism will go a long way in preventing  the spread of the infection . The Committee is 
pained to note that although the second wave came almost six months after the peak of the 
first wave, India’s testing infrastructure remained abysm al and highly insufficient. The 
Committee is of the opinion that to contain pandemic Covid-19 and its mutated strains, 
India must realise its full testing capacity and augment ’s this capacity even further. The 
government should ensure that the testing should  far o utpace the growth of the cases to 
arrest future waves of Covid-19 early.  

62 
 
3.12 The Committee also notes that with the new strain of Covid, Omicron (B.1.1.529) 
exhibiting 30+ mutations, tracking and testing facilities especially at airports must also be 
strengthened. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to explore imposing travel 
restrictions and isolating passengers  from 'at-risk' countries, as part of their new covid strain 
containment strategy. With WHO designating Omicorn as "Variant of Conce rn", the 
Government must take immediate measures to prevent the transmission of any newer strains 
in the country.  
Observation/Recommendation 
3.13 The Committee finds that the healthcare workers lack the skills required for epidemic 
outbreak investigation, contact tracing, counseling, home care and community mobilization. The 
Committee underlines an urgent need for capacity building and maintaining the pool of health 
resources to fight against the outbreak of the pandemic. The Committee strongly supports th e 
demand for the 'Indian Health Service' (IHS) in the Center and across States as a dedicated, 
efficient, and adequately resourced public health cadre on the pattern of Indian Administrative 
Service (IAS). Creation of Indian Health Service (IHS) can help i n streamlining the healthcare 
delivery as envisaged in the National Health Policy 2017. 
                             (Para 2.58) 
3.14 The Committee applauds the ASHA, ANM and Anganwadi workers who were at the 
forefront of community surveillance and risked their lives at these challenging times. The 
Committee expresses its anguish over the instances of ASHA workers being mistreated engaged 
for contact tracing and that too in the absence of safety equipment like masks, PPE kits for them. 
The Committee is also  pained to note that community health workers were denied wages even 
though they are the foot soldiers of the healthcare system. It is too much to expect from the 
community health workers to accomplish big task without proper training, incentives and 
support from the health system. The Committee strongly advocates for strengthening the network 
of ASHAs, ANMs and other community health workers and the necessary support in the 
healthcare delivery system. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to improve t he quality 
of training imparted to health workers to enable them to provide effective and efficient delivery 
of healthcare services.  
 
3.15 Regular training to the community health workers and Anganwadi workers particularly 
in the post COVID scenario of increasing incidence of Covid-19 cases and complexities involved 
in the post Covid -19 treatment of infected persons has become more relevant and an inevitable 
intervention.  
                             (Para 2.61) 
3.16 The Committee expresses concern over the large numbers of vacancies in secondary and 
tertiary public hospitals which considerably increases the dependence on private providers and 
contractual workers. In its earlier reports, the Committee has been pointing  out gross shortage 
of healthcare workforce in the country. The Committee urges upon the Ministry to fill up the 
posts of specialist lying vacant at Community Health Centres (CHC); doctors at Primary Health 

63 
 
Centres (PHC), ANMs and nurses at accentuated pac e to meet India‟s health needs without any 
further delay. 
                             (Para 2.62) 
Action Taken 
3.17 Public health and hospitals are State subjects, thus the primary responsibility of 
extending safety provisions to their health employees/workers including ASHAs deployed for 
Covid related activities, lies with the respective States/UTs. However, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Government of India, has requested States/UTs for extending all support as 
well as making necessar y provisions for the safety of ASHAs. Under the ASHA Incentives 
and Benefit Package, provisions have been made for providing masks, hand sanitizers and 
training on the subject including observance of social distancing norms while undertaking 
field work. Fu rther, the benefit under “PradhanMantriGaribKalyan Package: Insurance 
Scheme for Health Workers Fighting COVID 19”, has been launched to provide an insurance 
cover of Rs. 50 lakhs to public health providers including community health workers/ ASHAs, 
who ma y be at risk of being impacted by COVID19. The Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare, Govt. of India has provisions of additional incentive of Rs. 1000 per month under the 
“India COVID 19 Emergency Response and Health Systems Preparedness Package” to 
ASHAs for undertaking COVID 19 related activities for the period of their engagement in this 
work. An additional incentive of Rs. 500 per month is provided for ASHA facilitators. 
 
 Training Modules have been made available on iGOT online platform by DOPT 
(https://igot.gov.in/igot) where pre -curated content can be accessed on all devices  -
smart phones, tablets, laptops, PCs  -by multiple learners simultaneously at the time 
and place of their choice  .The training modules have been translated to regional 
language. Currently, there are 12 courses in different languages which have been 
uploaded under the MoHFW tab on the website including courses on topics like- 
 
o Basics of COVID-19 
o Quarantine and isolation 
o Infection prevention through PPE 
o Psychological care of patients with COVID-19 
o Infection prevention and control 
o Laboratory sample collection and testing 
o Clinical management of COVID-19 
o Management of COVID-19 
o ICU Care and Ventilation Management  
3.18 Close to 1.36 million courses have been registered into till date. This includes 5,710 
Doctors, 86,137 AYUSH professionals, 4,103 Nurses, 967 Allied Health Professionals, 5,884 
frontline workers, 2,70,910 volunteers and 26,25,914 other participants. About 19.22 lakh 
course completions have taken place on iGOT- Diksha platform. 
 
 Further, with respect to vacancies in various healthcare facilities, it is reiterated that 
Public health and Hospitals, being a State subject, the primary responsibility to ensure 

64 
 
availability of health human resources in States/UTs, lies with  the respective State/UT 
Governments. However, under National Health Mission (NHM), financial and 
technical support is provided to States/ UTs to strengthen their healthcare systems 
including support for engagement of doctors and other human healthcare wor kers, 
based on the requirements posed by them in their Programme Implementation Plans 
(PIPs) within their overall resource envelope. 
 A statement showing Human Resource (Contractual) engaged under National Health 
Mission (NHM) during last five years is give n at Annexure VII. The said statement 
reflects that the Government has made sustained efforts to improve availability of key 
service delivery personnel in the public health facilities in last five years as a result of 
which 1,99,117 additional health staff  have   been   engaged  through NHM alone in 
the last five years. With this, the total number of service delivery personnel supported 
under the NHM, as on June 2020, stood at 12,77,267. (Annexure VII). 
 Further 1,91,345 additional Human Health Resource in v arious categories have been 
engaged for COVID pandemic in States/UTs under the COVID Package till September 
2020 for which details are given at Annexure VIII . 
 Also, states were requested to ensure that incentive for routine and recurrent activities 
(Rs. 2000 per month) was paid in full for all the ASHAs, using the resources under 
COVID19 Package as well.  
 States were further communicated in April 2020 itself, to support ASHAs by 
supplying adequate PPE and ensuring her protection and were suggested to provi de 
ASHAs with Identity card and facilitating her movement in teams. 
 On 22ndApril 2020, an ordinance to the Epidemic Disease Act, 1897 was promulgated 
to protect healthcare personnel and property including their living/working premises 
against violence during epidemics. 
 Substantial reforms have been undertaken in the area ofHuman Resources, to ensure 
that the investments in infrastructure were leveraged efficiently to ensure population 
health outcomes.   
 To avoid duplication and enable efficient use of h uman resources, personnel under 
various vertical programmes including for disease control were merged using a 
systematic integrated approach.  
 NHM enabled the augmentation of human resources, with nearly 30% of the NHM 
budget committed to supporting 14.2 l akh personnel ranging from ASHAs to 
specialists, supplementing the HR in states.  
 Innovative measures such as “You Quote We Pay” and differential remuneration based 
on the degree of difficulty of place of posting, have also resulted in increased 
availability of HR in difficult and remote areas. 
 Human Resource Information System (HRIS) is a key administrative HR reform for 
regular and contractual staff, that provides comprehensive real time information on 
actual numbers of HR posted in facilities and in managerial positions, facilitating salary 
payments and transfer postings.   
 Another key area of focus is investment in capacity building and mentoring for all 
cadres of personnel, with a focus on multi -skilling and task sharing to address HR 
shortages. Developing Ddistrict Hospitals as training hubs for nursing and allied staff, 
has also been undertaken.   

65 
 
 NHM has supported 50,000 program management staff with skills in public health, 
finance, planning, management and M&E to plan and implement interventions, freeing 
up clinical staff to undertake their duties. The use of minimum performance indicators 
and benchmarks were developed and shared with the States. 
 As far as medical education is concerned, several landmark reforms have been 
undertaken in the last six  years. The National Medical Commission Act, 2019 for 
constitution of a National Medical Commission in place of Medical Council of India has 
been enacted. This will go in a long way in improving the quality of medical education, 
bringing it at par with the  international standards  .A uniform entrance examination 
namely National Eligibility cum Entrance Test (NEET) along with provisions for 
common counseling were introduced for admission to UG / PG medical and dental 
courses to promote merit and transparency in admission process. Further, 158 new 
medical colleges have been opened in the last six years. As a result, annual intake for 
MBBS has increased by 57% from 51112 in 2014 to 80312 in 2019. Similarly, the PG 
seats have also increased by 79% from 30,191 in 2014 to 54,094 in 2020. Besides, under 
the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for establishment of new medical colleges, 
establishment of 157 new medical colleges have been planned, out of which, 43 have 
become functional. These measures are accelerating improved access to tertiary care and 
expansion of medical education in underserved areas . 
 Regarding other sectors of health education, the proposal for constituting a regulatory 
body for all the allied and healthcare professionals, ‘The National Commission for 
Allied and Healthcare Professionals Bill ’, is being processed. On the similar lines, 
reforms in regulatory mechanism of dental and nursing education are being envisaged.  
3.19 We acknowledge the shortfall in HR and d espite the above -mentioned reforms, Stat es 
need to expedite action to filling in regular cadre vacancies and creating new positions, so that 
the reliance on contractual workforce is minimized.  Progress in adopting and scaling up these 
HR reforms has been uneven across states and needs substantial strengthening and accelerated 
implementation, including infusion of additional funds. 
Further Recommendation 
3.20     The Committee reiterates its recommendation for creation of  the 'Indian Health 
Service' (IHS) in the Center and across States as a dedicated, efficient, and adequately 
resourced public health cadre on the pattern of India n Administrative Service (IAS). It  
also recommends that the Ministry should issue specific guidelines to the states regarding 
timely payment of wages to the heal thcare workers particularly who are the foot soldiers 
of the healthcare system. The Committee further strongly advocates for strengthening the 
network of ASHAs, ANMs and other community health workers and the necessary 
support in the healthcare delivery sy stem. The Committee underlines the need to expedite 
the reforms in regulatory mechanism of dental and nursing education.  
Observation/Recommendation 
3.21 The Committee notes that the healthcare workers had to work under huge stress due to 
shortage of PPE kits amidst impending threat of corona virus infection as a result, quite many of 
them had to lose their precious lives. The Committee pays tribute to the doctors and nurses who 

66 
 
have sacrificed their lives while combating Covid -19. The Ministry needs to ensure that there is 
no shortage of personal protective equipment (PPE) kits. The Committee also recommends the 
Ministry to ensure the adequate supply of oxygen cylinders with appropriate price caps. 
                             (Para 2.72) 
Action Taken 
3.22 In the initial part of the pandemic, healthcare workers got affected due to inappropriate 
Infection, Prevention and Control practices within the hospitals  but more so they acquired the 
infection in their residential community set-ups. 
3.23 At the onset of COVID pandemic, there were no indigenous manufacturers of PPEs with 
requisite standards. This capacity was up -scaled with involvement of Ministry of Texti les, 
Department of pharmaceuticals, CDSCCO, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, DGFT, NPPA and 
multipronged strategy of promoting indigenous manufacturers and ensuring market availability, 
ban on exports and price control was put in place.  
3.24 More than 1100 domestic manufacturers of PPE coveralls have cleared quality test. More 
than 100 Licenses were issued by BIS for manufacturing of FFP2/N -95 with manufacturing 
capacity of more than 25 lakhs per day. Orders were also placed for 4.67 crore N -95 masks. 
States and Central Government Institutions have been supported with 1.76 crore of PPE Kits and 
4.22 crores N-95 masks. 
3.25 Government of India continues to monitor and support States to ensure supply of medical 
oxygen for patient care. So far 1,02,400 oxygen cyl inders have been supplied to States/UTs/ 
Central Government hospitals. Other initiatives are detailed in response to para 2.38 above. 
Further Recommendation 
3.26 The Committee is constrained to observe that the recent Second W ave of the Covid-
19 saw unprecedented price escalation and shortage of oxygen cylinder and other critical 
equipments and drugs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Governments must 
set up adequate Oxygen manufacturing plants and a robust supply and support mechanism 
for S tates to ensure uninterrupted supply of oxygen and other medical equipments and 
drugs for use under  emergency situation . The Committee is also concerned about the 
exorbitant prices of the cri tical medicines during pandemics. Given  the fact that  the 
National Pharmaceutical Pricing  Authority (NPPA) updates the price caps of such 
medicines and drugs, the Committee, recommends a  strict and regular monitoring over 
adherence to this price capping, especially in the event of pandemic like situation.  
Observation/Recommendation 
3.27 The Committee observes that disposal of biomedical waste has become a big challenge in 
the wake of the pandemic. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to 
ensure that the States strictly implement the guidelines on management of corona virus related 
bio-medical waste and take all sorts of requisite safety measures. 
                             (Para 2.73) 

67 
 
Action Taken 
3.28 MoHFW is sensitive to the importance of establishing a robust mechanism of bio-medical 
waste management including segregation, collection, transportation and final disposal especially 
during the pandemic COVID-19.  
3.29 For supporting the States, following  steps have been undertaken for implementation of 
the management of Coronavirus related bio-medical wastes: - 
1. Guidelines for the management of Bio Medical Waste i.e. Bio Medical Waste Rule 2016 and 
its amendment in 2018 & 2019 are already available in the country.  
2. For the effective management of COVID -19 waste, Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) 
issued Guidelines on 18th March 2020 for handling, treatment & disposal of waste generated 
during treatment/diagnosis/Quarantine of COVID-19 patients.   It was further disseminated to 
all  the States and UTs. The CPCB guidelines for the management of COVID waste were 
uploaded in https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/ on 5th April 2020. 
3. These guidelines were further amended on 2 5th March 2020,  18th April 2020 and 17th July 
2020 and disseminated to the states/UTs.  
4. A digital tracking system in consultation with CPCB was created, that can monitor the 
lifecycle of waste from collection, segregation, transportation and incineration b y geo -
tagging each process and submission of details on a common platform through mobile app 
namely „COVID19BWM‟. 
5. Orientation of all nodal officers and other facility staff  in Quality Assurance Programme and 
BMW was carried out  on 29th May 2020, through webinar organized by NHSRC. 
6. Short video was created to effectively manage COVID related BMW and it was disseminated 
to all the States/ UTs.  
7. The MoHFW has also issued guidelines to control transmission of infection of COVID -19 in 
home and Quarantine facili ties that includes management of COVID -19 related wastes like 
disposal of masks and uploaded in 
https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/Guidelinesforhomequarantine.pdf & 
https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/ 
3.30 Public Health, Sanitation in hospitals and dispensaries is a State subject. Under NHM, the 
Ministry provides technical and financial support to  the States for improving their health care 
system.  Such support is provided only till the District Hospital level in the State.    However, 
implementation of NHM rests with the respective State Governments. 
Further Recommendation  
3.31 The Committee believes that Covid -19 pandemic has brought to the fore the 
importance of bio-medical waste collection, management and its disposal.  Now-a-days, the 
management of biomedical waste has become a major concern as bio -medical waste is 
being generated not only from hospitals but also from households.  The Committee, 
therefore, r ecommends, that the capacity of the 200 odd Common Bio -medical Waste 
Treatment Facilities (CBWTF)  spread across the nation  must be augmented  for their 
optimal utilisation . The ULBs (Urban Local Bodies), concerned authorities and other 

68 
 
stakeholders must be directed  to ensure  minimal leakages in the waste (bio -medical) 
journey from point of origin to disposal. States need to be sensitized about the guidelines of  
disposal of biomedical waste. For this to happen, p roper training and awareness 
programmes should be organized at the district and block level to educate both the workers 
of municipalities and the public at large for better bio-medical waste management.  
Observation/Recommendation 
3.32 Noting the SWOT analysis of contingent and containment plan of the Government shared 
by the stakeholders, the Committee feels that adequate primary and secondary healthcare 
infrastructure needs to be put in place especially in the rural areas by increasing  requisite 
investment on physical infrastructure. The Ministry should also increase the number of VRDLs 
across different States so that testing capacity in the country is upgraded manifold. The 
Committee also strongly recommends that every State should est ablish at least one medical 
college and hospital as 'Centre of Excellence'. The Committee desires the Ministry to issue clear 
guidelines on facilities for teleconsultation and encourage the participation of the public through 
various awareness and outreach  programs. Panchayat and community leaders need to be 
actively involved for dissemination of information regarding hand washing, physical distancing 
and use of masks. The Committee also advocates researchand development and innovation in the 
healthcare sector and increase the medical device manufacturing capacity in the country. 
                            (Para 2.79) 
3.33 The Committee is of the view that Districts and States with poor public health sector need 
to be identified on priority and provided the  required infrastructure for tracing, testing and 
treatment by providing the required financial aid. The Committee calls upon the Ministry to 
make best use of the extra-ordinary situation arising out of the outbreak of pandemic COVID -19 
for strengthening t he primary and secondary healthcare services. The Ministry should take all 
the necessary measures to promote private consumption and investments in the country. A 
second wave of COVID has been witnessed in European countries and the Committee, therefore, 
feels that India must also be prepared to combat a possible second wave of Corona especially in 
the ensuing winter season and super-spreading series of festive events. 
                             (Para 2.80) 
Action Taken 
3.34 Atma Nirbhar Swasth Bharat initiative underlines the commitment of the Government for 
Increased investments in Public Health and other health reforms to prepare India for future 
pandemics. An Expenditure Finance Committee proposal for about Rs. 64179.75 Crores has 
been approved under the Budget 2021-22. The proposal has the following major components: 
i. Additional resources for COVID-19 emergency response. 
ii. Strengthening of Public Health Infrastructure for pandemic preparedness 
a. Establishment of dedicated infectious disease management ho spital blocks in 
district hospitals 
b. Strengthening/Establishment of Integrated Public Health Laboratories 

69 
 
c. Strengthening/Establishment of Ayushman Bharat Health and Wellness centres 
d. Strengthening surveillance of infectious diseases and outbreak response  
e. Strengthening ports of entry into country  
f. Strengthening Disaster and Epidemic Preparedness 
g. Knowledge Exchange and Capacity building through tele -consultation and 
leveraging on Information Technology 
h. Central Institutions as mentor institutions  
i. Support for se tting up National Digital Health Mission (NDHM) and 
strengthening Digital Health Services 
j. Bio security preparedness and strengthening Pandemic Research 
3.35 Apart from 117 Aspirational Districts identified under  based upon composite indicators 
from Health  & Nutrition, Education, Agriculture & Water Resources, Financial Inclusion and 
Skill Development and Basic Infrastructure, the Atma Nirbhar Swasth Bharat initiative has also 
prioritized the districts for capacity development.  
3.36 In the context of COVID, all Districts are being monitored based on key performance 
indicators related to surveillance, testing, hospital infrastructure, logistics. The Districts showing 
increase in weekly average of new cases/deaths/confirmation percentag e are prioritized for 
immediate action. With the current surge of cases, 53 such Districts have been identified, Central 
teams deployed to work in coordination with the District authorities to contain/suppress cycle of 
transmission. 
Further Recommendation  
3.37 The Committee notes the Government's efforts in combating the Covid-19, however, 
the Committee would like to be apprised of the 'plan of action' with respect to utilization of 
Rs. 64179.55 crores  allocated for strengthening of public health infrastructure for 
pandemic preparedness. The Ministry may also apprise the Committee  about the feedback 
and assessment pertaining to key performance indicators related to surveillance, testing, 
hospital infras tructure, logistics  at the district levels . The  Committee observes that the 
steps taken to combat the second wave of pandemic  were not sufficient and more concrete 
action could have been undertaken to contain the impact of Covid -19. The Committee 
believes that structural and operational corrections are required to prepare for the future 
health emerg encies. T he Committee, therefore, recommends that every State should 
establish at least one medical college and hosp ital as 'Centre of Excellence' for proper 
health surveillance during emergency situation.   
MANAGING MEDICAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
Observation/Recommendation 
3.38 The Committee also urges the Ministry to devise a plan for the availability of the vaccine. 
For this to happen, the vaccine production capacity in the country has to be considerably 

70 
 
ramped up for making the vaccine accessible to its citizens. The Committee , therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to collaborate with Serum Institute of India and other vaccine 
manufacturers so that vaccines are easily available at an affordable rate to the general public. 
The Committee calls upon the Ministry to subsidize the vacc ine cost for the weaker sections of 
the country, especially in rural and urban slum areas. The Ministry should be cautious in its 
efforts to check instances of black -marketing and shortage of vaccines. The Committee also 
recommends the Ministry to administ er the vaccines according to the WHO‟s “strategic 
allocation” approach or a multi-tiered risk-based approach. 
                             (Para 3.25) 
Action Taken 
3.39 In May 2020, Government of India constituted a Task Force headed by Principal 
Scientific Advisor to encourage R&D for vaccine manufacture. National Expert Group on 
Vaccine Administration for COVID -19 (NEGVAC) headed by Member, NITI Aayog was 
constituted in August 2020 to assist in roll out of the Covid vaccination programme. NAGVAC 
has been meeting regularly. NEGVAC has also been engaging with vaccine manufacturers. MEA 
is also facilitating collaboration with foreign manufacturers. 
3.40 NEGVAC based on a risk-based approach. Phase-I of the National Covid-19 Vaccination 
Strategy was l aunched on 16th January 2021 and focussed on protecting Health Care Workers 
(HCWs) and FrontLine Workers (FLWs). Phase -II was initiated from 1st March 2021 and 1st 
April  2021  and  focused  on protecting the most vulnerable i.e. population more than 45 ye ars 
of age. Liberalised Pricing and Accelerated National Covid -19 Vaccination Strategy came in 
effect from 1st May 2021 under which COVID -19 Vaccination was opened for persons 18 -44 
years of age groups.  
3.41 Covid-19  vaccination  will  continue  to  be  free  for  eligible  population groups  in  all  
those Government Covid  Vaccination  Centres  which  receive vaccine doses from Govt. of 
India. 
3.42 The details of current capacities of COVID -19 vaccines, manufacturer wise, is given 
below.  
S. 
No. 
Name of Firm Production Capacity (in Million 
doses / Annum) 
1 M/a Serum Institute 
of India Pvt., Ltd., 
Pune 
400-500 
2 M/s Bharat Biotech 
international Limited 
100 
3 M/s CadilaHealthcare 
Limited, Ahmadabad  
8.4 
 
Further Recommendation 

71 
 
3.43 The Committee is constrained to observe that vaccine scarcity is the major 
constraint of the Government's "Covid Vaccination" programme. The Committee wishes 
to point out that the Government failed in devising a plan for the systematic and continual 
availability of the vac cine. The Committee therefore, recommends the Ministry to 
collaborate with all the vaccine manufacturers in the country and ensure  that vaccines are 
easily available to the general public to catch pace of vaccination drive in all States/UTs.  
Observation/Recommendation 
3.44 The Committee observes that initially only NIV-Pune was equipped to carry out Covid-19 
testing; However by 1st April, testing facilities were increased to 151 labs and by 31st July, 
testing capacity was expanded to 1321 labs  which further has been expanded to 2082 labs as on 
10th November, 2020 (1143 labs in Government Sector and 939 labs in the private sector). This 
ramping up of testing capacity within few months is commendable. The Committee, however, 
finds that testing fa cility is only limited to bigger districts and cities. Lack of testing facilities in 
rural areas has also resulted in under reporting of cases. The PHCs and the CHCs are still 
largely devoid of any testing facilities and the required technical workforce. T he Committee 
strongly recommends the Ministry to establish a strong network of Viral Research & Diagnostic 
Laboratories (VRDLs) in the country to tackle the constantly increasing incidences of Covid -19 
cases. 
                             (Para 3.45) 
Action Taken 
3.45 DHR has an existent vibrant network of 118 Virus Research & Diagnostic Laboratories 
(VRDLs). The VRDLs have state of art infrastructure and capacity to undertake serological and 
molecular diagnosis of 20 -25 medically important viruses. Besides,  VRDLs provide a biosafe 
and bio secure network for detecting high risk as well as emerging / re -emerging infectious 
diseases. The network is supported financially and technically by DHR & ICMR. This support is 
proposed to continue along with expansion of the existing network. 
Further Recommendation  
3.46 The Committee  expresses its concern over prevailing disparities in health 
infrastructure including testing facilities in the rural and urban areas despite the  efforts 
put in by the Government. The Committee hopes that the Government has learnt some 
lessons from the disastrous second wave of the pandemic Covid -19. With the threat of new 
strains looming around the Government should utilise the  time in strengthening the pu blic 
health infrastructure. This is evident from the fact that unlike first wave (peaked is 
September 2020) of the Covid -19 pandemic which largely was restricted to urban areas, 
where testing was introduced rapidly, the second wave  (peaked in May)  largely spread 
through rural towns and villages. The Committee, therefore,  observes that there is dire 
need for improving the  geographical spread of testing facilities in the rural regions of the 
country. The Committee also recommends establishing sync between the PHCs/CHCs with 
the VRDLs in the states.  

72 
 
3.47 The Committee is also concerned about the efficacy of the present vaccines and the 
possibility of mutated strain like O micron evading vaccine immunity . The Committee, 
therefore recommends the Government to conduct more research and e xamine the need of 
administering booster dose of vaccines for containing the newer strain of virus.   
3.48 The Committee also recommends Indian SARS -CoV-2 Genomic Consortia INSACOG 
to closely monitor the new strain of the  virus and work towards upgrading the genome 
sequencing infrastructure in the country.   
Observation/Recommendation 
3.49 The Committee notes that at present, India has the second highest number of total Covid 
positive cases after USA. However, in spite of the scaling up of testing, the number of tests per 
million population in India is only 44,524 whereas for USA, it is 287, 354 (source: Worldometer 
18th September 2020). Brazil which has the third highest number of Covid positive cases is also 
conducting 68,666 tests per million population. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to further increase the number of Covid-19 tests in the country. 
                             (Para 3.47) 
Action Taken 
3.50 India has substantially augmented its testing capacity to more than 2535 labs presently 
and a capacity to conduct more than 20 lakh tests per day. This has been paired with validation 
of diagnostic commodities and ensuring their availability. 
Further Recommendation  
3.51 The Committee strongly believes that pre-emptive testing is key to rein in the spread 
of the pandemic. Extensive testing provides a window to understand the spatial spreading 
pattern of transmissions of the pandemic  Covid-19 thus extending research work and 
opportunity to devise remedial plan based on the conclusions drawn from that research 
work. During the second wave new cases surged as hi gh as 4.5 lakhs a day in April, 2021 
and more than 4 lakh infected persons have died of Covid -19, therefore, inadequate testing 
does not provide the clear picture of the transmission on the ground. The Committee 
recommends t hat the Ministry and authority c oncerned must plan testing a s one -step 
ahead of virus transmission so that infected people are traced and quarantined early, which 
help in breaking the transmission chain.  
Observation/Recommendation 
3.52 The Committee is concerned at the low number of Tests per Million population in States 
such as Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal etc. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the State Governments to shed their lackadaisical approach and continue 
tracking, testing and isolating so that Covid cases do not spike in the winter months. 
  (Para 3.50) 
Action Taken 

73 
 
3.53 MoHFW has been following up with these States on a regular basis through video 
conferencing and formal communications, with particular reference to increase quantum of 
testing by ensure optimum utilization of laboratory capacities, keeping confirmation percentage 
below 5%, use of RT-PCR and rapid antigen-based testing as per ICMR protocols. 
Over the period (September to Decembe r), all these States showed a decline in trajectory of 
COVID-19 cases and deaths. The trajectory of COVID -19 cases in the country however 
registered a resurgence from February 2021 onwards. 
Further Recommendation  
3.54 The Committee observes that the North-East region was engulfed during the second 
wave of the pandemic Covid-19. The Committee’s apprehension  came true as whatever 
efforts authorities  took to prevent spread of the pandemic  proved inadequate . T he 
Committee believes that it's high time Ministry pulls up its socks and takes concrete steps 
to improve the largely insufficient  healthcare facilities in the North-East Region of the 
country.  
3.55 The Ministry should ensure that its guidelines and advisories  regarding Covid 
Appropriate Behaviour (CAB) are strictly implemented in letter and spirit.  
Observation/Recommendation 
3.56 The Committee underlines the need of biosafety to protect the world community from any 
activity signaling bioterrorism. The adverse effects of Covid -19 pandemic have taught the lesson 
on the importance of controlling biological agents and the need of strategic partnerships among 
different nations. The Committee, therefore, feels that the present time is the most appropriate 
for the Government to formulate  effective laws to counter bioterrorism. The Committee also 
believes with expanding network of VRDLs, ICMR would serve as an important platform for 
diagnosis and surveillance of existing as well as emerging viral infections and thus make the 
country bio-secured against life threatening viruses and the menace of bioterrorism. 
                            (Para 3.52) 
Action Taken 
3.57 ICMR is continuously upgrading the biosafety and biosecurity network of the country 
through the following actions: 
 Training/re-training of VRDLs in biosafety and biosecurity. 
 Setting up new BSL-3 facilities in ICMR institutes / VRDLs 
3.58 Laying down guidelines for construction and validation of BSL-3 labs. 
Further Recommendation 
3.59 The Committee recommends that the Government must ensure the establishment of 
at least one BSL -3 lab in each VRDL spread across different S tates of the country.  The 
Committee would like to reiterate its recommendation mentioned in the Committee's 127 th 
Report for establishing at least one BSL -4 lab in each zone/ region viz. North, East, West, 

74 
 
Central and South. The Committee hopes that the Government would ensure fast -track 
establishment of both BSL-3 and BSL-4 labs within a fixed timeline. The Government must 
chalk out counter -strategy to make country bio -secured against the menace of bio 
terrorism.   
Observation/Recommendation 
3.60 The Committee expresses concern over inadequate investment on public health research 
even though innovation play pivotal role in controlling the sp read of disease. The country lacks 
resilient field surveillance to detect potential cluster of diseases. Lack of investment leads to 
dependence on imports of diagnostic kits and development of vaccine and drugs which ultimately 
enhances 'out of pocket expe nditure' of common populace. The Committee strongly recommends 
the higher investment on research and development and innovation in the field of health research 
at multiple levels to contain zoonotic virals like COVID -19 and to establish One Health 
Surveillance System with potential warning system of microbial spill over. The Committee is 
distressed to note the recent UIS data (UNESCO Institute of Statistics data) expressing that India 
invests only 0.65 percent of GDP on Research and Development. India's GER D as a percentage 
of GDP was 0.67 in 2017 and 0.65 in 2018. The Gross domestic expenditure on R&D (GERD) as 
a percentage of GDP is the total intramural expenditure on R&D performed in the national 
territory during a specific reference period expressed as a  percentage of GDP of the national 
territory. The Committee notes that India's GERD is well below the world average and the 
GERD of other countries. Countries like United States of America spend almost 2.84 percent of 
its GDP on research whereas China also  spends 2.19 percent of its GDP on research. The 
Committee deprecates the fact that India's lower appropriation on Research speaks volumes of 
how neglected the R&D sector has been in the country. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends that the Minis try should at least increase its spending on research to the world 
average of 1.72 as a percentage of GDP within two years. The Committee also recommends the 
Ministry to set specific expenditure targets for R&D and for promotion of science, technology 
and innovation (STI). This dedicated separate budgetary allocation should be supported even in 
financial crisis situations so that research activities do not suffer in the wake of any unforeseen 
circumstances. 
                            (Para 3.64) 
Action Taken 
3.61 The Department of Health Research was created as a new Department in 2007 -08 and its 
full-fledged working started from 2013-14 after the roll out of various schemes for infrastructure 
development and human resource & capacity development for promotion of heath research in the 
country. Since then, with the increase in the activities and research programmes of DHR -Indian 
Council of Medical Research(ICMR), the allocation and expenditure has been increasing every 
year. The allocation of Department of  Health Research has increased from Rs.880.56 crores in 
2013-14 to Rs. 4062.30 crores in the RE 2020 -21 which includes Rs.2100 crores of Emergency 
COVID-19 package. Thus, there has been a gradual increase in the allocation for the Department 
of Health Research. The details of the same are given below: 
Rs. in Crores 

75 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Further 
Recommendation  
3.62 The Committee notes that even though the budgetary allocation for DHR is 
witnessing a gradual increase, but the  enhanced allocation is not commensurate to the 
increased f inancial implications involved o n account of pandemic Covid -19. The 
Committee is of the firm view that preparedness and  prevention of the outbreak of third 
wave of pandemic Covid -19 would require public investment in  research work, including 
genome seque ncing and zoonotic surveillance . The Committee  notes that  in terms of the 
percentage of the GDP (Real) (as per first quarter for FY-21) the public expenditure for 
health research is a meagre 0.02%.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates its 
recommendation for a substantial increase in spending on research to the world average of 
1.72 as a percentage of GDP within two years.  
 
Observation/Recommendation 
3.63 The Committee strongly underlines the pivotal role of research and development and 
would like the Ministry to strive hard for an innovation enabling infrastructure in the country. 
The Committee applauds ICMR in leading the fight against the pandemic and strongly believes 
that dedicated research institutes on the lines of ICMR should be established across the country. 
The Committee also recommends the Ministry to increase funding for machine learning and 
artificial intelligence-based projects and also promote international collaboration in Science & 
Technology. The Ministry should also explore AI tools and innovative methods for providing 
personalized treatment to Covid-19 patients. 
                             (Para 3.65) 
Action Taken 
3.64 DHR has already established 118 Viral Research & Diagnostics Laboratories, 80 Multi - 
Disciplinary Research Units and 25 Modal Rural Health Research Units in Medical Colleges and 
central institutes across the country. These schemes have enhanced the capacity o f research in 
Year Allocation for Department of Health 
Research 
BE RE 
2013-14 1008.00 880.56 
2014-15 1017.67 932.00 
2015-16 1018.17 1012.60 
2016-17 1144.80 1344.80 
2017-18 1500.00 1743.39 
2018-19 1800.00 1742.73 
2019-20 1900.00 1950.00 
2020-21 2100.00 4062.30* 
2021-22 2663.00 NA 
*Due to additional allocation of Rs.2100 crores in 2020-
21 for Covid-19. 

76 
 
the country. Besides, it is also planned to setup One Health institutes at Nagpur and 4 NIV Pune 
sub-centres in different part of the country for strengthening pandemic Research. 
Further Recommendation 
3.65 The Committee acknowledges the Ministry’s efforts in spreading the network of 
Viral Research & Diagnostics Laboratories, Multi - Disciplinary Research Units and Modal 
Rural Health Research Units in the country.  It however strongly  believes that 
incorporating modern technologies like Arti ficial Intelligence (AI) as positive intervention 
in these initiatives can bear rich dividends in terms of quality, delivery and cost 
optimization of healthcare delivery services. Therefore , the Committee reiterates its 
recommendation that  the Minist ry mus t increase funding for machine learning and 
artificial intelligence-based projects and encourage the development of AI based systems, 
methods and tools in healthcare.  
COVID Management under Ayushman Bharat-PMJAY Scheme 
Observation/Recommendation 
3.66 The Committee notes that NHA has introduced a process of temporary empanelment for 
the hospitals to avail benefits of Ayushman Bharat Jan Arogya Yojana (AB PM -JAY) through 
HEM Lite. The Committee welcomes such an initiative considering the gross shortage of 
adequate healthcare facilities. However, the Committee recommends the Ministry to effectively 
scrutinize the whole procedure of temporary empanellement of hospitals so that instances of 
fraudulent healthcare behaviour are avoided. The Committee also recommen ds the Ministry to 
empanel more hospitals especially in areas and States with weak health infrastructure to ensure 
continued supply of essential healthcare services. 
                             (Para 4.14) 
Action Taken 
3.67 The temporary empanelment process using HEM Lite was a special measure in view of 
pandemic-induced circumstances and has ceased to operate now. A total of 535 applications (all 
private) were received under HEM lite module. Out of these, 141 hospitals were empanelled. 
Further, all these hospitals are being moved to draft mode under regular empanelment module. In 
draft mode these hospitals cannot raise fresh pre -authorization request. Standard operating 
procedure will be followed for regularizing their empane lment. For empaneling more hospitals, 
following steps have been taken:   
 All eligible public hospitals including those under the administrative jurisdiction of 
Central Government ministries have been empaneled.   
 A roadmap is being prepared for empaneling majority 100 bed hospitals under the 
scheme. 
 Prominent corporate hospital chains are being approached for empanelment under the 
scheme. In this direction, State Health Agencies have been asked to engage with non -
empaneled hospitals . 

77 
 
 National Health Author ity (NHA) and State  Health Agencies (SHAs) are regularly 
organizing meetings of national and local chapters of Indian Medical Association to seek 
their support in augmenting the role of private healthcare providers . 
  Special incentive over and above the package cost is being provided to NABH accredited 
hospitals.  
3.68 Additionally, a 10% incentive is being given to hospital empaneled in Aspirational 
Districts. This is aimed at attracting investment by private sector in such underserved areas. 
3.69 So far, 24,137 hospitals (including public and private) are empaneled under the scheme. 
Further Recommendation 
3.70 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry  in terms of attracting 
investment by private sector in underserved areas . The Committee desires to know 
whether any assessment has been made with respect  to identifying such areas and S tates 
which need urgent assistance to strengthen their health infrastructure  and incorporating 
the targeted beneficiaries within the ambit of the  Scheme. The Committee seeks to know 
number of hospitals empanelled in the rural areas out of the 141 empanelled hospitals. The 
Committee recommends that more hospitals having facilities to provide emergency services 
arising out of pandemics like Covid -19 should be empanelled in the rural  areas of the 
country.  
Observation/Recommendation 
3.71 The Committee is disappointed to note that many poor people have not been included 
under the scheme due to old SECC data and there is no provision to even update or revise the 
list of beneficiaries. The Committee is not convinced by the argument that State  Governments 
can add beneficiaries at their own cost under State schemes. The Committee believes that States 
generally are fund -starved and it would not be appropriate to lay additional burden on them. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry  and NHA must re -visit the idea of 
revising and updating the list of beneficiaries and not deprive poor strata of society who should 
be given coverage under the scheme. 
                             (Para 4.20) 
Action Taken 
3.72 The beneficiary database under AB-PMJAY has been frozen as per the approval of the 
cabinet and currently there is no mechanism to include additional beneficiaries. The possibility 
of using National Food Security Act (NFSA) data for rationalization and expansion of 
beneficiary base under PMJAY is being explored in consultation with all the stakeholders. Also, 
IT platform, Health Benefit Packages, Empanelled Healthcare providers of PMJAY can also be 
used by other health protection schemes for poor families who may not have figured in  the 
original database. With this in view, National Health Authority (NHA) is actively consulting 
with other Ministries and Departments implementing social security schemes in the country. 
Further Recommendation 

78 
 
3.73 The Committee  fails to comprehend the r ationale behind freez ing the beneficiary 
database and thus depriving the deserving large chunk of poor people from availing the 
benefits of AB -PMJAY, especially in rural areas. The Committee understands that t he 
objective of the scheme can only be fully re alized if the poor people who actually need the 
benefits are enrolled in this scheme at the earliest. The Committee strongly recommends 
the NHA (National Health Authority)  to expand the beneficiary base under the scheme in 
consultation with other Ministries/Departments implementing other social security schemes 
in the country.  
Observation/Recommendation 
3.74 The Committee is of the view that engagement of both private and public sector is a must 
for ensuring robust delivery of healthcare services under the  Scheme ABPMJAY. The Committee 
understands that Covid treatment rate and charges for other health package for small private 
hospitals may not be sustainable which would discourage private hospitals from empanelling 
under the Scheme. The Committee therefore  recommended the Ministry to rationalize the 
package rates especially in rural areas where people suffer due to a weak primary healthcare 
infrastructure. 
                             (Para 4.29) 
Action Taken 
3.75 Revision of benefit packages listed under AB-PMJAY is a continuous process based on 
feedback received from respective stakeholders. NHA has a dedicated medical cell which is 
consulted for technical inputs. The inputs of the medical cell are then put up to the respective 
review committee. Post that  States are consulted for understanding their views. Finally, the 
inputs are provided to the NHA Governing Board for making a decision. Further, State 
Governments have been given flexibility to increase the costs of health benefit packages within 
certain band to cater to temporal and spatial variations While NHA devised a national package 
for COVID treatment, flexibility was given to States to modify the package rates for COVID 
testing and treatment based on guidelines issued by NHA. 
Further Recommendation 
3.76 The Committee firmly believes that quality healthcare facilities in the rural areas 
can be developed by encouraging the participation of  the private sector in the development 
of healthcare systems. The Committee , therefore, reiterates its recommendation for 
engaging both private and public sector for ensuring robust delivery of healthcare services 
under the Scheme Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (AB-PMJAY). 
Covid Management through AYUSH System 
Observation/Recommendation 
3.77 The Committee notes that the Ministry has formulated Interdisciplinary AYUSH Research 
and Development Task for studying four different interventions viz. Ashwagandha, Yashtimadhu, 
Guduchi + Pippali and a poly herbal formulation (AYUSH - 64). However, due to scanty 
scientific evidence, this system of medicines gets very limited attention to the scientific 

79 
 
community. The Committee, therefore, underlines the need to develop evidence based traditional 
medicines with scientific validation for better acceptability and higher credibility. Research and 
Development is vital for growth and promotion of traditional system of medicine and therefore, 
the Committee recommends the Ministry to make efforts for scientific validation of the 
traditional medi cine by introducing necessary technological advancements to gain trust and 
acceptability. This would help to garner confidence of more and more people who in turn would 
opt for traditional medicine to boost their immunity and prevent and protect themselves  against 
various infectious diseases 
                              (Para 5.12) 
Action Taken 
3.78 Ministry of AYUSH commenced scientific   studies at various institutions through 
immunity guidelines as per the   recommendations of Interdisciplinary AYUSH Re search and 
Development (R&D) Task Force.  Accordingly, 112 studies are being conducted   at various 
centres. 
3.79 Further, Ministry of AYUSH has constituted a core group of experts under the 
Chairmanship of Prof Bhushan  Patwardhan, Vice -Chairman, UGC, to identify and propose 
formulations on COVID - 19 which are in line with Classical Ayurveda principles and have 
substantial leads on COVID - 19 viz, one for prophylaxis as immunomodulatory, another for 
management of COVID- 19 with antiviral properties and one product for post COVID-19 care. 
3.80 Central Council for Research in Ayurveda (CCRAS) has undertaken 10 clinical studies 
on Ashwagandha/ Guduchi + Pippali/ AYUSH - 64 as per the prevalent guidelines and adopting 
suitable tools of assessment. The details are at Annexure IX. 
3.81 Institute of Training & Research in Ayurveda (ITRA), Jamnagar has taken three major 
research projects on Ayurvedic medicines. One is population based multicentre (Ahemdabad, 
Vadodara, Bhavanagar, Kolavda and Jamnagar) prophylaxis stud y on Guduchi Ghana 
Vatiamongpopulation at high risk to SARS -CoV-2 exposure in which 20,000 participants were 
enrolled and assessed for incidence of COVID 19 infection, changes in immunity status and 
quality of life.  
3.82 Another is an open label randomized controlled clinical trial on efficacy of AYUSH 64 as 
add on therapy on COVID 19 patients with collaboration with Guru Govind Singh Civil 
Hospital, Jamnagar in which total 80 patients of COVID 19 infection were registered. 
3.83 One retrospective study was carried out in collaboration with State AYUSH Department, 
Gandhinagar, Gujarat in mild cases of COVID 19 patients admitted in Samaras Covid Care 
Centre, Ahmedabad and treated with Ayurveda treatment as add on to conventional care as per 
state AYUSH directorate. This cohort included 762 patients of COVID 19 and was analysed for 
clinical outcome of Ayurveda treatment through retrospective observational study. 
3.84 Central Council for Research in Siddha (CCRS), Chennai has undertaken scientific 
validation of Siddha formulations indicated for the prophylactic and management of COVID – 
19. The details of the Pre-clinical studies conducted by CCRS are as follows:  

80 
 
a. Siddha classical formulation KabasuraKudineer  subjected to molecular docking 
studies against the spike protein SARS-CoV-2 and research paper was published. “In 
Silico computational screening of  KabasuraKudineer - Official Siddha Formulation 
and JACOM against   SARS -CoV-2 spike protein” 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0975947620300243 
b. Immunomodulatory, thrombolytic of KabasuraKudineer has been established. 
c. Pre- clinical studies to evaluate the anti – viral effect of  MAM ( a Siddha Health 
drink) for COVID – 19. 
d. Anti-viral activity – SARS-CoV-2: KabasuraKudineer and NilavembuKudineer 
exhibited significant activity when compared to standard drug Remdesivir, which 
showed KSK inhibit virus replication similar to standard drug Remdesivir. 
3.85 All India Institute  of Ayurveda (AIIA), New Delhi is conducting research activities in 
Ayurveda under three major headings viz. Academic, Intra Mural and Extra Mural. In all these 
studies efforts are made to incorporate technological advancements in scientifically validating  
the outcomes. The focus of all these research activities are on developing evidence based 
traditional medicines with scientific validation for better acceptability and higher credibility. 
3.86 Every effort is made for scientific validation of the traditio nal medicine by introducing 
necessary technological advancements to gain trust and acceptability. Recently 07 joint 
collaborative projects have been initiated with IIT, Delhi with the same aims and objectives.  
3.87 AIIA is conducting three PHI projects un der Extra-Mural research activity of Ministry of 
AYUSH.  
3.88 Further, in the scenario of COVID 19 Pandemic, AIIA has taken up 11 research projects, 
of which 09 studies are prophylactic in nature specifically on boosting the host immunity against 
various infectious diseases such as COVID 19. One of the largest Public Health Initiative cohort 
study on 80,000 police personnel of Delhi Police is one among them. For systematic data 
management and reporting public health organization like PHFI is also involved i n these studies. 
There are 2 more studies on intervention in COVID 19 infection, in addition to these, clinical 
intervention and data recording is being done at CHC of AIIA. 
3.89 One fundamental research project namely “Understanding the mechanistic pathwa ys of 
Homoeopathy Medicine Cinchona (3C, 6C & 12C) through in vitro study their potential 
application as anti-viral drug to fight against COVID -19” of National Institute of Homoeopathy 
(NIH), Kolkata is in progress. 
Further Recommendation 
3.90 The Committee acknowledges the research work being carried out by various 
organizations under the wings of the Ministry  of AYUSH . However, the Committee 
believes that more needs to be done to equip the traditional systems o f medicine with 
scientific base  grounded on in-depth research. The Committee desires  that AYUSH 
research work carried out  by the institutes aimed towards recording and publishing the 
detailed process of extract ing the active ingredient from  herbs/plants, its effect initially in 
cell models, t hen in anim als, and finally human trials. T o facilitate transition from 
alternative systems to mainstream systems of medicine, it is all the more necessary to build, 

81 
 
promote and sustain this evidence based framework for the practitioners of the traditional  
systems.  
Observation/Recommendation 
3.91 The Committee deprecates the delay in permission to Research Councils and National 
Institutes under the Ministry of AYUSH in some of the States/UTs Governments for clinical and 
population-based research studies due to lack of clarity of policies and guidelines. This shows 
the apathy of the Government in formulating guidelines with regard to research activities under 
AYUSH system. The Committee, at the same time, recommends that AYUSH Research Councils 
and the Nat ional Institutes must undertake such research projects that would help in 
management of pandemic COVID -19 and extend protection to common masses against life 
threatening diseases. 
                             (Para 5.18) 
Action Taken  
3.92 Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy (CCRH)  has undertaken 02 
prophylactic studies; one study conducted at Delhi with 10180 population and another study 
enrolled total 32,198 individuals  residing in containment zones conducted at 07 Institute/Unit 
located all over India. 
3.93 Results showed that Arsenic album 30C was able to protec t 79% to 81% of population 
from COVID/COVID-like illness compared to control group. 
3.94 Mass homoeopathy prophylaxis has been provided to 48 lakh population through 
organised activity in collaboration with Homoeopathy Medical colleges & research Institutes. 
Data of 6.7 lakh population has been collected on predesigned format and is under analysis. 
Analysis shows that 99.23% did not develop any COVID like illness. 
3.95 Treatment Studies by CCRH: CCRH has undertaken 05 studies using Homoeopathy as 
adjuvant intervention to standard of care at reputed allopathic hospitals in management of 
COVID-19. The studies were conducted on mild, moderate, and severe COVID -19 cases. The 
results showed that there was early recovery in Homoeopathy as compared to those who are on 
standard of care alone. The death rate also decreased in homoeopathy group. The results of 
studies are encouraging. The details are annexed at Annexure II & III.    
3.96 It is pertinent to mention that CCRH has also conducted prophylactic research studies in 
dengue, chikungunya, Influenza like illness in high-risk population like JJ colonies/ urban slums. 
Results of studies are encouraging. 
3.97 Central Council for Research in S iddha has undertaken prophylactic studies at 6 
centres across India (Tamilnadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Delhi), clinical interventional 
studies at (Tamilnadu, Delhi), Standalone therapy (Tamilnadu). 
3.98 CCRAS has undertaken total 23 studies on COVID 19 . Out of 23 studies, 11 prospective 
studies have been conducted on Ayurveda intervention viz. GuduchighanVati, 
SudarshanGhanVati, Ashwagandha tablet, AYUSH 64, and Chyavanprashleyham as 

82 
 
prophylactic interventions in high risk population at community level /Covid care centres across 
the country while other studies on Ayurveda Interventions such as 
GuduchighanVati/ShamshamaniVati, AYUSH 64, Guduchi + Pippali, Ashwagandha Tablet and 
Shunthi Capsule have been undertaken as add -on treatment to standard care or a s standalone 
treatment in COVID 19 management. The details are at Annexure V. 
3.99 CCRUM has undertaken the following projects for the management of pandemic 
COVID-19:- 
• Population based prospective study on effectiveness and outcome of Unani medicine   
prophylactic intervention on population at risk of COVID -19 was carried out at CRIUM, 
Lucknow, RRIUMs, Srinagar, Mumbai, Aligarh, New Delhi and NIUM, Bengaluru on a 
Sample Size of 30,000. 
• A Study on Prophylactic Interventions of Unani Medicine on High / M oderate risk 
Population of Covid -19 was conducted on a sample size: 60 completed cases (30 in each 
arm). 
• An Add-on study entitled “A prospective, interventional, case control study to observe and 
assess the safety and efficacy of Unani regimen in preventin g the progression of severity of 
the disease in hospitalized SARS -CoV2 tested positive asymptomatic /mild to moderate 
symptomatic COVID -19 cases, managed as per Govt of India COVID -19 management 
guidelines, at a COVID -19 management facility was conducted o n a sample size of 60 
Complete Cases at A&U Tibbiya College, Karol Bagh, New Delhi.  
• A study to assess the safety and efficacy of add -on Unani regimen in preventing the 
progression of the severity of the disease in mild to moderate symptomatic COVID -19 RT-
PCR Positive cases has been initiated in collaboration with Safdarjung Hospital, New 
Delhi. Development of Pharmacopoeial Monographs of UnaniJoshanda has been carried 
out at RRIUM, Chennai. 
3.100 Central Council for Research in Yoga & Naturopathy  (CCRYN) h as undertaken a 
research project to verify the efficacy of Yoga in facilitating early recovery of COVID – 19 
patients in collaboration with Rajiv Gandhi Super Speciality Hospital, Delhi; AIIMS, New Delhi; 
AIIMS, Rishikesh and RML Hospital, New Delhi. 
3.101 National Institute of Ayurveda (NIA), Jaipur has undertaken the following studies for 
preventing and managing effect of COVID-19:- 
i. An Open label, Multi centric, Randomized, Comparative, Prospective, Interventional 
Community based Clinical Study to Evaluate Safety and Efficacy of Guduchi Ghana Vati 
as a Preventive Remedy on Healthy Individuals in Pandemic of COVID19. 
ii. Evaluation of Efficacy and Safety of Ayurveda Intervention (Ayush -64) add-on therapy 
for patients with COVID -19 infection (Stage I) - An Open l abelled, Parallel Group, 
Randomized controlled clinical trial 
iii. Clinical evaluation of DaburChyawanprash (DCP) as a preventive remedy in pandemic of 
COVID-19 – An Open label, Multi centric, Randomized, Comparative, Prospective, 
Interventional Community based Clinical Study on Healthy individuals. 
iv. A cross -sectional retrospective study on NIA Immunobooster kit (Chyavanprasha, 
Immunity booster capsules and Kwatha) prophylaxis for the prevention of COVID-19. 

83 
 
3.102 The scholars of MD/MS(Ayurveda) and Ph.D.(Ayurved a) of NIA have  undertaken 
comparative clinical, phytochemical and experimental, bio -chemical studies to evaluate safety 
and efficacy  of various Ayurvedic herbs and herbal drugs and their role in prevention and 
management of life threatening disease like jwara, hypertension, bronchial asthma, diabetes, 
sleep disorders, depression, cardio vascular, etc. More attention is being given to undertake study 
the role of herbs and compound in immunity boosting and maintaining health for prevention and 
protection to common masses against life threatening diseases. 
3.103 All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA)  is pioneer in starting exclusive Ayurveda 
management for COVID 19. The institute is running an exclusive CHC wherein Ayurveda 
management is given to admitted pat ients. In addition, the institute is conducting 11 COVID -19 
specific research projects (independently and in association with leading research institutes like 
AIIMS, IGIB, CSIR etc.). 
3.104 North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homeopathy (NEIAH), Shillong has 
undertaken 2 (two) population based prophylactic study and 3 (three) Clinical (therapeutic) trails 
on COVID-19. 
3.105 National Institute of Homeopathy, Kolkata hasundertaken following studies for 
preventing and managing effect of COVID-19:- 
• Community based cluster randomized open level controlled field trial to evaluate the 
effectiveness of Homoeoprophylaxis and standard prophylaxis against COVID-19. 
• Understanding the mechanistic pathways of Homoeopathy medicine Cinchona (3C, 6C & 
12C) through in vitro study for their potential application as anti -viral drug to fight against 
COVID-19. 
• An evaluation on effectiveness of Homoeopathic Intervention as an Add -On therapy in the 
management of Covid -19 infection – An open Labelled prospective Single Arm 
Observational Clinical Trails. 
3.106 All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA)  is pioneer in starting exclusive Ayurveda 
management for COVID 19. The institute is running an exclusive CHC wherein Ayurveda 
management is given to admitted patients. In addition,  the institute is conducting 11 COVID -19 
specific research projects (independently and in association with leading research institutes like 
AIIMS, IGIB, CSIR etc.). 
3.107 North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homeopathy (NEIAH), Shillong  has 
undertaken 2 (two) population based prophylactic study and 3 (three) Clinical (therapeutic) trails 
on COVID-19. 
3.108 National Institute of Homeopathy, Kolkata hasundertaken following studies for 
preventing and managing effect of COVID-19:- 
• Community based cluster randomized open level controlled field trial to evaluate the 
effectiveness of Homoeoprophylaxis and standard prophylaxis against COVID-19. 
• Understanding the mechanistic pathways of Homoeopathy medicine Cinchona (3C, 6C & 
12C) through in vitro study for the ir potential application as anti -viral drug to fight 
against COVID-19. 

84 
 
• An evaluation on effectiveness of Homoeopathic Intervention as an Add -On therapy in 
the management of Covid -19 infection – An open Labelled prospective Single Arm 
Observational Clinical Trails. 
• Incidence of Influenza like Illness (ILI) in participants taken Arsenicum Album 30 
immune buster during SARS-COVID 19 Pandemic: A retrospective cohort study. 
• A research study proposal on a survey on the effectiveness of Arsenicum Album 30c as a 
prophylactic medicine for COVID-19 among the residents of Dharawi, Mumbai. 
• A survey on the effectiveness of Arsenicum 30c as a prophylactic medicine for Covid -19 
among the frontline and health care workers of Thirumangalam, Madurai. 
3.109 National Institute of Siddha, Chennai  carried out population based study entitled  „A 
prospective non randomized open label controlled intervention study on the effect of polyherbal 
Siddha formulation KabasuraKudineer as a prophylactic measure among High risk population 
(Health care workers / Containment Zone Population) exposed to COVID -19‟. Siddha 
formulation KabasuraKudineer administered to 20,000 people in containment zones, staff and 
high risk group in the wake of current COVID19 pandemic and evaluated its protective eff ect 
and its safety. Questionnaire based documentation were carried out of health status, drug 
compliance, adverse effects if any, and in the end the overall effectiveness of the prophylaxis 
against the COVID 19 were assessed. The study was conducted, recor ded and reported in 
accordance with GCP -ASU guidelines laid down for ASU drugs and the ICMR Ethical 
guidelines for biomedical research on human participants‟ amendment in 2006. During the 
conduct of the clinical study, rights, safety and wellbeing of the s tudy participants have given 
prime importance. 
3.110 National Institute of Naturopathy, Pune in association with Ozone Forum of India has 
been involved in a pilot study for treatment of COVID -19 patients in moderate stage using 
intravenous administration o f ozonised saline as an adjuvant treatment. Study is completed and 
submitted for publication and waiting for reviewer‟s response. 
3.111  Another study in Yoga and Naturopathy in the management of COVID -19: A registry - 
based observation. Study has been comp leted. The results are being analysed and is under 
process. 
3.112 Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda (ITRA), Jamnagar has started total 
03 clinical (prophylactic and therapeutic add on), retrospective studies to deal with the COVID 
19 pandemic c ondition. Services of DhanvantariRath were launched by ITRA in collaboration 
with Jamnagar Municipal Corporation. Total 20601 healthy individuals and 1441 patients have 
taken the benefits of Ayurvedic medicines for their routine healthcare problems as well  as 
knowledge of measures for boosting their general immunity through Ayurveda. 
Further Recommendation 
3.113 The Committee notes the wide range of research stud ies going on in AYUSH 
research Councils with respect to manageme nt of Covid-19, however, the Committee finds 
that the Ministry of AYUSH has not given any justification for delay in approvals for 
clinical and population based research studies. The Committ ee reiterates its 
recommendation seeking clear guidelines with respect to research studies  along with 
proper timelines for the approval process. The Committee would also like to emphasize 

85 
 
that the outcome of all these research studies especially related to the Covid -19 must be 
recorded, published and adequately placed in the public domain. The Committee may also 
be apprised of AYUSH research outcomes highlighting concrete evidence in management 
of Covid-19.  
Observation/Recommendation 
3.114 The Committee appreciates the pharmacovigilance initiative taken by the Ministry with 
the aim to prevent the adverse drug reaction and safeguard the public health. This is a positive 
step to showcase that Indian traditional system of medicine is not only safe but also scientifically 
validated. The Committee, however, cautions that the fake claims and misleadi ng advertisements 
about ASU&H drugs would not only damage the credibility of AYUSH medicines but also create 
distrust amongst the users of ASU&H drugs as well. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to evolve stringent regulatory framework to ta ckle the problems of failed samples and 
ensure quality control of AYUSH drugs. Strict and exemplary action in a time bound manner 
must be taken against the manufacturers involved in manufacturing of spurious/low quality 
AYUSH drugs. The Ministry ought to f ix the responsibility of the officials concerned who 
approve low/substandard quality drugs. The Ministry must sensitize physicians, pharmacists, 
patients, the pharmaceutical industry and other stakeholders towards reporting adverse drug 
reactions. The Mini stry should also make efforts to strengthen State Government ASU&H 
Pharmacies and drug testing laboratories in tackling the menace of misleading advertisement 
and low quality AYUSH drugs. 
                            (Para 5.23) 
Action Taken 
 
3.115 Ministry of AYUSH has implemented the Central Sector Scheme of Pharmacovigilance 
Program of ASU & H drug since December 2017. Through this scheme a three tier network 
consisting of National Pharmacovigilance Co -ordination Centre (NPvCC), five Intermediary 
PharmacovigilanceCentres (IPvCs) and seventy four Peripheral PharmacovigilanceCentres 
(PPvCs) has been established for safety monitoring of Ayush drugs, reporting of adverse drug 
events and surveillance & reporting of misleading advertisements.   Functionality of the 
pharmacovigilance centres is reviewed periodically. As a result of effective implementation of 
the scheme, pharmacovigilance  centres have reported 9369 misleading advertisements, 185 
COVID -19 related claims and 543 cases of suspected adverse drug reactions of AYUSH drugs. 
Further Recommendation 
3.116 The Committee recommends to evolve stringent regulatory framework to tackle the 
problems of failed samples and ensure quality control of AYUSH drugs. Strict and 
exemplary action in a time bound manner must  be taken against those who are involved in 
manufacturing of spurious/low quality AYUSH drugs. The Committee expects the Ministry 
to fix the responsibility of the officials concerned who approve low/substandard quality 
drugs. The Committee wishes to be informed about the action taken by the responsible 
authorities in dealing with the misleading advertisements and unwarranted claims about 
drugs and other solution s in the last three years. The Committee is of the view that i t is 
high time to effect amendments in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Drugs and 
Magic Remedies Act 1954 to make the  provisions relating to offences and penalties/  

86 
 
stringent and effective enough to control and contain the misleading advertisements, poor 
quality products, cases of adverse reactions, etc.  
Observation/Recommendation 
3.117  The Committee is disappointed with the state -wise status   about efficacy and effect of 
traditional medicines in treating COVID   patients. The Committee believes that rigorous data 
are needed to show -case   that remedies under AYUSH system are safe and e ffective and all the 
States   should be seen as actively promoting the Ayush System. For this to happen, all States 
should have dedicated AYUSH COVID care centers where patients   could be treated with the 
traditional medicine along with modern medicine. T he   Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to establish AYUSH COVID care centres   in every state/UT of the Country. Further, 
the Ministry should maintain the   data from each State to evaluate the efficacy of the system. 
                             (Para 5.36) 
Action Taken 
3.118 Public health is a state subject. Various states have trained and deployed AYUSH 
manpower for COVID   duties.  
 Ministry of AYUSH & MoHFW jointly   have provided training to 33,000 AYUSH 
master trainers. Further, all   States/UTs have been advised to train more numbers of 
AYUSH manpower.  
 Total 66045   AYUSH Personnel has also obtained training at igot.gov.in platform on   
continual basis.  
 Ministry of AYUSH has also advised   States/UTs to train AYUSH doctors and do 
deploy them for combating the menace   of COVID-19. 
Further Recommendation 
3.119 The Committee is disappointed to observe that the Ministry of AYUSH is silent on 
its recommendation requiring a dedicated AYUSH Covid Care Centre in all the states. The 
Committee is of the considered view that the Ministry should undertake concrete steps to  
popularize the Indian systems of medicine to complement the modern system of medicine 
in management of Covid -19. The Committee strongly desires the Ministry to contemplate 
on this and apprises the Committee in this regard.  
Observation/Recommendation 
3.120 The Committee has taken note of the financial distress of the healthcare infra structure 
where small hospitals and nursing home in towns and cities have been shut down due to lack of 
liquidity and cash flow accentuated owing to unscientific and sustainable capping of cost/pricing 
for COVID treatment by Government authorities. The gov ernment support through liquidity for 
financing the operating loss followed by indirect tax relief/exemption on essential medicine, 
consumable and devices for treatment of COVID patients can go a long way in revival of private 
healthcare sector. The Commit tee alsorecommends a scientific and fair costing/pricing 
framework wherein Government may ensure that input taxes are not attributed to the cost of 
healthcare services.  

87 
 
3.121 The Committee also recommends the Government for expediting payment of outstanding 
Bills of the private hospitals. 
                             (Para 7.16) 
Action Taken 
3.122 National Health Authority has also issued new guidelines to fast -track the claim 
settlement under AB -PMJAY, defining the maximum Turn -Around-Time for various stages of 
claim and preauthorization process.  Timely settlement of claims is one of the key indicators 
which is being monitored on a constant basis. As on date, nearly 90% of the claims submitted by 
the hospitals have been paid. Further, reminders are constantly sent to SHAs with high degree of 
claim pendency, where necessary. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.123 The Committee emphasiz es that the major roadblock in delivering the quality 
healthcare services is insufficient public health spending. Needless to say, unless the 
government sets aside sufficient funds for healthcare , the prevailing state of public health 
care systems  cannot be improved . Inadequate public spending increases Out of P ocket 
expenditure owing to irrational pricing of life sav ing equipments, drugs etc, as was evident 
in the second wave of pandemic Covid-19. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
expenditure in healthcare must be enhanc ed adequately to ensure liqui dity and cash flow 
availability. This will help ease out financial distress in healthcare and infrastructure  and 
as a result the  medium sized hospitals and nursing homes can contribute in managing the 
health emergencies.  
3.124 The Committee further recommends the Government to evolve a mechanism to 
regulate the pricing of life saving drugs , particularly during emergencies and its effective 
implementation.  
Observation/Recommendation 
3.125 The Committee also understands that since many students may not be able to afford a 
smartphone or computer with internet connection, the Government needs to provide television -
sets and satellite TV connections in schools as a short -term measure so that the education for 
students of economically weaker sections do not suffer further. 
                             (Para 7.28) 
Action Taken 
3.126 Govt. is providing ICT infrastructure in schools through ICT component of 
SamagraShiksha. The component covers classes VI to XII. Flexibility to procure hardware such as 
tablets /laptops / notebooks / integrated teaching learning devices and open source op erating 
system as well as Hardware, Software, training and resource support has been given to States and 
UTs. This includes support for digital boards, smart classrooms, virtual classrooms and DTH 
channels on pro-rata basis for number of schools approved.  

88 
 
 For schools having classes 6 to 12, a non -recurring grant of up to Rs. 6.40 lakh per school and 
recurring grant of up to Rs. 2.40 lakh per school per annum for a period of 5 years is approved 
under the scheme.  
 In the present scenario of Covid majority of  students are not attending the school. The 
teachersare attending the school and connecting with the students through   alternative ways 
and providing them study material, worksheets etc. The provision of  TV set in schools will 
not help much as the teachers are already available in school for those students who are able to 
attend the classes physically.   
Provision of TV set and satellite TV connections may be done in Panchayats through Panchayati 
Raj Departments so that the students can access the TV chann els which are providing   
educational contents.  
 
Further Recommendation 
3.127 The Committee expects Government to ensure that education facilities for students 
particularly of economically weaker sections do not suffer further due to future Covid -19 
waves. The Committee takes note of growing public debate over re-opening of schools. The 
Committee may be apprised of whether the Ministry has done any studies regarding 
various age-group of students with respect to their immune response, mental health, ability 
to practice social distancing norms and other critical parameters affecting their health 
before allowing reopening of schools. The Committee notes that physical and mental health 
of children has been the area of concern during pandemic Covid -19.  T he Committee 
maybe apprised of studies carried out on impact of  online classes, absence of classroom 
schooling on overall development of children.  
Observation/Recommendation 
3.128 The Committee notes that the National Health Policy 2017 has emphasized on the 
potential of AYUSH and advocated its integration with National Health Mission. The Committee 
notes that the trend of utilization has been satisfactory for AYUSH and it is capable of absorbing 
more funds under its different schemes. The pandemic has also highlighted the importance of 
AYUSH medicines for prophylactic use. The Committee has time and again advocated the 
mainstreaming of AYUSH and highlighte d on the need of scientific validation and quality 
control. The Committee therefore, recommends the Government to ensure that the required funds 
are available to the Ministry of AYUSH. However, the Committee observes that the schemes such 
as Central Sector Scheme on Pharmaco-vigilance Initiatives for ASU&H Drugs should be given 
adequate importance and the funds may be increased under the Scheme. 
                            (Para 8.19) 
Action Taken 
3.129 The Ministry had projected an amount of Rs. 5435.55 crore in BE 2021 -22 for promoting 
various Schemes in AYUSH sector. The Ministry of Finance has allocated an amount of 
Rs.2970.30 crore for the year 2021 -22 which is 39.97 per cent more than the allocation  made in 
2020-21 i.e. Rs. 2122.08 crore.  

89 
 
3.130 The Ministry of AYUSH is giving adequate importance to the Central Sector Scheme on 
Pharmacovigilance initiatives for ASU&H drugs. So far 01 National Pharmacovigilance Center, 
05 inter-mediary centers and 74 Peripheral centers have been established. ADR‟s and misleading 
advertisements are being reported from time to time. It may be mentioned that an amount of Rs. 
4.10 crore has been allocated during the year 2021 -22 as against the allocation of Rs. 2.80 crore 
provided in BE 2020-21, an increase of 46.43 per cent, which is quite significant. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.131 The Committee notes that the Ministry had projected an amount of Rs. 5435.55 
crore in BE 2021 -22 for promoting various Schemes in AYUSH sector to which the  
Ministry of Finance allocated an amount of Rs.2970.30 crore for the year 2021 -22 which is 
39.97 per cent more than the allocation made in 2020 -21. The Committee believes that the 
Ministry of AYUSH is capable of absorbing more funds under its different schemes. The 
Committee, therefore recommends that the Ministry of AYUSH should plead for increased 
allocation from the Ministry of Finance in the ensuing financial years.  
 
 
 
  

90 
 
CHAPTER–IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
CONTINGENCY PLAN 
Observation/Recommendation 
4.1 The Committee has been given to understand that Railways have provided 813 coaches 
having 12472 beds for conversion of coaches into COVID Care Centers. As per information 
submitted by the Ministry till 21.07.2020, only 454 COVID patients were admitted in these 
COVID Care Ce ntres. The Committee fails to comprehend the underutilization of the available 
resources especially at a time when people struggled to find a bed in the hospitals. The 
Committee expects a convincing response from the Ministry on the issue. 
(Para 2.36) 
Action Taken 
4.2 A detailed Guidance document on appropriate management of suspect/confirmed cases of 
COVID-l9 in Railway Coaches converted into COVID Care Centre was provided to the States by 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in May 2020 and also made avail able on the website of 
Ministry of Health & FW 
(https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/GuidanceDocumentonappropriatemanagementofsuspectconfirme
dcasesofCOVID19RailwayCoachesCOVIDCareCenters.pdf ). As per this guidance document the 
State Nodal Officer designated for such purpose was to contact the identified nodal officer of 
Ministry of Railways for the deployment of such coaches. 
MANAGING MEDICAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
Observation/Recommendation 
4.3 The Committee agrees with the Ministry that a holistic approach is  needed for ensuring 
biosecurity against biological weapons. The Ministry should also engage with agencies and 
actively participate in ongoing International treaties. The Committee strongly recommends the 
Ministry to conduct more research and work towards training and capacity building for 
management of public health emergencies arising from use of bioweapons. 
  (Para 3.53)  
Observation/Recommendation 
4.4 The Committee is also concerned at the growing pollution in major cities of the country. 
Studies have highlighted that air pollution during the time of pandemic will cause additive 
adverse effect on health and wellbeing. The fact that air pollution can aggravate co -morbidities 
and other respiratory illnesses cannot be denied. Air pollution will increase th e risk associated 
with Covid and could lead to fatal outcomes. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to encourage undertaking of necessary health research projects on air pollution and 
better Covid management. Further, the Committee is of the v iew that the Ministry should also 

91 
 
liaise and coordinate with the Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change to find 
immediate solution for bringing down air pollution so that it does not aggravate the pandemic 
situation. The Committee also recommend s the Government to make arrangement of adequate 
health infrastructure to combat the challenges of air pollution and manage its adverse impact on 
the Covid patients. 
  (Para 3.54) 
Action Taken 
4.5 Necessary communications have been sent to Secretary, Department of Health Research 
(DHR) & Director General, Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), Secretary, Ministry of 
Environment, Forest & Climate Change (MoEFCC) and Chief Secretary of all States for 
necessary actions as per the recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee report. 
COVID Management under Ayushman Bharat-PMJAY Scheme 
Observation/Recommendation 
4.6 The Committee is of the view that the AB -HWC which is envisaged to provide 
comprehensive health care to all must be positioned with the required infrastructure including 
well equipped modules, technical facilities and the requisite technical human resources. The 
Committee believes that higher investment in the health sector will facilitate revival of health 
sector and the HWCs, in  the wake of any future pandemic, can act as the first effective point of 
quality healthcare delivery services. The Committee feels that HWCs with its cadre of health 
workers and emphasis on community engagement are pivotal to the rural healthcare system o f 
the country. The Committee, therefore, strongly advocates strengthening of the HWCs and 
developing a strong public health workforce at the grassroots level. 
(Para 4.12) 
Observation/Recommendation 
4.7 The Committee notes that Ayushman Bharat envisages ensuring robust tertiary 
healthcare services and therefore, recommends the Ministry to make constant efforts to 121 
achieve its envisaged goal of 1.5 lakh Health and Wellness Centres (AB -HWCs) to provide 
comprehensive health care (CPHC) services to enrich the physical infrastructure in fight against 
pandemic/epidemic like situation. The Committee would like the Ministry to ensure availability 
of adequate and trained human resources for effective functioning of the HWCs. 
 (Para 4.30)  
Observation/Recommendation 
4.8 The Committee would also like the Ministry to ensure that the private as well as public 
hospitals follow the appropriate guidelines on the isolation facilities, separate entry & exit, 
patient transfer facility etc to manage the contagion. The Commi ttee opines that directing the 
whole health machinery towards Covid -19 while neglecting other healthcare services is not the 
right approach. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to also ensure that basic 

92 
 
healthcare services like immunization, maternal, neonatal healthcare facilities, health check-ups, 
screenings etc are not disrupted in the Health and Wellness Centres.  
(Para 4.31) 
Combating the Challenges of Pandemic COVID-19  
Observation/Recommendation 
4.9 The Committee, while considering, the economic consequence of the pandemic on 
women, feels the urgent need for economic emancipation of women by providing them with 
equitable opportunity of employment and enabling their participation in the micro and macro -
decision-making process. In a world, where the share of women in the workforce is already less, 
the Committee believes that financial inequality between men and women will further rise 
sharply. The Committee notes many women are employed in the informal sector which has been 
worst hit due to the pandemic. The Committee therefore recommends the Ministry to make social 
security measures accessible to women and launch specific programmes so that women are able 
to absorb the economic shock and the resultant mental stress caused due to the sudd en job 
losses. 
                             (Para 7.34) 
Action Taken 
4.10 Noted. The matter would be taken up with Ministry of Women and Child Development 
and Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.  
Financing the Health Sector 
Observation/Recommendation 
4.11 The Committee also laments the poor state of primary healthcare especially in rural 
areas. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to urgently increase its spending under 
the National Rural Health Mission to strengthe n the delivery of health care servicesin the rural 
areas, keeping in view the languishing health infrastructure and inadequate delivery of health 
services to much needed rural population. 
                             (Para 8.11) 
Action Taken 
4.12 The allocation and expenditure by way of releases to the States/UTs under National 
Health Mission shows a positive increasing trend. Further, States/UTs are also instructed to 
increase their State sector health spending to >8% of their budget by 2020.  
4.13 Public health and hospitals being the State subject, besides, the support provided under 
NHM to strengthen the public healthcare delivery system including infrastructure as per 
population norms, States are instructed to desired focus on rural areas and backward areas. 
  

93 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
 
ADMINISTRATIVE MANAGEMENT OF LOCKDOWN & UNLOCKING 
 In view of the loss of life during the second wave of the Covid -19 pandemic, the 
Committee believes that the measures taken by the Ministry to contain/prevent spread of 
SARS-COV-2 proved to be squarely inadequate. The Committee believes that focus should 
be on strengthening of health infrastructure, ensuring adequate availability of beds, 
adequate supply of oxygen cylinders and essential medicines etc. Besides, the Government 
must aggressively keep pushing the vaccination programme in terms of granting appr oval 
to more vaccines, ramping up vaccines’ production, enhancing delivery capacity and 
increasing the vaccination rate.  
(Para 3.5) 
 With the incidence of highly mutated Omicron (B.1.1.529) strain of Covid virus, the 
Committee strongly believes that the efficacy of the vaccines must be evaluated. The 
concerns with regards to the new strain developing immunoescape mechanism need to be 
critically addressed. The Committee apprehends that rise in mutations in the virus may 
lead to reporting of more virulent and transmissible strain of Covid virus in the country. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to adopt Zero Toleran ce 
Covid-19 Policy and closely track Covid cases across the country.  
(Para 3.6) 
CONTINGENCY PLAN 
The Committee believes that timely detection and isolation of potentially infectious 
people is very crucial in reducing the impact of the pandemic Covid -19. The importance of 
diagnostic testing therefore, cannot be overlooked. An efficient and widely deployed testing 
mechanism will go a long way in preventing the spread of the infection. The Committee is 
pained to note that although the second wave came almost six months after the peak of the 
first wave, India’s testing infrastructure remained abysmal and highly insufficient. The 
Committee is of the opinion that to combat current pandemic Covid -19 and other future 
emergencies, India must realise its full testing  capacity and augment’s this capacity even 
further. The government should ensure that the testing should far outpace the growth of 
the cases to arrest future waves of Covid-19 early.  
 (Para 3.11) 
 The Committee also notes that with the new strain of Covid, Omicron (B.1.1.529) 
exhibiting 30+ mutations, tracking and testing facilities especially at airports must also be 
strengthened and rigorous testing and screening of travelers must be carried out. The 
Committee also recommends the Ministry to explore imposing travel restrictions and 
isolating passengers from 'at -risk' countries, as part of their new covid strain containment 
strategy. With WHO designating Omicorn as "Variant of Concern", the Governme nt must 
take immediate measures to prevent the transmission of any newer strains in the country.  
(Para 3.12) 
The Committee reiterates its recommendation for creation of the 'Indian Health 
Service' (IHS) in the Center and across States as a dedicated, effi cient, and adequately 

94 
 
resourced public health cadre on the pattern of Indian Administrative Service (IAS). It also 
recommends that the Ministry should issue specific guidelines to the states regarding timely 
payment of wages to the healthcare workers parti cularly who are the foot soldiers of the 
healthcare system. The Committee further strongly advocates for strengthening the 
network of ASHAs, ANMs and other community health workers and the necessary support 
in the healthcare delivery system. The Committee underlines the need to expedite the 
reforms in regulatory mechanism of dental and nursing education.  
(Para 3.20) 
 The Committee is constrained to observe that the recent Second Wave of the Covid -
19 saw unprecedented price escalation and shortage of oxygen  cylinder and other critical 
equipments and drugs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Governments must 
set up adequate Oxygen manufacturing plants and a robust supply and support mechanism 
for States to ensure uninterrupted supply of oxygen and other medical equipments and 
drugs for use under emergency situation. The Committee is also concerned about the 
exorbitant prices of the critical medicines during pandemics. Given the fact that the 
National Pharmaceutical Pricing  Authority (NPPA) updates t he price caps of such 
medicines and drugs, the Committee, recommends a strict and regular monitoring over 
adherence to this price capping, especially in the event of pandemic like situation.  
(Para 3.26) 
 The Committee believes that Covid -19 pandemic has b rought to the fore the 
importance of bio-medical waste collection, management and its disposal. Now -a-days, the 
management of biomedical waste has become a major concern as bio -medical waste is 
being generated not only from hospitals but also from househol ds. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends, that the capacity of the 200 odd Common Bio -medical Waste 
Treatment Facilities (CBWTF) spread across the nation must be augmented for their 
optimal utilisation. The ULBs (Urban Local Bodies), concerned authorities and other 
stakeholders must be directed to ensure minimal leakages in the waste (bio -medical) 
journey from point of origin to disposal. States need to be sensitized about the guidelines of 
disposal of biomedical waste. For this to happen, proper training a nd awareness 
programmes should be organized at the district and block level to educate both the workers 
of municipalities and the public at large for better bio-medical waste management.  
(Para 3.31) 
 The Committee notes the Government's efforts in combating the Covid-19, however, 
the Committee would like to be apprised of the 'plan of action' with respect to utilization of 
Rs. 64179.55 crores allocated for strengthening of public health infrastructure for 
pandemic preparedness. The Ministry may also apprise the Committee about the feedback 
and assessment pertaining to key performance indicators related to surveillance, testing, 
hospital infrastructure, logistics at the district levels. The Committee obs erves that the 
steps taken to combat the second wave of pandemic were not sufficient and more concrete 
action could have been undertaken to contain the impact of Covid -19. The Committee 
believes that structural and operational corrections are required to p repare for the future 
health emergencies. The Committee, therefore, recommends that every State should 
establish at least one medical college and hospital as 'Centre of Excellence' for proper 
health surveillance during emergency situation.   

95 
 
(Para 3.37) 
MANAGING MEDICAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
 The Committee is constrained to observe that vaccine scarcity is the major 
constraint of the Government's "Covid Vaccination" programme. The Committee wishes 
to point out that the Government failed in devising a pla n for the systematic and continual 
availability of the vaccine. The Committee therefore, recommends the Ministry to 
collaborate with all the vaccine manufacturers in the country and ensure that vaccines are 
easily available to the general public to catch pace of vaccination drive in all States/UTs.  
(Para 3.43) 
 The Committee expresses its concern over prevailing disparities in health 
infrastructure including testing facilities in the rural and urban areas despite the efforts 
put in by the Government. The C ommittee hopes that the Government has learnt some 
lessons from the disastrous second wave of the pandemic Covid -19. With the threat of a 
third wave looming around the Government should utilise the time in strengthening the 
public health infrastructure. Th is is evident from the fact that unlike first wave (peaked is 
September 2020) of the Covid -19 pandemic which largely was restricted to urban areas, 
where testing was introduced rapidly, the second wave (peaked in May) largely spread 
through rural towns and villages. The Committee, therefore, obs erves that there is dire 
need for improving the geographical spread of testing facilities in the rural regions of the 
country. The Committee also recommends establishing sync between the PHCs/CHCs with 
the VRDLs in the states.  
(Para 3.46) 
 The Committee is also concerned about the efficacy of the present vaccines and the 
possibility of mutated strain like Omicron evading vaccine immunity. The Committee, 
therefore recommends the Government to conduct more research and examine the need of 
administering booster dose of vaccines for containing the newer strain of virus.   
(Para 3.47) 
 The Committee also recommends Indian SARS -CoV-2 Genomic Consortia 
INSACOG to closely monitor the new strain of the virus and work towards upgrading the 
genome sequencing infrastructure in the country.  
(Para 3.48) 
The Committee strongly believes that pre-emptive testing is key to rein in the spread 
of the pandemic. Extensive testing provides a window to understand the spatial spreading 
pattern of transmissions of the pandemic Covid -19 thus extending research work and 
opportunity to devise remedial plan based on the conclusions drawn from that research 
work. During the second wave new cases surged as high as 4.5 lakhs a day in April, 2021 
and more than 4 lakh infected persons have di ed of Covid-19, therefore, inadequate testing 
does not provide the clear picture of the transmission on the ground. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry and authority concerned must plan testing as one -step 
ahead of virus transmission so that infected people are traced and quarantined early, which 
help in breaking the transmission chain.  
(Para 3.51) 

96 
 
 The Committee observes that the North-East region was engulfed during the second 
wave of the pandemic Covid -19. The Committee’s apprehension came true a s whatever 
efforts authorities took to prevent spread of the pandemic proved inadequate. The 
Committee believes that it's high time Ministry pulls up its socks and takes concrete steps 
to improve the largely insufficient healthcare facilities in the North -East Region of the 
country.  
(Para 3.54) 
 The Ministry should ensure that its guidelines and advisories regarding Covid 
Appropriate Behaviour (CAB) are strictly implemented in letter and spirit.  
(Para 3.55) 
 The Committee recommends that the Government mu st ensure the establishment of 
at least one BSL -3 lab in each VRDL spread across different States of the country. The 
Committee would like to reiterate its recommendation mentioned in the Committee's 127 th 
Report for establishing at least one BSL -4 lab in each zone/ region viz. North, East, West, 
Central and South. The Committee hopes that the Government would ensure fast -track 
establishment of both BSL-3 and BSL-4 labs within a fixed timeline. The Government must 
chalk out counter -strategy to make country bio-secured against the menace of bio 
terrorism.   
(Para 3.59) 
 The Committee notes that even though the budgetary allocation for DHR is 
witnessing a gradual increase, but the enhanced allocation is not commensurate to the 
increased financial implications involved on account of pandemic Covid -19. The 
Committee is of th e firm view that preparedness and prevention of the outbreak of third 
wave of pandemic Covid -19 would require public investment in research work, including 
genome sequencing and zoonotic surveillance. The Committee notes that in terms of the 
percentage of the GDP (Real) (as per first quarter for FY -21) the public expenditure for 
health research is a meagre 0.02%. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its 
recommendation for a substantial increase in spending on research to the world average of 
1.72 as a percentage of GDP within two years.  
(Para 3.62) 
 The Committee acknowledges the Ministry’s efforts in spreading the network of 
Viral Research & Diagnostics Laboratories, Multi - Disciplinary Research Units and Modal 
Rural Health Research Units in the country. I t however strongly believes that 
incorporating modern technologies like Artificial Intelligence (AI) as positive intervention 
in these initiatives can bear rich dividends in terms of quality, delivery and cost 
optimization of healthcare delivery services. Therefore, the Committee reiterates its 
recommendation that the Ministry must increase funding for machine learning and 
artificial intelligence-based projects and encourage the development of AI based systems, 
methods and tools in healthcare.  
(Para 3.65) 
 
 

97 
 
COVID MANAGEMENT UNDER AYUSHMAN BHARAT-PMJAY SCHEME 
 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry in terms of attracting 
investment by private sector in underserved areas. The Committee desires to know 
whether any assessment has been made with r espect to identifying such areas and States 
which need urgent assistance to strengthen their health infrastructure and incorporating 
the targeted beneficiaries within the ambit of the Scheme. The Committee seeks to know 
number of hospitals empanelled in the rural areas out of the 141 empanelled hospitals. The 
Committee recommends that more hospitals having facilities to provide emergency services 
arising out of pandemics like Covid -19 should be empanelled in the rural areas of the 
country.  
(Para 3.70)  
 The Committee fails to comprehend the rationale behind freezing the beneficiary 
database and thus depriving the deserving large chunk of poor people from availing the 
benefits of AB -PMJAY, especially in rural areas. The Committee understands that the 
objective of the scheme can only be fully realized if the poor people who actually need the 
benefits are enrolled in this scheme at the earliest. The Committee strongly recommends 
the NHA (National Health Authority) to expand the beneficiary base under the scheme  in 
consultation with other Ministries/Departments implementing other social security schemes 
in the country.  
(Para 3.73) 
 The Committee firmly believes that quality healthcare facilities in the rural areas 
can be developed by encouraging the participatio n of the private sector in the development 
of healthcare systems. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation for 
engaging both private and public sector for ensuring robust delivery of healthcare services 
under the Scheme Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (AB-PMJAY). 
(Para 3.76) 
COVID MANAGEMENT THROUGH AYUSH SYSTEM 
 The Committee acknowledges the research work being carried out by various 
organizations under the wings of the Ministry of AYUSH. However, the Committee 
believes tha t more needs to be done to equip the traditional systems of medicine with 
scientific base grounded on in -depth research. The Committee desires that AYUSH 
research work carried out by the institutes aimed towards recording and publishing the 
detailed process of extracting the active ingredient from herbs/plants, its effect initially in 
cell models, then in animals, and finally human trials. To facilitate transition from 
alternative systems to mainstream systems of medicine, it is all the more necessary to bu ild, 
promote and sustain this evidence based framework for the practitioners of the traditional 
systems.  
(Para 3.90) 
The Committee notes the wide range of research studies going on in AYUSH 
research Councils with respect to management of Covid -19, however, the Committee finds 
that the Ministry of AYUSH has not given any justification for delay in approvals for 
clinical and population based research studies. The Committee reiterates its 

98 
 
recommendation seeking clear guidelines with respect to research studie s along with 
proper timelines for the approval process. The Committee would also like to emphasize 
that the outcome of all these research studies especially related to the Covid -19 must be 
recorded, published and adequately placed in the public domain. The  Committee may also 
be apprised of AYUSH research outcomes highlighting concrete evidence in management 
of Covid-19.  
(Para 3.113) 
 The Committee recommends to evolve stringent regulatory framework to tackle the 
problems of failed samples and ensure qualit y control of AYUSH drugs. Strict and 
exemplary action in a time bound manner must be taken against those who are involved in 
manufacturing of spurious/low quality AYUSH drugs. The Committee expects the Ministry 
to fix the responsibility of the officials co ncerned who approve low/substandard quality 
drugs. The Committee wishes to be informed about the action taken by the responsible 
authorities in dealing with the misleading advertisements and unwarranted claims about 
drugs and other solutions in the last th ree years. The Committee is of the view that it is 
high time to effect amendments in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Drugs and 
Magic Remedies Act 1954 to make the provisions relating to offences and penalties/ 
stringent and effective enough to contro l and contain the misleading advertisements, poor 
quality products, cases of adverse reactions, etc.  
(Para 3.116) 
 The Committee is disappointed to observe that the Ministry of AYUSH is silent on 
its recommendation requiring a dedicated AYUSH Covid Care C entre in all the states. The 
Committee is of the considered view that the Ministry should undertake concrete steps to 
popularize the Indian systems of medicine to complement the modern system of medicine 
in management of Covid -19. The Committee strongly de sires the Ministry to contemplate 
on this and apprises the Committee in this regard.  
(Para 3.119) 
The Committee emphasizes that the major roadblock in delivering the quality 
healthcare services is insufficient public health spending. Needless to say, unless the 
government sets aside sufficient funds for healthcare, the prevailing state of public health  
care systems cannot be improved. Inadequate public spending increases Out of Pocket 
expenditure owing to irrational pricing of life saving equipments, drugs etc, as was evident 
in the second wave of pandemic Covid -19. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
expenditure in healthcare must be enhanced adequately to ensure liquidity and cash flow 
availability. This will help ease out financial distress in healthcare and infrastructure and 
as a result the medium sized hospitals and nursing homes can cont ribute in managing the 
health emergencies.  
(Para 3.123) 
 The Committee further recommends the Government to evolve a mechanism to 
regulate the pricing of life saving drugs, particularly during emergencies and its effective 
implementation.  
(Para 3.124) 

99 
 
 The Committee expects Government to ensure that education facilities for students 
particularly of economically weaker sections do not suffer further due to future Covid -19 
waves. The Committee takes note of growing public debate over re -opening of schools. The 
Committee may be apprised of whether the Ministry has done any studies regarding 
various age-group of students with respect to their immune response, mental health, ability 
to practice social distancing norms and other critical parameters affecting th eir health 
before allowing reopening of schools. The Committee notes that physical and mental health 
of children has been the area of concern during pandemic Covid -19.  The Committee 
maybe apprised of studies carried out on impact of online classes, absenc e of classroom 
schooling on overall development of children.  
(Para 3.127) 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry had projected an amount of Rs. 5435.55 
crore in BE 2021 -22 for promoting various Schemes in AYUSH sector to which the  
Ministry of Finance all ocated an amount of Rs.2970.30 crore for the year 2021 -22 which is 
39.97 per cent more than the allocation made in 2020 -21. The Committee believes that the 
Ministry of AYUSH is capable of absorbing more funds under its different schemes. The 
Committee, therefore recommends that the Ministry of AYUSH should plead for increased 
allocation from the Ministry of Finance in the ensuing financial years.  
(Para 3.131) 
 
  

100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
  

101 
 
II 
 
SECOND MEETING 
  
           The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 1 st December, 2021 in Committee 
Room-A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav             -   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2.      Shri A. K. Antony 
3.      Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4.      Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5.      Shri Suresh Prabhu 
6.      Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
7.      Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
8.      Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
LOK SABHA 
9.      Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
10.      Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
11.      Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
12.      Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
13.      Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
14.      Shri Arjunlal Meena 
15.      Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
16.      Shri K. Navaskani 
17.      Adv. Adoor Prakash 
18.      Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
19.      Dr. DNV Senthilkumar. S 
20.      Shri Anurag Sharma 
21.      Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
22.      Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri J. Sundriyal                 Joint Secretary  
2. Shri V.S.P. Singh   Director 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar  Additional Director 
4. Smt. Harshita Shankar                    Under Secretary 
 

102 
 
WITNESSES 
Department of Health and Family Welfare  
1. Shri Rajesh Bhushan, Secretary (Health) 
2. Shri Vikas Sheel, Additional Secretary 
3. Dr. Mandeep K. Bhandari, Joint Secretary 
4. Dr. V.G. Somani, DCG(I), CDSCO 
5. Shri Rajiv Wadhawan, Director 
6. Shri Pardeep Dahiya, Drugs Inspector, CDSCO 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and 
informed them that at first the Committee would consider and adopt the draft (i) 130 th Report on 
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/ Observations contained in its 123 rd 
Report on the Outbreak of Pandemic Covid-19 and its Management (ii) *** and  (iii) ***.    
 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the draft 130th, *** report of the 
Committee. He invited views/suggestions/modifications, if  any, from the Members in the draft 
reports. After a brief discussion, the Committee adopted all three reports and decided to present 
them in the ongoing session of the Parli ament. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to 
carry out any typographical/factual errors in the 130th, ** Report, if necessary. 
 
4. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the Reports may be presented to the Rajya Sabha 
and simultaneously laid on th e Table of the Lok Sabha on Friday, the 3 rd December, 2021. The 
Committee authorized its Chairman Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav, MP, Rajya Sabha and in his 
absence Smt. Sampatiya Uikey, MP, Rajya Sabha and in the absence of both members, Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVM Somu to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha. The Com mittee also authorized 
Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe MP, Lok Sabha and in his absence, Dr. Rajdeep Roy MP, Lok Sabha 
to lay the Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha. 
5. ***  
6. ***  
7. ***  
8. *** 
9. *** 
10. *** 
11. *** 
12. *** 
13. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
14. The Committee then adjourned at 4:17 p.m.  
*** Relates to other matter 

103 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
  

104 
 
ANNEXURE  I 
CCRAS research studies on COVID-19 in collaboration with the Allopathy institutions 
S.No. CCRAS COVID-19 Studies Centres 
1.  Effect of an Ayurvedic formulation as add-on therapy to Standard of Care 
in COVID 19 positive patients in a tertiary hospital 
[CTRI/2020/04/024882] 
Medanta Hospital, 
Gurugram 
2.  Clinical Evaluation of Chyawanprash For The prevention of COVID-19 
among Health Care Personnel – An open label, prospective Randomized 
controlled study 
(CTRI/2020/09/027974) 
KGMU Lucknow 
3.  AYUSH-CSIR study : A Randomized, Open Label, Parallel Efficacy, 
Active Control, Multi -Centre Exploratory Drug Trial to Evaluat e 
Efficacy and Safety of AYUSH 64 as Adjunct Treatment to Standard of 
Care for the management of Mild to Moderate COVID-19 Patients 
(CTRI/2020/06/025557) 
Podar Hospital, Mumbai 
Datta Meghe Institute of 
Medical Sciences, 
Nagpur 
King George‟s Medical 
University, Lucknow 
4.  A Study of Ashwagandha in the Prophylaxis Against COVID -19 and its 
benefits on General Health in High Risk Health Care Workers: A 
Randomized Controlled Comparison with Hydroxychloroquine Sulphate 
(HCQS) 
(CTRI/2020/08/027163) 
AYUSH-CRD project 
DMIMS Nagpur 
CARIC Mumbai 
SDM Hasan 
5.  In-silico evaluation of compounds of an Ayurvedic drug, AYUSH-64, for 
their action against SARS-CoV-2 Main Protease  
ICMR-National Institute 
of Nutrition (NIN), 
Hyderabad. 
 
  

105 
 
ANNEXURE II 
Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy 
Studies undertaken and proposed in integrative approach. 
 Title of study  Study site  Date of 
initiation  
Date of 
completion  
Preliminary 
outcome 
1. Homoeopathy as an 
adjuvant to standard 
treatment protocol in 
management of corona 
virus infection- a 
randomised, placebo 
controlled, open label 
study‟ 
Ruby Hall 
Clinic, KEM 
Hospital, and 
YCM Hospital, 
Pune, 
Maharashtra 
29.4.2020 30.11.2020 Total 300 patients 
enrolled in study. 
Analysis of the study 
reflects significant 
decrease in COVID -
19 deaths in add on 
homoeopathy group 
as 1.33.% patients 
died in add-on 
homoeopathy group 
compared to 8%  
COVID-19 deaths 
reported in only 
standard of care.  
2. Effect of adjuvant 
homoeopathy with 
standard treatment 
protocol in 
management of covid-
19: a randomised, 
open label, placebo 
controlled, parallel 
group study 
F. H. Medical 
college, Agra 
1.5.2020 --- Study initiated at F. 
H. Medical college, 
Agra on 1.5.2020. 
Total 49 cases 
enrolled in study. 
Could not complete 
the sample size as 
further cases not 
available in hospital. 
Hence study was 
discontinued. 
3. Effectiveness of 
individualized 
homoeopathy as an 
add-on to standard 
treatment of covid-19 
- a  multicentric, 
randomized, parallel 
arm, single blind, 
placebo, controlled 
trial 
Chirayu 
Hospital 
Bhopal 
5.7.2020 2.12.2020 Total 300 patients 
have been enrolled in 
the study. Analysis 
shows that there is 
earlier resolution of 
symptoms in add on 
Homoeopathy group 
by two days 
compared to standard 
of care group.   
4.  Comparative 
Effectiveness of Pre-
Identified 
Homoeopathic 
Medicines in 
Asymptomatic Covid -
19 Individuals 
Receiving Standard 
Covid Care 
Centre, Govt. 
Homoeopathic 
Medical 
College and 
Hospital, 
Bhopal, 
Madhya 
22.6.2020 31.10.2020 200 patients were 
enrolled (50 patients 
in each arm). 177 
patients became 
RtPCR negative by 
15 th day; 88%, 76%, 
98%, and 88% from 
Ars alb. (n=44), 

106 
 
Treatment Protocol–
An Open Label, 
Randomised, Placebo 
Controlled Trial 
Pradesh 
 
Camph.1M (n=40), 
Bry. alb. (n=49) and 
Pl. (n=44). A chi-
square test of 
association showed a 
statistically 
significant difference 
between the groups 
(chi-square value:8.1, 
df: 3, p-value: 0.04). 
Compliance to study 
medication was good. 
No serious adverse 
events were reported. 
5. Homeopathy as 
adjuvant to standard 
treatment protocol in 
management of corona 
virus infection- a 
randomized, placebo 
controlled, open label 
study 
AIIMS, Jhajjar 12 October 
2020 
10 Dec 2020 
(Tentative) 
Interim:  
Hospital stay: Case 
vs (/) Control: 
9.4/10.8 (Severe 
cases);  
7.3/7.7 (Moderate 
cases);  
Casualties: 
Case vs (/) Control:  
 3/7 (severe cases) 
3/3 (moderate cases) 
RTPCR: 
Case vs (/) Control: 
6.6/5.3 (Severe 
cases) 
5.8/6.1 (moderate 
cases) 
Comorbidities: 
Case vs (/) Control:  
43/53 (total cases) 
6. Randomised 
Controlled Trial to 
compare efficacy of 
standard of care alone 
and in combination 
with homoeopathic 
treatment of COVID-
19 
St. George 
Hospital, 
Group of JJ 
Hospitals, 
Mumbai 
1 January 
2021 
(Tentative) 
31 March 
2021 
(Tentative) 
Initiated in December 
2020. 
Proposed studies 
7. Homoeopathic 
treatment of 
Respiratory Sequelae 
of Post-COVID cases: 
An Open Label, 
Prospective, 
Interventional, Pilot 
All India 
Institute of 
Medical 
Sciences, New 
Delhi and  
Safdarjung 
Hospital, New 
--- --- Approved by 
Scientific Advisory 
Board, not yet 
initiated  

107 
 
Study Delhi 
8. The Role of 
Homoeopathic Health 
Supplement Alfa-
AvenaBioceutical on 
the Post COVID 
fatigue cases during 
Convalescent Stage 
 
 ---- --- Approved by 
Scientific Advisory 
Board, not yet 
initiated 
 
 
  

108 
 
ANNEXURE III 
Research activities undertaken by CCRH for masses in management of pandemic 
 Title of study  Study site  Date of 
initiation  
Date of 
completion  
Preliminary 
outcome  
1. Real time 
effect of 
Arsenicum 
Album 30C in 
prevention of 
COVID 19: a 
mass level 
PanIndia 
observational 
study 
Homoeopathy medicine 
Arsenic album 30C 
administered to masses 
all over India in 
collaboration with 
Homoeopathy Medical 
colleges. 
March 2020 ongoing Mass prophylaxis 
provided to 
appro.48 lakh 
population through 
organised activity 
in collaboration 
with Homoeopathy 
Medical colleges, 
out of which data 
of 6.7 lakh 
population is 
collected on 
predesigned format 
and is under 
analysis. 
2.  Mass 
Prophylaxis 
against 
COVID 19 
using 
Homoeopathic 
Medicine 
Arsenicum 
album 30C to 
the inmates, 
staff and 
family 
members of 
the  Delhi 
Prison 
Complexes at 
Tihar, Mandoli 
and Rohini 
Delhi Prisons at Tihar, 
Rohini and Mandoli 
1st June 2020  9th September 
2020 
Arsenicum album 
30 C was 
distributed 
continuously for 03 
months in the 
months of June, 
July and August 
2020 with 03 
follow ups done on 
each month in a 
21-day interval. 
Medicine is 
distributed among 
12,918 prisoners 
and 3215 staff of 
prison. 
3. Evaluation of 
Adjunct 
Homoeopathy 
treatment in 
COVID-19 
patients in 
Gujarat state 
Dedicated 
COVID 
Hospitals: A 
multicentric, 
Gujarat Dedicated 
COVID hospital 
allowing add-on 
Homoeopathic treatment 
July 2020 Ongoing  Time to 
clinical 
improvement 
of symptoms 
worsening of 
symptoms, 
recovery/disch
arge, or death 
in hospitalized 
COVID-19 
patients after 

109 
 
single arm 
Retrospective 
data analysis 
study 
add-on 
homoeopathic 
treatment. 
 Duration of 
Hospital stay. 
 Duration of 
Homeopathic 
medicine taken 
 Commonly 
indicated 
medicines for 
hospitalised 
COVID-19 
patients. 
4. Association 
between 
prophylactic 
AYUSH 
interventions 
and disease 
outcome in 
Covid 19 
positive 
patients: A 
retrospective 
cohort study 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. RRI(H) Imphal 
2. RRI(H) 
Guwahati 
3. RRI(H) 
Agartala 
4. RRI(H) 
Gudivada 
5. RRI(H) Mumbai 
6. RRI(H) Puri 
7. CRUT 
Puducherry 
8.  CRUT Ranchi 
9. CRUT Tirupati 
10. CRUT Siliguri  
11. HDRI Lucknow 
12. HRID Chennai 
13. DACRRI 
Kolkata 
14. DDPCRI(H) 
Noida 
15. NHRIMH 
Kottayam 
16. DPU 
Bhubaneshwar 
17. CRI(H) Jaipur 
18. CCRH Hqs. 
Delhi 
19. CD HMC Surat 
AIH, Hyderabad 
05/08/2020 Ongoing Sample size of the 
study (5000) has 
been achieved by  
end of Nov‟2020. 
Data entry in 
spreadsheet format, 
data cleaning and 
compilation is 
under process. 
 
5.  
Population 
based study 
    

110 
 
amongst the 
Maharashtra 
Police 
6. Population 
based data 
collection of 
mass 
prophylaxis 
program 
across various 
states through 
research 
centres of 
CCRH 
CCRH administered 
homoeopathy Arsenic 
album 30C via its 23 
research Institutes.  
April 2020 October 2020 Medicine is 
administered to 
around 2 lakh 
population and 
followed for 3 
weeks. Data 
compilation is in 
progress.  
7. Impact and 
management 
of Covid19 
pandemic on 
patients 
with Non-
communicable 
disease: A 
cross sectional 
study at 
AYUSH 
LSD Clinics of 
Krishna and 
Darjeeling 
LSD clinics , Krishna, 
and Darjeeling district 
5 Oct 2020 31st October 
2020 
Total of 499 
patients were 
surveyed. Data was 
collected in 
structured 
questionnaire. Data 
analysis under 
process 
 
  

111 
 
ANNEXURE  IV 
CCRS- Covid-19 proposals and its current status 
S.No. Title Study categorization Outcome 
1.  A prospective Non -
randomized Open label 
Controlled Interventional 
study on the effect of Siddha 
intervention – Kaba Sura 
Kudineer (KSK) as a 
Prophylactic measure among 
high risk population (Health 
Care Workers/Containment 
Zone population) exposed to 
COVID-19 (SIDDHALION) 
 Clinical – 
prophylactic study 
 In the interim analysis of prophylactic 
study with kabasura kudinner in 
containment zones, the results are 
proving to be very effective    
(control group 1.22 % turned positive 
vs treatment group with kabasura 
kudineer only 0.12 % turned positive) 
 Out of 20,000 sample size who were 
provided with kabasura kudineer  as 
prophylactic intervention,  only 24 
turned positive 
 Hence only  0.12 % turned positive in 
treatment group 
 The study explains the number of 
hospitalised in the positive patients 
where there is no severity of 
condition which required ICU or 
ventilator support. 
 Manuscript under process 
2.  A prospective, single centre, 
randomized open labelled 
comparative clinical study to 
evaluate the effectivene ss of 
Siddha medicine, Kabasura 
kudineer and vitamin c -zinc 
supplementation in the 
management of 
asymptomatic COVID 19 
patients.  at Government 
Stanley Medical College 
 Clinical – 
Randomised open 
label clinical trial 
 There was significant reduction of 
viral load (ct value). 
 66.7 % of negative conversion in 
study group ( Kabasura 
Kudineer)compared to control 
(vitamin C and zinc) 
 There was no incidence of symptoms 
like fever, cough and breathlessness 
in both groups during the study 
period. 
 No adverse events reported in both 
groups.  
The study protocol of the study titled "A 
prospective, single centre randomized 
open labelled comparative clinical study 
to evaluate the effectiveness of Siddha 
medicine, Kabasura kudineer  and 
vitamin c -zinc supp lementation in the 
management of asymptomatic COVID 
19 patients at Government Stanley 
Medical College" have been published 
in the journal “TRIALS” a springer 
nature indexed international journal  
https://rdcu.be/b9jr8   
 
 2.the study manuscript has been sent 

112 
 
to advisory panel and the mentor had 
provided inputs for the manuscript 
and the publication is in process 
 There was no abnormality observed 
in the safety parameters among both 
groups. No mortali ty occurred during 
the study period 
3.  Retrospective Survival 
analysis to assess the length 
of stay of novel coronavirus 
(COVID-19) patients in 
GMC & ESIH Coimbatore 
who were under - Integrated 
Medicine -Zinc, Vitamin C 
& Kabasura Kudineer 
(ZVcKK) 
 Survey analysis  Clinical presentations, Comorbidities, 
Outcomes including Length of stay in 
hospital of COVID -19 patients 
admitted(n=251) in GMC & ESIH 
Coimbatore those who were under 
Integrated Medical care -Zinc, 
Vitamin C & Kabasura Kudineer 
(ZVcKK) were assessed. The average 
length of Stay was 12 and Median 
days of stay were 13.5, which is 6 
days lesser than a similar study in 
Wuhan, China. 
 Manuscript under process 
4.  A prospective, non -
randomised, single arm 
observational study to access 
the safety and effectiveness 
of Siddha Sasthric 
Medicines – Fixed Regimen 
intervention in prevention of 
COVID-19 disease 
progression of severity from 
COVID-19 Positive 
asymptomatic, mild or 
moderate to critical with 
reference to the Siddha 
guidelines of COVID -19 
management, Ministry of 
AYUSH, Govt. of India at a 
Home Quarantine Chennai 
Containment Zone with 
interventions Thaleesadhi 
Chooranam Mathirai, 
Adathodai Manappagu 
Bramhananda Bairavam 
 Clinical – 
standalone 
 Reduction in the severity of disease 
and reductions of symptomsfrom day 
5 onwards  
 Reduction in severity of the disease as 
measured using Immune Status 
Questionnaire (ISQ). 
 Interim analysis in progress 
5.  A Double blinded RCT 
Namely "A Double Blinded 
controlled RCT to evaluate 
the efficacy Nilavembu 
Kudineer and Kabasura 
kudineer in Symptomatic 
COVID 19 Patients" was 
planned as a collaborative 
 Clinical – add on  Placebo Decaffeinated Tea Group – 
19 % Participants got RTPCR 
Negative on Day 6 and 81 % 
Participants got RTPCR Negative on 
Day 10. 
 Nilavembu Kudineer NVK Control 
Group - 32 % Participants got 
RTPCR Negative on Day 3 and 68 % 

113 
 
study with Govt. Institute of 
Medical Sciences, Greater 
Noida and Siddha Clinical 
Research Unit, New Delhi 
Participants got RTPC R Negative on 
Day 6. 
 Kaba Sura Kudineer KSK Trial 
Group – 45% Participants got RTPCR 
Negative on Day 3 and 55% 
Participants got RTPCR Negative on 
Day6. 
 Overall, KSK Group showing marked 
efficacy compare than Control Drug 
NVK & Placebo Drug Decaffeinated 
Tea. 
 In all three Groups, there are no 
ADR/AE/SAE reported till date. 
6.  Clinical validation of the 
“Immune booster” potential 
of the Siddha medicine drug, 
Kabasura kudineer (KSK) in 
asymptomatic contacts of 
COVID-19 cases: a 
controlled clinical trial. 
 Clinical   To study the anti -inflammatory and 
immunogenicity potential of 
Kabasura kudineer (KSK), using in 
vitro cell culture model ; 
 To validate the claim of KSK as a 
potent “immune booster” through a 
controlled clinical trial on human 
volunteers 
 To assess the levels anti- COVID IgG 
antibodies in KSK administered and 
non – administered groups of trial 
participants 
7.  A randomized open labeled 
clinical study to compare the 
effectiveness of Kabasura 
kudineer and Vitamin -C 
Zinc supplementation in the 
management of 
asymptomatic SARS -CoV-2 
patients at Govt. Theni 
medical college 
 Clinical – 
Randomised open 
label clinical trial 
 In Study group all the 30 patients 
turned negative in RT PCR at the end 
of 10 th day whereas in control group 
26 patients turned negative in  RT 
PCR at the end of treatment 
remaining 4 patients remained 
positive. 
 The study infers that there is 
reduction in the viral load of SARS 
CoV2 virus which in analysed by the 
cycle threshold value (ct value in RT 
PCR) for the 3 specific genes ORF, E 
and S genes. There is a significant 
difference in the mean ct value 
between the endline values of the 
study group and control group. 
 Manuscript under process 
8.  Assessment of prophylaxis 
offered to frontline workers 
who has involved 
themselves in war footing of 
COVID – 19 in Tamilnadu 
who are taking Siddha 
interventions like Nilavembu 
kudineer/kabasura Kudineer 
Survey analysis  Nilavembu kudineer/kabasura 
Kudineer have offered effective 
protection against COVID in health 
care workers, police personnel and 
sanitary workers. 
 Manuscript under process 

114 
 
9.  A prospective, non -
randomized, single -arm 
interventional study to assess 
the safety and efficacy of 
Siddha Sasthric Medicines – 
Fixed Regimen in the 
prevention of COVID -19 
disease progression of 
asymptomatic, and mild a t 
Siddha COVID Care Centre, 
Chennai, 2020 (SSM-FiRe) 
Clinical – standalone  Out of 60 participants, 83.33% (n=50) 
became RTPCR negative on 7 th day, 
3.33% (n=2) reported as negative on 
10th day, 11.66% (n=7) got negative 
on 14 th day, and 1.66% (n=1) not 
turned negative even after 14 th day. 
All the participants became symptom 
free on the 5 th day. Other outcome 
parameters analysis is in progress. Ct 
value of RT PCR is 35 and above or 
the patient becoming asymptomatic 
with all his/her Siddha parameters are 
found to be normal continuously for a 
period of 7 days from the date of 
confirmation or both will be taken as 
a primary success criterion. 
 Non-development of any ADR/AE 
both physically and clinically 
confirmed by the laboratory 
investigations along with changes  in 
immunological tests will be taken as 
secondary success outcome measures. 
 Significant reduction of symptoms 
with in the 3 days (Mild stage) 
 All the Safety parameters (LFT and 
RFT) within the normal limit on both 
the investigations 
 Manuscript under process 
10.  Awareness and practices 
regarding COVID-19 related 
prevention, control and 
promotive measures among 
population, Tamil Nadu, 
India: Cross-sectional study 
 Survey analysis  Most participants have taken 
preventive measures like mask 
wearing (95.1%), covering mouth 
with cloth while coughing (81.6%), 
hand wash(80.2%) using soap for 
hand wash (80.2%),taking Nilavembu 
kudineer as a preventive medicine 
(6.6%) Kabasura kudineer as a 
preventive medicine 
(77.2%).However, the participants 
has a positive attitu de towards NVK 
& KSK in preventing COVID 19 
(86.8%).This survey to assess 
knowledge, awareness and practice in 
response to the COVID -19 in the 
containment zones in Chennai. The 
results highlighted the importance of 
consistent messaging from health 
authorities and the government. 
 Manuscript under process 
 

115 
 
ANNEXURE V 
CCRAS COVID-19 STUDIES 
S.N. CCRAS COVID-19 Studies Centres 
1.  Evaluation of protective potential of an Ayurvedic Rasayan 
(Chyawanprash) in the prevention of COVID -19 among Health Care 
Personnel – An open label, prospective Randomized controlled 
parallel group study 
(CTRI/2020/05/025275) 
CBPACS, Najafgarh New 
Delhi 
2.  Evaluation of the efficacy of an Ayurvedic intervention 
(Chyawanprash) in the prevention of COVID -19 pandemic among 
Health Care Personnel – An open label single arm prospective study” 
(CTRI/2020/05/025425) 
A&U Tibbia College Karol 
Bagh New Delhi 
3.  Evaluation of Efficacy and Safety of Ayurveda Intervention (Ayush -
64) in the management of COVID -19 infection (Asymptomatic & 
Mild to M oderate symptoms)- An open label single arm prospective 
clinical trial” 
(CTRI/2020/05/025338) 
A&U Tibbia College Karol 
Bagh New Delhi  
4.  A pilot study to assess the efficacy of Ayush - 64 in COVID - 19 cases 
(CTRI/2020/05/0252335) 
CBPACS, Najafgarh New 
Delhi  
5.  Evaluation of Efficacy and Safety of Ayurveda Intervention (Ayush -
64) add -on-therapy for patients with Covid -19 infection (Stage -I)- A 
Randomized controlled clinical trial 
(CTRI/2020/05/025156)  
Govt.Medical College & 
Hospital Nagpur 
6.  A Randomized, Open Label, Parallel Efficacy, Active Control, 
Exploratory Clinical Trial to Evaluate Efficacy and Safety of an 
Ayurvedic Formulation (AYUSH 64) as Adjunct Treatment to 
Standard of Care for the management of Mild to Moderate  COVID-19 
Patients. 
(CTRI/2020/05/025214) 
Dhanwantri Ayurveda college, 
Chandigarh 
7.  Clinical Evaluation of Chyawanprash For The prevention of COVID -
19 among Health Care Personnel – An open label, prospective 
KGMU Lucknow 

116 
 
Randomized controlled study(CTRI/2020/09/027974) 
8.  A Prospective Randomized Controlled Clinical Trial  to evaluate the 
Efficacy and Safety of Ayurveda Interventions (Ashwagandha Tablet 
and Shunti Capsule) in the management of COVID -19 infection (Mild 
to Moderate symptoms) 
(CTRI/2020/08/027224) 
DhanwantriAyurveda College, 
Chandigarh 
9.  AYUSH-CSIR study: A Randomized, Open Label, Parallel Efficacy, 
Active Control, Multi -Centre Exploratory Drug Trial to Evaluate 
Efficacy and Safety of AYUSH 64 as Adjunct Treatment to Standard 
of Care for the management of Mild to Moderate COVID-19 Patients 
(CTRI/2020/06/025557) 
Podar Hospital, Mumbai 
Datta Meghe Institute of 
Medical Sciences, Nagpur 
King George‟s Medical 
University, Lucknow 
10.  Impact of Ayurvedic Interventions in prevention of COVID -19 
infection in identified containment area of Delhi 
(CTRI/2020/05/025069 ) 
CARICD New Delhi 
 
11.  A prospective non -randomized open label controlled interventional 
study on the effect of Guduchi GhanVati/ Sudarshan GhanVati as a 
prophylactic measure among high risk popul ation (Health Care 
Workers/ Containment Zone population) exposed to COVID 19 
(CTRI/2020/05/025385) 
15CCRAS institutes 
12.  Impact assessment of effectiveness, acceptance and usage of AYUSH 
advisories & measures in prevention of COVID 19: An app based 
study 
(IEC Done, CTRI Not applicable) 
App based study in all states 
across India 
13.  A prospective open label controlled interventional study on the effect 
of Ayurvedic intervention (Ayurveda Raksha Kit) as a prophylactic 
measure in the Pandemic of COVID-19 - A community based study 
(CTRI/2020/08/027316) 
Through 20 CCRAS institutes 
under SCSP project 
14.  A Study of Ashwagandha in the Prophylaxis Against COVID -19 and 
its benefits on General Health in High Risk Health Care Workers: A 
Randomized Controlled Comparison with Hydroxychloroquine 
Sulphate (HCQS) 
AYUSH-CRD project 
DMIMS Nagpur 
CARIC Mumbai 

117 
 
(CTRI/2020/08/027163) SDM Hasan 
15.  A Prospective Randomized Controlled Clinical Trial  to evaluate the 
Efficacy and Safety of Ayurveda Intervention ( Guduchi Ghan Vati) in 
the management of COVID -19 infection (Asymptomatic & Mild to 
Moderate symptoms) 
 
PKLGA college, Bhopal 
16.  Impact of Ayurvedic intervention (Guduchi Ghan vati) in the 
containment areas of Himachal Pradesh- a community-based study 
[CTRI/2020/05/025213] 
RARI, Mandi  
17.  Effect of an Ayurvedic formulation as add -on therapy to Standard of 
Care in COVID 19 positive patients in a tertiary hospital 
[CTRI/2020/04/024882] 
Medanta Hospital, Gurugram 
18.  A prospective non -randomized open labeled controlled interventio nal 
study on the effect of Ashwagandha ( Withania somnifera ) as a 
prophylactic measure among high risk population (Health Care 
Workers/Containment Zone Population) exposed to COVID-19 
(CTRI/2020/05/025429) 
NIIMH, Hyderabad 
19.  A prospective non -randomized open labeled controlled interventional 
study on the effect of Guduchi ( Tinosporacordifolia) as a prophylactic 
measure among high risk population (Health Care 
Workers/Containment Zone Population) exposed to COVID-19  
(CTRI/2020/05/025485) 
NIIMH, Hyderabad 
20.  A prospective non -randomized open labeled controlled interventional 
study on the effect of Chyavanprash Lehyam as a prophylactic 
measure among high risk population (Health Care Workers/ 
Containment Zone Population) exposed to COVID-19  
(CTRI/2020/05/025484) 
NIIMH, Hyderabad 
21.  Prospective non-randomized open label control interventional study on 
the effect of Ayurvedic Raksha Kit (Chavanprash, 
Samsahmanivati&Haritaki) as Prophylactic measure among police 
personal working in the vicinity of COVID -19 facilities  
NIIMH, Hyderabad 

118 
 
(CTRI/2020/05/025493) 
22.  Prospective non-randomized open label control interventional study on 
the effect of Ayurvedic Raksha Kit -1 (Ay ush 64, 
Samsahmanivati&Chayvanprasha) as Prophylactic measure among 
Ayush healthcare workers working in the vicinity of COVID -19 
facilities  
(CTRI/2020/06/025561) 
NIIMH, Hyderabad 
23.  In-silico evaluation of compounds of an Ayurvedic drug, AYUSH -64, 
for their action against SARS-CoV-2 Main Protease  
ICMR-National Institute of 
Nutrition (NIN), Hyderabad. 
 
  

119 
 
Annexure VI 
Total studies undertaken and/or proposed by CCRH in COVID-19 
S. 
No.  
Title of the project Nature of Study 
Preclinical/Clinical 
Site of Study  Status /Outcomes 
A. Prophylactic Studies 
1. Effectiveness of 
Arsenicum album 
30c In Prevention of 
Covid-19 In 
Individuals Residing 
in Hotspots of Red 
Zones in Delhi– A 
Prospective Cohort 
Study 
 
Clinical 11 containment zones of 
Delhi 
10180 individuals 
enrolled in study.  6590 
were enrolled in medicine 
group and 3590 were in 
observation group. The 
analysis shows that the 
medicine was able to 
protect about 81% 
population from 
COVID/COVID like 
illness compared to 
control group over period 
of 9 weeks. 
Only 0.50% developed 
Covid like illness as per 
standard definition of 
COVID 19 in the 
intervention group and 
3.03% in the control 
group. 
2.  Effectiveness of 
Arsenicum Album 
30c in Prevention of 
Covid-19 in 
Individuals Residing 
in Hot Spots of Red 
Zones– A 
Multicentric, 
Randomised, Cluster 
Level, Controlled 
Trial 
 
Clinical Total 27 containment 
zones from: 
Delhi,  
Hyderabad(Andhra 
Pradesh),  
Kolkata (West Bengal),  
Chennai (Tamil Nadu),  
Mumbai (Maharashtra),  
Surat (Gujarat) and  
Machilipatnam(Andhra 
Pradesh) 
32198 individuals were 
enrolled in the study and 
followed up for 3 weeks. 
22703 were enrolled in 
medicine group, while 
9495 were enrolled in 
observation group. The 
analysis shows that the 
medicine was able to 
protect about 79% 
population from 
COVID/COVID like 
illness compared to 
control group over period 
of 3 weeks. 0..15% of 
study population Covid 
like illness as per 
standard definition of 
COVID 19 in the 
intervention group and 
0.70 % in the control 
group.   
 
 

120 
 
S. 
No.  
Title of the project Nature of Study 
Preclinical/Clinical 
Site of Study  Status /Outcomes 
B. Add-on treatment Studies 
3. Homoeopathy as an 
adjuvant to standard 
treatment protocol in 
management of 
corona virus 
infection- a 
randomised, placebo 
controlled, open 
label study 
 
Clinical Ruby Hall Clinic, Pune 
KEM Hospital, Pune 
and YCM Hospital, 
Pune,  
300 patients were 
enrolled in the study. 
Preliminary analysis of 
the study reflects 
decrease in COVID -19 
deaths in add on 
homoeopathy group i.e 
1.33.% patients died in 
add-on homoeopathy 
group compared to 8% 
COVID-19 deaths 
reported in only standard 
of care. 
4. Effect of adjuvant 
homoeopathy with 
standard treatment 
protocol in 
management of 
covid-19: a 
randomised, open 
label, placebo 
controlled, parallel 
group study 
 
Clinical F. H. Medical college, 
Agra 
Total 49 cases enrolled in 
study. Could not 
complete the sample size 
as further cases not 
available in hospital. 
Hence study was 
discontinued. 
5. Effectiveness of 
individualized 
homoeopathy as an 
add-on to standard 
treatment of covid-
19 - a  multicentric, 
randomized, parallel 
arm, single blind, 
placebo, controlled 
trial 
 
Clinical Chirayu Hospital 
Bhopal 
300 patients were 
enrolled in the study. 
Analysis shows that there 
is earlier resolution of 
symptoms in add on 
Homoeopathy group by 
two days compared to 
standard of care group.  
6. Homeopathy as 
adjuvant to standard 
treatment protocol in 
management of 
corona 
virus infection- a 
randomized, placebo 
controlled, open 
label study 
Clinical AIIMS, Jhajjar 128 patients have been 
enrolled in the study. 
Interim analysis shows 
that add on homoeopathy 
group patient recover 01 
day earlier compared to 
standard of care.  
 
7. Comparative 
Effectiveness of Pre-
Identified 
Clinical Govt. Homoeopathic 
Medical college and 
Hospital, Bhopal 
200 patients were 
enrolled (50 patients in 
each arm). 177 patients 

121 
 
S. 
No.  
Title of the project Nature of Study 
Preclinical/Clinical 
Site of Study  Status /Outcomes 
Homoeopathic 
Medicines In 
Asymptomatic Covid 
-19 Individuals 
Receiving 
Standard Treatment 
Protocol–An Open 
Label, Randomised, 
Placebo Controlled 
Trial 
 
became RtPCR negative 
by 15 th day; 88%, 76%, 
98%, and 88% from Ars 
alb. (n=44), Camph.1M 
(n=40), Bry. alb. (n=49) 
and Pl. (n=44). A chi-
square test of association 
showed a statistically 
significant difference 
between the groups (chi-
square value:8.1, df: 3, p-
value: 0.04). Compliance 
to study medication was 
good. No serious adverse 
events were reported. 
8. Evaluation of 
Adjunct 
Homoeopathy 
treatment in COVID-
19 patients in 
Gujarat state 
Dedicated COVID 
Hospitals: A 
multicentric, single 
arm Retrospective 
data analysis study 
Clinical 
(Retrospective Data 
Analysis) 
Dedicated COVID 
hospital, Gujarat 
allowing add-on 
Homoeopathic treatment 
 Data of 4751 
patients treated 
between 19th 
May 2020 and 
30th Nov 2020 
has been received 
so far. Data 
cleaning and 
verification of 
the same is under 
process.  
 
 The interim 
analysis of data 
(2689) shows 
that 94% patients 
reported relief of 
symptoms 
between 0-8 days 
after taking add-
on homoeopathic 
medicines, with 
65% patients 
having hospital 
stay between 0-8 
days.  
9. Randomised 
Controlled Trial to 
compare efficacy of 
standard of care 
alone and in 
combination 
with homoeopathic 
Clinical St. George Hospital, 
Group of JJ Hospitals, 
Mumbai 
Approved by Scientific 
Advisory Board, CCRH 
Ethics Committee of 
CCRH & JJ Hospital. 
 Initiated in 
December 2020. 

122 
 
S. 
No.  
Title of the project Nature of Study 
Preclinical/Clinical 
Site of Study  Status /Outcomes 
treatment of 
COVID-19 
 
C. Population based data collection studies  
9. Real time effect of 
Arsenicum Album 
30C in prevention of 
COVID 19: a mass 
level Pan 
India observational 
study 
 
Clinical CCRH Hqs.  Data of 6.7 lakh 
population is 
collected on 
predesigned 
format and is 
under analysis.  
 Interim analysis 
shows that 
99.23% did not 
develop any 
COVID like 
illness. 
10. Association between 
prophylactic 
AYUSH 
interventions and 
disease outcome in 
Covid 19 positive 
patients: A 
retrospective cohort 
study 
Clinical 20. RRI(H) Imphal 
21. RRI(H) 
Guwahati 
22. RRI(H) 
Agartala 
23. RRI(H) 
Gudivada 
24. RRI(H) Mumbai 
25. RRI(H) Puri 
26. CRUT 
Puducherry 
27.  CRUT Ranchi 
28. CRUT Tirupati 
29. CRUT Siliguri  
30. HDRI Lucknow 
31. HRID Chennai 
32. DACRRI 
Kolkata 
33. DDPCRI(H) 
Noida 
34. NHRIMH 
Kottayam 
35. DPU 
Bhubaneshwar 
36. CRI(H) Jaipur 
37. CCRH Hqs. 
Delhi 
38. CD HMC Surat 
Data of 5000 post-covid 
individuals has been 
collected. Data entry in 
spreadsheet format, data 
cleaning and compilation 
is under process. 
11. Mass Prophylaxis 
against COVID 19 
using Homoeopathic 
Medicine Arsenicum 
Clinical Delhi Prisons at Tihar, 
Rohini and Mandoli 
22,204 prison inmates 
have been distributed 
Arsenic album 30C over 
3 months and 953 

123 
 
S. 
No.  
Title of the project Nature of Study 
Preclinical/Clinical 
Site of Study  Status /Outcomes 
album 30C to the 
inmates, staff and 
family members of 
the  Delhi Prison 
Complexes at Tihar, 
Mandoli and Rohini 
developed Covid similar 
symptoms and only 34 
tested Covid positive post  
homoeopathic 
prophylaxis. Of the 6055 
prison staff and family 
members who have been 
distributed Arsenicum 
album 30C over 3 
months, only 19 
developed Covid similar 
symptoms and nil tested 
Covid positive. 
12. Post -Prophylaxis 
analysis of impact of 
Arsenic album 30 in 
frontline workers 
(Maharashtra Police 
Personnels) 
Clinical Maharashtra Police 
Department 
Arsenic Album 30C was 
distributed to around 
1,50,000 police 
personnel. 
 
Data of police personnel 
of who received   Arsenic 
album 30 as prophylactic 
medicine is recorded. 
 
13.  Impact and 
management of 
Covid19 pandemic 
on patients 
with Non-
communicable 
disease: A cross 
sectional study at 
AYUSH 
LSD Clinics of 
Krishna and 
Darjeeling District" 
Cross sectional 
Survey 
LSD clinics , Krishna 
and Darjeeling district 
Total of 499 patients 
were surveyed. Data was 
collected in structured 
questionnaire. Data 
analysis under process. 
D. Preclinical studies 
14. Development of 
Nosodes of SARS-
CoV-2 virus antigens 
for prevention and 
management of 
COVID-19,  
Pre-clinical Virology Laboratory, 
DACRRI, Kolkata 
The study is ongoing will 
be completed in 6 
months.  
15. Study on the effect 
of homoeopathic 
medicines in 
modulating the 
interaction between 
haemoglobin and 
Pre-clinical Virology Laboratory, 
DACRRI, Kolkata 
The study is ongoing will 
be completed in 6 
months. 

124 
 
S. 
No.  
Title of the project Nature of Study 
Preclinical/Clinical 
Site of Study  Status /Outcomes 
SARS-CoV-2 
antigens,  
 
16. A study on the 
efficacy of 
homeopathic 
medicines on 
cytokine storm 
induced by SARS-
CoV-2 virus proteins 
in cell line and in 
mice,  
 
Pre-clinical Virology Laboratory, 
DACRRI, Kolkata 
The study is ongoing will 
be completed in 6 
months. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E. Studies in Pipeline 
17. Homoeopathic 
treatment of 
Respiratory Sequelae 
of Post-COVID 
cases: An Open 
Label, Prospective, 
Interventional, Pilot 
Study 
Clinical All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi and  
Safdarjung Hospital, 
New Delhi 
Approved by Scientific 
Advisory Board, CCRH 
Yet to be initiated 
18. The Role of 
Homoeopathic 
Health Supplement 
Alfa-
AvenaBioceutical on 
the Post COVID 
fatigue cases during 
Convalescent Stage 
Pre-clinical and 
Clinical 
 Approved by Scientific 
Advisory Board, CCRH 
Yet to be initiated 
19. Open label 
exploratory 
multi-centric 
studies on 
homoeopathic 
treatment of 
post COVID 19 
illnesses 
Clinical Proposed  
 Dr DP Rastogi 
Central 
Research 
Institute for 
Homoeopathy, 
Noida, UP 
 Regional 
Research 
Institute of 
Homoeopathy, 
Mumbai, 
Maharashtra 
 Dr Anjali 
Chatterjee 
Regional 
research 
Approved by Scientific 
Advisory Board, CCRH 
Yet to be initiated. 

125 
 
S. 
No.  
Title of the project Nature of Study 
Preclinical/Clinical 
Site of Study  Status /Outcomes 
Institute of 
Homoeopathy, 
Kolkatta, West 
Bengal 
 Extension centre 
of Drug 
Standardization 
Unit, 
Hyderabad, 
Andhra Pradesh 
  

126 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE VII 
 
Statement showing Human Resource (Contractual) In -position under National Health 
Mission (NHM) during last five years. 
 
 
Progress under Human Resources (March-2016 to June 2020) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Human Resource 
(Contractual) In 
-position 
As on 
March’ 
2016 
As on 
March’ 
2017 
As on 
March’ 
2018 
As on 
March’ 
2019 
 
As on June’ 
2020 
 
1 
General Duty Medical 
Officers (GDMOs) 
 
7363 
 
9936 
 
10644 
 
11172 
 
11921 
2 Paramedics 17870 31517 36378 39729 44314 
3 Specialist 3308 3369 2649 3147 3789 
4 Staff Nurses 36383 46481 52540 55308 73619 
5 Auxiliary Nurse 70674 79939 82528 83236 81978 
 Midwife's (ANMs)      
 
6 
Accredited Social 
Health Activists 
(ASHAs) 
 
942786 
 
1010457 
 
1031805 
 
1039630 
 
1061646 
Total 10,78,384 11,81,699 12,16,544 12,32,222 12,77,267 
 
  

127 
 
ANNEXURE VIII 
Statement showing Additional HR engaged for COVID under the 
COVID Package till September 2020. 
 
Sl. No. Additional Human Resources Numbers 
1 Physicians 1646 
2 Anaesthetists 517 
3 Other Specialists as required for clinical Management 1134 
4 Medical Officers [GDMOs] 5417 
5 Staff Nurses 31762 
6 Community Health Officers (CHOs) 8291 
7 Multipurpose Health Workers [Male] 6877 
8 Multipurpose Health Workers [Female] 8488 
9 ASHAs 94919 
10 ASHA facilitators and other community volunteers 6096 
11 Laboratory Technicians 7029 
12 Psychiatric Social Worker 406 
13 Epidemiologist at District level IDSP Unit 158 
14 Microbiologist at District level IDSP Unit 171 
15 Data Manager at District level IDSP Unit 151 
16 Data Entry Operators 3987 
17 Support Staff 14296 
 
  

128 
 
ANNEXURE IX 
CCRAS COVID-19 STUDIES on Ashwagandha/ Guduchi + Pippali/ AYUSH- 64 
 
S.N. CCRAS COVID-19 Studies Centres 
Ashwagandha 
1.  A Study of Ashwagandha in the Prophylaxis Against COVID-
19 and its benefits on General Health in High Risk Health 
Care Workers: A Randomized Controlled Comparison with 
Hydroxychloroquine Sulphate (HCQS) 
(CTRI/2020/08/027163) 
AYUSH-CRD project 
DMIMS Nagpur 
CARIC Mumbai 
SDM Hasan 
2.  A prospective non -randomized open labeled controlled 
interventional study on the effect of Ashwagandha ( Withania 
somnifera) as a prophylactic measure among high risk 
population (Health Care Workers/Containment Zone 
Population) exposed to COVID-19 
(CTRI/2020/05/025429) 
NIIMH, Hyderabad 
Guduchi+ Pippali 
3.  Effect of an Ayurvedic formulation as add -on therapy to 
Standard of Care in COVID 19 positive patients in a tertiary 
hospital 
[CTRI/2020/04/024882] 
Medanta Hospital, Gurugram 
AYUSH 64 
4.  Evaluation of Efficacy and Safety of Ayurveda Intervention 
(Ayush -64) in the management of COVID -19 infection 
(Asymptomatic & Mild to Moderate symptoms) - An open 
label single arm prospective clinical trial” 
(CTRI/2020/05/025338) 
A&U Tibbia College Karol Bagh 
New Delhi  
5.  A pilot study to assess the efficacy of Ay ush - 64 in COVID - 
19 cases 
(CTRI/2020/05/0252335) 
CBPACS, Najafgarh New Delhi  

129 
 
6.  Evaluation of Efficacy and Safety of Ayurveda Intervention 
(Ayush-64) add -on-therapy for patients with Covid -19 
infection (Stage-I)- A Randomized controlled clinical trial 
(CTRI/2020/05/025156)  
Govt.Medical College & Hospital 
Nagpur 
7.  A Randomized, Open Label, Parallel Efficacy, Active 
Control, Exploratory Clinical Trial to Evaluate Efficacy and 
Safety of an Ayurvedic Formulation (AYUSH 64) as Adjunct 
Treatment to Standard of Care for the management of Mild to 
Moderate COVID-19 Patients. 
(CTRI/2020/05/025214) 
Dhanwantri Ayurveda college, 
Chandigarh 
8.  AYUSH-CSIR study : A Randomized, Open Label, Parallel 
Efficacy, Active Control, Multi-Centre Exploratory Drug Trial 
to Evaluate  Efficacy and Safety of AYUSH 64 as Adjunct 
Treatment to Standard of Care for the management of Mild to 
Moderate COVID-19 Patients 
(CTRI/2020/06/025557) 
Podar Hospital, Mumbai 
Datta Meghe Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Nagpur 
King George‟s Medical Universi ty, 
Lucknow 
9.  Prospective non-randomized open label control interventional 
study on the effect of Ayurvedic Raksha Kit -1 (Ayush 64, 
Samsahmanivati&Chayvanprasha) as Prophylactic measure 
among Ayush healthcare workers working in the vicinity of 
COVID -19 facilities  
(CTRI/2020/06/025561) 
NIIMH, Hyderabad 
10.  In-silico evaluation of compounds of an Ayurvedic drug, 
AYUSH-64, for their action against SARS -CoV-2 Main 
Protease  
NIN, Hyderabad 
 
 
 
***** 