 
 
 
       
                                                                                       
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September, 2022/ Asvina, 1944 (SAKA) 
 
    REPORT NO. 
140 
ONE HUNDRED FORTIETH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
ONE HUNDRED THIRTY FOURTH REPORT ON DEMANDS 
FOR GRANTS 2022-23 (DEMAND NO. 46) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
(Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 12th September, 2022) 
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 12th September, 2022) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th December, 2022) 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-mail : rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
  

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September, 2022/ Asvina, 1944 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED FORTIETH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
ONE HUNDRED THIRTY FOURTH REPORT ON DEMANDS 
FOR GRANTS 2022-23 (DEMAND NO. 46) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
(Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 12th September, 2022) 
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 12th September, 2022) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th December, 2022) 
 
 
 
  
 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2. PREFACE (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS  (iii)-(v) 
4. REPORT  
 Chapter–I  
                Recommendations/Observations which have been  
accepted by the Department 
1 – 18 
 Chapter–II 
                Recommendations/Observations on which the 
Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the 
Department's replies 
 
19 – 28 
 Chapter–III 
                Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Department have not been accepted 
by the Committee 
 
29 – 54 
 Chapter–IV 
                Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Department have not been 
received 
55 - 59 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   - AT   A  
GLANCE 
60 – 66 
6. MINUTES 67 - 69 
7. ANNEXURES 70 - 89 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2022-23) 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
2. Dr. Anil Agrawal  
3. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4. Vacant 
5. Vacant 
6. Dr. Santanu Sen 
7. Shri A. D. Singh  
8. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu   
9. Vacant 
10. Vacant 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
12. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
13. Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
14. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
15. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
16. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
17. Shrimati Kavitha Malothu 
18. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
19. Shri Arjun Lal Meena 
20. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
21. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
22. Shri K. Navaskani 
23. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil 
24. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
25. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
26. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
27. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S. 
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
31. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Mahesh Tiwari   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Director    
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar                         Additional Director 
4. Shri Praveen Kumar   Deputy Secretary 
5. Shrimati Harshita Shankar     Deputy Secretary 
6. Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma   Assistant Committee Officer 
7. Ms. Monika Garbyal   Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 (i) 

 
 
PREFACE 
 I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to presen t the Report on its 
behalf, present this One Hundred Fortieth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by 
Government on the Recommendations/ Observations contained in the One Hundred Thirty 
Fourth Report on Demands for Grants 2022 -23 (Demand No. 46) of the Department of Health 
and Family Welfare (Ministry of Health & Family Welfare).  
2.  The 134th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 24th 
March, 2022.  The Department of Health and Family Welfare was forwarded the Action Taken 
Note on the recommendations/observations contained in the 1 34th Report within three months of 
the presentation of the Report in the Parliament. The Committee rece ived the Action Taken 
Notes on 26th July, 2022. 
3.  The Committee made a total of 77 recommendations in its 1 34th Report; out of which 25 
recommendations have been accepted by the Ministry and have been enumerated under Chapter 
I. Chapter II contains 14 recommendations, which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the Ministry‟s replies. In Chapter III there are 28 recommendations/observations in 
respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been accepted by the Committee and the 
Committee has made further recommendations thereon. While a total number of 10 
recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have not been 
received, has been categorized under Chapter IV. 
4.  The Committee, in its meeting held on t he 8th September, 2022 considered and adopted 
the draft Report.  
 
NEW DELHI  
8th September , 2022  
Bhadra, 1944 (Saka) 
PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
 CHAIRMAN 
Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
(ii) 

 
 
ACRONYMS (NHM SECTOR) 
AB-NHPM - Ayushman Bharat – National Health Protection Mission 
ANM  - Auxiliary Nurse Midwife 
ASCI  - Advertising Standards Council of India 
CHCs  - Community Health Centres 
eVIN  - Electronic Vaccine Intelligence Network 
HWCs  - Health and Wellness Centres 
INCHIS - Integrated Child Health and Immunization Survey 
JSSK  - Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakaram 
JSY  - Janani Suraksha Yojana 
MoHFW - Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
MR  - Measles-Rubella 
NCCMIS - National Cold Chain Management Information System 
NCDs  - Non Communicable Diseases 
NFHS  - National Family Health Survey 
NHM  - National Health Mission 
NHP  - National Health Policy 
NHPM  - National Health Protection Mission 
NHPS  - National Health Protection Scheme 
NIHFW - National Institute of Health and Family Welfare  
NRHM  - National Rural Health Mission 
NUHM  - National Urban Health Mission 
NSS  - National Service Scheme 
OOPE  - Out of Pocket Expenditure 
PCV  - Pneumococcal Vaccine 
PFMS  - Public Financial Management System 
PHCs  - Primary Healthcare Centres 
PIPs  - Programme Implementation Plans 
PMMVY - Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana 
PRC  - Population Research Centres 
RCH  - Reproductive and Child Health 
RE  - Revised Estimate 
RNTCP  - Revised National TB Control Programme 
RSBY  - Rastriya Swasthya Bima Yojana 
RVV  - Rotavirus Vaccine 
SBA  -  Skilled Birth Attendance 
SDG  - Sustainable Development Goals 
SHS  - State Health Society 
SIPV  - Sabin Strains Inactivated Polio Vaccine 
SRS  - Sample Registration System 
TOT  - Training of Trainers 
ULBs  - Urban Local Bodies 
UTs  - Union Territories 
 
(HEALTH SECTOR) 
AIIMS  -  All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
BE   -  Budget Estimate 
BJMC  -  B.J. Medical College 
BIS  -  Bureau of Indian Standard 
CDSCO   -  Central Drugs Standard Control Organization 
 
(iii) 

 
 
 
C-DAC            - Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
CE  -   Conformité Européene 
CGHS  -   Central Government Health Scheme 
CHS   -  Central Health Service 
CMO               -   Chief Medical Officer 
CPWD   -  Central Public Work Department 
CTVS   -  Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgeons 
DG  -  Director General  
DGHS   -  Director General of Health Services 
DUSIB  -  Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board 
EA   -  Executing Agencies 
FSSAI             - Food Safety and Standards Authority of India      
FY   -  Financial Year 
GDP   -  Gross Domestic Product 
GDMO  -  General Duty Medical Officer 
GMC                 -                         Government Medical Colleges/Institutions 
GIA   -  Grants In Aid 
GFR   -  General Financial Rules 
HEFA   -  Higher Education Financing Agency 
HITES   -  HLL Infra Tech Services Ltd. 
HLL   -  Hindustan Latex Limited  
HSCC   -  M/S Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation 
ICU   -  Intensive Care Unit 
IIFCL              -  India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited 
IVF   -  In Vitro Fertilization 
JICA   -  Japan International Cooperation Agency 
JR   -  Junior Resident 
L&T  -  Larsen & Toubro Limited 
LDC   -  Lower Division Clerk 
 MOA  -   Memorandum of Agreement 
MOH&FW -  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
MoHRD -   Ministry of Human Resource and Development 
MOU  -  Memorandum of Undertaking 
NACO  -  National Aids Control Organization  
NBCC             -   National Buildings Construction Corporation 
NCT  -  National Capital Territory 
NDMC  -  New Delhi Municipal Council 
NEIGRHIMS  - North-Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health and Medical 
Sciences , Shillong 
NER   -  North-Eastern Region 
OBC   -  Other Backward Classes 
OPD   -  Out Patient Department 
OT   -  Operation Theatre 
PG   -  Post Graduate 
PGIMER         -  Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research 
PMSSY            -  Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana 
PORB   -  Pension and Other Retirement Benefits  
PSA   -  Procurement Support Agency 
RDTL    -  Regional Drugs Testing Laboratory  
RE   -  Revised Estimates 
RIMS                 - Regional Institute of Medical Sciences, Imphal 
 
(iv) 

 
 
 
RISE                  - Revitalising Infrastructure and Systems in Education   
RML   -  DR. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital 
SACS                 -  State Aids Prevention and Control Societies 
SFC  -  Standing Finance Committee 
SR   -  Senior Resident 
SSC   -  Standing Selection Committee  
UC  -  Utilization Certificate 
UG   -  Undergraduate 
UPSC   -  Union Public Service Commission 
USFDA -   U S Food and Drug Administration 
VMMC  -  Vardhaman Mahavir Medical College 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)

 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Thirty Fourth Report of the Comm ittee on 
Demand for Grants 20 22-23 (Demand No 4 6) of the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare. 
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Government in respect of 
the recommendations contained in 134th  Report. They have been categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry:  Paras - 
2.13, 2.14, 2.15, 3.13, 3.14, 3.36, 3.39, 3.40, 3.47, 3.51, 3.71, 3.78, 3.86, 3.87, 3.94, 
3.118, 3.119, 3.126, 4.8, 4.35, 4.37, 4.42, 4.48, 4.56 and  4.57 
        Total - 25 (Chapter I)  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the Ministry‟s replies:  Paras – 1.12, 1.13, 2.5, 3.4, 3.6, 3.21, 3.58, 3.61, 3.91, 
3.97, 3.101, 4.7, 4.45 and 4.46 
        Total- 14 (Chapter II) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee:  Paras – 1.11, 2.3. 2.4, 2.9, 3.10, 3.11, 3.12, 3.26, 
3.29, 3.42, 3.46, 3.64, 3.65, 3.66, 3.67, 3.85, 3.104, 3.106, 3.125, 3.133, 4.19, 4.22, 
4.26, 4.30, 4.33, 4.49, 4.50 and 4.53 
        Total - 28 (Chapter III) 
(iv)  Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry are 
still awaited: Paras- 3.18, 3.79, 3.80, 3.93, 3.111, 3.112, 3.114, 3.127, 3.134 and 4.39
  
        Total-  10 (Chapter IV) 
3. The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vi)  
 
  

1 
 
CHAPTER–I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
1.1 Inter-State and intra-State disparity in healthcare infrastructure 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.1.1 The Committee is concerned at the existing wide inter -State and intra -State disparity 
in healthcare infrastructure across the country. Despite the much emphasized guidelines of 
the NHP, the States/UTs barring Delhi and Puducherry have not enhanced the shar e of 
health budget to more than 8% of the total State budget in the last 5 years. The Committee 
understands that States with poor financial resources and inefficient fiscal capacity have a 
herculean task ahead to overcome the situation of fragile health in frastructure vis-a-vis the 
demand of accessible and affordable healthcare facilities. The Committee is of the considered 
view that in order to maximise the benefits of economic, social and human capital, the States 
must invest in institutionalizing a robus t healthcare ecosystem that is capable of delivering 
adequate healthcare services to the masses on ground level especially in rural, urban and 
tribal region. The sooner the States realize the difference, a resilient and strong health system 
makes, the bett er will be the outcome on all social as well as economic indicators. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the States/UTs to emulate the UTs of Delhi and 
Puducherry and increase the share of health spending in their States Budget.  The Committee 
in this reg ard recommends the Department of Health and Family Welfare to persuade the 
State Governments to achieve the budgetary health expenditure to 8%. 
(Para 2.13 of 134th Report) 
Action Taken 
1.1.2     The NHM expenditure, which is shared by both the Union and States will induce the 
State to further increase their budgetary allocation on health. As per the expenditure data of 
the union budget for 2018 -19 and 2019 -20 expenditure on NHM is more than 50 % clearly 
indicating the purpose of the union government. Apar t from the overall allocation, around 
20% of the allocation is kept under the NHM conditionality framework. This framework 
incentivizes the State to perform better on various health parameters and also penalizes the 
States for not meeting the targets. This  is a step toward s result-based financing and nudges 
the States towards improving their efficiency and the better performing States get more 
budgetary support. 
 
1.2 Health and Underperforming Sector  
Recommendation 
1.2.1 The Committee noted that health has always remained an underperforming sector and 
despite funds allocation many States are not performing well on several health parameters. 
Many States lack the adequate absorption capacity to judiciously manage the allocated 
funds. The Committee, therefore,  recommends the Union Government to incentivise the 
States/UTs to make ground assessment of the efficacy of the health policies and help the 
States design policies suiting the needs of the respective region. The Union Government must 

2 
 
coordinate with the St ates to maximise the output under the Central Sector as well as 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes.  
(Para 2.14) 
Action Taken 
1.2.2 The performance and the absorption capacities vary across the States. There are 
various reasons for this including capacities as well as governance issues which are beyond 
health sector. Under NHM, States are encouraged to take up assessment of efficacy of  
various health sector policies and schemes and dedicated budget lines are there to budget 
such activities. In order to focus on the outcomes, the MoHFW has decided an output 
matrix for the biennial PIPs. In discussion with the States, the level of achievement has been 
decided which would be monitored on a quarterly basis with the help of PMS and HMIS 
portal. 
1.3 Robust Health Policy and Judicious Allocation of Funds 
Recommendation 
1.3.1 The Committee is also of the opinion that robust health policies and judicious 
allocation of funds under different Schemes is fundamental for the optimal performance of 
the States/UTs. The Committee notes that healthcare services remain highly fragmented t hat 
further aggravates the problem of high OOPE in the country. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends the Ministry to make efforts in developing a better healthcare financing 
mechanism and ensuring the delivery of quality healthcare services.  
(Para 2.15) 
Action Taken 
1.3.2 The Government is striving towards comprehensive care for all. In this direction, it 
has initiated the following programs which will have an impact on reducing Out of Pocket 
expenditure in the country and provide quality health care to the population: 
(i) Health and Wellness Centre under Ayushman Bharat is an attempt to move 
from a selective approach to health care to deliver a comprehensive range of 
services spanning preventive, promotive, curative, rehabilitative, and palliative 
care. It has two components that are complementary to each other. Under its 
first component, 1,50,000 Health & Wellness Centres (HWCs) will be created 
to deliver Comprehensive Primary Health Care, that is universal and free to 
users, with a focus on wellness and  the delivery of an expanded range of 
services closer to the community.  
(ii) HWC is envisaged to deliver an expanded range of services that go beyond 
Maternal and child health care s ervices to include care for non - 
communicable diseases, palliative and r ehabilitative care, Oral, Eye, and ENT 
care, mental health and first -level care for emergencies and trauma, including 
free essential drugs and diagnostic services 
(iii) Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PM -JAY): The second component is the 
Pradhan Mantri J an Arogya Yojana (PM -JAY) which provides health 

3 
 
insurance cover of Rs. 5 lakhs per year to over 10 crore poor and vulnerable 
families for seeking secondary and tertiary care. 
(iv) Free Drugs Initiatives: In 2015, under National Health Mission the 
government of India launched the Free Essential Drugs initiatives. Under this, 
free drugs are provided to all citizens in different levels of public health 
facilities.  
(v) Free Diagnostics Initiatives: The government of India under the National 
Health Mission (NHM ) launched the Free Essential Diagnostics in 2015. 
Under this initiative, a limited number of essential diagnostics at different 
levels of public health facilities are provided free to all citizens of India. 
(vi) Pradhan Mantri National Dialysis Program: T his initiative was rolled out in 
2016 as part of NHM wherein quality dialysis services are provided „Free‟ to 
BPL patients and at nominal costs to others through Public -Private 
Partnerships. 
(vii) Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram (JSSK), wherein all servic es including, 
drugs, diagnostics, transport, diet, and blood transfusion (if necessary) are 
provided free to all pregnant women and children up to the age of one year.  
(viii) Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY) wherein financial incentives are provided to 
mothers who underwent institutional deliveries. 
(ix) Free Treatment for TB under RNTCP: Under this scheme, free treatment 
services are available for TB at all Government hospitals, Community Health 
Centres (CHCs), and Primary Health Centres (PHCs). 
(x) Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram (RBSK): RBSK was launched in 2013 as 
a new initiative aimed at screening over 27 Crore children from 0 to 18 years 
for 4 Ds -Defects at birth, Diseases, Deficiencies, and Development Delays 
including Disabilities. Children diagnosed  with illnesses receive follow up 
including surgeries at the tertiary level, free-of-cost. 
(xi) Ambulance Services under NHM: Launched in 2005 when the country didn‟t 
have an ambulance network.  At present, 31 States/UTs have a facility where 
people can dial 108 or 102 telephone numbers for calling an ambulance.108 is 
predominantly an emergency response system, primarily designed to attend to 
patients of critical care, trauma and accident victims, etc. 102 services 
essentially consist of basic patient trans port aimed to cater to the needs of 
pregnant women and children though other categories are also taking benefit 
and are not excluded. JSSK entitlements e.g., free transfer from home to 
facility, inter-facility transfers in case of referral and drop back fo r mother and 
children are the key focus of 102 services. 
(xii) Pradhan Mantri Surakshit Matritva Abhiyan: Launched in 2016, this program 
aims to provide assured, comprehensive, and quality antenatal care, free of 
cost, universally to all pregnant women on the 9th of every month. The 
program aims to reach out to all Pregnant Women who are in the 2nd & 3rd 
Trimester of pregnancy. 
 

4 
 
1.4 Converting all the Ayush dispensaries into a composite dispensary facilitating 
Recommendation 
1.4.1 The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should explore opening and 
converting all the Ayush dispensaries into a composite dispensary facilitating all the 
branches of Ayush treatment.  The Committee further recommends that the medical officers & 
Para medical staff of Ayush should be treated at par with Allopathic system and should have 
similar promotional avenues.  Provision may be made to explore that the administration of 
Ayush system should be governed by the Ayush doctors.  The Committee also fee ls that there 
should be a transparent transfer policy for the MOs & the staff so that no one person should 
occupy a policy position for a long period.  
(Para 3.13) 
Action Taken 
1.4.2 Improvement of facilities under CGHS is a continuous dynamic process and 
expansion of more facilities shall be taken up at an appropriate time taking into consideration 
the utilization of facilities and sanction of new posts by Department of Expenditure. 
1.4.3 The Promotional  avenues of AYUSH Stream of MOs (Medical Officers) and other 
staff are at par with Allopathic MOs and other Staff.  Transfer policy guidelines have been 
framed under CGHS, which include AYUSH stream of staff also. 
1.5 Treatments through Yoga 
Recommendation 
1.5.1 The Committee is also of the considered opini on that the Ministry should consider 
opening of treatments through yoga at all the Ayush dispensaries and also explore the 
possibility of Music therapy. 
(Para 3.14) 
Action Taken 
1.5.2 Improvement of facilities under CGHS in approved streams of Medicine is a 
continuous dynamic process and expansion of more facilities shall be taken up at an 
appropriate time taking into consideration the utilization of such facilities and sanction of 
new posts by Department of Expenditure. There is a proposal that Ministry of  AYUSH shall 
provide online YOGA classes in consultation with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. 
 
1.6 Dr. RML Hospital 
Recommendation 
1.6.1 The Committee observes that in Dr. RML Hospital an actual expenditure of Rs. 51.49 
crore was incurred against a capital outlay of Rs. 100 crore in BE 2021 -22 which was 
slashed to Rs. 65 crore in RE 2021 -22. In ABVIMS, an actual expenditure of Rs. 21.39 cro re 
was incurred against a capital outlay of Rs. 42 crore in BE 2021-22 which was slashed to Rs. 
28.50 crore in RE 2021 -22. The Committee apprehends over the achievement of intended 

5 
 
physical progress as originally set up on account of slow actual capital ex penditure and feels 
that monitoring and executing machinery needs strengthening.   
(Para 3.36) 
Action Taken 
1.6.2 The instructions of the committee have been noted for future compliance. 
  
1.7 Construction Projects at ABVIMS 
Recommendation 
1.7.1 The Committee observes that the Physical Progress at New Hostel Block at ABVIMS 
&Dr. RML Hospital and Super Specialty Block at Dr. RML Hospital is 50.95% and 1.30% 
respectively while the Financial Progress at New Hostel Block and Super Specialty Block is 
45.95% and 1.30% respectively. The Committee feels that better coordination, faster 
approvals from the concerned authorities and better monitoring mechanism could have 
prevented the delay. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Ministry to track the 
progress and the work done by the Project management Consultant in both the Projects.  
(Para 3.39) 
Action Taken 
1.7.2 The instructions of the committee have been noted for future compliance and 
Department is tracking the progress and work done through the Project Management 
Consultant. 
 
1.8 Capital Outlay to ABVIMS 
Recommendation 
1.8.1 The Committee further observes that the Institute had not fully utilized the funds 
under the capital outlay, however, on the other hand the Institute has emphasized on the 
possible shortage of funds under capital outlay due to ongoing construction activiti es. The 
Committee feels that optimum utilization of earmarked allocation may be made and adequate 
funds may be arranged for them.  
(Para 3.40) 
Action Taken 
1.8.2 The instructions of the committee have been noted for future compliance and 
Department is trac king the progress and work done through the Project Management 
Consultant. 
 
 
 

6 
 
1.9 Expediting Recruitment Process in LHMC and Smt. S.K. Hospital 
Recommendation 
1.9.1 The Committee has noted that 874 posts are lying vacant out of the total sanctioned 
strength of 2348.  The Committee further notes that out of the sanctioned strength of 350 
under Group A category, 45 posts are lying vacant. The Committee, therefore, recom mends 
the Ministry to expedite the recruitment process for filling up of vacant posts of faculty, non -
faculty under Group A. The Institute must make efforts to make appointment under Group B 
and C as well at the earliest. 
(Para 3.47) 
Action Taken 
1.9.2 Directions and Observations of Committee with respect to appointment under Group 
„B‟ and „C‟ posts have been noted for compliance. Efforts are being made to fill -up the 
vacant posts at the earliest. 
1.10 Kalawati Saran Children's Hospital 
Recommendation 
1.10.1 The Committee has been given to understand that the Kalawati Saran Children's 
Hospital faces a huge challenge due to shortage of staff vis-a-vis the large number of patients 
that the hospital caters to. The Committee notes that the Institute is forc ed to hire the staff on 
contractual basis for a short period which provides temporary relief to the Institute. The 
Committee feels that running such important institutions with contractual employees may be 
avoided and recommends that the Institute may take measures so that the recruitment process 
for filling up the vacant posts in KSCH be expedited. 
(Para 3.51) 
Action Taken  
1.10.2 It is stated that continuous efforts for filling up vacant posts on permanent basis are 
being made. Group „A” posts are to be f illed by Ministry being the Cadre Controlling 
authority. Out of Group B & C posts, most of the DR posts have already been advertised. The 
vacant posts of MLT are to be filled up by LHMC, whereas, KSCH is in the final stage of 
process for filling up other D R posts through online examination. In respect of filling u of 
MTS posts, proposal is being sent to SSC, as PWD quota has been identified. 
 
1.11 National Aids and STD Control Programme 
Recommendation  
1.11.1 The Committee has been given to understand that more than 99% of population is free 
of HIV, nevertheless, the Committee emphasizes on the need to prevent new HIV infections.  
The Committee also recommends the Ministry to continue undertaking new initiative s and 
make use of the social media to de -stigmatize HIV infections. The Committee therefore 
believes that with the wide range of activities to be undertaken under the Scheme, the 

7 
 
Ministry must ensure that the funds under the Scheme are optimally utilized w ithin the 
financial year.  
(Para 3.71) 
Action Taken  
1.11.2 The Action Taken Report (ATR) in respect of  NACO on the above matter are as 
under: 
i) The Cabinet has approved continuation of Central Sector Scheme NACP – V 
to be implemented for a period of 1st April, 2021 to 31st March, 2026 or till 
further review, whichever is earlier, subject to adherence to Expenditure 
Finance Committee‟s (EFC) recommendations and the financial ceiling etc.  at 
a cost of Rs. 15471.94 crore with specific objective to the respond to the HIV 
AIDS and STD in India.  
ii) The Scheme builds on the gamechanger initiatives of the HIV/AIDS 
Prevention and Control Act (2017) and rules thereof, test and treat policy, viral 
load monitoring and decentralized  testing and treatment services,  with an 
integral, vibrant community engagement that will anchor national AIDS and 
STD response till 2025 -26. While the existing instructions will b e sustained, 
optimized and augmented, newer strategies will be adopted, piloted, and 
scaled-up under the programme to respond to the geographic and community 
specific needs and priorities.  
iii) At BE stage during Financial Year 2022 -23, an amount of Rs. 2 622.75 crore 
has been earmarked for NACO. However, the programme shall be re -assessed 
and additional requirements as per necessity will be projected at RE stage in 
Financial Year 2022-23. 
iv) In accordance with the approval accorded by the Cabinet, the Min istry will 
ensure that the funds under the Scheme are optimally utilized within each of 
the financial years of the programme as per the physical and financial outlay. 
1.12 Development of Nursing Sector 
Recommendation 
1.12.1 The Committee observes that the proposed demand under the Scheme meant for 
development of nursing sector was Rs. 53.50 cr. in BE 2022-23, however funds to the tunes of 
Rs. 20.43 crore only  has been allocated under the Scheme which appears grossly inadequa te 
to meet the expenditure as per originally conceived plan and thereby improving the nurse to 
population ratio. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to work out 
strategic course of action for assured development of nursing sector and assess the budgetary 
requirement under the Scheme and in case of any shortfall additional funds may be sought at 
RE stage.  
(Para 3.78) 
Action Taken 
1.12.2 Noted. It is propose to seek additional funds at RE Stage, depending on the number 
from State Governments. 

8 
 
1.13 National Organ Transplant Programme (NOTP) 
Recommendation 
1.13.1 The Committee appreciates that the program has been continued for next five years 
i.e. 2021 -22 to 2025 -2026 with a total outlay of Rs. 94.92 crore. The Committee, 
nevertheless, believes  that cooperation and coordination among the States/UTs and the 
Union Government is crucial for the success of the program. The Committee wonders as to 
why 14 States have not forwarded their proposals for setting up of SOTTOs and the Ministry 
has received only few proposals for infrastructure up gradation from existing ROTTOs and 
SOTTOs. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to follow up with the States 
that are yet to submit the proposals for SOTTOs and convince them to come forward. The 
Ministry may take the matter with the States urgently and make consistent efforts to achieve 
the objectives of setting up of State Organ and Tissue Transplant Organisations (SOTTOs) in 
each State/UT, setting up of National/ Regional/State Bio -material centres an d other 
envisaged targets under the program for successful achievement of cherished objectives of 
the program.  
(Para 3.86) 
Action Taken 
1.13.2 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is continuously following up with the 
remaining States/UTs where SOTTO is yet to be established under National Organ 
Transplant Programme. Recently, a D.O letter dated 29.12.2021 was written from the level to 
Secretary (HFW) to requesting a proposal in this regard. Subsequently a D.O. letter dated 
25.01.2022 has also been written from the level of Hon'ble Minister of Health and Family 
Welfare to Chief Ministers of aforesaid States. In response proposals have been receiv ed 
from few States which under under consideration.  
1.13.3 The status was also informed to the participating State Health Ministers at the 14th 
conference of the Central Council of Health and Family Welfare (CCHFW) held in Kevadia, 
Gujarat from 5 th to 7th May, 2022 as part of ATR of 13th CCHFW. As on date there is one 
NOTTO at the Center which also functions as SOTTO Delhi; there are five ROTTOs which 
also functions as SOTTOs for the States they are located in. In addition, there are 16 
SOTTOs. Further, pr oposals have been received from four more States. Thus 26 States/UT 
have either set up SOTTOs or will shortly do so. 
 
1.14 Assessment of NOTP by Third Party 
Recommendation 
1.14.1 The Committee also recommends the Ministry to share the findings of the assessment 
undertaken by the third party with the States/UTs. The Ministry must monitor the progress 
made by the States/UTs and issue guidelines regarding timely release of budgetary, 
allocation and expediting recruitment process etc. The Committee also notes that green 
corridors are also crucial for expediting organ transplantations. However, establishment of 
green corridor requires active coordination and participation from different agencies across 
the country. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Ministry to make consistent efforts 
to ensure development of such corridors and make efforts to engage all the stakeholders. The 
Committee also recommends the Ministry to explore usage  of drones and modern 

9 
 
technologies to minimise wastage of donor organs and ensure quick delivery of organs 
across the country.  
(Para 3.87) 
Action Taken 
1.14.2 The 3 rd party assessment was conducted by NIHFW and findings as incorporated in 
the guidelines have been shared on public domain. The Ministry/Dte.GHS/NOTTO hold 
regular review meetings with ROTTOs/SOTTO to monitor progress. Further, avoidance of 
wastage of donor organs is a critical issue. Keeping in view that the organ transplant activity 
is a highly time sensitive matter and as per the provisions of the Act organ/tissue can be 
procured from a deceased donor only after the consent of family members, therefore, u nder 
the National Organ Transplant programme (NOTP) the focus is to improve local utilization of 
organs so that the need for transportation from one State to another is minimized. Towards 
this the NOTP provides support to strengthen organ transplant/retrie val infrastructure in 
every State. Further, health is a State 
subject and States also make special provisions in this regard. SOTTOs in  
Rajasthan, Gujarat and Maharashtra have taken several steps to facilitate  
transport of organs by air or by road.         
 
1.15 Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) 
Recommendation 
1.15.1 The Committee notes that the Scheme of Strengthening of Food Testing System in the 
Country is crucial for upgrading the State Food Testing Laboratories and ensuring a robust 
food safety regime in the country. The Committee notes that the States/UTs Food Regulatory 
Authorities are the main implementing agency for the enforcement of the FSS Act. The 
Committee accordingly, believes that upgrading and equipping the State food laboratories 
with high end equipments is equally important and recommends the Ministry to ensure the 
smooth implementation of the Scheme by taking up corrective measures with s ustained 
monitoring. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to assess the impact of the 
Scheme and explore extending the Scheme particularly in the States that lack adequate food 
testing infrastructure. The Committee also emphasizes on the need of t echnical workforce 
which is crucial for the functioning of the testing laboratories. The Committee accordingly 
recommends the Ministry to evaluate workforce in the laboratories and chalk out an action 
plan for overcoming the shortage and expanding the pool of technical workforce.  
(Para 3.94) 
Action Taken 
1.15.2 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted and the following steps have 
been taken in this connection: 
(i) Central Sector Scheme for “Strengthening of Food Testing System in the Country 
Including Provision of Mobile Food Testing Labs” (SOFTeL) is already a PAN 
India Scheme which includes strengthening/setting up of 43 State Food Testing 
Labs with least one food testing laboratory in each State and two in larger States. 
Till date, a grant of Rs. 326.49 Crore has been sanctioned/released for 41 State 

10 
 
Food Testing Laboratories (SFTLs) from 30 States/UTs for the upgradation/setting 
up. 
(ii) National Institute of Health & Family Welfare (NIHFW) was entrusted with the 
task of evaluation of the Central Secto r Scheme „S OFTeL‟, being implemented 
through FSSAI during Feb -March, 2020 by Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare. Based on the outcome review of the third party evaluation conducted by 
NIHFW, the scheme was extended up to FY 22 -23 with few modifications in the 
previous scheme (e.g.  provision of 2 additional manpower in each lab being 
upgraded with High End Equipment (HEE) was included). 
(iii) There is an Empowered Committee (EC) headed by the Chairperson, FSSAI, to 
guide and over see the implementation of the scheme. The Committee meets 
regularly to oversee the implementation of the scheme.  7
th meeting of empowered 
Committee was held on 17.11.2021. Additionally, FSSAI has conducted Gap 
Analysis in State Food T esting Laboratories (SFTLs) & National Food 
Laboratories (NFLs) through a third party contract during 2021 -22 with an 
objective to strengthen the Food testing Laboratories in India. Gap analysis of 76 
laboratories (74 SFTLs and 2 NFLs)  was conducted by the third party. The report 
submitted was examined by FSSAI and most of the recommendations in the report 
for the identified gaps are being implemented by FSSAI including infrastructure, 
equipment, manpower, certified reference materials (CRMs), NABLs cope etc. 
Accordingly, instruments and manpower requiremen ts for different FTLs are 
considered in the MoUs being finalized with the States to extend necessary 
financial assistance. 
 
(iv) FSSAI is also disbursing the funds to States/UTs from the funds allocated by 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare through MOUs being signed with States as 
per the terms & conditions agreed by the State for strengthening of food safety 
ecosystem since FY 2020 -21. The year 2022 -23, is the third year of the funds 
disbursement through MOUs. The funding under MoUs with States is being done 
as Central: State share, as agreed by the States during execution of the respective 
work plans. The funding patterns being followed under MOUs are as follows: 
 
 60:40 (60%FSSAI:40%State), 
 90:10 (90%FSSAI: 10%State), 
 100 % FSSAI (75% retention of license & registration fees by FSSAI) to 
the states, & 
 100%FSSAI share for  the UTs without legislation). 
 
(v) As regards the need of technical workforce and filling up of gaps of technical 
manpower, wherever necessary and crucial for the functioning of the testing 
laboratories, FSSAI is providing 03 technical manpower along with each of the 
three High End Equipment (HEE) since FY 2017 -18 under CSS. The provision is 
of one technical person per equipment for a period of 7 years from the date of 
installation of the equipme nt. Further, a grant -in-aid for 2 additional technical 
manpower is also being provided for FY 2021 -22 & 2022-23 under CSS. Besides, 
FSSAI is also providing the funds for technical and non -technical work force 
required for the smooth functioning of State fo od testing laboratories on 
contractual basis from the funds allotted by Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
other than CSS since FY 2020-21 as per the demand of the States/UTs. Training of 

11 
 
technical personnel in State Labs and Inter Lab Comparisons, Prof iciency Testing 
are being under taken to improve the technical  capabilities of staff. 
 
1.16 Jawaharlal Institute o f Post Graduation Medical Education and Research, 
Puducherry 
Recommendation 
1.16.1 The Committee recommends the Institute to continue strict monitoring of the 
expenditure pattern of the allocated fund for optimum utilisation of the allocated funds. The 
Committee hopes that the establishment of Animal House at JIPMER, Construction of 
multispecialty consulting Unit at Yanam are completed by the end of March, 2022. The 
Committee recommends the Institute to put in place an effective monitoring mechanism to 
track the Progress of the remaining ongoing construction projects.  
(Para 3.118) 
Action Taken 
1.16.2 The Institute has devised necessary action plan for strict monitoring of the 
expenditure pattern of the allocated fund and will ensure optimum utilization of allocated 
funds as per Monthly Expenditure Plan and Quarterly Expenditure Plan ceili ng limits 
communicated by the Ministry. 
 (I) Status of Monitoring of the Projects: 
(a)  The Construction of Animal House is completed and some minor finishing works as 
per functional requirement are in progress which will be completed shortly. 
(b)  With regard to Multi -speciality Consulting Unit at Yanam, all major civil works are 
completed. However, few essential electrical works, setting up of Medical Gas Plant, 
Modular OTs etc. are in progress. The consulting Unit at Yanam is expected to be 
made functional by September, 2022. 
(II)  Mechanism for monitoring the ongoing infrastructure development projects. 
It is informed that JIPMER has a robust mechanism for monitoring the 
ongoing infrastructure development projects. In this regard, following steps are b eing 
taken up by the Institute to have a check on progress of infrastructure projects:-   
a. Project Management Committee periodically review the project works. 
b. Executive Agencies like CPWD, HLL submit monthly reports  
c. Site visits are made by Project Coordinator and Concerned Nodal Officer for 
onsite inspection. 
d. Online meetings are also being held regularly with the agencies who were 
awarded the works. 
e. Monthly Budget Review Meeting is held under the chairmanship of Director 
to monitor the funds utilisation and requirements. 
 
 

12 
 
1.17 Use of automated and modern technologies by JIPMER, Puducherry 
Recommendation  
1.17.1 The Committee also notes that the high patient load exerts a lot of pressure on the 
Doctors in the Institute. The Committee accordingly recommends the Institute to chalk out a 
roadmap to manage the daily OPD consultations smoothly. The Institute may also explore the 
idea of starting a screening OPD for the patients. The Committee further recommends the 
Institute to make use of automated and modern technologies to improve and streamline 
patient load. The Committee also recommends the Institute to improve and  train staff of the 
hospital administration for better management.  
(Para 3.119) 
Action Taken 
1.17.2 The screening OPD for triaging and screening of patients has been initiated. The 
proposal for manpower required in the screening OPD is under process.  The process of 
drafting specifications required for the Queue Management System and Integrated Voice 
Response System is in process. 
 
1.18 National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences (NIMHANS), Bengaluru 
Recommendation 
1.18.1 The Committee also notes  that there is a glaring shortage of the mental healthcare 
workers in the country. The Committee would recommend the Institute to make efforts to 
increase the reach of its NIMHANS Digital Academy so that the healthcare workers in rural 
areas also benefit f rom the training. The Institute must also take measure to increase 
awareness regarding tele -counselling services in rural areas.  NIMHANS being a premier 
institute of the country must also make consistent efforts to establish a better mental health 
environment in the country by assisting the Ministry in formulating better mental health 
policies. 
(Para 3.126) 
Action Taken  
1.18.2 NIMHANS is running the NIMHANS Digital Academy and is offering training not 
only to medical doctors but also to psychologists, social workers, nurses as well as lay health 
care providers. NIMHANS is the nodal Institute to roll out the National Tele Mental Health 
Counselling  programme that is envisaged in the current year‟s budget. 
1.19 National Health Mission (NHM) 
 
Recommendation 
  
1.19.1 The Committee emphasizes that the absorption capacity under the Scheme has been 
excellent and since 2018 -19, the utilization of funds at central level has been 100%. The 
Committee is given to understand that as against the projected requirement of Rs. 32,3 09.19 
crore for NHM (NRHM+NUHM) in 2022 -23 BE, Rs. 28,859.73 crore has been provided to 

13 
 
the Scheme in 2022 -23 BE. The Committee expresses serious concern over the reduction in 
budgetary outlay under NHM from Rs.31,100 crore in BE 2021 -22 to Rs. 28,859.73 c rore in 
BE 2022 -23. The Committee reiterates that the set of diverse activities/initiatives and 
healthcare facilities provided under the Scheme need a substantial push from the Government 
in form of increased budgetary allocations. The Committee, therefore , recommends the 
Ministry to approach the Ministry of Finance for increasing the budgetary allocation under 
the Scheme at RE stage. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to ensure that any 
shortfall of funds does not impact the implementation of the h ealth programmes under NHM. 
The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should also strengthen the monitoring mechanism 
to oversee the progress in implementation of the initiatives carried under different 
components of the Scheme so that the achievement of s et objectives under each component is 
ensured. 
(Para 4.8) 
Action Taken  
1.19.2     There has been consistent effort in increasing the Budgetary  outlay of the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare. Besides the NHM, the following interventions 
have been introduced to strengthen public health care delivery system:  
 (i) Pradhan Mantri Ayushman Bharat Infrastructure Mission (PM -ABHIM) with an 
outlay of Rs. 64,180 crores over 6 years has been launched on 25th October -2021. 
The scheme would develop capacities of primary, secondary, and tertiary care 
health systems, strengthen existing national institutions, and create new 
institutions, to cater to detection and cure of new and emerging diseases. 
 (ii) Fifteenth Finance Commission have recommended grants amounting to Rs. 
70,051 crores to health sector from FY 2021-22 to 2025-26. 
 (iii) Rs. 5000 crore has been provisioned in Demand for Grant No.42 of Min istry of 
Finance for support for Covid-19 Vaccination.  For FY 2022-23. 
1.19.3 However, as directed by the Committee, Department of Health and Family Welfare, 
basing on the trend of fund utilization, will request additional budget from the Ministry of 
Finance at the Revised Estimate stage for the F.Y. 2022-23.    
1.19.4 Further, under NHM, to improve the financial utilization of funds the following steps 
have been taken by the Ministry: 
(i) Performance Audit by the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of 
India, 
(ii) Annual Statutory Audits by CAG empanelled major Chartered Accountant 
Audit firms, 
(iii) Concurrent Audits by Chartered Accountant Audit firms,   
(iv) Public Financial Management System (PFMS) in NHM to track flow of 
funds,  
(v) Submission of quarterly Financial Mo nitoring Reports (FMRs) and 
Statement of Fund Position (SFP) by the States/UTs, 
(vi) Review and monitoring of scheme components. 
 
 

14 
 
1.20 Capacity Building for Trauma Centres 
Recommendation  
1.20.1 The Committee notes that the trend of utilization over the years has not improved 
under the Capacity Building for Trauma Centre and the Department should take cognizance 
to optimally utilize the funds. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to ensu re 
release of funds to the States and UTs for the Trauma Care Facilities (TCF) and ensure 
establishment of more TCF and burn Units across cities.  
(Para 4.35) 
Action Taken  
1.20.2 As informed earlier, at RE stage 2021 -22, the revenue allocation was Rs. 40.42 crore 
and by the end of FY 2021 -22, Rs. 40.03 crore was utilized i.e. 99% of allocation. Various 
trainings on Burn Injury Management were also conducted at AIIMS, New Delhi for Doctor, 
Nurses and other specialized staffs in second last week of March, 2022. 
1.20.3 For FY 2022-23, BE is Rs. 49.60 crore. The Programme Division will make effort to 
optimally utilize the funds by capacity building and releasing funds towards manpower to 
make Truama Care Facilities and Burn Units operational.  
 
1.21 National Programme for Prevention And Control of Cancer, Diabetes, 
Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke 
1.21.1 The Committee notes that there has been a considerable increase in the prevalence of 
non communicable diseases like Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke and 
there is an urgent need to provide impetus to initiatives under NPCDCS. The Committee, 
however, observes that the earmarked amount of Rs. 175.00 crore in BE 2021 -22, has be en 
reduced to Rs. 146.88 crore. The Committee therefore recommends the Ministry to have 
realistic requirement of funds to support the National Programme for Prevention and Control 
of Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke. The Committee belie ves that the 
Ministry should adopt a multi -sectoral approach for better management of NCDs and focus 
on disseminating information on individual lifestyle management as well as health policy 
decisions. The Committee recommends the Ministry to develop an eff ective preventive 
strategy that can bring modifications in lifestyle and reduce the risk of NCDs. The Committee 
also recommends the Ministry to make more concerted efforts to tackle the increasing 
number of the NCDs and ensure early diagnosis and timely sc reening of patients for NCDs. 
The Committee further recommends the Ministry to monitor the progress of the 19 SCIs and 
20 TCCCs that are supported under the program. 
(Para 4.37) 
Action Taken  
 
1.21.2 The Department of Health & Family Welfare reviews the pr ogress of the Projects 
with States /UTs from time to time to expedite the complection of projects. The Central 
Government releases the funds timely as and when concerned States/UTs raise a demand for 
the same, subject to completion all formalities and subm ission of documents viz. utilization 
statemets. However, the world wide covid pandemic has slowed down every project for 
various reasons. 

15 
 
 
1.21.3 Preventive aspect of NCDs is strengthened under Comprehensive Primary Health 
Care through Ayushman Bharat Health Wellness Centre scheme, by promotion of wellness 
activities and targeted communication at the community level. Other initiative for increasing 
public awareness about NCDs and for promotion of healthy lifestyle includes observation of 
National & Inte rnational Health Days and use of print, electronic and social media for 
continued community awareness. In addition, NPCDCS gives financial support under NHM 
for awareness generation (IEC) activities for NCDs to be undertaken by the States/UTs as per 
their Programme Implementation Plan (PIPs). 
1.21.4 A population – based initiative for prevention, control and screening for common Non 
– Communicable Diseases (NCDs) i.e. diabetes, hypertension and common cancers has been  
rolled out in the country under NHM an d also as a part of Comprehensive Primary Health 
Care. Under the initiative, persons more than 30 years of age are targeted for their screening 
for the common NCDs. Screening of these common NDCs is an integral part of service 
delivery under Ayushman Bharat – Health and Wellness Centres. 
1.21.5 Further, healthy eating is also prom oted under “Eat Right India” movement, project 
“Safe and Nutritious Food” and “Aaj se Thodakum” by FSSAI. Fit India movement is being 
implemented by Ministry of Youth Affairs and S ports, aims to promote fitness as an integral 
part of the daily life of every Indian citizen. To make a behavioural Fitness Protcols and 
various Yoga related activities are being carried out by the Ministry of AYUSH. 
1.22 Tele Medicine 
1.22.1 The Committee  observes that Telemedicine facilitates quick access to healthcare 
services and helps in expanding the geographic reach of healthcare. It not only lowers the 
cost for the patients but also the health care provider. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
the Ministry to take consistent measures to introduce telemedicine across the country and 
include a package of mental healthcare services also.    
(Para 4.42) 
Action Taken  
1.22.2 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW ) has developed a telemedicine 
application eSanjeevani which provides doctor to doctor and patient to doctor consultations. 
1.22.3 This application works on a hub and spoke model. Through the hubs medical 
professional including specialists can provide serv ices to Health and Wellness Centers 
(HWCs) and further people can also avail services through OPD module of eSanjeevani. 
1.22.4 The Ministry has also taken consistent measures to augment eSanjeevani platform. As 
on date, 1,26,500 HWCs (Health and Wellness Centre) have been registered on eSanjeevani 
Portal and more than 87,000 HWC and 10,388 Hubs are operational along with 
1080+specialist OPDs. More than 4.47 Cr. Consultation have been rendered form the 
eSanjeevani platform. Teleconsultation capacity has inc reased form 50,000 to 5,00,000 
consultations per day 
1.22.5 To ensure wider outreach of telemedicine services, eSanjeevani application has also 
been integrated with 3.74 lakh Common Service Centres   (CSCs) thereby facilitating access 
to equitable healthcare in the remotest areas of the country. 

16 
 
1.23 Human Resources for Health and Medical Education: Establishment of New 
Medical Colleges and Increase of Seats in Existing Government Medical Colleges 
1.23.1 The Committee believes that the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Establishment of 
New Medical Colleges and Increase of Seats in existing Government Medical Colleges  is 
very important as India faces a huge shortage of doctors in the country and the Scheme aim s 
to bridge the gap in the healthcare sector by increasing the number of MBBS and 
Postgraduate Seats in medical education. The Committee, however, observes that the current 
committed liabilities under the scheme of Human Resources for Health and Medical 
Education are Rs. 14712.66 crore. The Committee is given to understand that the extension 
of time for the above schemes have been proposed up to 2023 -24. Considering the budgetary 
requirement under the Scheme, the Committee believes that there is a need to i ncrease the 
allocation under the Scheme. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Ministry to 
increase the allocation under the Scheme and monitor the physical progress under different 
components of the Scheme.  
(Para 4.48) 
Action Taken  
1.23.2 The overall status of Centrally Sponsored Schemes in this regard is as under:     
  
1.22.3 The current committed liabilities stand at Rs. 13726.26 Cr. An amount of Rs. 7500 Cr 
has been approved in BE 2022 -23 for the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for establishment of 
new medical colleges and increase of MBBS and PG seats in existing government medic al 
colleges.  The remaining amount is proposed to be released in the next financial year as the 
timeline for these schemes have been extended up to 2023-24 vide this Ministry‟s order dated 
24.02.2022.  
 
 
S 
No 
Scheme Phase Approved 
Cost 
Central 
Share 
Released till 
now 
Current 
committed 
liabilities 
1 CSS for Establishment 
of New Medical 
Colleges attached with 
District/referral 
Hospitals 
Phase-I 10962 7541.1 7541.1 0 
2 Phase-
II 
6000 3675 3675 0 
3 Phase-
III 
24370.41 15499.74 9324.11 6175.63 
4 Up gradation and 
strengthening of State 
Govt medical colleges 
for increasing MBBS 
Seats 
  12000 7795 2451.1 5253.90* 
5 Up gradation and 
Strengthening of State 
Govt medical colleges 
for increasing PG 
seats 
Phase-I 1498.43 1063.03 1049.3578 13.6701 
6 Phase-
II 
4800 
  
3024 740.934 2283.066* 
  Total   59630.84 38597.87 24,781.6018 13,726.2661 

17 
 
1.24 Ayushman Bharat-PMJAY 
Recommendation 
1.24.1 The Committee finds that a revenue allocation of Rs. 6400 crores was earmarked in 
BE 2021-22 which was drastically reduced to Rs. 3199 crores at RE 2021-22. The Committee 
further notes that till 9 th  February 2022, the total funds utilized under Ayushman Bhar at-
PMJAY for financial year 2021 -22 is to the tune of Rs. 2635.72 crore only. The Committee 
observes that over the years, there has been a significant increase in the allocation under the 
Scheme; however the trend of utilization has not been very satisfact ory. Such mismatch in 
allocation and actual expenditure reflects poor financial prudence and failure in judicious 
assessments of the needs of the program. Although, the Committee takes into account the 
submission of the Ministry that the pandemic led to de cline in demand under the Scheme; 
however the Committee feels that the Ministry should ensure optimum and judicious 
utilization of the allocated funds in FY 2022-23.  
(Para 4.56) 
Action Taken  
1.24.2 National Health Authority – the implementing agency of Ayushman Bharat – Pradhan 
Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (AB -PMJAY) has taken the following measures for optimum and 
judicious utilization of allocated funds in FY 2022-23: 
 Renewed program of beneficiary identification- Aapke Dwar Ayushman 2.0 
 Upward revision of rates of various treatment packages. 
1.24.3 Additional flexibility to States to further customize Health Benefit Package rates to 
suit local requirements. 
1.25 Expanding the list of beneficiaries under AB-PMJAY  
Recommendation 
1.25.1 The Committee in its previous Reports has consistently highlighted the need of 
expanding the list of beneficiaries under AB -PMJAY as the outdated SECC census 2011 data 
may lead to exclusion of many beneficiaries. The Committee reiterates its recommendation 
that the Ministry mu st make efforts to expand the list of beneficiaries under AB -PMJAY. The 
Committee agrees that there is a direct correlation between the number of verified 
beneficiaries and demand for healthcare services under the scheme. The Committee, 
accordingly, recomm ends the Ministry to conduct large scale awareness campaigns 
especially in rural areas for wider dissemination of the provisions under the Scheme and 
work towards increasing the beneficiary base. 
(Para 4.57) 
Action Taken   
1.25.2 National Health Authority – the implementing agency of Ayushman Bharat - Pradhan 
Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (AB -PMJAY) has undertaken the following measures as part of 
beneficiary database updation: 

18 
 
1.25.3 BIS 2.0 has been launched to democratize and liberali ze the process of Ayushman 
card issuance. 
o Under BIS 2.0, village wise access to SECC 2011 database has been enabled. This will 
allow district / block administration to mobilize beneficiaries for Ayushman card 
generation.  
o BIS 2.0 will make it convenient fo r the scheme‟s beneficiaries to generate Ayushman 
cards by reducing their reliance on intermediaries and additional paperwork. 
o BIS 2.0 has been launched for 7 States – Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Jammu and 
Kashmir, Karnataka and Uttar Pradesh and is be ing extended to the rest of the country 
soon. 
 1.25.4 The highly successful Aapke  Dwar Ayushman campaign is being re -launched to 
further accelerate beneficiary identification under the scheme with a renewed focus on 
Assam, Bihar, Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh. Aapke  Dwar Ayushman 1.0 resulted in the 
verification of more than 4.8 crore beneficiaries since January 2021.  

19 
 
CHAPTER–II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY'S REPLIES 
2.1 Revisiting Organizational Structure 
Recommendation 
2.1.1 The Committee in its 126th Report on Demands for Grants 2021-22 had recommended 
the Ministry to revisit its organizational structure so that better administrative functionality 
can be achieved.  
2.1.2 The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Government must consider to 
constitute an Expert Group for detailed assessment of the effective working of the 
organization of the Department of Health and Family Welfare and do justice with the 
responsibilities entrusted to the Department. 
(Para 1.12 & 1.13) 
Action Taken 
2.1.3 The individual work allocation and file disposal of the Officers of the Ministry are 
being regularly monitored and as per the requirement, changes are made to make the work 
allocation as effective as possible.  Levels of disposal and channel of submission in th is 
Ministry is reviewed from time to time and necessary changes are made for efficiency and 
timely disposal of work.  For increasing efficiency and for leveraging technology, this 
Ministry regularly reviews implementation of e -Office. Further, usage of e -mail 
correspondence, online meetings and VPN etc. is continuously being encouraged.  With such 
efforts, the Ministry feels that better administrative efficiency will be achieved and Ministry 
will be able to respond to the changing need and do justice with the responsibility entrusted.  
2.2 Policy intervention to bridge infrastructure gaps 
Recommendation 
2.2.1 The Committee notes that in 2021-22, the country was engulfed by a deadly pandemic 
Covid-19 wave and the delivery of healthcare services was largely hampered. The pandemic 
brought forth in open the poor state of health infrastructure and necessitated Government's 
focus and Policy intervention to bridge infrastructure gaps to strengthen the healthcare 
facilities. It was anticipated that the ravages of t he pandemic will bring the attention of the 
Government to the rural -urban divide in the healthcare services and its delivery. However, 
just a 0.2 % increase in the BE of 2022 -23 in comparison to RE 2021 -22 reveals the 
reluctance of the Government in addres sing the immediate need of increasing public 
investments in the health sector. 
(Para 2.5) 
Action Taken 
2.2.2 It may be stated that in comparison to BE 2021 -22 of Rs. 71238.77 Crore,  the  RE 
2021-22 was enhanced due to  primarily one time Grant of Rs. 15728.22 Crore to combat 
CoVID-19 pandemic. With regard to 0.2 % increase in BE 2022 -23, Department of Health & 
Family Welfare have been allocated Rs. 83000.00 Crore in BE which is 16.50 % mo re than 

20 
 
the previous year (BE) Budgetary allocation. However, there has been a consistent effort in 
increasing the Budgetary outlay of the Department of Health and Family Welfare. 
2.2.3 In order to bridge infrastructure gaps to strengthen the health care f acilities in both 
rural-urban area in the country, Pradhan Mantri Ayushman Bharat Infrastructure Mission 
(PM-ABHIM) with an outlay of Rs. 64,180 crores over 5 years has been launched on 25th 
October-2021. In the current financial year, Rs. 5155.71 crore ha s been allocated for the said 
scheme. The scheme would develop capacities of primary, secondary, and tertiary care health 
systems, strengthen existing national institutions, and create new institutions, to cater to 
detection and cure of new and emerging diseases. 
2.3 Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS)  
Recommendations 
2.3.1 The Committee observes that the actual fund expenditure under the CGHS Scheme 
over the past few years has been higher than the allocation at BE stage. The Committee notes 
that a substantial part of the expenditure under the Budget is attributed to Pensions and 
Other Retirement Benefits (PORB). The Ministry must take special note of the budgetary 
expenditure and demands under the Scheme and ensure that adequate funds are allocated to 
the Scheme. The Committee is also of the view that all the CGHS beneficiaries should be 
provided with the cashless treatment facility at the empanelled hospitals and diagnostic 
centres.  The Committee has also come to know that many empanelled hospitals  avoid 
admitting CGHS beneficiaries stating that their bills are settled by the Ministry after a long 
time. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to prepare a time schedule for payment 
to the empanelled hospitals and ensure that there is no delay in p ayment to empanelled 
hospitals due to any shortage of funds under the budgetary head.  At the same time the 
Ministry must also ensure that the beneficiaries of CGHS get standard treatment at private 
hospitals and empanelled diagnostic centres. 
(Para 3.4) 
Action Taken 
2.3.2 Budget Estimates of CGHS are formulated based on the trend of expenditure in 
previous financial years. Payment of bills of empanelled private hospitals and diagnostic 
centres and also reimbursement to pensioner beneficiaries is made from Pension and other 
Retirement Benefits (PORB) Head. Shortfall, if any, is met from the enhanced allocation at 
RE stage. 
2.3.3 As per extant scheme guidelines, cashless treatment facility is provided only to certain 
specified categories of CGHS beneficiaries . Medical Reimbursement claims of serving 
central government employees are settled by the concerned Ministry/ Department from its 
own Budget Head. As the system of settlement medical reimbursement claims of serving 
employees is decentralized, it may not be  feasible to provide cashless facilities to the serving 
beneficiaries. 
2.3.4 Government has taken several measures to address the delay in settlement of the 
hospital bills as under, Bill processing has been shifted to NHA IT Platform for online 
settlement of hospital bills in a transparent and eco-friendly paperless mode. 
 

21 
 
2.4 Utilization of Capital Outlay 
Recommendation 
2.4.1 The Committee notes that under Capital head, an amount of Rs. 11.49 crore has been 
utilized. The Committee is of the view that capital expenditure is earmarked for procurement 
or maintaining fixed assets, such as land, buildings, and equipment. Lower utili zation of the 
allocated fund may hamper the developmental activities at various CGHS centers. The 
Committee, therefore recommends the Department to ensure judicious allocation of funds 
particularly with focus on development of infrastructure.  
(Para 3.6) 
Action Taken 
2.4.2 Allocation of funds under the capital head for development of infrastructure such as 
land, buildings etc. is made keeping in view the progress of construction of ongoing projects, 
being implemented by Central Public Works Department (CPWD). Similarly, allo cation of 
funds for procurement is made as per requirement.   
2.5 Capital Outlay of SJH AND BMMC 
Recommendation 
2.5.1 The Committee notes that against the total allotted funds of Rs. 110.14 crore at BE 
2021-22 under the total Capital Head, funds to the tune of Rs. 68.08 crore were spent leaving 
a balance of Rs. 42.06 crore. The Committee further notes that under Capital H ead 
"Machinery and Equipments", 55.27% of funds allocated in RE 2021 -22 have been spent. 
Against the allocated funds of Rs. 1435.64 crore under the revenue head, funds to the tune of 
Rs. 1181.47 crore only have been spent thus leaving a balance of Rs. 254. 17 crore. 
Considering the Utilisation trend in previous years, the Committee notes that the budgetary 
utilisation of the Institute has been satisfactory. However, the Committee notes that many 
construction projects are in pipeline in the Institute. The Com mittee, accordingly, 
recommends the Ministry to assess the budgetary requirements of the Institute and in case of 
any shortage of funds, the Institute may be allocated additional funds at the supplementary 
demand stage. The Committee, however, recommend th e balance funds under the Capital 
Head i.e. to the tune of Rs. 42.06 crore should be optimally utilized for the indented purpose.  
The Committee desires that the Institute must ensure that the funds are spent judiciously so as 
to achieve the originally conceived objective within stipulated timeframe.   
(Para 3.21) 
Action Taken 
2.5.2 It is stated that the final expenditure as on 31.03.2022 against total allotted funds of 
Rs.110.14 Cr. at BE 2021-22 under the total Capital Head is Rs, 81.61 cr. which was utilized 
as per the demand received from NBCC for the project expansion of Sport In jury Centre 
(SIC) and the balance budget is Rs.28.63 Cr. was pending due to non demand from NBCCC. 
Also under the Capital Head “Machinery and Equipment” the 45% of expenditure made in 
the last quarter. 
2.5.3 Due to „Make in India‟ Clause, the earlier firms  were not able to supply the 
machineries. The procurement done thereafter in the last quarter of F.Y 2021 -22 when 

22 
 
exemption list received and firm were available on „GeM‟ with Make in India Equipment‟s 
so as to achieve the originally conceived objective. F urther, due to Registration of Land 
sharing border countries Rules 144, there was delay in procurement, though the files were 
under procurement process within the time line. 
2.5.4 Under Revenue Head Rs. 1355.89 Cr. utilized against total allocation of Rs. 1435.64 
Cr. for the F.Y. 2021-22. 
 
2.6 Budgetary Allocation under PMSSY 
Recommendation  
2.6.1 The Committee notes that under PMSSY the Budgetary allocation in BE 2021 -22 was 
Rs. 7000 crore which was enhanced to Rs. 7400 crore at RE stage whereas the total 
expenditure till 17 th February, 2022, has been to the tune of Rs. 5720 crore. The Committee 
notes that PMMSY scheme is crucial for increasing the reach of healthcare services to 
underserved areas and aims at upgrading the healthcare infrastructure across the country. 
The Committee notes that there has been a substantial increase in the total budgetary funds 
allocated under the Scheme. The increase in capital outlay has been attributed to the various 
ongoing projects. The Committee however notes that till 17 th February, 2021, 77.29% of the 
total funds allotted in RE 2021 -22 have been used whereas in BE 2022 -23, the Ministry aims 
at spending a total of Rs. 10,000 crore under the Scheme. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends the Ministry to see that funds under the Scheme do not r emain              
underutilized. Considering the multitude of ongoing Projects, the Ministry may draw a 
feasible roadmap for the forthcoming Financial Year so that the funds are judiciously and 
optimally utilized for completion of undertaken projects with in stipulated time frame. The 
Committee also recommends the Ministry to monitor progress of the ongoing projects to see 
that no project is delayed / halted due to any shortage or diversion of funds. 
(Para 3.58) 
Action Taken 
2.6.2 The total expenditure under PMSSY during 2021 -22 was Rs.7225.35 Crores against 
allocation of Rs.7400.00 Crore at the RE Stage. The actual release under the scheme was 
therefore 97.64% of RE allocation. In addition, Rs.2044.17 Crores was provided for full 
repayment of outstanding loans availed from HEFA for capital works in various new AIIMS 
and interest due thereon. This amount was fully released for the purpose for which it was 
allocated.  
2.6.3 Progress of ongoing projects is monitored regularly at variou s levels, with the 
Executing Agencies and the Procurement Support Agency. Funds are released to Agencies 
based on demand received from them, which is linked to the progress of the project as well as 
utilisation of funds already released previously.  During review meetings also, requirement of 
funds by the Agencies is ascertained and funds are released in time so that the progress is not 
impacted adversely. 
 
 

23 
 
2.7 Projects in 16 new AIIMS 
Recommendation 
2.7.1 The Committee observes that progress of most of the projects in 16 new AIIMS has 
been at different stages.  The Committee, recommends the Ministry to track the progress of 
the various projects in 16 new AIIMS so that all the packages under the construction  
activities achieve a 100% mark within the envisaged timeframe.  The Committee also 
observes that in some AIIMS where the construction work is not complete, the MBBS classes 
are running from temporary campuses. The Committee recommends the Ministry to make  all 
out efforts so that the education of the MBBS students does not suffer in the absence of 
adequate infrastructure and facilities. The Ministry may take stock of the progress regularly 
in the new AIIMS so that the temporary infrastructure in good condit ion is available for 
conducting theory and practical classes in the Institutes. The Committee also recommends 
the Ministry to take up the matter of providing free land for AIIMS with the Government of 
Bihar and Haryana for construction of AIIMS Darbhanga and AIIMS Manethi, respectively.  
(Para 3.61) 
Action Taken 
2.7.2 Average time for completion of a new AIIMS ranges from 45 to 60 months from the 
date of approval of the Cabinet.  The timeline for completion varies depending upon location 
of the new AIIMS.  
2.7.3 As stated above, progress of the ongoing projects is reviewed regularly at various 
level to ensure completion within prescribed timeline.  However, pending full completion of 
the project, MBBS classes were started from temporary Campus in some of the  AIIMS in the 
interest of early start of teaching/learning activities. The temporary location for the purpose is 
identified in consultation with the State Governments. While doing so, it is ensured that the 
location so identified has adequate space and ass ociated facilities for running the course, as 
well as hostel facilities for students. Wherever required, necessary renovation is also carried 
out by the concerned AIIMS to make the place suitable. As and when Institute‟s own 
infrastructure becomes ready / available for the purpose, the teaching / learning activities as 
well as students are shifted to the main campus of the respective AIIMS.   
2.7.4 The issue of providing encumbrance free land, free of cost for AIIMS at Darbhanga 
and Manethi is being regular ly pursued with the State Governments of Bihar and Haryana, 
including at the level of the Chief Secretary of respective States and also Chief Minister in 
the case of Haryana.  
2.8 Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) 
Recommendation  
2.8.1 The Committee has noted the fact that against the projected demand of Rs. 506.08 
crore by FSSAI only an amount of the tune of Rs. 300.00 has been earmarked in BE 2022 -23.  
The committee hopes that FSSAI would continue to focus on strengthening of Food Test ing 
system in the country specially mobile food Testing Laboratories and if necessary, additional 
budgetary allocation may be sought at RE 2022-23. 
(Para 3.91) 

24 
 
Action Taken 
2.8.2 Distribution of Mobile Food Testing Laboratories (Food Safety on Wheels) for 
testing, training & creating awareness among different stakeholders is one of the components 
of the Central Sector Scheme (CSS) for „Strengthening of Food Testing System in the 
Country including provision of Mobile Food Testing Laboratories (SOFTEL)‟ launched in 
2016. 173 MFTLs have been sanctioned to 33 States & UTs. This includes 97 MFTLs 
sanctioned under CSS and 76 under non -CSS, based on the request from the States/UTs.  
Besides this, a grant of Rs.12.10 Crore under CSS and Rs.2.27 Crore under non - CSS has 
also been released towards operational expenses for smooth operation of MFTLs in the 
States/UTs as on 31.03.2022. 
2.8.3 Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FS SAI) will continue to focus on 
strengthening of Food Testing eco system in the country. 
2.9 Contractual Employees Working in FSSAI 
Recommendation 
2.9.1 The Committee feels that the Group -B and Group -C contractual employees working 
in the organisation for long years (more than 5 years) may be absorbed considering their 
experience in the working of the organisation.    
(Para 3.97) 
Action Taken 
2.9.2 Upon inception in 2008, FSSAI commenced its work with a very meagre staff. Only 
about 25 employees opted for absorption under Section 90 of the FSS Act. Although 356 
posts were sanctioned initially, no recruitment could be done on regular basis in absence of 
Recruitment Regulations. Therefore, to manage the work and the mandate of the Food 
Authority, a significant work force was also engaged at Gr. Band C levels on contract basis. 
2.9.3 With a view to give concessions to contractual employees indirect recruitmen t, 
provisions were made in Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (Recruitment and 
Appointment) Regulations), 2018 to provide relaxation in matter of upper age limit and 
weightage in selection for regular appointment on direct recruitment basis. In t he first phase 
of recruitment conducted in 2019 -20 for 249 Gr „B‟ and „C‟ posts, 50  contractual employees 
were selected and have joined FSSAI on regular basis. However, there are still 132 
contractual employees in Gr „B‟(83) and Gr. „C‟ (49) who are presen tly serving in FSSAI for 
5 years or more.  229 Posts in Gr. B and C have been advertised to be filled up under next 
phase of recruitment and selection is under process. Services of those contractual employees 
who fail to get selected despite the age relaxation and weight age in the current phase of 
selection are liable to be terminated. A proposal in this regard was received from FSSAI, 
which was examined in this Ministry. It was observed that as per FSSAI (Recruitment and 
Appointment) Regulations, 2018, the powers of appointment of Group B and Group C posts 
has been delegated to FSSAI. Therefore, FSSAI has been requested to take action in terms of 
provisions contained in FSSSAI (Recruitment and Appointment) Regulations, 2018 as per 
rules. 
  

25 
 
2.10 All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) NEW DELHI 
Recommendation 
2.10.1 The Committee notes that AIIMS, New Delhi has been receiving the highest budgetary 
allocation among all the hospitals under the Union Government since many years. There is 
no denying the fact that AIIMS New Delhi has proved to be a guiding light in the hea lthcare 
sector. The substantial amount of funds has helped the institute to improve its infrastructure 
by leaps and bounds. Nevertheless, the high patient load still leads to long waiting period for 
conducting medical tests as well as surgical intervention s. The Committee understands that 
the Institute reels under immense pressure and patients across the country visit AIIMS, Delhi 
on a daily basis. The Committee recommends the Institute to take effective measures to 
manage the patient flow in the Institute and maximize its operational efficiency. The 
Committee further notes that 51.55% of the total allocated fund in 2022 -23 will be spent on 
Salary and 18.94% of the total funds will be spent on Creation of Capital Assets. The 
Committee accordingly recommends the Ministry to conduct timely audit of the budgetary 
allocation and the Expenditure profile so that the utilisation capacity of the Institute under 
various heads can be optimised.  
(Para 3.101) 
Action Taken 
2.10.2 In order to ensure efficient and timely treatment of the patients visiting AIIMS, New 
Delhi, new facilities/blocks such as Surgical Block, Mother and Child Block, New Private 
Ward, Burns and Plastic Surgery, Geriatric Block and New OPD Block have been added. 
Further, for the patient management, appointment through Web portal/online registration 
(ORS), Interactive voice responsive system (IVRS), Self -service kiosk are in place in 
addition to physical counters. Further, for crowd management, staggered appointment system 
is also in place in the Inst itute. The Internal Audit Team of the Institute is conducting the 
Audit of different Centres/ Departments of AIIMS at regular interval and the statutory audit is 
being conducted too for the optimization of utilization capacity of the Institute under variou s 
heads. The recommendations of the committee have been noted for compliance. 
 
2.11 National Health Mission 
Recommendation  
2.11.1 The Committee notes that National Health Mission has been a flagship Scheme of the 
Government which has worked towards strengthening primary healthcare and bridging the 
gap in the public health infrastructure. The Committee is given to understand that 
intervention through NHM has helped in improving country's performance on various health 
indicators. However, the Committee believes that there is a strong need to scale up the 
existing interventions under NHM so that the benefits under the Scheme can be furth er 
amplified. The Committee further notes that the Scheme has played a major role in making 
the health infrastructure more resilient especially in rural areas, however the success of the 
Scheme has not transcended into increase in funds and the budget allo cation under NHM has 
remained stagnant over the years.  
(Para 4.7) 

26 
 
Action Taken 
2.11.2 National Health Mission (NHM) is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme under which the 
Government of India provides financial and technical support to States/UTs to strengthen 
their health care systems.  
2.11.3 The status funds released Centrally under National Hea lth Mission (NHM) for the 
past 3 years from 2019-20 to 2021-22 is as under: 
(Rs. In crore) 
Sl. 
No.  
Financial 
Year  B.E.  R.E.  
Release / 
Central 
Expenditure  
Release (%) 
against R.E.  
1 2019-20  27,989.00 28783.00 29,282.02 102% 
2 2020-21 27,989.00 29316.75 29,750.49 101% 
3 2021-22 31,100.00 28350.00 28,303.10 99.83% 
 
2.11.4 During the F.Y. 2019 -20, release was over and above RE due to re -appropriation of 
savings of other programmes of DoHFW to NHM which was distributed to the States/UTs for 
containment and management of COVID -19 pandemic. Central release more than 100% for 
FY 2020 -21was due to re -appropriation savings from other schemes of DoHFW to NHM. 
Further, it may be noted that the Gove rnment of India (GOI) has been making consistent 
efforts towards increasing overall allocation of funds to the health sector. 
2.11.5 In this regard Pradhan Mantri Ayushman Bharat Infrastructure Mission (PM-ABHIM) 
has been launched with an outlay of Rs. 64, 180 crores over 6 years on 25th October -2021. 
The scheme would develop capacities of primary, secondary, and tertiary care health systems, 
strengthen existing national institutions, and create new institutions, to cater to detection and 
cure of new and emerging diseases 
2.11.6 Further, the GOI has also provided financial support during FYs 2019 -20, 2020 -21 
and 2021-22 towards strengthening the health care systems at the cutting edge level during 
the COVID 19 pandemic. 
I. Rs.1113.21 crore was released to the  States/UTs under National Health Mission 
(NHM) for the FY 2019 -20 for management and control of COVID -19. This release 
was made through Agency NHM from the savings of Department of Health & Family 
Welfare and it was as per the approved Centre-State funding pattern under NHM. 
II. ECRP-I: The „India COVID -19 Emergency Response and Health System 
Preparedness Package -I‟ (ECRP -I) of Rs. 15,000 crore has been approved by the 
Cabinet on 22ndApril 2020 with an objective to prevent, detect and respond to the 
threat posed by COVID-19. Funds to the tune of Rs. 8473.73 crore have been released 
under this Package through Agency-NHM. It is 100% centrally funded.  
III. ECRP-II:  The Cabinet has also approved the scheme, “India Covid -19 Emergency 
Response and Health Systems Preparedness Package-II” (ECRP-II) on 08th July 2021 
for an amount of Rs. 23,123 crore for the F.Y. 2021 -22. The scheme aims to 
accelerate health syst em preparedness for immediate responsiveness for early 

27 
 
prevention, detection and management of COVID -19, with the focus on health 
infrastructure development including for Paediatric Care and with measurable 
outcomes. Funds to the tune of Rs.12740.22 crore have been released under this 
Package through Agency -NHM. It is as per approved Centre -State funding under 
NHM. 
IV. Financial support of Rs. 35,000 crore has been provisioned towards support for 
COVID-19 Vaccination in 2021-22 B.E. 
V. Fifteenth Finance Com mission have recommended grants amounting to Rs. 70,051 
crores to health sector from FY 2020-21 to 2025-26.  
 
2.12 Tobacco Control Programme and Drug De-Addiction Programme 
Recommendation 
2.12.1 The Committee notes that in BE 2020 -21, funds to the tune of Rs. 550 crore was 
allocated under Tertiary Care Programme which was slashed to Rs. 311.50 crore at RE stage 
and the actual expenditure were Rs. 300.52 crore. In BE 2021 -22, funds to the tune of R s. 
500.50 were allocated which was again reduced to Rs. 431.14 crore at RE stage. The actuals 
for the FY 2021 -22 upto 17.01.2022 is Rs. 315.47 crore. The Committee notes that in 2020 -
21, the actual expenditure under the Scheme was 54.64 % with respect to B E 2020 -21 
whereas in 2021 -22, the actuals upto 17/1/2022 is 63% with respect to BE 2021 -22. The 
Committee observes that under all the components of Programmes barring Telemedicine and 
Tobacco Control Programme & DDAP, funds have been reduced at the RE stag e. 
Considering the past trends of poor utilisation, the Committee strongly recommends that the 
Ministry must make all out efforts to optimally utilise the funds allocated under the Tertiary 
Care programmes giving due weightage to all the components of the programme. 
(Para 4.45) 
Action Taken 
2.12.2 Tobacco Control Programme and Drug De-addiction Programme is one component of 
Tertiary Care Programme. Total budget for National Programme for Tobacco Control and 
Drug-addiction Treatment (NPTCDAT) for BE/RE 2020-21 was Rs. 65.00 cr. and the total 
expenditure for the same was Rs. 56.64 crore which was 87.17 % of total approved budget. 
2.12.3 In 2021 -22, total budget approved for BE 2021 -22 was Rs. 65.00 cr  which was 
increase at RE stage to Rs. 68.64 crore. The actual expenditure for 2021 -22 as on 31.03.2022 
was Rs. 59.87 crore which was 87.22 % of the total budget at RE stage. Further, there was no 
decrease of funds at RE level under NTCPDAT. It is pertinen t to mention that the funds are 
spent judiciously under the scheme (NPTCDAT) with strict compliance to provisions of 
GFR, 2017. Funds under the scheme is released to the institutes and agencies as per the needs 
and requirement. Therefore, there is no poor utilization of the funds, only marginal savings 
are there under the scheme, which were surrendered within the stipulated period of time 
  

28 
 
2.13 Tobacco Control Programme and Drug De-addiction Programme 
Recommendation 
2.13.1 The Committee is of the considered view that for the smooth implementation of the 
programs, active cooperation between the States and the Union Government is required. The 
States are the implementing agencies that need to submit the required proposals and the re-
imbursement claims under various heads. Therefore, the States and the UTs must be 
continuously followed up for the successful implementation of the programs. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends the Department to conduct regular review meetings wi th the States 
and monitor the progress carried under each component of Program and apprise the 
Committee in its Action Taken Notes.  
(Para 4.46) 
Action Taken 
2.13.2 NTCP is being implemented through a three tier structure i.e.  (i) National Tobacco 
Control Cell  (NTCP) (ii) State Tobacco Control Cell (STCC) and (iii) District Tobacco 
Control Cell (DTCC) [subsumed in the flaxipool for non -communicable Diseases (NCDs) 
under the National Health Mission (NHM) and as such the State/UT wi se fund is being 
released by NHM Division. 
  

29 
 
CHAPTER–III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
3.1 Shortage of Officers and Staff in the Ministry of MoHFW 
Recommendation 
3.1.1 The Committee notes that there is shortage of Officers/Staffs at various levels in the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare which may impact the effective administrative 
functioning of the Ministry. The Committee recommends the Ministry to take up the matter of 
vacancies with the Cadre Controlling Authorities and expedite the recruitment of 
officers/Staffs at all levels in the Ministry. 
(Para 1.11) 
Action Taken  
3.1.2 The posts under Central Staffing Scheme and those belonging to various services such 
as Central Secretariat Service (CSS), Central Secretariat Stenographer Service (CSSS), 
Central Secretariat Clerical Service (CSCS), Indian Statistical Services (ISS), Indian 
Economic Service (IES), Subordinate Statistical Service (SSS) are required to be fill ed by the 
respective Cadre Controlling Authorities i.e. Department of Personnel and Training 
(DoP&T), Department of Economic Affairs,    and  Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation etc.  
 3.1.3 Due to retirement, transfer, resignation etc. of t he Officers, vacancies occur from time 
to time. The Ministry is taking up with the respective cadre controlling authorities to fill such 
vacancies at the earliest so that those vacancies exist for a minimum period. 
Further Recommendation 
3.1.4 The Committe e exp resses concern over vacant posts at various levels of the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. The Committee understands that such vacancies 
must have bearing on the administration efficiency and overall functioning of the 
Ministry.  Accordingly, it is incumbent upon the Ministry to take up the matter of filling 
up of vacant posts with respective cadre controlling authorities viz. Department of 
Personnel and Training (DoP&T), Department of Economic Affairs   and Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation etc. and apprise the Committee the response 
of those cadre controlling authorities towards filling up such vacancies.  
 
3.2 Macro- Analysis of Budgetary Allocation (DEMAND NO. 46) 
 
Budgetary Allocation  
Recommendations 
3.2.1 The Committee notes that against projection of Rs. 93,299.75 crore for the year 2022-
23, the Department of Health and Family Welfare has been allocated a budget of Rs. 83,000 
cr.  The Committee also observes that the revised estimates for 2021 -22 were Rs. 82,920.65 

30 
 
crore and the BE 2022 -23 allocation of Rs. 83,000 crore, is almost equal to the revised 
estimates of last year.  
(Para 2.3) 
Action Taken 
3.2.2     As compared to a projection for BE 2022 -23 of Rs. 93299.75 crore, an allocation of 
Rs. 83000 crore has been made in BE 2022-23 by the Ministry of Finance which is a shortfall 
of Rs. 10299.75 crore. Depending on requirement, any shortfall in allocation will  be sought 
through Supplementary Demand for Grants for the current year. 
Further Recommendation 
3.2.3 The Committee takes into account the submission of the Department that against 
the projection of Rs. 93299.75 crores for BE 2022 -23 an allocation of Rs. 83000.00 crore 
has been earmarked in BE 2022 -23 by the Ministry of Finance thereby indicating a 
shortfall of Rs. 10299.75 crore that would certainly cause financial constraint in 
achieving the target of various schemes/project administered by the Department. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to approach the Ministry of 
Finance to grant adequate fund at the time of supplementary demands for Grants for 
financial year 2022-23 to ensure that no scheme/project suffer for want of fund.  
3.3 Budgetary Allocation of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
Recommendation 
3.3.1 The Committee also notes that the budgetary allocation of Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare accounts f or 2.1% of the total BE 2022 -23 whereas the allocation for 
Ministry of Defence is 13.3% of the total budgeted expenditure of  the Government in 2022 -
23. The Committee realizes that for a country like India with limited State and Central 
Government funds, mobilization of resources poses a big cha llenge. However, this should not 
deter the Governments from increasing its health expenditure and according less priority to 
the health sector.   Health is one sector that can drive people to poverty and disrupt the 
economic conditions of families. Attenti on of the Committee has also been brought to the 
Tracking universal health coverage: 2017 Global Monitoring Report by WHO and World 
Bank that states, "Average 4.16 % of the population annually slips into poverty due to 
catastrophic health expenditure". The Committee reemphasizes that the importance of health 
sector must not be ignored and health must be given priority in terms of budgetary allocation. 
(Para 2.4) 
Action Taken 
3.3.2     India being a signatory to the SGD goals, achieving Universal Health coverage is one 
of the important targets. The National Health Policy also espouses similar sentiment as it has 
set a target of increasing government health expenditure to 2.5% of GDP to e nsure affordable 
and accessible health services to all. Report by WHO and World Bank has identified that 
around 4.6% of the population falls below poverty line due to excessive health expenses. The 
recent NHA estimates for out –of – pocket expenditure (OOPE) on health (which might lead 
to financial vulnerability) and Government health expenditure do suggest that there has been 
a positive development in the country. The government health expenditure as a share of GDP 

31 
 
has increased from 1.15% in 2013 -14 to 1.35% in 2017-18. For the same period, the share of 
OOPE has declined from 64.2% to 48% 
Further Recommendation 
3.3.3     The Committee keeps into consideration the submission of the Secretary while 
giving his presentation to the Committee on DFG (2022 -23) th at as per the WHO's 
Global Health Expenditure Database 2018, the Government Health Expenditure as 
percentage of Current Health Expenditure is only 27% and the Out of Pocket 
Expenditure as percentage of the Current Health Expenditure is 62.7%. India ranks 
158 out of 196 countries in GHE as percentage of CHE and 176 out of 196 countries in 
OOPE as percentage of CHE . Expressing concern over the factual statement of the 
Secretary, Committee recommends the Department to approach Ministry of Finance to 
earmark budgetary allocation, at last 2.5% of GDP, as per target of National Health 
Policy to ensure affordable and accessible health services to all and also reduce the 
share of Out–of– Pocket Expenditure (OOPE).   
 
3.4 National Health Accounts Data  
Recommendations  
3.4.1 The Committee takes into account the National Health Accounts data submitted by the 
Ministry and notes that there has been a gradual increase in the Government Health 
Expenditure as a percentage of GDP ranging from 1.2 to 1.35. However the Committee is not 
happy with the slow trend of increase in the share of health budget.  
(Para 2.9) 
Action Taken 
3.4.2 The health expenditure at the country level consists of expenditure on health by Union 
and States/UTs. According to the NHA 2017-18, the share of the Union government is 40.8% 
while States/UTs have contributed 59.2% to the total government health expenditure. As the 
majority of allocation on health comes from the States and health is also a State subject, 
that‟s the primary responsibility of the State to finance the health.  
3.4.3    In that direction, the NHP - 2017, has already mentioned that States should spend 
more than 8% of their general expenditure on Health. As per the State Finance: Study of 
Budgets of 2021 -22, the average of actual expenditure by States (Including UTs with 
legislature) for the year2019-20 was 5.1%. 
3.4.4 The government is continuously making efforts to increase the allocation to health. 
The 15 th FC has allocated special health grants of Rs.70,051 crores to local bodies. Apart 
from that, Government has also initia ted PM -ABHIM amounting to Rs.64,180 crore and 
ECRP-II with the allocation of Rs.23,123 crores. All these initiatives are directed toward 
building a robust health infrastructure in the country. The target of 2.5% by 2025 National 
Health Policy is based on t he premise that this target will enable universal health coverage 
in the country.  
3.4.5 To provide affordable and quality tertiary health care facilities, Government is 
setting up new AIIMS and upgrading Government Medical Colleges under the Pradhan 

32 
 
Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana. State Governments are also supported for setting up of 
new medical colleges as well as for increasing UG and PG medical seats.  
Further Recommendation 
3.4.6    The Committee recommends Ministry to approach the Ministry of F inance and 
the State Government to ensure allocation of Union Budgetary grant to the tune of 
2.5% of GDP and 8% States budget, respectively on Health Sector as per target of NHP 
-2017 to enable Universal Health Coverage.  The Committee takes into account 1 5th 
Finance Commission allocation to the tune of Rs. 70,051 crores as special health grants 
to the local bodies, allocation of fund to the tune of Rs. 64,180 crore and Rs. 23,123 
crore under ECRP-II.  The Committee hopes that with all these investment the Ministry 
will be in position to build a robust health infrastructure in the country.  
 
3.5 Vacancy Position of CGHS 
Recommendations 
3.5.1 The Committee takes note of the fact that out of the sanctioned strength of 1531 
Medical Officers, 287 posts are l ying vacant. The Committee fails to understand the reason 
behind the huge vacancy in the Gazetted staff where out of the sanctioned 36 posts, almost 32 
posts are lying vacant. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to follow up with 
the concerned authorities for expediting the recruitment of Medical Officer, Gazetted as well 
as Non -Gazetted Staff in the CGHS dispensaries to ensure proper functioning of the 
dispensaries.  The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should prepare a roadmap 
for streamlining the recruitment process to ensure that at no point of time there is a vacancy 
of more than 5% of the sanctioned strength.  The Committee feels that the promotional 
vacancies may be filled within six months and the Direct Recruitment vacancies within a year 
and to avoid increase in backlogs the Ministry should initiate the process of recruitment in 
anticipation of the vacancies.   
(Para 3.10) 
Action Taken 
3.5.2 Following measures have been undertaken to streamline the process of recruitment of 
Medical Officers and other staff in CGHS: 
i. Regular reporting of vacancies of GDMOs is done by CHS Division of the Ministry to 
UPSC for filling up through Combined Medical Services Examination held annually 
by UPSC. 
ii. The process of compilation of vacancies of  other staff has been streamlined by 
making it zone-wise at the level of Additional Directors as against the earlier practice 
of city-wise compilation thereof. 
iii. Additional Directors of CGHS have been directed to hold regular meetings of 
Departmental Promotion Committees (DPCs) to fill up promotional posts. 
iv. Additional Directors of CGHS have been directed to firm up vacancies and intimate 
the same in the online portal / window of Staff Selection Commission (SSC) as soon 
as it is opened for the purpose. Further , any follow -up action in the recruitment 
process, as desired by SSC, is to be taken promptly by them. 

33 
 
3.5.3 Regular training programmes are organized at Institute of Secretariat Training and 
Management (ISTM) for Office Superintendents to familiarize them  with various recruitment 
related formalities, so that they can assist Additional Directors in their discharge of 
administrative duties and to fast-track the process of recruitment.    
Further Recommendation 
3.5.4 The Committee observes that the Ministry m ore often than not, counts on 
plethora of steps taken to fill up the vacant posts, still the position of vacant posts 
continues to remain static year after year and so is the case with CGHS having 287 
Medical Officer vacant posts, out of sanctioned strengt h of 1531, 32 vacant posts  of 
gazetted staff other than Medical Officer indicating out of sanctioned 36 post and 1537 
non-gazetted posts out of 4728 sanctioned posts.  The Committee, therefore, does not 
approve the plea of the Ministry taking series of action for filling up vacant posts but to 
the understanding of the Committees are of no avail.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to adhere to measure of Human Resource For ecasting 
Management Model and streamline the recruitment process to fill up  the position of 
vacancy status against the sanctioned strength.  
 
3.6 Expanding Ayush Services   
Recommendation 
3.6.1 With the Government's focus shifting to holistic health and well being, there is an 
urgent need to make extra efforts to expand Yoga and Ayush in the country. The Committee is 
of the considered view that making Ayush healthcare services accessible to the i ntended 
beneficiaries through CGHS would offer an alternative mode of treatment to the beneficiaries 
for routine healthcare needs. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to make 
the remaining 41 sanctioned Ayush dispensaries/units under CGHS o perational at the 
earliest and ensure operationalization of the 53 sanctioned new Ayush units in CGHS 
dispensaries at the earliest.  
(Para 3.11) 
Action Taken 
3.6.2 Out of 53 Ayush Units sanctioned by Department of Expenditure, 12 are already 
functional. 
3.6.3 The other units shall be made operational as soon as the AYUSH Medical Officers are 
posted in CGHS by Ministry of AYUSH, the Cadre Controlling authority. Ministry of 
AYUSH has received the list of recommended candidates and the other codal formalitie s are 
in process. 
Further Recommendation 
3.6.4 The Committee recommends the Department of Health & Family Welfare to 
approach the Ministry of Ayush to expedite the recruitment process and posting of 
Ayush Medical Officer in CGHS so that the remaining 41 di spensaries/units, out of 53 
Ayush units sanctioned by Department of Expenditure, also get operationised without 
further delay.  The Committee reiterates its recommendation for ensuring Ayush 

34 
 
Healthcare Services accessible to the CGHS beneficiaries as an al ternative mode of 
treatment on regular and routine basis.  Yoga and Ayush must be integrated to CGHS 
healthcare services.  
 
3.7 Introducing in the CGHS modules the healthy lifestyle and healthy food habits 
Recommendation 
3.7.1 The Committee is given to understand that the Governments focus on holistic health 
&well being is paying good dividends.  The Committee is of the view that, in line with the 
Governments focus, Ministry should take more initiatives towards holistic health and 
introduce in the CGHS m odules the healthy lifestyle and healthy food habits for the 
beneficiaries to be compulsorily prescribed by all the doctors. 
(Para 3.12) 
Action Taken 
3.7.2 Ministry has initiated fortnightly webinar to impart health education to CGHS 
beneficiaries on relevant health topics, out of which 25% webinars are on AYUSH stream of 
Medicine. 
Further Recommendation 
3.7.3 Apart from imparting Ayush Health Education to CGHS beneficiaries through 
webinars by the Ministry of Ayush, the Committee reiterates its recommendation for 
the Ministry to introduce in the CGHS Module instructing all the doctors, compulsorily, 
prescribe the healthy lifestyle and healthy food habits for CGHS beneficiaries.  
3.8 Construction activities at the SJHVMC 
Recommendation 
3.8.1 The Committee is dismayed at the slow pace of construction activities at the 
SJHVMC. The Committee notes that such unnecessary delays due to procedural and 
administrative hassles result in time and cost overrun. The Committee emphasizes that all 
these issues could have been avoided through better monitoring and timely submission of the 
required receipts and documents by the Institute. The Committee, accordingly, recommends 
the Institute to re -submit the proposal regarding the redevelopment of staff colony a nd the 
DIB Note with revised cost for the redevelopment of hostel facilities. The Ministry must 
coordinate with the Institute and make efforts to adhere to the timeline for all the pending 
projects. The Committee is of the view that the inordinate delay in  the Dwarka Project 
reflects poor management and poor planning on behalf of the Institute as well as the 
Ministry. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to set realistic timelines for the 
completion of the projects and make consistent efforts to adhere to the timelines.  
(Para 3.26) 
Action Taken 
3.8.2 A proposal for the redeployment of the staff colony was submitted earlier to the 
Ministry to be taken up by M/s NBCC. However, the same was rejected on the ground of a 

35 
 
single nomination.  Since, NBCC is a Navratan Company of the Ministry of Urban 
Development, MoHFW is reconsidering the proposal of redevelopment through NBCC.  
3.8.3 Under the redevelopment plan phase -II, Safdurjung Hospital has been directed to 
furnish the concept note for constructions of Mother and Child Block (MCH) Blocks. 
3.8.4 Revised drawing  has been approved for Dwarka project by the Ministry on 
04.09.2021 and accordingly Rs.50 lakhs has been sanctioned to CPWD on 15.07.2021 for 
floating NIT. A letter has also been wri tten on 13.12.2021 to DDA for getting NOC and 
extension time to start construction. 
3.8.5 Now hospital has applied application to get local bodies clearances on 11.03.2022. 
Further Recommendation 
3.8.6 The Committee is constrained to expresses its unhappiness over continuing 
procedural and administrative delay in preparing proposals and concept note on 
redevelopment plan at SJHVMC.  The Committee is unable to understand the ground 
of rejection by the Min istry of Health and Family Welfare the  proposals for 
redevelopment of the staff colony to be taken by M/s NBCC.  The Committee also finds 
that Safdarjung Hospital is yet to submit the concept note on construction of Mother 
and Child Block (MCH) under the r edevelopment plan phase -II.  The Committee 
further observes that despite the approval of revised drawing for Dwarka Project the 
construction work has not commenced for want of NOC and clearance from local 
bodies wherei n the application is pending since 11 th March, 2022.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the MoHFW to pro -actively monitor the progress of 
construction projects in tandem with constructing agency and hospital management.  
3.9 Vacancy at SJHVMMC 
Recommendation 
3.9.1 The Committee is deeply concerned that out of the sanctioned 587 posts under Group-
A (Medical), 170 posts are lying vacant at SJHVMMC. Similarly against the sanctioned 
strength of 183 under Group -A (Non Medical), 36 posts are yet to be filled. Against the 
sanctioned strength of 54 and 2781 under Group -B Gazetted and Non gazetted respectively, 
32 and 748 posts are lying vacant. Under Group -C, 415 posts are lying vacant against the 
sanctioned strength of 1798. The Committee is dismayed to observe that premier  institutes 
like Safdarjung Hospital and Vardhman  Mahavir Medical College lack the required 
manpower which is fundamental for smooth functioning of the Institute as well as well being 
of our innumerable countrymen. The Committee notes that such vacancies a t various levels 
are retarding the functioning of the different departments of the Institute. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends the Ministry to ensure that advertisements for recruitment of 
medical as well as non medical workforce and other Groups are  released in anticipation of 
vacancies and recruitment process is completed well before the positions become vacant.  
The Committee also recommends that the workforce should be given promotions on time to 
ensure their morals and motivation remain high while serving in the Institute.  
(Para 3.29) 
Action Taken 
3.9.2 The following information was furnished by the Ministry:- 

36 
 
S. No. Name of 
the post 
Post Date 
Advertisem
ent of 
Status 
1.  Physiother
apist (SJH) 
+02  01 post: - the experience certificate of the 
selected candidate has been found to be 
faulty. The cancellation of her candidature 
is under process. 01 post: - of 
Physiotherapist is advertised shortly. 
2.  Physiother
apist-SIC 
02  Selection has been made and verification 
of documents of selected candidate is 
under process. 
 
3.  Multi 
Rehab. 
Worker 
1 07.05.2022 Posts has been re-advertised 
4.  Junior 
Technician 
(Footwear 
Technolog
y) 
1  The selected candidate has joined the post 
on 05.04.2022 
5.  Driver 
(Ordinary 
Grade) 
5 07.05.2022 
(01 Post) 
Selection has been made for 04 posts. 
01 post has been advertised. 
6.  Teacher 1 16.01.2021 Screening of application has been done. 
7.  Junior 
Technici
an 
(orthotic) 
01  The post is advertised shortly. 
8.  MTS 52 Through 
SSC 
1.  Out of 52 posts , 34 candidates have 
joined against Dossier received from  
MOHFW, 
2. At present 18 more posts are vacant, 
request sent to SSC shall be processed 
through MOITW when SSC window shall 
open 
9.  LDC 55 Through 
SSC 
55 dossier was received vide MoHFW 
letter NO. A.11011/01/2020 O&M dated: 
18.2.2020. Amongst them 43 LDCs have 
joined. 
10.  Pharmacist 2 27.06.2020 
to 3 july 
2020 
13 has been advertised 
11.  Housekeep
er 
1 07.05.2022 
to 13 May 
2022 
01 has been advertised 
12.  Family 
welfare 
Worker 
1 07.05.2022 
to 13 May 
2022 
01 post is advertised shortly 
13.  Sanitary 
Inspector 
2 07.05.2022 
to 13 May 
02 posts has been advertised. 

37 
 
2022 
14.  Radiograp
her 
7 07.05.2022 
to 13 May 
2022 
07 posts has been advertised. 
15.  Radio 
pharmacist 
01 07.05.2022 
to 13 May 
2022 
01 has been advertised. 
16.  Bio-
medical 
Engineer 
02 07.05.2022 
to 13 May 
2022 
02 posts has been advertised. 
17.  Laboratory 
technician 
Radioisoto
pes 
02 07.05.2022 
to 13 May 
2022 
02 posts has been advertised. 
18.  Bio-
Statistician 
02 07.05.2022 
to 13 May 
2022 
02 posts has been advertised. 
19.  Projectioni
st 
01 07.05.2022 
to 13 May 
2022 
01 posts has been advertised. 
20.  Medical 
Photograp
her 
02 07.05.2022 
to 13 May 
2022 
02 posts has been advertised. 
21.  Urban 
Laprosy 
Worker 
01 07.05.2022 
to 13 May 
2022 
01 posts has been advertised. 
22.  Nursing 
officer 
529
+73 
NORCET 
2019 by 
AIIMS New 
delhi on 
15.09.2019 
and 2021. 
73 Nos, supposed to be filled through 
waiting list, list of eligible candidate has 
provided by Dr RML Hospital offer 
letters have been issued to 68 
suitable candidates. 34 Nos has 
already joined. Rest yet to be 
Joined Result of 34 Nos. Posts, 
are pending due to court case and to be 
filled up as and when court case is 
decided To fill up the vacant posts of 4 
Cental Govt. Hospital of Delhi, an 
advertisement has been issued by AIIMS. 
529 Nos vacant post to be tilled up 
through NORCET 2021. Last date for 
getting registration was on 30.10.2021. 
Exam has conducted on 20.11.2021. 
Result declared by AI1MS, out of 
advertised vacancies of no. 529 a list of 
453 Nos was received. however another 
list of eligible number of. 104 is awaited 
from MIMS. Document verification of 
453 Nos has already done. Out of 453 nos, 
21 nos were absent. Rest of 432 Nos 
found to be eligible under 1st round. Offer 

38 
 
letters have been issued to 425 candidates. 
Rest 7 are falls in Option 2 hence offer 
letter will he issued only after direction of 
AIIMS/LIIMC Nodal hospital. Out of 425 
Nos. Only 416 have been accepted the 
offer. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.9.3 The Committee takes into accounts status of recruitment process for filling up of 
various posts in Safdarjung Hospital and Vardhman Mahavir Medical College that 
infact reta rd the functioning of the various departments of Institute.  In order to 
express the access of healthcare facilities , it is pertinent to fill up the vacant posts at the 
earliest.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to chalk out specific 
timeframe to complete the recruitments process so that vacant posts are filled up 
without delay.  
3.10 RML, PGIMER 
Recommendation 
3.10.1 The Committee has observed that out of the total 4126 posts, almost 71% posts i.e  
2960 posts have been filled and 283 posts are lying vacant in a model institute of Government 
of India. The Committee also observes that under Group A Medical category, 74.5 % of the 
total posts have been filled. The Committee further notes that the Institute is making efforts to 
fill up the vacant posts , however, the Committee feels that the gap in workforce is adversely 
affecting  the education of the students, besides smooth functioning of the hospital in general 
and health of the critical patients in p articular. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Department to make all out efforts to complete the process of filling up all the vacant posts at 
the earliest and also ensure that no such backlog is left in future. ABVIMS &  Dr. RML 
Hospital must work on  strengthening its administration and take the matter of filling up the 
non-faculty posts with SSC.  
(Para 3.42) 
Action Taken 
3.10.2 The sanction strength of the regular staff of ABVIMS &  Dr. RML Hospital as on 
01.02.2022 is 4126 out of which 2960 posts have been filled on regular basis. The hospital 
has initiated process for filling up the vacant posts on regular basis. 
Further Recommendation 
3.10.3 The Committee observes that the Ministry in its action taken notes, has not 
informed about the steps taken  for filling up of 283 vacant posts out of the total of 4126 
sanctioned posts at ABVIMS and Dr. RML Hospital and furnished the Committee old 
status of vacancy as on 01.02.2022 that was already in the possession of the Committee.  
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to monitor the 
recruitment process in ABVIMS and Dr. RML Hospital and furnish updated ATNs in 
consonance with letter and spirit of recommendation of the Committee. 
 

39 
 
3.11 Lady Harding Medical College (LHMC) & Smt. S.K. Hospital 
Recommendation 
3.11.1 The Committee observes that the Lady Harding Medical College (LHMC) & Smt. S.K. 
Hospital has undertaken many activities which have led to the constant enhancement of 
budgetary allocation i.e. to the tune of Rs. 710.00 crores in BE 2022 -23 against Rs. 600.79 
crores in BE 2021-22 and Rs. 640.93 crores at RE 2021-22. The Committee has been given to 
understand that the Institute aims to carry out major renovation work of Labour Room and 
Pediatric Centre in 2022 -21. The Committee, recommends the Institute to ensure that the 
physical targets are achieved within scheduled time frame.  
(Para 3.46) 
Action Taken  
3.11.2 The renovation work of Labour Room is going to be taken up in the current year and 
will be completed at the earliest. 
3.11.3 As far as Pediatirc Centre is concerned, a proposal for Kalawari saran Centre of 
Medical Sciences for Children is to be submitted for approval 
Further Recommendation 
3.11.4 The Committee recommends that the renovation work of labour  room in LHMC 
and Smt. S.K. Hospital must be completed within current financial year 2022 -23. 
Expressing displeasure over the delay on major renovation of Padiatric Centre in 
Kalawari Saran Centre of Medical Sciences for children, the Committee hopes that 
approval for the proposal would be sought at the earliest so that the renovation work is 
commenced and completed within a set timeframe.  
 
3.12 Vacancy Position in First Six AIIMS 
Recommendation  
3.12.1 The Committee expresses its concern at the shortage o f staff at various posts in the 
first six AIIMS and observes that none of the AIIMS have a satisfactory number of faculty & 
staff. The Committee understands that a premier Institute like AIIMS must maintain high 
standards in its selection criteria especial ly for highly skilled and specialized healthcare 
workforce. The Committee further notes that many measures have been taken up to fill up the 
vacant posts, nevertheless, the high vacancies in faculty and non -faculty in the Institutes 
necessitates concerted efforts to expedite the recruitment process. The Committee notes that 
AIIMS Patna and Raipur have the lowest faculty strength among all the new AIIMS 
established under Phase I of PMSSY. The vacancy in Faculty Posts is 88 in AIIMS Jodhpur 
which is the lowes t. However, the vacancy is as high as 169 and 143 in AIIMS Patna and 
AIIMS Rishikesh, respectively. The Committee also observes that in AIIMS Raipur, 27 faculty 
posts have been filled up on contractual basis whereas in AIIMS Bhubaneshwar and Patna 
no faculty is working on contract.   
3.12.2 The Committee in its 111 th Report on Functioning of the New AIIMS had also 
highlighted the gross shortage of Professors/Additional Professor/Associate 
Professor/Assistant Professors in the new AIIMS. The Committee had observed that many 

40 
 
important Departments such as Cardiology, Med ical Oncology and Haematology, 
Neonatology, etc were just functioning with one doctor in the new AIIMS. The Committee 
understands that the shortage of doctors and specialists in the country is a major concern. 
However, the Ministry must make constant and c oncerted efforts to improve the faculty and 
student ratio in the Institutes and offer special packages/incentives and explore alternative 
such as paid research collaboration, better working hours etc to fill the vacant posts in the 
Institutes. 
3.12.3 The Committee notes that only 28.48 % of the total non faculty posts have been filled 
up in AIIMS Bhopal whereas in AIIMS Jodhpur, 57.61 % of the total non faculty posts have 
been filled up. The Committee also notes that almost 55 % of the total non faculty pos ts have 
been outsourced in AIIMS Patna whereas only 22.21 % of the posts have been filled up on a 
regular basis. The Committee expresses its concern and recommends the Department to 
expedite the recruitment of the faculty and non faculty posts.   
3.12.4 The Committee is of considered opinion that the Ministry should prepare a roadmap 
for providing the necessary infrastructure, faculty and para -medical staff to all the 22 AIIMS 
functioning and scheduled to be operationlised in the next three years.  The Comm ittee feels 
that due to the gap in the requirement and availability of the faculty and para -medical staff, 
besides the proper infrastructure most of the AIIMS already functioning are not able to 
function to their full capacity.  The Committee expresses its  concern that the scarcity of 
faculty & staff in the operational AIIMS is causing the AIIMS, Delhi to be overburdened with 
the patients, thus defeating the purpose of opening of new AIIMS all over the country.  The 
Committee therefore, recommends that the Ministry should make efforts to prepare the 
faculty &para -medical staff by providing specialised training or encourage institution 
involved in such research & training.   
(Paras 3.64, 3.65, 3.66 & 3.67) 
Action Taken 
3.12.5 The recruitment exercise for various category of posts is planned by the Institute 
keeping in view the range of services already operational in the Institute and likely to become 
operational in near future. As per the requirement of the Institute, vacant p osts of Project 
Cell, Faculty and Non-faculty are regularly advertised by respective Institutions.  
3.12.6 The vacancies are also regularly monitored by the Ministry during review of the 
Institutes, held at various levels. Recently, vide letter dated 26 th March, 2022 of the Secretary 
(HFW), Directors/ EDs of various AIIMS were asked to draw the recruitment plan with a 
view to fill up vacant faculty posts in a time -bound manner. Recruitment plan received from 
the Institutes were also reviewed by Secretary (HFW) with Directors/EDs of Institutes on 11th 
and 12th of May, 2022 and timelines were fixed for issuing of advertisements and completion 
of the recruitment process.  
Further Recommendation 
3.12.7 The Committee takes into account the various steps taken by Ministry to fill up 
the vacant faculty and non -faculty staff of first six AIIMS, however, despite plethora of 
steps, the vacancy position in various AIIMS is a matter of concern to the Committee.  
The Committee understands that the recruitment exercise is planned by the respective 
management of the Institute; nevertheless, the Ministry cannot shrug off its 
responsibility from monitoring the progress of recruitment process.  The Committee 

41 
 
does not approve the plea of the Ministry that posts are filled upto the range of service 
already operational in the Institute, rather the reverse proposition is correct /true i.e 
many departments in various AIIMS remain inoperational due to vacant faculty and 
non-faculty staff.  The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Ministry to ensure 
adequate healthcare work force in all AIIMS like precious Institute not only for 
delivering the assured health services but for imparting education and undertaking 
research projects to understand the biology of various diseases.  
 
3.13 National Organ Transplant Program (NOTP) 
Recommendation  
3.13.1 The Committee noted that the Ministry has not been able to utilize allocated  funds  
under the National Organ Transplant Program (NOTP). The Committee observes that organ 
donation rate in the country is very low when compared to other countries and there is a 
huge lack of awareness among the public. The Committee feels that India has a va st potential 
of organ donations and demand due to its population but the Ministry needs to make 
concerted efforts to develop such feelings amongst its citizens. NOTP aims to promote organ 
donation and transplantation across all States/Union Territories in the country. However, the 
Committee notes that performance of the program has been very poor which is reflected by 
huge underutilisation of funds under the Scheme. The Committee notes that the Scheme was 
allotted Rs. 30.50 crore in BE 2021 -22 which was sla shed to Rs. 6.39 crore in RE 2021 -22 
which is a 79% decrease with respect to BE 2021 -22. The Committee further notes that the 
program has been allotted a total of Rs. 15.00 crore in BE 2022-23.  
(Para 3.85) 
Action Taken 
3.13.2 One of the important objectiv es of National Organ Transplant Programme (NOTP) is 
to improve awareness about organ donation among the public. Towards this end the NOTTOs 
and SOTTOs have been conducting awareness activities on an ongoing basis right through 
the year. These awareness act ivities have led to increased pledging from the people. Most of 
these activities are pro bono activities at the level of the  
NOTTO/SOTTOs. Underutilization of IEC funds is mostly due to these being conducted on 
pro bono basis. 
3.13.3 NOTP is a central sect or continuing scheme. The scheme has been evaluated 
externally and found to be giving positive results in terms of increased awareness about organ 
donation, increase in number of deceased organ donations and establishments of organization 
for organ procure ment and distribution. The organ donation rate i.e. number of persons 
donating organs per million populations has increased from around 0.16 in 2012 to 0.52 in 
2019. Further, based on the feedback and past experience, to make the programme more 
effective and bridge the gap between demand for and supply of the organs for transplantation, 
some new components have been introduced in the programme such as support in facilitating 
medical education of doctors and staff of medical colleges/institutions (both Gover nment and 
Private) doing transplant activities or willing to start organ transplantation activities, training 
for transplant teams (surgeons, physicians, anaesthetists, nurses, technicians and perfusionists 
(in cases of heart and lung transplants) in India  or Abroad, setting up of 4 skills centres in 
NOTTO and medical colleges in the country, 10(ten) Regional/State Biomaterial Centres, 

42 
 
setting up of State Organ and Tissue Transplant Organisations (SOTTOs) in each State, 
developing new/strengthening existing  retrieval and transplant centres, and support to 
retrieval centres. The SOTTOs are encouraged to send proposals to optimize utilization of 
funds for all the components of the programme. 
Further Recommendation  
3.13.4 The Committee appreciates that despite lower allocation of budget to NOTP and 
underutilization of IEC fund the organ donation rate has increased from 0.16 in 2012 to 
0.52 in 2019 due to enhanced impetus to organ donation awareness  campaign.  
However, the Committee observes that to make NOTP mo re effective and bridge the 
gap between demand and supply of the organs for transplantation , various new 
components have been incorporated in the programme viz. Medical Education for doing 
transplantation, training to transplants teams, setting up of 4 skills centers in NOTTO, 
10 Regional/State Bio-material centre, setting up of SOTTO in each State, strengthening 
existing retrieval and transplant centre etc.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to assess whether the continuing quantum of budge tary grant would be 
sufficient to meet the expenditure involving on various activities enshrined in new 
components of NOTP. 
 
3.14 Status Of Projects Undertaken by AIIMS, DELHI 
Recommendation 
3.14.1 The Committee notes that as per the information submitted by the Ministry, Surgical 
Block, Mother & Child Block, New Paid Ward are finally 100% complete. The Committee 
hopes that as projected the Geriatric Block/NCA is also operationlised by February 2022.  
The Committee also takes note of the inordinate delay in the commencement of important 
Projects, viz, Master Plan of AIIMS and Redevelopment of AIIMS Residential Colonies. The 
Committee recalls that the Master Plan of AIIMS  was approved on 28th February, 2019 
which aimed to develop AIIMS into a world class Medical University by March 2024. 
However, the timelines have already been delayed as the Project has not even started. As per 
the information submitted by the Ministry in the ATN on 126 th Report of the Committee, the 
Phase-I of the project is now likely to be completed in 2026 & Phase -II in 2028. The 
Committee further notes that the Institute had submitted that it will approach MoHFW with 
the revised EFC proposal with firmed -up costs by October 2021. The  Committee is given to 
understand that the Institute is yet to submit the EFC proposal to the Ministry therefore the 
Committee strongly recommends the Institute to expedite the approval process and submit the 
EFC proposal to the Ministry at the earliest. T he Committee has noted that progress of the 
Redevelopment of AIIMS Residential Colonies  Project at the snail's pace. The Committee 
recalls that the approval of the construction of 3519 dwelling units dates back to 2016, 
however, as submitted by the Ministr y, the final approval of building plans is still under 
process at NDMC and SDMC. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry 
to expedite the progress under both the Projects and make efforts to complete the project in 
timeframe. The Ministry  and the Institute must constantly monitor the progress of both the 
Projects for completion of projects without cost and time overrun. The Committee further 
notes that adequate infrastructure for Burn injury is missing in the country. A newly 
constructed building of Burns and Plastic Surgery Block was built in AIIMS Delhi which was 
used temporally as a dedicated facility for treating COVID -19 patients. The Committee 
strongly recommends the Ministry for the operationalization of new Burns and Plastic 

43 
 
surgery Block so that patients can be provided with high quality care. The Committee may be 
apprised about the status of sanctioned and in -position of staff and faculty of doctors and 
other specialists made available for Burn emergencies service, ICU and surgery and OPD.  It 
may also be stated whether the Burn Department has been made functional or not.  
(Para 3.104) 
Action Taken 
3.14.2 The EFC proposal for Master Plan of AIIMS, New Delhi has been received from the 
Institute and the same is under consideration in the Ministry. In the matter of Redevelopment 
of AIIMS Residential Colonies Project, all the necessary approvals obtained except clearance 
from NDMC, which is too in final stage. Further, an Empowered Committee under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary (Health & Family Welfare) is already in place, which is reviewing 
the projects on regular basis. It is informed that the Hon‟ble Minister of Health and Family 
Welfare inaugurated new Burns and Plastic surgery Block on 18.01.2021. As on date, 
Emergency services, Inpa tient Services including ICU services, OT Services and OPD 
services are operational. Sanctioned and in -position strength of Burns and Plastic Surgery 
Block is 328 and 248 respectively. 
Further Recommendation 
3.14.3 The Committee recommends that the Ministr y must give green sig nal to the 
Master Plan of AIIMS, New Delhi, so that the cherished goal of developing AIIMS into 
a world class Medical University by March, 2024 can be achieved without fail.  The 
Committee further recommends that redevelopmen t of AIIMS  Residential colonies   
Project should get clearance from NDMC without any delay so that civil work get 
commenced at the earliest and the project is completed within set timeframe.  The 
Committee, however, appreciates the efforts of AIIMS management and the  Ministry 
for offering the nation one of the best healthcare facilities to the people of the country 
and even to people of neighbouring countries of India.  
 
3.15 Vacancy Position in AIIMS, NEW DELHI 
 
Recommendation  
3.15.1 The Committee has noted the high vacancy under the Group A medical category 
wherein out of the sanctioned strength of 1131, only 727 posts have been filled leading to a 
vacancy of 404 in AIIMS New Delhi. The Committee also notes that 26.81%, 18.98% and 
20.73% of the total sanctioned posts are lying vacant under Group A Non Medical, Group B 
and Group C category respectively. The Committee understands that the shortage of doctors 
is a larger looming problem, however, such large vacancies at a premier Institut e like AIIMS 
does not auger well and highlights the need of increased interventions in the health sector. 
The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to monitor that advertisements regarding 
recruitment in different posts are timely issued and concerted  efforts are made to ensure that 
vacancies at all levels are filled on regular basis.  
(Para 3.106) 
 
 

44 
 
Action Taken 
3.15.2 Necessary instructions to fill up the posts are also being issued, from time to time to 
the Institute. However, the recommendations of  the Committee have been noted for 
compliance. 
Further Recommendation 
3.15.3 The Committee is constrained to note that despite necessary instruction s being 
given by the Ministry to AIIMS, New Delhi to fill up the vacant posts, a total of 404 
Group-A Medica l posts are vacant.  Similarly, 26.81% of Group -B and 20.73% of 
Group-C posts are vacant that must have bearing on delivery of health care facilities.  
The Committee, therefore, urges upon AIIMS Management and the Ministry to take 
concrete steps for filling up of vacant posts without further delay. 
3.16 National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS), Bengaluru 
Recommendation 
3.16.1 The Committee notes that the budgetary utilization trend of the Institute has been 
satisfactory, however, the Committee desires to know the status of any major pending 
construction projects. The Committee notes that NIMHANS is the apex institute for mental 
health education in the country and has been working to reduce the mental health burden of 
the country. The Committee understands that holistic health has become a priority and 
attention has been drawn to the importance of mental health. However, there still exists a 
huge gap between the identification and acceptance of the mental health illness and  its 
treatment.  
(Para 3.125) 
Action Taken  
3.16.2 The Institute is in the process of filling up the vacant positions. The Sub -specialty 
block and Common Laboratory Complex as well as the administrative block is presently 
under construction. 
Further Recommendation 
3.16.3 The Committee recommends NIMHANS to explore mechanism to measure the 
huge gap between the identification and acceptance of mental health illness i.e  
symptoms causing factors and its treatment.  Being an apex institute for mental health 
in the country, NIMHANS has the responsibility to reduce the burden of mental illness 
in the country.  
3.17 North Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health and Medical Sciences 
(NEIGRIHMS), Shillong 
Recommendation 
3.17.1 The Committee notes that at RE 2021 -22 stage, the North Eastern Indira  Gandhi 
Regional Institute of Health and Medical Sciences (NEIGRIHMS) was allocated a budget of 
Rs. Rs. 560.45 crore.  The Committee further notes that increase in the allocation has been 
attributed to requirement of funds under the Capital Assets for the construction of Regional 
Cancer Centre, Under Graduate Medical College and Expansion of Nursing College. As per 

45 
 
the information submitted by the Institute, the Actual Expenditure till 31st December 2021 
has been Rs.246.60 Crore. The Committee further notes  that the projected cost overrun is 
approximately Rs. 76 crores and the Projects are now bound to be completed by May/June of 
2022. The Committee observes that the Institute should ensure that the projects are 
completed within the extended time and further cost and time overruns must be avoided.   
(Para 3.133) 
Action Taken 
3.17.2 The time & cost overrun for 76 Cr is being taken up in the upcoming High Powered 
Committee for consideration. As progress report submitted by Institute‟s Consultant M/s 
HSCC out of  12 (twelve) buildings, 8 (eight) buildings have been completed and joint 
checking of the inventories is in progress. The remaining  4 (four) buildings are likely to be 
completed by September, 2022. 
Further Recommendation 
3.17.3 The Committee is not happy to observe that the completion date for the 
construction projects in NEIGRIHM has further been extended from May/June, 2022 to 
September, 2022.  Moreover, t he Ministry has not furnished the updated status of 
construction projects of Regional Cancer Centre under graduate medical college and 
expansion of Nursing College.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to 
update the status of those projects and further instruct the NEIGRIHMs Management 
to keep vigil on Institute’s construction consultant to ensure that 04 remaining buildings 
out of 12 buildings are also completed within revised timeframe i.e. September, 2022. 
3.18 Ayushman Bharat Health-Wellness Centres (AB-HWCs) 
Recommendation 
3.18.1 The Committee observes that the expenditure profile of all the initiatives under NHM 
has been satisfactory, however, there has been re-appropriation of funds from one pool to the 
other due to the pandemic Covid -19. The Committee notes that Ayushman Bharat Health-
Wellness Centres (AB -HWCs) is aimed at providing Comprehensive Primary Health Care 
(CPHC) to the masses. However, the Committee believes that along with increasing the 
number of these HWCs, the Ministry must also work towards enhancing the quality o f 
healthcare service delivery at these Centres. The Committee strongly recommends the 
Ministry to complete operationalization of the remaining HWCs and achieve the target of 
setting up of 1,50,000 functional HWCs by December 2022. The Ministry must also wo rk 
towards augmenting the Health care facilities by including tele -medicine, Yoga and mental 
health care services in these HWCs.  
(Para 4.19) 
Action Taken  
 
3.18.2 The National Health Policy 2017 envisages the goal of attainment of the highest 
possible lev el of health and well -being, through a preventive and promotive health care 
orientation, and universal access to good quality health care services without anyone having 
to face financial hardships as a consequence. To progressively achieve Universal Health  
Coverage, Ayushman Bharat – Health and Wellness Centres (AB-HWCs) was 
launched in 2018 to deliver Comprehensive Primary Healthcare Services. With a target of 

46 
 
1,50,000 Health and Wellness Centres by December, 2022, the existing Sub -Health Centres 
(SHC), Primary Health Centres (PHC) and Urban Primary Health Centres (UPHC) are being 
transformed into AB -HWCs to deliver Comprehensive Primary Health Care (CPHC) that 
includes preventive, promotive, curative, palliative and rehabilitative services which is 
universal, free, and close to the community. As on 30th June, 2022, total 1,20,112 AB -HWCs 
which includes 92,470 SHCs, 22,915 PHCs and 4,727 UPHCs, have been operationalized 
throughout the country against the operationalization target of 1,50,000 AB -HWCs by 
December, 2022. 
 
3.18.3 The measures undertaken for the approved centres to be recognized as functional AB -
HWC are: 
 
1) HR - availability - To improve the delivery mechanism, a new cadre of healthcare 
providers are introduced at the mid -level with educational back grounds such as 
B.Sc in Community Health or a Nurse (GNM or B.SC) or an Ayurveda 
Practitioners with due certification in public health. These Mid -Level HealthCare 
Providers are designated as Community Health Officer (CHO). The CHO at SHC -
HWC carry out publ ic health functions, ambulatory care, and management and 
provide leadership at the Sub-Health Centre-Health and Wellness Centres. 
 
2) Infrastructure - All AB -HWCs are provided with sufficient space for outpatient 
care, for dispensing medicines, diagnostic services, adequate spaces for display of 
communication material of health messages, including audio visual aids and 
appropriate community spaces for wellness activities, including the practice of 
Yoga and physical exercises. 
 
3) Availability of Free Medicines  - Number of essential medicines at PHC -HWCs 
have been increased to 172 and at the SHC -HWCs, these have been increased to 
105. The CHO at the SHC -HWCs dispense medicines based on treatment plans 
initiated by the medical officer at the PHC-HWC. 
 
4) Availability of Free Diagnostics -Number of essential diagnostic tests have been 
increased to 63 in PHC -HWCs and 14 in SHC -HWC. Completion of CBAC 
enumeration for NCDs and CDs - Community-Based Assessment Check list is 
administered by the ASHA for each individual abo ve 30 years at the household 
level. This captures the risk for various illness and also enables screening by MPW 
and referral to the nearest Ayushman Bharat – Health and Wellness Centre (AB -
HWC). 
 
6)    Capacity building of primary healthcare team on expanded  package of services - 
The MO, ASHAs and ANMs have been trained in the 7 basic services. The  
Community Health Officer undergone 15 days Expanded Induction training after 
their posting at SHC -HWC. This training covers sessions on RMNCHA+N, 
Communicable diseases, non-communicable diseases, and Jan Aarogyasamiti. 
 
7) Expanded Service Delivery- The existing package of Primary Health Care services 
is being expanded to go beyond Reproductive and Child Health and 
Communicable Diseases to include comprehensive primary health care services for 
non-communicable diseases, Mental Health, ENT, Ophthalmology, Oralhealth, 
Geriatric and Palliative healthcare and first level care for emergencies and traumas 

47 
 
well as Health promotion and wellness activities like Yoga. About 1.18 Cr 
Wellness Sessions, including Yoga, has been conducted at AB -HWCs & 60.46 Cr 
Screenings for NCDs (Hypertension/ Diabetes/ Oral, breast & cervical cancer) has 
been done as on 10.06.2022. 
 
8)    Robust IT system- AB-HWC portal and app has been developed and being used by 
the States/UTs to capture progress on AB -HWC operationalization. Tablets are 
being provided at AB -HWC for operationalization and digitization of the health 
information. Total Teleconsultation sundere-Sanjeevani is 3.90 crores (as on 
30.06.2022). E-Sanjeevani HWC is operational at 94,599 Spokes & 10,709 Hubs 
(including Spoke cum hubs). 
 
9) Financing/provider payment reforms -Performance linked payment is being 
provided to CHOs and primary healthcare team at HWC. 
 
10)    Community mobilisation and health promotion through activities like Fit Health 
Worker Campaign, Eat Right India movement, Annual health calendar for 
promoting wellness related activities. 
 
3.18.4 Additionally, to ensure an in tegrated approach of primary healthcare, various 
community platforms, namely Jan Arogya Samiti (JAS), Village Health, Sanitation and 
Nutrition Committee (VHSNC) and Mahila Arogya Samiti (MAS) are being created and 
engaged the level of community and AB-HWCs. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.18.5 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry in operationalizing 
a total of 1,20,112 AB-HWCs throughout the country against the target of 1,50, 000 AB-
HWCs by December, 2022. The Committee, however, recommends that the Ministry 
will make all out effort to achieve the target of op erationalizing 1,50,000 AB -HWCs in 
order to provide Comprehensive Primary Healthcare Services across the country.  T he 
Committee further recommends that all these centre must have adequate human 
resource with 4 technical expertise and latest tools and techniques, diagnostic kits, 
medicines to provide quality healthcare service and standard treatment.  The 
Committee also recommends the Ministry should popularize tele -consultation Sundere-
Sanjeevani in rural areas.   
 
3.19 Merger of pools under NHM 
Recommendation 
3.19.1 The Committee notes that there has been merger of pools under NHM which would 
provide greater flexibility to States/UTs for appropriation of funds. However, the Committee 
recommends the Ministry to ensure that such merger of pools should not lead to neglig ence 
of initiatives/programs under any other head in the Scheme. The Committee further 
recommends the Ministry to coordinate with the States/UTs for timely submission of 
proposals under different pools and ensure implementation of health interventions in e ach 
pool. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to give special impetus to States with 

48 
 
poor track record on health indicators and monitor their progress under each component of 
the Scheme.  
(Para 4.22) 
Action Taken 
3.19.2 The merger of flexible pools will provide more flexibility to States/UTs to utilize the 
funds and add to operational efficiency.  
3.19.3 It may be noted that the funds under NHM are released flexible pool wise whereas the 
approvals for utilization of the funds are given activity wise in the SPIP. Since it is expected 
that the funds released through the flexible pools shall be utilized against the activities 
already approved in the SPIP, merger of pools should not lead to negligence of any approved 
initiatives/programs under any other head in the Scheme. 
3.19.4 Further, under NHM, the Ministry keeps regular track on the financial utilization and 
progress through the following steps: 
(i) Performance Audit by the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India, 
(ii) Annual Statutory Audits  by CAG empanelled major Chartered Accountant Audit 
firms, 
(iii) Concurrent Audits by Chartered Accountant Audit firms,   
(iv) Public Financial Management System (PFMS) in NHM to track flow of funds,  
(v) Submission of quarterly Financial Monitoring Report s (FMRs) and Statement of 
Fund Position (SFP) by the States/UTs, 
(vi) Review and monitoring of scheme components. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.19.5 The Committee understands the merger of flexible pools will endow greater 
flexibility to States and UTs for appropriation of funds on various component of the 
scheme as per the instant requirement, however, the Committee desire to be apprised of 
the achievement of physical target as a result of release of funds against various 
components/activities approved in S PIP and subsequent improvement in health 
indicators. The Committee further desire s to know as how the scheme incentivizes  
States/UTs with poor health track record on health indicators. The Committee notes 
various mode of keeping track on the financial util ization of fund and progress 
thereupon, however, such monitoring mechanism must oversee the transformation of 
healthcare delivery system at ground level , that is the ultimate measurement of success 
of the scheme.  
 
 
 

49 
 
3.20 Pending Utilization Certificate under NHM 
Recommendation 
 
3.20.1 The Committee notes that under NHM, a total of 534 UCs are pending amounting to 
Rs. 3,504.13 crore out of which 458 UCs amounting to Rs. 3,339.58 crore pertain to the 
period 2019 -20. The Ministry should regularly monitor and pursue the States and other 
Institutions for timely submission of the UCs under NHM. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends the Department to liquidate the Pending UCs within a set time -frame so that 
further release of funds is facilitated without any delay. The Committee believes that a 
transparent online system that promotes efficient review of UCs is crucial for resolving the 
huge pendency of UCs. The Committee, accordingly recommends for an e -UC module where 
the receipts.  
(Para 4.26) 
Action Taken 
3.20.2 Keeping in view of Provisions  of GFR -2017, the States/UTs submit their Annual 
Audited Utilisation Certificates and accordingly the grants in aid of previous financial years 
are settled under NHM.   
3.20.3 Presently, 136 Utilisation Certificates amounting to Rs. 626.69 crore are pendin g 
with respect to the Central grants released up to F.Y. 2019 -20. The Ministry is regularly 
reviewing and liquidating the pending UCs in a time-bound manner. 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.20.4 The Committee desires that the pending 136 utilization certificate amounting to 
Rs. 629.69 crore with respect to the Central grants released upto financial year 201 -20 
need to be liquidated at the earliest.  The Committee further hopes that the Ministry 
will apprise the current pending UCs involving the total amount and steps taken to 
liquidate the pending UCs.  
 
3.21 Drug Manufacturing Industry 
Recommendation 
3.21.1 The Committee notes the importance and the huge potential of the Drugs 
manufacturing Industry in the country. However, the Committee also takes into account the 
lack of adequate drug control infrastructure and drug testing facilities across the States. The  
Committee strongly believes that for development of a vibrant Drugs manufacturing industry, 
issues related to supply of poor quality drugs need to be resolved. It is an established fact 
that Strengthening of State Drug Regulatory System is the keystone fo r addressing the issues 
of substandard drugs. The Committee also notes the plea of the Ministry that the lack of 
proposals from States for Strengthening of State Drug Regulatory System has been one of the 
primary reasons for underutilisation under the Sche me. The Committee is of the considered 
view that the non submission of proposals from States especially, States with higher 
allocation of the indicative amount, is not tenable. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that States, especially, Maharashtra, Utta r Pradesh, Bihar, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka may be 
persuaded to submit the project proposals matching to the indicative amount. The Ministry 

50 
 
may also follow up with all the States and make efforts to set up sufficient number of 
laboratories The Committee empha sizes on the need of cooperation between the States and 
the Union Government to establish a vibrant, dynamic and effective drug regulatory regime. 
The Committee believes a vibrant network of drugs testing laboratories is crucial for 
strengthening the drug regulatory environment in the country. 
(Para 4.30) 
Action Taken 
3.21.2 The Ministry has been making conceted efforts for implementation of the Scheme of 
Strengthening of State Drug Regulatory System with all the States/UTs for signing the 
Memorandum of Und erstanding under the scheme and submitting project proposals for 
release of grant –in-aid. 
3.21.3 All the States/UTs, which have received Grants -in-Aid, have also been requested to 
furnish Utilization Certificate (USs) and detailed progress report of the p rojects undertaken 
through a number of virtual meetings and repeated communications. 
3.21.4 Up to 31.03.2022, Grant -in-Aid of Rs. 642.18 crore has been released to the States/ 
UTs. This Scheme has paved the way for setting up of 17 new drugs testing labs a nd 
renovation / up – gradation of 26 existing ones as also for setting up of 48 new offices for 
Drugs Controllers and upgradation of 27 existing similar offices. 
3.21.5 It may be submitted that in line with the recommendations of the Hon‟ble Committee, 
the States of Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka are being 
persuaded to submit the project proposals matching their indicative amount. 
3.21.6 Further, all the other States/UTs are also being requested to set up sufficient number 
of drugs testing laboratories to meet their requirements. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.21.7 The Committee is of the considered view that vibrant, dynamic strengthened 
drug testing laboratories is concomitant efficient and effective drug regulatory 
mechanism to avert the prevalence of sub -standard drugs, therefore, the Ministry 
should instruct and guide the State Governments to strengthen State Drugs Regulatory 
System.  Moreover, the Committee wants to be informed of the response of State 
Governments of Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka to the 
Ministry’s perusal for submitting the project proposals matching the i ndicative amount 
of each State. U nderstandably the Ministry will continue to monitor optimal utilization 
of fund earmarked for the scheme. 
 
3.22 National Mental Health Programme 
 
3.22.1 The Committee is of the considered view that the constant under utilization of funds 
under the National Mental Health Programme is a matter of concern. The Committee 
emphasizes on the high prevalence of mental illness in the country and strongly recommends  
the Ministry to incentivize the States as well as the Institutes to carry out new initiatives 
under the revised funding mechanism. The Ministry should chalk out a plan for reducing the 

51 
 
mental health burden in the country and ensure that the States activel y participate under the 
Program and conduct awareness generation programmes across the States. 
(Para 4.33) 
Action Taken 
3.22.2 The approval for continuation of tertiary care programmes during 2021 -26 by CCEA, 
the reimbursement model under NMHP has been done away with. As per the guidelines of 
Department of Expenditure, the funds under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes, including 
NMHP, are now to be released in the Single Nodal Agency Account (SNA). The Ministry has 
emphasized the Institutions supported under NMHP to open the SNA Account and submit a 
request for further release of funds under NMHP.  
3.22.3 Further, the District Mental  Health Programme (DMHP) component of the National 
Mental Health Programme (NMHP) has been sanctioned for implementation in 715 districts 
for which support is provided to States/UTs through the National Health Mission.  Facilities 
made available under DMHP  at the Community Health Centre  (CHC) and Primary Health 
Centre (PHC) levels, inter-alia, include outpatient services, assessment, counselling/ psycho -
social interventions, continuing care and support to persons with severe mental disorders, 
drugs, outreac h services, ambulance services etc. In addition to above services there is a 
provision of 10 bedded in-patient facility at the District level. 
3.22.4 To generate awareness among masses about mental illnesses Information, Education 
and Communication (IEC) a ctivities are an integral part of the NMHP. At the District level, 
sufficient funds are provided to Districts under the DMHP under the Non -communicable 
Diseases flexi-pool of National Health Mission for IEC and awareness generation activities in 
the commun ity, schools, workplaces, with community involvement. Under the DMHP 
various IEC activities such as awareness messages in local newspapers and radio, street 
plays, wall paintings etc. are undertaken by the States/UTs. 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.22.5 The Committee desires to know the status on opening the S ingle Nodel Agency 
Account (SNA) by the Institution for further release of funds under NMHP.  The 
Committee hopes that facilities available under DMHP at CHC and PHC level w ould 
ensure successful exe cution of NMHP in direction of reducing the Mental Health 
burden in the country.  The Committee further wishes to know the fund allocated to 
IEC for awareness generation activities in the school, workplaces and community.  
Besides that the Ministry may apprise the Committee about the measures undertaken to 
reduce the Mental Health burden in the country.  
 
3.23 Establishment of New Medical Colleges 
Recommendation 
3.23.1 The Committee during the discussion of the demand for grants also noted that the 
release of Central share funds is subject to submission of proposals from the States/UT 
Government and a total of 157 medical colleges have been sanctioned in different States . 
However, out of 157 medical colleges, 71 colleges have become functional till date. The 
Committee, accordingly, recommends the Ministry to expedite the completion of all the 

52 
 
medical colleges under different phases of the Scheme. The Committee notes that the States 
with their limited resources face a major challenge and need active cooperation of the Union 
Government for bridging the wide gap in medical education. Accordingly, the Committee 
strongly recommends the Ministry to invite proposals from States t hat grapple with poor 
health infrastructure and lack adequate number of Government medical Colleges.  
(Para 4.49) 
Action Taken 
3.23.2 Letters from various levels of the Ministry have been written inviting Proposals for 
requirement of from the different sta te Governments along with the Utilization Certificates 
for the already released funds. The Ministry is closely monitoring the progress of the projects 
approved under this scheme. Review meetings at the highest levels are being conducted 
regularly, where the states are requested to expedite the progress and submit the requirement 
for funds on the basis of utilization of previously sanctioned amount. As of now, 72 medical 
colleges have become functional. Another 36 new medical colleges have applied for Letter of 
Permission to NMC for starting the courses from academic session 2022-23. 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.23.3 The Committee notes that out of 157 sanctioned medical colleges 72 medical 
colleges have become functional.  The Committee, however, desires to know the status of 
the Letter of Permission submitted by 36 new medical colleges to NMC for commencing 
the courses from academic session 2022 -23.   The Committee further recommends the 
Ministry to incentivize State Government to invite proposal for upgradi ng the 
educational infrastructure in existing medical colleges so that quality education could be 
imparted in those medical colleges.  The Committee also hopes that the Ministry would 
take up the matter of operationasation of remaining sanctioned medical c olleges at the 
earliest.  
3.24 Medical Education Standards and Professional Competence 
Recommendation 
3.24.1 The Committee further believes that the States must also adopt an optimistic outlook 
and resolve all pending issues so that the transfer of funds under the Scheme is facilitated at 
the earliest. The Ministry must work with the States towards achieving the envisaged targets 
under the Scheme and monitor the timely operationalization of the sanctioned medical 
colleges in all the States. The Committee also emphasizes on the importance of a robust 
monitoring and inspection mechanism for the medical colleges. The  Committee strongly 
recommends the Ministry to ensure that no compromises are done on medical education 
standards and professional competence.  
(Para 4.50) 
Action Taken  
3.24.2 As stated in the above para, review meetings are being convened at the highest levels 
of this Ministry where the States are asked to resolve the pending issues and update the 
progress along with the details of state share of funds released and photographs of the 
construction work on the dashboard specifically created for this purpose . The website to 
access this dashboard is https://pmssy.nhp.gov.in/me/dashboard 

53 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.24.3 The Committee is of the view that in order to ensure medical education standard 
and professional competence in medical colleges, the provision for human resources and 
technical expertise be made at the time of sanctioning of operationalization of medical 
colleges, itself so that quality of education imparted is not compromised. The Committee 
hopes that po sting the status of construction projects alongwith release of fund  on the 
dashboard would strengthen the monitoring mechanism besides making the system 
more transparent, result oriented and avoidance of time and cost overruns.  
 
3.25 Pradhan Mantri Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission (PM-ABHIM) 
3.25.1 The Committee has been given to understand that Pradhan Mantri Ayushman Bharat 
Health Infrastructure Mission (PM-ABHIM) is a long term health infrastructure development 
scheme with a total outlay of Rs. 64,180 crores for the period from 2021 -22 to 2025-26. The 
Scheme aims at developing capacities of health systems and institutions across all healthcare 
levels, i.e.  primary, secondary and tertiary.  The Committee feels that there is an urgent need 
of improving the health infrastructure and consolidation of the healthcare services under 
PM-ABHIM. The Committee, in this regard, recommends the Ministry to ensure that different 
envisaged targets under the Scheme in the ensuing financial year are achieved. The 
Committee, accordingly, recommends the Ministry to ju diciously assess the needs of the 
program and strive towards optimal utilisation of the allotted funds in order to achieve the 
cherished objectives of the Scheme.  
(Para 4.53) 
Action Taken 
3.25.2 PM ABHIM is being implemented as Centrally Sponsored Scheme, with few Central 
Sector Components. The CSS components of the PM Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure 
Mission will be implemented by following the existing framework, institutions and 
mechanisms of the National Health Mission.  
3.25.3 For the CSS components, the PM Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission 
would leverage the existing National Health Mission (NHM) structure available at central and 
State levels for appraisal, approval, and implementation and monitoring. 
3.25.4 Presently under NHM, to ensure optimal utilization of funds the following steps have 
been taken by the Ministry: 
(i) Performance Audit by the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of 
India, 
(ii) Annual Statutory Audits by CAG empa nelled major Chartered Accountant 
Audit firms, 
(iii) Concurrent Audits by Chartered Accountant Audit firms,   
(iv) Public Financial Management System (PFMS) in NHM to track flow of 
funds,  
(v) Submission of quarterly Financial Monitoring Reports (FMRs) and 
Statement of Fund Position (SFP) by the States/UTs, 
(vi) Review and monitoring of scheme components. 

54 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.25.5 The Committee aspires to know the total actual expenditure incurred on various 
components of PM -ABHIM since the commencement of the scheme and the physical 
target achieved so far.  The Ministry may apprise the Committee for appropriation of 
total outlay of Rs. 64,180 crore on various components of scheme,  financial year wise 
and the physical target set under the scheme.  The Committee hopes that by successful 
execution of PM -ABHIM the health infrastructure will improve and that will lead t o 
consolidation of healthcare services.  
 
 
  

55 
 
CHAPTER–IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
4.1 CGHS Wellness Centre 
Recommendations 
4.1.1 The Committee observed the delay in handing of the CGHS Wellness Centres at 
VasantVihar, Alaknanda and Rohini Sector-16 to CGHS by CPWD. The Committee feels that 
it is sheer wastage of resources when the Buildings are ready but the Wellness Centres are 
still running from rented buildings and is avoidable. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
suggests the Department  for expediting the operationalization of the Wellness centers from 
the new building. The Committee recommends the Department to take initiatives for 
obtaining the completion certificate from Local Authorities and commence the functioning of 
Centres in the new buildings at the earliest. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to 
monitor and coordinate with CPWD and the concerned agencies for timely completion of the 
Construction of buildings for Wellness Centre(s) in Delhi, Chennai and Bhopal. 
(Para 3.18) 
Action Taken 
4.1.2 Additional Directors, CGHS are following up with CPWD for handover of buildings 
at VasantVihar, Alaknanda and Rohini Sector -16 as early as possible for shifting the 
Wellness Centres to own buildings. 
4.1.3 Additional Directors have been directed to follow up with CPWD on regular basis to 
monitor the progress of construction of other CGHS buildings. 
4.2 Skewed Distribution of Nurses and Nursing Institutions 
Recommendation  
4.2.1 The Committee observes that skewed distribution of nurses and nursing institutions 
across the country is a major challenge. To make in -depth study and find out a viable 
solution a Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. Bimla Kapoor has been constituted. The 
Committee accordingly recommends the Ministry to chalk out an action plan on the 
recommendations/observations of the Dr. Bimla Kapoor Committee once the findings of the 
Report are out in the public.  
(Para 3.79) 
Action Taken 
4.2.2 The Report of the Dr.B imla Kapoor Committee is still awaited for want for 
information form State Governments and State Nursing Councils. To facilitate the Expert 
Committee, letters dated 20.05.2021 and 19.07.2021 were sent to all States/UTs with request 
to send consolidated dat a in the prescribed proformas to the Expert Committee. Further to 
expedite the information D.O. letter dated 02.02.2022 at the level of Joint Secretary (Nursing) 
and 23.03.2022 at the level of Additional Secretary looking after Nursing has bee sent to all 
State/UTs to send update and verified data to the Expert Committee for finalization of the 
Report. 

56 
 
4.3 Standard of Nursing Education and Institutions 
Recommendation 
4.3.1 The Committee also recommends the Ministry to make consistent efforts to improve 
the standard of nursing education and institutions in the country. The Committee also notes 
that the Government is set to bring in National Nursing & Midwifery Commission Bill  which 
will establish a National Nursing & Midwifery Commission and replace the Indian Nursing 
Council. The Committee recommends the Ministry to expedite the passing of the Bill with the 
purpose of ensuring more accountability and transparency in the regulatory environment.  
(Para 3.80) 
Action Taken 
4.3.2 Draft NNMC bill has been finalized and sent to Cabinet Secretariat for seeking 
approval of the Cabinet. The bill after obtaining approval of the Cabinet, will be introduced 
in the Parliament. 
4.4 Street Food 
Recommendation 
4.4.1 The Committee observes that Street Food is a reflection of the local food and is very 
popular in the Indian culture. Street Food is also an ideal opportunity to promote food 
tourism. However, the quality of food served by Street vendors and the lack of hygiene 
practices has been a cause of concern. The Committee in its 110 th Report on Functioning of 
FSSAI had noted that regulation of the unorganised food sector has been a major challenge 
and recommended FSSAI to evolve a mechanism  to train such registered street vendors. The 
Committee notes that the Scheme of Indigenous Food Streets  is a way forward to regulating 
the highly unorganised food sector and uplifting the safety and hygiene standards of street 
vended foods. The Committee strongly believes that the Street Food Vendors need to be 
trained in quality control, hygiene practices, safe handling, waste management etc. The 
Committee accordingly recommends the Ministry to approve the Central Sector Scheme and 
provide adequate budget  for the Scheme so that a cleaner healthier and safe street food 
culture can be established in the country. 
(Para 3.93) 
Action Taken 
4.4.2 A proposal for the Central Sponsored Scheme covering the details and procedure of 
the Scheme was received from FSSAI.  With the approval of Hon'ble Minister of Health & 
Family Welfare, copy of the SFC and Concept paper was shared with Department of 
Expenditure (DoE) for its in principle approval vide O.M. dated 21.04.2022. However, DoE 
with the approval of Finance Secreta ry & Secretary (Expenditure) vide their OM dated 
04.05.2022 has conveyed that “The main mandate of the FSSAI is to establish science based 
standards and to regulate the articles of food based on these standards and not development of 
Indigenous Food Street s which is a function more closely associated with respective Local 
and State Governments and also considering the fiscal position of the Government, " In -
principle" approval for the scheme is not accorded.” 

57 
 
4.4.3 The Ministry has taken up the matter again  with DoE for reconsideration. In response 
to the same, DoE vide OM dated 8 th July, 2022 has sought certain clarification to be 
furnished before granting in-principle approval . 
 
4.5 Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences And Research (PGIMER), 
Chandigarh 
Recommendation 
4.5.1  The Committee has noted that there has been inordinate delay in the setting up of 
Satellite Centre of PGIMER Chandigarh at Sangrur (Punjab). The Committee recalls that the 
as per the information submitted by the Ministry in the A TN on the 126 th Report of the 
Committee, the aforementioned project was 98% complete and the expected date of 
completion was December, 2021. However, the Ministry, in its written submission, has stated 
that the project is now expected to be completed by June, 2022. The C ommittee wants to 
know the reason behind extending deadlines when the Project is supposedly almost complete. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to follow timeline in setting up 
of Satellite Centre at Una, Himachal Pradesh and Ferozepur, Punjab.  The reasons for 
delay / extension of time lines for the work at Satellite Centre, Sangrur, inter alia, related to 
delay in award of work by the executing agency, non – funalization of tenders, delay in 
statutory approvals, Covid – 19 and non – availability of labour due to strike. However, the 
work at Satellite Centre, Sangrur is substantially completed. Monitoring Committees under 
the chairmanship of Director, PGIMER, Chandigarh for the Satellite Centre at Una and 
under the chairmanship of De an (Academic) for the Satellite Centre at Ferozepur have 
already been constituted. Regular meetings are held for assessing the progress of work to 
complete the project in a time   bound manner. 
4.5.2 The Committee also notes that Modernization of Research Block ‘A’ & ‘B’, and 
Modernization of Nehru Hospital, PGIMER, Chandigarh  has been a long pending project 
which was entrusted to NBCC India Ltd. during March, 2013. However, with the delay in the 
Operation by the Executing agency the Project is delayed. The Committee, in this connection, 
suggests the Ministry to appoint a Project Management Consultant Agencies at the earliest 
for the Modernization of Research Block ‘A’ & ‘B’, and Modernization of Nehru Hospital, 
PGIMER, Chandigarh and the  Development of Sara ngpur Campus, PGIMER, Chandigarh 
and hold regular review meetings to monitor the progress under both the Projects.  
(Para 3.111 & 3.112) 
Action Taken 
4.5.3 The suggestion of the Committee to appoint Project Monitoring Consultant Agencies 
has been noted for compliance. 
 
4.6 Vacancy Position in PGMIR, Chandigarh  
Recommendation 
4.6.1 The Committee notes that under Group A Medical category, out of the sanctioned 
strength of 743, 139 posts are lying vacant. Under Group A Non -Medical category, out of the 

58 
 
sanctioned strength of 248, 112 posts are lying vacant. The Committee has noted that despite 
the institute following the vacancies twice a year in July & December every year, 36 posts of 
Professor are vacant against the sanctioned strength of 70 and 91 pos ts of Assistant 
Professor are vacant against the sanctioned strength of 652. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Department to accelerate the administrative process so that vacant post are 
filled up on regular basis within a specified period of time. 
(Para 3.114) 
Action Taken 
4.6.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.  
 
4.7 NIMHANS 
Recommendation 
4.7.1 The Committee is of the view that the Institute must work towards upgrading its 
infrastructure with the increasing patient  load in the country. The Committee has been given 
to understand that for comprehensive trauma care, a poly trauma centre and hospital with all 
medical services is planned at NIMHANS North campus. The Ministry in the ATN submitted 
on the 126th Report of the Committee, has stated that the DPR for developing a Poly Trauma 
Complex at the Northern campus is ready and a separate funding to the tune of Rs. 1500 
crore over a period of 5 years is required for the said project. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends t he Ministry to assess the DPR proposal of the Poly Trauma Complex and 
accordingly allocate grants for the development of the Centre. The Committee also 
recommends the Department to take effective measures to fill up the vacant posts with respect 
to Faculty, Group A and B Officers and Hospital/Office Assistant in the Institute.  
(Para 3.127) 
Action Taken  
4.7.2 The DPR for the North Campus for the Poly Trauma Centre and PG Institute was 
presented to the Standing Finance Committee in its meeting held in February, 2022 and upon 
the recommendations of the Standing Finance Committee, the proposal is being revised. 
 
4.8 NEIGHRIHMS, SHILLONG 
Recommendation 
4.8.1 On a close study of in position strength of the Institute, the Committee notes that there 
are vacan cies in Faculty, Senior & Junior Resident doctors in most Speciality and Super 
Speciality Departments.  The Committee recommends the Institute to continuously advertise 
the vacant posts at all the levels and make necessary changes in the recruitment rules to 
ensure that no post remains vacant for more than a year. 
(Para 3.134) 
 

59 
 
Action Taken 
4.8.2 The Institute is making all efforts to fill up the vacant Faculty and non-Faculty posts.  
 Detailed statement of recruitment of Faculty, Group „A‟ posts and Senior Resident 
Doctors and Junior Resident Doctors are enclosed at Annexure-I 
 Detailed statement of recruitment of Group B posts are enclosed at Annexure-II 
 Detailed statement of recruitment of Group C posts are enclosed at Annexure-III 
 
4.9 National Programme for Health Care For The Elderly 
Recommendation 
4.9.1 The Committee is of the view that National Program for Healthcare for the Elderly 
should draw the attention of Public so as to widen the loss of its beneficiaries. The Ministry 
should also make assessment for requirement of funds for successful implementation of the 
Programme.  
(Para 4.39) 
Action Taken 
4.9.2 Noted for compliance. Efforts will be made to widen the reach of IEC activities 
under the Programme. 
  

60 
 
RECOMMENDATONS/OBSERVATIONS- AT A GLANCE 
SHORTAGE OF OFFICERS AND STAFF IN THE MINISTRY OF MOHFW 
 The Committee expresses serious concern over vacant posts at various levels of 
the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. The Committee understands that such 
vacancies must have bearing on the administration efficiency and overall functioning of 
the Ministry.  Accordingly, it is incumbent upon the Ministry to take up the matter of 
filling up of vacant posts with respective cadre controlling authorities viz. Depar tment 
of Personnel and Training (DoP&T), Department of Economic Affairs   and Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation etc. and apprise the Committee the response 
of those cadre controlling authorities towards filling up such vacancies.  
(Para 3.1.4) 
 
MACRO- ANALYSIS OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATION (DEMAND NO. 46) 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION  
 The Committee takes into account the submission of the Ministry that against 
the projection of Rs. 93299.75 crores for BE 2022 -23 an allocation of Rs. 83000.00 crore 
has been earmarked in BE 2022 -23 by the Ministry of Finance thereby indicating a 
shortfall of Rs. 10299.75 crore that would certainly cause financial constraint in 
achieving the target of various schemes/project administered by the Department. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to approach the Ministry of 
Finance to grant adequate fund at the time of supplementary demands for Grants for 
financial year 2022-23 to ensure that no scheme/project suffer for want of fund.  
(Para 3.2.3) 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION OF MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY 
WELFARE 
 The Committee keeps into consideration the submission of the Secretary while 
giving his presentation to the Committee  on DFG (2022 -23) that as per the WHO's 
Global Health Expenditure Database 2018, the Government Health Expenditure as 
percentage of Current Health Expenditure is only 27% and the Out of Pocket 
Expenditure as percentage of the Current Health Expenditure is 62.7%. India ranks 
158 out of 196 countries in GHE as % of CHE and 176 out of 196 countries in OOPE as 
% of CHE. Expressing concern over the factual statement of the Secretary, Committee 
recommends the Ministry of Finance to earmark budgetary allocation, a t last 2.5% of 
GDP, as per target of National Health Policy to ensure affordable and accessible health 
services to all and also reduce the share of Out–of– Pocket Expenditure (OOPE).   
(Para 3.3.3) 
NATIONAL HEALTH ACCOUNTS DATA  
  The Committee recommends Ministry to approach the Ministry of Finance and the 
State Government to ensure allocation of Union Budgetary grant to the tune of 2.5% of 
GDP and 8% States budget, respectively on Health Sector as per target of NHP -2017 to 
enable Universal Health Coverag e.  The Committee takes into account 15 th Finance 

61 
 
Commission allocation to the tune of Rs. 70,051 crores as special health grants to the 
local bodies, allocation of fund to the tune of Rs. 64,180 crore and Rs. 23,123 crore 
under ECRP-II.  The Committee hop es that with all these investment the Ministry will 
be in position to build a robust health infrastructure in the country.  
(Para 3.4.6) 
VACANCY POSITION OF CGHS 
 The Committee observes that the Ministry more often than not, counts on 
plethora of steps tak en to fill up the vacant posts, still the position of vacant posts 
continues to remain static year after year and so is the case with CGHS having 287 
Medical Officer vacant posts, out of sanctioned strength of 1531, 32 vacant posts 
gazetted staff other tha n Medical Officer indicating out of sanctioned 36 post and 1537 
non-gazetted posts out of 4728 sanctioned posts.  The Committee, therefore, does not 
approve the plea of the Ministry taking series of action for filling up vacant posts but to 
the understandi ng of the Committees are of no avail.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to adhere to measure of Human Resource Forcating 
Management Model and streamline the recruitment process to fill up  the position of 
vacancy status against the sanctioned strength.  
(Para 3.5.4) 
EXPANDING AYUSH SERVICES   
 The Committee recommends the Department of Health &  Family Welfare to 
approach the Ministry of Ayush to expedite the recruitment process and posting of 
Ayush Medical Officer in CGHS so that the remaining 41 dispensaries/units, out of 53 
Ayush units sanctioned by Department of Expenditure, also get operatio nised without 
further delay.  The Committee reiterates its recommendation for ensuring Ayush 
Healthcare Services accessible to the CGHS beneficiaries as an alternative mode of 
treatment on regular and routine basis.  Yoga and Ayush must be integrated to CG HS 
healthcare services.  
(Para 3.6.4) 
INTRODUCING IN THE CGHS MODULES THE HEALTHY LIFESTYLE AND 
HEALTHY FOOD HABITS 
 Apart from imparting Ayush Health Education to CGHS beneficiaries through 
webinars by the Ministry of Ayush, the Committee reiterates its r ecommendation for 
the Ministry to introduce in the CGHS Module instructing all the doctors, compulsorily, 
prescribe the healthy lifestyle and healthy food habits for CGHS beneficiaries.  
(Para 3.7.3) 
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES AT THE SJHVMC 
 The Committee is constrained to expresses its unhappiness over continuing 
procedural and administrative delay in preparing proposals and concept note on 
redevelopment plan at SJHVMC.  The Committee is unable to understand the ground 
of rejection by the Min istry of H ealth and Family Welfare the proposals for 
redevelopment of the staff colony to be taken by M/s NBCC.  The Committee also finds 

62 
 
that Safdarjung Hospital is yet to submit the concept note on construction of Mother 
and Child Block (MCH) under the r edevelopment plan phase -II.  The Committee 
further observes that despite the approval of revised drawing for Dwarka Project the 
construction work has not commenced for want of NOC and clearance from local 
bodies wherei n the application is pending since 11 th March, 2022.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the MoHFW to pro -actively monitor the progress of 
construction projects in tandem with constructing agency and hospital management.  
(Para 3.8.6) 
VACANCY AT SJHVMMC 
 The Committee takes into accounts status of recruitment process for filling up of 
various posts in Safdarjung Hospital and Vardhman Mahavir Medical College that 
infact retard  the functioning of the various departments of Institute.  In order to 
express the access of healthcare facilities , it is pertinent to fill up the vacant posts at the 
earliest.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to chalk out specific 
timeframe to complete the recruitments process so that vacant posts are filled up 
without delay.  
(Para 3.9.3) 
RML, PGIMER 
 The Committee observes that the Ministry in its action taken notes, has not 
informed about the steps taken for filling up of 283 vacant posts out of the total of 4126 
sanctioned posts at ABVIMS and Dr. RML Hospital and furnished the Committee old 
status of vacancy as on 01.02.2022 that was already in the possession of the Committee.  
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to monitor the 
recruitment process in ABVIMS and Dr. RML Hospital and furnish updated ATNs in 
consonance with letter and spirit of recommendation of the Committee. 
(Para 3.10.3 ibid) 
 
LADY HARDING MEDICAL COLLEGE (LHMC) & SMT. S.K. HOSPITAL 
 The Committee recommends that the renovation work of labour  room in LHMC 
and Smt. S.K. Hospital must be completed within current financial year 2022 -23. 
Expressing displeasure over the delay on major renovation of Padiatric Centre in 
Kalawari Saran Centre of Medical Sciences for children, the Committee hopes that 
approval for the proposal would be sought at the earliest so that the renovation work is 
commenced and completed within a set timeframe.  
(Para 3.11.4) 
VACANCY POSITION IN FIRST SIX AIIMS 
 The Committee takes into account the various steps taken by Ministr y to fill up 
the vacant faculty and non -faculty staff of first six AIIMS, however, despite plethora of 
steps, the vacancy position in various AIIMS is a matter of concern to the Committee.  
The Committee understands that the recruitment exercise is planned  by the respective 
management of the Institute, nevertheless , the Ministry cannot shrug off its 

63 
 
responsibility from monitoring the progress of recruitment process.  The Committee 
does not approve the plea of the Ministry that posts are filled upto the rang e of service 
already operational in the Institute, rather the reverse proposition is correct /true i.e 
many departments in various AIIMS remain inoperational due to vacant faculty and 
non-faculty staff.  The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Ministry to ensure 
adequate healthcare work force in all AIIMS like precious Institute not only for 
delivering the assured health services but for imparting education and undertaking 
research projects to understand the biology of various diseases.  
(Para 3.12.7) 
NATIONAL ORGAN TRANSPLANT PROGRAM (NOTP) 
 The Committee appreciates that despite lower allocation of budget to NOTP and 
underutilization of IEC fund the organ donation rate has increased from 0.16 in 2012 to 
0.52 in 2019 due to enhanced impetus to organ do nation awareness  campaign.  
However, the Committee observes that to make NOTP more effective and bridge the 
gap between demand and supply of the organs for transplantation , various new 
components have been incorporated in the programme viz. Medical Education for doing 
transplantation, training to transplants teams, setting up of 4 skills centers in NOTTO, 
10 Regional/State Bio-material centre, setting up of SOTTO in each State, strengthening 
existing retrieval and transplant centre etc.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to assess whether the continuing quantum of budgetary grant would be 
sufficient to meet the expenditure involving on various activities enshrined in new 
components of NOTP. 
(Para 3.13.4) 
STATUS OF PROJECTS UNDERTAKEN BY AIIMS, DELHI 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry must give green sig nal to the 
Master Plan of AIIMS, New Delhi, so that the cherished goal of developing AIIMS into 
a world class Medical University by March, 2024 can be achieved without fail.  The 
Committee further recommends that redevelopmen t of AIIMS Residential colonies   
Project should get clearance from NDMC without any delay so that civil work get 
commenced at the earliest and the project is completed within set timeframe.  The 
Committee, however, appreciates the efforts of AIIMS management and the Ministry 
for offering the nation one of the best healthcare facilities to the people of the country 
and even to people of neighbouring countries of India.  
(Para 3.14.3) 
VACANCY POSITION IN AIIMS, NEW DELHI 
 
 The Committee is constrained to note that despite necessary instruc tions being 
given by the Ministry to AIIMS, New Delhi to fill up the vacant posts, a total of 404 
Group-A Medical posts are vacant.  Similarly, 26.81% of Group -B and 20.73% of 
Group-C posts are vacant that must have bearing on delivery of health care facilities.  
The Committee, therefore, urges upon AIIMS Management and the Ministry to take 
concrete steps for filling up of vacant posts without further delay. 
(Para 3.15.3) 

64 
 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL HEALTH AND NEURO SCIENCES 
(NIMHANS), BENGALURU 
 
 The Committee recommends NIMHANS to explore mechanism to measure the 
huge gap between the identification and acceptance of mental health illness i.e 
symptoms causing factors and its treatment.  Being an apex institute for mental health 
in the country, NIMHANS has the responsibility to reduce the burden of mental illness 
in the country. 
(Para 3.16.3) 
NORTH EASTERN INDIRA GANDHI REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF HEALTH AND 
MEDICAL SCIENCES (NEIGRIHMS), SHILLONG 
 The Committee is not happy to observe that the completion date for the 
construction projects in NEIGRIHM has further been extended from May/June, 2022 to 
September, 2022.  Moreover, t he Ministry has not furnished the updated status of 
construction projects of Regional Cancer Centre under graduate medical college and 
expansion of Nursing College.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to 
update the status of those projects and further instruct the NEIGRIHMs Management 
to keep vigil on Institute’s construction consultant M/s HSCC to ensure that 04 
remaining buildings out of 12 buildings are also completed within revised timeframe i.e 
September, 2022. 
(Para 3.17.3) 
AYUSHMAN BHARAT HEALTH-WELLNESS CENTRES (AB-HWCS) 
 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry in operationalizing 
a total of 1,20,112 AB-HWCs throughout the country against the target of 1,50, 000 AB-
HWCs by December, 2022. The Committee, however, recommends that the Ministry 
will make all out effort to achieve the target of opratinalizing 1,50,000 AB -HWCs in 
order to provide Comprehens ive Primary Healthcare Services across the country.  The 
Committee further recommends that all these centre must have adequate human 
resource with 4 technical expertise and latest tools and techniques, diagnostic kits, 
medicines to provide quality healthca re service and standard treatment.  The 
Committee also recommends the Ministry should popularize tele -consultation Sundere-
Sanjeevani in rural areas.   
(Para 3.18.5) 
MERGER OF POOLS UNDER NHM 
 The Committee understands the merger of flexible pools will end ow greater 
flexibility to States and UTs for appropriation of funds on various component of the 
scheme as per the instant requirement, however, the Committee desire to be apprised of 
the achievement of physical target as a result of release of funds agains t various 
components/activities approved in SPIP and subsequent improvement in health 
indicators. The Committee further desires to know as how the scheme incesstinize 
States/UTs with poor health track record on health indicators. The Committee notes 

65 
 
various mode of keeping track on the financial utilization of fund and progress 
thereupon, however, such monitoring mechanism must oversee the transformation of 
healthcare delivery system at ground level , that is the ultimate measurement of success 
of the scheme.  
(Para 3.19.5) 
PENDING UTILIZATION CERTIFICATE UNDER NHM 
 
The Committee desires that the pending 136 utilization certificate amounting to 
Rs. 629.69 crore with respect to the Central grants released upto  financial year 201 -20 
need to be liquidated at the earliest.  The Committee further hopes that the Ministry 
will apprise the current pending UCs involving the total amount and steps taken to 
liquidate the pending UCs.  
(Para 3.20.4) 
DRUG MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY 
 The Committee is of the considered view that vibrant, dynamic strengthened 
drug testing laboratories is concomitant efficient and effective drug regulatory 
mechanism to avert the prevalence of sub -standard drugs, therefore, the Ministry 
should instruct and guide the State Governments to strengthen State Drugs Regulatory 
System.  Moreover, the Committee wants to be informed of the response of State 
Governments of Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka to the 
Ministry’s perusal for submitting the project proposals matching the i ndicative amount 
of each State. U nderstandably the Ministry will continue to monitor optimal utilization 
of fund earmarked for the scheme. 
(Para 3.21.7) 
NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME 
 
 The Committee desires to know the status on opening the S ingle Nodel Agency 
Account (SNA) by the Institution for further release of funds under NMHP.  The 
Committee hopes that facilities available under DMHP at CHC and PHC level w ould 
ensure successful exe cution of NMHP in direction of reducing the Mental Health 
burden in the country.  The Committee further wishes to know the fund allocated to 
IEC for awareness generation activities in the school, workplaces and community.  
Besides that the Ministry may apprise the Committee about the measures undertaken to 
reduce the Mental Health burden in the country.  
(Para 3.22.5) 
 
ESTABLISHMENT OF NEW MEDICAL COLLEGES 
 The Committee notes that out of 157 sanctioned medical colleges 72 medical 
colleges have become functional.  The Committee, however, desires to know the status of 
the Letter of Permission submitted by 36 new medical colleges to NMC for commencing 
the courses from academic session 2022 -23.   The Committee further recommends the 
Ministry to incentivize State Government to invite proposal for upgrading the 
educational infrastructure in existing medical colleges so that quality education could be 
imparted in those medical colleges.  The Committee also hopes that the Ministry would 

66 
 
take up the matter of op erationasation of remaining sanctioned medical colleges at the 
earliest.  
(Para 3.23.3) 
MEDICAL EDUCATION STANDARDS AND PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE 
 The Committee is of the view that in order to ensure medical education standard 
and professional competence in medical colleges, the provision for human resources and 
technical expertise be made at the time of sanctioning of operationalization of medical 
colleges, itself so that quality of education imparted is not compromised. The Committee 
hopes that po sting the status of construction projects alongwith release of fund  on the 
dashboard would strengthen the monitoring mechanism besides making the system 
more transparent, result oriented and avoidance of time and cost overruns.  
(Para 3.24.3) 
 
PRADHAN MANTRI AYUSHM AN BHARAT HEALTH INFRASTRUCTURE 
MISSION (PM-ABHIM) 
 The Committee aspires to know the total actual expenditure incurred on various 
components of PM -ABHIM since the commencement of the scheme and the physical 
target achieved so far.  The Ministry may apprise the Committee for appropriation of 
total outlay of Rs. 64,180 crore on various components of scheme; financial year wise 
and the physical target set under the scheme.  The Committee hopes that the successful 
execution of PM -ABHIM the health infrast ructure and consolidation of healthcare 
services.  
(Para 3.25.5) 
  

67 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
  

68 
 
XVI 
 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
  
           The Committee met at 12.00 Noon on Thursday, the 8th September, 2022 
in Committee Room-A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav             -   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
3. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4. Shri A.D. Singh 
5. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
6. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
7. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
8. Shri Arjun Lal Meena 
9. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
10. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
11. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
12. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
13. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Mahesh Tiwari   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Director  
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar  Additional Director 
4. Shri Praveen Kumar   Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Harshita Shankar                  Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee 
and informed that the meeting has been convened to consider and adopt four  
 

69 
 
draft Reports namely  (i) *** (ii) Draft 140th Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 134 th 
Report on Demands for Grants 2022 -23 (Demand No. 46) of the Department of 
Health and Family Welfare; ***  
3.1 *** 
3.2 The Committee then considered the draft 140 th Report which included a 
total of 28 observations/recommendations and was adopted without any 
modification by the Committee.  
3.3 ***  
3.4 ***  
4. ***  
5. ***  
5.1 ***   
5.2 ***  
5.3 *** 
6. ***  
6.1 ***  
6.2     ***  
6.3 *** 
7. ***   
8. The Committee then adjourned at 12.52 p.m.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Pertains to other matter  

70 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
Status of vacancies of Faculty, Group A, Senior Resident & Junior Residents Doctors as on 10.05.2022  
 
Statement showing the Sanctioned posts, Filled up and Vacancy position Group - A Posts 
Sl. Posts Pay Level Pay Matrix Gro
up 
Sanctione
d Posts 
In 
positio
n 
Vacancy 
Position 
Remarks 
1 Director 17 225000 A 1 1 0  
2 Senior Prof.   A  4 0  
3 Professor 14A 159100 A 31 14 13 The vacant 
faculty posts 
have been 
advertised for 
filling up on 
regular basis 
vide 
Advertisement 
No. NEIGR -
E.II/19/2004/Pt. 
XXIV dated 
05.11.2021. 
Closing date of 
submission of 
application was 
02.05.2022. 
 
A Preliminary 
Screening 
Committee has 
been constituted 
to screen the  
applications 
which will be 
held on 
26.05.2022. 
Thereafter the 
applications will 
be placed before 
the Main 
Screening 
Committee. 
Interviews likely 
to be held in 
July/August 
2022.   
 
2 posts of 
Associate 
Professor 
department of 
General 
Medicine and 
O&G are 
pending with 
Hon‟ble High 
Court of 
Meghalaya. 
4 Additional 
Prof. 
    21  
5 Associate 
Professor 
13A1 131400 A 39 26 17 
6 Assistant 
Professor 
12 101500 A 71 15 
Regular 
11 
Adhoc 
30 
7 Epidemiologi
st-cum-
12 101500 A 1 0 1 The post was 
proposed to be 

71 
 
Lecturer 
 
re-designated to 
Assistant 
Professor 
(Epidemiology). 
But Ministry 
vide letter 
No.U.12012/41/
2013-NE dated 
19.12.2019 
informed that 
the post fall 
under deemed 
abolished 
category. 
 
Proposal 
submitted to 
Ministry vide 
Institute‟s l etter 
No. NEIGR -
E.II/7/2011/Pt-
III dated 
08.04.2022 to 
revive the post. 
8 Medical 
Officer 
Health-cum-
Lecturer  
 
12 101500 A 1 0 2 The posts were 
proposed to be 
re-designated to 
Assistant 
Professor cum 
Medical Officer 
of Health for 
Rural & Urban 
Health Centers. 
But Ministry 
vide letter 
No.U.12012/41/
2013-NE dated 
19.12.2019 
informed that 
the posts fall 
under deemed 
abolished 
category. 
 
Proposal 
submitted to 
Ministry vide 
Institute‟s letter 
No. NEIGR -
E.II/7/2011/Pt-
III dated 
08.04.2022 to 
revive the posts. 
9 Deputy 
Director 
(Admn) 
13 118500 A 1 1 0                  - 
10 Superintendin
g Engineer 
13 118500 A 1 0 1 DPC conducted 
on 26.11.2020. 
But Ministry 
vide letter F. 

72 
 
No.U.12012/01/
2021-NE dated 
28.09.2021 
informed that 
the post fall 
under deemed 
abolished 
category. 
 
Proposal 
submitted to 
Ministry vide 
Institute‟s letter 
No. NEIGR -
E.I/3/2014/Pt.I 
dated 
21.12.2021 to 
revive the post. 
11 Deputy 
Financial 
Advisor 
12 78800 A 1 1 0                  - 
12 Prof.cum 
Principal 
(Nursing 
College) 
12 78800 A 1 0 1 The vacant 
Nursing faculty 
posts have been 
advertised for 
filling up on 
regular basis 
vide 
Advertisement 
No. NEIGR -
E.II/10/2019 
published in 
Employment 
News on 26 th 
Feb-4th March 
2022. Closing 
date of 
submission of 
application was 
11.04.2022. 
 
A Prel iminary 
Screening 
Committee has 
been constituted 
to screen the 
applications 
which will be 
held on 
26.05.2022. 
Thereafter the 
applications will 
be placed before 
the Main 
Screening 
Committee. 
Interviews likely 
to be held in 
July/August 
2022. 
13 Prof.cum 
Vice Principal 
(Nursing 
College) 
12 78800 A 1 0 1 

73 
 
 
14 Registrar 12 78800 A 1 0 1 The post was 
advertised 
several times but 
there is no 
eligible/suitable 
candidate. 
The post has 
again been re -
advertised on 
deputation basis 
vide 
advertisement 
No. NEIGR-
E.II/51/2014/Pt 
published in 
Employment 
News on 2 nd-8th 
April 2022 and 
the last date for 
submission of 
application is 
16.05.2022. 
15 Chief Nursing 
Officer 
12 78800 A 1 1 0 - 
16 Executive 
Engineer 
(Civil) 
11 67700 A 1 1 0                  - 
17 Executive 
Engineer 
(Elect) 
11 67700 A 1 0 1 Ministry vide 
letter No. 
U.12012/01/202
1-NE dated 
07.09.2021 has 
instructed to 
advertise the 
post as per 
provision of 
approved RRs.  
 
The post has 
been re -
advertised by 
Composite 
Method 
(Deputation/Pro
motion) vide 
advertisement 
No. NEIGR -
E.II/51/2014/Pt 
published in 
Employment 
News on 2 nd-8th 
April 2022 and 
the last date for 
submission of 
application is 
16.05.2022. 

74 
 
18 Dy.Medical 
Superintende
nt 
11 67700 A 1 0 1 The post was 
advertised 
several times but 
there is  no 
eligible/suitable 
candidate. 
The post has 
again been re -
advertised vide 
advertisement 
No. NEIGR -
E.II/9/2012/Pt. 
II published in 
Employment 
News on 22 nd-
28th January 
2022 and the last 
date for 
submission of 
application was 
21.02.2022. 
 
A Screening 
Committee has 
been constituted 
to screen the 
applications 
received for the 
post of DMS. 
Interviews likely 
to be held in 
June/July 2022.  
19 Medical 
Officer (I/c 
Blood Bank) 
11 67700 A 1 1 0 - 
20 Reader/Assoc
. Prof. 
(Nursing 
College) 
11 67700 A 1 1 0 - 
21 Dental 
Officer 
11 67700 A 3 2 1 1(one) -UR post 
reserved for 
Hearing 
handicapped 
(H.H.) The post 
was advertised 
several times by 
the Institute, but 
due to dearth of 
eligible 
candidate 
belonging to 
PWD category 
the posts could 
not be filled up 
till date.  
The post has 
again been re -
advertised vide 
advertisement 
No. NEIGR -

75 
 
E.II/24/2017 
published in 
Employment 
News on 25 th 
March-1st April 
2022 and the last 
date for 
submission of 
application was 
25.04.2022. 
A total of 4 
applications 
have been 
received. A 
Screening 
Committee is 
constituted to 
screen the 
applications. 
Interviews likely 
to be held in 
June/July 2022 
22 System 
Analyst 
11 67700 A 1 0 1 The post was 
advertised 
several times but 
there is no 
eligible/suitable 
candidate. 
 
The post has 
again been re-
advertised by 
Composite 
Method 
(Deputation/Pro
motion) vide 
advertisement 
No. NEIGR -
E.II/51/2014/Pt 
published in 
Employment 
News on 2 nd-8th 
April 2022 and 
the last date for 
submission of 
application is 
16.05.2022. 
23 Chief 
Security 
Officer 
11 67700 A 1 1 0                  -  
24 Chief 
Dietician & 
Nutrition 
Officer 
11 67700 A 1 0 1 Ministry vide 
letter No. 
U.12012/01/202
1-NE dated 
07.09.2021 has 
instructed to 
advertise the 
post as per 
provision of 
approved RRs.  

76 
 
 
The post has 
been re -
advertised by 
Composite 
Method 
(Deputation/Pro
motion) vide 
advertisement 
No. NEIGR -
E.II/51/2014/Pt 
published in 
Employment 
News on 2 nd-8th 
April 2022 and 
the last date for 
submission of 
application is 
16.05.2022. 
25 Veterinary 
Officer 
11 67700 A 1 1 0                  - 
26 Chief 
Physiotherapi
st 
11 67700 A 1 1 0                  - 
27 Sr.Statistical 
Officer 
11 67700 A 1 0 1 The post was 
proposed to be 
re-designated to 
Senior Store & 
Procurement 
Officer. But 
Ministry vide 
letter 
No.U.12012/45/
2015-NE dated 
24.04.2019 has 
informed that 
the post fall 
under deemed 
abolished 
category. 
 
Proposal 
submitted to 
Ministry vide 
Institute‟s letter 
No. NEIGR -
E.II/7/2011/Pt-
III dated 
08.04.2022 to 
revive the post. 
28 Dy.Registrar 11 67700 A 1 1 0 The post has 
been advertised 
on deputation 
basis vide 
advertisement 
No. NEIGR -
E.II/51/2014/Pt 
published in 
Employment 
News on 2 nd-8th 

77 
 
April 2022 and 
the last date for 
submission of 
application is 
16.05.2022. 
29 Sr. Accounts 
Officer 
11 67700 A 1 1 0 Ministry vide 
letter No. 
U.12012/01/202
1-NE dated 
07.09.2021 has 
instructed to 
advertise the 
post as per 
provision of 
approved RRs.  
 
The post has 
been re -
advertised by 
Composite 
Method 
(Deputation/Pro
motion) vide 
advertisement 
No. NEIGR -
E.II/51/2014/Pt 
published i n 
Employment 
News on 2 nd-8th 
April 2022 and 
the last date for 
submission of 
application is 
16.05.2022. 
30 Nursing 
Superintende
nt 
11 67700 A 2 2 0 - 
31 Lecturer 
(Nursing 
College) 
10 56100 A 5 4 1 The vacant 
Nursing faculty  
posts have been 
advertised for 
filling up on 
regular basis 
vide 
Advertisement 
No. NEIGR -
E.II/10/2019 
published in 
Employment 
News on 26 th 
Feb-4th March 
2022. Closing 
date of 
submission of 
application was 
11.04.2022. 
 
A Preliminary 
Screening 
Committee has 

78 
 
been constituted 
to screen the 
applications 
which will be 
held on 
26.05.2022. 
Thereafter the 
applications will 
be placed before 
the Main 
Screening 
Committee. 
Interviews likely 
to be held in 
July/August 
2022. 
 
32 Jr.Medical 
Officer BB 
10 56100 A 1 - 1 The post was 
advertised 
several times but 
there is no 
eligible/suitable 
candidate. 
The post has 
again been re -
advertised vide 
advertisement 
No. NEIGR -
E.II/9/2012/Pt. 
II published in 
Employment 
News on 22 nd-
28th January 
2022 and the last 
date for 
submission of 
application was 
21.02.2022. 
 
A Screening 
Committee has 
been constituted 
to screen the 
applications 
received for the 
post. Interviews 
likely to be held 
in June/July 
2022. 
33 Casualty 
Medical 
Officer 
10 56100 A 4 4 0                  - 
34 Librarian 10 56100 A 1 1 0                  - 
35 Bio-Medical 
Engg 
10 56100 A 1 1 0                  - 
36 Store & 
Procurement 
Officer 
10 56100 A 1 1 0                  - 
37 Lady Medical 
Officer 
10 56100 A 2 2 0                  - 

79 
 
38 Assistant 
Registrar 
10 56100 A 2 2 0                  - 
39 Administrativ
e Officer 
10 56100 A 1 1 0                  - 
40 Statistician 
cum Lecturer 
10 56100 A 1 0 1 Recruitment 
Rules  yet to 
approved 
41 Programmer 10 56100 A 1 1 0  
42 Dy.Chief 
Dietician 
10 56100 A 1 1 0                  - 
43 Law Officer 10 56100 A 1 1 0                  - 
44 Statistical 
Officer 
10 56100 A 2 0 2 1(one) -UR post 
reserved for 
Visually 
handicapped 
(B.L.V.) The 
post was 
advertised 
several times by 
the Institute, but 
due to dearth of 
eligible 
candidate the 
posts could not 
be filled up till 
date. 
 
The post has 
again been re -
advertised vide 
advertisement 
No. NEIGR -
E.II/24/2017 
published in 
Employment 
News on 25 th 
March-1st April 
2022 and the last 
date for 
submission of 
application was 
25.04.2022. 
 
A total of 5 
applications 
have been 
received. None 
of the applicants 
are found 
eligible. The 
posts will be re -
advertised. 
45 Medical 
Physicist 
10 56100 A 3 2 1 1(one) OBC 
post reserved for 
Physically 
handicapped 
(OL). The post 
was advertised 
several times by 
the Institute, but 

80 
 
due to dearth of 
eligible 
candidate the 
posts could not 
be filled up till 
date.  
The post has 
again been re -
advertised vide 
advertisement 
No. NEIGR -
E.II/24/2017 
published in 
Employment 
News on 25 th 
March-1st April 
2022 and the last 
date for 
submission of 
application was 
25.04.2022. 
 
Only 1 (one) 
application was 
received. The 
applicant is 
found eligible. 
The post will be 
re-advertised. 
46 Accounts 
Officer 
10 56100 A 1 1 0 - 
47 DNS/ANS 10 56100 A 9 9 0 - 
48 Sr.Occupation
al Therapist 
10 56100 A 1 1 0 - 
 TOTAL     207 139 79  
 SRD   
(3 years 
Tenure post) 
11 
 
 
 
 
67700 
 
 
 
 
C 
 
 
 
105 61 44 
 
The Institute is 
conducting 
Walk-in 
Interview every 
two month to fill 
up remaining 
vacant posts. 
Walk-in-
interview was 
held on 27 th& 
28th April 2022. 
The next 
interview is 
likely to be held 
in June 2022. 
 JRD   
(1 year 
Tenure post)  
10 56100 
 
 
 
 
 
C 
 
 
 
 
 
84 73 11 
 
 
 
 
 
The walk -in-
interview is 
conducted every 
two month to fill 
up remaining 
vacant posts. 
Next Walk -in-
interview will be 
held on 17 th& 
18th May 2022.  

81 
 
A
4 
Statement  showing the Sanctioned posts, filled up & vacancy position of Group 'B' posts   (as on 
10.05.2022) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of post Grade 
Pay 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
In 
position 
Vacancy Remarks 
Regular 
1 Senior Nursing Officer              
(Ward Sister) 
` 4800 131 123 8 Method of recruitment by 
Promotion: 1 (One) vacancy 
arises due to demise of an 
incumbent Smt. SangitaBala  
Das on 15.09.2018 & another 
2 (two) vacancy arises due to 
promotion of the incumbents 
to DNS recently on 
15.09.2021 & 31st January, 
2022. DPC to be held. 
2 Tutor/Clinical Instructor ` 4800 14 14 0 - 
3 Public Health Nursing 
Officer (PHN) 
` 4800 2 2 0 - 
4 CSSD Officer ` 4600 1 0 1 Method of recruitment by 
Promotion.DPC held on 
21.04.2022 and the proposal 
has been sent to ministry for 
approval. 
5 Assistant Accounts 
Officer 
` 4600 3 1 2 The proposal for amendment 
of qualification  in RR  has 
been sent to the Ministry and 
approval has been received 
recently.As per approved 
existing RR the post is to be 
filled up 2/3rd by Promotion 
& 1/3rd by Direct 
Recruitment.The 1 vacant 
post under Direct Recruitment 
will be advertised shortly. The 
other 1 post is to be filled up 
by promotion. 
6 Pharmaceutical 
Chemist/Suptd 
Pharmacist 
` 4600 3 2 1 Method of recruitment by 
Promotion.DPC held on 
21.04.2022 and the proposal 
has been sent to ministry for 
approval. 
7 Clinical Psychologist ` 4600 1 1 0 - 
8 Nursing Officer ` 4600 580 275 305 Method of recruitment by 
Direct Recruitment  :-                                      
- The 2 (two)  posts reserved 
for PWD (i.e. 1 - PH &1-HH) 
has been re -advertised vide 
advt. No. NEIGR - 
E.III/8/2015/Pt.Idtd. 
28.03.2017 and  Written test 
for eligible candidates against 
PH & HH category has been 
conducted on 19.12.2020 but 
all the eligible candidates did 
not appear for the written test. 
The post is under process for 
Re-Advertisement. 
- The 230 newly sanctioned 
Annexure II 

82 
 
posts + 1 (one) post arising 
due to resignation of staff on 
08.12.2018 has been 
advertised vide advt. No. 
NEIGR-E.III/10/2016/Pt. dtd. 
26.02.2019 and screening of 
applications is completed and 
written examination is to be 
fixed shortly.          
-64 posts are vacant due t o 
promotion of incumbents to 
SNO recently as per institute's 
order dated 31.01.2022. 
-2 (Two) post  are vacant due 
to resignation of one staff 
recently on 21.08.2019 and 
2021 
respectively.Advertisement 
for these post will be issued 
along with 64 posts of 
Nursing Officers that have 
been  promoted to SNO 
recently. 
-6 vacant posts  are due to 
promotion of staffs to senior 
Nursing Officer as per order 
dated 
28.10.2019.Advertisement for 
these post will be issued along 
with 64 posts of Nursing 
Officers that  have been  
promoted to SNO recently.                                                                                                
9 Sr. Perfusionist ` 4600 1 1 0   
10 Assistant Engineer (E) ` 4600 1 1 0 - 
11 Assistant Administrative 
Officer 
` 4600 4 1 3 Method of recruitment by 
Promotion. The incumbents 
being recently promoted to 
AO & AR. DPC held on 
21.04.2022 and the proposal 
has been sent to ministry for 
approval. 
12 Dietician ` 4600 1 0 1 Method of recruitment by 
Promotion.  
13 Assistant Engineer 
(Civil) 
` 4600 1 1 0 - 
14 Private Secretary ` 4600 2 2 0 - 
15 Security Officer ` 4600 1 1 0 - 
16 Chief Technician ` 4600 1 0 1 Method of recruitment by 
Promotion 
17 Technical Supervisor ` 4600 1 1 0 - 
18 Sr. Tech. Officer 
(Opthalmic) 
` 4600 1 1 0 - 
19 Radiology 
Supervisor/CT Scan/     
GE 
Radiology/Radiographer 
` 4600 3 0 3 Method of recruitment by 
Promotion. DPC held on 
21.04.2022 and the proposal 
has been sent to ministry for 
approval. 
20 Hindi Officer ` 4600 1 0 1 Method of recruitment by 
Promotion. DPC held on 
21.04.2022 and the proposal 

83 
 
has been sent to ministry for 
approval. 
21 Legal Assistant ` 4600 1 1 0 - 
22 Radiation Supervisor ` 4600 2 0 2 The post could not be filled 
up since there is no approved 
RR. Ministry‟s approval for 
the RR sent is still awaited. 
23 Estate Manager ` 4600 1 0 1 No approval from Ministry 
was received for appointment 
of the selected candidate since 
the post is deemed abolished. 
The proposal for revival of 
the post has already been sent 
to Ministry and awaiting 
approval. 
24 Curator of Museum ` 4600 2 2 0 - 
25 Assistant Librarian ` 4600 2 2 0 - 
26 Sanitation Officer ` 4600 1 1 0 - 
27 Office 
Superintendent/OA 
` 4200 13 6 7  Proposal for amendment of 
RR by 100% promotion  sent 
to the Ministry since 2013 for 
approval has just been 
recently approved on 
09.09.2021. DPC held on 
21.04.2022 and the proposal 
has been sent to ministry for 
approval. 
28 Jr. Engineer (Elec) ` 4200 1 0 1 Since the incumbent Junior 
Engineer (Electrica l) was 
promoted to Assistant 
Engineer (Electrical) , the 
vacant post has been 
advertised vide advt no 
NEIGR.E-III/15/2014/Pt.IV 
dated 15th November,2015 
with  last date on 14.02.2022. 
Screening of applications is 
still in process. 
29 Sr. Lab Technician ` 4200 11 9 2 Method of recruitment by 
Promotion. DPC held on 
21.04.2022 and the proposal 
has been sent to ministry for 
approval. 
30 Medical Record Officer ` 4200 1 0 1 Method of recruitment by 
Promotion  
DPC held on 21.04.2022 and 
the proposal has been sent to 
ministry for approval. 
31 Statistical Assistant ` 4200 4 4 0 - 
32 Medical Social Worker ` 4200 5 3 2 Method of recruitment by 
Direct Recruitment       
1 (one) post reserved for 
PWD against VH category 
has been re -advertised vide 
advt. dated 26.02.2019 with 
last date 19.08.2019. No 
eligible candidates were 
found suitable and the post is 
under the process of re -
advertisement. Another 1 

84 
 
(one) post has been sent to 
Ministry for upgradation to 
MSSO Grade -I and awaiting 
approval from Ministry. 
33 Prosthetic & Orthotic 
Technician 
` 4200 1 1 0 - 
34 Occupational Therapist ` 4200 1 0 1 The vacancy arises due to 
promotion of the incumbent 
to Senior Occupational 
Therapist and the vacant post 
has been advertised vide advt 
no NEIGR.E -
III/15/2014/Pt.IV dated 15th 
November, 2015 with  last 
date on 14.02.2022. Screening 
of applications is still  in 
process. 
35 Physiotherapist ` 4200 6 5 1 The vacancy arises due to 
promotion of the incumbent 
to Chief Physiotherapist and 
the vacant post has been 
advertised vide advt no 
NEIGR.E-III/15/2014/Pt.IV 
dated 15th November,2015  
with  last date on 14.02.2022. 
Screening of applications is 
still in process. 
36 Sanitary Superintendent ` 4200 1 0 1 Method of recruitment by 
Promotion.  
37 Optometrists/ 
Refractionist 
(Opthalmic) 
` 4200 2 2 0 - 
38 Assistant Dietician ` 4200 2 2 0 - 
39 Transport Incharge ` 4200 1 0 1 Method of recruitment by 
Promotion. DPC held on 
21.04.2022 and the proposal 
has been sent to ministry for 
approval. 
40 Sr. X-Ray Tech ` 4200 6 6 0 - 
41 CSSD Supervisor ` 4200 2 1 1 The vacant post could not be 
filled up since proposal for 
amendment of RR by 100% 
promotion sent to the 
Ministry and approval is still 
awaited. 
42 Jr. Accounts 
Officer/Accountant 
` 4200 4 0 4 Ministry has 
recentlyconsidered the posts 
as Deemed Abolished. The 
proposal for revival of the 
deemed abolished posts to be 
submitted to Ministry by the 
Institute. 
43 Sr. Library & 
Information Assistant 
` 4200 2 2 0 - 
44 Chief Fire Guard ` 4200 1 0 1 Method of recruitment by 
Promotion.  
45 Store Superintendent ` 4200 2 0 2 Proposal has been sent to 
Ministry for surrendering 
2(two) posts of Store 
Superintendent and creation 

85 
 
of 2 posts of  Assistant Store 
Officer. Approval is still 
awaited from Ministry.  
46 Store Keeper ` 4200 31 30 1 Due to the sudden demise of 
the incumbent viz. 
Mr.BankerlangMalngiang, the 
vacant post has been 
advertised vide advt no 
NEIGR.E-III/15/2014/Pt.IV 
dated 15th November,2015 
with  last date on 14.02.2022. 
Screening of applications is 
still in process. 
47 Sr. Stenographer/ 
Stenographer 
` 4200 27 27 0 - 
48 Sr. Hindi Translator ` 4200 1 1 0 - 
49 PT Instructor ` 4200 1 1 0 - 
50 Warden/Lady Warden ` 4200 6 3 3 Method of recruitment is 
2/3rd by Promotion & 1/3rd 
by Direct Recruitment                                                                                                
-In view of non availability of 
eligible candidates in the 
earlier advertisements, 1 
(one)-UR  post to be filled up 
on DR been re -advertised 
vide advt. No. NEIGR -
E.III/10/2016/Pt. dtd. 
26.02.2019 with last date on 
19.08.2019 and written test to 
be conducted shortly.                                                                                                                
-1 (one) vacant post of PWD 
against PH category to be 
filled up on DR has been re -
advertised vide advt. dated 
26.02.2019 with last date 
19.08.2019. Written 
examination has been 
conducted on 
12.03.2021.However, as the 
candidate did not pass the 
examination, the post is under 
process for re -advertisement. 
-Another 1 (one) vacancy 
arising due to death of the 
incumbent is to be filled up 
by Promotion. 
51 DPA Gr.I ` 4200 2 1 1 Method  of Recruitment is 
by Promotion-  DPC held on 
21.04.2022 and the proposal 
has been sent to ministry for 
approval. 
52 Health Inspector ` 4200 4 1 3 Method of recruitment by 
Direct Recruitment      
In view of non availability of 
eligible candidates in the 
earlier advertisements, the 3 
(three) vacant posts has been 
advertised vide advt no 
NEIGR.E-III/15/2014/Pt. IV 
dated 1 5th November, 2015 

86 
 
with  last date on 14.02.2022. 
Screening of applications is 
still in process. 
53 Health Educator ` 4200 3 0 3 Method of recruitment by 
Direct Recruitment      
In view of non availability of 
eligible candidates in the 
earlier advertisements,  
- 1 (one) vacant PWD post 
reserved against VH category 
has been re -advertised vide 
advt. dated 26.02.2019 with 
last date 19.08.2019. No 
eligible candidate was found 
suitable and the post is under 
process for re -advertisement.   
- 2 (two) vacant posts against 
UR category to be filled up on 
DR has been re -advertised 
vide advt. No. NEIGR -
E.III/10/2016/Pt. dtd. 
26.02.2019 with last date on 
19.08.2019.The post s will be 
re-advertised due to less 
response from in -eligible 
candidates and under  process 
for re-advertisement. 
54 Jr. Perfusionist ` 4200 2 0 2 Method of recruitment by 
Direct Recruitment   
In view of non availability of 
eligible candidates in the 
earlier advertisements, the 
vacant posts has been 
advertised vide advt no 
NEIGR.E-III/15/2014/Pt. IV 
dated 15th November,2015 
with  last date on 14.02.2022. 
Screening of applications is 
still in process. 
55 Radiographer ` 4200 12 7 5 Method of recruitment by 
Direct Recruitment      
Written test to fill up 5 (4- UR 
& 1 - OBC) vacant posts was 
conducted on 19.12.2020 and 
for appointment of the 
selected candidates on Merit 
list were sent to Ministry for  
approval. Ministry has 
instructed the institute to 
place the recommendation in 
the Selection Committee and 
forward the proposal 
thereafter. The Selection 
committee was held on 
21.04.2022 and the proposal 
was sent to Ministry on 
28.04.2022. Ministry's 
approval is still awaited. 
  Total 917 545 372   
 

87 
 
ANNEXURE –III 
 
VACANCIES STATUS OF GROUP- ‘C ‘ POSTS - NEIGRIHMS, SHILLONG AS ON 10.05.2022 
 
Sl. 
No. Posts Sanction Group Sanctioned 
Posts In Position Vacancy 
Position Action Taken Report 
1 Pharmacist C 7 6 1 
Post already advertised and 
screening of applications is 
under Process 
2 ECG Technician C 3 3 0 - 
3 Technical Assistant C 52 22 30 
24 Posts written Exam to be 
conducted, another 5 posts 
screening of applications is in 
process.1 post reserved for 
PWDs (HH) is under process 
for advertisement,  
4 Sanitary Inspector C 6 0 6 Post is yet to be appointed. 
Sent to Ministry for approval 
5 Jr. Lab. Technician C 30 28 2 Written exam to be conducted 
6 Artist C 1 1 0 - 
7 Gas Officer C 1 1 0 - 
8 House Keeper C 8 7 1 
Post reserved for PWD (PH) 
is under process for 
advertisement 
9 Transport Supervisor C 1 1 0 - 
10 Ophthalmic Technician C 4 4 0 - 
11 Hoover Operator C 10 10 0 - 
12 Jr. Hindi Translator C 1 1 0 - 
13 Audio Visual Tech 
(Projectionist) C 2 2 0 - 
14 Photographer C 2 2 0 - 
15 Speech Therapist C 1 1 0 - 
16 Audio Metric 
Technician C 3 2 1 
Screening already completed 
and written exam to be 
conducted 
17 Radiotherapy 
Technician C 6 4 2 
Post already advertised and 
screening of applications is 
under Process 
18 Reprographic 
Technician C 2 0 2 Posts are under process for 
advertisement. 
19 Technical Assistant 
(Cath Lab) C 2 2 0 - 
20 Animal Supervisor C 1 1 0 - 
21 Modeller C 1 0 1 
Draft RRs has been sent to 
the Ministry and approval is 
still awaited 
Sl. 
No. Posts Sanction Group Sanctioned 
Posts In Position Vacancy 
Position Action Taken Report 
22 Registration Clerks C 13 12 1 Post to be filled up by 
promotion 

88 
 
23 Receptionist C 6 6 0 - 
24 Generator Mechanic C 1 1 0 - 
25 Jr. Stenographer C 4 4 0 - 
26 U.D.C C 19 18 1 Post to be filled up by  
promotion 
27 DPA Gr.II C 4 4 0 - 
28 Cashier C 3 3 0 - 
29 CSSD Assistant Gr-I C 3 3 0 - 
30 Plaster Cutting 
Technician C 1 1 0 - 
31 BCG Technician C 6 6 0 - 
32 Fire Guard C 6 6 0 - 
33 Dental Hygienist C 3 2 1 Written exam to be conducted 
34 Driver Gr-II C 2 2 0 - 
35 Dental Mechanic C 3 0 3 Written exam to be conducted 
36 Boiler Room Operator C 1 1 0 - 
37 
Medical Social Worker 
(Blood Donor 
Organizer) 
C 1 0 1 
Draft RRs has been sent to 
the Ministry and approval is 
still awaited 
38 Lower Division Clerk C 22 17 5 
2 Posts to be filled up by 
promotion& 2 Posts already 
advertised and Screening of 
application is under process 
and another 1 post yet to be 
advertised due to technical 
resignation.  
39 Record Clerk C 20 20 0 - 
40 Electrician C 1 1 0 - 
41 Motor Mechanic C 2 2 0 - 
42 EPABX Operator C 4 4 0 - 
43 Van Driver/Driver 
Gr.III* C 9 7 2* Posts are under process for 
advertisement. 
Sl. 
No. Posts Sanction Group Sanctioned 
Posts In Position Vacancy 
Position Action Taken Report 
44 Security Guard C 8 8 0 - 
45 Plumber C 1 1 0 - 
46 Carpenter C 1 1 0 - 
47 Dark Room Assistant C 11 10 1 
Post already advertised and 
screening of applications is 
under Process 
48 Diet Clerk C 1 0 1 
Screening already completed 
and written exam to be 
conducted 
49 Gas Keeper C 2 2 0 - 

89 
 
50 Library Assistant C 1 0 1 Post is under process for 
advertisement 
51 Gas Mechanic C 1 1 0 - 
52 Assistant Laundry 
Supervisor C 1 1 0 - 
53 Laundry Mechanic C 1 0 1 
Post already advertised and 
screening of applications is 
under Process 
54 Hindi Typist C 1 0 1 Written exam to be conducted 
55 AC Mechanic C 1 1 0 - 
56 Wireman C 4 4 0 - 
57 Pump Mechanic C 1 1 0 - 
58 OT Assistant Gr-II C 20 20 0 - 
59 CSSD Asst. Gr-II C 3 3 0 - 
60 Animal Keepers C 2 2 0 - 
Total  338 273 65  
61 Multi Tasking Staff C 171 57+*114 - *114 Posts has been adjusted 
through Outsource 
Grand Total  509 444 65  
 
 
 
 
**** 