24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT
ON
THE JAWAHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POST-GRADUATE MEDICAL   EDUCATION AND
RESEARCH, PUDUCHERRY BILL-2007
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 7TH SEPTEMBER,2007)
   (LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 7th  SEPTEMBER,2007)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
     September, 2007/ Bhadrapada, 1929 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     
2.         PREFACE                  
3.         REPORT        
4.         OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE          
5.         MINUTES
6.         ANNEXURES I -64
7.         ANNEXURES II
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2006-2007)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Amar Singh                       ¾        Chairman
      2.   Prof. P. J. Kurian
3. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
4. Shrimati Maya Singh
5. Shri Digvijay Singh
6. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy
7.   Shri Lalhming Liana
      8.   Smt. Viplov Thakur
    #9.  Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur           
@10.            Shri A.K. Antony
       
LOK SABHA
     11.  Smt. Bhavana P. Gawli
     12.  Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
     13.  Smt. Maneka Gandhi
     14.  Shri B. Vinod Kumar
     15.  Shri Rajendra Kumar
     16.  Smt. Susheela Bangaru Laxman
     17.  Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
     18.  Shri Rasheed Masood
     19.  Dr. Chinta Mohan
     20.  Shri Nihal Chand
     21.  Shri D.B. Patil
     22.  Smt. K. Rani
     23.  Shri Pannian Ravindran
     24.  Dr. R. Senthil
     25.  Dr. Mohd. Shahabuddin
     26.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
   *27.  Shri Ajit Kumar Singh

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
     28.  Shri Uday Singh
     29.  Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
     30.  Shri Vinod Khanna
     31.  Shri R.L. Jalappa
SECRETARIAT
                                     Shri N.C. Joshi,         Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg,  Joint Secretary
Shri H.C. Sethi,         Deputy Secretary
Shri  Pradeep Chaturvedi,  Under Secretary
         Shri Dinesh Singh,   Committee Officer
__________________________________________________________
#          Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 15
th December, 2006 on demise
@        Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 24th October, 2006
*          Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 1st August, 2007 on demise
 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE (2007-08)
 
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Amar Singh                                   --                     Chairman
2. Prof. P.J. Kurien
3. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
4. Shrimati Maya Singh
5. Shri Digvijay Singh
6. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy
7. Shri Lalhming Liana
8. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
    #9.   Shrimati Kanimozhi
10.  Vacant
LOK SABHA
     11.  Smt. Bhavana P. Gawli
     12.  Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
     13.  Smt. Maneka Gandhi
     14.  Shri B. Vinod Kumar
     15.  Shri Rajendra Kumar
     16.  Smt. Susheela Bangaru Laxman
     17.  Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
     18.  Shri Rasheed Masood
     19.  Dr. Chinta Mohan
     20.  Shri Nihal Chand
     21.  Shri D.B. Patil
     22.  Smt. K. Rani
     23.  Shri Pannian Ravindran
     24.  Dr. R. Senthil
     25.  Dr. Mohd. Shahabuddin
     26.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
     27.  Shri Uday Singh
     28.  Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
29.
    Shri Vinod Khanna
30.    Shri R.L.Jalappa
    *31  Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia
 
SECRETARIAT
                                     Shri N.C. Joshi,         Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg,  Joint Secretary
Shri R.B.Gupta,         Joint Director
Shri  T.N. Pandey,     Deputy Director
         Shri Dinesh Singh,   Committee Officer
#          Nominated w.e.f. 16
th August, 2007
*          Nominated w.e.f. 30th August, 2007
 

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
PREFACE
 
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare, having been
authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Twenty-fourth Report of the Committee on the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-
Graduate Medical   Education and Research, Puducherry Bill-2007. *
2.         In pursuance of Rule 270 relating to the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha,
referred** the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical    Education and Research, Puducherry Bill-2007 (ANNEXURE-I) as
introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 7
th March 2007 and pending therein, to the Committee on the 14th March, 2007, for examination
and report.
3.         The Committee considered the Bill in its meetings held on the 8th June, 18th, 20th and 27th July, 2007.
4.         At its meetings held on the 8 th June and 27th July, 2007, the Committee heard the Secretary of the Department of Health and
Family Welfare. The Committee also heard Dr. K.B. Logani Ex- Director, JIPMER and Dr. K.K. Talwar, Director, PGIMER,
Chandigarh on 20 th July 2007, and Dr. P. Venugopal, Director, AIIMS New Delhi, on the 27 th July 2007.   The Committee in its
meeting held on 8 th June 2007 also decided to undertake study visit and to have detailed interactions with all concerned. The
Committee, accordingly, visited JIPMER, Puducherry from 1st to 4th July 2007.
____________________________________________________________________
*          Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II Section-2, dated 7th March 2007.
**        Rajya Sabha Parliamentary bulletin Part II, No 43943, dated 14th March, 2007
 
(iii)
5.         The Committee has relied on the following in finalizing the Report:
(i)                  Background Note and Clause-by-Clause Note on the Bill received from the Department of Health and Family
Welfare;
(ii)                Presentation and clarification by the Secretary of the Department;
(iii)               Memoranda received on the Bill from various bodies/ associations/ organizations/ experts;
(iv)              Oral evidence on the Bill;
(v)                Replies to the Questions/queries raised by Members in the meetings on the Bill received from the Department; and
(vi)              Report of the study-visit (ANNEXURE-II)
 
6.         The Committee at its meeting held on 30th August, 2007, considered the draft Report and adopted the same.
7.         On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the contributions made by those who appeared before
the Committee and submitted their valuable suggestions on the subject matter of the Bill.
8.         For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold
letters in the body of the Report.
 
NEW DELHI;
30th August,2007
Bhadrapada 8, 1929 (Saka)
AMAR SINGH
Chairman,        
            Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare
 
REPORT
 
 

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
The Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry Bill, 2007 was introduced in the Rajya Sabha
on the 7th March, 2007 and referred to the Committee for examination and report on the 14 th March, 2007. The Statement of Objects
and Reasons appended to the Bill reproduced below gives the background justifying the need for bringing a new Bill-
      “The Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research, Pondicherry was established in 1964
primarily with the objectives to develop patterns of teaching in undergraduate and postgraduate medical education so as to
establish and demonstrate high standards of education. The Institute has been providing quality education and excellent patient
care delivery services. Over the years, however; it could not grow due to constraints in the process of manpower selection,
lack of academic autonomy, lack of flexibility in administrative and financial powers, commensurate with other institutions
like, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi and Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research,
Chandigarh.
 It is proposed to make the Institute a statutory body corporate and declare as an institution of national importance
under entry 64 of List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution so that it may develop as a high level institution of
medical education and research on the pattern of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi and the Post-Graduate
Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh.
      This Bill will empower the Institute with academic autonomy to develop its own curriculum, set new trends in medical
education and research and award its own degrees and also enable it to have appropriate delegated administrative and financial
powers. The conferring of statutory status on this Institute will enable it to grow into a model centre of excellence.”
 
2.         The Committee initiated the process of consideration of the Bill by having the benefit of the views of the Secretary of Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare in its meeting held on the 8
th June, 2007. The Secretary gave the background that necessitated the
formulation of this legislation. At the time of setting up of the Institute, it was envisaged that JIPMER, Puducherry will develop as an
Institute at par with premier institutions in North India, namely, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi and Post-
Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh.  However, it was noticed that while AIIMS and
PGIMER have shown substantial growth both in medical education as well as research, the progress of JIPMER, Puducherry has not
been commensurate with the aims and objectives for which it was set up. 
3.         Elaborating upon the main reasons for the restricted growth of JIPMER, the Secretary stated that being a subordinate office of
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, directly under the administrative control of DGHS, the Institute is governed by
rules/instructions as applicable to any other subordinate office of the Ministry.  Lack of financial/administrative autonomy coupled
with distance from Delhi resulted in undue delay in clearance of even routine matters.   Not only this, JIPMER is at present subject to
the regulation of statutory bodies like Medical Council of India, Dental Council of India, and Nursing Council etc. As a result it can
neither set its own curriculum, nor can it increase the number of seats or post-graduate programmes.   In contrast, AIIMS and
PGIMER set up by statutes are free from the control of these regulatory bodies.  They are free to prescribe their own curriculum and
decide which discipline they want to start and how many seats should be there. 
4.         The Secretary reiterated that through the Bill an effort has been made to overcome the present plethora of problems and
convert JIPMER into a statutory body on the pattern of AIIMS/PGIMER so that an environment for developing high standard of
medical education and also to undertake research of highest order may evolve. It will also grant the Institute a ‘University’ status
which will provide the necessary flexibility to frame its own regulations and pursue the task of setting standards of medical education
independent of Medical Council of India and also of Puducherry University. Besides that, JIPMER will also have its own policy for
manpower selection and retention.
5.         Subsequently, a number of representations from different associations/ unions of JIPMER were received by the Committee.  
Quite a few political parties also approached the Committee.   The Committee observed that all these representations indicated grave
apprehensions not only about different provisions of the Bill but also about the very basis for bringing out such a legislation. The
Committee also felt that a number of provisions proposed in the Bill have grave ramifications as far as the autonomy of the JIPMER
is concerned. Against this backdrop and keeping in view the far-reaching implications of the Bill on the future of JIPMER, the
Committee decided to have detailed interactions with all concerned so as to ensure better understanding of the subject.
 6.        The Committee, accordingly, visited JIPMER, Puducherry from 1
st to 4th July 2007 and held extensive discussions with a
large number of witnesses representing the management and faculty members of the Institute, various associations/unions of the
Institute and Hospital, representatives of various political parties, the State Government of Puducherry and the state branch of Indian
Medical Association.

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
7.         Keeping in view the fact that the present Bill was broadly based on Acts governing AIIMS and PGIMER, the Committee also
had useful discussions with the Director, PGI Chandigarh, and the Director, AIIMS, besides some ex-Directors of JIPMER. On the
basis of the feedback received by the Committee during the course of its interactions with various individuals/associations and experts
who appeared before it, the Committee sought further clarifications from the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on
certain aspects of the Bill at its meeting held on the 27th July 2007. 
8.         All these interactions proved to be very useful and helped the Committee to a great extent in formulating its opinion on
different provisions of the Bill. The Committee would like to emphasize here that during the entire exercise, its efforts were directed
towards putting forth an objective assessment of the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research
Puducherry Bill 2007 and report thereon.
9.         The Committee has been given to understand that the proposed Bill is broadly based on the lines of PGIMER Chandigarh Act
and the AIIMS Act.   However, given the special requirements relating to the prior existence of JIPMER as a Central Government
Institute, suitable changes have been made, wherever necessary, in the interest of effectiveness.  The Committee would like to point
out that, difference in the origin of the Institutes notwithstanding, a comparative analysis of the PGIMER Chandigarh Act, the AIIMS
Act and the proposed Bill reveals that there are basic differences in some provisions which needed a close scrutiny before arriving at a
final viewpoint. The Committee would be highlighting the same while reporting on such Clauses.
 
The Clauses where the Committee has suggested amendments are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
Clause 3
10.       Clause 3 provides for definitions of certain words/terms used in the Bill.   The Committee observes that whereas in both
AIIMS and PGIMER Act, specific definition of words ‘regulation’ and ‘rule’ has been given, in the present Bill, there is no such
definition. Instead it has been proposed to define the words ‘prescribed’ and ‘specified’ with reference to rules and regulations
respectively.  The Committee fails to understand the rationale for giving the definition of ‘regulation’ and ‘rule’ in a roundabout
manner.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends that in place of definition of ‘prescribed’ and ‘specified’ as given in the Clause 3
(e) and (f), following definition of ‘rule’ and ‘regulation’ may be given
(e)
                ‘rule’ means a rule made by the Central Government;
(f)                 ‘regulation’ means a regulation made by the Institute.
 
The Committee also recommends that consequential amendments may be carried out in the relevant provisions of the Bill by
suitably substituting the words ‘prescribed’ and ‘specified’ by the words prescribed/specified by rules or regulations.
 
Clause 5
11.       Clause 5 of the Bill relates to the composition of the Institute Body.
            The Committee has been given to understand that the JIPMER Bill has been largely modeled on the lines of the AIIMS Act
and the PGIMER Chandigarh Act.  However, a detailed perusal and comparison of the composition of the Institute Body, as provided
in the aforesaid Acts and the Bill reveals very significant differences, the first being reflected in the strength of the three Institute
Bodies.  The Committee observes that JIPMER will be a 22 member Institute as compared to 20 Members of PGIMER, Chandigarh
and 17 Members of AIIMS.  As per JIPMER Puducherry Bill-2007 out of total 22 members, 8 will be ex-officio members and 11
shall be Govt. nominees.  During the course of discussion with different witnesses, it was constantly emphasised that the inclusion of
so many ex-officio members and nominees of the Government to the Institute Body would affect the autonomous character of the
Institute.  Strong apprehensions were voiced that the proposed composition of the Institute Body would lead to undue governmental
interference.
11.1     The Committee strongly feels that these apprehensions seem to be very true, especially due to a striking departure, i.e.
proposed inclusion of the Minister-in-charge of Health and Family Welfare as the President, and, Secretary, Department of Health and
Family Welfare as ex-officio members in the Institute Body. On a specific query in this regard, Secretary, during the course of his
deposition before the Committee on the 27
th July, 2007, stated that autonomy should not be confused with lack of accountability.  
AIIMS, PGIMER and JIPMER are all Central Government Institutions and therefore, are accountable to the Central Government
through the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, and through the Government to the Parliament.    The Secretary clarified that in
both AIIMS and PGIMER, the Minister is nominated as a member of the Institute Body and then by convention he becomes the
President.  The Secretary justified the proposed explicit provision in the JIPMER Bill, drawing the attention of the Committee to the
following observations made by the Supreme Court in the B. Shankaranand versus Common Cause and Others case: -

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
   “Government appears to have nominated the Minister of Health and Family Welfare and the Secretary of the
Department of Health as Chairman and Member, respectively, so that in the ultimate management of the supreme body
constituted under the Act, the Government also will protect the interests of the institution.   Otherwise, it would appear
that the Government does not seem to have any say or control in the management of the AIIMS.  Considered from this
pragmatic background and from the point of view of the importance of the institution and public interest, we are of the
considered view that the Central Government is justified to nominate four persons other than Scientists, the fifth being a
non-medical scientist representing the Indian Science Congress Association”.
 
11.2    The Secretary clarified that the Health Minister and the Health Secretary have been made ex-officio members of JIPMER,
keeping in view the above observations of the Supreme Court. The Committee has its reservations on this crucial issue.   The
Committee would like to draw the attention of the Department to the fact that the observation of Supreme Court was made in the
context of inclusion of the Minister and the Secretary in the ex-officio nominated category in the Institute Body of AIIMS. By no
stretch of imagination it can be said that the Apex Court has approved the separate nomination of the Minister and the Secretary to the
Institute Body. The Committee would also like to point out that the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the said judgment delivered in 1996
had also observed that there should be no undue interference by the Government in the autonomous management of the AIIMS and it
should not be treated as any other Department of the Government.
11.3     During the course of deliberations on the composition of the Institute Body, Committee’s attention was also drawn to the
reported observation endorsing the inclusion of the Minister and Secretary as ex-officio members in AIIMS made by the Rajya Sabha
Committee on Subordinate Legislation in its meeting held on 27
th September, 2006. The Committee is very surprised by the kind of
intervention made by the representative of the Ministry. It is very disturbing to note that deliberations of a Parliamentary Committee,
not conclusive with the Report yet to be presented to the House, have been placed before another Parliamentary Committee. It is a
well-established convention to maintain the confidentiality of Parliamentary Committee deliberations which is supposed to be strictly
adhered to by all concerned. Expressing its serious reservations on such a development, the Committee refuses to take cognizance of
the submission (both verbal and written) made by the representative of the Ministry.
11.4     The Committee is disturbed to note that the proposed nomination of the Minister and the Secretary, no doubt in ex-officio
capacity, is in addition to seven persons to be nominated under Clause 5(1) (i). This has virtually resulted in increasing the strength of
ex-officio members, which cannot be considered appropriate, if autonomy of the Institute is sought to be maintained.
11.5     The Committee would like to point out that during the Parliament debate at the time of consideration of AIIMS Bill in 1956, it
was emphasised that having a majority of non-officials was always a healthy convention. Only that could ensure that the people who
were there will not be persons who will act according to orders given, written or otherwise.
            The Committee’s attention has also been drawn to the following observations made by the standing Committee on Human
Resource Development in its 31
st Report:-
The AIIMS was set up as an autonomous Institute by an Act of Parliament. The Act had envisaged an
Institute Body and a Governing Body at its apex and there was a tradition of Government nominating the Minster of
Health as its President. The Committee would like to note that the advantage and disadvantages of this tradition have
been debated from time to time but there has been no departure from the traditional practice, nor could the argument
be clinched either way.
The Committee has given serious thought to the conflicting views available on the utility and propriety of
continuing with the practice of the Health Minister being nominated as the President of the Institute. This has been
stretched so far that even after demitting office, the ex-Minister continues to remain the Institute’s President. The
arguments in favour briefly appear to be that this was initiated in the past so that such Ministerial presence may
increase the influence of the Institute in Governmental circles. It has also been argued that there is nothing in the Act
to prohibit the Minister from being nominated as President.
It may be pointed out that the Act does not, at the same time, provide that the Minister would be ex-officio
President of the Institute, which could easily have been done had such been the intention. On the other hand, there is
much evidence, to the contrary, particularly from eminent witnesses closely associated with the growth of AIIMS.
They are of the firm opinion that neither the Health Minister nor the Health Secretary should be nominated as a
member of the Institute Body. Instead, the only ex-officio members should be the Director-General of Health
Services and the Finance Advisor in their official capacities and the Minister and the Secretary should keep out of
any direct involvement in bodies charged with manning of the AIIMS and its day to day working. The advantage
would be that not being directly  involved and thus becoming party to the Institute Body’s decision, the Minister and
the Secretary would be able to assess matters objectively and hold the Institute body accountable to performance.

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
 
11.6     The Committee would like to emphasise that the above line of thinking continues to remain relevant, and has rather become
more relevant in the present circumstances.  The Committee has been compelled to make such a statement as there have been several
unsavory developments in the recent past that have cast their shadow on the autonomy of AIIMS.  A host of issues involving AIIMS
and Ministry of Health & Family Welfare are again before the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi.  The Committee is not averse to the idea
of Government having a say in the management of Central Government Institutions.  But if the intervention of the Government proves
baneful for the autonomy of institutions of excellence, the issue of the nomination of the Health Minister and the Health Secretary as
ex-officio members therein clearly needs to be revisited. The Committee apprehends that being a sister Institute, JIPMER may meet
the same fate and fall prey to the same problems as are plaguing AIIMS.
 11.7    The Committee notes that under Clause 5 (1) (e), (g), (h) and (i) four Government nominees have been made members of the
Institute.  Besides, the Government is also empowered to nominate seven persons to the Institute Body under Clause 5 (j).  The
Committee is reasonably hopeful that the Bill leaves enough scope to the Government to wield control and influence for the
implementation of Government policies in JIPMER.
            The Committee favours the views held by eminent witnesses and the stakeholders of JIPMER and concurs that for objective
assessment of the work of the Institute, the Minister and the Secretary of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should remain
out of any form of direct involvement in any of the Institute bodies. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Clause 5(1) (a)
and (b) be deleted.
 
Clause 5(1) (c ), (d) and (g)
 
11.8     The Committee observes that Vice-Chancellor of Puducherry University (ex-officio), Vice-Chancellor of the Tamil Nadu Dr.
M.G.R. Medical University (ex-officio) and Chief Secretary, Government of Puducherry (ex-officio) are proposed to be members of
the Institute. On a comparison of relevant provisions of AIIMS Act and PGIMER, Chandigarh Act, the Committee finds that only
Vice-Chancellor of Delhi University and Punjab University are represented in these two Institute Bodies.
11.9     During the course of its deliberations at Puducherry, it was impressed upon the Committee by some witnesses, that the
following should also find place in the Institute Body:-
*          Health Minister of Puducherry
*          One/three MLA(s) of Puducherry Legislative Assembly
*          Secretary to Government (Health), Govt. of Puducherry
*          Director of Health and Family Welfare Services, Puducherry
 
11.10   The Committee is not inclined to concur with these suggestions, simply because   state representation in the JIPMER Institute
is already more when compared with AIIMS and PGIMER, Chandigarh Institute Body. One should not forget that JIPMER is sought
to be declared as an institution of national importance. It would be in the fitness of things if regional imbalance is not reflected in an
institute having an all India status.
 
11.11   Clause 5(1)(j) of the Bill provides that: -
“(j) seven persons of whom one shall be a non-medical scientist representing the Indian Science Congress Association, to be
nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed;”
 
 
11.12   Serious doubts on the above category of members were raised by eminent witnesses and the stakeholders of the Institute
during their interaction with the Committee. It was stated that the membership, as laid down under the above sub-clauses does not
specify any criteria as to who can be nominated to the above mentioned category thereby, leaving ample scope for the Government to
nominate any person of its choice which will ultimately affect the decision-making of the Institute Body. It was also suggested by the
witnesses that in order to avoid ambiguity, nominated members under sub-clause (1) (j) of Clause 5 should be ex-officio.
 
11.13   The Committee notes that the sub-clause (1)(j) of Clause 5, in its present form, leaves   room for ambiguity and interpretation
and may lead to nepotism and favoritism. The Committee observes that the criteria as to who can qualify for such membership under

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
Clause 5 (1) (j) of the Bill should be categorically mentioned.
11.14   The Committee deliberated the issue at length and sought opinion of the various experts who appeared before the Committee.  
Based on the feedback received, the Committee observes that excellence is all about processes and all care needs to be taken to ensure
that processes get precedence over predilections.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the six members who should find place
in the Institute Body, (other than a non-medical scientist representing the Indian Science Congress Association as provided under
Clause 5(1)(j) ), should be persons of eminence and should be nominated from  a panel of 14 fellows half of whom shall be from
Medical  Faculties of Indian Universities and Health Science Universities  suggested by the Indian National Science Association, New
Delhi, Indian Academy of Sciences, Bangalore and National Academy of Sciences, Allahabad.
 
The said sub-clause (1)  (j) of Clause 5 should, therefore, read as follows-
“(j) seven persons, of whom one shall be a non-medical scientist representing the Indian Science Congress Association
and the other six members shall be persons of eminence and shall be nominated from  a panel of 14 “fellows” half of
whom shall be from medical faculties of Indian Universities and Health Science Universities as suggested by Indian
National Science Association, New Delhi, Indian Academy of Sciences, Bangalore and National Academy of Sciences,
Allahabad, to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
 
Clause 5(1)(k)
            Clause 5(1)(k) of the Bill provides that: -
“(k) Four representatives of the medical faculties of Indian Universities to be  nominated by the Central Government in such
manner as may be prescribed;
11.15   During its study visit to Puducherry, the stakeholders and witnesses suggested that the four representatives of the medical
faculties of Indian Universities to be nominated by the Central Government under Clause 5(1) (k) of the Bill should be in active
service, should also be practitioners of allopathic medicine, and must be ex-officio members and not otherwise. A view point which
emerged was that the four representatives should be the Director AIIMS, Director PGIMER, Chandigarh, Director Sree Chitra Tirunal
Institute for Medical Sciences & Technology, Thiruvananthapuram and Director, National Institute of Mental Health and
Neurological Sciences, Bangalore.
11.16   The Committee agrees that clear mention of who should be the four representatives from the medical faculties of Indian
Universities needed to be provided in the Bill itself. This would ensure that eminent persons from medical fraternity would find place
in the Institute Body. On the basis of the submissions made before the Committee and also the inputs made available to it, the
Committee is of the view that the four representatives proposed under this category, should be the Director, AIIMS, New Delhi, the
Director, National Institute of Mental Health and Neurological Sciences, Bangalore, Director PGIMER, Chandigarh and Director Sree
Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences & Technology, Thiruvananthapuram.
            The Committee, therefore, recommends that sub-clause (1) (k) of Clause 5 be modified on the above lines.
Clause 5 (1) (l)
11.17   The Committee notes that AIIMS Act and the PGIMER Chandigarh Act  provide that three  Members  of  Parliament of 
whom  two  shall  be elected from among themselves by Members of the House  of the  People (Lok Sabha) and one from among
themselves by    members of the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) should be in the Institute Body.  The Committee is, however,
surprised to note that a distinction is sought to be made in the JIPMER Bill which provides that two Members of Parliament from the
Union territory of Puducherry, one each from Lok Sabha to be nominated by the Speaker of Lok Sabha, and from Rajya Sabha to be
nominated by the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha. The Committee observes that JIPMER being an Institute of national importance
should be nationally representative in character and spirit; hence, regional representation should be avoided. The Committee holds the
view that sub-clause (1) (l) may be suitably modified on the lines of the AIIMS Act and the PGIMER Chandigarh Act. The said sub-
clause (1) (l) of Clause 5 should read as follows: -
 
“three Members of Parliament of whom two shall  be elected from among themselves by Members of the House 
of the  People (Lok Sabha) and one from among themselves by Members of the Council of States (Rajya Sabha)”
 
Clause 6
12.       Clause 6 provides for term of office of members of the Institute, their re-nomination and manner of filling up of vacancies of
the members.
Sub-clause (1) of Clause 6 reads as follows:-
“ Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of a member shall be five years from the date of his
nomination.”

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
 
12.1     In view of the amendment suggested by the Committee to sub-clause (1) (l) of Clause 5, the above sub-clause should be
suitably amended to allow for the election of the members of the Parliament to the Institute Body. The said sub-clause should now
read as follows: -
“Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of a member shall be five years from the date of his
nomination or election.”
 
The word ‘nominated’ wherever used in Clause 6 (2) may be substituted by the word ‘elected’. Similarly, the word
‘nominated’ used in sub-clause (5) may be substituted by the word ‘elected’. Words “or re-election” may be added at the end of sub-
clause (6)                        of Clause 6.
 
12.2     During the Committee’s visit to JIPMER Puducherry, some of the stakeholders raised apprehensions regarding sub-clause
(5)&(6) of Clause 6 of the Bill. As per Clause 6(5), an out-going member may continue till new member occupies his place, while
Clause 6(6) states that an out-going member shall be eligible for re-nomination. It was stated that a new member might not be
nominated in order to retain the outgoing member or that the outgoing members shall be re-nominated throughout his / her life.
Therefore, the above two sub-clauses needed to be suitably amended.
 
12.3     The Committee, too, agrees to the above view that under the present provision of sub-clause (5) of Clause 6 it is possible that a
new member might not be nominated in order to retain the outgoing member and since the power to nominate is with the
Government, the process of nomination may be delayed long enough to the detriment of the Institute. It firmly believes that a
stipulated time-frame must be set within which the process of nomination of the new member should be completed and opines that a
period of three months from the date of expiry of term of the present member would be sufficient for the process of nomination of the
new member to the Institute. The Committee, accordingly, suggests that the said sub-clause (5) of Clause 6 of the Bill which reads as:
-
 
“(5) An out-going member other than a member nominated under Clause (l) of subsection (1) of section 5 shall,
unless the Central Government otherwise directs, continue in office until another person is nominated as a member
in his place.”
 
should be modified to read now as:-
 
 
“(5) An out-going member other than a member elected under sub-clause (1) (l)  of Clause 5 shall, unless the
Central Government otherwise directs, continue in office until another person is nominated, within a period of not
more than three months from the date of expiry of term of the outgoing member.”
 
Clause 7
 
13.       Clause 7 provides that the President shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as are laid down in the Bill or as
may be prescribed.
The Committee would take the opportunity to state here that in foregone discussions on Clause 5 of the Bill, it has voiced its
disagreement to the nomination of the Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare as the President of the Institute and accordingly
recommended deletion of Clause 5 (1)(a). The Committee, while perusing Clause 7 of the AIIMS Act and PGIMER Chandigarh Act,
has observed that sub-clause (1) of the Clause under discussion of the above two Acts provides for the nomination of the President of
the Institute by the Central Government. The Committee is of the view that the nomination of the President of the Institute should be
provided in the Bill on the same lines as provided in the AIIMS Act and the PGIMER Chandigarh Act.
 
13.1     The Committee, therefore, recommends that Clause 7 should be substituted by the following Clause:-
“(1) There shall be a President of the Institute who shall be nominated by the Central Government from
among the members other than the Director of the Institute.”
 
                         “(2) The President shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as are laid down in this Act or 
as may be prescribed by rules or regulations.”

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
 
Clause 10
 
14.       Clause 10 deals with Governing Body and other Committees of the Institute. Clause 10 (1) reads as follows:-
“There shall be a Governing Body of the Institute which shall be constituted by the Institute in such manner as may be
specified:
 
Provided that the number of persons who are not members of the Institute shall not exceed one-third of the total
membership of the Governing Body.”
 
14.1     On a comparative analysis of relevant provision in AIIMS and PGIMER Act, the Committee observed a slight variation.  
Provision of having not more than one-third of total membership of the Governing Body from persons not being members of the
Institute proposed in the JIPMER Bill is based on PGIMER Act.  AIIMS Act has only members of the Institute as members of the
Governing Body.  When asked to justify the basis for having such a provision, the Committee was informed that it would facilitate
nominating members from Tech/ Management and such specialized fields.
 
14.2           During its interaction with different witnesses, divergent views emerged on this aspect.   It was emphasized by the
various associations connected with the Institute that the Governing Body should have only members of the Institute as its
members. The other viewpoint voiced by experts/ ex-Directors was that only medical scientists from Indian Science Congress and
Medical Universities should be included in the Governing Body from outside.
 
14.3           The Committee agrees that mere reference to one-third members who are non-members of the Institute leaves a wide
scope as to who can be or cannot be nominated by the Central Government to the Governing body of the Institute. The Committee
fails to understand the rationale for having non-members in the Governing Body.  The Committee is of the firm view that Clause
10 can be easily based on the relevant Clause of the AIIMS Act. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that proviso to Clause
10(1) may be deleted.
 
14.4     Sub-clause (5) of Clause 10 deals with the constitution of Standing Committees and ad-hoc Committees by the Institute.
The witnesses and the various stakeholders of JIPMER who appeared before the Committee were of the view that the details
of Standing Committees to be constituted should be specified. It was further stated by some of them that the Faculty of JIPMER
should be given adequate representation in Standing Committees and ad-hoc Committees. The Central Government nominees who
were to be nominated to the Standing/ad-hoc Committees may be specified in the Bill (though it is not done so in AIIMS / PGIMER
Acts) and that these nominees should be drawn from Universities of excellence, Department of Science and Technology and Teaching
Institutions.
 
14.5     The Committee is also of firm opinion that the number of Standing Committees, which the Institute may form, should be
provided in detail. It feels that the membership of the Standing Committees should be formed from among the members of the
Institute. The Committee therefore recommends that a new sub- Clause may be inserted in the Clause 10 of the Bill on the lines of the
sub-clause (6) of Clause 10 of the AIIMS Act.
 The new sub-clause may now read as: -
 
“A Standing Committee shall consist exclusively of members of the Institute, but an ad hoc Committee may
include persons who are not members of the Institute but the number of such persons shall not exceed one- half
of its total membership”
 
 
14.6     The Committee’s attention was drawn to several suggestions given by the witnesses and stakeholders regarding the
composition of the Governing Body. It was stated that the Students’ Body, the Resident Doctors Association, the CHS Officers’
Welfare Association, and the employees’ union should be adequately represented in the Governing Body.
 
14.7     The Committee observes that an autonomous institute of learning should have at least one representative each representing the
students’ body and the employees and the staff of the Institute in the Governing Body. This would not only provide them a platform
to voice out their sentiments and opinions but also act as a necessary balance to the policy-making and decision-making processes and
representative nature of the Governing Body. The Committee, therefore, recommends that suitable modification be made to Clause 10

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
in order to provide the above-mentioned bodies adequate representation in the Governing Body.
 
14.8     It was also impressed upon the Committee that the Standing Selection Committee has a very strong bearing on the quality of
Faculty and Staff of the Institute.   It would be in the fitness of things if such a Committee was headed by a medical person with
outstanding academic achievements and has eminent members from the medical and non-medical profession.
14.9     The Committee, from its experience and information gathered from the witness and experts, would like to observe that to
insulate the said Committee from extraneous influence the Chairmanship of the Committee should be institutionalized. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the three-member Selection Committee should consist of the Vice-Chancellor of Puducherry
University who shall be the Chairman, the DGHS and the Director of the Institute.
 
Clause 11
15.     Clause 11 relates to Staff of the Institute.
 
Clause 11 (4) of the Bill states that-
“Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, the Institute may appoint such number of other officers and
employees as may be necessary for the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions and may determine
the designations and grades of such other officers and employees.”
 
15.1     Representatives of several Associations/ Unions of JIPMER hospital and Institute raised apprehensions that non-specification
of rules of recruitment would lead to manipulation in filling up of posts in various grades in the Institute. To a query regarding
Gazette notification of recruitment rules in AIIMS, the representatives of AIIMS, during the course of their deposition before the
Committee on 27
th July 2007, replied that none of the recruitment Rules have ever been Gazette notified. The Committee is appalled
to note that in this era of e-governance, when there is almost universal practice of bringing out all relevant details and posting the
same on the Internet for the sake of fairness and transparency, the Recruitment Rules of AIIMS are yet to be Gazette notified. The
Committee is of the firm view that such a state of affairs makes the selection process prone to manipulation and extraneous
considerations.
            Taking a cue from the above state of affairs, and also on the basis of the feedback made available, the Committee recommends
that the Recruitment Rules of JIPMER be Gazette notified from the date of operation of JIPMER Act and the same be posted on the
Internet for the sake of transparency and fair play.
 
Clause 26
 
16.       Clause 26 relating to resolution of differences reads as follows : -
           
“If in, or in connection with, the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions by the Institute under this
Act, any dispute or difference arises between the Institute and the Central Government, the decision of the Central
Government thereon shall be final.”
 
 
16.1     Perusal of similar Clauses of the AIIMS Act and the PGIMER Chandigarh Act reveals that the said Clauses speak only of the
matter of resolution of any dispute arising between the Institute and the Central Government. However, unlike in the case of the
JIPMER Bill, they make no reference to the matter of resolving differences arising between the Institute and the Central Government. 
 
16.2     The Committee observes that the connotation of the word ‘dispute’ varies from that of the word ‘difference’ in degree or
amount by which there is disagreement on an issue or matter between two parties, in this instance the parties being the Institute and
the Central Government. The Committee believes that if any difference on any issue arises between the Institute and the Central
Government, then such a difference can always be resolved amicably at the earliest.  On a specific query about the basis for adding
the word ‘difference’, the representative of the Department failed to give a convincing reply. The Committee strongly feels that by
diluting the area of dispute by adding the element of difference with Central Govt. having the final say, occasion may arise which
may lead to confrontation between the Centre and the Institute.  This would ultimately go against the interest of public at large.
 
16.3     The Committee feels that allowing Central Government to impose its final decisions in case of differences arising between the

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
Institute and the Central Government would tantamount to arbitration by the Central Government. Hence it recommends that the
word  “differences” may be deleted from the said Clause.
 
Clause 28
 
17.       Clause 28 provides for (i) the absorption of existing employees of the Jawaharlal Institute of Post Graduate Medical Education
and Research, Puducherry in the Institute on same terms and conditions of service including remuneration, leave, provident fund,
retirement and other terminal benefits unless the concerned employees opts within six months not to be employee of the Institute; (ii)
the terms and conditions of absorption or deputation of employees belonging to Central Health Service, Central Secretariat Service or
any other service; (iii) protection of pay and other interests on promotion in certain cases in the event of absorption in the Institute.
 
Sub-clause (1) of Clause 28 of the Bill presently reads as follows: -
 
“On and from the date of commencement of this Act, every employee holding office under the Jawaharlal Institute
of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry, immediately before that date shall hold his office
in the Institute by the same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions of service including remuneration,
leave, provident fund, retirement and other terminal benefits as he would have held such office if the Institute had
not been incorporated and shall continue to do so as an employee of the Institute or until the expiry of the period of
six months from that date if such employee opts not to be the employee of the Institute.”
 
17.1           Strong apprehensions were voiced by the representatives of various unions/associations of JIPMER Hospital and
Institute, and various political parties regarding the above provisions of this Bill. It was a general view that terms and conditions
of service including remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement and other terminal benefits; the terms and conditions of
absorption or deputation of employees of various services; protection of pay and other interests on promotion in certain cases in
the event of absorption in the Institute were not properly safeguarded within the present provisions of Clause 28 of the Bill.
 
17.2   One of the apprehensions expressed by the various Employees’ Union was that Clause 28 (1) merely states that those who
have not opted to be an employee of the JIPMER shall continue to be treated as Government employee for a period of six months
only and that nothing had been mentioned about redeployment after six months.
 
17.3   Asked to clarify the matter, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in a written submission informed the Committee that
the employees who do not opt for absorption in JIPMER after the stipulated period would be appointed in other subordinate
offices / hospitals under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare as per the provisions of Rule 4 (6) of CCS (Redeployment of
Surplus Staff) Rules.  The Ministry further clarified that the employees would also be considered for redeployment through DOPT
through the Surplus Cell as per rule 37-A (6) of CCS (Pension) Rules.
      The Committee is satisfied with the explanation offered by the Ministry and recommends that Clause 28 (1) be suitably
amended to reflect the above position with a view to dispel misgivings of the Employees’ Union.
 
17.4           It was stated by the Faculty members of JIPMER, Experts, CHS Officer’s Welfare Association, JIPMER Employees
Union, JIPMER Anti-Autonomy People’s Action Committee, JIPMER SC/ST Employees Welfare Association and several
political parties that the terms and conditions of services of existing employees requires elaboration and should not be to the
detriment of the employees. It was further suggested that the terms and conditions should be notified in unambiguous terms along
with the Act. It was also stated that the time period given for an employee to exercise his/her option to remain an employee of the
CHS or to join the JIPMER Institute should be extended to three years and not six months as given in the proposed Bill.
 
17.5     The Committee, held wide ranging discussions with eminent witnesses including some of the Ex-Directors of JIPMER and the
current Directors of AIIMS and PGIMER Chandigarh, and representatives of various associations/unions regarding the opposition to
the provisions of Clause 28. The Committee also sought clarification from the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare,
during its interactions, on the various objections that were raised by the witnesses/stakeholders of JIPMER. 

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
 
17.6     Analysing the details of the said Clause, the Committee felt that framing the terms and conditions of the Institute soon after it
is conferred autonomy is a time taking process. Hence, it concluded that the time-period given to the employees for exercising the
option to remain an employee of the CHS or to join the JIPMER Institute should be extended to one year after the notification of the
terms and conditions of service by the autonomous Institute. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the word “six-months” may
be replaced with the word “one year from the date of notification of the terms and conditions of service by the autonomous Institute”
in sub-clause (1) of Clause 28.
 
17.7     Another apprehension raised by the JIPMER Employees Union was that though Clause 28 (4) merely states that the absorbed
employee shall be governed by leave, provident fund, retirement benefits admissible to Central Government servant, it does not state
that retirement benefits shall be payable by the Government.
The Ministry, in a written submission, has stated that the absorbed employees on their retirement shall be eligible for grant of
pension from the Government as per extant rules in force. The Committee is satisfied with the explanation of the Ministry and
recommends that the above assurance be incorporated in the Bill for the sake of clarity.
 
17.8     Most of the representatives of the JIPMER Employees union/association of Hospital and Institute, suggested that the Bill
should include a Clause that, like some other autonomous bodies, Institute shall be brought under the purview of Central
Administrative Tribunal. Provisions should be made in the Act itself that absorbed staff shall be allowed to appeal before the CAT
against the dismissal or any other order of the Secretary of the  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
Asked to comment on this, the Ministry had replied in the affirmative stating that allowing the employees’ of JIPMER after
they are absorbed in the institution to approach CAT for service matters would not be a matter of difficulty.
             The Committee acknowledges the Ministry’s reply and recommends that a specific sub-clause be incorporated in the body of
Bill.
Clause 29
 
18.       Clause 29 enables the Central Government to make rules to carry out the purposes of the Bill and enumerates the various
provisions whereunder such rules may be made.
Sub-clause (1) of Clause 29 of the Bill states that: -
 
“The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purpose of this
Act.”
18.1     A comparison of the power to make rules by the Central Government under sub-clause(1) of Clause 28 of the AIIMS Act and
sub-clause(1) of Clause 31 of the  PGIMER Chandigarh Act reveals that the notification of the rules in the Official Gazette by the
Central Government is made only after consultation with the Institute.
18.2     The Committee fails to understand the rationale for omitting this Clause. The Bill proposes to provide the Central Government
the power to notify rules with which the Institute may not be in agreement or that the said rule(s) may prove detrimental to the
interests of the Institute. By taking away the right of consultation on the rules from the Institute, the Bill gives no scope to the Institute
to convey its opinion on the rules by which it will be governed ultimately. The Committee would like to point out that having a
consultation process that too with a body which is to be governed by such rules is the right course of action which needs to be adhered
to.  The Committee sees no reason for deviating from the same. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words “after
consultation with the Institute” be inserted in sub-clause (1) of Clause 29 in the following manner and a proviso may be added on the
lines of sub-clause (1) of Clause 31 of the PGIMER Chandigarh Act. The new sub-clause (1) of Clause 29 may now read as: -
“The Central Government, after consultation with the Institute, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to
carry out the purposes of this Act:
Provided that consultation with the Institute shall not be necessary on the first occasion of the making of rules under this
section, but   the Central Government shall take into consideration    any suggestions which the Institute may make in
relation to the amendment of such rules after they are made.”
 
Clause 30
19.       Clause 30 enables the Institute to make regulations with the previous approval of the Central Government and consistent with

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
the Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of the Bill. It also provides that first regulations under this Clause
shall be made by the Central Government and any regulation so made may be altered or rescinded by the Institute.
 
19.1     Sub-clause (1)(a) of Clause 30 relates to the summoning and holding of meetings, other than the first meeting, of the Institute,
the time and place where such meetings are to be held and the conduct of business at such meetings under Section 9.
 
19.2     During the Committee’s visit to JIPMER Puducherry, the representatives of CHS Officers’ Welfare Association, JIPMER,
informed the Committee that the Quorum for the meetings of the Committees, as well as the Institute and Governing Body should be
spelt out in clear terms in the Bill. 
 
19.3     The Committee notes that although sub-clause (1) (a) speaks of the summoning and holding of meetings, other than the first
meeting, of the Institute, the time and place where such meetings are to be held and the conduct of business at such meetings, it
remains silent on the notification of the regulations or number of members necessary to form the quorum at such meetings. Clause 9
of the Bill also remains silent about such an important matter. The Committee feels that specifying  quorum of the meetings of an
autonomous Institute is necessary  and should be spelt out in unambiguous terms in the light of critical decision-making powers
conferred upon it by granting autonomy.  Analysis of sub-clause (a) of Clause 29 of the AIIMS Act and sub-clause (1)(a) of Clause 32
of the PGIMER Chandigarh Act shows that the matter regarding the number of members necessary to form the quorum at such
meetings has been rightly included. The Committee is of the view that same principle should be followed in the case of JIPMER also.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that in sub-clause (1) (a) of Clause 30 necessary amendment be incorporated to indicate the
quorum required for the meetings of the Institute.
 
20.       The Committee adopts the remaining Clauses of the Bill, including enacting formula and the title without any amendment.
 
 
21.   Miscellaneous Comments/Suggestions made by the Committee.
 
 
21.1           During its interaction with the various witnesses representing student associations, employees’ union, political parties
and Ex-Directors of JIPMER, it was unanimously opined that the present status of reservation of certain percentage of medical
seats for undergraduates hailing from Puducherry should be continued even after the conferment of autonomy to JIPMER and that
any increase in the overall number of seats should result in a proportionate increase in the reserved seats for the people of
Puducherry. 
Asked to clarify the matter, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, in a written submission, informed the Committee that the
provision for reservation of certain percentage of medical seats for undergraduate courses for the residents of Puducherry was
made when there was no other medical college in Puducherry.   The Ministry further stated that since a number of medical
colleges (seven already established and 2 or 3 including one from the State Government) are under process with projected
undergraduate medical seats numbering almost around 1000, adequate number of seats is available for the residents of
Puducherry. Under the circumstances such reservation may not be appropriate if JIPMER was to maintain status of being an
Institute of national importance.
The Ministry went on to clarify further that at present there is no proposal for withdrawing the facilities given to the residents of
Puducherry in admission to undergraduate medical courses.  As regards the PG courses the principle laid down by Supreme Court
in Saurav Chaudhary i.e. number of seats to be reserved for those students passing out from JIPMER, would hold good. 
 
The Committee is satisfied with the explanation of the Ministry and recommends that the above assurance on reservation of
seats be incorporated in the Bill for the sake of clarity.
 
21.2           During the Committee’s study visit to Puducherry the Committee was informed by the witnesses that the poor people
residing in Puducherry and its neighbouring areas i.e. Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala and Karnataka come to JIPMER

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
which provides them with free treatment.   However, nothing has been mentioned in the Bill for the continuance of free medical
treatment as is presently available to them.
      The Committee shares concerns of the witnesses and recommends that explicit provision be made in the JIPMER Bill to the
effect that free treatment to the poor people in and around Puducherry shall continue as it exists now in JIPMER.
 
21.3           The Committee observes that a host of conflicting issues have arisen in the existing statutory Medical Bodies
concerning the powers and functions of the Director of the Institute, the President, the Governing Body and the Institute Body, as
there is no clear-cut demarcation of their powers.  
            The Committee, based on its experience, observes that the powers and functions of the above functionaries/bodies be specified
explicitly in the Bill. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that a schedule stating the powers and functions of the Director of the
Institute, the President, the Governing Body and the Institute Body be appended to the Bill.
Similarly, another schedule stating therein the appointment, disciplinary and appellate authority for various posts should also
be incorporated. This, the Committee feels, would make the things clearer leaving no room for ambiguous interpretations and in case
of disagreement on any issue, reference can be made to the schedule with regard to the extent of powers of various functionaries and
bodies of the Institute while considering important administrative proposals.
 
21.4     The Committee has observed that the medical institutions like AIIMS, PGIMER, JIPMER, apart from the academic activity,
have a major mandate of providing specialised services to the public at large.   Often, these institutions are the final destination of a
large segment of the society to seek quality care at affordable cost.  Against such a backdrop, the need for having a prompt and proper
mechanism is required to solve the genuine grievances of all categories of employees. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that
initiative should be taken by the Govt. for evolving such a mechanism.
 
21.5     Though the Committee was happy with the provision for according status of national importance to JIPMER, it felt that
infrastructure and health facilities in a number of hospitals across the country leave much to be desired. The Committee recommends
to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to identify some hospitals and medical colleges across the country which are catering to
far larger number of people than the JIPMER, Puducherry for the purpose of improvement of infrastructure and patient care facilities
and allocate additional funds to them. The Committee would like the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to appraise it on the
progress made on this matter at the time of examination of Demand for Grants 2008-09.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
            Clause 3 provides for definitions of certain words/terms used in the Bill.   The Committee observes that whereas in both
AIIMS and PGIMER Act, specific definition of words ‘regulation’ and ‘rule’ has been given, in the present Bill, there is no such
definition. Instead it has been proposed to define the words ‘prescribed’ and ‘specified’ with reference to rules and regulations
respectively.  The Committee fails to understand the rationale for giving the definition of ‘regulation’ and ‘rule’ in a roundabout
manner.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends that in place of definition of ‘prescribed’ and ‘specified’ as given in the Clause 3
(e) and (f), following definition of ‘rule’ and ‘regulation’ may be given
(g)
                ‘Rule’ means a rule made by the Central Government;
(h)                ‘Regulation’ means a regulation made by the Institute.
 
The Committee also recommends that consequential amendments may be carried out in the relevant provisions of the Bill by
suitably substituting the words ‘prescribed’ and ‘specified’ by the words prescribed/specified by rules or regulations. (Para 10)
 
    The Secretary clarified that the Health Minister and the Health Secretary have been made ex-officio members of JIPMER,
keeping in view the above observations of the Supreme Court. The Committee has its reservations on this crucial issue.   The
Committee would like to draw the attention of the Department to the fact that the observation of Supreme Court was made in the
context of inclusion of the Minister and the Secretary in the ex-officio nominated category in the Institute Body of AIIMS. By no
stretch of imagination it can be said that the Apex Court has approved the separate nomination of the Minister and the Secretary to

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
the Institute Body. The Committee would also like to point out that the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the said judgment delivered in
1996 had also observed that there should be no undue interference by the Government in the autonomous management of the
AIIMS and it should not be treated as any other Department of the Government. (Para 11.2)
During the course of deliberations on the composition of the Institute Body, Committee’s attention was also drawn to the reported
observation endorsing the inclusion of the Minister and Secretary as ex-officio members in AIIMS made by the Rajya Sabha
Committee on Subordinate Legislation in its meeting held on 27
th September, 2006. The Committee is very surprised by the kind
of intervention made by the representative of the Ministry. It is very disturbing to note that deliberations of a Parliamentary
Committee, not conclusive with the Report yet to be presented to the House, have been placed before another Parliamentary
Committee. It is a well-established convention to maintain the confidentiality of Parliamentary Committee deliberations which is
supposed to be strictly adhered to by all concerned. Expressing its serious reservations on such a development, the Committee
refuses to take cognizance of the submission (both verbal and written) made by the representative of the Ministry. (Para 11.3)
 
The Committee is disturbed to note that the proposed nomination of the Minister and the Secretary, no doubt in ex-officio
capacity, is in addition to seven persons to be nominated under Clause 5(1) (i). This has virtually resulted in increasing the
strength of ex-officio members, which cannot be considered appropriate, if autonomy of the Institute is sought to be maintained.
(Para 11.4)
 
      The Committee notes that under Clause 5 (1) (e), (g), (h) and (i) four Government nominees have been made members of the
Institute.  Besides, the Government is also empowered to nominate seven persons to the Institute Body under Clause 5 (j).  The
Committee is reasonably hopeful that the Bill leaves enough scope to the Government to wield control and influence for the
implementation of Government policies in JIPMER.
      The Committee favours the views held by eminent witnesses and the stakeholders of JIPMER and concurs that for objective
assessment of the work of the Institute, the Minister and the Secretary of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should
remain out of any form of direct involvement in any of the Institute bodies. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Clause 5(1) (a) and (b) be deleted.  (Para 11.7)
 
The Committee is not inclined to concur with these suggestions, simply because state representation in the JIPMER Institute is
already more when compared with AIIMS and PGIMER, Chandigarh Institute Body. One should not forget that JIPMER is
sought to be declared as an institution of national importance. It would be in the fitness of things if regional imbalance is not
reflected in an institute having an all India status. (Para 11.10)
 
The Committee notes that the sub-clause (1)(j) of Clause 5, in its present form, leaves  room for ambiguity and interpretation and
may lead to nepotism and favoritism. The Committee observes that the criteria as to who can qualify for such membership under
Clause 5 (1) (j) of the Bill should be categorically mentioned.  (Para 11.13)
 
The Committee deliberated the issue at length and sought opinion of the various experts who appeared before the Committee. 
Based on the feedback received, the Committee observes that excellence is all about processes and all care needs to be taken to
ensure that processes get precedence over predilections.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the six members who should
find place in the Institute Body, (other than a non-medical scientist representing the Indian Science Congress Association as
provided under Clause 5(1)(j) ), should be persons of eminence and should be nominated from  a panel of 14 fellows half of
whom shall be from Medical  Faculties of Indian Universities and Health Science Universities   suggested by the Indian National
Science Association, New Delhi, Indian Academy of Sciences, Bangalore and National Academy of Sciences, Allahabad.  
The said sub-clause(1)  (j) of Clause 5 should, therefore, read as follows-
“(j) seven persons, of whom one shall be a non-medical scientist representing the Indian Science Congress Association
and the other six members shall be persons of eminence and shall be nominated from  a panel of 14 “fellows” half of
whom shall be from medical faculties of Indian Universities and Health Science Universities as suggested by Indian
National Science Association, New Delhi, Indian Academy of Sciences, Bangalore and National Academy of Sciences,

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
Allahabad, to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed; (Para 11.14)
 
The Committee agrees that clear mention of who should be the four representatives from the medical faculties of Indian
Universities needed to be provided in the Bill itself. This would ensure that eminent persons from medical fraternity would find
place in the Institute Body. On the basis of the submissions made before the Committee and also the inputs made available to it,
the Committee is of the view that the four representatives proposed under this category, should be the Director, AIIMS, New
Delhi, the Director, National Institute of Mental Health and Neurological Sciences, Bangalore, Director PGIMER, Chandigarh
and Director Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences & Technology, Thiruvananthapuram.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that sub-clause (1) (k) of Clause 5 be modified on the above lines.  (Para 11.16)
 
            The Committee notes that AIIMS Act and the PGIMER Chandigarh Act  provide that three  Members  of  Parliament of 
whom  two  shall  be elected from among themselves by Members of the House  of the  People (Lok Sabha) and one from among
themselves by    members of the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) should be in the Institute Body.  The Committee is, however,
surprised to note that a distinction is sought to be made in the JIPMER Bill which provides that two Members of Parliament from the
Union territory of Puducherry, one each from Lok Sabha to be nominated by the Speaker of Lok Sabha, and from Rajya Sabha to be
nominated by the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha. The Committee observes that JIPMER being an Institute of national importance
should be nationally representative in character and spirit; hence, regional representation should be avoided. The Committee holds the
view that sub-clause (1) (l) may be suitably modified on the lines of the AIIMS Act and the PGIMER Chandigarh Act. The said sub-
clause (1) (l) of Clause 5 should read as follows: -
“three Members of Parliament of whom two shall  be elected from among themselves by Members of the House  of the  People
(Lok Sabha) and one from among themselves by Members of the Council of States (Rajya Sabha)” (Para 11.17)
 
            In view of the amendment suggested by the Committee to sub-clause (1) (l) of Clause 5, the above sub-clause should be
suitably amended to allow for the election of the members of the Parliament to the Institute Body. The said sub-clause should now
read as follows: -
“Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of a member shall be five years from the date of his
nomination or election.”
 
The word ‘nominated’ wherever used in Clause 6 (2) may be substituted by the word ‘elected’. Similarly, the word ‘nominated’
used in sub-clause (5) may be substituted by the word ‘elected’. Words “or re-election” may be added at the end of sub-clause
(6)                 of Clause 6.                                                                                                                     (Para 12.1)
            The Committee, too, agrees to the above view that under the present provision of sub-clause (5) of Clause 6 it is possible that a
new member might not be nominated in order to retain the outgoing member and since the power to nominate is with the
Government, the process of nomination may be delayed long enough to the detriment of the Institute. It firmly believes that a
stipulated time-frame must be set within which the process of nomination of the new member should be completed and opines that a
period of three months from the date of expiry of term of the present member would be sufficient for the process of nomination of the
new member to the Institute. The Committee, accordingly, suggests that the said sub-clause (5) of Clause 6 of the Bill which reads as:
-
“(5) An out-going member other than a member nominated under Clause (l) of subsection (1) of section 5 shall,
unless the Central Government otherwise directs, continue in office until another person is nominated as a member
in his place.”
should be modified to read now as:-
“(5) An out-going member other than a member elected under sub-clause (1) (l)  of Clause 5 shall, unless the Central Government
otherwise directs, continue in office until another person is nominated, within a period of not more than three months from the
date of expiry of term of the outgoing member.” (Para 12.3)
            The Committee, therefore, recommends that Clause 7 should be substituted by the following Clause:-

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
“(1) There shall be a President of the Institute who shall be nominated by the Central Government from
among the members other than the Director of the Institute.”
 
“(2) The President shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as are laid down in this Act or as may be
prescribed by rules or regulations.” 
                                                                                                                 (Para 13.1)  
                             
The Committee agrees that mere reference to one-third members who are non-members of the Institute leaves a wide scope as to
who can be or cannot be nominated by the Central Government to the Governing body of the Institute. The Committee fails to
understand the rationale for having non-members in the Governing Body.  The Committee is of the firm view that Clause 10 can
be easily based on the relevant Clause of the AIIMS Act. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that proviso to Clause 10(1)
may be deleted. 
                                                                                                                              (Para 14.3)                      
            The Committee is also of firm opinion that the number of Standing Committees, which the Institute may form, should be
provided in detail. It feels that the membership of the Standing Committees should be formed from among the members of the
Institute. The Committee therefore recommends that a new sub- Clause may be inserted in the Clause 10 of the Bill on the lines of the
sub-clause (6) of Clause 10 of the AIIMS Act.
 The new sub-clause may now read as: -
“A Standing Committee shall consist exclusively of members of the Institute, but an ad hoc Committee may include persons who
are not members of the Institute but the number of such persons shall not exceed one- half of its total
membership”                              (Para 14.5)
 
      The Committee observes that an autonomous institute of learning should have at least one representative each representing the
students’ body and the employees and the staff of the Institute in the Governing Body. This would not only provide them a
platform to voice out their sentiments and opinions but also act as a necessary balance to the policy-making and decision-making
processes and representative nature of the Governing Body. The Committee, therefore, recommends that suitable modification be
made to Clause 10 in order to provide the above-mentioned bodies adequate representation in the Governing Body.  (Para 14.7)
 
    The Committee, from its experience and information gathered from the witness and experts, would like to observe that to
insulate the said Committee from extraneous influence the Chairmanship of the Committee should be institutionalized. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the three-member Selection Committee should consist of the Vice-Chancellor of
Puducherry University who shall be the Chairman, the DGHS and the Director of the Institute.  (Para 14.9)
 
            Representatives of several Associations/ Unions of JIPMER hospital and Institute raised apprehensions that non-specification
of rules of recruitment would lead to manipulation in filling up of posts in various grades in the Institute. To a query regarding
Gazette notification of recruitment rules in AIIMS, the representatives of AIIMS, during the course of their deposition before the
Committee on 27
th July 2007, replied that none of the recruitment Rules have ever been Gazette notified. The Committee is appalled
to note that in this era of e-governance, when there is almost universal practice of bringing out all relevant details and posting the
same on the Internet for the sake of fairness and transparency, the Recruitment Rules of AIIMS are yet to be Gazette notified. The
Committee is of the firm view that such a state of affairs makes the selection process prone to manipulation and extraneous
considerations.
      Taking a cue from the above state of affairs, and also on the basis of the feedback made available, the Committee recommends
that the Recruitment Rules of JIPMER be Gazette notified from the date of operation of JIPMER Act and the same be posted on
the Internet for the sake of transparency and fair play.  (Para 15.1)
 
The Committee observes that the connotation of the word ‘dispute’ varies from that of the word ‘difference’ in degree or amount
by which there is disagreement on an issue or matter between two parties, in this instance the parties being the Institute and the
Central Government. The Committee believes that if any difference on any issue arises between the Institute and the Central
Government, then such a difference can always be resolved amicably at the earliest.   On a specific query about the basis for
adding the word ‘difference’, the representative of the Department failed to give a convincing reply. The Committee strongly feels

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
that by diluting the area of dispute by adding the element of difference with Central Govt. having the final say, occasion may arise
which may lead to confrontation between the Centre and the Institute.   This would ultimately go against the interest of public at
large.                                                                                           (Para 16.2)
 
      The Committee feels that allowing Central Government to impose its final decisions in case of differences arising between the
Institute and the Central Government would tantamount to arbitration by the Central Government. Hence it recommends that the
word  “differences” may be deleted from the said Clause.                                        (Para 16.3)
 
 One of the apprehensions expressed by the various Employees’ Union was that Clause 28 (1) merely states that those who have
not opted to be an employee of the JIPMER shall continue to be treated as Government employee for a period of six months only
and that nothing had been mentioned about redeployment after six months.               (Para 17.2)
 
 
 
Asked to clarify the matter, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in a written submission informed the Committee that the
employees who do not opt for absorption in JIPMER after the stipulated period would be appointed in other subordinate offices /
hospitals under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare as per the provisions of Rule 4 (6) of CCS (Redeployment of Surplus
Staff) Rules.  The Ministry further clarified that the employees would also be considered for redeployment through DOPT through
the Surplus Cell as per rule 37-A (6) of CCS (Pension) Rules.
      The Committee is satisfied with the explanation offered by the Ministry and recommends that Clause 28 (1) be suitably
amended to reflect the above position with a view to dispel misgivings of the Employees’ Union. (Para 17.3)
 
Analysing the details of the said Clause, the Committee felt that framing the terms and conditions of the Institute soon after it is
conferred autonomy is a time taking process. Hence, it concluded that the time-period given to the employees for exercising the
option to remain an employee of the CHS or to join the JIPMER Institute should be extended to one year after the notification of
the terms and conditions of service by the autonomous Institute. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the word “six-
months” may be replaced with the word “one year from the date of notification of the terms and conditions of service by the
autonomous Institute” in sub-clause (1) of Clause 28. (Para 17.6)
 
            Another apprehension raised by the JIPMER Employees Union was that though Clause 28 (4) merely states that the absorbed
employee shall be governed by leave, provident fund, retirement benefits admissible to Central Government servant, it does not
state that retirement benefits shall be payable by the Government.
The Ministry, in a written submission, has stated that the absorbed employees on their retirement shall be eligible for grant of
pension from the Government as per extant rules in force. The Committee is satisfied with the explanation of the Ministry and
recommends that the above assurance be incorporated in the Bill for the sake of clarity.  
                                                                                                                             (Para 17.7)                    
            Most of the representatives of the JIPMER Employees union/association of Hospital and Institute, suggested that the Bill
should include a Clause that, like some other autonomous bodies, Institute shall be brought under the purview of Central
Administrative Tribunal. Provisions should be made in the Act itself that absorbed staff shall be allowed to appeal before the CAT
against the dismissal or any other order of the Secretary of the  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
Asked to comment on this, the Ministry had replied in the affirmative stating that allowing the employees’ of JIPMER after
they are absorbed in the institution to approach CAT for service matters would not be a matter of difficulty.
       The Committee acknowledges the Ministry’s reply and recommends that a specific sub-clause be incorporated in the body of
Bill.                                             (Para 17.8)
 
     The Committee fails to understand the rationale for omitting this Clause. The Bill proposes to provide the Central Government the
power to notify rules with which the Institute may not be in agreement or that the said rule(s) may prove detrimental to the interests of

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
the Institute. By taking away the right of consultation on the rules from the Institute, the Bill gives no scope to the Institute to convey
its opinion on the rules by which it will be governed ultimately. The Committee would like to point out that having a consultation
process that too with a body which is to be governed by such rules is the right course of action which needs to be adhered to.  The
Committee sees no reason for deviating from the same. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words “after consultation
with the Institute” be inserted in sub-clause(1) of  Clause 29 in the following manner and a proviso may be added on the lines of sub-
clause(1) of Clause 31 of the  PGIMER Chandigarh Act . The new sub-clause(1) of  Clause 29  may now read as : -
“The Central Government, after consultation with the Institute, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to
carry out the purposes of this Act:
Provided that consultation with the Institute shall not be necessary on the first occasion of the making of rules under this
section, but   the Central Government shall take into consideration    any suggestions which the Institute may make in relation
to the amendment of such rules after they are made.”                                               (Para 18.2)
 
The Committee notes that although sub-clause (1) (a) speaks of the summoning and holding of meetings, other than the first
meeting, of the Institute, the time and place where such meetings are to be held and the conduct of business at such meetings, it
remains silent on the notification of the regulations or number of members necessary to form the quorum at such meetings. Clause
9 of the Bill also remains silent about such an important matter. The Committee feels that specifying   quorum of the meetings of
an autonomous Institute is necessary  and should be spelt out in unambiguous terms in the light of critical decision-making powers
conferred upon it by granting autonomy.  Analysis of sub-clause (a) of Clause 29 of the AIIMS Act and sub-clause (1)(a) of
Clause 32 of the PGIMER Chandigarh Act shows that the matter regarding the number of members necessary to form the quorum
at such meetings has been rightly included. The Committee is of the view that same principle should be followed in the case of
JIPMER also. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in sub-clause (1) (a) of Clause 30 necessary amendment be
incorporated to indicate the quorum required for the meetings of the Institute.                          (Para 19.3)
 
      During its interaction with the various witnesses representing student associations, employees’ union, political parties and Ex-
Directors of JIPMER, it was unanimously opined that the present status of reservation of certain percentage of medical seats for
undergraduates hailing from Puducherry should be continued even after the conferment of autonomy to JIPMER and that any
increase in the overall number of seats should result in a proportionate increase in the reserved seats for the people of Puducherry. 
 
Asked to clarify the matter, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, in a written submission, informed the Committee that the
provision for reservation of certain percentage of medical seats for undergraduate courses for the residents of Puducherry was
made when there was no other medical college in Puducherry.   The Ministry further stated that since a number of medical
colleges (seven already established and 2 or 3 including one from the State Government) are under process with projected
undergraduate medical seats numbering almost around 1000, adequate number of seats is available for the residents of
Puducherry. Under the circumstances such reservation may not be appropriate if JIPMER was to maintain status of being an
Institute of national importance.
The Ministry went on to clarify further that at present there is no proposal for withdrawing the facilities given to the residents of
Puducherry in admission to undergraduate medical courses.  As regards the PG courses the principle laid down by Supreme Court
in Saurav Chaudhary i.e. number of seats to be reserved for those students passing out from JIPMER, would hold good. 
The Committee is satisfied with the explanation of the Ministry and recommends that the above assurance on reservation of seats
be incorporated in the Bill for the sake of clarity.                        
                                                                                                    (Para 21.1)
 
      During the Committee’s study visit to Puducherry the Committee was informed by the witnesses that the poor people residing
in Puducherry and its neighbouring areas i.e. Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala and Karnataka come to JIPMER which
provides them with free treatment.  However, nothing has been mentioned in the Bill for the continuance of free medical treatment
as is presently available to them.
The Committee shares concerns of the witnesses and recommends that explicit provision be made in the JIPMER Bill to the effect

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
that free treatment to the poor people in and around Puducherry shall continue as it exists now in JIPMER.                        (Para
21.2)
 
      The Committee observes that a host of conflicting issues have arisen in the existing statutory Medical Bodies concerning the
powers and functions of the Director of the Institute, the President, the Governing Body and the Institute Body, as there is no
clear-cut demarcation of their powers.  
      The Committee, based on its experience, observes that the powers and functions of the above functionaries/bodies be specified
explicitly in the Bill. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that a schedule stating the powers and functions of the Director of
the Institute, the President, the Governing Body and the Institute Body be appended to the Bill.
Similarly, another schedule stating therein the appointment, disciplinary and appellate authority for various posts should also be
incorporated. This, the Committee feels, would make the things clearer leaving no room for ambiguous interpretations and in case
of disagreement on any issue, reference can be made to the schedule with regard to the extent of powers of various functionaries
and bodies of the Institute while considering important administrative
proposals.                                                                                             (Para 21.3)
 
The Committee has observed that the medical institutions like AIIMS, PGIMER, JIPMER, apart from the academic activity, have
a major mandate of providing specialised services to the public at large.   Often, these institutions are the final destination of a
large segment of the society to seek quality care at affordable cost.  Against such a backdrop, the need for having a prompt and
proper mechanism is required to solve the genuine grievances of all categories of employees. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that initiative should be taken by the Govt. for evolving such a mechanism.                                  (Para 21.4)
 
Though the Committee was happy with the provision for according status of national importance to JIPMER, it felt that
infrastructure and health facilities in a number of hospitals across the country leave much to be desired. The Committee
recommends to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to identify some hospitals and medical colleges across the country
which are catering to far larger number of people than the JIPMER, Puducherry for the purpose of improvement of infrastructure
and patient care facilities and allocate additional funds to them. The Committee would like the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare to appraise it on the progress made on this matter at the time of examination of Demand for Grants 2008-
09.                                                              (Para 21.5)
MINUTES
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE
X
TENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Friday the 8
th June, 2007 in Committee Room “A”, Ground Floor, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
 
                       MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Digvijay Singh      --                       in the Chair
2. Prof. P.J. Kurien
3. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
4. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
 
          LOK SABHA
     5.    Shri B. Vinod Kumar
     6.    Shri Rajendra Kumar
     7.    Smt. Susheela Bangaru Laxman
     8.    Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
     9.    Shri Nihal Chand
     10.  Shri Pannian Ravindran
     11.  Dr. R. Senthil

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
     12.  Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
    
 
SECRETARIAT
Smt Vandana Garg,                 Joint Secretary
Shri H.C.Sethi,                         Deputy Secretary
Shri Dinesh Singh,                     Committee Officer
 
WITNESSES
 
1.         Shri Naresh Dayal,                   Secretary, 
2.         Dr. R.K.Srivastava,                  Director General (Health Services)       
3.         Dr. K.S.V.K. Subba Rao,        Director, JIPMER, Puducherry
  4.         Smt. Bhawani Thygrajan,          Joint Secretary, Department of Health & Family
    Welfare
2.         In the absence of Chairman, Shri Digvijay Singh, member, Rajya Sabha, presided over the meeting.
3.         At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee and informed them that Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha had granted an extension of time upto the last date of the ensuing Monsoon Session of the Parliament for presentation/laying of
the report of the Committee on the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research Bill, Puducherry - 2007.
4.         He apprised the Committee that the Secretariat had received various representations from different associations, namely,
JIPMER Staff Struggle Committee, JIPMER Hospital Employees’ Union, JIPMER SC/ST Employees’ Welfare Association, JIPMER
Anti-Autonomy People’s Committee, CPI (M) Puducherry Pradesh Committee.
5.          Keeping in view the wide ramifications of various provisions of the Bill, the Committee decided to undertake a visit to
JIPMER, Puducherry during the first week of July, 2007, in order to gather the views of the various stake-holders on a first-hand
basis. The Committee in this connection authorized the Chairman of the Committee to approach Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for
seeking necessary permission for the aforesaid study visit of the Committee.
6.         The Committee also decided to hear the views of Management of AIIMS, New Delhi and PGIMER, Chandigarh as the present
Bill is based on the Acts governing these Institutes.
7.         The Committee, thereafter, heard the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare on the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-
Graduate Medical Education and Research Bill, Puducherry – 2007.
8.         A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
9.         The Committee then adjourned at 3.50 p.m.
NEW DELHI
8
th June, 2007
H.C. SETHI
DEPUTY SECRETARY
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE
XI
ELEVENTH   MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday the 18
th July, 2007 in Room No. 139, First  Floor, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
 
      MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
 
1. Shri Amar Singh                                   --                     Chairman
2. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
3. Shrimati Maya Singh
4. Shri Digvijay Singh
5. Shri Lalhming Liana
6. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
 
           LOK SABHA
 

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
      7.   Smt. Maneka Gandhi
      8.   Shri B. Vinod Kumar
9.   Shri Rajendra Kumar
1. Smt. Susheela Bangaru Laxman
2. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
3. Shri Nihal Chand
4. Shri Pannian Ravindran
5. Dr. R. Senthil
6. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
7. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
8. Shri Vinod Khanna
9. Shri R.L.Jalappa
    
 
SECRETARIAT
Smt Vandana Garg,                 Joint Secretary
Shri H.C.Sethi                          Joint Director
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi,        Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh,                     Committee Officer
 
2.         The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed all the Members of the Committee. The Committee then discussed the issues which
emerged as a result of its interaction with the Director and faculty members of JIPMER, all the associations of the Institute
representing different categories of employees and local representatives of a number of political parties during its study visit to
JIPMER, Puducherry on the JIPMER, Puducherry Bill-2007 from 1st to 4th July, 2007.
3.         Thereafter, the Chairman informed the Committee that Director, AIIMS who was scheduled to appear before the Committee at
its meeting to be held on 20 th July, 2007, would not be able to do so due to his pre-occupation. The Committee then decided to hear
Director AIIMS, to have a final discussion with the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare and hold clause by clause
discussion on the various provisions of the Bill at its meeting to be held on 27th July, 2007.
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 3.45 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 on 20th July, 2007
NEW DELHI
18th July, 2007
PRADEEP CHATURVEDI  
                     JOINT DIRECTOR
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE
XII
TWELFTH  MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Friday the 20
th July, 2007 in Committee Room “A”, First Floor, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
 
     MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
 
1.   Shri Digvijay Singh      --                       in the Chair
2.   Prof. P.J. Kurian
3.   Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
4.   Shrimati Maya Singh
5.   Shri Lalhming Liana
 
           LOK SABHA
      6.   Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
7.   Shri B. Vinod Kumar
8.   Shri Rajendra Kumar
9.   Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
10. Dr. Chinta Mohan
1. Shri Nihal Chand

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
2. Shri D. B. Patil
3. Shri Pannian Ravindran
4. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
5. Shri Vinod Khanna
6. Shri R.L.Jalappa
    
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri H.C.Sethi                          Joint Director
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi,        Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh,                     Committee Officer
 
WITNESSES
1.          Dr. K.B. Logani           Former Director, JIPMER, Puducherry
2.          Dr. K.K. Talwar           Director, PGIMER, Chandigarh
 
2. In the absence of Chairman, Shri Digvijay Singh, Member, Rajya Sabha, presided over the meeting.
3.         At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee and witnesses. The Committee then heard the views
of Dr. K.B. Logani, former Director, JIPMER and Prof. K.K. Talwar, Direcor, PGIMER, Chandigarh  on the Jawaharlal Institute of
Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research Bill, Puducherry – 2007.  Thereafter, the Chairperson and members of the Committee
raised a number of queries on the subject which were replied to by the witnesses.
4.         A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 12.15 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on  30
th July, 2007
NEW DELHI
20th July 2007 
PRADEEP CHATURVEDI  
                     JOINT DIRECTOR
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Friday the 27 th July, 2007 in Committee Room “A”, Ground Floor, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
 
      MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
 
1.   Shri Amar Singh                            ------          Chairman         
2.   Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
3.   Shri Lalhming Liana
4.   Shri Digvijay Singh     
 
            LOK SABHA
5. Smt. Maneka Gandhi
6. Shri Rajendra Kumar
7. Smt. Susheela Bangaru Laxman
8. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
9. Shri Rasheed Masood
10. Shri Nihal Chand
11. Shri Ajit Kumar Singh
12. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
  
 
SECRETARIAT
Smt. Vandana Garg                  Joint Secretary
Shri H.C.Sethi                          Joint Director
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi,        Joint Director

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
Shri Dinesh Singh,                     Committee Officer
 
            WITNESSES
A.         All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi
 1.         Dr. P. Venugopal          Director, AIIMS, New Delhi
2.         Dr. A.K. Bisoi, Addl. Prof. CTVS
            3.         Dr. Shakti Gupta,         Medical Superintendent
 
      B.         Department of Health and Family Welfare
1.         Shri Naresh Dayal                    Secretary
2.         Dr. R. K. Srivastava,                Director General of Health Services
3.         Smt. Bhavani Thyagrajan,         Joint Secretary
 
 
2.         The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed the representatives of AIIMS.  Thereafter, the representatives of AIIMS made a
presentation before the Committee on the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research   Bill – 2007.   The
presentation focused on various aspects of autonomy, composition of the Institute Body, Governing Body, regulation-making powers,
Selection Committee, Finance Committee etc. Members asked questions on the subject which were replied to. 
3.         The Committee also heard the views of the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare on certain aspects of the Bill.
Members sought clarification from the Secretary with regard to certain issues in the light of the Committee’s interaction with various
stakeholders during its study visit to Puducherry.  The Secretary answered the queries raised by Members.  The Committee adjourned
for lunch at 1:10 p.m.
4.         A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5.         The Committee reassembled after lunch at 2:30 p.m. to take up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill.   The Committee,
after discussing the matter directed the Secretariat to prepare a draft Report on the Bill and circulate the same to its Members before
the next meeting.
6.         The Committee then adjourned at 3.10 p.m.
NEW DELHI
27
th July, 2007
PRADEEP CHATURVEDI  
                     JOINT DIRECTOR
 
 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE
I
FIRST MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 3.30 p.m. on Thursday, the 30 th August, 2007 in Room No-63, First Floor, Parliament House, New
Delhi.
 
      MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1.   Shri Amar Singh                            ------          Chairman         
2.   Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
3.   Smt Maya Singh
1. Shri Lalhming Liana
2. Smt Viplove Thakur
 
          LOK SABHA
3. Dr Ram Chandra Dome
4. Smt. Maneka Gandhi
5. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
6. Dr Chinta Mohan
7. Shri Nihal Chand

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
8. Shri D.B. Patil
9. Shri Pannian Ravindran
10. Dr R.Senthil
11. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
12. Shri R.L.Jalappa
  
SECRETARIAT
Shri R.B.Gupta                        Joint Director
Shri T.N.Pandey                      Deputy Director
Shri Dinesh Singh                      Committee Officer
 
1.                              At the outset, the Chairman made a reference to the passing away of Shri Ajit Kumar Singh, a sitting Member of Lok
Sabha and member of the Committee during 2006-07, on 1st August 2007.  The Committee expressed its profound grief at the
untimely demise of Shri Ajit Kumar Singh.   The Committee, thereafter, observed two-minute silence, as a mark of respect to the
memory of the departed soul.
2.
                              Thereafter, the Committee suo moto took cognizance of non-issuance of degree certificates to the Resident Doctors of
AIIMS and the resultant strike by Doctors of AIIMS, thereby paralyzing the patient care services there and subjecting the common
people to great sufferings.  The Committee felt that, as a watchdog, it cannot remain a mute spectator to the happenings in AIIMS and
hence passed the following resolution to be forwarded to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
“The Committee expresses its deep concern over the non-issuance of degree certificates to the Resident Doctors of AIIMS and
the resultant strike which has severely paralyzed the patient care services at the premier Institute.   The Committee urges upon
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to take immediate remedial measures for the issuance of degree certificates to the
eligible Doctors of AIIMS without further loss of time and also to put in place a mechanism to ensure that such a situation
does not recur in future.”
3.         Thereafter, the Committee considered the draft 24
th Report on the Jawaharlal Institute of Post Graduate Medical Education
and Research (JIPMER), Puducherry Bill-2007 and adopted the same with a few amendments, as suggested by members.   The
Committee, then, decided that the Report may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the table of Lok Sabha on Friday, the 7th of
September 2007. The Committee authorized the Chairman of the Committee and in his absence, Smt Maya Singh to present the
Report to the Rajya Sabha and Dr. R.C. Dome and in his absence, Smt Maneka Gandhi to lay the Report on the table of Lok Sabha.
 
4.         The Chairman also apprised the Committee about the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment)  Bill-2007 that has been referred to
the Committee on 23
rd August 2007 for examination and report thereon, within three months.
 
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 p.m.
NEW DELHI
30th August, 2007
                 T.N.PANDEY
DEPUTY DIRECTOR
ANNEXURES
                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                ANNEXURE-I
 
 
Bill No. XII of 2007
THE JAWAHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POST-GRADUATE MEDICAL 
      EDUCATION AND RESEARCH, PUDUCHERRY BILL, 2007
 
A
BILL
to declare the Institution known as the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical 
           Education and Research, Puducherry,   to be an institution of national importance 
           and   to provide for its incorporation and   matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education
and Research, Puducherry Act, 2007.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
2. Whereas the objects of the institution known as the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-
Graduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry in the Union territory of Puducherry are such as to make the institution one of
national importance, it is hereby declared that the institution known as the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education
and Research, Puducherry is an institution of national importance.
Short title
and
commencement.
 
 
 
Declaration of 
Jawaharlal 
Institute of 
Post-Graduate 
Medical
Education and Research,
Puducherry, as 
an institution 
of national 
importance .
 
 
 
 
 
 
Definitions.                   3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Fund" means the Fund of the Institute referred to in section 16; 
(b) "Governing Body" means the Governing Body of the Institute;
(c) "Institute" means the institution known as the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-
Graduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry, incorporated under this Act;
(d) "member" means a member of the Institute;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "specified" means specified by regulations made under this Act.
Incorporation                4. The Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research,
of Institute.        Puducherry, an Institute functioning under the Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare,
is hereby constituted a body corporate by the name aforesaid and as such body corporate, it shall have
perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold
and dipose of property and to contract and shall, by that name, sue and be sued.
Composition                 5. (1) The Institute shall consist of the following members, namely:—
of Institute.
(a) The Minister in Charge of Health and Family Welfare — President;
(b) Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry or Department of Health and Family
Welfare, ex officio;
(c) the Vice-Chancellor of the Puducherry University, ex officio;
(d) the Vice-Chancellor of the Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G. R. Medical University, Tamil Nadu, ex
officio;
(e) the Director-General of Health Services, Government of India, ex officio; (f) the Director of
the Institute, ex officio;
(g) Chief Secretary, Government of Puducherry, ex officio;
(h) Secretary to the Government of India or his nominee (not below the rank of 
Joint Secretary) in the  Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, ex officio;
(i) Secretary to the Government of India or his nominee (not below the rank of Joint Secretary)
in the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development, ex officio;
(j) seven persons of whom one shall be a non-medical scientist representing the Indian Science
Congress Association, to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be
prescribed;
(k) four representatives of the medical faculties of Indian Universities to be 
nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(l) two Members of Parliament from the Union territory of Puducherry, one each from Lok
Sabha to be nominated by the Speaker of Lok Sabha, and from Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the
Chairman of the Rajya Sabha.

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
(2) It is hereby declared that the office of member of the Institute shall not disqualify its holder for
being chosen as, or for being, a member of either House of Parliament.
Term of                                             6. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of a member shall be
office of, and      five years from the date of his nomination.
vacancies
among                           (2) The term of office of a member nominated under clause (l) of sub-section (1) of
members.            section 5 shall come to an end as soon as he becomes a Minister or Minister of State or
Deputy Minister or the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the Lok Sabha or the Deputy
 
 
 
 
Chairman of the Rajya Sabha or ceases to be a member of the House from which he was nominated.
(3) The term of office of an ex officio member shall continue so long as he holds the office by virtue
of which he is such a member.
(4) The term of office of a member nominated to fill a casual vacancy shall continue for the remainder
of the term of the member in whose place he is nominated.
(5) An out-going member other than a member nominated under clause (l) of subsection (1) of section
5 shall, unless the Central Government otherwise directs, continue in office until another person is
nominated as a member in his place.
(6) An out-going member shall be eligible for re-nomination.
(7) A member may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Central 
Government but he shall continue in office until his resignation is accepted by that Government.
(8) The manner of filling vacancies among members shall be such as may be prescribed.
7. The President shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as are laid
down in this Act or as may be prescribed.
8. The President and other members shall receive such allowances from the Institute as may be prescribed.
9. The Institute shall hold its first meeting at such time and place as may be appointed by the Central Government and shall
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at the first meeting as may be laid down by that Government;
and thereafter, the Institute shall meet at such times and places and observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of
business at its meetings as may be specified.
10. (1) There shall be a Governing Body of the Institute which shall be constituted by the Institute in such manner as may be
specified:
Provided that the number of persons who are not members of the Institute shall not exceed one-third of the total membership of
the Governing Body.
(2) The Governing Body shall be the executive committee of the Institute and shall 
exercise such powers and discharge such functions as the Institute may specify in this 
behalf.
(3) The President of the Institute shall be the Chairperson of the Governing Body and as Chairperson thereof he shall exercise
such powers and discharge such functions as may be specified.
(4) The procedure to be followed in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions by the Governing Body, and the
term of office of, and the manner of filling vacancies among the members of the Governing Body shall be such as may be specified.
(5) Subject to such control and restrictions as may be prescribed, the Institute may constitute as many standing committees and
as many ad hoc committees as it thinks fit for exercising any power or discharging any function of the Institute or for inquiring into, or
reporting or advising upon, any matter which the Institute may refer to them.
(6) The Chairperson and members of the Governing Body and the Chairperson and the members of a standing committee or an
ad hoc committee shall receive such allowances, as may be specified.
11. (1) There shall be a chief executive officer of the Institute who shall be designated as the Director of the Institute and shall,
subject to such rules as may be prescribed, be appointed by the Institute:
Powers    and
functions   of President.
Allowances of 
President and 
members.
Meetings   of Institute.
 
 
 

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
 
Governing 
Body and
other
committees 
of Institute.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Staff of
Institute.
 
Provided that the first Director of the Institute shall be appointed by the Central Government.
(2) The Director shall act as the Secretary to the Institute as well as the Governing
Body.
(3) The Director shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as may be specified, or as
may be delegated to him by the Institute or the President of the Institute or the Governing Body or the
Chairperson of the Governing Body.
(4) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, the Institute may appoint such number of other officers
and employees as may be necessary for the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions and may
determine the designations and grades of such other officers and employees.
(5) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, the Director and other officers and employees of the
Institute shall be entitled to such salary and allowances and shall be governed by such conditions of service
in respect of leave, pension, provident fund and other matters as may be specified.
Objects of                      12. The objects of the Institute shall be—
Institute.
(a) to develop patterns of teaching in undergraduate and postgraduate medical
education in all its branches so as to demonstrate a high standard of medical education;
(b) to bring together, as far as may be, in one place educational facilities of the 
highest order for the training of personnel in all important branches of health activity; 
and
(c) to attain self-sufficiency in postgraduate medical education to meet the country's needs for
specialists and medical teachers.
Functions  of                 13. With a view to the promotion of the objects specified in section 12, the Institute
Institute.            may—
(a) provide for undergraduate and postgraduate teaching in the science of 
modern medicine and other allied sciences, including physical and biological sciences;
(b) provide facilities for research in the various branches of such sciences; (c) provide for
the teaching of humanities;
(d ) conduct experiments in new methods of medical education, both undergraduate and
postgraduate, in order to arrive at satisfactory standards of such education;
(e) specify courses and curricula for both undergraduate and postgraduate studies;
(f) notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, establish
and maintain—
(i) one or more medical colleges with different departments, including a department of
preventive and social medicine, sufficiently staffed and equipped to undertake not only
undergraduate medical education but also postgraduate medical education in different subjects,

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
(ii) one or more well-equipped hospitals,
(iii) a dental college with such institutional facilities for the practice of dentistry and for
the practical training of students as may be necessary,
(iv) a nursing college sufficiently staffed and equipped for the training of nurses,
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) rural and urban health organisations which will form centres for the field training of
the medical, dental and nursing students of the Institute as well as for research into community
health problems, and
(vi) other institutions for the training of different types of health workers, such as
physiotherapists, occupational therapists, pharmacists, drug analysts and medical technicians of
various kinds;
(g) train teachers from different medical colleges in India;
(h) hold examinations and grant such degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions and
titles in undergraduate and postgraduate medical education as may be laid down in the regulations;
(i) institute, and appoint persons to, professorships, readerships, lecturerships and posts of any
description in accordance with regulations;
(j) receive grants from the Government and gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests and
transfers of properties, both movable and immovable, from donors, benefactors, testators or
transferors, as the case may be;
(k) deal with any property belonging to, or vested in, the Institute in any manner 
which is considered necessary for promoting the objects specified in section 12;
(l) demand and receive such fees and other charges as may be specified;
(m) construct quarters for its staff and allot such quarters to the staff in accordance with such
regulations as may be made in this behalf;
(n) borrow money, with the prior approval of the Central Government, on the security of the
property of the Institute;
(o) do all such other acts and things as may be necessary to further the objects specified in
section 12.
14. The properties of the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and
Research, Puducherry which vested in the Central Government shall, on the commencement of this Act, vest in the Institute.
15. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Institute in each
financial year such sums of money and in such manner as may be considered necessary by that Government for the exercise of its
powers and discharge of its functions under this Act.
16. (1) The Institute shall maintain a Fund to which shall be credited—
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government;
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Institute;
(c) all moneys received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations,
benefactions, bequests or transfers; and
(d) all moneys received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other
source.
(2) All moneys credited to the Fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested in 
such manner as the Institute may, which the approval of the Central Government, decide.
(3) The Fund shall be supplied towards meeting the expenses of the Institute including expenses incurred in the exercise of its
powers and discharge of its functions under section 13.
 
Vesting of
property.
 
 
Payment to 
Institute.
 
 

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
 
Fund of
Institute.
 
 
 
 
 
Budget of
Institute.
 
 
 
Accounts and 
Audit.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annual
Report.
 
 
 
Pension and
Provident
Funds.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Authentication 
of orders and 
instruments of 
Institute.
 
Acts and
proceedings
not to be
invalidated by 
vacancies, etc.
Grant of
medical
degrees,
diplomas,
etc., by
Institute.
Recognition
of medical
qualifications 
granted by
Institute.
 
17. The Institute shall prepare in such form and at such time every year a budget in
respect of the financial year next ensuing showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Institute and shall forward to the Central
Government such number of copies thereof as may be prescribed.
18. (1) The Institute shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and 
prepare and annual statement of accounts including the balance-sheet in such form as the 

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
Central Government may by rules prescribe, and in accordance with such general directions
as may be issued by that Government, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Institute shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Institute to the Comptorller
and Auditor-General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Institute shall have the same rights, privileges 
and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have 
the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other 
documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the Institute as well as of the institutions
established and maintained by it.
(4) The Accounts of the Institute as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report 
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Government shall
cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
19. The Institute shall prepare for every year a report of its activities during that year 
and submit the report to the Central Government in such form and on or before such date as 
may be prescribed and a copy of this report shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament
within one month of its receipt.
20. (1) The Institute shall constitute for the benefit of its officers, teachers and other employees in such manner and subject to such
conditions as may be specified by regulations, such pension and provident funds as it may deem fit.
(2) Where any such pension or provident fund has been constituted, the Central 
Government may declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925, shall apply to,           
19 of 1925.
such fund as if it were a Government Provident Fund.
21. All orders and decisions of the Institute shall be authenticated by the signature of 
the Director or any other member authorised by the Institute in this behalf and all other 
instruments shall be authenticated by the signature of such officers as may be authorised by
the Institute.
22. No act done or proceeding taken by the Institute, Governing Body or any standing 
or ad hoc committee under this Act shall be questioned on the ground merely of the existence 
of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the Institute, Governing Body or such
standing or ad hoc committee.
23. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the Institute shall have the power to grant
medical, Dental Nursing degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions and titles under this Act.
 
24. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 the     12 of 1956.
Dentist Act, 1948, the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947, the medical degrees and diplomas,    16 of 1948.
Dental Degrees and Nursing Degrees granted by the Institute under this Act shall be               48 of 1947.
recognised medical qualifications for the purposes of the Acts aforesaid and shall be deemed to be included in the Schedules to the
respective Acts.
 
 
 
 
25. The Institute shall carry out such directions as may be issued to it from time to time
by the Central Government for the efficient administration of this Act.
 
26. If in, or in connection with, the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions by the Institute under this Act, any
dispute or difference arises between the Institute and the Central Government, the decision of the Central Government thereon shall be
final.
27. The Institute shall furnish to the Central Government such reports, returns and other information as that Government may
require from time to time.
28. (1) On and from the date of commencement of this Act, every employee holding office under the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-
Graduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry, immediately before that date shall hold his office in the Institute by the same
tenure and upon the same terms and conditions of service including remuneration, leave, provident fund retirement and other terminal
benefits as he would have held such office if the Institute had not been incorporated and shall continue to do so as an employee of the
Institute or until the expiry of the period of six months from that date if such employee opts not to be the employee of the Institute.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall also apply to the members of the Central Health Service, the Central Secretariat
Service or any other service or to persons borne on cadre outside the Institute who have been working in the Institute immediately

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
before the date of commencement of this Act:
Provident that where any such member intimates within the time specified in sub-
section (1) his intension of not becoming an employee of the Institute but to continue on deputation, he may be allowed to continue on
deputation, in accordance with such terms and conditions as may be prescribed:
Provident further that on and from the date of commencement of this Act, the 
appointment of the officers, belonging to the Central Health Service, to the Institute shall be 
determined in such manner and in accordance with such terms and conditions as may be 
prescribed.
(3) The officers and employees holding office under the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-
Graduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry immediately before the date of commencement of this Act, shall become the
officers and employees of the Institute with such designations as the Institute may determine and shall be governed by such regulations
as may be made as respects remuneration and other conditions of service including pension, leave and provident fund and shall
continue to be an officer or employee of the Institute unless and until his employment is terminated by the Institute.
(4) Every officer or other employee of the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry,
shall, within six months from the date of commencement of this Act, exercise his option, in writing, to be governed—
(a) by the scale of pay applicable to the post held by him in the Jawaharlal
Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry immediately
before the date of such commencement, or the scale applicable to the post under the
Institute to which he is appointed; and
(b) by the leave, provident fund, retirement or other terminal benefits admissible
to the employees of the Central Government in accordance with the rules or orders of
the Central Government, as amended from time to time, or the leave provident fund or
other terminal benefits admissible to the employees of the Institute under the regulations,
and such option once exercised under this Act shall be final:
Provided that the option exercised under clause (a) by an officer or other employee shall be applicable only in respect of the post
under the Institute to which such officer or other employee is appointed and an appointment to a higher post under Institute he shall be
eligible only for the scale of pay applicable to such higher post:
 
 
 
Control by
Central
Government.
Resolution of 
differences.
 
 
Returns   and 
information.
 
Transfer of 
service of
existing
employees.
 
es.
 
Provided further that if immediately before the date of his appointment any such 
officer or other employee is officiating in a higher post under the Government either in a leave 
vacancy or any other vacancy of a specified duration his pay on such appointment shall be 
protected for the unexpired period of such vacancy and thereafter, he shall be entitled to the 
scale of pay applicable to the post under the Government to which he would have reverted 
or to the scale of pay applicable to the post under the Institute to which he is appointed, 
whichever he may opt:
Provided also that when an officer or other employee serving in the Union Ministry of 
Health or in any of its attached or subordinate offices is promoted to officiate in a higher post 
in the Ministry or office subsequent to the appointment to the Institute of any other officer 
or employee senior to him in that Ministry or office before such appointment, the officer or 
other employee who is promoted to officiate in such higher post shall on appointment to the 
Institute, be entitled only to the scale of pay applicable to the post he would have held but 
for such promotion or the scale of pay applicable to the post under the Institute to which he 
is appointed, whichever he may opt.
(5) No officer or other employee appointed under sub-section (2),—
(a) shall be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate to the authority competent to
make a similar or equivalent appointment under the Institute as may be specified;

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
(b) shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank except after an inquiry in which he has
been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in
respect of those charges:
Provided that where it is proposed after such inquiry to impose upon him any such penalty, such
penalty may be imposed on the basis of evidence adduced during such inquiry and it shall not be necessary to
give   such person an opportunity of making representation on the proposed penalty:
Provided further that clause (b) shall not apply where an officer or other employee is dismissed or
removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led   to his conviction on a criminal charge.
(6) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-sections (1) and ( 3), the tenure, remuneration and
terms and conditions of service including pension of any such officer of other employee shall not be altered
to his disadvantage.
Power to                       29. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
make rules.         to carry out the purpose of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of nomination of members under clauses (j) and (k) of subsection (1) of section
5;
(b) the manner of filling vacancies under sub-section (8) of section 6;
(c) the powers and functions to the exercised and discharged by the President of the Institute
under section 7;
(d) the allowances to be paid to the President and other members of the Institute under section 8;
(e) the control and restrictions in relation to the constitution of standing and ad hoc committees
under sub-section (5) of section 10;
(f) the tenure of office, salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the Director
and other officers and employees of the Institute appointed by the Institute under section 11;
 
(g) the form in which, and the time at which, the budgets and reports shall be prepared by the
Institute under section 17;
(h) the form of annual statement of accounts including balance-sheet under sub-section (1) of
section 18;
(i) the from of annual report under section 19;
(j) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed by rules.
30. (1) The Institute with the previous approval of the Central Government, may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes
of this Act, and without prejudice to the generality of this power, such regulations may provide for—
(a) the summoning and holding of meetings, other than the first meeting, of the
Institute, the time and place where such meetings are to be held and the conduct of
business at such meetings under section 9;
(b) the manner of constituting the Governing Body and standing and ad hoc
committees, the term of office of, and the manner of filling vacancies therein, the
allowances to be paid to the members and the procedure to be followed by the Governing
Body; standing and ad hoc committees in the conduct of their business, exercise of
their power discharge of their function under section 10;
(c) the powers and duties of the Director and other officers and employees of
the Institute under sub-sections (3) and (4) and other conditions of service under sub-
section (5) of section 11;
(d) the power of the Institute under section 13, to specify—
(i) courses and curricula for undergraduate and postgraduate studies;
(ii) hold examination and grant degrees, diplomas and other academic
distinctions and titles under clause (h);
(iii) the professorships, readerships, lecturerships and other posts which
may be instituted and persons who may be appointed to such posts under
clause (i);
(iv) the management of the properties of the Institute under clause (k);
(v) the fees and other charges which may be demanded and received by

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
the Institute under clause (l);
(e) the manner in which, and the conditions subject to which, pension and
provident funds may be constituted for the benefit of officers, teachers and other
employees of the Institute under sub-section (1) of section 20;
(f) any other matter for which under this Act provisions may be made by
regulations.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the first regulations under this Act shall be made by the Central
Government; and any regulations so made may be altered or rescinded by the Institute in exercise of its powers under sub-section (1).
31. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall  be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall
 
Power to
make
regulations.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Laying of 
rules and 
regulations 
before
Parliament.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
 
 
 
 
 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that rule or regulation.
 
 
Power to
Remove
Difficultie                       
32. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provision not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section, after the expiry of a period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament.
 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 
The Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research, 
Pondicherry was established in 1964 primarily with the objectives to develop patterns of 
teaching in undergraduate and postgraduate medical education so as to establish and 
demonstrate high standards of education. The Institute has been providing quality education 
and excellent patient care delivery services over the years, however; it could not grow due 
to constraints in the process of manpower selection, lack of academic autonomy, lack of 
flexibility in administrative and financial powers, commensurate with other institutions like, 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi and Post-Graduate Institute of Medical 
Education and Research, Chandigarh.
2. It is proposed to make the Institute a statutory body corporate and declare as an
institution of national importance under entry 64 of List I of the Seventh Schedule to the
Constitution so that it may develop as a high level institution of medical education and research
on the pattern of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi and the Post-Graduate
Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh.
3. This Bill will empower the Institute with academic autonomy to develop its own 
curriculum, set new trends in medical education and research and award its own degrees 
and also enable it to have appropriate delegated administrative and financial powers. The 
conferring of statutory status on this Institute will enable it to grow into a model centre of 
excellence.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
NEW DELHI;
The    28th    November, 2006.
 
ANBUMANI  RAMADOSS.
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
Notes On Clauses
 
Clause 1 provides for short title, extent and commencement of the Act.
Clause 2 in view of the objects of the Jawaharlal Institute of Post Graduate Medical Education and
Research, Puducherry in the Union territory of Puducherry declares it as an institution of national
importance.
Clause 3 provides for the definitions of certain words ‘Fund’, ‘Governing Body’, 

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
‘Institute’, ‘member’, ‘prescribed’ and ‘specified’ used in various provisions of the Bill.
Clause 4 provides for incorporation of the Jawaharlal Institute of Post Graduate Medical
Education and Research, Puducherry into a body corporate by the same name having perpetual succession
and a common seal with certain powers.
Clause 5 provides for the composition of the Institute with the Minister in charge of Health and
Family Welfare as its President and twenty-one other members consisting of eight ex officio  members,
medical specialists, etc., and two Members of Parliament from the Union territory of Puducherry one each
from Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha as its members. It also provides that the office of a member of the Institute
shall not disqualify its holder for being chosen as, or for being, a member of either House of Parliament.
Clause 6 provides for term of office of member of the Institute, their re-nomination and manner of
filling of vacancies of the members.
Clause 7 provides that the President shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as
laid down in the Bill or as may be prescribed.
Clause 8 provides that the President and members shall receive such allowances from the Institute
as may be prescribed.
Clause 9 prescribes the procedure of holding first meeting of the Institute and the meetings to be
held thereafter.
Clause 10 requires that the Institute shall constitute a Governing Body and the President of the
Institute shall be its Chairperson and deals with other committees of the Institute and their powers and
functions.
Clause 11 makes provision for the chief executive officer of the Institute who shall 
be designated as Director of the Institute and shall be appointed in the prescribed manner. 
It also provides that the first Director shall be appointed by the Central Government.  It also 
provides that the Director shall be the Secretary of the Institute as well as the Governing 
Body.   It also provides that the Institute may appoint, subject to such rules as may be 
prescribed, such number of officers and employees as may be necessary and the Director 
and other officers and employees shall be entitled to such salaries and allowances and be 
governed by such conditions of service as may be specified by regulations.
Clause 12 enumerates the objects of the Institute as developing and attaining high standard of
medical education, training of personnel in important branches of health activity, attaining self-sufficiency in
higher medical education.
Clause 13 provides for the various functions of the Institute, which inter alia 
include the providing of undergraduate and postgraduate teaching in the science of modern 
medicine and other allied sciences and research in various branches of science; conduct 
experiments, establish and maintain medical, dental and nursing colleges, hospitals, rural 
and urban health organisations which will form centres for field training; specify courses 
and curricula activities; hold examination and grant degrees, diplomas and other academic 
distinctions and titles and do all other acts and thing as may be necessary to further the 
objects of the Institute.
Clause 14 provides that the properties of the Jawaharlal Institute of Post Graduate Medical
Education and Research, Puducherry, which vested in the Central Government, shall vest in the Institute.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clause 15 provides that Central Government may provide money after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law to the Institute for exercising its power and discharging functions under the Bill.
Clause 16 makes provision for a Fund to be maintained by the Institute in which 
moneys received from Central Government and all fees, other charges, grants, gifts, donation, 
etc., shall be credited. It also makes provision for applying the fund to meet the expenses of 
the Institute.
Clause 17 provides for preparation of budget in respect of the financial year next ensuing showing
receipts and expenditure of the Institute in prescribed form and requires it to forward the same to the
Central Government.
Clause 18 makes provision for maintaining proper accounts and other relevant records and
preparation of annual statement of accounts including the balance sheet in such form as may be prescribed in
accordance with general directions issued by the Central Government and in consultation with the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India and also provides for its audit by the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India.
Clause 19 provides for preparation of annual reports of the activities of the Institute in prescribed
form to be submitted to the Central Government.    This clause also requires laying of the such report before
Parliament.

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
Clause 20 provides for constitution of pension and provident fund for the benefit of its officers,
teachers and other employees in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be specified by
regulations.   It also empowers the Central Government to declare that the provisions of the Provident Fund
Act, 1925 shall apply to such fund as if it were a Government Provident Fund.
Clause 21 provides that all orders and decisions of the Institute shall be 
authenticated by the signature of the Director or any other member authorised by the 
Institute.
Clause 22 ensures that any action of the Institute, its Governing Body or any 
standing or ad hoc committee shall not be invalidated on account of any vacancy or defect 
in any constitution of the Institute, Governing Body, standing or ad hoc committee.
Clause 23 provides that notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for 
the time being in force, the Institute shall have the power to grant Medical, Dental and 
Nursing degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions and titles under the Bill.
Clause 24 provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Medical Council Act,
1956, the Dentist Act, 1948, the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947, Medical Degrees and Diplomas, the
Dental Degrees and Nursing Degrees granted by the Institute shall be recognised medical qualifications
under those Acts and shall be deemed to be included in the Schedules of the respective Acts.
Clause 25 provides that Institute shall carry out the directions issued by the 
Central Government from time to time having regard to the efficient administration of the 
Bill.
Clause 26 provides if any dispute or difference arises between the Institute and the Central
Government with regard to the exercise of powers and discharge of functions by the Institute, the decision of
the Central Government thereon shall be final.
Clause 27 provides that the Institute shall furnish such reports, returns and other information as
may be asked by the Central Government from time to time.
Clause 28 provides for (i) the absorption of existing employees of the Jawaharlal 
Institute of Post Graduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry in the Institute on 
same terms and conditions of service including remuneration, leave, provident fund, 
retirement and other terminal benefits unless the concerned employees opts within six 
months not to be employee of the Institute; (ii) the terms and conditions of absorption or 
deputation of employees belonging to Central Health Service, Central Secretariat Service or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
any other service;            (iii) protection of pay and other interests on promotion in certain cases
in the event of absorption in the Institute.
Clause 29 enables the Central Government to make rules to carry out the purposes 
of the Bill and enumerates the various provisions whereunder such rules may be made.
Clause 30 enables the Institute to make regulations with the previous approval of 
the Central Government and consistent with the Act and the rules made thereunder to carry 
out the purposes of the Bill.  It also provides that first regulations under this clause shall be 
made by the Central Government and any regulation so made may be altered or rescinded 
by the Institute.
Clause 31 provides for laying of rules and regulations before each House of Parliament.
Clause 32 provides that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
the Bill the Central Government may by order make such provisions not inconsistent with 
provisions of the Bill for removing the difficulty.  It also provides that no such order shall be 
made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of commencement of the Act and 
all orders made under this clause shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research, 

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
Puducherry, an institute functioning under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, is 
proposed to be declared as an institution of national importance under clause 2 of the Bill. 
Clause 5 provides for the constitution of the Institute and clause 8 makes provision for the 
allowances of the President and other members of the Institute. Sub-clause (6) of clause 10 
provides for the allowances of the Chairperson and members of the Governing Body, standing 
committee and ad-hoc committee. Sub-clause (5) of clause 11 provides for the salary and 
allowances of the Director and other officers and employees of the Institute.
Clause 15 provides that after due appropriation made by Parliament, by law, the Central Government may pay to the Institute
by way of grants in each financial year such sums of money as the Central Government considers necessary for being utilised for the
purposes of the Bill.
Presently, the Institute functioning under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is provided budgetary support. For the
current financial year a budget provision of rupees 104 crores have been made to meet its expenditure. The Institute shall continue to be
supported from Government budget through grant-in-aid.
The Bill does not involve any other expenditure of a recurring or non-recurring
nature.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 29 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carryout 
the purposes of the Bill.   Such rules may, inter alia, provide for the (i) the manner of 
nomination of members under clauses (j) and (k) of sub-clause (1) of clause 5; (ii) the manner 
of filling vacancies under sub-clause (8) of clause 6; (iii) the power and functions to be
exercised and discharged by the President of the Institute under clause 7;  (iv) the allowances 
to be paid to the President and other members under clause 8; (v) the tenure of office, 
salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the Director and other officers 
and employees of the Institute under clause 11; (vi) the form of annual statement of accounts 
including balance sheets under sub-clause (1) of clause 18; (vii) the form of annual report 
under clause 19.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 30 of the Bill empowers the Institute to make regulations, 
with the previous approval of the Central Government, consistent with the provisions of 

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
the Bill and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the purposes of the Bill.  Such regulations 
may, inter alia, provide for (i) the summoning and holding of meetings of the Institute; (ii) 
the manner of constituting the Governing Body and standing and ad hoc committees, their 
term of office, manner of filling vacancies thereunder, allowances to be paid to members and 
procedure to be followed by such committees and exercise of their powers and discharge of 
functions under clause 10; (iii) the powers of the Institute under clause 13 to specify 
courses and curricula, holding examinations and grant of degrees, diplomas, etc., management 
and priorities of the institute, fees and other charges which may be demanded and received 
by the Institute, etc.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 30 empowers the Central Government to make the first 
regulations enumerated in clause (1) which may subsequently be altered and rescind by the 
Institute.
The rules and the regulations made under the Bill are also required to be laid before each House of Parliament.
The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made under the 
aforesaid provisions are matter of procedure and administrative details and it is not practical 
to provide for them in the Bill.  The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA   SABHA
 
 A
Bill
to declare the Institution known as the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education 
                     and Research, Puducherry, to be an institution of national importance and to provide 
                         for its incorporation and matters connected therewith.
 
 
(Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss, Minister of Health and Family Welfare)
 
 
 
 
 
MGIPMRND—785RS(S-5)—02.03.2007.
 
                                                                                                                        ANNEXURE-II
 
STUDY NOTE
OF
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
 VISIT
TO

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
PUDUCHERRY
(1ST TO 4TH JULY 2007)
INTRODUCTION
1.         The Committee in its examination of the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research Bill 2007
(hereinafter referred to as Bill) undertook a study visit to the Union Territory of Puducherry from 1 st to 4th July 2007.   During its
study visit the Committee had interacted with Management of JIPMER, Experts, various associations / unions of the Institute and
Hospital and other stakeholders who approached the Committee on the various provisions of the Bill as well constraints being faced
in the functioning of JIPMER.  The List of witnesses who appeared before the Committee at Puducherry on the JIPMER Bill-2007 is
appended as Appendix.  The views and suggestions expressed by different stakeholders are enumerated in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
MANAGEMENT OF INSTITUTE AND FACULTY OF JIPMER AND EXPERTS
 
Management of Institute
 
            On 2
nd July 2007 the Committee heard the views of Management of the Institute. While presenting the viewpoint of
management, Director, JIPMER gave an overview of the Institute, to the Committee.   JIPMER is a premier medical institute offering
a variety of undergraduate and postgraduate courses.  With bed strength of 1050, the Institute also provides patient-care and hospital
services.  
The Committee was informed that over the years, budget allocation for the Institute has shown a steady increase.   As
compared to 9th plan allocation of Rs. 70.00 crore, 10 th Plan allocation stood at Rs. 150.00 crore.  However, when compared with
Plan provision for AIIMS and PGIMER, funds provided to JIPMER cannot be considered sufficient enough.  Committee’s attention
was also drawn towards the shortage of required staff strength.  Against 3007 total sanctioned posts, only 2395 posts were in position,
with 612 vacancies.   Position was very discouraging in respect of Group A posts, where almost half (123) of the sanctioned (249)
posts were lying vacant.   The Committee was given to understand that staff position in AIIMS and PGIMER was quite different,
where the sanctioned staff strength was higher with the number of vacant posts being lesser.  Director, JIPMER highlighted the
following main constraints being faced by the Institute-
·
        Enormous increase in patient load
·        No increase in staff strength.
·        Recruitment for Group A and B (Gazetted) through UPSC not done in the last 4 years.
·        Selected candidates do not join or leave.
·                    Within 2 to 3 years, 47 candidates appointed by UPSC did not join. 
·        Enormous delay in implementing the expansion programmes for want of clearances.
·        Lack of educational autonomy and administrative flexibility
·        Distance from administrative authority.
 
Representatives of the faculty of JIPMER
The Faculty of JIPMER supported the change of status of the institute into an autonomous institute of national importance by
an act of Parliament, due to the fact that only such a change could bring about a marked improvement in its functioning, health care
delivery, teaching, research and national status.  The Committee was given an idea about the difficulties being faced in the
functioning of the Institute. The faculty expressed the following reservations about accepting the Bill in its present form. 
            It was pointed out that despite nearly 50% of the faculty posts lying vacant, JIPMER was being consistently rated among the
first five medical colleges in India.   Indicating the reasons as to why faculty do not join JIPMER or if they do, they leave quickly or
get transferred back to Delhi, the faculty stated that UPSC interviews had not been conducted for a long time.  If at all they were
conducted, the interviews were being held in Delhi, with the local experts from the region.  In the process, doctors hailing from those
regions only were filling the posts.  Even after selection, it took a very long time for the appointment orders to be issued.  Faculties
selected on contract basis were not issued their appointment orders for nearly three months or more resulting in many of the selected
candidates not joining due to a long waiting period.

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
The Committee was given to understand that despite having the basic infrastructure, clinical material, equipment and the
know-how to start different courses in super specialties, para-medical courses; it has not been possible to do the same. They have also
stated that lack of Faculty, non-fulfillment of requirements / stipulations of various professional bodies were the main factors
responsible for such a situation. The Institute was facing shortage of Faculty also due to unattractive pay scales and other incentives
being offered by it when compared with the service conditions of Faculty members of eight medical colleges located in Puducherry. 
The representatives further informed the Committee that the faculties of JIPMER were not able to conduct cutting edge
research mainly due to good equipment meant purely for research not being purchased for want of required funds.  Secondly, very
high teaching and clinical load left little time for research. The time lag in getting permission for funds for industry-academia
collaborative projects and for international collaborative research project, in getting permission from the ministry to leave the country
for conferences, workshops or training courses were the other de-motivating factors.
The faculty members made the following suggestions in various provisions of the Bill: -
·
        Politicization of the Institute Body should be avoided and no political person should be given the post of Chairman or the
membership.
·        The bill should be very explicit in the constituent members of the institute, governing body and standing committees.
·        Governing body and the Standing Committee of the Institute should be constituted by the institute from among its members
only as is existing in AIIMS / PGI Act.  No members to be included from outside the Institute.
·        Transfer of service of existing employees needs to be elaborated.   The notification on regulations including the designation,
pay scales, perks, conferences, benefits, allowances etc should be notified along with the Act.
·        Due consideration should be given to the faculty who have served for long years in the same post and due to be promoted to
the higher post.
·        On conversion to autonomous institute at par with AIIMS, the faculty should be absorbed at a higher pay scale with all the
perks.
·        Puducherry being a small city lacks the educational facilities as well as the social and recreational milieu of larger cities like
Chennai, Mumbai or Delhi. Therefore, additional special allowances should be granted to the faculty of JIPMER to
compensate for the inconveniences of working in a place like Puducherry.
·        The time duration given for an employee to exercise his/her option to remain an employee of the CHS or to join the JIPMER
Institute should be extended to three years and not six months as given in the proposed Bill.
·        In case officers of the Medical Officer grade opt to join the institute (as an autonomous organization) they should be suitably
absorbed with full protection of pay, all perks and allowances in the teaching cadre as lecturer/ reader/professor / administrator
and their such appointment should be given preference as they are already rendering service in the respective areas.
·        Existing health care and CGHS dispensary benefits should continue to all the officers even if one opts for institute cadre. 
Health care benefits should be continued even after retirement.   Besides, all those who move to other stations should be
covered by the CGHS and receive the benefits at those stations.
·        Well furnished quarters and recreational amenities should be provided to all consultants appropriate to their scale of pay.
·        To attract more faculties and simultaneously to retain them and maintain their interest in the institute, a well-regulated paid
clinic system should be started. 
·        The Faculty of JIPMER should be given adequate representation in Standing Committees and Adhoc Committees. The
Central Government nominees should be specified in the Bill (though it is not done so in AIIMS / PGI Acts).  These nominees
should be drawn from Universities of excellence, Department of Science and Technology and Teaching Institutions.  This is
especially important because the faculty believe that having more number of political persons nominated in the institute may
not be advantageous to the growth of the institute.
·
        The four (4) members from the medical universities should also be spelt in the Bill (though it is not done so in AIIMS / PGI
Acts).
·        The meetings of the Institute, Governing Body and other committees should be held at Puducherry.
·        There are a number of non-medical faculty openings in addition to existing ones in medical institutions of national eminence
in departments like Anatomy, Physiology, Biochemistry, Pharmacology, Microbiology, Statistics, radiotherapy (Physicist),

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
Psychiatry, Sociology, Pharmacy, Biomedical engineering, etc.   It has been recognized by IV pay commission and Supreme
Court that the nature of duties performed by non-medical employees is not only of similar nature but it complements the job
performed by medical faculty.   To maintain inter alia seniority, it is proposed that non-medical faculty should have service
conditions, allowances except non-practicing allowance (NPA) and promotional avenues, as offered to medical faculty (as in
AIIMS, Delhi).  At present, in JIPMER, they are not getting promotions with the same time intervals and designation as their
counterparts. 
 
EXPERTS
The Committee had also heard the views of the former Directors of JIPMER and other Experts who are well conversant with
the functioning of JIPMER.
 
Prof. D.S. Dubey, Adviser, Mahatma Gandhi Medical College And Research Institute, Ex-Director, JIPMER, Puducherry
The Committee noted that Prof. Dubey had a long association with the Institute from 1984 onwards till his retirement as Director in
1997. Based on his experience of the day-to-day functioning of the Institute, Prof Dubey made the following observations: -
JIPMER as a medical Institute of reputation in our country has got lot of potential to grow as a national Institute of eminence in
the Medical field. The proposal for making it an autonomous Institute at par with AIIMS and PGIMER is a welcome proposal
which will definitely potentate and build up the capabilities of this Institution in that direction.
Many hurdles and bottlenecks are experienced locally in the smooth functioning and development of the Institute such as,
unsatisfactory budget allocation, filling of teaching and other group (A) posts through UPSC/Ad-hoc/Deputation from Delhi.
Lot of time is taken for these and in the bargain the Institute suffers. Unduly delayed process for Framing of recruitment
rules/change-modification of recruitment rules, disciplinary action, procurement of equipment were the other problem areas.
The response of the faculty after their regular or ad-hoc appointment has been very poor particularly those joining from
Northern part of the country being always interested to go back to Delhi on transfer.
Prof Dubey has also given following suggestions on the proposed Bill:
Clause 5(1) (j) lacks clarity, whereas it has been stated that seven persons of whom one shall be a Non-Medical Scientist
representing ISC will be nominated by Central Government. The question is as to who will be the remaining six persons from
which class of activity such as eminent medical people, eminent academicians/scientists or persons of academic and social
eminence etc. Clause should be suitably modified so as to allay the apprehensions in constituting the Institute body.
In the constitution of the Governing Body, in respect of clause No. 10(1), one third of the members (who are not members of
the Institute) should also be clarified and proper representation should be given to academic and medical people.
As regards the resolution of differences and transfer of service of existing employees, the same may be suitably drafted keeping
the interests and welfare of the employees particularly their retirement benefits, pension, gratuity and other facilities and
provision of a CGHS dispensary in JIPMER, Puducherry.
As far as the existing faculty is concerned, their option conditions and their absorption in autonomous status should also be
carefully drafted, so that their services interests are not compromised. The case of JIPMER autonomy at this stage is different
from AIIMS and PGIMER (these Institutes were raised as autonomous Institutes right from the beginning but in case of
JIPMER, it is a transition from existing Central Government status to an autonomous status after a gap of fifty years or so).
 
DR. N.ANANTHAKRISHNAN, Director, Peruthalaivar Kamaraj Medical College & Research Institute,
 
Dr. N. Ananthakrishnan who had served in various capacities in JIPMER for a period of nearly 30 years from Feb, 1977 to July, 2006,
made following observations / suggestions:
 
Faculty: Nearly 30-50 per cent of faculty posts remain unfilled in JIPMER at any time. The reasons for these are:
Undue delay in the posts being advertised by the UPSC.
The UPSC interviews are held almost always in Delhi with experts being mostly from Institutions based in Delhi or near
about. Hence candidates who are selected are also generally from these Institutions.
The candidates selected by UPSC either do not join or try to leave within a short time of joining.
There are hardly any incentives for faculty in the form of encouragement for research.

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
The pay scales are very poor compared to other private institutions. In Puducherry where there are seven private medical
colleges at present, the difference varies from 15,000-20,000 for each category, with private practice being additionally
allowed by these institutions unlike JIPMER. Hence there is a gradual outflow of staff form JIPMER.
The system of automatic promotion in the Central Health Services leaves no incentives to excellence.
Administrative issues: In the current system of control in JIPMER, it is impossible to create posts or create departments.
Starting of a new areas of patient care are nearly impossible.
Research: The research output of JIPMER is negligible when compared to All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) or
PGIMER for the following reasons.
There is minimal fund for research activity for faculty.
Although there are many requests, due to administrative delays, we are not able to accept invitations to join international
clinical or drug trials.
There are no incentives for research output.
The research equipment gets least priority in the budget earmarked for equipments after patient care and teaching-
learning activities.
Even scientific papers or reprints have to be sent at the author’s own expenses for want of funds.
 
 
Student related issues:
Although JIPMER was set up with the idea of establishing newer patterns of teaching, because of the restrictions imposed by
the MCI regulations, no curricular experiments outside the MCI norms are permissible. For example, Problems based learning,
modular learning, competency based curriculum are all the norms in leading educational institutions around the world.
However, the subject-oriented curriculum with all its deficiencies is still being followed in JIPMER because it is the only one
permitted under MCI norms.
JIPMER which ranks third in All India amongst medical institutions providing Under Graduate studies and seven other private
institutions with minimal facilities, clinical material and faculty, get the same degree from the University with no distinction or
mention of the Institute of training. Thus JIPMER students get no recognition when they apply for outside posts.
Administrative constraints do not permit liberal exchange of students, because the sanction which has to come from Delhi often
gets delayed.
Students are admitted late to other institutions whereas in JIPMER students are admitted in July itself.  Hence examinations get
delayed, results get delayed leading to delay in postings and curtailments of clinical time.
Due to difficulties in getting administrative approval, starting new paramedical courses, which are the need of the country, is a
Herculean task.
 
Patients’ care: Modern medicine is a costly affair requiring constant procurement of equipment and consumables. Due to
paucity of funds, even supply of all the required medicines leave alone consumables to deserving patients who are exceedingly
poor has not been possible. Equipment procuring process is very lengthy and because of this, even if one initiates the purchase
procedures early, often the financial year passes without successfully being able to procure the equipments.
 
Employee related issues: JIPMER, which is now fifty years old, has an ageing population of employees. The previous
Recruitment Rules have been based by and large on offering promotional opportunities without leaving any scope for lateral
entry. Because of large vacancies in the feeding cadre promotional posts like operation theatre assistants, operation theatre
technicians etc., do not get filled thus affecting patients’ care services. The process of modification and re-notifying of
Recruitment Rules is so tedious and cumbersome that years pass before any success can be achieved or expected in this area.
 
·        Suggestions on the Bill: -
 
There are serious apprehensions in the minds of some of the employees regarding what is involved by this change. It is
necessary to take all of them into confidence since they constitute the vast bulk of the employees, so that they become willing
partners in this welcome change. The Bill seems to be a verbatim copy of the AIIMS Bill. It must be remembered that AIIMS
started de-novo with no existing employees, whereas in the current instance, the status of a 50-year-old Institute with all its
existing employees is sought to be altered. Hence there is a great need of co-operation from everybody to make this change
meaningful and functional.
 
Governing Body of the proposed Institute: Looking across the nation it would be obvious that whatever be the field, whether
it is Engineering, Law, Management or Medicine, the top ranking institutions are only those which have a considerable degree
of autonomy in functioning. Perusal of the Institute Body of the Institute shows that out of twenty-one members, ten are ex-
officio and of the remaining eleven, seven are nominees of the Central Government. It is not clear who these nominees will be.
Autonomy must mean freedom to act and take decisions and must not remain only in name. Hence great care has to be given in
deciding the composition of the Institute Body as also the Governing Body.
 
Dr. D. Nagaraja, Director, NIMHANS, Bangalore

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
Dr. Nagaraja expressed his views in favour of autonomy of the Institute and shared the views enumerated by the other two
Experts.                       
 
 
 
 
ASSOCIATIONS / UNIONS OF INSTITUTE AND HOSPITAL
 
Views of Jipmer Students Association
 
Representatives of the JIPMER students association expressed their views on the Bill before the Committee.   They were in favour of
JIPMER becoming autonomous by an Act of Parliament.  They have given the following reason for the same:-
 
·
        The students get admission in this premier medical institute after going through a rigorous All-India entrance examination (the
admission procedure being similar to that of AIIMS), but their degree is awarded by the Puducherry University, to which
JIPMER is affiliated thus making it at par with other private medical colleges affiliated to the university and hence they get
invariably equated with private medical college students.  These private medical colleges have come up in existence much
latter than JIPMER, thus the status of JIPMER as premier medical institute is loosing its stint considerably even though
students with higher merit join the Institute for medical education. 
·        There has been a steady outflow of faculty from JIPMER institute to these private medical colleges and as of now, more than
50% faculty posts are lying vacant and so the existing faculty is being overburdened with both clinical and academic work. 
They were hopeful that autonomy will not only make the recruitment procedures simpler and faster (thus enabling the institute
to fill up the vacant posts) but also stop further erosion of the faculty strength.
·
        Autonomy will vest power in the hands of the Institute Administrative Council, enabling it to improve and upgrade the
existing infrastructure and facilities thus benefiting faculty, staff, students and patients.
·        The Students Association also made the following suggestions on behalf of the students for consideration of the Committee:-
o       Status quo should be maintained on all admission procedures (Both under-graduate and post-graduate).
o       Student fees should not be raised under any circumstances.
o       The rights and privileges now available to the students should not be infringed upon.
o       Student representatives should be included in the Governing Body to enable students to make their views and
suggestions in the decision making process.
 
Views of JIPMER Resident Doctors Association
 
The representatives of the JIPMER Resident Doctors Association (JRDA) wholeheartedly welcomed the proposal to make JIPMER
institute autonomous and an institute of national importance.  The said association made the following observations: -
·
        The need for an autonomous institute is to attract more distinguished faculty in the specialties and super specialties, carry out
research instead of being overburdened with clinical and administrative work which has been the bane of JIPMER in the last
two decades.  In spite of being reasonably endowed in terms of human resources, JIPMER lags far behind institutes like
AIIMS, PGIMER, SGPGI in terms of academic and research output and true tertiary health care.
·
        Autonomy will help to reduce administrative hassles in appointments and recruiting faculty and other staff.  They have given
an example that the Departments of Psychiatry and Forensic Medicine do not have any faculty on their rolls and as a result of
which the famed JIPMER MBBS degree faces MCI de-recognition sooner or later.   The administration and associations
(students, doctors and employees) have been at loggerheads for the last eight years over the lack of manpower in our library
that is having a slow demise.
·
        An autonomous institute was needed to retain unique brand identity of JIPMER in terms of degrees (MBBS, MD/MS,
DM/MCh, BSc MLT/Nursing) amidst the plethora of private medical colleges that exist in a single enclave of Puducherry
Union Territory.
 
 
Views of CHS Officers’ Welfare Association, JIPMER
 
The Medical officers of CHS Officers Welfare Association has pointed out that there are subtle differences between the
AIIMS/PGI and proposed Bill for JIPMER. The views expressed by the association are as follows:-
AIIMS / PGI were created as new autonomous institutes, while JIPMER is being converted from an already existing vibrant
central Govt. institute to an autonomous institute.   There are already existing faculty and staff whose welfare needs to be taken
care of unlike at the time of establishing AIIMS/PGI.
There is enormous difference in the geographical locations of these two sets of institutes.   AIIMS / PGI are established near the
offices and ministries of Union Government, while JIPMER is established thousands of miles away.  Despite making the
institute autonomous, if major control stays with the central government, existing problems may continue to some extent.

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
The types of the patients benefited by these two groups of institutes are entirely different.  The patients coming to JIPMER are
from very poor strata of society, while in AIIMS and PGI they are from a relatively higher socio-economic class.
In spite of a large population in Delhi and Chandigarh, there are none or very few private medical colleges in the vicinity, while
in Puducherry already there are 5 private medical colleges in existence and two more are expected in near future along with one
State Government medical college.  The demand for faculty is very high with very high and negotiable emoluments and perks
in these colleges creating a very difficult situation for JIPMER to get faculty.
 
In view of the above the following changes /inclusions/deletions to be incorporated in the JIPMER, Puducherry Bill-2007 is
suggested by the association:
 
The President should be an eminent allopathic medical doctor and an academician with an impeccable track record who is in
active service from amongst the members of the Institute Body as exists in AIIMS Act.
Only one Vice-Chancellor, i.e. the VC of Puducherry University should be a member as exists in AIIMS Act.
Five Central Government nominees only, instead of seven as mentioned in the Bill.   Four of them should be eminent medical
persons who are in active service.  The non-medical scientist representing Indian Science Congress should also be an eminent
person.
The four representatives of Medical Faculties of Indian Universities should be in active service and should be practitioners of
allopathic medicine.  They should be the Director AIIMS, Director PGI, Chandigarh, Director Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for
Medical Sciences & Technology, Thiruvananthapuram and Director National Institute of Mental Health and Neurological
Sciences, Bangalore.
The two MPs shall be a member of the Institute only so long as he / she is an MP. He/she shall cease to be member once his/her
term is over.
The meetings of the Institute, governing body and other committees should be held at Puducherry. (Clause 9)
In Clause 10 (1)
Governing body of the Institute should be constituted by the institute from among its members only.  No members to be
included from outside the institute.
Members of the Standing Committee should be from the Institute.  This clause must be included in the Bill.
Adhoc Committees may include persons who are not members of the Institute, but the number should not exceed one half
of its total membership.  This clause must be included in the Bill. 
Quorum for the meetings of the committees, as well as the Institute and Governing Body should be spelt out.  This is not
present in the Bill and has to be specified.
Clause 13 (f) (i): JIPMER shall not establish and / or maintain any new medical colleges in or around Puducherry.  It shall also
not get affiliated, or linked, or associated in any way with any pre-existing medical college or any new medical college outside
the JIPMER campus.  Any Dental, nursing or Pharmacy College if established, should be only within the JIPMER campus.
 
Clause 20 (1) and (2):
The salary, wages, allowances, provident fund and pension of JIPMER Institute shall be ensured by a sovereign
guarantee of the Govt. of India.
Pay and allowances of the faculty members must be linked to the pay and allowances of the faculty of AIIMS, New
Delhi.  The Pay and allowances of the faculty members should be on par with or more than the corresponding pay scales
of faculty members of AIIMS, New Delhi.  As and when the pay and allowances are revised for the faculty of AIIMS, the
pay and allowances of the faculty of JIPMER must be automatically revised.  These provisions linking the pay and
allowances of the doctors to that of the AIIMS faculty must be incorporated in the JIPMER Bill.
o
       (b) Special allowances should also be granted to the faculty of JIPMER for making sacrifices by working in a small
town like Puducherry that lack social and educational facilities available in large cities like Delhi and Chandigarh.
Clause 28. Transfer of service of existing employees
The time duration given for an employee to exercise his / her option to remain an employee of the CHS or to join the
JIPMER Institute should be extended to three years and not six months as is given in the proposed bill.
The designation of the officers should not be lowered at any cost.  The officer should be absorbed in the similar
designation in the institute if it comes into existence i.e. Director-Professor shall be absorbed as Professor of Eminence
with the same scale of pay or more as in AIIMS Delhi.  Similarly Professor should be absorbed as Professor and
Associate Professor as Associate Professor and Assistant Professor as Assistant Professor in the same scale of pay or
more than what is given in AIIMS, Delhi.
Those who have completed tenure to become Professor or Associate Professor in CHS but have not yet received the
promotion order from Ministry, on the date of incorporation of the institute should also be absorbed as Professor or
Associate Professor as the case may be in the Institute.
In case officer of the Medical Officer grade opt to join the institute (as an autonomous organization) he / she should be
suitably absorbed with full protection of pay, all perks and allowances in the teaching cadre as Assistant Professor /
Associate Professor/ Professor/ Administrator and their such appointment should be given preference as they are already
rendering service in the respective areas.
Details of the service conditions and the emoluments of the officers must be included in the Bill or should be notified

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
simultaneously at the time of incorporation of the institute.
Lateral entry should be permitted only for newly created departments.  For Departments with already existing staff, entry
should be only at the lowest level.
Promotions should be based on merit cum seniority.
Existing health care and CGHS dispensary benefits should continue to all the officers even if one opts for institute cadre. 
Health care benefits should be continued even after retirement.  Besides, all those who move to other stations should be covered
by the CGHS and receive the benefits at those stations.
Free tertiary care medical treatment to the poor:
·        Free treatment to the poor people in and around Puducherry must continue by the same formula as exists in JIPMER,
Puducherry at present and not in the way it exists in AIIMS, New Delhi or PGIMER, Chandigarh .  This should be included in
the Bill.
·        Puducherry Quota for admission: The reservation that is available for students domiciled in Puducherry at present in JIPMER
must be continued.  30% of the seats of the Institute for under graduate medical course and other courses should be reserved
for students domiciled in Puducherry.  This should be included in the Bill.
·        Well-furnished quarters should be provided to all consultants appropriate to their scale of pay.
 
 
Views of JIPMER Employees Union, JIPMER Anti Autonomy People’s Action Committee, JIPMER SC/ST Employees
Welfare Association
 
The Employees Union, Anti Autonomy People’s Action Committee and SC/ST Employees Welfare Association were heard together
by the Committee. The representatives of the said unions / associations opposed the proposed autonomy of the Institute.  They were of
the view that the autonomous JIPMER will deprive the JIPMER employees of the following:
·
        Government Employees status and benefits
The existing checks and balances would be missing in the autonomous body.
The autonomy of JIPMER may lead to its privatization.
Nepotism and favoritism would become a routine affaire.
 
However they also gave the following suggestions on the proposed Bill: -
 
Clause 28 (1) is not clear. It is the life problem of staff. So, there should not be any ambiguity in the meaning of words in this
clause. This clause states that those who have not opted to be an employee of this Institute shall continue to be treated as
Government employee for a period of six months only. Nothing has been mentioned about their redeployment after six months.
They should be redeployed within the other subordinate offices/hospitals under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
under rule 4(6) of CCS (Redeployment of surplus staff) rules, 1990. If no vacancies are available, they should be redeployed
through the Division of Redeployment and Adjustment under the Department of Personnel and Training (previously called
surplus cell) under Rule 37-A(6) of CCS (Pension) Rules as amended from time to time.
Clause 28 (2) permits the CHS officers to work in Institute on deputation. The deputation period is normally 3 years. It does
not mention anything about their services after 3 years. Even, this facility is not extended to other employees who constitute 85
percent of total employees strength. That Group C and D staffs that wish to work on deputation, should be permitted like CHS
officers.
Clause 28(3) states that all existing employees (understood as except those covered under clause 28(1) shall automatically be
the employees of the Institute from the date of incorporation. They shall be governed by the rules and regulations of the
Institute. Those absorbed employees should be permitted to draw pro-ratio pension from the Government for the services
rendered under the government, and should be permitted to continue to work in the Institute without any loss of salary as per
recent amendment in Rule 37-A(8) of CCS (Pension)Rules, 2005.
Clause 28(4) (b) does not state that retirement benefits shall be payable from the Government. It states that the absorbed
employee shall be governed by leave, provident fund, retirement or other terminal benefits admissible to the employees of the
Central Government. The Government does not take the responsibility of paying the retirement benefits to the absorbed
employees. The Government should take the responsibility as defined in Rule 37 –A(19) of CCS (Pension) Rules, if the
Institute is not in a position to pay the monthly pension.
Clause 28(5)(a) states that appointing authority may dismiss the absorbed employee. As per amendment to Rule 37-A (24) ( c)
of CCS (Pension) Rules, the dismissal order for the absorbed employees shall not come into effect until it is confirmed (the
word ‘review’ has already been amended as ‘confirmation’) by the Secretary to the Department. So, this Section should be
amended accordingly. The absorbed employees should be permitted to approach the Central Administrative Tribunal against
the order of Secretary to the Department/order of Director of Institute.
Clause 28(5) (b) states that employee shall be dismissed without notice. As per Rule 15(1-A) of CCS (CCA) Rules, notice
should be given before imposing penalty even though reasonable opportunity was given and proposed penalty is on the basis of
evidence adduced during enquiry. Rule 15 (1-A) is the latest order, which overrides Rule 15 (which stated notice is not
necessary). This should be followed strictly. The Institute should not dismiss the employees who went on strike against

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
incorporation. (7)            All absorbed employees should be treated alike. No one should be revenged. The Institute should
withdraw all departmental disciplinary proceedings/criminal cases filed against such employees. Their ‘dies-non’ service from
8-9-2006 to 29-09-2006 should  be converted as leave due and admissible.
·        Clause 28(6) should be modified in such a way that the pension shall not be altered to the disadvantage of absorbed employee,
even though he shall be dismissed under Section 28(5) (a) (b).
·        Clause 20(1) states that pension is payable from the funds created by the Institute. This is not acceptable, because this would
mean that the Institute would discharge its liability by making contribution to the funds. We reiterate that pension should be
made payable from the budget of the Institute like salary.
·        Clause 20(2) states that for pension and provident funds, the Provident Funds Act would apply as if it is a Government fund.
It is informed that Provident Funds Act deals with provident funds only. It gives guarantee to the repayment of provident fund
at the time of retirement. It has nothing to do with pension. So, this clause does not give any guarantee for the payment of
monthly pension.
·
        The Bill should include a clause that CGHS facility anywhere in India after retirement should be allowed to the retiring
absorbed employee.
·        The Bill should include a clause that Institute shall be brought under the purview of Central Administrative Tribunal like some
other autonomous bodyies.
·        The Bill should include a clause regarding the provision for continuance of 20 numbers of MBBS seats earmarked for
Puducherry.
·        The Bill should include a clause regarding the provision for continuance of appointment to about 2000 numbers of Group C
and D from Puducherry people.
·        The Bill should include a clause regarding the provision for continuance of free medical treatment to public without
production of any documents.
·        The Bill should include a clause regarding the provision for continuance of existing tuition and other fees for students.
·        Everything mentioned in this Bill shall be possible without altering its administrative set-up. However, we have no objection
to develop this Institute without any change in the present status-quo administration.
 
The JIPMER Anti Autonomy People Action Committee also raised the following other objections in addition to those mentioned
above and also made a few suggestions on the proposed Bill: -
 
AIIMS and PGIMER are autonomous institution from the date of their inception. They were not established as subordinate
institutions of Government. But, JIPMER is a subordinate office of Government from the date of its beginning. Therefore,
JIPMER cannot be compared with AIIMS and PGIMER.
The Hon’ble Minister has stated that there is no financial implication on the part of Government for its incorporation.
Therefore, there is no reason to believe that this Institute would develop further once it is incorporated
The Bill does not contain the provision for continuance of 20 numbers of MBBS seats earmarked for Puducherry. When
JIPMER had 65 MBBS seats, 15 seats were earmarked for Puducherry People till 1997. 10 seats had been increased in the year
1997. 5 out of 10 seats were earmarked to Puducherry. It means, 50% of the increased numbers are earmarked to Puducherry
people. So, whenever number of seats increased, 50% of increased numbers may be expected for Puducherry people. So, at
present, 20 out of 75 seats are earmarked for Puducherry people. The Bill does not state anything about the continuance of 20
numbers of MBBS seats earmarked for Puducherry people. Further, the Bill should give an assurance that 50% of the increased
seats shall be reserved for Puducherry whenever the total number increases beyond 75.
The Bill does not contain the provision for continuance of appointment to about 2000 numbers of Group C and D from
Puducherry people. Since the year of establishment of this Institute, all the Group C and D posts numbering 2000 are filled up
among the candidates from Puducherry. The present Bill does not state anything about the continuance of appointment to the
Group C and D posts that comprise approximately 2000.
The Bill does not contain the provision for continuance of free medical treatment to public without producing any documents.
Nothing has been mentioned in this Bill for the continuance of free medical treatment. At present, free treatment is provided to
all people for all kinds of treatment without production of any certificate. Poor people residing in Puducherry, Tamil Nadu,
Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka are coming to JIPMER for free treatment. There is no provision in the Bill for the
continuance of free treatment as is available at present.
The Bill does not contain the provision for continuance of same tuition and other fees for students. Tuition and other fees for
MBBS, MD, MS, MCh, DM, PhD, B.Sc, M.Sc, are very cheap. There is no guarantee for the continuance of same fees. For
example tuition fee for 1 MBBS is less than Rs. 1000/-. But, autonomous institutions do not charge this amount. They are
charging 10 times more than this amount. It is understood that, in autonomous institutions, poor people are not in a position to
pay the tuition fee even though their wards get admission on merit. There is no guarantee in this Bill that the existing tuition fee
for all the course will continue like in Maulana Azad Medical College.
As per clause 5 (1) (j), any six persons can be appointed as members. This clause does not state any criteria for such six
persons. The Hon’ble Minister may, at his choice, nominate any person under this clause. It should be ex-officio members.
As per Clause 5(1) (k), four medical faculties from Indian universities can be nominated as members. This clause does not state
the names of universities and age, qualification and experience of medical faculties. The members to be appointed by this

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
clause must be ex-officio so that Minister cannot appoint any medical faculty at his choice.
A member nominated under Clause 5(1) (I) and 5(1) (k) can be accommodated against Clause 5(1) (j), because there is no
provision contrary to it. If it is allowed, then an M.P. can continue as a member of this Institute even after expiry of his
Parliament tenure by switching over to Clause 5(1)(j). Further, a medical faculty can continue as a member of this Institute after
retirement from his service in university. So, a new clause should be inserted that, ‘ a member shall not be switched over from
one sub-clause to another sub-clause in clause 5(1) to suit his retention as member in this Institute/governing body/committee’.
As per clause 6(5), an out-going member may continue till new member occupies his place. If it is permitted, new member may
not be nominated in order to retain the outgoing members. So, this clause should be amended so that out-going member shall
not continue after completion of his/her tenure.
As per Clause 6(6) an out-going member shall be eligible for re-nomination. If it is permitted new members cannot be included
in the Institute and the outgoing members shall be re-nominated throughout his / her life. So, this clause should be amended so
that an out-going member shall not be eligible for re-nomination.
As per Clause 10(1) one third of the members of Governing Body may be outsiders. Only members of Institute should be
nominated as persons in the Governing Body. Otherwise, anybody can be appointed as member in the Governing Body. It is
again reiterated that the members of Institute must be by ex-officio post, not by name.
As per Clause 10(5) the Institute may constitute a number of Committees. The number of Standing Committees and ad-hoc
Committees must be mentioned. The members must hold ex-officio post. Only the members of the Institute should be
nominated in the Standing Committees and ad-hoc Committees.
As per Clause 11(1), the Director shall be appointed by the Institute. It means that the Institute has the power to remove the
Director. The Institute/Governing Body should not terminate the service of the Director. The Governing Body should get the
approval of the Union Cabinet before taking any decision to terminate his service.
Clause 22 states that vacancy of members shall not be taken into account while deciding the majority in the Governing Body.
Decision by Institute, Governing Body, Standing Committee and ad-hoc Committee should be from more than 50% of total
members in each body/Committee. Otherwise, vacancies shall not be filled up immediately.
Clause 30(1) (b) states that the Institute itself shall decide the allowances for the members. It should be decided by the
Committee to be appointed by the Parliament in this regard.
The rules and regulations framed by the Government in the first meeting under Clause 30(2) should not be altered or rescinded
by the Institute to the disadvantage of staff, public and students.
As per Clause 31, if Parliament rejects/amends the Rules and Regulations made by this Institute, it may take effect from the
date of such rejection/amendment. But, it should take effect retrospectively. Otherwise, the Governing Body can make modify
Rules and Regulations personally suited to them, and give effect immediately. They will worry about its rejection/amendment
in the Parliament because, their purpose would be served before such rejection/amendment.
As per Clause 32 (1), the Government will cease to have its power over the Institute two years from the date of incorporation.
The Government should always retain its power over the Institute. It should not cease its control after two years. Otherwise, the
Government body may give effect to the provisions of this Act, to suit their personal needs.
The Institute is affiliated to the Puducherry University, which is a Central  University. The Institute has been earning its
goodwill since the date of establishment. If this Institute is made autonomous in the name of developing curriculum, it would
mean that the curriculum adopted by the Puducherry University is bad, which is not correct. Puducherry University is famous
for its national curriculum. So, this Institute should not be made autonomous in the name of academic autonomy.
 
Other suggestions put forth by JIPMER SC/ST Employees Welfare Association
 
Under Clause 28 the option to remain as a Central Government Servant till retirement should be left to the concerned
employee.
The Bill should provide under Clause 5(i) that all the members of the Governing Body (including seven Non-Medical
Specialists and four Medical Faculties) should be appointed by virtue of their posts in Government service (ex-officio), not
otherwise.
There should not be political nominee (M.P) in Governing Council/Executive Council including Central Minister because that
will spoil the working condition of the Institute and degrade the quality of education and patient care.
The Bill must include a Clause that minimum 5 members (15% + 7.5% = 22.5%; 22.5% x 22 = 4.95 belonging to SC/ST
category must be included in the JIPMER Governing Body, in which at least one member should be Puducherry Scheduled
Caste who is working in higher position in Puducherry Government service.
The Bill should include under Clause 30(1) that any alteration of prescribed rules regarding JIPMER should be ratified only by
the Parliament.
All benefits should be maintained as per the CCS rules.
There should be no retrenchment of any staff in JIPMER.
All vacant position in Group ‘D’ must be recruited.
There should be at least 5% reservation to all courses to the children of JIPMER employees.
The Bill should provide under Clause 13 that the movable and immovable properties belonging to JIPMER should never be
sold or mortgaged to any firm or person in the future.
 

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
Views of JIPMER Staff Struggle Committee and JIPMER Hospital Employees Union
 
            The JIPMER Staff Struggle Committee was not in favour of converting JIPMER into a statutory corporate body and wanted
JIPMER to continue under the present administrative set up. Their views are as follows:-
 
The Government should get the concurrence of Puducherry people, before changing the administrative set of this Institute.
In the Statement of objects and reasons attached to this Bill, the Hon’ble Minister compared JIPMER with AIIMS and
PGIMER. The Hon’ble Minister should not compare this Institute with AIIMS and PGIMER. Those Institutes were established
as autonomous form the beginning. If the Minister decided an Institute on par with AIIMS, he should incorporate a new
Institute without touching JIPMER.  JIPMER is already a world famous Institute in its present set-up. 
There is no proof to believe that Parliament did not allocate more funds to JIPMER for the reason that it is under the
Government. Further, there is no proof to believe that parliament would allocate more funds to JIPEMR, if it is made
autonomous.
Suggestion in respect of Clause 28 (1) states that , those who does not opt to be an employee of this Institute shall hold office
by same terms and conditions of services for a period of six months only. Nothing has been mentioned about their
redeployment after 6 months. The employees opting to remain in Government services should be redeployed through the
Surplus Cell. Absorption of surplus staff within the other offices of Ministry or Department should be preferred, before they are
redeployed through the Surplus Cell.  This should be incorporated in the Act.
Clause 28 (2): Along with CHS staff, the facility ‘to continue to work on deputation’ should be made applicable to all other
staff.  The deputation period is normally for 3 years. The Bill does not mention anything about their redeployment after 3 years.
Whether they will be reverted back to Government service after 3 years? If so, where they will be posted? Whether they will be
permitted to work in Institute on deputation till superannuation?  This should be clarified and incorporated in the Act.
Clause 28 (3): As per Rule, the existing staff shall become the employees of the Institute and continue to work till
superannuation, and they may opt to receive pro rata retirement benefits for the services rendered under the Central
Government in accordance with the orders issued by the Government.  The staff who have completed 10 years of Government
service shall be eligible for pro rata pension. The staffs that have not completed 10 years of service shall be eligible for one
time lump sum payment.
Clause 28 (4): This Clause states that employee may opt to be governed by Government Rules for retirement benefits. This
Clause does not specifically state that Government would guarantee the retirement benefits to those who opt to be governed by
Government Rules for retirement benefits. The word ‘to be governed by retirement or other terminal benefits admissible to the
employees of the Central Government, as amended from time to time’ does not give an assurance that the Government would
meet the retirement benefits. As per the Rule, Government assures the monthly pension and other retirement benefits for the
absorbed employees, in case the Institute is not in a position to pay it.
Clause 28 (5) (a): As per Rule, the dismissal order for the absorbed employee shall not be operated unless it is confirmed by
the Secretary to the Ministry
Clause 28 (5) (b): As per Rule, 15 days notice should be given before imposing penalty even though reasonable opportunity
was given and proposed penalty is on the basis of evidence adduced during enquiry and the Authority should not proceed
further till the disposal of the representation to be made by the employee in this regard.
Clause 28 (6): Why there is a word that ‘subject to provisions of sub-section (3)’?  This sub-section (3) states that absorbed
employees shall be governed by the regulations of the Institute for retirement benefits. Further, the regulations of the Institute
will be framed only after incorporation of Institute. So, whether it is applicable to the absorbed staff who opted to be governed
by the Government Rules for retirement benefits? The word ‘subject to provision of sub-section (3) should be deleted. As per
Rule, the compassionate allowance (equivalent to compensation pension) may be paid to the dismissed employee.
 
Along with the above, the JIPMER Staff Struggle Committee made the following suggestions to be incorporated in this Clause
in the Bill.
 
The existing staff that opted for pro rata retirement benefits for their services under Central Government should be placed in
the same scale of pay and in the same Basic Pay and in the same position in the seniority list.
Up-to-date amendments of Rule 37-A of CCS (Pension) Rules should be followed for the absorbed employee for pension from
the Government. This gives protection for retirement benefits to all the existing regular staff whether they have completed 10
years of service or not.
Absorbed staff should not be asked to contribute to the Pension Fund for getting pension from the Institute at the time of
retirement.
Family pension should be paid from Government for those staff who opt for pro rata retirement benefit for the services rendered
from the Government.   In addition to it, they should also be eligible for Family Pension from the Institute as per O.M.
No.4/10/2006-P & PW (D), dt, 14.5.2007, issued by DOPT, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions.
No promotional posts should be abolished. All promotional posts should be filled up with the in-service staff. Relaxations in
respect of number of years of service in the feeder cadre, should be relaxed, if vacancies arise due to VRS opted by existing
staff in the event of conversion of JIPMER as autonomous Institute. Promotion should be strictly on seniority-cum-fitness basis.
CGHS facility should be extended to the absorbed staff (including their dependents) who opt pro rata retirement benefits for
the services under the Government.

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
Provisions should be made in the Act that, absorbed staff may prefer appeal before the CAT against the dismissal or any other
order of Secretary of Ministry.
Reservation for certain percentage of vacancy in Group C and D posts should be made available for the heirs of existing Staff
who opt for voluntary retirement in the event of conversion of JIPMER as autonomous Institute.
No one should be victimized in any way for their anti-autonomy agitations so far. Their dies non period for 22 days for not attending
the office on account of threat by political parties in September 2006 should be treated as Earned Leave. A Forum consisting of staff
and administration should be made, and it should meet bimonthly to hear the grievances of staff and to set it right. Unions /
Associations should be recognized. They should be consulted for the formation / amendment of Recruitment Rules, in case it goes
against the interest of absorbed. Staff indulging in union activities should be not victimized for the democratic acts and other acts
permissible under law.
 
POLITICAL PARTIES
 
Views of the representatives of Puducherry State unit of AIADMK Party and CPI (M)
 
The representatives of AIADMK and CPI (M) party had identical views as expressed by the JIPMER Employees Union and JIPMER
Anti Autonomy People’s Action Committee.   Both the parties opposed the move for granting autonomy to JIPMER.  They also felt
that it is prima-facie a step to make JIPMER a private institute.
 
 
Views of the representatives of Puducherry State unit of DMK Party and Nationalist Congress Party (NCP)
 
The representatives of DMK and NCP parties welcomed JIPMER, Puducherry Bill 2007 as in their opinion it would improve the
status and development of JIPMER. Besides upgrading its status, the Bill would confer a number of advantages on the Institute such
as powers of decision making with regard to its education and medical service. This would avoid delay and accelerate the phase of
development of JIPMER. This process would help the poor patients and enable the students of Puducherry to get qualitative medical
education. After passing this Bill the Institute would get more funds for development.
 
Views of representatives of Puducherry State unit of PMK Party
 
Professor M. Ramadass, M.P. (Lok Sabha) led the delegation of PMK Party and made the following observation on behalf of the
PMK party:
 
JIPMER has received more resources in recent times and can grow with the present status. It can create infrastructure with the
added resources. But these facilities cannot be optimally used until and unless quality manpower is available. At present, the
recruitment being done through UPSC and the faculty being part of CHS cadre, there has been difficulties in people joining the
Institute. Even if suitable candidates are selected through UPSC they do not join the Institute. Consequently in many of the
departments, the positions of faculty remain vacant for many years, as a result of which the teaching activities in the Institution
have suffered a great deal. The appointment of specialists and experts in various specialties is much worse and the Institute is
unable to invite this valued human resource on its own since it has no authority to do so.
With the present status, the decision making in JIPMER has become highly cumbersome and complicated. For every activity,
whether it is medical education or health service, the Director of JIPMER will have to wait for the orders of the Ministry of
Health which is highly time consuming. These delays have created an uncongenial environment in the Institution. Most of the
developmental activities have been impaired because of centralization of decision-making at New Delhi. 
PMK party has analyzed the Bill clause by clause and noticed that the Bill in totality would help to confer the status of national
importance to JIPMER. and it wholeheartedly welcomes this Bill. 
The Bill, spread over 32 clauses, provides for an Institute Committee with 22 Members, a Governing body, many Standing
Committees and Adhoc Committees. This organizational set up envisaged by the Bill would provide sufficient freedom and
independence for the Institute for manpower selection, infrastructure development diversification of courses, financial powers
commensurate with other Institutions like AIIMS and PGI.
Another advantage of JIPMER becoming a national Institute is that it would enable it to overcome its present financial crunch. 
Section 15 of the Bill provides for a separate Budget to JIPMER. This would be a great relief to the Institute as it would enable
it to receive at least 3 to 4 times more than the present allocation of financial resources by the Government of India.
The Institute would be relieved form the clutches of Puducherry University and would emerge as an University by itself. It can
have academic freedom to design its courses in conformity with the needs of the society and the Country. 
The proposed National Institute would be able to determine better conditions of service to its employees, faculties and others.
The Bill primarily upgrades the status of JIPMER from an ordinary medical college into an Institution of national importance
like Central University, Puducherry. That Institute would be vested with academic, administrative and financial powers to take
decisions on its own through Institute Body, Governing Body, and Sub-Committees etc. Granting powers to the Institute is
incidental to its becoming a National Institute and autonomy is not the direct objective of the proposed Bill. 
The Institute would not affect the interest of any employees as the Bill makes it abundantly clear in section 28. 
The following modifications or amendments have also been suggested in the proposed Bill:

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
The Bill should clearly state that the present system of user charges in JIPMER will not alter and more particularly the patients
below poverty line would be exempted from any of the charges.
The Bill should make it clear that the present reservation of seats to Puducherry students would continue, even after it becomes
the National Institute. The present reservation of twenty seats may be increased to thirty and correspondingly the total number
of seats may be increased.
·        Necessary rules should be framed in accordance with the Provisions of the Bill.
 
Views of Communist Party of India (CPI) Puducherry State Council
 
The representatives of CPI stated that they had gone through the JIPMER Bill-2007 and welcomed the declaration of the Institute
to be an institution of national importance as provided under the constitution of India provided; the following obligatory steps are
taken along with revamping the Institute:
 
o
       In the composition of the Institute, Health Minister of the Puducherry should be an ex-officio member of the Governing Body
of the Institute. Besides, three local MLAs of Puducherry should be in the Governing Body to facilitate a better access to the
local Public.
o       Free service of the JIPMER should continue to the poor.
o       The payment system or charging the affordable should not exceed the charges fixed by the local Government.
o       The retirement age, pension, General provident Fund system etc. hitherto available to its employees should be continued to its
employees recruited prior to the date of passing of the Bill. 
o       The student enrolment for Medical education should be enhanced.  50% student admission should be from Puducherry origin. 
Misuse of college admission against the local Government norms should be curtailed.
o       The employees should not be compelled to exercise option as provided in section 28 (4) of the Bill.
o       In Section (4) (a) the last word shall be substitute as “of the scale applicable to the post under the Institute to which he is
“lastly appointed” and should not be based on his initial appointment.
o       Filling up of all Groups – ‘C’ and ‘D’ posts as also the Daily rated, casual and Part-time engagements of staff in JIPMER
should be done with the Union Territory of Puducherry origin persons only.
 
In short, the representatives of the CPI welcomed & supported the declaration of the Institute as an Institution of national importance
as proposed by the Bill, subject to the condition that the steps that they indicated above are fulfilled and its implementation, assured
through the proposed Act.
 
Views of the representatives of Puducherry State unit of Indian National Congress
 
The representatives supported the Bill with the following suggested incorporations: -
o
       The services rendered by JIPMER should not be to the disadvantage of the poor people.  It should continue to provide free
treatment to people over after autonomy.
o       The cost of MBBS course currently makes it affordable for the poor students.  The same should continue after autonomy
and no change should be effected in the existing fee structure.
o       The Bill should provide job security for the present employees of the JIPMER Institute.
 
 
Views of the representatives of Puducherry State unit of Lok Janshakti Party (LJP), MDMK AND BJP
 
The representatives of LJP, MDMK and BJP were totally opposed to the autonomy of the JIPMER Institute.  They opined that the
institute should continue to enjoy benefit of Central Govt. status. They also opined that the Group C and D category employees of the
Institute should be recruited from Puducherry.
 
 
Views of the representatives of Puducherry State unit of CPI (ML)
           
            The representatives were of the view that the status quo should be maintained in the present Administrative set up of the
JIPMER Institute to function directly as Subordinate Office of the DGHS under the Government of India for the following reasons:
 
If JIPMER is granted Autonomous, in the context of financial crunch, this Institute also. Like other Autonomous Institutions viz
AIIMS at Delhi and PGIMER at Chandigarh, etc. will be left with no other option but o mobilize the funds on its own by way
of charging the Patients for everything.
From the objective of the proposed Bill for JIPMER, it can be rightly observed that the Status of Autonomy for JIPMER will
eventually make the Institution an elitist one and take the Hospital and the College beyond the reach of the poor and middle
class people in and around Puducherry. The students who can now prosecute the studies for M.B.B.S., P.G. Degree Courses and
other allied courses with a few. Thousand Rupees will be compelled to pay exorbitant fees. The Employees of this Institution

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
will have also to suffer in many ways in the process of conversion of the JIPMER Institution into an Autonomous Body.
In this context, it is the considered view of this Party that conferment of Autonomy is not the panacea for all the ills that afflict
the JIPMER Institute, nor will it aid the Development of the JIPMER Institute at Puducherry on par with other Autonomous
entities like the AIIMS, New Delhi and the PGIMER, Chandigarh etc.
This CPI (ML) is also of the considered view that adequate allocation of funds required for the maintenance, expansion,
Research and Development Activities of the JIPMER Hospital & College with the introduction of more specialties, the number
of beds in different Wards and above all, given more powers to this Institute by way of decentralization of Powers from the
Department “DGHS” through its Ministry “Health & Family Welfare”, of course, after restructuring / reorganization of the
present set up for quicker clearance of the proposals emanated from JIPMER etc., will go a long way in further developing and
strengthening of the JIPMER as a premier Institute of excellence in the services of Patient Care, Hospital Treatment and
Medical Education & Research in India.
Further it is not out of place to mention here that the move of Autonomy to JIPMER is only an attempt of certain vested interest
Political Parties / Leaders who would like to control this prestigious Institute for their Political vested interests at the cost of
Public Interests / Exchequer.
If autonomy is granted and elevated to the status of ‘National Institute of Excellence’ the fruits of reservation so far permitted in
appointments and in others will be denied, because normally reservation is not allowed in Autonomous Research Institute.
Hence Autonomy to JIPMER is detrimental to the Public.
Moreover, there are strong apprehensions in the minds of people of Puducherry that if the status of the JIPMER is altered from
its present status to that of autonomous body, rights of their wards to consideration fro appointment / recruitment to different
posts in the JIPMER on the basis of quota system will completely be taken away and as such their right to job and livelihood
will be infringed upon. 
 
 
OTHER ORGANISATIONS
Views of Bharathiya Labour Union
 
Bharathiya Labour union opposed the proposed move of granting autonomy to JIPMER.  However, the Union was in favour of
allotting more funds and taking other appropriate measures including filling up of all the existing vacancies of Doctors, Faculties and
Staff Members for the allround development of JIPMER in the existing pattern and status.  The Union was also in favour of granting
some extra powers by decentralization of certain powers from DGHS.  The Union stressed the need to allow JIPMER to function as a
“subordinate office “directly under the control of the Department of Health and Family Welfare of the Government of India in the
interest of the Public, the Student Community and the Employees of the JIPMER.
 
VIEWS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF PUDUCHERRY
           
The Government of Puducherry was in agreement with all the 32 Clauses proposed in the above Bill.  However, a few
modifications were suggested in the proposed Bill:
 
·
        Following three members may be included in the Governing Body from the Union Territory of Puducherry:
o       One Member of the Legislative Assembly of Puducherry to be nominated by the Hon’ble Speaker of the Assembly.
o       Secretary to Government (Health), Govt. of Puducherry.
o       Director of Health & Family Welfare Services, Puducherry.
·        The inclusion of these three members will facilitate the expression of views and concerns of the public of the Union Territory
in the Governing Body and also pave way for better cooperation from various Government Departments of Union Territory of
Puducherry in the functioning of the Institute.  It is all the more important in view of the Clause No. 13 (f) (i), (ii), (iii) & (iv)
which provides for establishment and maintenance of more Medical Colleges, Hospitals, Dental College, and Nursing College
etc by the Institute. 
·
        Clause 10 (3): Provides that the President of the Institute shall be the Chairperson of the Governing Body and as Chairperson
thereof he shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as may be specified.
·        It is proposed that Hon’ble Minister for Health, Government of India shall be the President of the Institute as well as the
Chairperson of the Governing Body.  It is felt that Hon’ble Minister for Health and Family Welfare, Government of India may
or may not be in a position to attend the regular and extra-ordinary meetings of the Governing Body on a consistent basis.
 Hence, it is desirable that a Vice-Chairperson to the Governing Body be nominated who would be in a position to attend the
Governing Body meetings regularly.   This will ensure that the decisions of the Governing Body are taken with the full
involvement of the Chairperson/ Vice-Chairperson.  The Hon’ble Minister for Health, Government of Puducherry may be
designated as Vice-Chairperson of the Governing Body.
 
Views of Indian Medical Association-Puducherry State Branch
 
The representatives of Indian Medical Association endorsed the views expressed by the State Government and were in favour of
according autonomy to JIPMER. However, they made following suggestions:

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
·        Governing Body & Institute Body should include Puducherry State Govt. representatives like Health Minister, Chief Secretary
or Health Secretary and Director of Health and Family Welfare Services.
·        All existing Teaching Faculty and Medical Officers have to be retained (if they are willing to stay) and status quo should be
maintained for Pay and Allowances as well as Promotions.
·        Poor patients should not be charged for treatment.   If the poor patients are forced to pay, they will turn away from JIPMER
and clinical material will be scarce, thus affecting the quality of Doctors coming out of JIPMER.
·        Student fee structure should remain the same and MBBS seats Reservation for Puducherry Union Territory should be
maintained.
·        There should be perfect co-ordination with the State Government Health Department both Academic and Administrative, as at
present.
·        Post Graduate seat reservation for Puducherry Health Service Doctors should be considered in the new set up.
 
 
Representations/Written Submissions
            The Committee had also received representations/written submissions from several associations/ unions and political parties
namely, to whom the Committee could not give audience due to paucity of time and fixed schedule of business. However, the
Committee considered their written submissions.
 
APPENDIX   
 
 
LIST OF WITNESS WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE AT PUDUCHERRY ON THE JIPMER BILL 2007
 
 
 
    Representatives of Ministry, JIPMER Management and Experts
 
1.
            Ms. Bhavani Thyagarajan,      Joint Secretary
2.            Dr. P.H. Ananthanarayanan,  DDG
3.            Dr. K.S.V.K. Subha Rao,                 Director, JIPMER
4.            Dr. K.S.Reddy,                                 Dean (JIPMER)
5.            Dr. S.Badrinath,                                Project coordinator, JIPMER
6.            Dr. A.K.Das,                                    MS,JIPMER
7.            Dr. D. Nagaraja,                               Expert
8.            Dr. D.S.Dubey,                                 Expert
9.            Dr. N.Ananthakrishnan,                     Expert
 
Representatives of JIPMER Faculty Members
1.
                  Dr. S.Srinivasan,
2.                  Dr. Ajit Sahay
3.                  Dr. Karun Agarawal
4.                  Dr. J. Balachander
5.                  Dr. Gitanjali Bhatnagar
 
 
Representatives of various associations/unions of Institute & Hospital
1.          Dr. G. Chetan,                               President, JIPMER Resident Doctor’s Association(JRDA,)
2.          Shri Stalin V                                  General-Secretary, JRDA
3.          Shri N. Srinivas Acharya,   Council Member
4.          Shri Saptharishi L.G.                      President, JIPMER Students’ Association                 
5.          Shri G. Maya                                 Vice-President, JSA
6.          Shri Tapas Sadasivan Nair,            Speaker, JSA
7.          Shri  J.Arul Prakash Pandian, Council members, JSA
8.          Shri A.Tumbanalh              CHS Officers Welfare Association       
9.         Dr. Jaishankar        President, CHS Officers Welfare Association   
10.       Dr. S.Datchanamoorthy,     President, JIPMER Employees’ Union (JEU)
11.       Dr. N.Visvanathan,             General-Secretary, JEU
12.       R. Sehamani,                                  EC member, JEU
                       
 

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
 
 
Representatives of  JIPMER SC/ST Employees Welfare Association
 
1.         Shri P. Paramasivam                 General Secretary 
2.         Shri K. Srikanth                                    Additional General Secretary 
3.         Shri S. Velayudham                              Treasurer
4.         Shri V. Lingesan                                   Vice-President
 
Representatives of  JIPMER Staff Struggle Committee
 
1.         Shri S. Dakshinamurty              President
2.         Shri R. Arochiamkalaimathy      General Secretary 
3.         Shri P. Paramasivam                 Secretary
 
Representatives of  JIPMER Hospital Employees Union
1.         Shri N.Panneer Selvam             President
2.         Shri R. Arochiamkalaimathy      General Secretary
 
Representatives of various political parties
 
CPI
 
1.         Shri R Vsiwanathan                  MLA
2.         Shri Nara. Kalainathan              MLA
3.         Shri T. Geethanathan
4.         Shri J. Chandra Segaran
5.         Shri I. Dinesh Ponniah
 
 
AIADMK
 
1.         Shri A. Anbahgan                                 MLA
2.         Shri Om Sakthi Segar               MLA
3.         Shri Shri M. Pondurangam
4.         Shri A. Ravindran
5.         Shri S. Kasinathan
6.         Shri R.V.Thirunavukarasar
7.         Shri A.Babu Say
 
Nationalist Congress Party
 
1.         A. Gandhraj                                         Former Minister
2.         K. Harikrishnan
 
BJP
 
1.         M. Viswaraman                                    State President
2.         S.P.K Dhamodhar                                State General Secretary
3.         Thange Vikraman                                 State Vice President
4.         Paranthaman                             Dist. President
 
 
Lok Sansakthi Party
 
1.         M.D.Umasudhan                                  State President Yuva
2.         P. Manoharan,                          Secretary Yuva
 
Representatives of State Govt. Puducherry
 
1.         Mr. Pradip Mehra                                Chief Secretary
2.         Mr. Balakrishanan                                Secretary (Health)

24th Report of Committee On Haelth And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/24threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:53:05]
3.         Dr. Dilip Kumar Daligi              Director Health & Family Welfare
 
Representatives of IMA
 
1.         Dr. V. Govindaraj                                 M.D President Puducherry
2.         Dr. R.V. Krishna Kumar                       Vice President IMA,Puducherry
 
 
 
 