PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 22  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARL IAMENTARY STANDING   
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2007-2008 (DEMAND NO. 46) OF 
THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE) 
 
 
 
 (PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA  SABHA ON 3RD MAY, 2007) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON 3RD MAY, 2007) 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MAY, 2007/VAISAKHA, 1929 (SAKA) 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail:rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING   
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2007-2008 (DEMAND NO. 46) OF 
THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE) 
LITERACY 
(MINISTRY O 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA  SABHA ON 3RD MAY, 2007) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON 3RD MAY, 2007) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MAY, 2007/VAISAKHA, 1929 (SAKA)


CONTENTS 
PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)—(ii) 
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................ (iii) 
3. R EPORT   
4. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE..................... 1—5 
 (i) Introduction and Budgetary Allocation ............................................................. 6—35 
 (ii) Health Sector ................................................................................................. 36—61 
 (iii) NRHM and Family welfare ................ ............................................................ 62—85 
5. MINUTE …...............................................................................……….…………………...... 87—91 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
( 2006-2007 )
 
 1. Shri Amar Singh  — Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 #2. Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur  
 @3. Shri A.K. Antony 
 4. Prof. P. J. Kurien 
 5. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar 
 6. Shrimati Maya Singh 
 7. Shri Digvijay Singh 
 8. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy 
 9. Shri Lalhmingliana 
 *10. Shri Manohar Joshi 
 $$11. Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
  LOK  SABHA  
 @12. Shri M. Ambareesh  
 ^13. Shrimati Bhavana P. Gawli 
 14. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
 15. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi 
 16. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
 17. Shri Rajendra Kumar 
 18. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman 
 19. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah 
 20. Shri Rasheed Masood 
 21. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
 22. Shri Nihal Chand 
 23. Shri D.B. Patil 
 24. Shrimati K. Rani 
 25. Shri Pannian Ravindran 
 26. Dr. R. Senthil 
 27. Dr. Mohd. Shahabuddin 
 28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
 29. Shri Ajit Kumar Singh 
 30. Shri Uday Singh 
 31. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav 
 **32. Shri Rajnarayan Budholiya 
 ^^33. Shri Vinod Khanna  
 $34. Shri R.L. Jalappa 
 
# Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 15th December, 2006 on demise. 
@ Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 24th October, 2006. 
* Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 4th  September, 2006. 
$$ Nominated w.e.f. 30th November, 2006. 
^ Nominated w.e.f. 31st August, 2006. 
** Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 31st August, 2006. 
^^ Nominated w.e.f. 3rd September, 2006. 
$ Nominated w.e.f. 28th November, 2006. 
 

  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary 
  Shrimati Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary 
  Shri H.C. Sethi, Deputy Secretary 
  Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Under Secretary 
  Shri Dinesh Singh, Committee Officer  

PREFACE 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parlia mentary Standing Committee on Health and Family 
Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to pres ent the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this 
Twenty-second Report of the Committee on the Demands fo r Grants (Demand No.46) of the Department of 
Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2007-08. 
2. The Committee considered the vari ous documents and relevant papers received from the Department of 
Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and also heard the Secretary  
and other officials of that Department on the said Demands for Grants in its meeting held on the  
10th April, 2007. 
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted  the same in its meeting held on the 27th April, 
2007. 
  AMAR SINGH 
NEW DELHI ; Chairman, 
April 27, 2007 Department-related Parliamentary 
Vaisakha 7, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is instru mental and responsible for implementation of various 
programmes on a national scale in the areas of Health and Family Welfare, prevention and control of major 
communicable diseases and promotion of traditional and indigenous systems of medicine. The Ministry incurs 
expenditure either under Central Schemes through its two Departments i.e. Department of Health and Family 
Welfare and Department of AYUSH or by way of grants -in-aid to the autonomous/statutory bodies etc. and 
NGOs. In addition to the 100 per cent centrally sponsored Family Welfare Programme, the Ministry is 
implementing several World Bank assisted programmes for control of AIDS, Malaria, Tuberculosis, etc. in 
designated areas. Besides, States Health Systems Development Projects with World Bank assistance are under 
implementation in various States. The projects are im plemented by the respective State Governments and the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare only facilita tes the States in availing of external assistance. All 
these schemes aim at fulfilling the national commitment to  improve access to primary health care facilities 
keeping in view the needs of rural areas and where the incidence of disease is high. 
 Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare in his presentation before the Committee 
highlighted the following main objectives of the Department:— 
 — Enhance public spending on health 
 — Improve access to health care deli very and promote primary health care 
 — Move towards population stabilisation 
 — Attain targets set for communicable diseases 
 — Decentralised planning with  active community participation 
 — Develop availability of super-specialit y and tertiary care in deficient areas 
 — Address emerging concerns (lifestyle diseases, avian flu, deafness) 
 — Involve private sector through Public Private Partnership. 
1.2 Secretary emphasised that health was one of the thrust areas under the National Common Minimum 
Programme (NCMP), wherein the Government intended to  raise public spending on health from current 0.9 
per cent of GDP to at least 2-3 per cent of GDP over the next five years with focus on primary health care, 
introduction of a national scheme for health insurance for poor families and step up public investment in 
programmes to control communicable diseases. 
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
2.1 The Ministry had proposed a total outlay of Rs. 18,281 crores for the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare for 2007-08 to the Planning Commission. The approved allocation against this projected requirement 
is Rs. 13,875 crores including North East. The Committee  was informed that against the projected requirement 
of Rs. 12,866 crore for NRHM, only Rs. 10,890 crore has been provided. Similarly, for Health Programmes 
outside NRHM, Plan allocation of Rs. 2985 crore has been made which was almost half of the projected 
requirement of Rs. 5415 crore. Under NRHM, activities  directly under the Mission  were allocated Rs. 9928 
crores against a proposed outlay of Rs. 11649.35 cror es and for Disease Control Programmes, the final 
allocation stood at Rs. 962 crores against the projection of approximately Rs. 1217.27 crores. 
2.2 It was clarified that the impact of this reductio n will be known during the cour se of the year depending 
on the absorptive capacity of the States. Ongoing health schemes were likely to be affected more severely. This 
is because, out of the approved outlay of Rs. 2985 cr ores, Rs. 600 crores was towards Oversight Committee 
and Rs. 150 crores towards PMSSY, leaving a balance of  Rs. 2235 crores to be spread across the various 
schemes, Hospitals and Dispensaries, Research and Medical Institutions etc. Due to the insufficient allocation, 

final scheme-wise outlays in some cases were  less than even the existing RE for 2006-07 e.g. ICMR. In the 
case of certain other schemes, the BE for 2007-08 was less than the BE for 2006-07. Major programmes likely 
to be affected by inadequate prov isioning included PMSSY, Assistance to States for Capacity Building, 
Hospitals and Dispensaries (Safdarj ung, Dr. RML, CIP, Ranchi, AIIS&H, Mysore), CGHS and institutions 
concerned with medical education and training like JIPMER, LHMC, NIMHANS etc. In some of the Hospitals 
like Dr. RML  and Safdarjung and Medical Instituti ons like JIPMER, LHMC, construction activities were on 
and under provisioning was likely to affect the completi on of these works and in th e process the Institutions 
adversely. Adequate provisioning had also not been possible for development of Nursing Services and 
institutions like AIIH and PH, Kolkata which are covere d under Public Health. NIB,  Noida, Central Research 
Institute, Kasauli, Central Drug Standard Control Orga nization, National Medical Library have all been given 
provisions lower than that had been projected for. On Health Sector, Disaster Preparedness, a token provision 
has been made against the projected requirement. Not only this, small institutions like LRSTB, Delhi falling 
under the Central Sector and set up for providing research support for existing national programmes and 
institutions concerned with medical education, training and research would be deprived of the required funds. 
2.3 Secretary informed the Committee that on receipt of  the final allocation, Planning Commission had been 
addressed regarding the insufficiency of outlays in respect of Health sector programmes. It has now been asked 
by the Planning Commission to indicate the schemes/pr ogrammes where the requirements were insufficient. 
Critical minimum requirement in all the affected schemes was being communicated to the Planning 
Commission so that the momentum in implementation of these programmes was not lost. Committee was also 
given to understand that the Ministry would be moving for additionalities in the first supplementary and 
subsequently, in some of the schemes, seek a higher allocation at the RE level, based on the pace of their 
expenditure. 
2.4 The Committee is dismayed to note that the Department at the initial stage has failed to project its 
budgetary requirements in an effective and prudent way, which is evident from the fact that the 
Planning Commission has requested the Department to indica te the schemes/programmes where the 
allocation is insufficient. The Committee would like the Department to process the matter with a sense 
of urgency so that the stumbling blocks in the allo cation of sufficient funds for a crucial sector like 
health are removed. 
2.5 Secretary, while justifying the projected requirements of the Department for 2007-08, informed the 
Committee that by the end of financial year 2006-07, Depa rtment was able to utilise Rs.9295.55 crore against 
RE allocation of Rs. 10,000 crore i.e. 93.5 per cent of allocated funds. The Committee, however, is not 
inclined to agree, simply because the detailed analysis of trend of allocation of plan funds and utilisation 
thereof during 2006-07 reveals a different position. Th e Committee would like to  draw the attention of 
the Department towards the fact th at BE allocation of  Rs. 11,305.00 crore had to be brought down to 
Rs. 10,000.00 crore at the RE stage. As per the information available with the Committee, actual 
expenditure figures as on the 15th February, 2007 in the Heath sector were Rs. 1435.78 crore against RE 
allocation of Rs. 2048.92 crore. Under NRHM, there was utilisation of Rs. 6047.30 crore as on 28th 
February, 2007 against RE provision of Rs. 7951.08 cror e. Even if total provisional expenditure of  Rs. 
9295.55 crore as on 31st March, 2007 turns out to be the final utilisation status, the fact remains that 
about Rs. 2000.00 crore were spent in the latter half of the last quarter of the financial year. During 
2005-06 also, allocated funds remained under-utilised . Against a total plan allocation of Rs. 9332.00 
crore, final expenditure figures were Rs. 7926.55 crore. 
2.6 Committee has been commenting on this discouraging utilizatio n trend year after year. However, 
there does not seem to be any noticeable improvement . This is all the more di sturbing as there was no 
significant enhancement in the plan allocation for 2006-07 when compared with 2005-06. Against this 
backdrop, total plan allocation of Rs. 13,875.00 crore  for the entire health s ector including NRHM for 
2007-08 is at an enhanced level when compared with the previous year. The Committee is well aware 
that health sector is the most vital sector for a va st country like ours where  majority of population 
remains deprived of even the minimum medical fac ilities. The Committee has been advocating higher 
allocation for health and family welfare and would continue to do the same this year too. 

2.7 The Committee is fully aware that health being a state subject, central funds are to be spent 
through the agencies of State  Gov ernments alone. It is also true th at absorption capacity varies from 
State to State. The Committee would like to emphasize once again that the Centre has to play a more 
pro-active role. The main priority for the Depart ment should be to extensively monitor both the 
implementation of all the schemes and functioning of  those premier institutions/ hospitals, constantly 
showing unsatisfactory performanc e level. The Committee wonders whether any exercise has been 
initiated so far so as to analyse their status duri ng the Tenth Plan. The Comm ittee strongly feels that 
with the Eleventh Plan al ready begun, such an analysis should be made, if not done already, without 
further delay, followed by remedial measures. 
2.8 The Committee views with serious concern very discouraging utilization status of major disease 
control programmes like National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme, National Cancer Control 
Programme, National Mental Health Programme, Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme, Rural 
Family Welfare Services, State Training Centres, Routine Immunisation, Inst itutes/Organisations like 
Central Institute of Psychiatry, Ranchi, JIPMER, Po ndicherry, National T.B. Institute, Bangalore, 
Central Drug Standard and Contro l Organisation, Drug Control, De velopment of Nursing Sciences, 
Health Sector Disaster Preparedness and Management , Health Education. Performance under/of these 
schemes/institutions needs to be monitored all the more as their plan allocation for 2007-08 shows 
considerable enhancement. 
2.9 On a specific question regarding diversion of funds from plan to non-plan during the financial year 
2006-07, the Department informed that  Rs. 109.75 crores were likely to be diverted from plan to non-plan. 
This was on account of the fact that at BE stage th e projected requirements fo r non-plan were not fully 
provided for. Additional funds for non-plan had been al located at RE stage by di verting funds from plan to 
non-plan. It was felt that an internal exercise was n ecessary to look into the non-plan budget in respect of 
institutions like AIIMS for drawing up a strategy for the same so that transfer of funds from plan to non-plan 
was avoided. 
2.10 The Committee in this connection would like to ob serve that this unhealth y practice of diverting 
plan funds to meet the expenditure on the non-plan si de has been continuing for the last several years. 
The Committee in its 16th Report on Demands for Grants 2006-07 had recommended to curb this trend. 
The Committee, however, observes  that the trend has remained unabated during the financial year 
2006-07 also. In this regard, the response of the Department that it needs to do an internal exercise to 
look into the non-plan budget of institutions like AIIMS and draw a strategy is a much delayed but very 
much required action. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should complete 
whatever exercise proposed to ensure that adeq uate funds are available to meet the non-plan 
expenditure and unhealthy practice of diversion of funds from plan to non-plan is brought to an end. 
2.11 The Committee in this connection would also like to observe that non-plan expenditure in respect 
of Health and Family Welfare Sector has a slightly different character and impact as compared to non-
plan expenditure of other organizations and Depart ments. A large chunk of non-plan funds of the 
Department is spent on consumables, drugs and ma intenance of hospitals, machinery and equipment. 
Therefore, insufficient provision for meeting such vital recurring expenditure year after year will 
eventually paralyse the running of various Hospit als and Institutions. The Committee expects that the 
above mentioned concern would be shared and appr eciated by the Government while allocating non-
plan funds for the Department. 
2.12 Committee has been viewing with serious concern the pendency of Utilisation Certificates under 
various schemes of the Department. Committee was informed that the Department has been pursuing 
the clearance of pending Utilisation Certificates wi th State  Governments. However, the problem of 
pending UCs continues unabated. The Committee is co nstrained to observe that as on 1st March, 2007, 
there were as many as 2810 outstanding UCs amountin g to Rs. 1184.05 crore for the grants released 
upto 2004-05. The Committee finds that problem is more acute under Family Welfare Sector having 

outstanding UCs for Rs. 716.12 crore. By the close of  2006-07, total number of UCs which have become 
due is 4153 amounting to Rs. 5417.34 crores. 
2.13 The Committee was given to understand that und er the revised Finance Mi nistry guidelines, UCs 
become due after 12 months instead of earlier period  of 18 months. The Committee is of the view that 
under the new dispensation, this problem is bound to aggravate. It seems that the Department has so far 
failed to take any effective corrective measure in spite of the Committee rep eatedly making pointed 
references in this direction. The Committee does not have much fa ith in the Programme Management 
Units being set up at State level and District level and deputing of managerial experts to the States by 
the Department. Committee has been compelled to make such an observation in view of a serious 
shortfall in the accounting/audit system of the Mini stry itself, pointed out in the CAG Report on the 
functioning of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the period 2002-05 (Report No. 12 of 
2006). It has been noticed that audit of all the central and centrally sponsored health programmes, PSUs 
under the Department and autonomous bodies like AIIMS, PGI, Chandigarh are kept out of jurisdiction 
of Internal Audit. CAG was of th e opinion that in view of huge amount of funds involved, such a 
procedure defeated the very purpose of having an  Internal Audit Wing of  the Ministry. Committee 
views the proposed audit of autonomous bodies from 2007-08 by the Internal Audit Wing of the 
Ministry too late an exercise in the day. Committee finds the statemen t of the Department all the more 
disturbing that internal audit of all central and centrally sponsored schemes would require the 
Internal Audit Wing to be strengthened considerably. This clearly shows that there is not much hope of 
situation improving in the near fu ture. The Committee would, therefore, urge upon the Department to 
set its own House in order first without any further delay. The Committee also feels that vigorous efforts 
need to be made on priority basis to clear th e UCs pending for the last three decades or so. 
Simultaneously, the Department should pursue with the States showin g maximum pendency, if 
necessary at the highest level. 
2.14 During the course of deposition before the Comm ittee, under-utilization of the allocated funds for 
NRHM was brought to the notice of the Department by the Committee. When asked to identify the factors 
responsible for the under-utilization of the allocated fu nds and the specific steps, if any, initiated by the 
Department to ensure the optimum and judicious utilization of the allocated funds, the Secretary explained that 
in 2005-06, the Mission was just beginning. In 2006-07, most of the money was sanctioned to the States on the 
basis of State level Programme Implementation Plans (PIP s). But now, micro planning has been taken to the 
district level and district programme implementation plans are being made based on the specific requirement of 
each district. These plans are amalgamated into Stat e level Programme Implemented Plans and sanctions are 
now being made, on that basis. He also informed the Committee that management system is also being 
strengthened. The Secretary opined th at more micro plans and the releases  based on specific programmes and 
items in each district would enable the States to spend money faster and furnish utilization certificates timely. 
2.15 Dwelling further on the micro planning, the Join t Secretary of the Department stated that the 
Department’s emphasis is on decentralization and it has been decided to spend 70 per cent of the money at the 
block and below block levels, 20 per cent at the District level and only 10 per cent at the State and National 
level. He however brought to the notice of the Co mmittee a systemic constraint. Implementation of many 
components of NRHM involves the household, the village, the sub-centre, PHC, CHC, reporting to the State 
and then to the Central Government. This procedure takes time and also requires a large management structure 
to collect feedback for preparing the Utilization Certific ates. He stated that the fu nds are released to PHCs, 
CHCs, sub-centres and district hospitals  for the entire year and they are re quired to be spent over the entire 
year. As per the revised General Financial Rules, Utiliz ation Certificates have to be furnished within 12 
months of the end of the financial year. He further informed that the Government’s General Financial Rules till 
2005 provided for an 18-month period after the end of the financial year for th e submission of Utilization 
Certificates in respect of non-recurring grants. 
2.16 As regards recurring grants, it requires submission of the Utilization Certificate before applying for the 
second instalment. He pleaded that given the existing cons traints associated with dece ntralization as also with 

the fledgling management system, the old GFRs which provided for 18-month period for the submission of 
UCs for non-recurring grants should be restored. The Committee was given to understand that this 
dispensation was required for three years only as the existing constraints would be taken care of by then. 
2.17 The Committee takes note of the concerns regarding submission of utilization certificates within 
12 months, as required by the General Financial Rule s, as amended in 2005. The Committee is inclined 
to agree to the Department’s view that given the nature of decentralization and the mandate of the 
NRHM, the issue of submission of Utilization Certificates within a period of 12 months of the end of the 
Financial Year needs serious re -examination. The Committee theref ore recommends that applicability 
of revised GFR in the context of Health and Fa mily Welfare Programme may be reviewed and the 
Ministry of Finance may be approached in this regard. 

Part-A  
(HEALTH SECTOR) 
III. CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME, (CGHS)  
3.1 The CGHS is a welfare scheme of Central Govern ment which takes care of the medical needs of the 
Central Government employees, pensioners, sitting MP s and Ex-MPs, sitting and retired Judges of Supreme 
Court/High Courts, Freedom Fighters, Ex-Governors, serving and pensioner employees of a few autonomous 
organisations in Delhi and the cities where CGHS is in  operation. There are at present 9.11 lakh CGHS card 
holders and 33.01 lakh beneficiaries. 
3.2 Plan Allocation of Rs. 35.00 crore for CGHS for 2006-07 was enhanced to Rs. 39.57 crore at the RE 
Stage. Committee has been given to understand that provisional expenditure as on 31st March, 2007 would be 
Rs. 34.42 crore. The Committee would,  however, like to point out that act ual utilization status as on 28th 
February, 2007 was only Rs. 28.36 crore which is even less than the BE allocation of  Rs. 35.00 crore. Not 
only this, Rs. 3.00 crore earmarked for N-E region have  remained unspent. The Co mmittee has also observed 
that during the Tenth Plan, while during the first three year s, utilization level remained satisfactory, in the last 
two years, enhanced provision has remained under utilised. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
every effort should be made for optimum and judicious utilization of Rs. 40.00 crore provided for CGHS 
in 2007-08. 
3.3 The Committee observes that a number of init iatives are proposed for CGHS which include 
delegation of enhanced financial powers to Minist ries and within CGHS, Local Advisory Committees at 
dispensary level, compilation of manual of rules and procedure, reduction in waiting time for 
registration and delivery of medicines. Welcomin g such initiatives, the Committee would like to 
emphasize that all the proposed in itiatives should be implemented in a time-bound manner with the 
ultimate objective of making CGHS more patient-friendly. 
3.4 The Committee observes that the target of Com puterisation of all CGHS dispensaries in Delhi 
during 2006-07 could not be accomplis hed. Only the Pilot Project of co mputerization of dispensaries in 
Laxmi Nagar, North Avenue, South Avenue and Parl iament House Annexe could be completed. On a 
specific query in this regard, Department has also submitted that the original programme of completion 
of computerization by the end of 2006-07 could not be achieved due to resource constraints as funds 
could be allocated only during February 2007. Sancti on order for the computerisation of dispensaries in 
Delhi has been conveyed to National Informatics Ce ntre and it is expected that the computerisation 
process would be completed by 17th August, 2007. 
3.5 The Committee would like to point that BE allocation of Rs. 35.00 crore was enhanced to Rs. 
39.57 crore at the RE stage. Provisional expenditure as on 31st March, 2007 as informed by the 
Department is Rs. 34.42 crore, leaving a gap of Rs. 5.00 crore. Hence the reply of the Department that 
due to resource constraints, funds could be alloca ted only during February , 2007 has raised more 
queries than it has answered. The Committee feels that delay must have occurred due to prolonged 
procedure involved while sanctioning a new project. The Commit tee, accordingly, recommends that 
computerization of CGHS dispensaries in Delhi should be completed by the revised target date of 17th 
August, 2007. 
3.6 In reply to a query, the Department has submitted th at “to be more realistic to the current attendance of 
beneficiaries in all dispensaries in CGHS, it has now been decided that the SIU report will be implemented on 
the basis of the norms fixed based on attendance data for 2005. All Additional Directors/Joint Directors in-
charge of CGHS cities have been requested to forwar d the average attendance deta ils for the year 2005. As 
soon the details are received, the SIU Report will be implemented and assessed strength of each dispensary 
will be calculated and fixed accordingly.” 

3.7 The Committee is constrained to observe that implementation of SIU Report has been kept 
postponed on one pretext or the other year after year. Upto last year, information on existing strength in 
the dispensaries was being sought from CGHS un its. Norms have changed since then and now SIU 
Report is to be implemented on the basis of norm s based on attendance data for 2005. The Committee, 
however, observes that details from all Addition al/ Joint Directors are yet to be received. The 
Committee apprehends that if there is a further delay in getting the average attendance details for the 
year 2005 as proposed by the Department, the data so received will again not match the ground realities 
which will again delay the implementation of the SIU Report. The Committee, therefore, recommends to 
the Department to complete all the procedural forma lities, paving the way for early implementation of 
the SIU Report. 
3.8 Committee observes that follow- up action on a number of recomm endations made in the Report 
given by M/s Ferguson and Company, sponsored by European Union has been taken by the 
Department. Committee would like to comment on some  aspects of action initiated by the Department. 
The reduction in the number of functional dispensaries to half, due to work-load being negligible during 
emergency hours cannot be considered a wise move . The Committee is not in clined to agree with the 
contention that in an emergency, the beneficiary ca n take treatment at any private hospital, whether 
empanelled or not. The Committee is of the strong view that for small emergencies, the patient should 
depend on the nearest dispensary which would be providin g free of cost treatment. It would be better if 
emergency service is made available in more and more dispensaries, specially in view of quite a few 
dispensaries, at least in Delhi, moving in buildings of their own. 
3.9 European Commission study has also pointed out that the present dispensary timings are inconvenient to 
serving employees. Committee has also been voicing its concern in this regard since long. The Committee 
is surprised to note that the Department continues to  indicate that operating dispensaries in two shifts 
was not possible due to resistance by the Em ployees’ Association. The Committee expresses  its strong 
reservation to this line of argument. The Committee reiterates that the Department has to play a more 
pro-active role in such matters. A beginning can be easily made by starting two shifts in a few 
dispensaries as a test case. After some time, an analys is about patient visits to dispensary can be easily 
made and a final decision taken in the end. 
3.10 Committee has been observing that CGHS continues to suffer from shortage of manpower. The latest 
status of cadre-wise vacancy position under the CGHS system as furnished by the Department is as under:- 
Cadre Sanctioned Filled Vacant 
GDMO 1387 1214 173 
Non teaching specialist 106 61 45 
SAG Level Doctors 83 16 67 
Paramedical Gr-C 3023 2521 502 
Paramedical Gr-D 2961 2477 484 
 The Committee has been given to understand that pending implementation of SIU Report, large number 
of post continue to remain  vacant. Superannuation and Vo luntary retirement cases have also led to increase in 
vacancies. 
3.11 The Committee observes that si nce on the basis of its earlier recommendations, Ministry of 
Finance has already lifted the ban on filling up of technical posts, the responsibility for expediting the 
filling up of vacancies lies now on the Departme nt and any further delay in the matter cannot be 
justified. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to expedite the filling up of 
vacancies at the earliest. 

3.12 The Department has informed that in respect of  non technical posts, the Screening Committee in 
its meeting held on December, 2006, has cleared 136 posts in CGHS for being filled up and action to fill 
them up has been initiated. The Committee would like to be informed about the progress made in this 
regard. 
3.13 The Committee notes that the empanelment process for CGHS Delhi has been completed and the list of 
empanelled hospitals and diagnostic centres with effect from 1st November, 2006, has been placed on the 
website of the Ministry. 
3.14 The Committee was given to understand that one significant change has been made in the new 
system. Now empanelment of hospitals/diagnostic centers is a continuous process, option being available 
to join the CGHS at any time. The Committee would, however, like to point out that there are inherent 
drawbacks under such a system. Beneficiaries will have to keep a track of empanelled hospitals which is 
not always possible under such a flexible system, clerical errors may sometime occur, putting the 
patients to inconvenience. The Committee, therefore,  feels that it would be appropriate if a minimum 
period of empanelment is also la id down for private hospitals/diagnostic centres and labs, as done 
earlier. 
3.15 The Committee has another very strong obje ction in respect of the new procedure. The 
Committee is of the firm opinion that inclusion in th e list of empanelled hospitals/diagnostic centres on 
the basis of lowest quotations cannot be considered to be based on a sound principle. The Committee 
feels that the mandate of the Government is to provide a fullsome and comprehensive medical care 
facility to the beneficiaries and not a piece-meal one. Private hospitals/diagnostic centres have been 
recognized throughout the countr y for specialist treatment/diagno sis, providing access of quality 
medical care to the beneficiaries on the one hand and relieving the Government Hospitals of the extra 
patient load on the other. Moreov er, there cannot be two opinions th at in almost al l the Government 
Hospitals, the infrastructure and other facilities are already overstretched. The Committee thinks that 
provision of private recognized hospitals and diagnostic centres should be logical and essential extension 
of the existing system and to hold that it is an additional facility is not in sync with the current buzzword 
of Public-Private-Partnership. 
3.16 The Committee feels that literally speaking, though the Department cannot force private 
hospitals/diagnostic centres to be empanelled, it can indirectly compel the quality private 
hospitals/diagnostic centre to opt ou t of empanelment, if the rates quo ted are very low. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the rates should be fixed realistically, taking into acco unt the market 
realities so as to encourage quality private hospitals and diagnostic centres to join the system. 
IV. SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI  
4.1 Safdarjung Hospital is the largest of the three Central Government, tertiary care multi-disciplinary 
hospitals in Delhi with a pre-independence history as it was established in 1942, during the Second World 
War. The Hospital presently has facilities in the 34 clinical and 45 special clinics. 
4.2 The BE plan allocation for Safdarjung Hospital for the year 2006-07 was Rs. 48.00 crores which was 
subsequently increased to Rs. 51.39 crores at the RE stage. The provisional expenditure figures till 31st March, 
2007 is Rs. 43.27 crores. With regard to the Vardhman  Mahaveer Medical College attached to the Safdarjung 
Hospital, against an allocation of Rs. 30.00 crore, provisional expenditure reported upto 31st March, 2007 is 
Rs. 29.09 crore. This clearly reflects that in case of VMMC though the utilization of funds has been optimum, 
the same is not the case fo r the Safdarj ung Hospital. The Committee also observes that trend of plan 
allocation and utilization thereof during the Tenth Pl an period shows that somehow the Hospital has 
failed to keep pace with the allocation of plan funds. 
4.3 The Committee notes that the Annual Plan proposed for Safdarjung Hospital for 2007-08 was Rs. 92.50 
crore. However, only Rs. 51.00 crore have been provided. Committee has be en informed that under-

provisioning is likely to adversely affect the completi on of ongoing construction act ivities and in the process 
the Hospital itself. 
4.4 The Committee has been observing that even thou gh the patient load in the Hospital has been 
showing a steady increase over the years, the bed st rength of 1531 of the Hospital, continues to remain 
unchanged. Appreciating that the ever- increasing patient load has al ready overstretched the Hospital 
services and infrastucture, the Committee has been st rongly advocating the need for increase in the bed 
strength of the Hospital. The Committee is happy to  note that a proposal for the redevelopment of 
Safdarjung Hospital has been prepared and submitted to Planning Commission for approval. The 
estimated cost of the whole project is Rs. 1400 crores to be spread over 15 years (within Three Five Year 
Plans). The first phase of this redevelopment plan is estimated to cost Rs. 700 crores. The Committee 
was, however, informed that the Pl anning Commission has refused to grant ‘in- principle’ approval for 
the proposal. 
4.5 During the course of discussions with the Department , the Committee sought clarifications in this regard 
from the Secretary. The Committee was then informed th at the Planning Commission was of the view that the 
health facilities of Delhi needed comprehensive redevelopment and accordingly, focus only on the 
redevelopment of a specific institution should not be th ere. Accordingly, the Department was asked to come 
back to the Planning Commission with a proposal for revamping the health services in the NCR, Delhi. The 
Department then clarified that health  services was primarily the responsibility of Delhi Government. Except 
Safdarjung Hospital, Planning Commission had already okayed the redevelopment plans of all the Central 
Institutions. Against this background, it would be unjus tified to leave Safdarjung Hospital, specially because 
the Hospital was serving not only the Delhi citizens bu t from the neighbouring States as well. The Committee 
was informed that the Department have now been asked to revise the redevelopment plan with a shorter period, 
preferably a plan period, taking care of cost containment also. 
4.6 The Committee notes that the redevelopment plan of Safdarjung Hospital is a phase-wise conversion 
from 1531 beds to 3000 beds, with full-fledged facility for medical and para-medical training alongwith tele-
connectivity with the Vardhman Medical College. The Committee was given to understand that planning was 
done in such a manner that the services of the Hospital, i.e., patient-care services and teaching and training 
services are not disturbed even for a single day. 
4.7 The Committee observes that the Hospital caters not only to the ordinary citizens of Delhi with 
meager means but also of the neighbouring States. The basic idea not to disturb the existing services and 
simultaneously go for redevelopment needs to be impl emented without any deviation and dilution in the 
original plan deserves to be implemented in the real sense. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends to the Department to approach the Pl anning Commission once again to convince the 
Commission of the necessity of  according approval for the  redevelopment plan of the Hospital as 
originally envisaged. At the same time, the Depa rtment should make ever y conceivable effort to 
complete the redevelopment plan with in the targeted date and also with out cost escalation to the extent 
possible. The Committee would appreciate if th e Department puts in place a joint monitoring 
Committee of Department and Hospital authorities so as to tie all the loose ends and work towards the 
redevelopment of the Safdarjung Hospital. The Committee also recommends that the required funds are 
made available for the project. 
4.8 Committee’s attention has been drawn by the fo llowing quantifiable deliverables/physical outputs 
identified for the hospital for the year 2006-07:- 
 (i) To initiate the establishment of Renal Transp lantation in Department of Surgery/Urology  and 
Invitro Fertilization (IVF) clinic in Obs and Gynae Deptt. 
 (ii) Construction of Vardhaman Ma havira Medical College building. 
 (iii) Filling up of 245 technical posts, which ar e under process of recruitment. Procurement of 
equipments and medicine. 

 Achievements made, as intimated by the De partment in this regard are given below:- 
 (i) Renal Transplantation unit is in the process of establishment,  
 (ii) Construction of V.M.M. Colle ge building is under progress,  
 (iii) Filling up of 245 technical po sts are under process of recruitment. 
4.9 The Committee is constrained to observe that the Department has failed to achieve tangible 
achievements in respect of even one proposed target. More so, the eloquent silence in respect of progress made 
in the establishment of IVF clinic in Obs and Gynae Department is reflective of the fact that work has not even 
been started. The Committee notes that identi cal targets have been set for 2007-08 also. In view of the 
discouraging level of achievement, the Committee wo uld like to observe that merely defining targets 
without showing any achievement does not make out a very convincing case for allocation of additional 
funds. The Committee in this co nnection would like to emphasise that non-optimum utilization of 
planned funds would not help the hospital’s cause of getting an enhanced allocation for future expansion 
or development, thereby impacting adversely the health care delivery system and depriving a 
substantially large number of poor patients of basic health care facilities. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Department, in coordination with the hospital authorities, should closely monitor 
the ongoing projects from the beginning of financial year 2007-08 itself. Only then, the Department can 
make out a case for additional funds at the RE stage. 
V. DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI  
5.1 Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital is a multi-sp ecialty (25 specialties), 1000 bedded Hospital which 
caters to the needs of CGHS beneficiaries, and VVIPs besides other general patients. The Hospital covers all 
major specialties and super-specialties. 
5.2 The Plan allocation of Rs. 36.00 crore has been made available to the Hospital for 2007-08 against the 
projected requirement of Rs. 60.00 crores. The Committee was given to understand that the under-provisioning 
was likely to affect the completion of ongoing projects and in the process, the hospital itself adversely. 
5.3 The Committee notes that an allocation of Rs. 150.00  crores was made for the Hospital during the Tenth 
Five Year Plan. The year-wise alloca tion and actual expenditure for each year of the Tenth Plan is given 
below:— 
(Rs. in crores) 
2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 Expenditure 
BE AE BE AE BE AE BE AE BE RE Upto 15.2.07 
25 17.83 25.00 18.66 30 20.05 55.30 29.23 40.34 48.23 42.12 
5.4 The Committee is constrained to note the sub-optimal utilization of plan funds in respect of the 
Hospital and that too for each of the last five years. The Committee would like to observe that such low 
level of utilization of plan funds will do no good to  the Department’s projection  of higher allocation for 
the Hospital. The Committee is unable to reconcile itse lf with the fact that th ough the under-utilization 
of the allocated funds has accentuated over the years, no attempt se ems to have been made to arrest the 
trend. The Committee hopes that in the light of as surance given by the Secretary before the Committee 
that each Central Institute will be having a separa te Monitoring Committee, things will improve and 
ongoing projects will be completed as envisaged in a time-bound manner. 
5.5 The Committee observes that a number of projects and activities are planned for 2007-08. Following are 
the three major projects which have been going on for the last few years:— 
 — Strengthening of Accident and Emergency Department and setting up of Trauma Centre. 
 — Upgradation of School of Nursing into College of Nursing. 
5.6 The Committee notes that the new building with separate trauma beds, emergency Operation Theatre 
and ICU is almost completed and likely to be commi ssioned very soon. The manpower is being selected for 

recruitment and sophisticated equipmen ts are being procured. PGIMER at the Hospital is also likely to be 
completed during 2007-08. The Committee observes that buil ding for Trauma Centre is to be handed over by 
HSCC and CPWD by June, 2007 and required equipment are likely to be procured shortly. 
5.7 The Committee would like to point out that this project has been going on for the last so many 
years. Committee’s experience has been that even after completion of construction work, process of 
obtaining of clearance from all the concerned authorities is a protracted and complicated exercise which 
is likely to take another one-two years. The Committe e would, therefore, imp ress upon the Department 
to expedite the completion of all required formalities in coordination with the hospital authorities. At the 
same time, the recruitment process for getting t echnical and non-technical manpower and obtaining 
required equipments should also begin at the earliest. 
5.8 Upgradation of School of Nursing into a College of Nursing is another project of the Hospital which has 
been in the implementation status since long. In the absence of any information about the progress made so far, 
the Committee is inclined to believe that this proj ect must be entangled in procedural formalities. The 
Committee would like to be apprised about the present status of this project. 
VI. DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA PG INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND 
RESEARCH 
6.1 The plan allocation for Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia PG Institute of Medical Education and Research, New 
Delhi was Rs 10.06 crores in BE and RE 2006-07, which has been substantially reduced to Rs 1.30 crores. 
Explaining the reason for the reduction in allocation the Department has submitted that “Dr. R.M.L. Hospital 
had forwarded the demand of Rs. 20.00 crores to the Ministry for the construction of PGIMER for the financial 
year 2007-08 and the same was reco mmended by the Ministry. The reduced  allocation of Rs. 1.30 crores is 
insufficient to meet the required expenditure. Secretary (Health  and Family Welfare)  has, therefore, taken up 
the matter for enhancement of the proposed allocation with the Planning Commission. The Department has 
also submitted that functioning of the PGIMER is not yet started. The structural construction upto 8th Floor is 
completed . The construction work of PGIMER is likely to be completed by September, 2007.” 
6.2 The Committee is constrained to observe that funds for the proposed PG Institute has been 
drastically reduced mid-way through its completion. Since the Institute is near completion, cutting the 
source of funds at this final stage defies logic. The Committee observes that it is a well known fact that 
our country needs specialist doctors and that too in large numbers. To meet this burgeoning need the 
actual operationalization of this Institute is urgently required. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that allocation for the Institute be enhanced suitably. 
VII. KALAWATI SARAN CHILDREN HOSPITAL  
7.1 Kalawati Saran Children Hospital is a premier refe rral children’s hospital. As per the information given 
in the Annual Report, an amount of Rs. 140.00 crores were provided in the Tenth Plan inter alia for upgrading 
the facilities by establishing an advanced centre for pa ediatrics. The proposed centre is poised to be a premier 
centre of paediatrics care in the country. 
7.2 The year-wise allocation and actual expenditure for the last five years is given below :-  
(Rs. in crores) 
2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 Expenditure 
BE AE BE AE BE AE BE AE BE RE Upto 15.2.07 
6.00 5.97 6.00 5.77 8.00 7.00 8.62 6.99 10.94 9.82 7.57 
7.3 The Committee is constrained to observe that out of the proposed allocation of Rs. 140.00 crores 
for the Tenth Plan, actual plan allocation was on ly Rs. 39.56 crores and actual expenditure was even 
lesser i.e. Rs. 34.47 crores. The Committee fails to understand as to how with this shoe-string budget, the 
Hospital can be made a premier paediatric care inst itute in the country. The Committee would like to 
observe that institutions of excellence are not built overnight and mere rhetoric, not backed by concrete 
action on the ground, is unlikely to realize the dream of making the Hospital an institution of excellence 

in paediatric treatment. Finance being the most important component of any development activity, must 
be utilized to the fullest in a time-bound manner. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the 
Department to make every effort for optimum and j udicious utilization of Rs. 8.00 crore provided for 
2007-08 so that the objective of making the Hospital an Institution of Excellence in paediatric treatment 
is realized. 
VIII. INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH (ICMR), NEW DELHI  
8.1 The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) is the apex body for the planning, organization, 
implementation and coordination of medical research in the country. It promotes biomedical research through a 
network of its 21 permanent institutes and 6 Regional  Medical Research Centres distributed throughout the 
country and also through grants-in-aid given to projects in non-ICMR institutes. 
8.2 The plan allocation for the ICMR was Rs. 217.00 crore in 2006-07, against which an expenditure of Rs. 
210.00 crore has been reported upto 15th February, 2007. As per the information made available by the 
Department, provisional expenditure would be Rs. 307. 00 crore by 31st March, 2007. Against the projected 
requirement of Rs. 375.86 crore in 2007-08, provision of only Rs. 176.65 crore has been made. 
8.3 The Committee has noted that the ICMR’s reco rd in utilizing the allocated funds has been 
impressive and except for 2004-05, the ICMR’s ut ilization has either matched the allocated funds or 
exceeded the same. In view of the above, the Committee is at a loss to understand the basis for non-
provision of required provision to ICMR for 2007-08. The Committee feels that due to the reduction in 
allocation for this premier institut e of the country in the field of me dical research, not only a number of 
ongoing research projects will be affected adversely but it will  also be very difficult to undertake any 
new project. This, in the opinion of the Committee w ill prove to be detrimental for the medical research 
in the country, specially in the fi ercely competitive global scenario. The Committee is disturbed to note 
that its strong recommendation for higher allocation of funds for the Council for 2006-07 made last year 
which was based on the Performance Appraisal Board’s expert advocacy, failed to get additional funds 
released at the RE stage. The Committee, however, reiterates that the Depa rtment should vigorously 
pursue the matter with the Planning Commission to meet the requirements of medical research in the 
country and release adequate funds for this purpose. The Committee is of the firm view that funding for 
medical research should not be looked at the same level as funding for routine schemes/matters. Overall 
cut in the plan funds should not be made applicable to one and all. 
8.4 The Committee is happy to note that ICMR ha s undertaken a number of successful and path-
breaking studies on subjects like Viral Encephalitis. H. Pylori infection, improving the utilization of 
emergency contraception through paramedics, multi-centric study on genomics of male infertility, 
assessment of prevalence of osteoporosis in adult population etc. 
8.5 The Committee notes that there is unanimity in the Government on the issue of the creation of a new 
Department of Health Research within the Ministry  of Health and Family Welfare for the purpose of 
addressing the needs of specialized research and budgetary requirements more forcefully as is evident from the 
fact that the Committee of Secretaries at its meeting held on 9th August, 2006 has given its “in principle” 
approval to the proposal. The Committee in this connection would like to observe that what is needed for 
the upliftment of research in the country is more fu nds and greater autonomy and lesser control. In this 
connection, the Committee would like to recall the observations made by the five member Performance 
Appraisal Board having two international and three national experts. This Board was constituted by the 
Department in 2005 and had made valuable sugges tions about changes required in the authority, 
autonomy, financial support and restructuring. In th e opinion of the Committe e, bureaucratization of 
the research institutes is actual ly part of the problem and not th e remedy. The Committee feels that 
need of hour is to make massive investments in medi cal RandD and not to fasten it with a red tape. The 
Committee would like to be apprised about follow-up action, if any, initiated by the Department on 
PAB’s recommendations. 
IX. NATIONAL CANCER CONTROL PROGRAMME  

9.1 Cancer is an important public health problem in India with nearly 7-9 lakh new cases occurring every 
year in the country. It is estimated that there are 20-25 lakh cases of cancer in the country at any given point of 
time. With the objectives of prevention, early diagnosis and treatment, the National Cancer Control 
Programme (NCCP) was launched in 1975-76. The Progra mme was revised in 1984-85 and subsequently in 
December 2004. Under the National Cancer Control Programme there are 25 Regional Cancer Centres 
recognized in various parts of the country. It is proposed to recognize new RCCs in uncovered areas and 
additional RCCs in populous states and provide these cen tres a one time financial assistance of Rs. 5.00 crores 
for development of infrastructure to a certain level, based on action plan. 
9.2 The Committee is aware that cancer is a dreade d disease which can be cured, if detected early. 
The Committee is of the considered view that upgradation of existing  RCCs into Centres of Excellence 
and setting up of more RCCs, specially in unders erved and unserved areas is a step in the right 
direction. The Committee would, however, like to advise the Department to ensure that the targets set in 
this regard are invariably met. The Committee, theref ore, recommends to the De partment to inform it 
about the progress made in the matter of upgradation of existing RCCs into Centres of Excellence and 
setting up of more Regional Cancer Centres, specially in remote and backward areas of the country. 
9.3 The Committee observes that the trend of plan allocation and utilization thereof under the National 
Cancer Control Programme during the Tenth Plan remained satisfactory during the first four years of the Plan 
period. However, the Committee is constrained to observe that during the last year, i.e. 2006-07 plan allocation 
of Rs. 87.00 crores was reduced to 47.00 crores at the RE stage. Explaining the reasons for the decrease in 
allocation, the Department has informed that due to non initiation of the construction activity of the second 
campus of CNCI, Kolkata for want of allotment of land by West Bengal authorities, funds allocated for CNCI 
could not be utilized at all. Efforts are being made to  take up this activity in the right earnest. The Committee 
was also given to understand that in view of a number of mature proposals waiting for release of grants-in-aid 
on account of non-availa bility of funds, Budget Division has be en requested to restore the allocation. The 
Committee fails to comprehend the level of utilizatio n as by 15th February, 2007, only Rs. 16.88 crore 
could be spent. The Committee views with concern th e provisional expenditure of Rs. 42.98 crore as on 
31st March, 2007 with Rs. 8.70 crore earmarked for N-E region remaining almost unutilized. 
9.4 A look at the level of performance of Physical Targets set under the Programme for 2006-07 reveals a 
very disturbing scenario. Against the target of streng thening of 6 existing Regional Cancer Centres (RCCs) for 
equipments, only the strengthening of RCC at Cuttak could be completed Grant of Rs. 5 crore each for 
strengthening of another four RCCs located at Allaha bad, Trivendram, Ahmedabad and Banglore could only 
be approved. Details about the fifth RCC are not known. 
9.5 The Committee observes that an enhanced allocation of Rs. 180.00 crore has been made for 2007-
08 and targets have been set up under different co mponents of the programme. The Committee would 
like to emphasise that every effort should be made  to take the maximum benefit of the new scheme of 
Upgradation of existing RCCs into Centres of Excellence. All the existing 25 RCCs should be upgraded 
in a time-bound manner during the Eleventh Plan. The Committee also takes note of the fact that RCCs 
have been made the nodal agencies for implementati on of the NGO Scheme of ‘Health Camps’ with a 
view to provide guidance to the NGOs and also monitoring the implementation of the scheme. The 
Committee appreciates this initiative. 
9.6 The Committee also observes that the proposal of the Ministry for conducting the evaluation of 
the National Cancer Control Programme is at the final stage. The Committee is of the view that with the 
survey of cancer-prone areas, the programme in it s modified form would be implemented in a more 
effective manner. The Committee would appreciate if this survey is conducted at the earliest. 
9.7 The Health Secretary while making a power-point  presentation before the Committee informed the 
Committee that the funds are regularly released to Region al Cancer Centres. On a specific query as to whether 
the funds have been released to Mahavir Cancer Ins titute, Patna, the Health Secretary replied in the 
affirmative. However, it has been  brought to the notice of the Co mmittee that the Mahavir Cancer 

Institute, Patna is yet to receive the funds. The Committee is aware that th e Mahavir Cancer Institute, Patna is 
a reputed regional institute. The Committee therefore recommends that funds proposed for 2006-07 be 
released to the Institute, if not released so far.  The Committee also recommen ds that the details about 
the funds earmarked for the same for 2007-08 be supplied to the Committee. 
X. LADY HARDING MEDICAL COLLEGE AND SMT. SUCHETA KRIPALANI HOSPITAL,  
NEW DELHI 
10.1 The plan allocation for Lady Harding Medical College and Smt. S.K. Hospital has 
been reduced from Rs. 27.00 crores in BE 2006-07 to Rs. 18.00 crores in BE 2007-08. The reduction is due to 
over all lower allocation for Health Sector. 
10.2 The Committee notes that total allocation for the Hospital for the Tenth Five Year Plan was  
Rs. 200.00 crores. The year wise allocation and actual expenditure is given below:- 
(Rs. in crores) 
2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 Expenditure 
BE AE BE AE BE AE BE AE BE RE Upto 15.2.07 
10.00 9.30 10.00 9.07 20.00 14.81 27.00 16.49 28.00 27.20 11.21 
10.3 The Committee expresses its serious concern, both at the reduced allocation for the year 2007-08 
and low level of utilization of allocated funds, continuously, for each year of the Tenth Plan Year Plan. 
10.4 The Committee is aware that Lady Harding Medical  College established in the year 1916 has matured 
as a pioneering Institute for Medical Education. The Committee has been informed that projected requirement 
for the College and Hospital for 2007-08 was Rs. 62.31 crore. The Committee does not dispute the fact that 
against this level of requirement, allocation of less than  one-third of funds is bound to adversely affect the 
ongoing projects and in the process Institute itself. The Committee would, accordingly, recommend that the 
Department should make an analysis of the reason s for lesser allocation than planned and even lesser 
utilization of allocated funds during the Tenth Plan . Corrective measures should be taken afterwards. 
The Committee would also impress upon the Department  to take up with the Planning Commission the 
case of additional funds for the Institution at the ea rliest. In the absence of early action, the Committee 
has every reason to believe that the target of  completion of First Phase of Comprehensive 
Redevelopment Plan of LHMC and its associated ho spital to be completed by 2009-10 will not be 
completed. 
XI. ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS), NEW DELHI  
11.1 AIIMS is a premier institute of the country engaged in under-graduate and post graduate medical 
education, research and training. The Institute lays major emphasis on medical research in the areas of national 
needs, besides providing patient care in specialties and s uper specialties. It is considered to be a centre of 
excellence in modern medicine. 
11.2 A plan allocation of Rs. 675.00 crores was made for the Tenth Plan in favour of the Institute. The trend 
of allocation and actual expenditure indicates that as compared to the first two years of the plan period, 
allocated funds during the last three years remained under-utilised. The Committee is constrained to observe 
that upto 15th February, 2007 only half of the Plan al location could be utlised. As per the latest details 
made available to the Committee, by the end of 31st March, 2007, provisional expenditure was Rs. 
160.07 crore. 
11.3 During the course of discussions, Director, AI IMS was asked by the Committee to specify the reasons 
for allocated funds remaining under-utilised during 2006-07.  Director clarified that against a plan allocation of 
Rs. 205.00 crore, the Institute was released only Rs. 100. 00 crore till March, 2007 inspite of the Department 
being approached every week for rele ase of balance funds. However, things remained unchanged as Rs. 75.00 
crores were already surrendered by the Department. It was only after vigorously pursuing the matter with the 

Department’ and the issue also being taken up with the Se cretary (Expenditure), that Rs. 33.55 crores could be 
released against the requirement of Rs. 53.55 crores. 
11.4 On being asked to clarify the position, Secretary informed the Commi ttee that first instalment of Rs. 
100.00 crore was released to AIIMS without asking for Utilisation Certificates, as  per the existing financial 
norms. However, in view of more stringent financial norms being brought into force by the Ministry of 
Finance which stipulate submission of Utilisation Certificates within 12 months against the earlier period of 18 
months, Ministry had to act accordingly. Secretary informed the Committee that the Institute had not submitted 
the required UCs. However, Financial Advisor of th e Institute who was also present in the meeting, 
categorically stated that not a single Utilization Certificate was pending. 
11.5 The Committee is disturbed by such a level of  communication gap between the premier Institute 
of the country and the administrative Ministry. The Committee is of the firm view that if things are 
allowed to continue in th is manner any further, it would not be  in the interest of the country and its 
people. The Committee can only emphasise that cons cious efforts need to be made to break this 
deadlock by all concerned and consequent return of the normalcy. 
11.6 The Committee was informed that the Institute has projected the requirement of Rs. 3080 crore for 
Eleventh Plan for construction of a number of projects and proposed centers. However, against the annual 
requirement of Rs. 500 crores, only Rs . 200 crores have been provided for 2007-08, which is the first year of 
Eleventh Plan. It was strongly advocated that additional funds were required to be provided to the Institute. On 
a specific query about the status of pending projects, the Committee was informed that the Jai Prakash Narayan 
Apex Trauma Centre had become functional and would be completely operational before the end of May. With 
regard to the Dental Education and Research Centre, things  were moving in the right direction, only difficulty 
being faced about re-appropriation of funds. The third project, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Institute and Rotary Cancer 
Hospital had also become functional and its services were being expanded. 
11.7 The Committee also notes that a number of steps have been taken for improving the patient care 
services at the Institute which include addition of 60 be ds in emergency ward, abolition of waiting list in the 
private ward, de-congestion of OPD, Medicine and Paed iatrics, setting up of new mortuary etc. Another 
positive development which has taken place is the covering of open drain to prevent the last year’s outbreak of 
dengue. Taking note of the status of various projects undertaken during the Tenth Plan and 
augmentation of existing health care services at the Institute and the projects planned for Eleventh Plan, 
the Committee recommends that required funds be made available to the Institute for 2007-08. It should 
not be forgotten that AIIMS is the most prestigious Institute of the country and its status should be 
maintained, present constraints notwithstanding. 
11.8 The Committee had recommended last year that th ere was a need for setting up of a Burns Unit 
in the AIIMS. The Committee is, however, surprised to note that so far it has not been possible to place 
the proposal before the Governing Body of the Instit ute. The Committee expresses its reservation to the 
casual approach adopted by the Department to  a recommendation made  by a Parliamentary 
Committee. The Committee would appreciate if the proposal for Burns Unit is placed before the 
Governing Body without any further delay. The Committee  strongly feels that with the proposed 
expansion of various facilities at the Institute, the proposal for Burns Unit can also easily be handled. 
XII. POST GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION  AND RESEARCH (PGIMER), 
CHANDIGARH 
12.1 PGIMER is a premier national centre of medical education research, post graduate medical education 
and specialized hospital. The Committee observes that th ere has been optimum utilization of allocated funds 
during the Tenth Plan. During 2006-07 the last year of the Tenth Plan, plan funds of Rs. 40.00 crores were 
utilized by 15th February, 2007 and provisional expenditu re reported as on 31st March, 2007 is Rs. 101.00 
crores. 

12.2 The Committee is, however, surprised to observe that the following projects which were to be 
completed during the Tenth Plan are yet to be completed. 
Projects in hand Scheduled date of                   Remarks 
 Completion  
Advanced Cardiac Centre June, 2006 Work will be completed by June-July, 2007 
Setting up of additional  December, 20 06 Work will be completed by Dec., 2007 
66KV sub-stations   
Advanced Trauma Centre December, 2007 Work will be completed by April, 2009  
 The Committee expresses it serious concern over the delay in operationalization of the above 
projects and resultant escalation in the original es timates. The Committee recommends that all efforts 
be made to meet the new deadlines in respect of each project to avoid further cost overrun. 
12.3 The Committee notes that a number of new projects are to be taken up during the Eleventh Plan. 
The Committee is of the view that all these proposed projects should be closely monitored from the first 
year itself so as to avoid the experience of the Tenth Plan. It would be better if the procedural 
formalities are streamlined to the extent possible. 
12.4 The Committee has been observing that a large num ber of teaching and non-teaching posts have 
been lying vacant in the Institute since long. Latest po sition made available to the Committee is not very 
encouraging. The Committee finds that out of 209 vacant posts of Professor/Additional Professor/ 
Associate Professor/Assistant Professor as on 1st Ma rch, 2007, only 122 posts could be filled up during 
2006-07. With regard to posts of Lecturer/Supervisor/C linical Inspector etc., the position is no better. 
Out of 26 posts, only 4 could be filled up during  the year. Committee does not foresee any noticeable 
improvement in the near future as the recruitment rules for these posts are required to be amended. The 
Committee notes that out of Engineering Cadre post s numbering 130, only 10 were filled up during 
2006-07. The Committee is disturbed most by the status of non-teaching posts lying vacant since 2001-
02. The Committee has been  informed that the Screen ing Committee has recently cleared 131 posts out 
of 328 posts and abolished the remaining 197 posts on 1st December, 2006. It took the Screening 
Committee five years to take this decision. The Comm ittee can well imagine the time likely to be taken 
in the filling up of 131 non-teac hing posts, finally cleared by th e Screening Committee. The Committee 
strongly feels that such a situation should not be allowed to continue any further in any teaching medical 
institute. It is all the more disturbing if a prem ier institute like PGI, Chandigarh is allowed to 
continuously suffer in such a manner for long. 
XIII. JAWAHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POST GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION  AND 
RESEARCH, (JIPMER), PONDICHERRY 
13.1 JIPMER is a Central Government Institution, a subordinate office of Director General of Health 
Services and is affiliated to the Pondicherry University . The primary functions of the Institute are patient care, 
teaching, learning and research. 
13.2 Projected requirement of the Institute for 2007-08 was Rs. 275.10 crores. However, an allocation of 
only Rs. 107.45 crores has been made. The Committee has been given to understand that this under-
provisioning was likely to affect the completion of ongo ing works and in the process the Institute itself. While 
not disputing this statement, the Committee would like to  draw the attention of Department towards the fact 
that trend of utilization during the Tenth Plan, particularly in the last two years has been very discouraging. 
During 2005-06, out of Rs. 62.00 crores, only Rs. 33.36 crores could be utilized. During 2006-07, position 
seems to have worsened. Plan allocation of Rs. 70.00 crores had to be reduced to Rs. 60.00 crores at the RE 
stage and actual expenditure incurred upto 15th Februa ry, 2007 was only Rs. 20.84 crores. The Committee has 
been given to understand that by 31st March, 2007, provisi onal expenditure is reported to be Rs. 41. 63 crores. 
The Committee would like to point out that the trend of utilization clearly indicates that all is not well 
with this premier institute. 

13.3 The Committee observes that an enhanced allocation of Rs. 107.45 crores has been proposed for the 
Institute for 2007-08. The Committee would like to draw th e attention towards the disturbing fact of not even 
one project out of the three proposed projects taking of f during 2006-07. So far, only the work relating to 
setting up of Super Specialty Block,  Nursing College, Cancer Centre an d Trauma Care Centre, has been 
awarded to M/s L&T on turn key basis. The Committee not es that for 2007-08 also the same physical targets 
have been set up. The Committee strongly feels that there is  an urgent need for having a separate 
Monitoring Committee for this Institute if it is to be strengthened in the real sense. 
13.4 The Committee is constrained to observe that a significant part of funds meant for the purchase 
of machinery and equipment could not be utilized. The Committee in this connection recommends to the 
Department to complete the necessary formalitie s and procure the equipments without any further 
delay. The Committee further recommends to the Department to inform about the progress made in this 
regard. 
13.5 In reply to a specific query, the Department ha s given the details of teach ing and non-teaching posts 
sanctioned, filled and vacant for the year 2006-07:—  
 Sanctioned Filled Vacant 
Teaching posts 186 98 88 
Non-Teaching posts 26 21 25 
 The Department has also mentioned that efforts are being made to fill up the vacant teaching/non-
teaching posts in the In stitute through UPSC. Besides, action has been  taken to fill up the teaching posts on 
contract basis in the level of Asst. Prof, by conducti ng interviews at JIPMER itself, pending recruitment 
through UPSC. 
13.6 The Committee expresses its profound anguish th at in a premier Central Government teaching 
institute, nearly fifty per cent teaching posts are lying vacant. This, in the opinion of the Committee 
must be impacting adversely the st andard of teaching in the Instit ute. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends to the Department to take necessary action on an urgent basis to fill them up at the earliest. 
The Committee also recommends to the Department to inform about the progress made in this regard. 
XIV. NORTH EASTERN INDIRA GANDHI REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF HEALTH  AND 
MEDICAL SCIENCES (NEIGRIHMS), SHILLONG 
14.1 The North Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health  and Medical Sciences (NEIGRIHMS), 
Shillong is an autonomous organization established in 19 87. The main objective of the Institute is to provide 
advanced specialized health care to the people of the North Eastern Region including those of Sikkim, to serve 
as a regional referral services centre and to pr omote a programme of health manpower development and 
training in identified fields of super-specialisation. The Institute is fully funded by the Government of India. 
14.2 The Government of India has approved the NEIGRIHMS project at Shillong at a cost of Rs. 422.60 
crores to be made operational by mid 2005. However, the Committee has been given to understand,that due to 
problems associated with the NE Region and delay in construction of staff and faculty quarters and 
procurement of equipment, recruitment of personnel etc., the project is expected to take some more time before 
it is fully commissioned. 
14.3 The Committee observes that required funds are be ing made available for this Institute. However, 
utilization level has so far failed to pick up the right momentum. During 2005-06, out of Rs. 126.51 
crores provided, only Rs. 30.00 crores could be uti lized. Inspite of similar provision being made during 
2006-07, allocation had to be redu ced at the RE stage and actual expenditure incurred as on 15th 
February, 2007 was only Rs. 62.84 crores. The level of allocation made for 2007-08 i.e. Rs. 42.50 crores 
clearly indicates that position is not likely to improve during  2007-08 also. 
14.4 To a specific query regarding a large number of po sts of specialists lying vacant, the Department has 
informed the Committee that as on 6.3.2007, out of 1519 sanctioned posts, 725 posts are to be filled in Phase-I 

and the remaining 794 in Phase-II. Out of the 725 posts in  Phase-I, 417 has been filled. Recruitment to posts in 
Phase-II will be taken up later. The Committee finds that  the medical faculty posts have been advertised more 
than seven times. However, the resp onses have been very poor and for some Departments it was nil due to 
non-availability of specialists in North Eastern Region and poor response for taking up assignment in 
NEIGRIHMS. Accordingly, supporting staff in Group ‘C and ;D’ in these Departments are not being filled for 
now. As an alternative, Director General, Armed Forc es Medical Services, Central Health Service Cadre and 
Medical Cadres in the Ministry of Home Affair s have been approached for deputing/posting of 
specialist/teaching faculty in NEIGRIHMS to take care of the requirements. 
14.5 The Committee expresses its concern at the delay in  actual operationaization of the Institute. The 
Committee can understand the constraints faced by the Department in filling up the vacant posts due to 
shortage of specialists in NE Region, but the delay in procurement of equipment is beyond its 
comprehension. The Committee would also observe th at NE Region already lags behind in terms of 
health care and other infrastructure facilities as compared to other regions of the country. Delay in 
operationalization of the Institute amounts to denying quality and tertiary health care facilities to the 
people of the region which is very important strategically. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the 
Department to make more vigorous ef forts towards making the Institute fully functional at the earliest. 
The Committee also advises the Department to purs ue the matter with DG,AFMS for an expeditious 
decision in the matter. 
XV. PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHYA SURAKSHA YOJNA (PMSSY)  
15.1 Government of India has launched Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojna (PMSSY) on 15th July, 
2003 with the objective of correcting regional imbalance in the availability of affordable/reliable tertiary 
healthcare services and also to au gment facilities for quality medical ed ucation in the country. The PMSSY 
Scheme has two components; (A) Establishment of six ne w AIIMS like institutions and (B) Upgradation of 13 
medical college institutions to the level of AIIMS. 
15.2 The PMSSY envisages the following:- 
 Establishment of six new AIIMS like institutions 
 • Under PMSSY, it is proposed to set up one AI IMS like institution each in  the States of Bihar 
(Patna), Chhattisgarh (Raipur), Madhya Prad esh (Bhopal), Orissa (Bhubaneshwar) Rajasthan 
(Jodhpur) and Uttaranchal (Rishikesh). 
 • These States have been identified on the basis of various socio-economic indicators like human 
development index, literacy rate, population below poverty line and per capital income and 
health indicators like population to bed ratio , prevalence rate of serious communicable 
diseases, infant mortality rate etc. 
 • The estimated cost for setting up of each instit ute is Rs. 332.00 crores based on CPWD plinth 
area rates. 
 • CCEA has approved setting up of new AIIMS like institutions on 16th March, 2006. 
Facilities proposed to be offered by each of the six new AIIMS 
 850 bedded hospital (500 beds for the medical co llege hospital and 350 beds  for supper-specialties 
having 39 specialty/super-specialty disciplines. Under graduate medical education with 100 intake capacity per 
year and also for post graduate/post doctoral courses. 
Contribution of States 
 For six AIIMS minimum 100 acres of developed land free of cost and facilities for road connectivity. 
Water and electricity supply. 
15.3 Status of action taken for setting up of 6 AIIMS like institutes:-  

 The States have provided 100 acres of land. The work of construction of boundary wall has been 
completed. WAPCOS, a Government of India organization, has initiated pre-construction survey (geo-
technical, topographical  and Hydrological) and EIA for getting the environmenta l clearance. Architectural 
design for the six AIIMS like instituti ons has been selected and negotiati ons are being carried out with the 
short listed architectural bidder for development of enlarged concept plan. 
15.4 The following Medical Institutes are to be upgraded  
 • Government Medical College, Jammu (J&K) 
 • Government Medical College, Srinagar (J&K) 
 • Kolkatta Medical College, Kolkatta (W.B) 
 • Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institut e of Medical Sciences, Lucknow (U.P.) 
 • Institute of Medical Sciences, BHU, Varanasi, (U.P.) 
 • Nizam Institute of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad (A.P.) 
 • SriVenkateshwara Institute of Medical Scie nces, Tirupati (A.P.) (50 per cent cost of 
upgradation will be borne by the TTD Trust) 
 • Government Medical College, Salem (Tamil Nadu) 
 • Patliputra Medical College  and Hospital, Dhanbad (Jharkhand) 
 • B.J. Medical College, Ahmedabad (Gujarat) 
 • Bangalore Medical College, Bangalore (Karnataka) 
 • Grants Medical College  and Sir J.J. Group of Hospitals, Mumbai, (Maharashtra) 
 • Medical College, Thiruvananthapuram, (Kerala) Upgradation of the above institution was 
approved by CCEA on 26th June, 2006 
• Estimated cost of upgradation 
 The estimated cost for upgradation of each medical in stitute is estimated at Rs. 120.00 crores (approx), 
out of which the Central Government assistance will be limited to Rs. 100.00 crores. 
• Contribution of State Government  
 Respective State Government will make contribute to capital cost of upgradation of one medical 
institute. The State Governments will also provide specialist manpower and supporting staff and meet the 
recurring expenditure for running the upgraded facilities including manpower and maintenance and 
replacement of upgraded facilities. 
• Management of the institutes 
 The management of the institutes proposed to be upgraded will continue to be under the control of 
concerned State Governments. 
 The Committee has observed that the funding pattern for the 13 Medical Institutions to be 
upgraded is Rs.100 crores as central assistance and Rs. 20 crores to be contributed by the State 
Governments. However, incase of Sri Venkateshwara Institute of Medical Sciences, Tirupati there is an 
exception. Fifty percent of the cost  of upgradation has to be borne by the T.T.D. Trust. The Committee 
feels that similar funding pattern as applicable to other Medical Institutions under the P.M.SSY scheme 
should also be applicable in case of Sri Venkateshwara Institute of Medical Sciences, Tirupati. A view 
may also be taken for additional grants to this Institute due to heavy influx of patients/pilgrims. 
15.5 Progress made so far under the first component of  setting up of 6 AIIMS like Institutions makes a 
dismal reading:- 

 (i) 100 acres of land has been provided by all the State Governments i.e. Bihar, Chhattisgarh, 
M.P., Orissa, Rajasthan and Uttaranchal. Work of construction of boundary wall has been 
completed. 
 (ii) In 2004, it was decided to have one Project consultant for these Institutions, who was to 
prepare detailed Project Reports for all the si tes simultaneously, based on a generic concept 
plan/design selected through an architectural competition. Accordingly, Expression of Interest 
(EOIs) had been floated and bidders shortlisted for both the architectural competition as well as 
consultant. 
 (iii) CCEA approved setting up of new AI IMS like institutions on 16.03.2006.  
 (iv) Out of the short-listed bidders, only two bi dders participated for the Project Consultant bid. 
Both the bids did not qualify on technical grounds and were rejected. 
 (v) An architectural design bidding was also held . The offer received from  the prize winning firm 
for development of concept plan had also to be rejected due to exorbitantly high price quoted 
by them. 
 (vi) Bids are now to be called separately for each of the six Institutions. Further, the housing 
component has also been separated which is proposed to be built through EPC (Engineering 
Procurement and Construction) developer on turnkey basis.  
 (vii) Expression of Interest (EOI) for providing engineering, procurement and construction services 
etc. and EOI for selection of design have been issued on 09.02.2007 and 15.02.2007 
respectively. 
 (viii) Request for proposal in both the cases for short-listed bidders to be issued in April, 2007. 
15.6 Proposed timelines clearly indicate that it would take at least another plan period before these six 
AIIMS like Institutions would start functioning in th e real sense. That would be made possible only if 
the prescribed action plan is stri ctly adhered to. The Committee does not have much hope as it has 
taken a whole plan period to con ceptualize these two projects. Another plan period has started and the 
projects continue to remain at the planning stage. 
15.7 In view of dismal past record in funds utilization the Committee has serious doubts as to whether 
the current allocation of Rs. 150.00 crores would be utilized fully fo r the intended purpose during the 
financial year 2007-08. The Committee feels that since a number of agencies at the State and Central 
level are involved, there might be lack of co-ord ination between different agencies. The Committee 
therefore, recommends that steps be taken to establish greater sy nergy between different agencies 
involved so that this project of national importance is not delayed any further. 
15.8 Status of upgradation of medical college instit utions. HILL/HSCC and CPWD have been awarded the 
work relating to Project Consultancy and execution of upgradation of medical college institutions. Preliminary 
Project Report has been apprised in  respect of all medical institutions . Concept plan has been approved for 
upgradation of (1) Kolkata Medical College (2) SG PGIMS, Lucknow (3) NIMS, Hyderabad (4) SVIMS, 
Tirupati (5) B.J. Medical College, Ahmedabad (6) Thiruvananthapuram Medical College and (7) Bangalore 
Medical College. The process for procurement of equipments upto Rs. 10 lakhs and between Rs. 10-30 lakhs, 
needed for existing Departments is underway. Detailed Pr oject Reports for the super-specialty buildings of the 
upgradation projects are under preparation. 
15.9 The Committee notes that regarding upgradation of 13 existing Government Medical Colleges, 
the respective State Governments not only have to make a capital contribution of Rs. 20.00 crores, 
appoint the specialist manpower and specialist staff but they will al so have to bear the recurring 
expenditure for running the upgraded facilities including manpower maintenance and replacement of 
upgraded facilities. However, given the precarious fi nancial condition of most of the states, financial 

viability of such colleges is an important issue that needs to be sorted out before hand. The Committee is 
not sure whether the Central Government has cons ulted the states concerned on this aspect. The 
Committee would appreciate if the Department furnishes its observation on this issue at the earliest.  
15.10 Committee has been informed that Prime Minister had announced the setting up of an AIIMS like 
Institute in Panipat, Haryana in the memory of I ndian Astronaut, Ms. Kalpana Chawla. NASA has offered 
financial assistance for this purpose. The Committee w ould appreciate if this proposal is expedited. The 
Committee strongly feels that with such an Institute coming up near  Delhi, pressure on already over-
stretched services of AIIMS would somewhat get reduced. 
XVI. DEVELOPMENT OF NURSING SERVICES  
16.1 In order to improve the quality of Nursing Serv ices, the following activities are being implemented 
under the scheme of Development of Nursing Services:— 
 • Training of nurses. 
 • Strengthening of existing schools/colleges of nursing. 
 • Upgradation of Schools of Nursing attached to medical colleges into Colleges of Nursing by 
providing one time non-recurring assistance of Rs. 1.50 crores to States. 
 • Providing recurring assistance to schools of nursing which were opened during IX plan with 
assistance under the scheme of development of nursing services. 
 • Establishment of college of nursing at JIPMER, Pondicherry. 
 • Strengthening of R.A.K. College of Nursing as Centre of Excellence. 
 • Upgradation of Schools of Nursing into Colleges of Nursing attached to Dr. R.M.L Hospital, 
S.J. Hospital and Lady Hardinge Medical College, New Delhi. 
 • Construction of Delhi nurses colony. 
16.2 There was a plan provision of Rs. 82.00 crores for development of Nursing Services during the Tenth 
Plan. The Committee notes that although funds were be ing released every year, under-utilization has been 
reported. The year 2006-07 which is the last year of the plan period was no exception. Not only this, the 
Committee is surprised to note that against an allocation of Rs. 11.00 crores during the Tenth Plan for 
development of R.A.K college of Nursing, New Delhi, only Rs. 6.46 crores could be released and expenditure 
reported is only Rs. 2.63 crores. The Committee can only conclude that  there are inherent problems at all 
levels otherwise such a vital comp onent of health sector would not have remained neglected in this 
manner. 
16.3 The Committee tried to make an attempt to an alyse the performance level of various physical 
targets set for development of nursing  services during 2006-07. The Comm ittee is surprised to note that 
identical physical targets have been set for 2006- 07 and 2007-08. Some activity has been reported 
during 2006-07. The Committee, therefo re, is disturbed by the candid st atement of the Department that 
utilization of funds depended upon  the proposals received from the inst itutions and also submission of 
utilization certific ates. The Committee hopes that the Depart ment must have taken some corrective 
measures by now. If not, the Committee would caution the Department to initiate remedial action at the 
earliest, otherwise Eleventh Plan would repeat the slow progress as done in the Tenth Plan. 
16.4 The Committee observes that against the projecte d requirement of Rs. 29.00 crores, a provision of 
only Rs. 15.00 crores has been proposed. While re commending higher allocation, the Committee would 
impress upon the Department to take every conceiva ble measure so as to ensu re optimum and judicious 
utilization of allocated funds. 
16.5 Committee’s attention has been drawn by the recent move of the Nursing Council to upgrade the 
existing Nursing Schools into colleges  for which Central grant of Rs. 1.5 crores for each school is proposed. 
The Committee, however, notes that there might be so me State Governments which do not want to upgrade 
Nursing Schools into colleges because of non-availability of the faculty Andhra Pradesh is one such state. On a 

specific enquiry in this re gard, it was clarified that upgradation of  nursing schools was not binding on State 
Government. The Committee would appreciate if all the State Governments are informed accordingly. 
16.6 There are at present 1771 Nursing Schools in the country consisting of 202 Nursing Schools in 
Government and 1569 in private sector. State-wise brea k-up of these Nursing Schools indicates that their 
spread is uneven across th e country. On their attention being drawn towards this disturbing trend, the 
representatives of the Department admitted that there wa s mal-distribution of Nursing Schools/Colleges in the 
country. Not only this, number of exis ting Nursing Institutions fell far below the requirements of such a vast 
country. The Committee was informed that during the El eventh Plan, it was proposed to get established 230 
Nursing Schools. Keeping in view the uneven coverage, the Department has decided to start this exercise by 
providing funds for setting up Nursing Schools in 230 district hospitals in Northern belt. 
16.7 The Committee notes that a proposal seeking Rs. 4,000 crores for Nursing Sector in Eleventh Plan 
has been made to the Planning Commission. The Commit tee strongly feels that th ere is an urgent need 
for expansion of nursing services , simply because there is a bi g gap between the requirement and 
availability of nursing personnel in the country. With the National Rural Health Mission taking off in 
the country, requirement of nurses has increased manifold. The Committee was given to understand 
that under the existing provisions, some problems w ere being faced in the setting up of Nursing Schools. 
The Committee recommends that both  the existing provisions and pro cedure for setting up of Nursing 
Schools may be received and corrective measures taken, wherever required. The goal should be to set up 
the required number of Nursing Sc hools without compromising the quality factor. The Committee was 
given to understand that relaxation in the norms fr om five to three beds fo r each trainee nurse as 
suggested by it has worked well. The Committee woul d like to point out that in view of shortage of 
teachers in this sector, it would be better if the present eligibility conditions for Nursing teachers be 
reviewed and revised to the extent possible. 
XVII. NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME 
17.1 The AIDS epidemic has become a major health and development concern. Although India remains a 
low prevalence country with overall HIV prevalence of 0.9 per cent, the last few years have seen it moving 
from high risk groups to the general population with  women, youth and the rural population being highly 
vulnerable. 
17.2 According to the Sentinel Survey figures released in 2005, total number of HIV infected people 
amongst the adult population (15-49 years) numbered 5.206 million. Consequently a mere 0.1 per cent increase 
in prevalence, translates into 0.5 million new infectio ns. India accounts for nearly 13 per cent of the global 
HIV prevalence. The categorization of the country as a low prevalence country hides the large numbers of HIV 
infected people. 
17.3 Sexual transmission is driving India’s AIDS epidem ic, accounting for approximately 86 per cent of HIV 
infections. The remainder 14 per cent  are through, Parent-to-child transm ission, use of infected syringes and 
needles by Injecting Drug Users (IDU), and contaminated blood transfusion etc. 
17.4 Presently Phase-III of National AIDS Contro l Programme (2006-2011) is being implemented  
NACP-III seeks to implement the principle of a continuu m of care. Accordingly, prevention will go hand in 
hand with access to prophylaxis, management of opportunistic infections and ART. Given the spread of HIV 
infection into rural areas, NACP-III will further de centralize its organizational structure to implement 
programmes at the district level. The basic unit of implem entation will now be the district. Accordingly, based 
on the epidemiological and vulnerability criteria, all the 6 10 districts in the country ha ve been classified into 
four categories: Category A-141 districts - high prevalence;  Category B-46 districts - concentrated epidemic; 
Category C-309 districts - increased presence of vul nerable population and Category D-114 districts - 
low/unknown vulnerability. 
17.5 The categorization of districts based on vulnerability  is useful for enabling the Government to prepare 
plans that are need based. Accordingly, differential packages of services have been developed for each 
category of districts. Institutional arrangements and ca pacities of the SACS as well as the proposed District 

AIDS Prevention and Control Units (DAPCUs) will be st rengthened. To address spec ial vulnerabilities of the 
North-Eastern States, a Regional AIDS Control Unit (RACU) will be established as a sub-office 
of NACO but embedded in the governance structure of NRHM. NACP-III has also developed an HRD plan to 
continuously update and improve the competency and skills of the programme personnel. 
17.6 NACO has launched National Paediatric AIDS initiative on 30th November, 2006 to provide 
comprehensive care and support (including ART) to children infected and affected by HIV/AIDS. NACO, 
alongwith the Indian Academy of Paediatrics (IAP),  UNICEF, WHO and Clinton Foundation, has developed 
guidelines for paediatric ART including diagnosis in child ren. Paediatric drugs formulations as per weight 
bands for treating 10,000 children in the current year have been provided to the ART centres. Other 
activities under this initiative include establishment of seven regional Paediatric Centres, free CD4 monitoring, 
free DNA PCR test for children up to 18 months, liqu id formulations for babies weighing less than 5 kg, 
diagnosis and treatment of opportunistic infection and micro nutrient supplementation.. The initiative also 
includes training of paedia tricians and counsellors. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
achievements made vis-a-vis the targets fixed under National Paediatric AIDS Initiative. 
17.7 The Department in its Annual Report has informed that care and support for CLHA (Children Living 
with HIV/AIDS) orphans and vulnerab le children forms an integrat part of NACP-III. A comprehensive 
service package for these children will be funded under GFA-RD-VI and will be offered through home and 
foster based care and support services in 2007. The Committee recommends the Department to inform 
about the specific steps taken and the progress made in this regard. 
17.8 One of the most important components of the National AIDS Control Programme (NACP-II) is the 
Targeted Intervention (TI) projects that aim to interrupt HIV transmission  among highly vulnerable 
populations. These population groups are at a greater risk of acquiring and transmitting HIV infection due to 
more frequent exposure to HIV, higher levels of risk y behaviour and insufficient capacity or power to make 
decisions and take appropriate action to protect themselves. Such population groups include- commercial sex 
workers, injecting drug users, men who have sex with men (MSMs), truckers, and migrant workers. The 
following table reveals the estimated size and estimated coverage of these High Risk Groups. 
Sl.  High Risk Group Estimated Size Estimated coverage Percent 
No.    coverage 
1. Sex Worker 8,31,677-12,50,115 5,88,777 55% 
2. IDUs 96,463-1,89,729 1,02,344 53% 
3. MSM 23,52,113 1,46,397 6.0% 
4. Male sex Workers 2,35,213   
17.9 The Committee is deeply disturbed to note that all the High Risk Groups have not yet been 
covered under the Target Intervention Project. The situation is worse in th e case of MSM where the 
percentage coverage is only 6 per cent and Male Sex Workers in respect of whom either the Department 
do not have the figures of estimated coverage or they are simply not covered  at all. The Committee, 
therefore feels that much ground ne eds to covered by the Department so  far as targeted intervention is 
concerned. The Committee, therefore, recommends to th e Department to double its efforts to bridge the 
gap between estimated size and estimated coverage. 
17.10 Condom promotion has important role to HIV pr evention. Behavioural Surv eillance Survey (BSS) end 
line 2006 shows a significant increase in consistent con dom use from 32.4 per cent in 2001 to 49.7 per cent in 
2006 among those who had sex with any non-regular sex partners in the previous 12 months. Condom use 
reported during the last sexual intercourse with any non-regular from 40 per cent in 2001 to 58 per cent in 
2006. Awareness about condoms increased from 77 per cent to 82 per cent during the last five years. About 65 
per cent of respondents during the end line BSS were aware that consistent condom use could prevent 
transmission of HIV/AIDS, which is an increase of 15 per cent since 2001. Accessibility of condoms within 30 

minutes from the nearest source, which is one of the key determinants for condom use, increased from 46 per 
cent to 81 per cent. In 2001-02 fiscal year, the distribu tion of condoms under free supply and social marketing 
was 733 million pieces and 438.79 million pieces respec tively. In 2006-07, the dist ribution has increased to 
1250 million pieces and 593 million pieces under free su pply and social marketing, respectively. Under 
NACP-III, the objective is to increa se condom use to 3.5 billion pieces per annum by the year 2009 from the 
present level of about 1.8 billion per annum, through intensive demand generation and supply efforts with 
support from a Technical Support Group (TSG) to be constituted by NACO with support from the Bill  and 
Melinda Gates Foundation. 
17.11 The Committee is appreciative of the fact that use of condoms and its awareness as a preventive 
weapon to fight AIDS has increased over the years. The Committee, however, notes that use of condoms 
amongst those who had sex with any non-regular sex part ner is still 49.7 per cent which is considered to 
be low. Since having many sex partners or changing  sex partners frequently increases the vulnerability 
towards AIDS, the Committee recommends to the Department to ta ke effective steps to increase the use 
of condom amongst this group. 
17.12 The Department has informed that in order to reiterate the Government’s commitment to prevent the 
spread of HIV and to facilitate a strong multi-sectoral re sponse to combat it effectively, a National Council on 
AIDS (NCA) headed by the Prime Minister of India provides the leadership at the national level. 31 Ministries, 
Chief Ministers of select states, repr esentatives of the privat e sector, civil society and NGOs are members of 
NCA. Under the directions of the NCA, efforts have  commenced to build a multi sectoral response by 
involvement and participation of the private sector , civil society and key Government Departments. The 
Committee recommends to the Department to finalize  the modalities of the proposed multi-sectoral 
response and inform the Committee accordingly. 
17.13 The Department in the Outcome Budget has informed about the following priorities for programme 
activities under the NACP during the financial year 2007-08. 
 (i) Saturation of coverage of high risk groups through Targeted Interventions by upscalling of 
interventions and increase to the total number of intervention up to 1300. 
 (ii) Providing greater care  and support and trea tment services to larger number of People Living 
with HIV/AIDS through: 
 • Expansion of Anti-retroviral Treatment, Ca re and Support to cover the entire country 
under GFATM Round VI (Project Approved) 
 • Expansion of ART services through hospita ls in other sectors (Railways, ESI, Army 
etc.), PSUs, Corporate Hospitals and NGOs. 
 • It is also planned to upscale from existing 96 ART centres to 120 centers by March, 
2007 and to provide free ART to 100,000 patients by end 2007 and 300,000 patients 
by 2012. 
 (iii) In order to improve access to safe blood, 3070 Blood Storage Centres will be established. The 
equipment grant for these centres will be provided through NRHM, while NACO will provide 
training and annual recurring grant as well as the transport facilities for transportation of blood 
to these Storage Centres. It is also envisaged to  initiate the process of establishment of Centre 
of Excellence in four Metropolitan Cities, on e Plasma Fractionation Centre and one Model 
Blood Bank (in each of the States). The voluntary blood donation will be augmented to more 
than 65 per cent of the total blood collection in the next financial year. 
 (iv) The ICTCs and basic services facilities will be extended to Community Health Care level in 
the country to ensure access to rural population. 
 (v) Establishing nation-wide Management Inform ation System for effective monitoring of the 
programme. 

 (vi) Instituting a mechanism of quality assurance programme in Blood Banks, ICTCs and CD4 
laboratories in the country. 
 (vii) Establish additional Community Care Centres to ensure provision of psycho-social support, 
outreach services, referrals and palliative care to People Living with HIV/AIDS. 
 (viii) The major IEC activities to be ta ken up during the next FY will include: 
 a. Saturating the mass media channels for disseminating messages on HIV/AIDS. 
 b. Special programmes on TV and Radio focusing on women and youth 
 c. Expanding inter-personal communication through units of Directorate of Field 
Publicity, Song  and Dram a Division, holding of A dvocacy and sensitization 
workshops. 
 d. Utilization of existing servi ce centres as communication nodes. 
 (ix) Strengthening the efforts for mainstreaming and partnership to ensure effective multi-sectoral 
response from various departments, Ministries, other stakeholders, private sector, civil society 
organizations and PLHA network for effective prevention programmes and service delivery. 
 (x) Initiate various activities under ‘Social Marketing of Condoms’ for more intensified action. 
17.14 The Committee appreciates that the Department has prioritised a number of activities for 
financial year 2007-08. The Commit tee is convinced that if tangib le progress is achieved towards 
implementation of the targets set, National AIDS Control Programme will achieve significant success. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Depart ment to inform it about the progress made 
towards achieving the targets set. 
17.15 As per media reports, out of 47000 patients receiv ing anti-retroviral treatment (ART) under the National 
AIDS Control Programme, about 3000-5000 patients have b ecome resistant to the treatment. Such patients 
need second-line treatment which is  too costly. In reply to a query whether, the Department/NACO has 
formulated any scheme to take care of patients, who have developed resistance to first line of ART the 
following reply was submitted by the Department:- 
 “The initiation of second line of ART drugs is fr aught with a number of operational difficulties and 
technical issues. We had been able to roll out and st abilise the first line of ART treatment to 60,000 patients 
after a considerable effort and the launch of the 2nd line  drugs would require a far more intensive effort. It has 
been decided that the rollout of 2n line ART drugs would be considered only after the coverage of 1 lakh 
persons is reached”. 
17.16 The Committee feels that it is highly insensitiv e and in-human to delay th e availability of second 
line of drugs to the patients till the figure of th e first line of ART treatment has 1 lakh patients. The 
present policy is sure to aggrava te the sufferings of already traumatized patients. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends to the Department to take some  initiative towards star ting the second line of 
treatment so that the sufferings of drug resistant patients can be lessened to some extent. 
17.17 The Department has informed that in the meeting of the 26th National AIDS Control Board held on the 
4th October 2006, it was recommended to create one post of Counsellor for all the major blood banks in the 
Government sector supported by NACO. These Counsellors  will provide the pre and post test counselling to 
the HIV sero-reactive blood donors along with confirmatory testing for HIV. The Committee would like to 
be informed about the actual progress made in the matter of appointing Counsellors. 
17.18 The Department in reply to a question has su bmitted that at present 107 ART Centres are 
operational which will be increased to 250 centres by the end of Eleventh Plan. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the year-wise target set fo r establishing ART Centres during the Plan period and 
also the progress made in this regard during 2007-08. 
17.19 The Committee observes that during the Tenth Plan , there has been optimum utilization of allocated 
funds for NACP. However, 2006-07, the last year was an exception. The Committee is constrained to note 

that against a provision of Rs. 705.67 crores, actual expenditure reported upto 15th February, 2007 was 
only Rs. 578.65 crores. The Committee finds that opti mum utilization of funds have not happened in 
respect of even a single of the five components of the NACO. Such low utilization of funds in the opinion 
of the Committee will not help in arresting the spre ad of this dreaded disease in this country. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Departme nt immediately initiate prompt action towards 
removing the bottlenecks coming in the way of opti mal utilization of allocated funds and apprise the 
specific action taken, to it. 
17.20 The Committee is more disturbed by the level of  achievement under some of the very crucial 
physical targets during 2006-07 as indicated below:- 
Component (2006-07) Target Achievement 
Modernization of District 39 — 
Level Blood Banks   
STD Clinics 200 68 
Targeted Interventions 350 126 
New School to be covered SAEP School  68,000 17,000 
AIDS Education Programme   
 What is more worrisome is that under achievement was reported under these targets during 2005-
06 also. The Committee notes that similar targets have been set under different components for 2007-08 
also. The Committee is constrained to observe that the target of setting up STD clinics, targeted 
interventions, and new schools to be covered und er school AIDS Control Programme have fallen 
woefully short of the targets. The Committee feels that setting up of  only 68 STD cl inics against the 
target of 200, and making only 126 targeted interventions against the target of 350 will have grave 
future implications. Similarly meetin g only a quarter of target of covering 68,000 schools under the 
school AIDS programme amounts to denying the mu ch required sex educatio n to a large number of 
adolescent pupils which would have helped them in  receiving knowledge abou t safe sex practices. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to make all efforts to achieve the previous years 
targets. 
XVIII. NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME (NMHP) 
18.1.1 Main strategies of National Mental Health Prog ramme during the Tenth Plan period are as follows:— 
 • Expansion of DMHP to 100 districts all over the country. 
 • Strengthening and modernization of mental hospitals 
 • Upgradation of psychiatry wings in the general hospital/ medical colleges. 
 • Research  and training in Mental  Health for improving service delivery 
18.2 NMHP now covers 94 districts in 29 States/ Uni on Territories all over the country. The programme 
envisages a community based approach to the problem, which includes: 
 • Training of mental health team at the identified nodal institutions. 
 • Increase awareness abou t Mental Health problems. 
 • Provide services for early detection  and treatment of mental illnesses in the community 
(OPD/Indoor and follow up) 
 • Provide valuable data  and experience at the level of community at the state  and center for 
future planning  and improvement in service  and research. 
18.3 Plan allocation of Rs. 50.00 crores for 2006-07 under these programme had to be reduced to  
Rs. 45.00 crores at the RE stage. Reason given by the Department is non- receipt of complete proposals from 

State Government/ Institutions. The Committee is constrained to note th at against this reduced provision, 
expenditure reported upto 15th February, 2007 was only Rs. 24.01 crores. Committee had been given to  
understand that provisional expenditure as on 31st March, 2007 would be Rs. 35.93 crores. The 
Committee takes a serious view of this trend of utilization of funds during 2006-07. The Committee 
urges upon the Department to take all possible meas ures to ensure optimum utilization of Rs. 70.00 
crores proposed for 2007-08. Feed-back made available to the Committee clearly indicates that inspite of 
special efforts being made on the part of the Departme nt for expediting utilization certificates for grants 
released to various states, not much progress could be made. The Comm ittee views with serious concern 
the achievements reported under upgradation of ment al hospitals also. Out of the 10 targeted mental 
hospitals, funds could be released only for mental hospital at Indore. 
18.4 The Committee notes that in a meeting held on  12th February, 2007 re presentatives of State 
Governments were requested to furnish new proposals with all requisite information under the 
programme. The Committee feels that this is a step in  the right direction and such interactions should 
continue to be held in future also. 
18.5 As per the information given in the Annual Report the Department has identified the following issues 
and challenges in respect of NMHP as given below:- 
 • Strengthening of DMHP  and enhance its visibility at grass root level. 
 • Filling up manpower gap in the field of psychiatry in general  and DMHP in particular. 
 • Harnessing NGOs help in the community based care of mentally ill. 
 • Focusing on preventive  and promotive components of mental health in addition to treatment of 
serious mental ailments. 
 • Strengthening the EIC activities partic ularly in the School Health Programme. 
 • Training of general practitioners in Mental Health Programme. 
 • Need to develop the urba n Mental Health Programme. 
 • Development of standardized training manuals for doctors and health care workers. 
18.6 The Committee would like to be informed about the manner in which it proposes to meet these 
challenges during the Eleventh Pl an. The Committee would also like to  be informed about the specific 
steps taken to bridge the manpower gap in the field of psychiatry in general and DMHP in particular, to 
harness NGOs help in this field and to train general practitioners in Mental Health Programme. 
XIX. PUBLIC HEALTH LABORATORIES  
19.1 An allocation of Rs.42.82 crores was made for Pu blic Health Laboratories in BE 2006-07 which was 
reduced to Rs.28.10 crores at the RE stage. Expl aining the reasons for th e decrease in allocation the 
Department has stated that the reduction in allocation of Rs.42.82 crores made for public health laboratories in 
BE 2006-07 to Rs.28.10 crores at RE stage was primarily on account of reduction in the allocation for National 
Institute of Biologicals (NIB), Noida from Rs.34.40 crores in BE 2006-07 to  Rs. 19.65 crores in RE 2006-07. 
The reasons for this reduction are as follows:- 
 “A provision of Rs.14 crores had been made for pr ocuring movable scientific equipments for the newly 
constructed Lab and Animal House at NIB, Noida. Further, a provision of Rs.9.71 crores was made for 
electricity charges and various annual  maintenance contracts required for full functioning of the new Lab and 
Animal House. A provision of Rs. 2 crores was kept fo r fixed equipments and furnishings of the same Lab and 
Animal House building. However, there was a delay in handing over of the Lab and Animal House to NIB due 
to several reasons including rectification of faults in the construction. Due to the delay, a decision was taken to 
stagger the procurement of equipments and it was decided to reduce the provision in procurements of 
equipments from Rs.14 crores to Rs.9.85 crores. 

 Similarly, out of Rs.9.71 crores provided for electricity charges and AMC charges, only approx. Rs.4.37 
crores can be expended. The work of procuring fixed equipments and furnishing for Lab and Animal House 
also could not be finalized in the current financial year resulting in further savings of Rs.2 crores. Some 
miscellaneous work related to existing facility like furnishing of the cafeteria building etc. could not be 
undertaken due to administrative reasons which resulted in further savings.  
19.2 The Committee expresses its displeasure over the fa ct that in a premier scientific institution like 
NIB, the newly constructed animal house and lab coul d not be made operational due to defects in the 
construction of the building. The Committee feels that this delay would definitely have a damaging effect 
on the quality and quantity of various biological products that are manufactured in the Institute. The 
Committee, therefore, exho rts the Department with all powers at its command to make the lab  and 
animal house functional at the earliest. 
XX. ASSISTANCE FOR CAPACITY BUILDING FOR TRAUMA CENTRES  
20.1 In respect of “Assistance for capacity Building for Trauma Centres”, an alloca tion of Rs. 42.00 crores 
was made in B.E. 2006-07 which was reduced to Rs. 34.0 cr ores at the R.E. stage. On a specific query in this 
regard, the Committee was informed th at proposals were not received from  various States properly and also 
that some of the States were requested to complete the tendering process. It was, th erefore, decided to release 
the funds in phase-wise manner depending on the completion of the work. It was felt that the entire amount 
allocated would not be utilized in the current financial year, therefore, the allocation was reduced to 34.00 
crores. 
20.2 As per the information made available to the Committ ee, during the last three years funds were released 
to one hundred eleven hospitals spread  over in 30 states under this sche me. The Committee also notes that of 
the remaining seventy three Government Hospitals to which funds were released, UCs are awaited in respect of 
as many as 53 hospitals. The Committee can only hope that in th e remaining cases, UCs must have been 
submitted in time by the respective State Governments. Pendency of such a large number of UCs is in 
the opinion of the Committee a poor reflection on the system of monitoring  by the Department. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend s to the Department to take remedial measures in this regard. The 
Committee is also of the view that there is a need to make an assessment of all the state hospitals to 
which funds have been released for strengthening of Trauma  Centre so far. Such an exercise is required 
for identifying the problem areas/constraints being faced under the scheme for strengthening the same 
for future implementation. 
20.3 Committee’s attention has also been drawn by the uneven spread of these Trauma Centre in the country. 
Whereas bigger states are not having such services, in so me small states a number of such Trauma Centers are 
getting central assistance. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take an 
initiative in this crucial area of health care and p ersuade all such states to take the benefit of this 
scheme. 
XXI. ASSISTANCE FOR CAPACITY BUILDING PROJECT FOR FOOD AND DRUGS  
21.1 The project was aimed at realizing the long term goal of the Government of India to ensure safety and 
quality of foods and drugs for Indian Public and increasing India’s competitiveness in the international market. 
21.2 An Allocation of Rs.75.35 crores was made in re spect of ‘Assistance for capacity Building Project for 
Food  and Drugs’ in BE 2006-2007 which was substantia lly reduced to Rs.55.43 crores at the RE stage. In 
reply to a question, the Department has submitted a stat ement showing the BE, RE, sanctioned expenditure till 
date for 2006-07 and final estimates alongwith head wise reasons for the reduction in the budget provision.  
21.3 The Committee notes that as regular posts could not be created, efforts are being made to fill 
them up on contractual basis. The Committee recommends the Department to inform about the 
progress made in this regard. 

21.4 The Committee notes that under the head office  expenses, a provision of Rs. 254.10 lakhs was 
made for BE 2006-07 which was reduced substantially to Rs. 100.09 crores at the RE stage. The 
Committee further notes that total sanctioned expenditure till 15th March, 2007 is abysmally low at Rs. 
10.29 lakh and final estimates is Rs. 37.58 lakh. The Committee is constrained to note the Department’s 
reply that even after a lot of efforts, expenditure at the state level did not pick up causing a saving of Rs. 
62.51 lakhs. The Committee in this connection recommends to the Department to find out the reasons 
for sub optimum utilization at the states level and inform of the same . The Committee also notes that an 
amount of Rs. 2.79 crores has been earmarked for of fice expenses for the year 2007-08. The Committee 
recommends to the Department to inform it about th e steps to be taken by the Department to ensure 
optimum utilization of the funds. 
XXII. TOBACCO CONTROL PROGRAMME 
22.1 In respect of Tobacco Control Programme, an allocation of Rs.5.00 crores was made for the year 2006-
07 which has been increased by more than six times to Rs.32.00 crores in BE 2007-08. In reply to a query as to 
how the enhanced allocation is proposed to be utilized, the Department has submitted that 
 “In order to ensure effective implementation of vari ous provisions of the Act, for building capacity in 
the form of setting up of Labs in States and for creating awareness about Legislative Provisions of ill-effects of 
Tobacco, a National Tobacco Control Programme including setting up of Tobacco Regulatory Authority is 
being envisaged. Accordingly, increased allocation has been provided”. 
22.2 The Committee recommends to the Department to  inform about the progress with respect to 
setting up of a Tobacco Regulatory Authority and labs in various states. 
XXIII. NEW SCHEMES 
23.1 The Committee observes that a number of new programme were launched during the last year of Tenth 
Plan. Status of funds released and utilization thereof is self revealing:- 
(Rs. in crores) 
Programme 2006-07 Actual upto 15.02.2007 
 BE RE  
Telemedicine 15.00 5.00 — 
National Programme for Diabetes,     
Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke 5.00 2.50 — 
National Programme for Deafness 15.00 2.50 1.21 
23.2 The Committee notes that under the National  Programme for Prevention and Control of 
Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke, the Pl anning Commission grante d in principle approval 
to launch the programme on a pilot basis and a sum of  Rs. 5.00 crores was allocated for the same during 
2006-07. The Committee is, however, constrained to ob serve that not a single penny was utilized during 
2006-07 in respect of the programme. Giving reasons, the Department has submitted that the details of 
programme are being worked out and the programme is likely to be launched shortly. The Department 
has also informed that a comprehe nsive National Programme covering the country as a whole is being 
prepared for seeking the approval of competent authorities. 
23.3 The Committee is dismayed to note that the Department announced this programme without 
finalizing the specific modalities resulting in no expe nditure being incurred during 2006-07 and delay in 
the launch of the programme on a pilot basis. The Committee is convinced that had the Department 
acted with a sense of urgency, the funds could h ave been put to better and productive use. The 
Committee recommend to the Department to complete the formalities to launch the Programme at the 
earliest. 
23.4 The Committee has been consistently recommending  that two programmes namely Diabetes Control 
Programme and Cardiovascular Disease Control Programme  including Control of Rheumatic Health Diseases 

need to be launched on a priority basis. It has taken almost two plan periods for the Department to 
formulate a composite programme on the control of above-mentioned diseases. However, from the details 
made available to the Committee, it is not known whether there would by  any focus on Rheumatic Fever. The 
Committee understands that the final components of the programme are still being worked out. The 
Committee, accordingly, reiterates that Rheumatic Fever should also be covered under the National 
Programme for Control of Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke. 
23.5 The Committee has also been informed  that for the Eleventh Five Year Plan, a proposal has been sent to 
Planning Commission for allocation of Rs. 1680.00 cror es for National Programme for Control of Diabetes, 
Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke (NPCDCS). In view  of the high vulnerability of Indian people to 
cardiovascular diseases and diabetes due to various r easons and their potential to pose serious challenges to 
Indian society and its economy, the Committee suppor ts the Department’s proposal for the NPCDCS and 
recommends that the Department should implement the programme as a matter of priority. 
23.6 The Committee is unhappy to note that the Departme nt has failed to finalize the key components of the 
National Programme of Deafness during the whole of the ye ar 2006-07, which also happens to be the year of 
launch of this programme. As a result, like other newly launched programmes, dismal utilization of funds has 
occurred in respect of this programme also. In view of the lack of prior preparation done by the Department 
before the launch of the programme, and fixing targets in  respect thereof, the Committee is left with no other 
option but to believe the programme would remain in the proposal stage for quite some time. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends to the Department to finalize th e key components of the pr ogramme at the earliest and 
then strive to achieve the targets fixed for 2007-08 in a progressive manner. 
23.7 The Committee finds that a number of addition al new programmes have been announced for  
2007-08 for which a token provisions of Rs. 1.00 crore per scheme has been made:- 
 • Forward Linkages to NRHMS 
 • National Programmes for Sports Injury 
 • National Centre for Disease Control 
 • National Advisory Board for Standards 
 • Setting up of paramedical institutions 
 • Strengthening/upgradation of Pharmacy Schools 
 • Leptospirosis Control Programme 
 • Pilot Projects on Prevention and Control of Human Rabies 
 • National Organ Transplant 
 • Oral Health 
 • National Programme for Prevention and Control of Fluorosis 
 • National Programme for Health care for Elderly 
 • Medical Rehabilitation. 
23.7 In view of the past experience the Committee would reiterate once again that new schemes should 
be announced only after ground work is completed. The Committee would appreciate if new schemes 
announced for 2007-08 are taken in the right earnest from the first day itself. 
XIV. VACANCIES IN CHS CADRE  
24.1 Central Health Service (CHS) comprises of four sub-cadres namely, General Duty Medical Officers 
(GDMOs), Teaching Specialists, Non-Teaching Specialis ts and Public Health Specialists. The sanctioned 
strength of various sub-cadres, the vacancies existed as  on 1.1.2006 and those filled during 2006 are given 
below:- 

Name of sub-cadre Vacancies as on 1.2.2007 Filled during 2006-07 
Teaching 239 18 
Non-Teaching 252 19 
Public Health 26 — 
GDMO 640 103 
T
OTAL: 1157 140 
24.2 The Committee is constrained to observe that th e Department during the year 2006 was able to 
fill only 230 vacancies of the 1133 vacancies of vari ous sub cadres of CHS. With the lifting of ban on 
technical posts by Ministry of Finance, the Depart ment should have been able to fill most of the 
vacancies during the year 2006. Th e Committee recommends to the Depa rtment to inform it about the 
steps taken by it to fill up each sub-cadre separa tely along with the reasons for not filling up all 
vacancies. The Committee also recommends to the Department to fill up the vacancies at the earliest. 
24.3 On being asked to explain the factors responsible for such a dismal positi on, the representative of 
the Department informed the Committee that all the vacancies in CHS have been requisitioned from the 
UPSC. However in case of specialists, due to shortage in certain faculties, posts had to be advertised and 
re-advertised over the last one year. Ultimately, only a few candidates have joined. The position was 
more serious on the GDMO side. Inspite of advert ising for the last three years and recommendation 
from UPSC being received, joining rate has been very poor. The Committee was informed that the 
verification process of antecedents of selected candi dates used to take eight to sixteen months time. 
Cabinet Secretariat was approa ched in this regard. As a result, it has been decided that under CHS, on 
the recommendations of UPSC, medical examination of  the candidates is co nducted and provisional 
letter of appointment given to the successful candidates straight  away without any verification. The 
other problem area highlighted was undue long time taken in conducting of combined medical services 
examination. Every candidate sitting for this exam also applies for admi ssion in post graduate courses. 
On getting admission, they are permitted to join on a later date after completion  of their post graduate 
studies. As a result, the present joining rate is below 40 per cent. Inspite of having enhanced panel of 
candidates, problem continues to be the same. The Committee understands that efforts are being made 
to resolve this genuine problem by giving incentive s for joining in difficult areas. The Committee hopes 
that with such initiatives, things would improve in 2007. 
XXV. CAG REPORT 
25.1 The Committee’s attention has been drawn by the CAG Report on the functioning of the Ministry for 
the period 2002-05 (Report No. 12 of 2006). While Committee has given its observations on the matter of 
schemes/PSUs being kept outside Internal Audit under the heading ‘Budgetary Allocation’ in the Report, the 
Committee makes the following observations on the other main Audit Objections. 
25.2 Audit Objection 
 Not more than 33 per cent of the budget should be utilized during the last quarter. However, between 40 
and 51 per cent of plan allocation was utilized only in the last quarter of the respective years during 2002-05. 
Reply 
 The reasons for utilization of funds more than 33 per cent of the budgeted allocation in the last quarter 
of years during 2002-05 may be mainly attributable to delay in receipt of approval of schemes/ programmes by 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC), CCEA etc., Non receipt of adequate proposals from the State 
implementing agencies in time, slow pace of implementati on of schemes/capital work and/ or non receipt of 
utilization certificates/audited accounts etc, delay in  procurement of major equipments due to delay in 
completion of procedural formalities (i.e. tendering technical and financial evaluation etc.)  

25.3 The Committee would like to be apprised ab out the corrective measur es initiated by the 
Department so as to ensure proper utilization of allocated funds in this regard. 
25.4 Audit Objection 
 A test check of stock registers of the Department an d its subordinate offices reve aled that the system of 
periodic physical verification of assets had not been instituted and implemented in the Department/ 
Subordinate Offices. As a result, actual status rega rding custody of stores, position of condemned and 
unserviceable items and losses, if any, could not be ascertained. 
Reply 
 A yearly physical verification of the assets of th e hospital are regularly conducted and actions taken 
accordingly. 
 The Committee would, however, like to point out that as per CAG Report, no record of previous 
physical verification of stock of assets of the Department of Health and Directorate-General, Health Services 
was available. 
25.5 The Committee would like to be apprised about th e remedial measures, if any, initiated by the 
Department. 
25.6 Audit Objection 
 Physical verification of CGHS not done since 1995 and of National Medical Library not done since 
1986. With regard to the Department and DGHS, no record of previous physical verification available. 
Reply 
 The efforts are on to get physical verification done of the National Medical Library during  
2007-08 as per procedures laid down for physical verification of big libraries. 
25.7 The Committee would like to unders tand the reasons for physical verification of National Medical 
Library not being conducted for the last twenty year s. The Committee also expresses its serious concern 
on physical verification of CGHS not being conducted since 1995. The Committee would appreciate if 
steps were initiated to fulfil this basic requirement at the earliest. 
25.8 Audit Objection  
 CAG Report points out that it was noticed that advances aggregating Rs. 138.72 crore and pertaining to 
the years 1999-2000 to 2003-04 were outstanding for adjustment as of November, 2005. 
Reply 
 The amount of outstanding advances has come down to Rs. 67.90 crore from Rs. 138.73 crore for the 
period, upto 2003-04. This amount is outstanding towa rds the advances given to National Procurement and 
Supply Agencies. 
25.9 The Committee views with serious concern, Rs . 67.90 crore for the period upto 20.03.2004 as 
outstanding towards advances given to the National  Procurement and Supply Agencies. The Committee 
would like to be apprised about the status of advances outstanding from 20.04.2005 onwards. 
XXVI. MISCELLANEOUS 
26.1 The Committee’s attention has been drawn by the fa ct that State Government hospitals attached to the 
medical colleges at the district level which are in a precarious state. There is absence of ICUs and Cath Labs in 
most of them and most of the existing ICUs do not  have basic life saving equipments. Moreover, these 
hospitals lack basic laboratory facilities and diagnostic facilities like ultrasound. Financial ill health of the 
States also does not allow them to address these problems satisfactory. The Committee, 
therefore, is of the firm view that along with upgradation of State Government hospitals, it is high time 
that Government should take some initiative in  providing assistance to such hospitals which are 

attached with Medical Colleges and other district level hospitals. A beginning can perhaps be made by 
providing assistance to the hospital attached to the G.R. Medical College, Gwalior. 
26.2 The Health Secretary during the course of his de position before the Committe e, stated that the State 
Governments are not investing money in upgrading State Medical Colleges.  He also informed the Committee 
that in this Budget, the Government has kept mone y for the upgradation of State Medical Colleges. The 
Committee welcomes the initiative of the Department to allocate funds for the upgradation of the State 
Medical Colleges. The Committee is also aware that  the maintenance of district hospitals leaves 
much to be desired. The Committee welcomes the initiative of the Department to provide funds for the 
upgradation of State Medical Colleges. In this contex t, the Committee would also like to point out that 
the majority of the district hospit als are also in a very bad shape and need financial assistance. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that  besides allocating money for upgradation of State Medical 
Colleges, the Department also initiate steps to provid e maintenance grants to the districts hospitals, to 
the extent possible. 
26.3 The Committee has been given to understand that  the President while pr esiding in a function  
at Christian Medical College, Vellore had expressed the desire that for serious patients, there is a need  
for having Stem Pathology Lab in every Medical College/ Hospital in the country. Allahabad, M.L.N Medical 
College which was earlier under the State Government of U.P. had been provided some financial assistance by 
the State Government for this purpose. With the Allaha bad University becoming a Central University recently, 
the College has also come under the jurisdiction of Central Government. The Committee would appreciate 
if, funds are released to this Medical College for setting up of Stem Pathology Lab. 
26.4 During the course of the deposition of the Hea lth Secretary before the Committee, the Committee 
brought to the notice of the Secretary the issue of regi onal imbalance in the distribution of medical colleges in 
the country. It was pointed out by the Committee that wh ile in one part of the country, a number of medical 
colleges have come up, there are very few in the other parts. The Committee impressed upon the Secretary that 
it is the Government’s responsibility to take steps to  remove skewed distribution of medical colleges in the 
country. The Secretary informed the Committee that one of things the Government is considering in this regard 
is to permit district hospitals, which have the capacity to take clinical load, to attain synergy with private 
medical colleges. Explaining the background of the Government’s current thinking on the above lines the 
Secretary informed the Committee that it has been observed that private hospitals lack patient load while the in 
State Government hospitals, absenteeism arising of private practice is very rampant. 
26.5 The Secretary assured the Committee that his Depart ment will try to provide some incentives for the 
removal of regional imbalance in the development of medical colleges. 
26.6 The Committee views with serious concern the exis ting skewed distribution of medical colleges in 
the country. The Committee strongly feels that it is high time that the Department adopt a more pro-
active role in the setting up of medical colleges in uncovered areas. The Committee accordingly 
recommends that the Department finalize with fair amount of promptitude its policy on offering 
incentives for removal of regional imbalance in the development of medical colleges in the country. The 
Committee has also observed that there is a shortage of teaching staff in Medical Colleges. Standards of 
Medical Colleges are going down. To meet the shortage  of staff, the Committee strongly feels that the 
present age limit of 65 years may be relaxed. 
26.7 National Illness Assistance Funds was established/ set up during 1996-97. Under this scheme, Central 
Assistance in the form of Grants-in-Ai d towards expenditure on hospitalization of the poor is released to all 
such State Governments/UTs where the State Illness Assistance Funds/ Societies have been established. The 
assistance is limited to 50 per cent to the State G overnment contribution to the State funds/society to a 
maximum of Rs. 5.00 crores for bigger States and Rs. 2.00  crores for smaller States. Central assistance to the 
tune of Rs. 50 lakhs each is granted to Union Territ ories without Legislature where the Funds/Societies have 
been set up. State Government/UTs are empowered to sa nction upto Rs. 1.5 lakhs to each patient living below 
poverty line for treatment of life-threatening diseases, from the funds. Out of the Budget allocation of Rs. 5.00 

crores made to National Illness Assi stance Funds an advance of Rs. 10.00 lakhs each have been placed at the 
disposal of Medical Superintendent of AIIMS, Safdarjung Hospital, Dr. R.M.L.Hospital, LHMC  and Smt. 
S.K.Hospital, PGI, Chandigarh and JIPMER, Pondicher ry. These Institutions have been empowered to 
sanction upto Rs. 25,000 in each deserving cases from the Central Funds of NIFM. The Committee feels that 
the sum of Rs. 25,000 is perhaps too little a sum to provide any meaningful assistance to individuals 
suffering from life threatening diseases. The Committee also feels that since 1996, when the ceiling of Rs. 
25,000 was laid down, the cost of treatment has in creased substantially. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Department should increase the ceiling limit of Rs. 25,000 suitably. 

PART - B  
NATIONAL RURAL HEALTH MISSION (NRHM) 
AND  
FAMILY WELFARE PROGRAMMES 
1.1 The National Rural Health Mission was operationalis ed in April, 2005 throughout the country. Special 
focus of the Mission is on 18 States which have weak h ealth infrastructure and health indicators. These States 
include 8 Empowered Action Group States (Bihar, Jharkha nd, M.P., Chhattisgarh, U.P., Uttaranchal, Orissa 
and Rajasthan) 8 North-East States, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu  and Kashmir. The main objective under the 
Mission is to provide accessible, af fordable, accountable and effective healthcare delivery, especially to the 
poor and the vulnerable sections of the society, bridge gaps in healthcare, facilitate decentralized planning in 
the health sector, ensure population stabilization, gender  balance and bring about inter-sectoral convergence. 
The NRHM also provides an overarching umbrella to the existing programmes of Health  and Family Welfare 
including RCH-II, Vector Borne Disease Control Programme, TB, Leprosy, NPCB and the Integrated Disease 
Surveillance Project. It also addresses the issue of  health in the context of a sector-wise approach 
encompassing sanitation and hygiene, nutrition and safe  drinking water as basic determinants of good health 
and also advocates greater convergence with related social sector Departments like Women  and Child, 
Panchayati Raj etc. Mainstreaming of AYUSH is also one of the strategies under the Mission. 
II. INFRASTRUCTURE STRENGTHENING 
2.2 Strengthening of Primary Health Infrastructure and im proving effective service delivery of healthcare is 
one of the primary aims of NRHM. As per 2001 population norms, the following is the status of Primary 
Healthcare Institutions in the country as on March, 2007.  
 Required In position Shortfall 
SCs 1,58,792 1,44,988 21,983 
PHCs 26,022 22,669 4,436 
CHCs 6,491 3,910 3,332 
 The Committee has been informed that the variation in figures of In-position and Shortfall columns is 
due to the reason that some States have establishe d SCs, PHCs and CHCs in surplus over and above the 
specified targets. 
2.3 During the Tenth Plan, the targets of setting up of SCs, PHCs and CHCs and their achievements in some 
of the States/UTs is reported to be Nil as given below: - 
State/UT Sub-Centre PHC CHC 
 Tenth  Achievements Tenth Achievments Tenth Achievement 
 Plan  during Tenth Plan during Tenth Plan during the 
 Target Plan (upto Target Plan (upto Target Plan (upto 
  March, 2006)  March, 2006)  March, 2006) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Assam   116 0 81 0 
Bihar 1210 0 319 0 403 0 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Chhattisgarh   159 0 26 0 
Jharkhand   115 0   
Madhya   123 0 100 0 

Pradesh 
Meghalaya 51 0     
Orissa 447 0     
Tripura 40 0   13 0 
Delhi 148 0 24 0 8 0 
West Bengal   464 0   
 As per the existing population norms 2001, against a requirement of 1,58,792 Sub-Centres, as on 
March, 2006, there are 1,44,988 Sub-Centres functioning. St ate-wise figures given indicate that in respect of 
some of the States like Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pr adesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, 
J&K, Karnataka, Kerala, Rajasthan, Ta mil Nadu, number of Sub-Centres is more than the required norms. In 
contrast, there is a shortfall in the number of function al Sub-Centres in respect of some States as indicated 
below- 
Name Required (R) In-position (P) 
Bihar 14959 8858 
Haryana 3005 2433 
Jharkhand 5057 3958 
Madhya Pradesh 10402 8874 
Maharashtra 12153 10453 
Orissa 7283 5927 
Uttar Pradesh 26344 20521 
West Bengal 12101 10356 
2.4 The Committee notes with disappointment the pr ogress of work in establishing the required 
number of SCs, PHCs and CHCs in the country as per 2001 population norms. Performance level of the 
High Focus States, where the need is the maximum, compels the Commit tee to conclude that inspite of 
every possible effort made so far at every level, gr ound realities are very di sturbing. Total failure of 
vulnerable States in establishing all categories of targeted centres during the Tenth Plan needs serious 
and immediate action on the part of all concerned. Th is is all the more required as one Plan period is 
over and another has begun. The  shortfall in the health units have continued from one Plan period to 
another without necessary steps being initiated by the Department in establishing these healthcare units. 
The Committee has made several recommendations and observations on the nece ssity of bridging the 
gap by establishing the required SCs, PHCs and CH Cs. However, they seem to have made no visible 
impact. The Committee feels that by the time the Department wakes up for filling the shortfall, 
requirement for more health units would surely manifest with growing population in the country. The 
Committee recommends that the Department should initiate immediate corrective measures after 
making an analysis of problem areas encountered by the States during the Tenth Plan. 
2.5 The Committee would like to caution the Departme nt that if the discoura ging performance in the 
matter of establishing SCs, PHCs and CHCs is allowed to persist, the objective of the Mission to provide 
affordable, accessible, accountable and effective he althcare delivery, especially to the poor and 
vulnerable sections of the society will remain a distant dream. If need be, the matter may accordingly be 
taken up at the highest level in the under performing States. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the underlying causes and the initiatives taken by the Department to find a solution to the problem. 

2.6 The Committee is surprised to note that out of 1449 88 functional Sub-Centres, building status is only 
available for 144171. Status of Sub-Centres set up in Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland and Delhi, being not 
available with the Department, is all the more dist urbing. There are as many as 68848 Sub-Centres whose 
building are yet to be constructed. It has also been informed that 5114 buildings are under construction. 
2.7 With regard to PHCs and CHCs, shortfall in the num ber of functional centres continues to be there. Out 
of 22,669 functional PHCs, building status of 85 func tional PHCs in Arunachal Pradesh is not available. 
Buildings for 3875 PHCs are under construction. With regard to 3910 functional CHCs, status of 31 functional 
in Arunachal Pradesh and 126 in Punjab is not availa ble. Buildings of 188 CHCs are to be constructed and 
buildings of 416 CHCs are under construction. The Committee is not aware whether any corrective 
measures have been initiated by the Department so that all the Sub-Centres. PHCs and CHCs set up so 
far become fully functional. The Committee is of the firm view that with such a poor status of buildings 
of all the centres, in different States, urgent steps are required to be taken. The Committee observes that 
there is no shortage of Central funds. Problem lies in their timely reaching the implementing agencies 
and utilization capacity of these agencies. The Co mmittee would accordingly, recommend that this 
crucial aspect of healthcare services for our most  needy segment of populati on should be given due 
attention. 
2.8 As per the information furnished by the Department , all States/UTs are required to complete the IPHS 
facility survey of the existing CHCs as a first step towards the upgradation to IPHS level in a phased manner 
by 2010. It has further informed that a total of 2045 CHCs have been identified to be upgraded to IPHS 
standards of which reports of IPHS Facility Survey for 541 CHCs has been received from 14 States/UTs. The 
Committee is happy to note that th e Ministry has set a deadline for the upgradation of CHCs to IPHS. 
The Committee notes that no report has yet been r eceived from Bihar, Jharkhand, U.P., M.P., Andhra 
Pradesh, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Punjab, J and K, Ma nipur, Arunachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, Gujarat, 
Nagaland, Meghalaya, Delhi, Cha ndigarh, A and N Islands, Pondicherry etc., although, as per the 
information provided by the Department, IPHS Facility Survey has been completed in 1554 CHCs 
during 2006-07. The Committee advises the Department to be vigilant about meeting the deadline and 
take all necessary measures towards this end. 
ASHA 
2.9 ASHA is a major strategic intervention under the Mission for the ten high focus States namely Uttar 
Pradesh, Uttaranchal, Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya Prad esh, Chhattisgarh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Assam and Jammu 
and Kashmir. ASHA is envisaged as a trained women community health volunteer who will reinforce 
community action for universal immunization, saved delivery, new born care, prevention of water born disease 
and communicable disease, improved nutrition and promo tion of house hold toilets. She is required to inform, 
interact, mobilize and facilitate improved access to preventive and promotive healthcare and also provide basic 
curative care through her drug kits. She will assist in form ulation of village health plan by the village health 
and sanitation committee. ASHA will also promote awar eness and usage of ISM. The requirement for ASHA 
is one per thousand population with relaxation to this norm depending upon the workload and terrain. ASHA is 
envisaged to be a primary resident of the village who would be selected by the Gram Sabha following an 
intense community mobilization process. She will be fully accountable to the Panchayat. 
2.10 Capacity building of ASHA is critical in enhanc ing her effectiveness as a link between the community 
and the health facility. The initial orientation training is  for a period of 23 days spread in 5 rounds over a 
period of 12 months and followed by periodic re-training for about 2 days once every alternate month, apart 
from the on-the-job training she would be getting. Training modules for this purpose have been developed 
based on a thematic approach and States have also constituted district and block training teams for this 
purpose. Progress made in selection and training of ASHA (as on 20.02.2007) is given in the following table:-  
 No. of 
ASHAs 
No. of No. of Total Total No. 
 proposed for ASHAs ASHAs No. of of ASHAs 
 the Mission selected selected ASHAs trained 

 period  during  during  selected (during 
 2005-10 2005-06 2006-07  2006-07 
     till date) 
In 10 High-focus States 406530 119983 195008 314991 210586 
In High-focus NE States 46979 9058 24873 33929 14789 
In Tribal areas of others States 21643 0 0 0 0 
Link workers in other areas  113934 0 91013 91013 80564 
(Under RCH-II)      
T
OTAL: 589086 129041 310894 439933 305939 
2.11 As per the information given in the Annual Report 2006-07, it is envisaged that selection of training 
process of ASHA will be given due attention by the conc erned State to ensure that at least 40 per cent of the 
envisaged ASHAs in the State are selected and given inducti on training in the first year as per the norms given 
in the guidelines. 
2.12 The State-wise status of AS HAs reveals that among the ten High Focus States, only Chhattisgarh has 
done laudable work by completing the recruitment and training of all ASHAs. U.P., Jharkhand,  
J and K, M.P., Orissa, H.P and 8 High Focus NE States including Assam have performed poorly in training the 
ASHAs selected so far. The figures for the 8 High Fo cus NE States reveal a gr immer picture. Out of 46979 
ASHAs to be recruited, 33929 have been selected, and of that, only 14789 ASHAs have been trained and that 
too, from two States, i.e. Assam (14030) and Nagaland (759), while the work relating to recruitment and 
training of ASHA in the 8 Non-High Focus-Tribal Areas states is yet to  commence. Further, there is no 
statistics for the State of Meghalaya available with the Department. 
2.13 The Committee expresses its utter dissatisfaction with the progress in the recruitment, training 
and posting of ASHAs across the country. Delay due to  non-selection, and posting of ASHA is surely 
going to affect the activities that the NRHM has earmarked for ASHA. The point that the Committee 
would like to raise at this juncture is that despite the Department’s claim of laying special emphasis on 
the High Focus and 8 North Eastern States, situation concerning these States seems to have made no 
improvement. The Committee would like  to observe that the training is the most critical component of 
ASHA and if such huge mismatch in the selection and training targets of ASHAs are allowed to persist, 
it will not only undermine the quality health- care delivery to the rural poor , but also, widen the gap 
between rural and urban India. The Committee, the refore, recommends that the Department hold a 
meeting with the 10 High Focus States and 8 High Focus NE States Health Ministers with a view to 
ironing out the difficulties faced by them in selection and training of ASHAs. 
Shortfall in the required manpower in Rural Health Services 
2.14 The Committee is disturbed to note that shorta ge of manpower more or less persists in all 
States/UTs. As on March, 2006, the overall shortfall (which excludes the existing surplus in some of the 
States) in the posts of ANM was 10.9 per cent of the total requirement. In case of Lady Health Visitors 
(LHVs), the shortfall was 26.9 per cent and that of Health Assistant Male was 32.5 per cent. For doctors 
at PHCs, there was a shortfall of 9.7 per cent of the total requirement. Even out of the sanctioned posts, 
a significant percentage of posts are vacant at all the levels. For example, about 8.1 per cent of the 
sanctioned posts of ANMs were vacant as compared to about 31 per cent of the sanctioned posts of 
MPW (M). At PHCs, about 14 per cent of the sanction ed posts of LHV, 24.7 per cent of Male Health 
Assistant and 20.8 per cent of the sanctioned posts of doctors were vacant. The Committee believes that 
ANMs/LHVs/MPW (F) are grassroot-level health func tionaries who are entrusted great responsibilities  
concerning IEC, awareness building, identification of diseases/cases of serious health hazards and 
carrying basic but vital primary heal thcare to the doorsteps of the peop le in rural areas. Vacancies and 
shortfall in their numbers speak of the improper programme implementation process leading to 
apathetic outcome reflected by the health indicators. 
2.15 The Committee notes that abou t 7.5 per cent of the PHCs were without a doctor, about 38.9  
per cent were without a lab technician and about 17.7 per cent were without a pharmacist. Not only this, the 

current position of specialists manpow er at CHCs reveals that out of the sanctioned posts, about 59.4 per cent 
of Surgeons, 45.0 per cent of Obstetricians  and Gynecologists, 61.1 per cent of Physicians and about 53.85 per 
cent of Pediatricians were vacant. Overall, about 54.4 per cent of the sanctioned posts of specialists at CHCs 
were vacant. Moreover, there was a shortfall of 70.2 per cent specialists at the CHCs as compared to the 
requirement for existing infrastructure on the basis of existing norms. The shortage of manpower, more or less, 
persists in all States/UTs. 
2.16 In reply to a specific query,  the Department has informed the Committee that the acute shortage of 
health functionaries ANMs/LHV/MPW (M) and(F)/HW (M) and (F) as well as poorly staffed primary 
healthcare centres is one of major causes of such bale ful condition of maternal and child health indicators in 
the EAG States. In its 16th and 21st Report, the Comm ittee had urged the Department to take appropriate 
measures in this regard so that year after year the same story is not repeated. The Department’s stock reply that 
every effort is made to realize the objective does not sound convincing to the Committee. 
2.17 The Committee is not satisfied with simply pur suing the matter of filling the vacancies with the 
State/UT Governments by the Department and subsequent display of helplessness on its part. Apathy on part 
of the States at the cost of jeopardizing Family Welfare Programmes ought to be treated on a serious note. The 
Committee therefore recommends that the Department should review its policies and plan of action concerning 
this matter and take necessary steps towards filling up of the posts of various health 
functionaries lying vacant for a number of years within a time-bound framework during the Eleventh Plan 
period. The Department, should not confine its role to  that of fund-disbursing authority but play a more 
proactive role in overcoming the obstacles. 
2.18 The Committee’s attention has been drawn by a numb er of suggestions made by a Task Force so as to 
ensure services of doctors in rural areas. Some important suggestions are as follows:— 
 • increase in the retirement age to 65 years 
 • decentralization of recruitment at district level 
 • walk in interview and contractual appointment of doctors 
 • enhancing the salary for posting in the rural areas by l/3rd 
 The Committee would appreciate if action on the abov e-mentioned suggestions is initiated at the earliest 
so that the targeted population is able to avail the required healthcare services in the real sense. 
Mobile Medical Units (MMUs) 
2.19 Another target set under Infrastructure Strengthening under NRHM during 2006-07 was to provide all 
600 districts in the country with MMUs, whereas, only 318 districts co uld be provided with such units. What 
makes it noteworthy of mention is the fact that th ese 318 districts are distributed among 18 States only 
and among which names of the bigger states like Bihar, Jharkhand, M.P., Maharashtra, U.P. find no 
mention. Since funds for Mobile Medical Units are disbursed as per the proposals received from them, 
the Committee infers that no proposals have been rece ived from these States. If that be so, then the 
Committee would urge the Department to take up the matter with the defaulting States to submit the 
proposals at the earliest, so that MMUs can be provided with all districts. 
III. NATIONAL VECTOR BORNE DISEASE CONTROL PROGRAMME (NVBDCP)  
3.1 The National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme (NVBDCP) is an umbrella programme for 
prevention and control of vector borne diseases viz., Malaria, Filariasis, Kala-azar, Dengue/Dengue 
Haemorrhagic Fever (DF/DHF) and Japanese Encephal itis. Under the programme, comprehensive and multi-
faceted public health activities are being implemente d in the country. These diseases pose immense public 
health concern and are major impediments in the path of socio-economic development. The high-risk areas are 
generally rural, tribal and urban slums inhabited by  the poor, marginalized and vulnerable sections. 
Remoteness and inaccessibility, socio-economic conditions , inappropriate health seeking behaviour, migration 
of population as well as emerging drug and insecticide resistance are the contributing factors to the problem of 
vector borne diseases in the country. 

3.2 The Directorate of NVBDCP is the nodal agency for planning, policymaking, technical guidance, and 
for monitoring and evaluation of programme implementation in respect of prevention and control of the vector 
borne diseases. The States are responsible for planning, implementation and supervision of the programme. 
3.3 The Committee observes that during the Tenth Pl an, funds allocated for the Programme remained 
under-utilized. Year 2006-07, the last year of the Tenth Plan was no exception. Against the plan allocation of 
Rs. 371.58 crore marginally increased to Rs. 381.56 cr ore at the RE stage, expenditure reported upto 28th 
February, 2007 is only Rs. 259.65 crore. The Committee has been given to understand that as on 31st March, 
2007, provisional expenditure was Rs. 306.91 crore. The Committee fails to unde rstand the reasons due to 
which inspite of funds being made available, impl ementing agencies have failed to make optimum 
utilization thereof.  
3.4 The Committee has also observed that physical ta rgets set under various co mponents of different 
vector-borne disease covered under the Programme during 2006-07 show unde r achievement. Similar 
targets have been set for 2007-08 also. The Committee would like to point out that with an enhanced 
provision of Rs. 400.00 crore being made for 2007-08 which marks the beginning of Eleventh Plan, it is 
all the more necessary that corrective measures were taken by the Department. If such an action is yet 
to be taken, the Committee would urge upon the Department to do so at the earliest. 
Malaria 
3.5 Among the Vector Borne Diseases , Malaria stands apart as the lead ing killer disease. North Eastern 
States and Assam, Orissa, West Bengal are highly Malaria endemic. 100 per cent Central assistance is 
provided to seven N.E States since 1994 and to Sikkim since 2003. 
 As per the information furnished in the Outcome Bu dget, the annual incidence of Malaria currently is 
around 1.80 million cases and about 80 per cent of malari a cases and deaths are reported from the N.E. States, 
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Gujarat, Rajasthan, West 
Bengal and Karnataka. 
 Incidence of malaria cases  and deaths in NE St ates, Orissa and W. Bengal continued to remain 
unabated during 2005 and 2006. Following details about the most endemic States are self-revealing:— 
States 2005 2006 
 Positive Deaths Positive Deaths 
Arunachal Pradesh 31215 0 14349 196 
Assam 67885 113 118581 298 
Meghalaya 16816 41 24875 118 
Mizoram 10741 74 10644 120 
Tripura 18008 20 22950 25 
Orissa 396573 255 375907 253 
West Bengal 185964 175 161260 203 
3.6 The Committee has been given to understand that under the Vector  Borne Disease Control Programme, 
the maximum allocation of funds is made for malaria control. Rs.255.13 crores out of Rs.338.75 allocated for 
NVBDCP, was spent on malaria eradication in 2006-07. State-wise details of allocation/expenditure during 
2006-07 made available to the Committee reveal a very disturbing trend. While in the case of some States/ UTs 
i.e. Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, U. P., Delhi, Pondicherry, expenditure exceeded the 
allocated funds, funds remained under-utilized in th e remaining States particul arly Malaria-prone States i.e. 
N.E. States, Orissa, West Bengal, as indicated below:— 
(Rs. in crores) 

State Allocation Expenditure 
Arunachal Pradesh 6.25 1.83 
Assam 33.62 9.59 
Manipur 4.88 2.49 
Meghalaya 6.93 3.11 
Mizoram 5.49 3.04 
Nagaland 7.48 5.43 
Sikkim 0.33 0.09 
Tripura 7.31 3.95 
West Bengal 21.38 14.06 
Orissa 46.25 34.66 
 
3.7 The Committee also notes that in the States of West  Bengal, Orissa, Jharkhand, not even 50 per cent of 
the total amount of funds released to the District Heal th Societies have been utilized, uptill December, 2006. 
West Bengal has not been able to spend the allocation of Rs.50.00 lakhs released in 2005-06 in the same year 
whereas an additional Rs.94.48 lakhs was released in  2006-07. On being asked about the measures being 
contemplated by the Department to plug the loopholes in the delivery of funds to the districts in the above 
States, the Department has replied that funds are now being released through the State and District Health 
Societies constituted under NRHM and that the release of funds to Societies would facilitate timely receipt of 
funds by the districts for the implementation of the programme. 
3.8 The Committee welcomes the initiative taken by  the Department to release funds directly to 
Health Societies and monitor quarterly utilization of  funds and hopes that such a move would remove a 
major constraint faced by the State authorities in  combating malaria. The Committee would like this 
facility to be extended to other malaria endemic St ates. The Committee would also like the Department 
to put in place a mechanism to assess the impact of this measure over a period of one year and apprise 
the Committee of the outcome.  
3.9 The operational performance indicator for mala ria is screening of minimum 10 per cent of the 
population living in malaria prone areas. The indicator is Annual Blood Examination Rate (ABER). The 
impact indicator is Annual Parasite Incidence (API), i.e. the number of malaria cases per year per 1000 
population. As per the Outcome Budget the physical progress during the 10th Plan is as follows:- 
Year Positive cases Annual Blood Annual Parasite 
 (in million) Examination Rate Incidence per 1000 
  (ABER) population 
2002 1.84 8.93 1.80 
2003 1.86 9.65 1.81 
2004 1.92 9.33 1.84 
2005 1.82 10.34 1.80 
2006* 1.05 6.90 1.04 
*
Upto November, 2006. 
3.10 The Committee is distressed to note that except  for 2005, even the minimum target of 10 per cent 
of ABER has not been achieved in any of the years of the Tenth Plan. The Committee has been given to 

understand that the ABER which measures surveillance rate has remained below the national minimum 
average of 10 per cent in all NE States, exce pt Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh. The Committee 
reiterates its observation made in  the 16th report that the basic exercise of identification of  suspected 
cases of malaria is not being carried out and hence actual figures relating to malaria cases and deaths 
are not being projected. 
3.11 The Committee takes note of the following constr aints highlighted with regard to monitoring and 
supervision of Malaria Control Programme in N.E. States:— 
 (i) Non-availability of mobility support and shortage of surveillance workers and supervisors 
affecting regular surveillance at district level and below.  
 (ii)  Integration of the Programme with the pr imary healthcare system has not yet taken place in 
these states. 
 (iii)  Negligible involvement of Anga nwadi Workers/ANMs in the Programme.  
 (iv) The web based computerized National Ante-Malaria Management Information System 
(NAMMIS) has not been operationalized in NE  States although ne cessary training and 
computer support has been provided upto district level. 
3.12 The Committee is also disturbed to note that th ere is acute shortage of Male Health Workers, the 
main functionary of the Programme. The following de tails in respect of most crucial States are self-
revealing:- 
States Required Sanctioned In position 
Arunachal Pradesh 376 23 23 
Assam 5109 638 320 
Orissa 5927 4911 3392 
W. Bengal 10356 8126 5603 
 The Committee is of the opinion that in the absence of key functionaries, surveillance and 
treatment of malaria cases would continue to suffer. The Committee is constrained to observe that if this 
state of affairs is allowed to continue, the goal of reduction in mortality on account of malaria by 50  per 
cent by 2010 and efficient morbidity control, as set in the National Health Policy (2002) would be dented 
to a great extent. The Committee therefore, strongly  recommends that the Department devise means of 
improving ABER in consultation with malaria endemic NE States so that the above-mentioned problems 
are overcome at the earliest. The Committee would also  like to be apprised of the measures taken by the 
Department in this regard. 
Kala-Azar 
3.13 Kala-azar is a slow progressing indigenous diseas e caused by protozoan parasite leishmania donovani 
and spread by its vector-Sandfly. The National Health Policy (2002) has set the goal for elimination of Kala-
azar from the country by 2010. Kala-azar is endemic in 33 districts in Bihar, 4 districts in Jharkhand, 5 districts 
of Uttar Pradesh and 11 districts of West Bengal (total 53 districts) besides sporadically occurring in a few 
other areas. An estimated 130 million population is exposed to the risk of Kala-azar in the endemic areas. The 
disease incidence has come down from 77099 cases in 1992 to 31217 cases in 2005 and confirmed deaths from 
1419 in 1992 to 157. However, in recent years (2003 onw ards), there is an increasing trend as indicated 
below:- 
State 2003 2004 2005 2006(P) 
 C D C D C D C D 
Bihar 13960 187 17324 107 21797 124 29711 162 
West Bengal 1487 7 3015 23 2706 15 1750 10 

Jharkhand 2607 5 4028 14 6578 12 7509 11 
U.P. 34 1 34 2 73 2 83 0 
Imported 126 10 78 9 63 4 27 4 
T
OTAL: 18214 210 24479 155 31217 157 39080 187 
C=Cases 
D=Deaths 
3.14 The Committee does not entirely agree with the Department’s contention that intensive 
surveillance has resulted in registering increased number of cases. The Comm ittee draws the attention 
to the fact that from 2004 onwards, the cases detected and the number of deaths reported both have 
increased. The Committee is not co nvinced that the initiatives taken by the Government to contain the 
disease have been effective enough . The Department has informed that a Patient Coding Scheme is yet 
to be implemented to facilitate tracking of all pati ents to the village and individual household. The 
Committee hopes that introducing such a measure wo uld surely help in not only identification of 
existing cases but also reveal the true picture as to whether new cases are on the increase. 
3.15 The Committee’s attention is also drawn to certain disturbing trends in utilization of funds released for 
the above programme. The Department has informed that States of Jharkhand and Bihar had requested for 
revalidation of their balances available with them from the previous years to the tune of Rs. 113.32 lakhs 
(Jharkhand) and Rs. 1216.38 lakhs (Bihar). Existence of such balances that too in the most endemic States 
only confirms the apprehensions of the Commit tee that the programme implementation is not 
proceeding as per the plans and the targeted benefici aries are being left out from getting the benefits. 
Therefore, Committee advises the Department to make extensive efforts so as to ensure that the released 
funds are utilized in time. 
Japanese Encephalitis 
3.16 Japanese Encephalitis (JE) is a viral disease with a tendency of seasonal outbreaks. JE has been reported 
repeatedly from 15 States. There is no specific anti viral drug for JE and cases are managed symptomatically. 
Efforts have been directed to provide technical support and strengthen capabilities of State through training to 
tackle this disease. A vaccination programme for children between 1 and 15 years of age under the Universal 
immunization programme, using single dose live attenuated SA-14-14-2 vaccine has been launched in 2006. A 
total of 93.08 lakhs children were vaccinated against the target of 105.31 lakhs children achieving 88.39 per 
cent coverage. 
3.17 During the year 2006, 2832 cases due to suspected JE  were reported from ten States in the country, with 
Uttar Pradesh (2320 cases), Assam (392 cases), and Bihar (73 cases) leading the tally. During 2006, 658 deaths 
were reported against 1682 deaths reported during the previous year. 
3.18 The Committee has been given to  understand that till 31st December 2007, the number of cases 
reported and resultant deaths have shown a sign ificant decrease on a year-on-year basis. The 
Committee is happy to note that the number of cases reported and also deaths thereof are on the decline. 
However, the Committee would also like to draw th e attention of the Depart ment towards the rising 
death cases due to JE reported from Assam during 2006. While the cases detected and deaths were 145 
and 52 in 2005, the numbers for 2006 at 392 and 119 respectively, is more than double in cases reported 
and deaths thereof, over that of the previous year. No  doubt, in U.P. the number of cases detected and 
deaths have come down significantly, yet the Co mmittee asks the Department not to let down its 
vigilance and step up efforts in Assam as well as U.P. so that the dreaded disease is eliminated for good. 
The Committee urges the Department to step-up the ongoing IEC activities in the endemic States so that 
the desired objective is reached soon. 
Dengue/Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever 

3.19 Dengue/Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever is an acute vira l infection transmitted by Aedes aegypti mosquitoes 
that breed in man made containers in which water stag nates for more than a week. Dengue is endemic in 18 
states/UTs with the population of about 450 million at risk. During the year 2003, 12,754 cases and 215 deaths 
were reported. Again in the year 2004  and 2005, there were outbreaks in many parts of the country reporting 
11985 cases and 157 deaths in 2005. Year 2006 has also reported 10815 cases and 171 deaths. 
3.20 The Committee would like to draw the attention of the Department to the increased number of detected 
cases and deaths reported from the States/UTs of Ch andigarh, Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, Andhra Pradesh, 
Rajasthan, and U.P. These States had, during the previous years, done well in containing the disease and 
related death. However, during 2005 and 2006 the trend has shown an increase. The following table shows the 
number of cases detected and deaths. 
States/UTs 2004 2005 2006 
 cases deaths cases deaths cases deaths 
Chandigarh 0 0 2 0 108 0 
Delhi 606 3 1023 9 3236 64* 
Gujarat 117 4 454 11 493 3 
Haryana 25 0 183 1 430 2 
Rajasthan 207 5 370 5 1224 17 
U.P 8 0 121 4 630 14 
Andhra Pradesh 230 1 99 2 149 16 
3.21 The Committee notes with alarm the rising trend in Dengue related deaths in the country during the past 
two years. The Committee is compelled to observe that the all-out efforts made by the Department during 2004 
at arresting the spread of Dengue have not continued in the following years. If such an effort had been 
sustained, the results would have been visible in 2005 and 2006. It apprehends that if the trend continues, this 
year will see a further increase in the number of  Dengue cases and resultant deaths. The Committee 
understands that there is no specific anti-viral drug fo r Dengue and mortality can only be minimized by early 
diagnosis and prompt symptomatic management of cases. It, therefore recommends that the Department should 
start its preventive measures well in time so that further spread of the disease is effectively controlled. 
3.22 The Committee further contends that though the Department has informed the Committee that for the 
effective control of the disease, Directorate of NVBDCP has prepared a long term action plan which is focused 
on enhancing surveillance through sentinel surveillance,  appropriate management of  cases, emergency vector 
control etc, the ground realities lead the Committee to the conclusion that the impl ementation of the Action 
Plan needs to be monitored for de riving positive results. The Committe e, therefore, recommends that the 
Department put in place a mechanism for periodic monitoring of the Action Plan also. 
IV. NATIONAL T.B. CONTROL PROGRAMME  
4.1 T.B is a major health problem in India. India accounts for l/5th of the global incidence of T.B. cases. To 
control the problem of TB, Revised National TB Control Programme (RNTCP), an application of WHO 
recommend Directly Observed Treatment short course with an objective of achieving cure rate of 85 per cent 
of new sputum positive cases and to detect at least 70 per cent of such cases, was launched in the country on 26 
March 1997. The Department has informed that the Programme was implemented in a phased manner and by 
March, 2006, the entire population of the country covering 632 districts has been covered. The Committee has 
been further informed that 2263 NGOs and 14674 Private Practitioners have been involved in RNTCP under 
various GoI approved schemes. As against a target of 70 per cent case detection of new sputum positive cases, 
65 per cent level could be achieved by December, 2006. Against the targeted cure ra te of 85 per cent of new 
sputum positive cases,  83 per cent cure rate was achieved upto December, 2006. 
4.2 The RNTCP project Phase-II has been approved by the Government for the period October, 2005 to 
September, 2011 for a total outlay of Rs. 1,156 Crore (USD 256.9 million) which includes credit from World 
Bank of Rs. 756 crores (USD 170 million) and commodity  assistance of anti-TB drugs from DFID through 

WHO for Rs.287 crores (USD 63.7 million) with balance of Rs.191 crores (USD 42.5 million) will be given by 
GoI. In addition, 427 crores through GFATM and USAID have also been provided. 
4.3 As per the information provided by the Departme nt, the total allocation un der the Programme to all 
States/UTs during 2006-07 was to the tune of Rs.224.50  crores. However, the expenditure reported up till 6th 
March, 2007 has been Rs.219.83 crores. The Committee, in its 21st Report, had expressed its concern 
regarding unspent balances being carried forwar d to the forthcoming year and had recommended 
streamlining the utilization of funds allocated in the same financial year. However, there seems to be no 
respite as a similar trend continues in 2006-07 also . While the expenditure fi gures for the States of 
Assam, Bihar, Haryana, Maharash tra, Orissa, Tripura, Meghalaya, Rajasthan and Kerala reveal 
under-utilization of the allocated funds, in case  of the other states, ex penditure has exceeded the 
allocated funds. The figures in the table below show that upto  6th March, 2007, utilization of allocation 
by States like Assam, Bihar, Maharashtra, Orissa, Tripura, Meghalaya, Kerala show large variations:— 
(Rs. in lakhs) 
States Allocation (2006-07) Expenditure-2006-07 
1 2 3 
Assam 1209.91 700.54 
Bihar 1509.31 1227.17 
1 2 3 
Maharashtra 1730.10 1626.13 
Orissa 640.96 591.14 
Tripura 144.34 45.04 
Meghalaya 110.38 98.73 
Kerala 543.75 442.03 
T
OTAL: 5888.75 4730.78 
 Not only this, in respect of States like Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura varying amount  of unspent balances was available as on  
1st April, 2006. Trend of under utilisation during 2006-07 must have aggravated the position further. 
Both availability of unspent balances and under-ut ilisation of funds indicate that inherent flaws 
continue to persist in the implementation of th is Programme. With the be ginning of an other Plan 
period, the Department should initiate remedial steps so as to put a stop to such a trend during the 
Eleventh Plan. 
4.4 To a specific query, the Department has inform ed the Committee that 2263 NGOs and 14,674 Private 
Practitioners were involved in the Programme during 2006-07 under various components of the Programme. It 
has further informed that a total amount of Rs.1,114. 2 lakhs had been allocated to the NGOs of various 
States/UTs for IEC and other activities at the rate of Rs. 1 lakh per million populations covered under RNTCP 
during 2006-07. The Committee notes that maximum number of NGOs and Private Practitioners under this 
Programme are concentrated in the following States:— 
States NGOs Private Practitioners 
Gujarat 263 3486 
Karnataka 106 1166 
Maharashtra 217 3824 
Tamil Nadu 224 858 
Kerala 55 1062 

4.5 The Committee would like to have an idea about the impact made on the programme as a result 
of participation by NGOs and Private Practitioners (PPs). The Committee also feels that an attempt 
should also be made so that NGOs/Private Practition ers also come forward in other States. A beginning 
can be made by having a forum where participat ing NGOs/PPs get the opportunity to share their 
experiences with similar workers from other Stat es. At the same time, the Committee would also 
recommend that the evaluation of the above initiatives be ma de under the Routine Programme 
Evaluations carried out by the States  (2 districts per quarter) and the Centre (2 districts per month) in 
order to review the progress made under the IEC initia tives and suggest proper utilisation of the funds 
allocated under the scheme. 
4.6 The Committee’s attention is drawn to another aspect, i.e, the percentage of defaulters under the 
RNTCP programme during the last couple of years. The Department has informed that 7 per cent of the total 
cases treated during 2005 have been defaulters and given a similar trend in the current year also at least an 
equal percentage of T.B. cases would have been defaulters too. 
4.7 The Committee observes that MDR-TB (Multi-Drug Resistant T.B.) though relatively low in percentage 
translates into large numbers that may increase the magnitude and the severity of T.B. The Committee notes 
that 7 per cent defaulters in a year is quite a significan t number of cases that remains untreated or half treated. 
Given the fact that a single T.B patient can infect 10- 15 persons in a year, the Committee apprehends that the 
rate of infection may increase per year. Moreover, it is likely that the virus may manifest resistant strains that 
may, in all likelihood, cause difficulties in treatment  in future. The Committee ther efore suggests that since 
records of T.B. cases are kept, the he lp of both NGOs and Private Practition ers should be taken for identifying 
defaulting patients and mainstreaming them into RNTCP. 
4.8 The Committee notes that one of the new initiative s proposed under the Prog ramme is the introduction 
of diagnostic and treatment services for Multi-Drug Resi stant T.B in a phased manner, starting with Gujarat 
and Maharashtra in the first quarter of 2007. Committee has been given to understand that anti-TB Drugs for 
MDR TB are over 400 times more expensive than re gular DOTS. The Committee is not aware whether any 
assessment about the estimated number of patients in the country needing such treatment has been made so far. 
The Committee strongly feels that such a survey should be carried out at the earliest both for identifying such 
patients and the factors responsible for this emerging problem. 
V. NATIONAL LEPROSY ERADICATION PROGRAMME (NLEP)  
5.1 National Leprosy Eradication Programme was launched with the objective of eliminating Leprosy i.e. 
achieving prevalence rate of <1case/1 0,000 population from the country. National level elimination of leprosy 
has been achieved since 31st December, 2005 when the prevalence rate came down to 0.95 or less than 
1/10,000 population. Prevalence rate has further redu ced to 0.85/10,000 population in May, 2006 and to 
0.75/10,000 population in January 2007.  27 States/UTs ha ve achieved elimination level while States of Bihar, 
U.P., Jharkhand, West Bengal, Chha ttisgarh and UTs—Delhi, Dadra  a nd Nagar Haveli and Chandigarh are 
close to achieving the goal of elimination of leprosy. 
5.2 Rs. 38.63 crores was allocated at RE 2006-07 while  an allocation of Rs.40 crores has been made for 
2007-08 towards this objective. Justifying the allocati on the Department has stated that although elimination 
has been achieved at Nationa l level, new cases will continue to come up for some time. These newly detected 
cases have to be provided quality leprosy services so th at they are diagnosed and treated early. Further, there 
are 29 districts and quite a number of blocks having prevalence rate of >2 per 10,000 population situated in 7 
States. Any relaxation at this stage may lead to accumu lation of large number of hidden cases thus requiring 
the existing services under the programme to be sustained. 
5.3 The Committee’s attention is, however, drawn to large amount of funds lying unutilized by the 
States/UTs during 2006-07. The Department has informed the Committee that majority of the funds are 
allocated to training and IEC activities in orde r to continue with the good work. However, the 
Committee notes with exasperation that, as per the information provided by the Department, uptill 15th 
March, 2007 the following States/UTs have large unspent balances with them:— 

Sl. No. States/UTs Allocation of Funds  Utilization 
  2006-07 (in lakhs) (as on 15/03/07)  
   in lakhs 
1 2 3 4 
1. Bihar 358.42 98.09 
2. Chhattisgarh 209.99 179.20 
3. Goa 17.45 5.48 
4. Gujarat 157.93 123.50 
5. Jharkhand 320.04 66.47 
6. Madhya Pradesh 250.49 30.04 
7. Meghalaya 42.19 18.82 
8. Orissa 242.20 121.18 
9. Uttaranchal 81.80 44.75 
10. A&N Islands 11.18 0.98 
11. Daman  and Diu 15.00 4.75 
12. Lakshadweep 7.00 0.50 
13. Chandigarh 11.00 4.65 
14. Delhi 61.00 50.16 
 All India 3725.00 2911.95 
5.4 The Committee notes that Bihar,  Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Chandigarh and Delhi which are yet to 
achieve the goal of elimination of leprosy, also figure  in the above list. The Comm ittee fears that during the 
current year too, similar amounts would accumulate as  unspent balances. The Committee feels that monitoring 
of the utilization of funds, especially in the above Stat es/UTs which are on the scan list, is not being done 
properly by the Department. Unspent balances entail that targeted beneficiaries remain deprived by the scheme 
and therefore the prevalence rate in these State/UTs di splay slow progress in the elimination of the disease. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Depart ment should make a quarterly evaluation of the 
allocated funds and reassess what progress is made by these States and UTs in total elimination of leprosy. The 
Committee would also like to be informed about the number of physically deformed people who have been 
rehabilitated during the last 5 years under the programme. 
VI. NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS  
6.1 The National Programme For Control of Blindness was launched in the year 1976 as a 100  
per cent Centrally Sponsored scheme with the goal  to reduce the prevalence of blindness from 1.4  
per cent to 0.3 per cent. As per Survey in 2001-02, prevalence of blindness is estimated to be 1.1 per cent. 
Target for the Tenth Plan is to reduce prevalence of blindness to 0.8 per cent by 2007. The Committee would 
like to know the actual achievement made against th e target of reducing the prevalence of blindness to 
0.8 per cent during the Tenth Five Year Plan. The Comm ittee would also like to be informed of the time 
frame by which prevalence of blindness is targeted to be reduced from 1.4 per cent to 0.3 per cent. 
6.2 A total release of Rs. 110.44 crores was made during 2006-07 while the expenditure reported upto 28th 
February, 2007 is Rs. 94.7 crores. Out of Rs. 85.34 crores, 20 major States could spend a Rs. 15.68 crores. 
Himachal Pradesh is the only State that has been able to utilize the allocated funds fully while Bihar, 
Chhattisgarh, Goa, J&K, Maharashtra and Uttaranchal reporting nil expenditure. The programme has not taken 
off properly in the other States, with Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh reporting 
very meagre spending. A total amount of Rs. 10.68 crores were released to 8 NE States while the provisional 

expenditure reported has been only Rs. 4.57 crores during 2006-07. Among the NE States, poor utilization has 
been reported from Tripura, Mizoram, Meghalaya and Assam. 
6.3 The Committee is disturbed to note that the st atus of utilisation of allocated funds during  
2006-07 has been very poor and discouraging. The Committee feels that similar amounts of funds may be 
lying idle with the States/UTs in the previous year s. The Committee apprehends that the programme has not 
been monitored properly. The Committee would like to be apprised about the sub- optimal utilization of the 
allocated funds and also the steps taken to streamline the monitoring of the Programme. 
6.4 To a specific query regarding allocation and utiliz ation of funds released to  States/UTs including NE 
States during 2006-07, the Department has replied that ca sh grants and Grants-in-aid to the tune of Rs.967.00 
lakhs and Rs. 5713 lakhs to twenty major States and Rs . 40 lakhs and Rs. 570.50 lakhs to NE States were 
released respectively during 2006-07. The Department ha s further informed that the concerned States will 
furnish Utilization Certificates after completion of the Financial Year. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the level of utilisation of cash grants  and Grants-in-aid made to the States and UTs under 
the Programme. 
6.5 The Department has informed the Committee that th e major contributor to prevalence of blindness in 
the country is the problem of cataract. Against a targ et of 211.00 lakh cataract operations, 213.52 lakh 
operations have been done by 19th March, 2007. The St ate/UT-wise details of performance of cataract surgery 
during 2006-07 (as on 6.3.2007) are given as below:— 
States/UTs Target Achievement 
Other than NE States   
Haryana 110,000 25,122 
Maharashtra 550,000 481,275 
Kerala 100,000 61,384 
Punjab 160,000 109,083 
Tamil Nadu 480,000 338,248 
U.P 520,000 358,122 
West Bengal 240,000 188,608 
NE States/UTs   
Arunachal Pradesh 1000 503 
Meghalaya 2000 720 
Sikkim 500 241 
Tripura 8000 6091 
D and N Haveli 330 101 
Delhi 80,000 55,390 
T
OTAL ALL INDIA : 45,00,000 35,92,736 
6.6 Committee’s attention is drawn to the aforesaid table where performances of certain States/UTs 
have been indicated. Analyzing the data, the Commi ttee feels that during 2006-07, the performance of 
the programme has been way below the mark. So far as achieving th e targeted number of Cataract 
Surgeries is concerned, the Committee notes that desp ite an increased allocation of funds during 2006-
07, i.e., from Rs 81 crores at BE to Rs 98.39 crores at RE, there is under achievement. Focusing on the 
performance of Haryana, U.P, Tamil Nadu, Kerala , West Bengal, Delhi and Meghalaya, the Committee 
finds that the achievement levels have been way be hind, in general, and particularly in Haryana where 
only 25,122 cat ops could be done against a set target of 1,10,000. Like wise, performance of NE States 

has also left much to be desired. Not a single NE  State has been able to achieve the targets set for 
cataract surgery. The Committee recommends that the Department in consultati on with the aforesaid 
States including NE States should workout modalitie s for initiating a special drive in the States under 
reference with a view to wipe out the target-achievement mismatch in cataract surgeries therein. 
6.7 Committee’s attention has also been drawn towards the fact that States of Gujarat, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, 
Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Delhi and UTs of Pondicherry and Chandigarh have attained the rate of 400 
operations per lakh population. However, Bihar and Assa m are among the lowest performing States and have 
cataract surgery rate of <200/ lakh. 
6.8 From the data concerning expenditure of funds released to various DBCS/SBCS/NGOs of State/UTs 
provided to the Committee, it is evident that although Rs 10531.48 lakhs have been released to the above 
organizations as cash, kind, grants-in- aid, only Rs 28 81.46 lakhs have been expended till date. What is more 
concerning is that the Department has released the fu nds without monitoring their proper utilization in the 
previous quarters. The Committee, therefore, recommends th at the Department should reassess the 
system of releasing the funds to DBCS/SBCS/NGOs a nd should set up a mechanism where in a biannual 
assessment of FMR can be obtained from the above organizations. This will ensure better financial 
utilization. 
6.9 The Committee notes that a su rvey on Rapid Assessment of TR ACHOMA cases was done in 10 
districts in Haryana, Gujarat, U.P., Uttaranchal, Punjab and Rajasthan whose Report was to be 
finalized by December, 2006. The Committee would app reciate if major findings  of this survey are 
shared with it. 
VII. NATIONAL IODINE DEFICIENCIES DISORDERS PROGRAMME  
7.1 On the basis of survey conducted by the DGHS, ICMR and the State Health Directorates, it has been 
found that out of 324 districts surveyed in 28 St ates and all the 7 UTs, 263 districts are endemic i.e., where the 
prevalence of Iodine Deficiency Disord e r  i s  m o r e  t h a n  1 0   p e r  c e n t .  I t  i s  a l s o  e s t i m a t e d  t h a t  m o r e  t h a n  7 1  
million persons are suffering from goitre and other iodine  deficiency disorder, which includes abortion, still-
birth, mental retardation, squint, neuromotor defects. 
7.2 The Committee observes that out of a Plan allocation of Rs. 12 crore in 2005-06, expenditure reported is 
only Rs. 8.44 crore and for 2006-07 expenditure reported upto 28.02.2007 is Rs. 8.91 crore against an 
allocation of Rs. 15 crore. 
7.3 For effective implementation of the programme at the State level, 31 States/UTs have established Iodine 
Deficiency Disorder Control Cells. 18 States/UTs have set up IDD monitoring Labs and remaining States are 
in the process of doing the same. However, as per th e information made availabl e to the Committee, funds 
being directly released to States/ UTs have remained under-utilised as indicated below- 
(Rs. in lakhs) 
States 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 
 Allo. Rel. Allo. Rel. Allo. Rel. Allo. Rel. Allo. Rel. 
Major 
States 
100.00 84.00 150.00 80.75 114.00 43.00 105.00 77.41 100.00 48.00 
NE 
States 
50.00 41.20 50.00 35.07 50.00 32.00 100.00 35.38 100.00 21.50 
7.4 The Committee notes that Rs. 25.00 crores have been provided under the programme for   
2007-08. However, the past performance level makes th e Committee apprehensive about the level of progress 
under the different States. The Committee is of the view that more extensive monitoring is required at every 
conceivable level so as to make the programme successful. 
VIII. INTEGRATED DISEASE SURVEILLANCE PROJECT (IDSP)  

8.1 Integrated Disease Surveillance Project is a de centralized, State based Surveillance programme 
launched in the country in November, 2004. It is intended to detect early warning signals of impending 
outbreak and help initiate an effective response in a time ly manner it is also expected to provide essential data 
to monitor progress of ongoing disease control programmes and help allocate health resources more 
effectively. Malaria, Acute Diarrhoeal Disease (Cholera), Typhoid, Tuberculosis, Measles, Polio, Road Traffic 
Accidents, Plague, Yellow Fever, Meningo-encephalitis, respiratory Distress, Haemorrhagic fevers, HIV/HBV, 
HCV, water quality, outdoor air quality, Obesity, Blood pr essure, Tobacco use etc. ha ve been included in the 
core list for surveillan ce. The States can identify up to five States  specific diseases that require surveillance 
based on disease burden and availability of public health action. 9 States in Phase-I (Andhra Pradesh, 
Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya  Pradesh, Maharashtra, Uttarancha l, Tamilnadu, Mizoram and Kerala) 
and 14 States/UTs in Phase-II (Chha ttisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Rajasthan, West Bengal, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Orissa, Tripura, Chandigarh, Pondicherry, Delhi, Nagaland) have been covered. The programme is 
being initiated in remaining 12 States/UTs in Phas e-III (Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jammu  and Kashmir, 
Jharkhand, Punjab, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Sikkim, A&N Islands, D  and N Haveli, Daman  and Diu, 
Lakshadweep) after the pre-requisites are met, for which the process is already going on. The progress made 
includes: 
 • In most districts of Phase-I and II States , Rapid Response Teams have been identified and 
trained. 
 • In Phase-I States, 927 Programme Officers /RPT and in Phase-II States, 605 Programme 
Officers/RPT have been trained at 9 identified National Level Institutions. 
 • In Phase-I States, 9596 Medical Officers, 341 82 MPWs,  and 241 Laboratory Technicians and 
in Phase-II States, 4086 Medical Officers, 19166 MPWs  and 731 Laboratory Technicians have 
further been trained in IDSP. 
 • IDSP has developed specific training manuals, operation manuals, standard operating protocols 
and guidelines for capacity building of IDSP officers and staff. 
 • NIC has been assigned the task to establish and manage Information Technology Network 
connecting about 800 States  and District He adquarters, as well as Government Medical 
Colleges. NIC would be developing specific software to facilitate data transfer and analysis. 
 • IDSP has developed and distributed reporting formats and guidelines in 23 Phase-I  and Phase-
II States. CSU presently receives weekly diseas e surveillance reports from about 63 per cent 
(250/394) districts. Respective districts are taking data analysis and action. 
 • Strengthening of the district level, State level and referral laboratories for diagnosis of 
epidemic prone diseases in Phase-I  and Phase-II States. 
8.2 The Committee observes that funds allocated during Tenth Plan have remained under- utilised. 
Although quantum of plan allocation was increased considerably, implementing agencies have showed 
their incapacity to benefit from them. As a result, enhanced allocation of Rs. 102.00 crore in 2006-07, the 
last year of the Tenth Plan, had to be brought down  to Rs. 36.86 crore at the RE Stage. The Committee, 
however, finds that actual expenditure reported upto 28th February, 2007 was only Rs. 9.64 crore. 
Provisional expenditure of Rs. 12.97 crore as on 31st March, 2007 also indicates discouraging scenario 
under this programme. 
8.3 While taking note of the progress made so far under the programme, the Committee is 
constrained to observe that during 2005-06, Physical Targets under various components show very 
discouraging results as indicated below: - 
Targets  Achievements 
Setting up of District Surveillance Units 184  Orders issued by State Governments 
  except for Meghalaya 
Laboratory Strengthening 390 districts Lab Equipment Supply under process in 
  206 districts of Phase-I 

Orientation Workshop for Distt. 14  4 Orientation Workshop completed 
Surveillance Officers   
Training for Distt. Surveillance Team 390 Training of 206 Teams 
8.4 During 2006-07, although some improvement has been noticed in the achievement of Physical Targets, 
the most important component, setting up of 35 State Surveillance Units showed very discouraging results. 
Details made available to the Committee indicate that not even one State Surveillance Unit could be set up 
during the year. 
8.5 The Committee notes that Rs.80 crores has b een proposed to be spent in 2007-08 under the 
Programme. Keeping in view the slow pace of implementation of the project during 2005-06 and 2006-07 
and as a result the funds released remaining under- utilized, the Committee would like to emphasise that 
as more than two years have passed since the beginning of this programme, the Department cannot 
continue with the plea that it is too early to expect any results. Th e Committee strongly feels that the 
Department should take all possible measures in coor dination with the State-Machinery so as to ensure 
implementation of the programme as envisaged. 
8.6 Committee’s attention has been drawn by the low level of performance under the most important 
component, i.e. training, so far. The Committee notes that nine Training Institutes were identified to conduct 
training of the State and District Surveillance Teams. It has been informed that training has been completed for 
9 States of Phase-I. Details made av ailable to the Committee indicate that Tamil Nadu is the only State, which 
has achieved the targets set for training. There is cons iderable gap in the target  and achievement level in 
respect of following States as indicated below: 
Phase-I States 
Name of Planned Medical Planned Multi- Planned District 
State Load Officers Load Purpose Load Lab. Tech. 
 MO Trained MPW worker DLT Trained 
    Trained   
Total 11182 9596 66158 34182 824 208 
Karnataka 1925 1755 9819 5050 108 0 
Madhya Pradesh 1918 280 10000 65 180 1 
Maharashtra 2119 1847 11493 3533 140 0 
Kerala 1049 996 6038 1667 56 28 
8.7 With regard to Phase-II States, out of 14 States, tr aining has been completed in 12 States. It has been 
informed that training in all the Phase-II States was likely to be completed by end of 2006. However, 
information made available giving the status of training upto 28.02.2007 under Phase-II States is as foliows:— 
8.8 The Committee notes with regret that such a crucial programme as that of IDSP having very wide 
ramifications is not receiving the required attention of the Department. Priority should have been 
placed on recruiting/training key field-level functionaries i.e., MPWs, PLTs and DLTs in that order and 
positioning them. But from the forgone analysis it is  evident that from both Phase I and II States less 
than half of the required MPWs could be trained.  The Committee apprehends that early detection, 
identification and notification of disease outbreaks would not be possible if these key functionaries are 
not positioned at the earliest. Tr aining of personnel for Phase III St ates, which were targeted to be 
completed in Financial Year 2006-07, has not yet be gun and the Department has made no proper data 
available. 
8.9 The Committee, accordingly, sugges ts that the Department should pursue the matter with the State/UTs 
and redraw targets for this financial year and accordingl y monitor the progre ss of work made in this regard. 
Vigilance and pursuance should be complementarily used to make the States/UTs to make some target oriented 

progress in making the IDSP fully functional. The Co mmittee believes that only then the programme would 
succeed in its objective. 
IX. NATIONAL DRUG DE-ADDICTION CONTROL PROGRAMME  
9.1 The Drug De-addiction Programme of the Ministry was started in 1987-88 with the establishment of 6 
De-addction Centres in Central Institutions viz. AIIMs, New Delhi, Dr. RM L Hospital, New Delhi, Lady 
Hardinge Medical College and Smt. S.K. Hospital, New Delhi, JIMPMER, Pondicherry, PGI, Chandigarh and 
NIMHANS, Bangalore. Ministry of H&FW have so far established 123 Drug De-addiction Centres including 
the above 6 centres and 43 centres in North Eastern States . The details of allocation and utilization of funds 
released under the Drug De-addiction Control Programme is given below:- 
(Rs. in crores) 
Financial Year Budget (RE) Utilization 
2004-05 26 25 
2005-06 55 39.29 
2006-07  66 3.86 
 (expenditure upto September 2006)  
 From the analysis of the above expenditure details of the last two financial years made under Drug De-
addiction Control Programme, the Committee finds that out of Rs.55 crores provided at RE stage in 2005-06 
only 39.5 crores could be utilized, while in 2006-07 ou t of Rs.60 crores allocated at RE a meager Rs. 3.86 
crores could be utilized. 
9.2 The Committee notes that one of the major threat s to adolescent health today is drug-abuse. The 
Committee understands that increasing number of adoles cents are resorting to drugs due to various reasons. 
The Committee further notes that the trend of under u tilization is much too large for the health of the 
Programme itself. With balances amounting to more than  Rs.10 crores during 2005-06, an enhanced allocation 
of Rs. 60 crores was made during 2006-07 against an allocation Rs. 55 crores in 2005-06. The Committee feels 
that the Department has failed to keep a vigilant eye on the way the funds under the Programme have been 
utilized and stay informed of the beneficiaries. This is evident from the fact that the Department has sought 
more time to collect information regarding details of Drug De-addiction cases detected, registered and treated 
during last three years. The Committee does not find th e reply tenable. It is surprised to note that the 
Department has till date not kept any records of th e above information in a systematic manner and for 
providing the same it has sought more time. 
9.3 Further, to the Committee’s query as to how the department plans to spend Rs. 10.00 crores that 
has been allocated under the National Drug De-add iction Control Programme in the B.E. 2007-08, the 
Department’s reply has been evasive and off the ma rk The Committee feels that the Department has 
treated the matter in a cavalier fashion without stating its clear cut plans for the current year. This, the 
Committee feels, is not at all a healthy trend. The Committee suggests that the detail plans as to how the 
Department proposes to spend the allocation this ye ar, the details of expenditu re of the last three year 
and the details of Drug De-addiction cases detected, registered and treated during last three years under 
the Programme may be provided to the Committee as  soon as the same is collected. The Committee 
recommends that a compliance surv ey should also be made so as  to observe how many cases are 
defaulting and/or relapsing into addiction. 
X. REPRODUCTIVE AND CHILD HEALTH PROGRAMME 
10.1 RCH II is the flagship programme under NRHM that provides special attention to Reproductive, Child 
and Maternal Healthcare across the c ountry. It has important components like essential obstetric care which 
includes Institutionalised delivery and skilled birth atte ndance. The objective of the programme is to improve 
the performance of the RCH indicators namely IMR, MMR and TFR. The targets set under 10th Plan and 
under RCH-II Goal (2010) for improving the above indicators are given below:- 

 MMR IMR TFR 
 SRS 1999-01 SRS 2001-03 SRS 2000 SRS 2005 SRS 2000 SRS 
2004 
India 327 301 68 58 3.2 2.9 
10th Plan Goal  <200 <45 <2.3 
(2007)    
RCH 11 Goal (2010) <100 <30 <2.1 
10.2 Under the NRHM, RCH-II commenced on 1st April, 2005 and is being implemented with special focus 
on ten High Focus States including seven EAG States and 8 High Focus NE States with special emphasis on 
rural healthcare. As per the information provided by th e Department in the outcome budget, from 10 States 
(including seven EAG) namely Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jh arkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Uttar 
Pradesh, J and K, Assam and Haryana have not been able to achieve any of the 3 goals of IMR, MMR and 
TFR for 2007 under the 10th Plan. The SRS Report States that during 2004-05 the IMR has remained sticky at 
58. Further analysis of the data reveals that IMR for M. P. (76), Orissa (75), U.P. (73), Rajasthan (68), Assam 
(68), Chhattisgarh (63), Bihar (61) and Haryana (60) remain above the national average of 58. In State/UTs of 
Assam, Rajasthan, U.P., J&K, Delhi, Mizoram and  A and N Islands IMR has shown a rising trend the 
Committee notes with alarm that even Keral  and Pond icherry which are two of the best performers in 
terms of RCH indicators have also registered a rising trend in IMR in 2005 over the figures of 2004.  
10.3 The Committee is anguished to note that despite sufficient funds being poured into RCH 
programme, the achievement in spending the funds for the intended purpose of bringing down the IMR 
during the Tenth Plan remains well short of the set targets. The Committee notes that M.P., 
Chhattisgarh, Orissa, U.P., Rajasthan, Bihar, Assa m have remained as badly performing states for 
years together under RCH-I pr ogramme and continue to do  so under RCH-II also. The 
Committee’s contention is support ed by the NFHS-III survey, which was conducted in 2005-06. A 
comparison between NFHS-II (98-99) and NFHS- III (2005-06) for some indicators indicates 
improvement in overall average. However, State- wise performance reveals a very discouraging 
scenario:- 
State/UT At least Ante-natal Birth assisted Institutional Births 
 check-up  per cent   
 NFHS III NFHS II NFHS III NFHS II NFHS III NFHS II 
 (2005-06) (1998-99) (2005-06) (1998-99) (2005-06) (1998-99) 
All India 50.7 44.2 48.2 42.4 40.7 33.6 
Jharkhand 36.1 24.5 28.7 17.5 19.2 13.9 
M.P. 40.2 27.1 37.1 28.9 29.7 22.0 
Rajasthan 41.2 23.6 43.2 35.8 32.2 21.5 
U.P. 26.3 14.6 29.2 21.8 22.0 15.2 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
36.4 40.9 33.4 31.9 30.8 31.2 
Nagaland 31.6 21.9 25.9 32.8 12.2 12.1 
Uttaranchal 44.8 19.7 41.5 34.6 36.0 20.6 
Bihar 16.9 15.9 30.9 24.8 22.0 14.8 
Assam 36.3 30.9 31.2 21.4 22.7 17.6 

10.4 The Committee observes that although some of the High Focus States have shown considerable 
improvement, the fact remains that they are far below th e national average. The Committee is of the view that 
inspite of very strategic interventions  under the RCH programme made in th e past years, performance level of 
those very States needing maximum attention and getti ng the same too is a cause of concern. The Committee 
believes that ANC, assisted birth and institutional deliveries are key to reduction in IMR 
and MMR in the country. But the gloomy picture as reve aled by the data only spea ks as to what level the 
programme has been able to penetrate into the rural areas of the country and the failure of the objectives 
thereof. 
10.5 The funds for RCH-II programme under NRHM are provided from RCH Flexible Pool. RCH Flexible 
Pool subsumes a number of schemes which include among others: 
 (i) Logistic Improvement 
 (ii) Child Health 
 (iii) Maternal Health 
 (iv) Referral Transport 
 (v) RCH Camps, and 
 (vi) Janani Suraksha Yojana 
 Share of Funds for various components under the Pool are as follows:- 
Components of RCH Flexi-Pool Percentage of fund allocated 
Maternal Health (including Janani Suraksha Yojana) 47 per cent 
Family Planning 17 per cent 
Institutional strengthening 10 per cent 
New initiatives 7 per cent 
BCC/IEC 6 per cent 
Programme Management 6 per cent 
Child Health 1  per cent 
Urban and Tribal Health 4 per cent (3 + 1) 
 The Committee has been informed fu rther that during 2006-07, Rs. 17 05.72 crores BE which was later 
revised to Rs. 1419.72 crores at RE was allocated und er RCH Flexible Pool while only Rs. 1156.74 crores 
were stated to be spent upto 28th February 2007. The State-wise utilization figures confirms the disturbing 
trend in respect of States like Bihar (5.04 per cent),  Jharkhand (27.35  per cent), Rajasthan (38.83 per cent), 
Uttaranchal (29.95 per cent), Assam (29.77  per cent), Meghalaya (23.45 per cent), Tripura (9.20 per cent), 
West Bengal (10.60 per cent), and Maharashtra (21.07 per cent). 
10.6 The Committee notes that out of the expenditure of  Rs. 229.51 crore upto December, 2006 on Maternal 
Health (47 per cent of total expenditure under RCH Flexib le Pool), expenditure on Janani Suraksha Yojana is 
Rs. 116.64 crore contributing to 24 per cent of total expenditure on RCH and approximately 51 per cent of 
total expenditure on Maternal Health. Andhra Pradesh, with  Rs. 22.64 crore contributes to 25 per cent of total 
expenditure on Janani Suraksha Yojana. 
10.7 The Committee is disturbed to note that the trend of  under-utilization of funds continues into the second 
year of NRHM. From the data of unspent balan ces (uptill 31st December, 2006) as provided by the 
Department it is evident that although funds have duly been released to the States expenditure during the first 
two quarters have been miserable, specially in Bihar (Rs.135.33 crores), U.P (Rs.143.69 crores), M.P (Rs. 
75.66 crores), Rajasthan (Rs. 67.04 crores) among the High Focus States other than NE States. Among the 

High Focus NE states, Assam (Rs.79.49 crores), Meghalay a (Rs. 8.13 crores), Nagaland  (Rs. 5.44 crores), 
Tripura (Rs. 12.42 crores) are also way behind their targets. The expenditure figures for Non-High Focus 
States/UTs are also no better with balances (cumulativ e) for the last two years standing at Rs 536.18 crores, 
with Maharashtra (Rs. 103.84 crores), West Bengal (Rs. 108.43 crores) and Delhi showing large unspent 
balances. 
10.8 The Committee observes that huge unspent balances have begun to pile up in the High Focus states. Not 
only is piling up of funds in the first two quarters an un healthy trend, it also reflects that during the following 
quarters, in a haste to complete the targets speedy work  may compromise the quality of the deliverables. This, 
in the opinion of the Committee may affect the achievem ents of various targets set by the Department under 
NRHM. 
10.9 The Committee has noted that under the Janani Suraksha Yojana an amount of Rs.1400/- is given as 
incentive for institutional deliveries in EAG States and Rs. 700/- in other States/UTs. However, this incentive 
is not given beyond two children. The Committee would like to point out the main objective of this scheme is 
to keep a check on IMR and MMR and to encourage In stitutional Delivery leading to safe Motherhood. 
Therefore, ceiling of two-child norm should not be made applicable under this Scheme. The Committee 
accordingly recommends that necessary changes may be made. The Committee is  of the view that institutional 
deliveries will go a long way in reducing MMR, thereby realizing the goal of Janani Suraksha Yojana. The 
Committee, therefore, further recommen ds that the Department initiate st eps towards upgrading the maternity 
hospital across the country. 
Mission Flexible Pool 
10.10 The Mission Flexible Pool also funds certain activities under NRHM. Thes e activities under Mission 
Flexible include among others:- 
 • Selection/Training of ASHA in 18 High-focus States 
 • Corpus Grant of Rs. 5 lakh/1 Lakh for District/Sub-District Rogi Kalyan Samiti 
 • Generic Drug Supply 
 • Annual Maintenance Grants of Rs. 10,000 to  every Sub-Centre, Rs. 50,000 to PHC and Rs. 1 
Lakh to each CHC. 
 • Ambulances for PHCs/ CHCs/ Distt. Hospitals 
 • Untied grants for local health action -SC- Rs. 10,000, PHC- Rs. 25,000, CHC- Rs. 50,000. 
10.11 There was an expenditure of Rs. 1491.71 crore as on 28.02.07 against an allocation of Rs. 2247.13 crore 
in 2006-07. As per the information made available to the Committee, total expenditure reported upto 
December, 2006 was Rs. 220.40 crores. The Committee is constrained to observe that maximum 
utilisation-taking place only in the last quarter of  the financial year. The Co mmittee would like to be 
apprised about the exact release of funds u nder different components to the High Focus 
States. The Committee was given to understand that element of flexibility was the underlying feature of 
this Innovative Programme. The idea being, allowing the states to devi se local specific components so as 
to provide the maximum benefit to the targeted beneficiaries. The Committee however feels that due 
publicity has not been given to this important co mponent. In the absence of ground functionaries 
remaining unaware of such beneficiary features, the very basis of conceptualizing  them gets defeated. 
The Committee would therefore urge upon the Departme nt to give maximum publicity to such notable 
and beneficial features of the Programme. 
10.12 Committee’s attention is drawn to huge unspent ba lances for schemes under infrastructure maintenance 
which stands out at a whopping Rs. 38522.92 crores as on 28th February, 2007, with Maharashtra having the 
maximum balance of Rs. 16,666.20 crores followed by Chhattisgarh (Rs. 6403.09 crores), Assam (Rs. 4778.94 
crores), Andhra Pradesh (Rs. 3135.20 crores), J&K (Rs 2205.03 crores) and NCT of Delhi (Rs. 2077.48 
crores). The Committee is, therefore, compelled to observ e that the Department’s claims of active 
monitoring is perhaps not functioning at its best in th e High Focus States. It furt her states the fact that 

the trend of unspent balances lying with these states  before the launch of NRHM  continuing even after 
the Mission has been operational, is a worrisome feat ure which, if not corrected early, is sure to push 
back the Mission objectives. 
10.13 The Committee recommends that a quarterly rele ase of funds should also be considered by the 
Department only after obtaining a green signal based on  the Monitoring Committee’s report on review of 
progress of work done by the High Focus  and NE Stat es. Also, a mechanism for holding at least one meeting 
per month with the District authoritie s should be put in place by the Stat es to address and solve the problems 
that arise from time to time and threaten the progress of work in these States. This, the 
Committee believes, would go a long way in sorting the grey areas and removing the bottlenecks. 
Immunization Programmes 
10.14 Routine Immunization Programme is a very important component of RCH-II project within NRHM, 
under which vaccines are provided to  infants and pregnant women for co ntrolling six vaccine preventable 
diseases. On a query as to what are the targets the of various immunization initiatives set by the Department 
and how far the Department has been able to achieve th em, the Department informed  that as per the District 
level Household Survey of 2002-03, the immunization level of coverage in the country is 47.6 per cent. This is 
to be raised to a minimum of 75.5 for each of the antigens i.e. BCG, DPT, OPV and Measles. The District 
Level Household (DLH) survey has not been conducted af ter 2002-03, therefore, the exact progress in respect 
to the fixed target can be available only when the ne xt DLH survey will be conducted. However, as per the 
NGHS survey, the vaccine-wise reported coverage of 2005-06 is as under: 
 BCG- 78.2 per cent 
 DPT- 55.3 per cent 
 OPV (3 drops)- 78.2 per cent and 
 Measles- 58.8 per cent 
 The Committee would like to be informed of the reasons behind not conduct ing the District Level 
Household (DLH) Survey since 2002-03 and also the prospective date/year for conducting the next DLH 
Survey. 
10.15 The Committee would however, like to draw the attention towards the following comparative data in 
respect of some States concerning Routine Immunization figures:- 
State NFHS-II NFHS-III 
 (1998-99) (2005-06) 
1 2 3 
All India 42.0 43.5 
Andhra Pradesh 58.7 46.0 
Gujarat 53.0 45.2 
Karnataka 60.0 55.0 
Kerala 79.7 75.3 
Maharashtra 78.4 58.8 
Punjab 72.1 60.1 
Tamil Nadu 88.8 80.8 
Delhi 69.8 63.2 
Goa 82.6 78.6 
Himachal Pradesh 83.4 74.2 

Mizoram 59.6 46.4 
10.16 The Committee notes with dismay that no signif icant improvement in full immunization figures across 
the country has been visible although there is a gap of seven years between NFHS-II and  NFHS-III. Out of the 
29 states, most of them show improvements in the immunization levels but the instances of the above-
mentioned states show a very miserly progress. The Co mmittee notes with extreme dissatisfaction that in case 
of Maharashtra, Gujarat and Punjab, the NFHS-III immunization figures show “regression” than progress over 
the NFHS-II figure, while U.P, Bihar, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh hover between 20 
per cent and 35 per cent of full immunization levels. This, the Committee observes, is not only discouraging 
but at the same time disturbing too. 
10.17 It has been reported that unfilled vacancie s of ANMs, District Immunization Officers and 
inadequate infrastructure in the States are the two main  factors responsible for this state of affairs. It is 
not understood as to why inspite of Central funds  being available, required functionaries and 
infrastructure are not there. The Committee can only conclude that cumbersome recruitment/ 
procurement procedure may be the main hurdle in the effective implementation of this programme. The 
Committee is disturbed to note that BE allocation is being reduced at the RE stage every year and even 
the reduced allocation has remained underutilised. 
10.18 The Pulse Polio Programme started in 1995-96, a nd has since made appreciable progress in containing 
and controlling the dreaded disease. Only 66 cases were reported in 2005 against 1600 cases in 2002. 
However, 2006-07 was a bad year with 674 cases of Polio reported with maximum cases from U.P (546) 
followed by Bihar (61), Haryana (19) and Uttarakhand (13). The Department has informed that the reasons for 
weak performance by some of the States are due to unfilled vacancies of Auxiliary Nurses, Midwives (ANMs), 
District Immunization Officer etc. in th e States, and inadequate infrastructure. The Committee’s fear is 
substantiated by the data provided by the UNICEF  survey conducted in 2006 which reports that OPV-
3rd Dose coverage is 61.3 per cent only as against  78.2 per cent coverage reported under NFHS-III, as 
given in the annual report 2006-07. 
10.19 The Department has also informed the Committee th at on the basis of recommendations of India Expert 
Advisory Group (IEAG) on Polio in its meeting held on 11-12 December, 2006 and on the assumption that the 
zero transmission may be achieved by 2008, the strategies for 2007-08 have been planned. According to this 
plan, there will be 5 Sub-National Immunization Days (SNI D) in the high risk States/Districts, additional mop 
up round in 12 high risk districts in Bihar and 20 high risk districts in Uttar Pradesh between April and 
December, 2007. Two nation-wide rounds are planned for January and February, 2008. The Committee 
would like to be informed of the achievements made in respect of zero transmission of Polio targeted for 
2008 by the Department. 
10.20 The Committee recommends that the Department should fix targets for filling up of the vacant posts for 
each poorly performing State and seek monthly reports on the progress made in this regard by the latter. It 
further suggests that the Department should hold review  meetings with the highest level State authorities and 
discuss on a regular basis the obstacles/obstructions faced by the states and suggest ways to overcome them in 
order to ensure that progress in filling up vacancies takes place in a time bound manner. 
10.21 It has been reported that two instances of pres ence of foreign body in the trivalent Oral Polio Vaccine 
were found from Punjab and Haryana. As a follow-up action, the Ministry has asked M/s. Bharat 
Immunological and Biological Corporation Ltd., Bulundshahar to first get Good Manufacturing (GMP) 
Certificate from the Drug Controller. The Committee would like to kn ow whether this exercise was 
completed before award of order to the above- mentioned company. It would further like to 
know whether orders have been placed to any other company for providing oral polio vaccines. 
10.22 The Committee’s attention is drawn to another serious matter, that of unspent balances under RIP and 
PPP. As per the information provided in the outcome budget 2006-07, the figures for utilization under the 
above programmes is given below:— 

(Rs. in crores) 
Name of Scheme 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 
 BE AE BE RE AE BE 
     (as on 28.02.07)  
RIP 507.00 162.58 345.00 280.00 170.23 317.00 
PPP 877.00 918.07 1049.00 1051.72 875.09 1341.00 
 The Committee notes that under Routine Immunization Programme, Rs. 344.42 crores during 2005-06 
and Rs. 109.77 during 2006-07 uptill 28th February, 2007 remained unspent while under Pulse Polio 
Programme Rs. 41.07 crores of excess spending in 2005-06 was made and Rs. 176.63 crores during 2006-07 
remained unspent (uptill 28.02.07). 
10.23 The Committee is distressed to note that fund s lie under-utilized under  such important health 
programmes aimed at benefiting women and children. It fears that during 2007-08 also, the funds sought under 
the programmes lie unutilized like in the previous ye ar. The Committee infers from the above analysis that 
unspent balances lying with the states can only mean  that key activities under the above programme are not 
being properly implemented and that there are deficienci es in the monitoring system. The Committee observes 
that trying to implement a National level progr amme with the help of inadequate health 
infrastructure/personnel of the states and over these re sources the Department seems to have the least control, 
is sure to jeopardize with the quality of deliverables and objective of the Mission. Lack of proper 
implementing agents at field-level co mpounded with lack of authority that keeps a vigil on the progress of 
work at the ground level would not help in an y significant achievements. The committee therefore 
recommends that the department take up the matter of f illing up the vacant posts of the healthcare personnel, 
under every programme, with states on a priority basis. 
 Major Deliverable Output s expected in 2007-08:- 
10.24 The Department has set the following ta rgets in respect of infrastructure for 2007-08:- 
Infrastructure:- 
 • Strengthen 35,000 sub-centres 
 • Upgrade 750 CHCs to FRU 
 • Facility survey in 1177 CHCs 
 • Operationalise 1500 PHCs on 24x7 basis 
Institutional Structure:- 
 • Select 50,000 ASHAs and train 1,50,000 ASHAs 
 • 1.5 lakh ASHAs to be given drug kits 
 • RKS to be set up in 110 district hospitals and 30,000 SD hospitals, CHC, PHC 
 • Training to be imparted to at least 20 per cent medical officers 
 • Operationalization of 318 Mobile Medical Units 
 The Committee notes that in the light of the past targets-achievements mismatch in respect of the 
infrastructure under NRHM, the above targets are very  ambitious and will require herculean efforts on 
the part of the Department as well as the State Governments to materialize them. The Committee would 
like the Department to regularly monitor the progress of the above targets so that a reasonable degree of 
success is achieved in meeting them. 
 

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 The Committee is dismayed to note that the Depart ment at the initial stage has failed to project its 
budgetary requirements in an effective and prudent way, which is evident from the fact that the 
Planning Commission has requested the Department to indica te the schemes/programmes where the 
allocation is insufficient. The Committee would like the Department to process the matter with a sense 
of urgency so that the stumbling blocks in the allo cation of sufficient funds for a crucial sector like 
health are removed. (Para 2.4) 
 The Committee, however, is not inclined to agree, simply because the detailed analysis of trend of 
allocation of plan funds and utilisation thereof during 2006-07 reveals a different position. The 
Committee would like to draw the attention of the De partment towards the fact that BE allocation of  
Rs. 11,305.00 crore had to be brought down to Rs. 10,000.00 crore at the RE stage. As per the 
information available with the Committee, actual ex penditure figure as on the 15th February, 2007 in 
the Heath sector were Rs. 1435.78 crore against RE allocation of Rs. 2048.92 crore. Under NRHM, there 
was utilisation of Rs. 6047.30 crore as on 28th February, 2007 against RE provision of Rs. 7951.08 crore. 
Even if total provisional expenditu re of  Rs. 9295.55 crore as on 31st March, 2007 turns out to be the 
final utilisation status, the fact remains that about  Rs. 2000.00 crore were spent in the latter half of the 
last quarter of the financial year. During 2005-06 al so, allocated funds remained under-utilised. Against 
a total plan allocation of  Rs. 9332.00 crore, final expenditure figures were Rs. 7926.55 crore. (Para 2.5) 
 Committee has been commenting on this discouraging utilizatio n trend year after year. However, 
there does not seem to be any noticeable improvement . This is all the more di sturbing as there was no 
significant enhancement in the plan allocation for 2006-07 when compared with 2005-06. Against this 
backdrop, total plan allocation of Rs. 13,875.00 crore  for the entire health s ector including NRHM for 
2007-08 is at an enhanced level when compared wi th the previous year. The Committee is well aware 
that health sector is the most vital sector for a va st country like ours where  majority of population 
remains deprived of even the minimum medical fac ilities. The Committee has been advocating higher 
allocation for health and family welfare and would continue to do the same this year too. (Para 2.6) 
 The Committee is fully aware that health being a state subject, Central funds are to be spent 
through the agencies of State  Govern ments alone. It is also true that  absorption capacity varies from 
State to State. The Committee would like to emphasize once again that the Centre has to play a more 
pro-active role. The main priority for the Depart ment should be to extensively monitor both the 
implementation of all the schemes and functioning of  those premier institutions/ hospitals, constantly 
showing unsatisfactory performanc e level. The Committee wonders whether any exercise has been 
initiated so far so as to analyse their status duri ng the Tenth Plan. The Comm ittee strongly feels that 
with the Eleventh Plan al ready begun, such an analysis should be made, if not done already, without 
further delay, followed by remedial measures. (Para 2.7) 
 The Committee views with serious concern very discouraging utilization status of major disease 
control programmes like National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme, National Cancer Control 
Programme, National Mental Health Programme, Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme, Rural 
Family Welfare Services, State Training Centres, Ro utine Immunisation, Institutes/Organisations like 
Central Institute of Psychiatry, Ranchi, JIPMER, Po ndicherry, National T.B. Institute, Bangalore, 
Central Drug Standard and Contro l Organisation, Drug Control, De velopment of Nursing Sciences, 
Health Sector Disaster Preparedness and Management , Health Education. Performance under/of these 
schemes/institutions needs to be monitored all the more as their plan allocation for 2007-08 shows 
considerable enhancement. (Para 2.8) 
 The Committee in this connection would like to ob serve that this unhealth y practice of diverting 
plan funds to meet the expenditure on the non-plan si de has been continuing for the last several years. 
The Committee in its 16th Report on Demands for Grants 2006-07 had recommended to curb this trend. 

The Committee, however, observes  that the trend has remained unabated during the financial year 
2006-07 also. In this regard, the response of the Department that it needs to do an internal exercise to 
look into the non-plan budget of institutions like AIIMS and draw a strategy is a much delayed but very 
much required action. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should complete 
whatever exercise proposed to ensure that adeq uate funds are available to meet the non-plan 
expenditure and unhealthy practice of diversion of funds from plan to non-plan is brought to an end.  
  (Para 2.10) 
 The Committee in this connection would also like to observe that non-plan expenditure in respect 
of Health and Family Welfare Sector has a slightly different character and impact as compared to non-
plan expenditure of other organizations and Departments. A large chunk of  non-plan funds of the 
Department is spent on consumables, drugs and ma intenance of hospitals, machinery and equipment. 
Therefore, insufficient provision for meeting such vital recurring expenditure year after year will 
eventually paralyse the running of various Hospit als and Institutions. The Committee expects that the 
above mentioned concern would be shared and appr eciated by the Government while allocating non-
plan funds for the Department. (Para 2.11) 
 Committee has been viewing with serious concern the pendency of Utilisation Certificates under 
various schemes of the Department. Committee was informed that the Department has been pursuing 
the clearance of pending Utilisation Certificates wi th State  Governments. However, the problem of 
pending UCs continues unabated. The Committee is co nstrained to observe that as on 1st March, 2007, 
there were as many as 2810 outstanding UCs amountin g to Rs. 1184.05 crore for the grants released 
upto 2004-05. The Committee finds that problem is  more acute under Family Welfare Sector having 
outstanding UCs for Rs. 716.12 crore. By the close of  2006-07, total number of UCs which have become 
due is 4153 amounting to Rs. 5417.34 crores. (Para 2.12) 
 The Committee was given to understand that und er the revised Finance Mi nistry guidelines, UCs 
become due after 12 months instead of earlier period  of 18 months. The Committee is of the view that 
under the new dispensation, this problem is bound to aggravate. It seems that the Department has so far 
failed to take any effective corrective measure in spite of the Committee rep eatedly making pointed 
references in this direction. The Committee does not have much fa ith in the Programme Management 
Units being set up at State level and District level and deputing of managerial experts to the States by 
the Department. Committee has been compelled to make such an observation in view of a serious 
shortfall in the accounting/audit system of the Mini stry itself, pointed out in the CAG Report on the 
functioning of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the period 2002-05 (Report No. 12 of 
2006). It has been noticed that audit of all the central and centrally sponsored health programmes, PSUs 
under the Department and autonomous bodies like AIIMS, PGI, Chandigarh are kept out of jurisdiction 
of Internal Audit. CAG was of th e opinion that in view of huge amount of funds involved, such a 
procedure defeated the very purpose of having an  Internal Audit Wing of  the Ministry. Committee 
views the proposed audit of autonomous bodies from 2007-08 by the Internal Audit Wing of the 
Ministry too late an exercise in the day. Committee finds the statemen t of the Department all the more 
disturbing that internal audit of all central and centrally sponsored schemes would require the 
Internal Audit Wing to be strengthened considerably. This clearly shows that there is not much hope of 
situation improving in the near fu ture. The Committee would, therefore, urge upon the Department to 
set its own House in order first without any further delay. The Committee also feels that vigorous efforts 
need to be made on priority basis to clear th e UCs pending for the last three decades or so. 
Simultaneously, the Department should pursue with the States showin g maximum pendency, if 
necessary at the highest level. (Para 2.13) 
 The Committee takes note of the concerns regarding submission of utilization certificates within 
12 months, as required by the General Financial Rule s, as amended in 2005. The Committee is inclined 
to agree to the Department’s view that given the nature of decentralizatio n and the mandate of the 
NRHM, the issue of submission of Utilization Certificates within a period of  12 months of the end of the 

Financial Year needs serious re -examination. The Committee theref ore recommends that applicability 
of revised GFR in the context of Health and Fa mily Welfare Programme may be reviewed and the 
Ministry of Finance may be approached in this regard. (Para 2.17) 
Part-A  
(HEALTH SECTOR) 
III. CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME (CGHS)  
 The Committee observes that a number of init iatives are proposed for CGHS which include 
delegation of enhanced financial powers to Minist ries and within CGHS, Local Advisory Committees at 
dispensary level, compilation of manual of rules and procedure, reduction in waiting time for 
registration and delivery of medicines. Welcomin g such initiatives, the Committee would like to 
emphasize that all the proposed in itiatives should be implemented in a time-bound manner with the 
ultimate objective of making CGHS more patient-friendly. (Para 3.3) 
 The Committee observes that the target of Com puterisation of all CGHS dispensaries in Delhi 
during 2006-07 could not be accomplis hed. Only the Pilot Project of co mputerization of dispensaries in 
Laxmi Nagar, North Avenue, South Avenue and Parl iament House Annexe could be completed. On a 
specific query in this regard, Department has also submitted that the original programme of completion 
of computerization by the end of 2006-07 could not be achieved due to resource constraints as funds 
could be allocated only during February, 2007. Sanction order for the computerisation of dispensaries in 
Delhi has been conveyed to National Informatics Ce ntre and it is expected that the computerisation 
process would be completed by 17th August, 2007. (Para 3.4) 
 The Committee would like to point that BE allocation of Rs. 35.00 crore was enhanced to Rs. 
39.57 crore at the RE stage. Provisional expenditure as on 31st March, 2007 as informed by the 
Department is Rs. 34.42 crore, leaving a gap of Rs. 5.00 crore. Hence the reply of the Department that 
due to resource constraints, funds could be alloca ted only during February , 2007 has raised more 
queries than it has answered. The Committee feels that delay must have occurred due to prolonged 
procedure involved while sanctioning a new project. The Commit tee, accordingly, recommends that 
computerization of CGHS dispensaries in Delhi should be completed by the revised target date of 17th 
August, 2007. (Para 3.5) 
 The Committee is constrained to observe that implementation of SIU Report has been kept 
postponed on one pretext or the other year after year. Upto last year, information on existing strength in 
the dispensaries was being sought from CGHS un its. Norms have changed since then and now SIU 
Report is to be implemented on the basis of norm s based on attendance data for 2005. The Committee, 
however, observes that details from all Addition al/ Joint Directors are yet to be received. The 
Committee apprehends that if there is a further delay in getting the average attendance details for the 
year 2005 as proposed by the Department, the data so received will again not match the ground realities 
which will again delay the implementation of the SIU Report. The Committee, therefore, recommends to 
the Department to complete all the procedural forma lities, paving the way for early implementation of 
the SIU Report. (Para 3.7) 
 Committee observes that follow- up action on a number of recomm endations made in the Report 
given by M/s. Ferguson and Company, sponsored  by European Union has been taken by the 
Department. Committee would like to comment on some  aspects of action initiated by the Department. 
The reduction in the number of functional dispensaries to half, due to work-load being negligible during 
emergency hours cannot be considered a wise move . The Committee is not in clined to agree with the 
contention that in an emergency, the beneficiary can take treatment at any private hospital, whether 
empanelled or not. The Committee is of the strong view that for small emergencies, the patient should 
depend on the nearest dispensary which would be providin g free of cost treatment. It would be better if 

emergency service is made available in more and more dispensaries, specially in view of quite a few 
dispensaries, at least in Delhi, moving in buildings of their own. (Para 3.8) 
 Committee has also been voicing its concern in this  regard since long. The Committee is surprised 
to note that the Department continues to indicate that operating dispensaries in two shifts was not 
possible due to resistance by the Employee s’ Association. The Committee expresses  its strong 
reservation to this line of argument. The Committee reiterates that the Department has to play a more 
pro-active role in such matters. A beginning can be easily made by starting two shifts in a few 
dispensaries as a test case. After some time, an analys is about patient visits to dispensary can be easily 
made and a final decision taken in the end. (Para 3.9) 
 The Committee observes that si nce on the basis of its earlier recommendations, Ministry of 
Finance has already lifted the ban on filling up of technical posts, the responsibility for expediting the 
filling up of vacancies lies now on the Departme nt and any further delay in the matter cannot be 
justified. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to expedite the filling up of 
vacancies at the earliest. (Para 3.11) 
 The Department has informed that in respect of  non technical posts, the Screening Committee in 
its meeting held on December, 2006, has cleared 136 posts in CGHS for being filled up and action to fill 
them up has been initiated. The Committee would like to be informed about the progress made in this 
regard. (Para 3.12) 
 The Committee was given to understand that one significant change has been made in the new 
system. Now empanelment of hospitals/diagnostic centers is a continuous process, option being available 
to join the CGHS at any time. The Committee would, however, like to point out that there are inherent 
drawbacks under such a system. Beneficiaries will have  to keep a track of empanelled hospitals which is 
not always possible under such a flexible system, clerical errors may sometime occur, putting the 
patients to inconvenience. The Co mmittee, therefore, feels that it would be appropriate if a minimum 
period of empanelment is also la id down for private hospitals/diagnostic centres and labs, as done 
earlier. (Para 3.14) 
 The Committee has another very strong obje ction in respect of the new procedure. The 
Committee is of the firm opinion that inclusion in th e list of empanelled hospitals/diagnostic centres on 
the basis of lowest quotations cannot be considered to be based on a sound principle. The Committee 
feels that the mandate of the Government is to provide a fullsome and comprehensive medical care 
facility to the beneficiaries and not a piece-meal one. Private hospitals/diagnostic centres have been 
recognized throughout the countr y for specialist treatment/diagno sis, providing access of quality 
medical care to the beneficiaries on the one hand and relieving the Government Hospitals of the extra 
patient load on the other. Moreov er, there cannot be two opinions th at in almost al l the Government 
Hospitals, the infrastructure and other facilities are already overstretched. The Committee thinks that 
provision of private recognized hospitals and diagnostic centres should be logical and essential extension 
of the existing system and to hold that it is an additional facility is not in sync with the current buzzword 
of Public-Private-Partnership. (Para 3.15) 
 The Committee feels that literally speaking, though the Department cannot force private 
hospitals/diagnostic centres to be empanelled, it can indirectly compel the quality private 
hospitals/diagnostic centre to opt ou t of empanelment, if the rates quo ted are very low. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the rates should be fixed realistically, taking into acco unt the market 
realities so as to encourage quality private hospitals and diagnostic centres to join the system. 
  (Para 3.16) 
IV. SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI  

 The Committee also observes that  trend of plan allocation and utilization thereof during the 
Tenth Plan period shows that someho w the Hospital has failed to keep pace with the allocation of plan 
funds. (Para 4.2) 
 The Committee has been observin g that even though the patient load in the Hospital has been 
showing a steady increase over the years, the bed st rength of 1531 of the Hospital, continues to remain 
unchanged. Appreciating that the ever-increasing patient load has al ready overstretched the Hospital 
services and infrastucture, the Committee has been st rongly advocating the need for increase in the bed 
strength of the Hospital. The Committee is happy to  note that a proposal for the redevelopment of 
Safdarjung Hospital has been prepared and submitted to Planning Commission for approval. The 
estimated cost of the whole project is Rs. 1400 crores to be spread over 15 years (within Three Five Year 
Plans). The first phase of this red evelopment plan is estimated to cost Rs.700 crores. The Committee 
was, however, informed that the Pl anning Commission has refused to grant ‘in- principle’ approval for 
the proposal. (Para 4.4) 
 The Committee observes that the Hospital caters not only to the ordinary citizens of Delhi with 
meager means but also of the neighbouring states. The basic idea not to disturb the existing services and 
simultaneously go for redevelopment needs to be impl emented without any deviation and dilution in the 
original plan deserves to be implemented in the real sense. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends to the Department to approach the Pl anning Commission once again to convince the 
Commission of the necessity of  according approval for the  redevelopment plan of the Hospital as 
originally envisaged. At the same time, the Depa rtment should make ever y conceivable effort to 
complete the redevelopment plan with in the targeted date and also with out cost escalation to the extent 
possible. The Committee would appreciate if th e Department puts in place a joint monitoring 
Committee of Department and Hospital authorities so as to tie all the loose ends and work towards the 
redevelopment of the Safdurjung Hospital. The Committee also recommends that the required funds are 
made available for the project. (Para 4.7) 
 In view of the discouraging level of achievement, the Committee would like to observe that merely 
defining targets without showing any achievement does not make out a very convincing case for 
allocation of additional funds. The Committee in this connection would like to emphasise that non-
optimum utilization of planned funds would not help the hospital’s cause of getting an enhanced 
allocation for future expansion or  development, thereby impacting adversely the health care delivery 
system and depriving a substantially large number of p oor patients of basic health care facilities. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department, in coordination with th e hospital authorities, 
should closely monitor the ongoing projects from the beginning of financial year 2007-08 itself. Only 
then, the Department can make out a case for additional funds at the RE stage. (Para 4.9) 
V. DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPTIAL, NEW DELHI  
 The Committee is constrained to note the sub-optimal utilization of plan funds in respect of the 
Hospital and that too for each of the last five year s. The Committee would like to observe that such low 
level of utilization of plan funds will do no good to  the Department’s projection  of higher allocation for 
the Hospital. The Committee is unable to reconcile itse lf with the fact that th ough the under-utilization 
of the allocated funds has accentuated over the years, no attempt se ems to have been made to arrest the 
trend. The Committee hopes that in the light of as surance given by the Secretary before the Committee 
that each Central Institute will be having a separa te Monitoring Committee, things will improve and 
ongoing projects will be completed as envisaged in a time-bound manner. (Para 5.4) 
 The Committee would like to point out that this project has been going on for the last so many 
years. Committee’s experience has been that even after completion of construction work, process of 
obtaining of clearance from all the concerned authorities is a protracted and complicated exercise which 
is likely to take another one-two years. The Committe e would, therefore, imp ress upon the Department 
to expedite the completion of all required formalities in coordination with the hospital authorities. At the 

same time, the recruitment process for getting t echnical and non-technical manpower and obtaining 
required equipments should also begin at the earliest. (Para 5.7) 
 The Committee would like to be apprised about the present status of this project. 
  (Para 5.8) 
VI. DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA PG INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND 
RESEARCH 
 The Committee is constrained to observe that funds for the proposed PG Institute has been 
drastically reduced mid-way through its completion. Since the Institute is near completion, cutting the 
source of funds at this final stage defies logic. The Committee observes that it is a well known fact that 
our country needs specialist doctors and that too in large numbers. To meet this burgeoning need the 
actual operationalization of this Institute is urgently required. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that allocation for the Institute be enhanced suitably. (Para 6.2) 
VII. KALAWATI SARAN CHILDREN HOSPITAL  
 The year-wise allocation and actual expenditure for the last five years is given below:—  
(Rs. in crores) 
2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 Upto 
15.2.07 
BE AE BE AE BE AE BE AE BE RE  
6.00 5.97 6.00 5.77 8.00 7.00 8.62 6.99 10.94 9.82 7.57 
          (Para 7.2) 
 The Committee is constrained to observe that out of the proposed allocation of Rs. 140.00 crores 
for the Tenth Plan, actual plan allocation was only Rs. 39.56 crores and actual expenditure was even 
lesser i.e. Rs. 34.47 crores. The Committee fails to understand as to how with this shoe-string budget, the 
Hospital can be made a premier paediatric care inst itute in the country. The Committee would like to 
observe that institutions of excellence are not built overnight and mere rhetoric, not backed by concrete 
action on the ground, is unlikely to realize the dream of making the Hospital an institution of excellence 
in paediatric treatment. Finance being the most important component of any development activity, must 
be utilized to the fullest in a time-bound manner. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the 
Department to make every effort for optimum and j udicious utilization of Rs. 8.00 crore provided for 
2007-08 so that the objective of making the Hospital an Institution of Excellence in paediatric treatment 
is realized. (Para 7.3) 
VIII. INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH (ICMR), NEW DELHI  
 The Committee has noted that the ICMR’s record in utilizing the allocated funds has been 
impressive and except for 2004-05, the ICMR’s ut ilization has either matched the allocated funds or 
exceeded the same. In view of the above, the Committee is at a loss to understand the basis for non-
provision of required provision to ICMR for 2007-08. The Committee feels that due to the reduction in 
allocation for this premier institut e of the country in the field of me dical research, not only a number of 
ongoing research projects will be affected adversely but it will  also be very difficult to undertake any 
new project. This, in the opinion of the Committee w ill prove to be detrimental for the medical research 
in the country, specially in the fi ercely competitive global scenario. The Committee is disturbed to note 
that its strong recommendation for higher allocation of funds for the Council for 2006-07 made last year 
which was based on the Performance Appraisal Board’s expert advocacy, failed to get additional funds 
released at the RE stage. The Committee, however, reiterates that the Department should vigorously 
pursue the matter with the Planning Commission to meet the requirements of medical research in the 
country and release adequate funds for this purpose. The Committee is of the firm view that funding for 
medical research should not be looked at the same level as funding for routine schemes/matters. Overall 
cut in the plan funds should not be made applicable to one and all. (Para 8.3) 

 The Committee is happy to note that ICMR ha s undertaken a number of successful and path-
breaking studies on subjects like Viral Encephalitis. H. Pylori infection, improving the utilization of 
emergency contraception through paramedics, multi-centric study on genomics of male infertility, 
assessment of prevalence of osteoporosis in adult population etc. (Para 8.4) 
 The Committee in this connection would like to obs erve that what is needed for the upliftment of 
research in the country is more funds and greater au tonomy and lesser control. In this connection, the 
Committee would like to recall the observations ma de by the five member Performance Appraisal 
Board having two international an d three national experts. This Board was constituted by the 
Department in 2005 and had made valuable sugges tions about changes required in the authority, 
autonomy, financial support and restructuring. In th e opinion of the Committe e, bureaucratization of 
the research institutes is actual ly part of the problem and not th e remedy. The Committee feels that 
need of hour is to make massive investments in medical R and D and not to fasten it with a red tape. The 
Committee would like to be apprised about follow-up action, if any, initiated by the Department on 
PAB’s recommendations. (Para 8.5) 
IX. NATIONAL CANCER CONTROL PROGRAMME  
 The Committee is aware that cancer is a dreade d disease which can be cured, if detected early. 
The Committee is of the considered view that upgradation of existing  RCCs into Centres of Excellence 
and setting up of more RCCs, specially in unders erved and unserved areas is a step in the right 
direction. The Committee would, however, like to advise the Department to ensure that the targets set in 
this regard are invariably met. The Committee, theref ore, recommends to the De partment to inform it 
about the progress made in the matter of upgradation of existing RCCs into Centres of Excellence and 
setting up of more Regional Cancer Centres, specially in remote and backward areas of the country. 
  (Para 9.2) 
 The Committee fails to comprehend the level of ut ilization as by 15th Fe bruary, 2007, only Rs. 
16.88 crore could be spent. The Committee views wi th concern the provisional expenditure of Rs. 42.98 
crore as on 31st March, 2007 with Rs. 8.70 crore earmarked for N-E region remaining almost unutilized.  
  (Para 9.3) 
 The Committee observes that an enhanced allocation of Rs. 180.00 crore has been made for 2007-
08 and targets have been set up under different co mponents of the programme. The Committee would 
like to emphasise that every effort should be made  to take the maximum benefit of the new scheme of 
Upgradation of existing RCCs into Centres of Excellence. All the existing 25 RCCs should be upgraded 
in a time-bound manner during the Eleventh Plan. The Committee also takes note of the fact that RCCs 
have been made the nodal agencies for implementati on of the NGO Scheme of ‘Health Camps’ with a 
view to provide guidance to the NGOs and also monitoring the implementation of the scheme. The 
Committee appreciates this initiative. (Para 9.5) 
 The Committee also observes that the proposal of the Ministry for conducting the evaluation of 
the National Cancer Control Programme is at the final stage. The Committee is of the view that with the 
survey of cancer-prone areas, the programme in it s modified form would be implemented in a more 
effective manner. The Committee would appreciate if this survey is conducted at the earliest. (Para 9.6) 
 The Committee therefore recommend s that funds proposed for 2006-07 be released to the 
Institute, if not released so far. The Committe e also recommends that the details about the funds 
earmarked for the same for 2007-08 be supplied to the Committee. (Para 9.7) 
X. LADY HARDING MEDICAL COLLEGE AND SMT. SUCHETA KRIPALANI HOSPITAL,  
NEW DELHI 
 The Committee expresses its serious concern, both at the reduced allocation for the year 2007-08 
and low level of utilization of allocated funds, continuously, for each year of the Tenth Five Year Plan.  
  (Para 10.3) 

 The Committee would, accordingly, recommend that the Department should make an analysis of 
the reasons for lesser allocation th an planned and even lesser utilization of allocated funds during the 
Tenth Plan. Corrective measures should be taken afterwards. The Committee would also impress upon 
the Department to take up with the Planning Commission the case of additional funds for the Institution 
at the earliest. In the absence of early action, the Committ ee has every reason to be lieve that the target 
of completion of First Phase of Comprehensive Redevelopment Plan of LHMC and its associated 
hospital to be completed by 2009-10 will not be completed. (Para 10.4) 
XI. ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS), NEW DELHI  
 The Committee is constrained to observe that up to 15th February, 2007 only half of the Plan 
allocation could be utilised. As per the latest details  made available to the Committee, by the end of 31st 
March, 2007, provisional expenditure was Rs. 160.07 crore. (Para 11.2) 
 The Committee is disturbed by such a level of  communication gap between the premier Institute 
of the country and the administrative Ministry. The Committee is of the firm view that if things are 
allowed to continue in th is manner any further, it would not be  in the interest of the country and its 
people. The Committee can only emphasise that cons cious efforts need to be made to break this 
deadlock by all concerned and consequent return of the normalcy. (Para 11.5) 
 Taking note of the status of various projects undertaken during the Tenth Plan and augmentation 
of existing health care services at the Instit ute and the projects planne d for Eleventh Plan, the 
Committee recommends that required funds be made available to the Institute for 2007-08. It should not 
be forgotten that AIIMS is the mo st prestigious Institute of the co untry and its status should be 
maintained, present constraints notwithstanding. (Para 11.7) 
 The Committee had recommended la st year that there was a need fo r setting up of a Burns Unit 
in the AIIMS. The Committee is, however, surprised to note that so far it has not been possible to place 
the proposal before the Governing Body of the Instit ute. The Committee expresses its reservation to the 
casual approach adopted by the Department to  a recommendation made  by a Parliamentary 
Committee. The Committee would appreciate if the proposal for Burns Unit is placed before the 
Governing Body without any further delay. The Committee  strongly feels that with the proposed 
expansion of various facilities at the Institute, the proposal for Burns Unit can also easily be handled.  
  (Para 11.8) 
XII. POST GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION  AND RESEARCH (PGIMER), 
CHANDIGARH 
 The Committee is, however, surprised to observe that the following projects which were to be 
completed during the Tenth Plan are yet to be completed. 
Projects in hand Scheduled date of                   Remarks 
 Completion  
Advanced Cardiac Centre June, 2006 Work will be completed by June-July, 2007 
Setting up of additional  December, 20 06 Work will be completed by Dec., 2007 
66KV sub-stations   
Advanced Trauma Centre December, 2007 Work will be completed by April, 2009  
 The Committee expresses it serious concern over the delay in operationalization of the above 
projects and resultant escalation in the original es timates. The Committee recommends that all efforts 
be made to meet the new deadlines in respect of each project to avoid further cost overrun. (Para 12.2) 
 The Committee notes that a number of new projects are to be taken up during the Eleventh Plan. 
The Committee is of the view that all these proposed projects should be closely monitored from the first 

year itself so as to avoid the experience of the Tenth Plan. It would be better if the procedural 
formalities are streamlined to the extent possible. (Para 12.3) 
 The Committee has been observing that a large num ber of teaching and non-teaching posts have 
been lying vacant in the Institute since long. Latest position made available to the Committee is not very 
encouraging. The Committee finds that out of 209 vacant posts of Professor/Additional 
Professor/Associate Professor/Assistant Professor as on 1st March, 2007, only 122 posts could be filled 
up during 2006-07. With regard to posts of Lecturer/Supervisor/Clinical Inspector etc., the position is no 
better. Out of 26 posts, only 4 could be filled up during the year. Commi ttee does not foresee any 
noticeable improvement in the near future as the re cruitment rules for these po sts are required to be 
amended. The Committee notes that ou t of Engineering Cadre posts numbering 130, only 10 were filled 
up during 2006-07. The Committee is disturbed most by the status of non-teaching posts lying vacant 
since 2001-02. The Committee has been informed that the Screening Committee has recently cleared 131 
posts out of 328 posts and abolished the remaining 197 posts on 1st December, 2006. It took the 
Screening Committee five years to take this decisi on. The Committee can well im agine the time likely to 
be taken in the filling up of 131 non-teaching post s, finally cleared by the Screening Committee. The 
Committee strongly feel s that such a situation should not be allowed to continue any further in any 
teaching medical institute. It is all the more disturbi ng if a premier institute like PGI, Chandigarh is 
allowed to continuously suffer in such a manner for long. (Para 12.4) 
XIII. JAWAHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POST GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION  AND 
RESEARCH, (JIPMER), PONDICHERRY 
  The Committee would like to point out that the trend of utilization clearly indicates that all is not 
well with this premier institute. (Para 13.2) 
 The Committee strongly feels that  there is an urgent need for having a separate Monitoring 
Committee for this Institute if it is to be strengthened in the real sense. (Para 13.3) 
 The Committee is constrained to observe that a significant part of funds meant for the purchase 
of machinery and equipment could not be utilized. The Committee in this connection recommends to the 
Department to complete the necessary formalitie s and procure the equipments without any further 
delay. The Committee further recommends to the Department to inform about the progress made in this 
regard. (Para 13.4) 
 The Committee expresses its profound anguish th at in a premier Central Government teaching 
institute, nearly fifty percent teaching posts are lying vacant. This, in the opinion of the Committee must 
be impacting adversely the standard of teaching in the Institute. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
to the Department to take necessary action on an urgent basis to fill them up at the earliest. The 
Committee also recommends to the Department to inform about the progress made in this regard.  
  (Para 13.6) 
XIV. NORTH EASTERN INDIRA GANDHI REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF HEALTH  AND 
MEDICAL SCIENCES (NEIGRIHMS), SHILLONG 
 The Committee observes that required funds are be ing made available for this Institute. However, 
utilization level has so far failed to pick up the right momentum. During 2005-06, out of Rs. 126.51 
crores provided, only Rs. 30.00 crores could be uti lized. Inspite of similar provision being made during 
2006-07, allocation had to be redu ced at the RE stage and actual expenditure incurred as on 15th 
February, 2007 was only Rs. 62.84 crores. The level of allocation made for 2007-08 i.e. Rs. 42.50 crores 
clearly indicates that position is not likely to improve during  2007-08 also. (Para 14.3) 
 The Committee expresses its concern at the delay in  actual operationaization of the Institute. The 
Committee can understand the constraints faced by the Department in filling up the vacant posts due to 
shortage of specialists in NE Region, but the delay in procurement of equipment is beyond its 
comprehension. The Committee would also observe th at NE Region already lags behind in terms of 
health care and other infrastructure facilities as compared to other regions of the country. Delay in 

operationalization of the Institute amounts to denying quality and tertiary health care facilities to the 
people of the region which is very important strategically. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the 
Department to make more vigorous efforts towards making the Institute fully functional at the earliest. 
The Committee also advises the Department to purs ue the matter with DG,AFMS for an expeditious 
decision in the matter. (Para 14.5) 
XV. PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHYA SURAKSHA YOJNA (PMSSY)  
 The Committee has observed that the funding pattern for the 13 Medical Institutions to be 
upgraded is Rs.100 crores as central assistance and Rs. 20 crores to be contributed by the State 
Governments. However, incase of Sri Venkateshwara Institute of Medical Sciences, Tirupati there is an 
exception. Fifty percent of the cost  of upgradation has to be borne by  the T.T.D. Trust. The Committee 
feels that similar funding pattern as applicable to  other Medical Institutions under the PMSSY scheme 
should also be applicable in case of Sri Venkateshwara Institute of Medical Sciences, Tirupati. A view 
may also be taken for additional grants to this Institute due to heavy influx of patients/pilgrims.(Para 15.4) 
 Proposed timelines clearly indicate that it would take at least another plan period before these six 
AIIMS like Institutions would start functioning in th e real sense. That would be made possible only if 
the prescribed action plan is stri ctly adhered to. The Committee does not have much hope as it has 
taken a whole plan period to con ceptualize these two projects. Another plan period has started and the 
projects continue to remain at the planning stage. (Para 15.6) 
 In view of dismal past record in funds utilization the Committee has serious doubts as to whether 
the current allocation of Rs. 150.00 crores would be utilized fully fo r the intended purpose during the 
financial year 2007-08. The Committee feels that since a number of agencies at the State and Central 
level are involved, there might be lack of co-ord ination between different agencies. The Committee 
therefore, recommends that steps be taken to establish greater sy nergy between different agencies 
involved so that this project of national importance is not delayed any further. (Para 15.7) 
 The Committee notes that regarding upgradation of 13 existing Government Medical Colleges, 
the respective State Governments not only have to make a capital contribution of Rs. 20.00 crores, 
appoint the specialist manpower and specialist staff but they will al so have to bear the recurring 
expenditure for running the upgraded facilities including manpower maintenance and replacement of 
upgraded facilities. However, give n the precarious financial condition of most of the States, financial 
viability of such colleges is an important issue that needs to be sorted out before hand. The Committee is 
not sure whether the Central Government has cons ulted the States concerned on this aspect. The 
Committee would appreciate if the Department furnishes its observation on this issue at the earliest.  
  (Para 15.9) 
 The Committee strongly feels that with such an Institute coming up near Delhi, pressure on 
already over-stretched services of AIIMS would somewhat get reduced. (Para 15.10) 
XVI. DEVELOPMENT OF NURSING SERVICES  
 The Committee can only conclude that there are inherent problems at all levels otherwise such a 
vital component of health sector would not have remained neglected in this manner. 
  (Para 16.2) 
 The Committee tried to make an attempt to an alyse the performance level of various physical 
targets set for development of nursing  services during 2006-07. The Comm ittee is surprised to note that 
identical physical targets have been set for 2006-07 and 2007-08. Some activity has been reported during 
2006-07. The Committee, therefore, is disturbed by the candid statement of the Department that 
utilization of funds depended upon  the proposals received from the inst itutions and also submission of 
utilization certific ates. The Committee hopes that the Depart ment must have taken some corrective 
measures by now. If not, the Committee would caution the Department to initiate remedial action at the 
earliest, otherwise Eleventh Plan would repeat the slow progress as done in the Tenth Plan. (Para 16.3) 

 The Committee observes that against the projecte d requirement of Rs. 29.00 crores, a provision of 
only Rs. 15.00 crores has been proposed. While recommending higher allocation, the Committee would 
impress upon the Department to take every conceiva ble measure so as to ensu re optimum and judicious 
utilization of allocated funds. (Para 16.4) 
 The Committee would appreciate if all the State Governments are informed accordingly. 
  (Para 16.5) 
 The Committee notes that a proposal seeking Rs. 4,000 crores for Nursing Sector in Eleventh Plan 
has been made to the Planning Commission. The Commit tee strongly feels that th ere is an urgent need 
for expansion of nursing services , simply because there is a big gap between the requirement and 
availability of nursing personnel in the country. With the National Rural Health Mission taking off in 
the country, requirement of nurses has increased manifold. The Committee was given to understand 
that under the existing provisions, some problems w ere being faced in the setting up of Nursing Schools. 
The Committee recommends that both  the existing provisions and pro cedure for setting up of Nursing 
Schools may be received and corrective measures taken, wherever required. The goal should be to set up 
the required number of Nursing Sc hools without compromising the quality factor. The Committee was 
given to understand that relaxation in the norms fr om five to three beds fo r each trainee nurse as 
suggested by it has worked well. The Committee woul d like to point out that in view of shortage of 
teachers in this sector, it would be better if the present eligibility conditions for Nursing teachers be 
reviewed and revised to the extent possible. (Para 16.7) 
XVII. NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME 
 The Committee would like to be ap prised of the achievements made vis-a-vis the targets fixed 
under National Paediatric AIDS Initiative. (Para 17.6) 
 The Committee recommends the Department to in form about the specific steps taken and the 
progress made in this regard. (Para 17.7) 
 The Committee is deeply disturbed to note that all the High Risk Groups have not yet been 
covered under the Target Intervention Project. The situation is worse in th e case of MSM where the 
percentage coverage is only 6 per cent and Male Sex Workers in respect of whom either the Department 
do not have the figures of estimated coverage or they are simply not covered  at all. The Committee, 
therefore feels that much ground ne eds to covered by the Department so  far as targeted intervention is 
concerned. The Committee, therefore, recommends to th e Department to double its efforts to bridge the 
gap between estimated size and estimated coverage. (Para 17.9) 
 The Committee is appreciative of  the fact that use of condoms and its awareness as a preventive 
weapon to fight AIDS has increased over the years. The Committee, however, notes that use of condoms 
amongst those who had sex with any non-regular sex part ner is still 49.7 per cent which is considered to 
be low. Since having many sex partners or changing  sex partners frequently increases the vulnerability 
towards AIDS, the Committee recommends to the Department to ta ke effective steps to increase the use 
of condom amongst this group. (Para 17.11) 
 The Committee recommends to the Department to finalize the modalities of  the proposed  multi-
sectoral response and inform the Committee accordingly. (Para 17.12) 
 The Committee appreciates that the Department has prioritised a number of activities for 
financial year 2007-08. The Commit tee is convinced that if tangib le progress is achieved towards 
implementation of the targets set, National AIDS  Control Programme will achieve significant sucess. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Depa rtment to inform it about the progress made 
towards achieving the targets set. (Para 17.14) 
 The Committee feels that it is highly insensitiv e and in-human to delay th e availability of second 
line of drugs to the patients till the figure of th e first line of ART treatment has 1 lakh patients. The 
present policy is sure to aggrava te the sufferings of already traumatized patients. The Committee, 

therefore, recommends to the Department to take some  initiative towards star ting the second line of 
treatment so that the sufferings of drug resistant patients can be lessened to some extent. (Para 17.16) 
 The Committee would like to be informed about the actual pr ogress made in the matter of 
appointing Counselors. (Para 17.17) 
 The Department in reply to a question has su bmitted that at present 107 ART Centres are 
operational which will be increased to 250 centres by the end of Eleventh Plan. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the year-wise target set fo r establishing ART Centres during the Plan period and 
also the progress made in this regard during 2007-08. (Para 17.18) 
 The Committee is constrained to note that agai nst a provision of Rs. 705.67 crores, actual 
expenditure reported upto 15th February, 2007 was only Rs. 578.65 crores. The Committee finds that 
optimum utilization of funds have not happened in resp ect of even a single of th e five components of the 
NACO. Such low utilization of funds in the opinion of the Committee will not help in arresting the 
spread of this dreaded disease in this country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Department immediately initiate prompt action towa rds removing the bottleneck s coming in the way of 
optimal utilization of allocated funds and apprise the specific action taken, to it. (Para 17.19) 
 The Committee is more disturbed by the level of achievement under some of the very crucial 
physical targets during 2006-07 as indicated below:- 
Component (2006-07) Target Achievement 
Modernization of District 39 — 
Level Blood Banks   
STD Clinics 200 68 
Targeted Interventions 350 126 
New School to be covered SAEP School  68,000 17,000 
AIDS Education Programme   
 W h a t  i s  m o v e  w o r r i s o m e  i s  t h a t  u n d e r  a c h i e vement was reported under these targets during 
2005-06 also. The Committee notes that similar targ ets have been set under different components for 
2007-08 also. The Committee is constrained to observe th at the target of setting up STD clinics, targeted 
interventions, and new schools to be covered und er school AIDS Control Programme have fallen 
woefully short of the targets. The Committee feels that setting up of  only 68 STD cl inics against the 
target of 200, and making only 126 targeted inte rventions against the target of 350 will have grave 
future implications. Similarly meetin g only a quarter of target of covering 68,000 schools under the 
school AIDS programme amounts to denying the mu ch required sex education to a large number of 
adolescent pupils which would have helped them in  receiving knowledge abou t safe sex practices. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to make all efforts to achieve the previous years 
targets. (Para 17.20) 
XVIII. NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME (NMHP) 
 The Committee is constrained to note that agai nst this reduced provision, expenditure reported 
upto 15th February, 2007 was only Rs. 24.01 crores. Committee had been given to  understand that 
provisional expenditure as on 31st  March, 2007 would be  Rs. 35.93 crores. The Committee takes a 
serious view of this trend of utilization of funds during 2006-07. The Committee urges upon the 
Department to take all possible measures to ensure optimum utilization of  Rs. 70.00 crores proposed for 
2007-08. Feed-back made available to the Committee clearly indicates that inspite of special efforts 
being made on the part of the Department for expediti ng utilization certificates  for grants released to 
various States, not much progress could be made . The Committee views wi th serious concern the 
achievements reported under upgradation of mental  hospitals also. Out of the 10 targeted mental 
hospitals, funds could be released only for mental hospital at Indore. (Para 18.3) 

 The Committee notes that in a meeting held on  12th February, 2007 re presentatives of State 
Governments were requested to furnish new proposals with all requisite information under the 
programme. The Committee feels that this is a step in  the right direction and such interactions should 
continue to be held in future also. (Para 18.4) 
 The Committee would like to be informed about the manner in which it proposes to meet these 
challenges during the Eleventh Pl an. The Committee would also like to  be informed about the specific 
steps taken to bridge the manpower gap in the field of psychiatry in general and DMHP in particular, to 
harness NGOs help in this field and to train general practitioners in Mental Health Programme.(Para 18.6) 
XIX. PUBLIC HEALTH LABORATORIES  
 The Committee expresses its displeasure over the fa ct that in a premier scientific institution like 
NIB, the newly constructed animal house  and lab co uld not be made operationa l due to defects in the 
construction of the building. The Committee feels that this delay would definitely have a damaging effect 
on the quality and quantity of various biological products that are manufactured in the Institute. The 
Committee, therefore, exho rts the Department with all powers at its command to make the lab  and 
animal house functional at the earliest. (Para 19.2) 
XX. ASSISTANCE FOR CAPACITY BUILDING FOR TRAUMA CENTRES 
 The Committee can only hope that in the remaining cases, UCs must have been submitted in time 
by the respective State Gov ernments. Pendency of such a large numb er of UCs is in the opinion of the 
Committee a poor reflection on the sy stem of monitoring by the Department. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends to the Department to take remedial meas ures in this regard. The Committee is also of the 
view that there is a need to make an assessment of all the State hospitals to which  funds have been 
released for strengthening of Trauma  Centre so far. Such an exercise is required for identifying the 
problem areas/constraints being faced under the scheme for strengthening the same for future 
implementation. (Para 20.2) 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Depa rtment should take an  initiative in this 
crucial area of health care and persuade all such States to take the benefit of this scheme. (Para 20.3) 
XXI. ASSISTANCE FOR CAPACITY BUILDING PROJECT FOR FOOD AND DRUGS  
 The Committee notes that as regular posts could not be created, efforts are being made to fill 
them up on contractual basis. The Committee recommends the Department to inform about the 
progress made in this regard. (Para 21.3) 
 The Committee notes that under the head office  expenses, a provision of Rs. 254.10 lakhs was 
made for BE 2006-07 which was reduced substantially to Rs. 100.09 crores at the RE stage. The 
Committee further notes that total sanctioned expenditure till 15th March, 2007 is abysmally low at Rs. 
10.29 lakh and final estimates is Rs. 37.58 lakh. The Committee is constrained to note the Department’s 
reply that even after a lot of efforts, expenditure at the State level did not pick up causing a saving of Rs. 
62.51 lakhs. The Committee in this connection recommends to the Department to find out the reasons 
for sub optimum utilization at the States level and in form of the same . The Committee also notes that 
an amount of Rs. 2.79 crores has been earmarke d for office expenses for the year 2007-08. The 
Committee recommends to the Department  to inform it about the steps to be taken by the Department 
to ensure optimum utilization of the funds. (Para 21.4) 
XXII. TOBACCO CONTROL PROGRAMME 
 The Committee recommends to the Department to  inform about the progress with respect to 
setting up of a Tobacco Regulatory Authority and labs in various States. (Para 22.2) 
XXIII. NEW SCHEMES 
 The Committee notes that under the National  Programme for Prevention and Control of 
Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke, the Pl anning Commission grante d in principle approval 

to launch the programme on a pilot basis and a sum of  Rs. 5.00 crores was allocated for the same during 
2006-07. The Committee is, however, constrained to ob serve that not a single penny was utilized during 
2006-07 in respect of the programme. Giving reasons, the Department has submitted that the details of 
programme are being worked out and the programme is  likely to be launched shortly. The Department 
has also informed that a comprehe nsive National Programme covering the country as a whole is being 
prepared for seeking the approval of competent authorities. (Para 23.2) 
 The Committee is dismayed to note that the Department announced this programme without 
finalizing the specific modalities resulting in no expe nditure being incurred during 2006-07 and delay in 
the launch of the programme on a pilot basis. The Committee is convinced that had the Department 
acted with a sense of urgency, the funds could h ave been put to better and productive use. The 
Committee recommend to the Department to complete the formalities to launch the Programme at the 
earliest. (Para 23.3) 
 The Committee has been consistently recomme nding that two programmes namely Diabetes 
Control Programme and Cardiovascular Disease Cont rol Programme including Control of Rheumatic 
Health Diseases need to be launched on a priority basis. It has taken almost two plan periods for the 
Department to formulate a composite programme on the control of above-mentioned diseases. However, 
from the details made available to the Committee, it is not known wh ether there would by any focus on 
Rheumatic Fever. The Committee under stands that the final components of the programme are still 
being worked out. The Committee, accordingly, reiter ates that Rheumatic Fever should also be covered 
under the National Programme for Control of Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke. (Para 23.4) 
 The Committee has also been informed that for th e Eleventh Five Year Plan, a proposal has been 
sent to Planning Commission for allocation of Rs. 1680.00 crores for National Programme for Control of 
Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases an d Stroke (NPCDCS). In view of the high vulnerability of Indian 
people to cardiovascular diseases and diabetes due to various reasons and their potential to pose serious 
challenges to Indian society and its economy, the Committee supports the Department’s proposal for the 
NPCDCS and recommends that the Department should implement the programme as a matter of 
priority. (Para 23.5) 
 The Committee is unhappy to note that the Depa rtment has failed to finalize the key components 
of the National Programme of Deafness during the wh ole of the year 2006-07, which also happens to be 
the year of launch of this programme. As a resu lt, like other newly launch ed programmes, dismal 
utilization of funds has occurred in respect of this  p r o g r a m m e  a l s o .  I n  v i e w  o f  t h e  l a c k  o f  p r i o r  
preparation done by the Department before the launch  of the programme, and fixing targets in respect 
thereof, the Committee is left with no other option  but to believe the programme would remain in the 
proposal stage for quite some ti me. The Committee, therefore, reco mmends to the Department to 
finalize the key components of the programme at the ea rliest and then strive to achieve the targets fixed 
for 2007-08 in a progressive manner. (Para 23.6) 
 In view of the past experience the Committee would reiterate once again that new schemes should 
be announced only after ground work is completed. The Committee would appreciate if new schemes 
announced for 2007-08 are taken in the right earnest from the first day itself. (Para 23.7) 
XIV. VACANCIES IN CHS CADRE 
 The Committee is constrained to observe that th e Department during the year 2006 was able to 
fill only 230 vacancies of the 1133 vacancies of vari ous sub cadres of CHS. With the lifting of ban on 
technical posts by Ministry of Finance, the Depart ment should have been able to fill most of the 
vacancies during the year 2006. Th e Committee recommends to the Depa rtment to inform it about the 
steps taken by it to fill up each sub-cadre separa tely along with the reasons for not filling up all 
vacancies. The Committee also recommends to the Department to fill up the vacancies at the earliest.  
  (Para 24.2) 

 On being asked to explain the factors responsible for such a dismal positi on, the representative of 
the Department informed the Committee that all the vacancies in CHS have been requisitioned from the 
UPSC. However in case of specialists, due to shortage in certain faculties, posts had to be advertised and 
re-advertised over the last one year. Ultimately, only a few candidates have joined. The position was 
more serious on the GDMO side. Inspite of advert ising for the last three years and recommendation 
from UPSC being received, joining rate has been very poor. The Committee was informed that the 
verification process of antecedents of selected candi dates used to take eight to sixteen months time. 
Cabinet Secretariat was approa ched in this regard. As a result, it has been decided that under CHS, on 
the recommendations of UPSC, medical examination of  the candidates is co nducted and provisional 
letter of appointment given to the successful candidates straight  away without any verification. The 
other problem area highlighted was undue long time taken in conducting of combined medical services 
examination. Every candidate sitting for this exam also applies for admi ssion in post graduate courses. 
On getting admission, they are permitted to join on a later date after completion  of their post graduate 
studies. As a result, the present joining rate is below 40 per cent. Inspite of having enhanced panel of 
candidates, problem continues to be the same. The Committee understands that efforts are being made 
to resolve this genuine problem by giving incentive s for joining in difficult areas. The Committee hopes 
that with such initiatives, things would improve in 2007. (Para 24.3) 
XXV. CAG REPORT 
 The Committee would like to be apprised ab out the corrective measur es initiated by the 
Department so as to ensure proper utilization of allocated funds in this regard. (Para 25.3) 
 The Committee would like to be apprised about th e remedial measures, if any, initiated by the 
Department. (Para 25.5) 
 The Committee would like to unders tand the reasons for physical verification of National Medical 
Library not being conducted for the last twenty year s. The Committee also expresses its serious concern 
on physical verification of CGHS not being conducted since 1995. The Committee would appreciate if 
steps were initiated to fulfil this basic requirement at the earliest. (Para 25.7) 
 The Committee views with serious concern, Rs. 67.90 crore for the period upto 20.03.04 as 
outstanding towards advances given to the National  Procurement and Supply Agencies. The Committee 
would like to be apprised about the status of advances outstanding from 20.04.05 onwards. (Para 25.9) 
XXVI. MISCELLANEOUS 
 The Committee, therefore, is of the firm view th at along with upgradation of State Government 
Hospitals, it is high time that Go vernment should take some initiative in providing assistance to such 
Hospitals which are attached with Medical Colleges a nd other district level hospitals. A beginning can 
perhaps be made by providing assistance to the hospital attached to the G.R. Medical College, Gwalior.  
  (Para 26.1) 
 The Committee welcomes the initiative of the Depa rtment to provide funds for the upgradation of 
State Medical Colleges. In this context, the Committe e would also like to point out that the majority of 
the district hospitals are also in a very bad sh ape and need financial assistance. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that beside s allocating money for upgradation of State Medical Colleges, the 
Department also initiate steps to provide maintenan ce grants to the districts hospitals, to the extent 
possible. (Para 26.2) 
 Committee would appreciate if, funds are released to  this Medical College for setting up of Stem 
Pathology Lab. (Para 26.3) 
 The Committee views with serious concern the exis ting skewed distribution of medical colleges in 
the country. The Committee strongly feels that it is high time that the Department adopt a more pro-
active role in the setting up of medical colleges in uncovered areas. The Committee accordingly 
recommends that the Department finalize with fair amount of promptitude its policy on offering 

incentives for removal of regional imbalance in the development of medical colleges in the country. The 
Committee has also observed that there is a shortage of teaching staff in Medical Colleges. Standards of 
Medical Colleges are going down. To meet the shortage  of staff, the Committee strongly feels that the 
present age limit of 65 years may be relaxed. (Para 26.6) 
 The Committee feels that the sum of Rs. 25,000 is perhaps too little a sum to provide any 
meaningful assistance to individual s suffering from life threatening diseases. The Committee also feels 
that since 1996, when the ceiling of Rs. 25,000 wa s laid down, the cost of  treatment has increased 
substantially. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should increase the ceiling 
limit of Rs. 25,000 suitably. (Para 26.7) 
PART - B  
NATIONAL RURAL HEALTH MISSION (NRHM) 
AND  
FAMILY WELFARE PROGRAMMES 
II. INFRASTRUCTURE STRENTHENING 
 The Committee notes with disappointment the pr ogress of work in establishing the required 
number of SCs, PHCs and CHCs in the country as per 2001 population norms. Performance level of the 
High Focus States, where the need is the maximum, compels the Commit tee to conclude that inspite of 
every possible effort made so far at every level, gr ound realities are very di sturbing. Total failure of 
vulnerable States in establishing all categories of targeted Centres during the Tenth Plan needs serious 
and immediate action on the part of all concerned. Th is is all the more required as one Plan period is 
over and another has begun. The  shortfall in the health units have continued from one Plan period to 
another without necessary steps being initiated by the Department in establishing these healthcare units. 
The Committee has made several recommendations and observations on the nece ssity of bridging the 
gap by establishing the required SCs, PHCs and CH Cs. However, they seem to have made no visible 
impact. The Committee feels that by the time the Department wakes up for filling the shortfall, 
requirement for more health  units would surely manifest with growing population in the country. The 
Committee recommends that the Department should initiate immediate corrective measures after 
making an analysis of problem areas encountered by the States during the Tenth Plan. (Para 2.4) 
 The Committee would like to caution the Departme nt that if the discoura ging performance in the 
matter of establishing SCs, PHCs and CHCs is allowed to persist, the objective of the Mission to provide 
affordable, accessible, accountable and effective he althcare delivery, especially to the poor and 
vulnerable sections of the society will remain a distan t dream. If need be, the matter may accordingly be 
taken up at the highest level in the under performing States. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the underlying causes and the initiatives taken by the Department to find a solution to the problem.  
  (Para 2.5) 
 The Committee is not aware whether any correct ive measures have been initiated by the 
Department so that all the Sub-Centres PHCs and CHCs set up so far become fully functional. The 
Committee is of the firm view that with such a poor status of buildings of all the centres, in different 
States, urgent steps are required to be taken. The Committee observes that there is no shortage of 
Central funds. Problem lies in their timely reaching the implementing agencies and utilisation capacity 
of these agencies. The Committee would accordingly, recommend that this crucial aspect of healthcare 
services for our most needy segment of population should be given due attention. (Para 2.7) 
 The Committee is happy to note th at the Ministry has set a deadline for the upgradation of CHCs 
to IPHS. The Committee notes that no report has ye t been received from Bihar, Jharkhand, U.P., M.P., 
Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Punjab, J andK, Manipur, Arunachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, 
Gujarat, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Delhi, Chandigarh, A andN Islands, Pondicherry etc., although, as per 
the information provided by the Department, IPHS Facility Survey has been completed in 1554 CHCs 

during 2006-07. The Committee advises the Department to be vigilant about meeting the deadline and 
take all necessary measures towards this end. (Para 2.8) 
ASHA 
 The Committee expresses its utter dissatisfaction with the progress in the recruitment, training 
and posting of ASHAs across the country. Delay due to  non-selection, and posting of ASHA is surely 
going to affect the activities that the NRHM has earmarked for ASHA. The point that the Committee 
would like to raise at this juncture is that despite the Department’s claim of laying special emphasis on 
the High Focus and 8 North Eastern States, situation concerning these States seems to have made no 
improvement. The Committee would like  to observe that the training is the most critical component of 
ASHA and if such huge mismatch in the selection and training targets of ASHAs are allowed to persist, 
it will not only undermine the quality health care delivery to the rural poor, but also, widen the gap 
between rural and urban India. The Committee, the refore, recommends that the Department hold a 
meeting with the 10 High Focus States and 8 High Focus NE States Health Ministers with a view to 
ironing out the difficulties faced by them in selection and training of ASHAs. (Para 2.13) 
Shortfall in the required manpower in Rural Health Services 
 The Committee is disturbed to note that shorta ge of manpower more or less persists in all 
States/UTs. As on March 2006, the overall shortfall (which excludes the existing surplus in some of the 
States) in the posts of ANM was 10.9 per cent of the total requirement. In case of Lady Health Visitors 
(LHVs), the shortfall was 26.9 per cent and that of Health Assistant Male was 32.5 per cent. For doctors 
at PHCs, there was a shortfall of 9.7 per cent of the total requirement. Even out of the sanctioned posts, 
a significant percentage of posts are vacant at all the levels. For example, about 8.1 per cent of the 
sanctioned posts of ANMs were vacant as compared to about 31 per cent of the sanctioned posts of 
MPW (M). At PHCs, about 14 per cent of the sanction ed posts of LHV, 24.7 per cent of Male Health 
Assistant and 20.8 per cent of the sanctioned posts of doctors were vacant. The Committee believes that 
ANMs/LHVs/MPW (F) are grassroot-level health func tionaries who are entrusted great responsibilities  
concerning IEC, awareness building, identification of diseases/cases of serious health hazards and 
carrying basic but vital primary heal thcare to the doorsteps of the peop le in rural areas. Vacancies and 
shortfall in their numbers speak of the improper programme implementation process leading to 
apathetic outcome reflected by the health indicators. (Para 2.14) 
Mobile Medical Units (MMUs) 
 What makes it noteworthy of mention is the fact that these 318 districts are distributed among 18 
states only and among which names of the bigger states like Bihar, Jharkhand, M.P, Maharashtra, U.P 
find no mention. Since funds for Mobile Medical Units are disbursed as per the proposals received from 
them, the Committee infers that no proposals have been  received from these states. If that be so, then 
the Committee would urge the Depart ment to take up the matter with the defaulting States to submit 
the proposals at the earliest, so that MMUs can be provided with all districts. (Para 2.19) 
III. NATIONAL VECTOR BORNE DISEASE CONTROL PROGRAMME (NVBDCP)  
 The Committee fails to understand the reasons due to which inspite of funds being made 
available, implementing agencies have failed to make optimum utilisation thereof.  (Para 3.3) 
 The Committee has also observed that physical ta rgets set under various co mponents of different 
vector-borne disease covered under the Programme during 2006-07 show unde r achievement. Similar 
Targets have been set for 2007-08 also. The Committee  would like to point out that with an enhanced 
provision of Rs. 400.00 crore being made for 2007-08 which marks the beginning of Eleventh Plan, it is 
all the more necessary that corrective measures were taken by the Department. If such an action is yet 
to be taken, the Committee would urge upon the Department to do so at the earliest. (Para 3.4) 
Malaria 

 The Committee welcomes the initiative taken by  the Department to release funds directly to 
Health Societies and monitor quarterly utilization of  funds and hopes that such a move would remove a 
major constraint faced by the State authorities in  combating malaria. The Committee would like this 
facility to be extended to other malaria endemic St ates. The Committee would also like the Department 
to put in place a mechanism to assess the impact of this measure over a period of one year and apprise 
the Committee of the outcome.  (Para 3.8) 
 The Committee is distressed to note that except  for 2005, even the minimum target of 10 per cent 
of ABER has not been achieved in any of the year s of the Tenth Plan. The Co mmittee has been given to 
understand that the ABER which measures surveillance rate has remained below the national minimum 
average of 10 per cent in all NE states, except  Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh. The Committee 
reiterates its observation made in  the 16th report that the basic exercise of identification of  suspected 
cases of malaria is not being carried out and hence actual figures relating to malaria cases and deaths 
are not being projected. (Para 3.10) 
 The Committee is also disturbed to note that th ere is acute shortage of Male Health Workers, the 
main functionary of the Programme. The following de tails in respect of most crucial States are self-
revealing;- 
States Required Sanctioned In position 
Arunachal Pradesh 376 23 23 
Assam 5109 638 320 
Orissa 5927 4911 3392 
W. Bengal 10356 8126 5603  
 The Committee is of the opinion that in the absence of key functionaries, surveillance and 
treatment of Malaria cases would continue to suffer . The Committee is constrained to observe that if 
this state of affairs is allowed to continue, the goal of reduction in mortality on account of malaria by 50  
per cent by 2010 and efficient morbidity control, as set in the National Health Policy (2002) would be 
dented to a great extent. The Comm ittee therefore, strongly recomme nds that the Department devise 
means of improving ABER in consultation with mala ria endemic NE states so that the above-mentioned 
problems are overcome at the earliest. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the measures 
taken by the Department in this regard. (Para 3.12) 
Kala-Azar 
 The Committee does not entirely agree with the Department’s contention that intensive 
surveillance has resulted in registering increased number of cases. The Comm ittee draws the attention 
to the fact that from 2004 onwards, the cases detected and the number of deaths reported both have 
increased. The Committee is not co nvinced that the initiatives taken by the Government to contain the 
disease have been effective enough . The Department has informed that a Patient Coding Scheme is yet 
to be implemented to facilitate tracking of all pati ents to the village and individual household. The 
Committee hopes that introducing such a measure wo uld surely help in not only identification of 
existing cases but also reveal the true picture as to whether new cases are on the increase. (Para 3.14) 
 Existence of such balances that too in the most endemic States only confirms the apprehensions of 
the Committee that the programme implementation is  not proceeding as per th e plans and the targeted 
beneficiaries are being left out from getting th e benefits. Therefore, th e Committee advises the 
Department to make extensive efforts so as to ensure that the released funds are utilized in time.(Para 3.15) 
Japanese Encephalitis 
 The Committee has been given to understand that  till 31st December, 2007, the number of cases 
reported and resultant deaths have shown a sign ificant decrease on a year-on-year basis. The 
Committee is happy to note that the number of cases reported and also deaths thereof are on the decline. 

However, the Committee would also like to draw th e attention of the Depart ment towards the rising 
death cases due to JE reported from Assam during 2006. While the cases detected and deaths were 145 
and 52 in 2005, the numbers for 2006 at 392 and 119 respectively, is more than double in cases reported 
and deaths thereof, over that of the previous year. No  doubt, in U.P. the number of cases detected and 
deaths have come down significantly, yet the Co mmittee asks the Department not to let down its 
vigilance and step up efforts in Assam as well as U.P. so that the dreaded disease is eliminated for good. 
The Committee urges the Department to step-up the ongoing IEC activities in the endemic States so that 
the desired objective is reached soon. (Para 3.18) 
IV. NATIONAL T.B. CONTROL PROGRAMME  
 The Committee, in its 21st Report, had expressed its concern regarding unspent balances being 
carried forward to the forthcomin g year and had recommended streamlining the utilization of funds 
allocated in the same financial year. However, there s eems to be no respite as a similar trend continues 
in 2006-07 also. While the expendit ure figures for the States of Assa m, Bihar, Haryana, Maharashtra, 
Orissa, Tripura, Meghalaya, Rajast han and Kerala reveal under-utilizat ion of the allocated funds, in 
case of the other States, expenditure has exceeded th e allocated funds. The fi gures in the table below 
show that upto 6th March, 2007, utilization of allo c a t i o n  b y  s t a t e s  o f  A s s a m ,  B i h a r ,  M a h a r a s h t r a ,  
Orissa, Tripura, Meghalaya, Kerala show large variations:- 
(Rs. in lakhs) 
States Allocation (2006-07) Expenditure (2006-07) 
Assam 1209.91 700.54 
Bihar 1509.31 1227.17 
Maharashtra 1730.10 1626.13 
Orissa 640.96 591.14 
Tripura 144.34 45.04 
Meghalaya 110.38 98.73 
Kerala 543.75 442.03 
T
OTAL: 5888.75 4730.78  
 Not only this, in respect of States like Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura varying amount of unspent balances was available as on 1st April, 
2006. Trend of under utilization during 2006-07 must  have aggravated the position further. Both 
availability of unspent ba lances and under-utilizatio n of funds indicate that inherent flaws continue to 
persist in the implementation of this Programme.  With the beginning of another Plan period, the 
Department should initiate remedial steps so as to put a stop to such a trend during the Eleventh Plan.  
  (Para 4.3) 
 The Committee would like to have an idea about the impact made on the programme as a result 
of participation by NGOs and Private Practitioners (PPs). The Committee also feels that an attempt 
should also be made so that NGOs/Private Practition ers also come forward in other States. A beginning 
can be made by having a forum where participat ing NGOs/PPs get the opportunity to share their 
experiences with similar workers from other Stat es. At the same time, the Committee would also 
recommend that the evaluation of the above initiatives be ma de under the Routine Programme 
Evaluations carried out by the States  (2 districts per quarter) and the Centre (2 districts per month) in 
order to review the progress made under the IEC init iatives and suggest proper utilization of the funds 
allocated under the scheme. (Para 4.5) 
V. NATIONAL LEPROSY ERADICATION PROGRAMME (NLEP)  

 The Committee’s attention is, however, drawn to large amount of funds lying unutilized by the 
States/UTs during 2006-07. The Department has informed the Committee that majority of the funds are 
allocated to training and IEC activities in orde r to continue with the good work. However, the 
Committee notes with exasperation that, as per the information provided by the Department, uptill 15th 
March 2007 the following States/UTs have large unspent balances with them:- 
Sl.  States/UTs Allocation of Funds Utilization 
No.  2006-07 (in lakhs) (as on 15.03.07) 
   in lakhs 
1. Bihar 358.42 98.09 
2. Chhattisgarh 209.99 179.20 
3. Goa 17.45 5.48 
4. Gujarat 157.93 123.50 
5. Jharkhand 320.04 66.47 
6. Madhya Pradesh 250.49 30.04 
7. Meghalaya 42.19 18.82 
8. Orissa 242.20 121.18 
9. Uttaranchal 81.80 44.75 
10. A&N Islands 11.18 0.98 
11. Daman  and Diu 15.00 4.7-5 
12. Lakshadweep 7.00 0.50 
13. Chandigarh 11.00 4.65 
14. Delhi 61.00 50.16 
 All India 3725.00 2911.95  
  (Para 5.3) 
VI. NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS  
 The Committee would like to know the actual ac hievement made against the target of reducing 
the prevalence of blindness to 0.8 per cent during the Tenth Five Year Plan. The Committee would also 
like to be informed of the time-frame by which pre valence of blindness is targ eted to be reduced from 
1.4 per cent to 0.3 per cent. (Para 6.1) 
 The Committee would like to be apprised of the le vel of utilization of cash grants and Grants-in-
aid made to the States and UTs under the Programme. (Para 6.4) 
 The Committee’s attention is drawn to the aforesaid table where performances of certain 
States/UTs have been indicated. Analyzing the data, the Committee feels that during 2006-07, the 
performance of the programme has been way below th e mark. So far as achieving the targeted number 
of Cataract Surgeries is concerned, the Committee no tes that despite an increased allocation of funds 
during 2006-07, i.e., from Rs 81 crores at BE to Rs 98.39 crores at RE, there is under achievement. 
Focusing on the performance of Haryana, U.P, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, West Bengal, Delhi and Meghalaya, 
the Committee finds that the achievement levels have been way behind, in general, and particularly in 
Haryana where only 25,122  cat. ops. could be done against a set target of 110,000. Like wise, 
performance of NE States has also left much to be  desired. Not a single NE State has been able to 
achieve the targets set for cataract surgery. Th e Committee recommends that the Department in 
consultation with the aforesaid States including NE  States should workout modalities for initiating a 
special drive in the States under reference with a view  to wipe out the target-achievement mismatch in 
cataract surgeries therein. (Para 6.6) 

 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should reassess the system of 
releasing the funds to DBCS/SBCS/NGOs and sh ould set up a mechanism where in a biannual 
assessment of FMR can be obtained from the above organizations. This will ensure better financial 
utilization. (Para 6.8) 
 The Committee notes that a su rvey on Rapid Assessment of TR ACHOMA cases was done in 10 
districts in Haryana, Gujarat, U.P., Uttaranchal, Punjab and Rajasthan whose Report was to be 
finalized by December, 2006. The Committee would app reciate if major findings  of this survey are 
shared with it. (Para 6.9) 
VIII. INTEGRATED DISEASE SURVEILLANCE PROJECT (IDSP)  
 The Committee observes that funds allocated du ring Tenth Plan have remained under utilized. 
Although quantum of plan allocation was increased considerably, implementing agencies have showed 
their incapacity to benefit from them. As a result, enhanced allocation of Rs. 102.00 crore in 2006-07, the 
last year of the Tenth Plan, had to be brought down  to Rs. 36.86 crore at the RE Stage. The Committee, 
however, finds that actual expenditure reported upto 28th February, 2007 was only Rs. 9.64 crore. 
Provisional expenditure of Rs. 12.97 crore as on 31st March, 2007 also indicates discouraging scenario 
under this programme. (Para 8.2) 
 While taking note of the progress made so far under the programme, the Committee is 
constrained to observe that during 2005-06, Physical Targets under various components show very 
discouraging results as indicated below:— 
Targets  Achievements 
(a) Setting up of District Surveillance Units 184  Orders issued by State Governments 
  except for Meghalaya. 
(b) Laboratory Strengthening 390 districts Lab Equipment Supply under process 
in 
  206 districts of Phase-I 
(c) Orientation Workshop for Distt. 14 4 Orientation Workshop completed 
(c) Surveillance Officers   
(d) Training for Distt. Surveillance Teams 390  Training of 206 Teams 
   (Para 8.3) 
 The Committee notes that Rs.80 crores has b een proposed to be spent in 2007-08 under the 
Programme. Keeping in view the slow pace of implementation of the project during 2005-06 and 2006-07 
and as a result the funds released remaining under- utilized, the Committee would like to emphasise that 
as more than two years have passed since the begi nning of this programme, the Department cannot 
continue with the plea that it is too early to expect any results. Th e Committee strongly feels that the 
Department should take all possible measures in coor dination with the State-ma chinery so as to ensure 
implementation of the programme as envisaged. (Para 8.5) 
 The Committee notes with regret that such a crucial programme as that of IDSP having very wide 
ramifications is not receiving the required attention of the Department. Priority should have been 
placed on recruiting/training key field-level functionaries i.e., MPWs, PLTs and DLTs in that order and 
positioning them. But from the forgone analysis it is  evident that from both Phase I and II States less 
than half of the required MPWs could be trained.  The Committee apprehends that early detection, 
identification and notification of disease outbreaks would not be possible if these key functionaries are 
not positioned at the earliest. Tr aining of personnel for Phase III St ates, which were targeted to be 
completed in Financial Year 2006-07, has not yet be gun and the Department has made no proper data 
available. (Para 8.8) 
IX. NATIONAL DRUG DE-ADDICTION CONTROL PROGRAMME  
9.3 Further, to the Committee’s query as to how the department plans to spend Rs. 10.00 crores that 
has been allocated under the National Drug De-add iction Control Programme in the B.E. 2007-08, the 
Department’s reply has been evasive and off the ma rk. The Committee feels that the Department has 

treated the matter in a cavalier fashion without stating its clear cut plans for the current year. This, the 
Committee feels, is not at all a healthy trend. The Committee suggests that the detail plans as to how the 
Department proposes to spend the allocation this ye ar, the details of expenditu re of the last three year 
and the details of drug de-addiction cases detected , registered and treated during last three years under 
the Programme may be provided to the Committee as  soon as the same is collected. The Committee 
recommends that a compliance surv ey should also be made so as  to observe how many cases are 
defaulting and/or relapsing into addiction. (Para 9.3) 
X. REPRODUCTIVE AND CHILD HEALTH PROGRAMME 
 In States/UTs of Assam, Rajasthan, U.P., J& K, Delhi, Mizoram and A and N Islands IMR has 
shown a rising trend. The Committee notes with alarm that even Kerala and Pondicherry which are two 
of the best performers in terms of RCH indicators have also registered a ri sing trend in IMR in 2005 
over the figures of 2004.  (Para 10.2) 
 The Committee is anguished to note that despite sufficient funds being poured into RCH 
programme, the achievement in spending the funds for the intended purpose of bringing down the IMR 
during the Tenth Plan remains well short of the set targets. The Committee notes that M.P., 
Chhattisgarh, Orissa, U.P., Rajasthan, Bihar, Assa m have remained as badly performing States for 
years together under RCH-I pr ogramme and continue to do  so under RCH-II also. The 
Committee’s contention is support ed by the NFHS-III survey, which was conducted in 2005-06. A 
comparison between NFHS-II (1998 -99) and NFHS-III (2005-06) for some indicators indicates 
improvement in overall average. However, State- wise performance reveals a very discouraging 
scenario:— 
State/UT At least Ante-natal Birt h assisted Institutional Births 
 check-up  per cent     
 NFHS III NFHS II NFHS III NFHS II NFHS III NFHS II 
 (2005-06) (1998-99) (2005-06) (1998-99) (2005-06) (1998-99) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7  
All India 50.7 44.2 48.2 42.4 40.7 33.6  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Jharkhand 36.1 24.5 28.7 17.5 19.2 13.9 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
40.2 27.1 37.1 28.9 29.7 22.0 
Rajasthan 41.2 23.6 43.2 35.8 32.2 21.5 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
26.3 14.6 29.2 21.8 22.0 15.2 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
36.4 40.9 33.4 31.9 30.8 31.2 
Nagaland 31.6 21.9 25.9 32.8 12.2 12.1 
Uttaranchal 44.8 19.7 41.5 34.6 36.0 20.6 
Bihar 16.9 15.9 30.9 24.8 22.0 14.8 
Assam 36.3 30.9 31.2 21.4 22.7 17.6 
  (Para 10.3) 
 The Committee is constrained to observe that m aximum utilisation-taking place only in the last 
quarter of the financial year. The Committee would lik e to be apprised about the exact release of funds 
under different components to the High Focus States. The Committee was given to understand that 
element of flexibility was the underlying feature of this Innovative Programme. The idea being, allowing 
the states to devise local specific components so as to provide the maximum benefit to the targeted 

beneficiaries. The Committee however feels that du e publicity has not been given to this important 
component. In the absence of ground functionaries re maining unaware of such beneficiary features, the 
very basis of conceptualizing  them gets defeated. The Committee would therefore urge upon the 
Department to give maximum publicity to such notable and beneficial features of the Programme.  
  (Para 10.11) 
 The Committee is, therefore, compelled to observ e that the Department’s claims of active 
monitoring is perhaps not functioning at its best in th e High Focus States. It furt her states the fact that 
the trend of unspent balances lying with these states  before the launch of NRHM  continuing even after 
the Mission has been operational, is a worrisome feat ure which, if not corrected early, is sure to push 
back the Mission objectives. (Para 10.12) 
Immunization Programmes 
 It has been reported that unfilled vacancies of ANMs, District Immunization Officers and 
inadequate infrastructure in the States are the two main  factors responsible for this state of affairs. It is 
not understood as to why inspite of Central funds  being available, required functionaries and 
infrastructure are not there. The Committee can only conclude that cumbersome recruitment/ 
procurement procedure may be the main hurdle in the effective implementation of this programme. The 
Committee is disturbed to note that BE allocation is being reduced at the RE stage every year and even 
the reduced allocation has remained underutilised. (Para 10.17) 
 The Committee’s fear is substantiated by the data  provided by the UNICEF survey conducted in 
2006 which reports that OPV-3rd Dose coverage is 61.3 per cent only as against 78.2 per cent coverage 
reported under NFHS-III, as given in the annual report 2006-07. (Para 10.18) 
 The Committee would like to be informed of the achievements made in respect of zero 
transmission of Polio targeted for 2008 by the Department. (Para 10.19) 
 The Committee would like to know whether this exercise was completed before award of order to 
the above-mentioned company. It would further like to  know whether orders have been placed to any 
other company for providing oral polio vaccines. (Para 10.21) 
 The Committee notes that in the light of the past targets-achievements mismatch in respect of the 
infrastructure under NRHM, the above targets are very  ambitious and will require herculean efforts on 
the part of the Department as well as the State Governments to materialize them. The Committee would 
like the Department to regularly monitor the progress of the above targets so that a reasonable degree of 
success is achieved in meeting them. (Para 10.24) 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
VII 
 SEVENTH MEETING 
 The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday the 10th April, 2007 in Main Committee Room, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
  RAJYA SABHA 
 1. Shri Digvijay Singh — In the Chair 
 2. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar 
 3. Shrimati Maya Singh 
  LOK SABHA 
 4. Shrimati Bhavana P. Gawli 
 5. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
 6. Shri Rajendra Kumar 
 7. Shrimati Sushee la Bangaru Laxman 
 8. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
 9. Shri Nihal Chand 
 10. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
 11. Shri Uday Singh 
 12. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shrimati Vandana Ga rg, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Pradeep Chatur vedi, Under Secretary 
  Shri Dinesh Singh, Committee Officer 
  WITNESSES 
  Representatives of the Department of Health and  Family Welfare 
 1. Shri Naresh Dayal, Secretary 
 2. Dr. R. K. Srivastava, DGHS 
 3. Shri Raghubir Singh, Additional Secretary & FA 
 4. Shri Vineet Chawdhry, Joint Secretary 
 5. Shri Amarjeet Sinha, Joint Secretary 
 6. Shri K. Raamamoorathy, Joint Secretary 
 7. Dr. P.Venugopal, Director (AIIMS) 
 8. Ms. Rashmi Jain, F. A. (AIIMS) 
 9. Dr. N.K. Ganguly, Director (ICMR) 
 10. Dr. R.N. Salhan, Addl. DG&MS (Safdarjung Hospital) 
2. In the absence of the Chairman of  the Committee, Shri Digvijay Singh presided over the meeting. At the 
outset, he apprised the Committee that JIPMER, Puducher ry Bill-2007 has been referred to the Committee for 
examination and report by April 30th, 2007. The Committee felt that due to its being  pre-occupied with the 
examination of Demands for Grants 2007-08, it was not possible to spare time for in-depth examination of the 
Bill. The Committee accordingly, decided to seek extension of time up to the last day of the Monsoon Session 
2007 for examination and Report on the Bill and authorized the Chairman to seek necessary permission from 
the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha in this regard. 
3. Thereafter, the Committee heard the Secretary and othe r officials of the Department of Health & Family 
Welfare. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and requested him to make a brief presentation on the 
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department. The Secretary made a power-point presentation of the 

activities undertaken, achiev ements of the Department during the last year and plans for the current year on 
various schemes/institutions /hospita ls falling under the Health Sector and NRHM and Family Welfare. The 
Members sought clarifications on the activities and ac hievements of the Ministry and deliberated on the 
budgetary allocation on different heads of the Department. The Secretary replied to the queries raised by the 
Members. 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 
P.M. to meet again at 11:00 A.M. on Wednesday the 11th April, 
2007. 
 
 
 

IX 
NINTH MEETING 
 The Committee met at 1.00 P.M. on Friday the 27th April, 2007 in  Committee Room "A", Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
  RAJYA SABHA 
 1. Shri Digvijay Singh — In the Chair 
 2. Shrimati Maya Singh  
 2. Shri Lalhming Liana 
 3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
  LOK  SABHA  
 5. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
 6. Shri Rajendra Kumar 
 7. Shrimati Sushee la Bangaru Laxman 
 8. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
 9. Shri Pannian Ravindran 
 10. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shrimati Vandana Ga rg, Joint Secretary 
  Shri H.C. Sethi, Deputy Secretary 
  Shri Dinesh Singh, Committee Officer 
2. In absence of the Chairman, Sh ri Digvijay Singh, Member, Rajya Sabha, presided over the meeting. 
3. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed th e members of the Committee. The Committee then 
considered the draft 22nd and 23rd Reports on Demands- for-Grants (2007-08) relating to the Department of 
Health and Family Welfare and the Department of  AYUSH respectively. After some discussion, the 
Committee adopted both the reports with some minor modifications. 
4. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the Reports may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the 
table of Lok Sabha on Thursday, the 3rd of May 200 7. The Committee authorized the Chairman of the 
Committee and in his absence Shri Digvijay Singh and in the absence of both, Shrimati Maya Singh to present 
the reports in Rajya Sabha, and, Dr. Karan Singh Yada v, and in his absence Dr. Chinta Mohan and in the 
absence of both, Smt. Susheela Bangaru Laxman to lay the reports on the table of Lok Sabha. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 2.00  
P.M. 
 