PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 31
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE  ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELF ARE
THIRTY-FIRST REPORT
ON
THE PARAMEDICAL AND PHYSIOTHERAPY
CENTRAL COUNCILS BILL, 2007
ST  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21 OCTOBER, 2008)
ST  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 21 OCTOBER, 2008)
ST  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21 OCTOBER, 2008)
ST  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 21 OCTOBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-hfw@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
THIRTY-FIRST REPORT
ON
THE PARAMEDICAL AND PHYSIOTHERAPY
CENTRAL COUNCILS BILL, 2007
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21 ST OCTOBER, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 21 ST OCTOBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................ (ii i)-(iv)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—27
4. O BSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE ........................................................... 28—38
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................ 39—52
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 53 —84
Annexure–I (Copy of the Bill) .................................................................................. 53—80
Annexure–II (List of Witnesses) ............................................................................... 81—84

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2007-08)
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. P. J. Kurien
3. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
4. Shrimati Maya Singh
5. Shri Digvijay Singh
6. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy
@7. Shri Lalhming Liana
8. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
9. Shrimati Kanimozhi
*10. Shri Rajeev Shukla
LOK SABHA
11. Shrimati Bhavana P. Gawli
12. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
13. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
$14. Shri B. Vinod Kumar
15. Shri Rajendra Kumar
16. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
17. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
18. Shri Rasheed Masood
19. Dr. Chinta Mohan
20. Shri Nihal Chand
21. Shri D.B. Patil
22. Shrimati K. Rani
23. Shri Pannian Ravindran
24. Dr. R. Senthil
25. Dr. Mohd. Shahabuddin
26. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
27. Shri Uday Singh
28. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
29. Shri Vinod Khanna
30. Shri R.L. Jalappa
31. Shrimati Yashodhara Raje Scindia
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Deputy Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Committee Officer
@ Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 18th July, 2008.
* Nominated w.e.f. 18th February, 2008.
$ Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 3rd March, 2008.

(ii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2008-09)
1. Shri Amar Singh – Chairman
MEMBERS
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
3. Prof. P. J. Kurien
4. Shri Rajeev Shukla
5. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
6. Shrimati Maya Singh
7. Shri Digvijay Singh
8. Shrimati Kanimozhi
9. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy
*10. Shri Lalhming Liana
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
12. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
13. Shrimati Bhavana P. Gawli
14. Shri Vinod Khanna
15. Shri Rajendra Kumar
16. Shri R.L. Jalappa
17. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
18. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
19. Shri Rasheed Masood
20. Dr. Chinta Mohan
21. Shri Nihal Chand
22. Shri D.B. Patil
23. Shrimati K. Rani
24. Shri Pannian Ravindran
25. Shrimati Yashodhara Raje Scindia
26. Dr. R. Senthil
27. Dr. Mohd. Shahabuddin
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Shri Uday Singh
30. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
#31. Shri B. Vinod Kumar
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Deputy Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
* Nominated w.e.f. 12th August, 2008.
# Nominated w.e.f. 20th August, 2008.

(iii)
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II Section-2, dated 4th December, 2007.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No 44735, dated 17th December, 2007.
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee, do hereby present this Thirty-first
Report of the Committee on the Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill, 2007.*
2. In pursuance of Rule 270 relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha, referred**
the Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill-2007 (Annexure-I) , as introduced in the
Lok Sabha on the 4th December, 2007 and pending therein, to the Committee on the 14th
December, 2007, for examination and report.
3. A Press Release inviting views/suggestions from the stakeholders and the general public was
issued in December, 2007.
4. The Committee considered the Bill in its meetings held on the 11th February, 27th May,
9th June, 1st July and 10th September, 2008.
5. At its meeting held on the 11th February, 2008, the Committee heard the Director General
(Health Services) and the Joint Secretary Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Committee
also heard a large number of stakeholders representing various Associations/bodies/experts and
individuals (list of witnesses enclosed at Annexure-II). The Committee concluded its interactions
with hearing the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on the
10th September, 2008.
6. The Committee has relied on the following in finalizing the Report:
(i) Background Note and Clause-by-Clause Note on the Bill received from the Department
of Health and Family Welfare;
(ii) Presentation and clarification by the Secretary of the Department;
(iii) Memoranda received on the Bill from various bodies/associations/organizations/
experts/Members of Parliament;
(iv) Oral evidence on the Bill;
(v) Replies to the Questions/queries raised by Members in the meetings on the Bill received
from the Department; and
(vi) Similar State and International Acts.
7. The Committee at its meeting held on 30th September, 2008, considered the draft Report
and adopted the same.
8. On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the contributions
made by those who appeared before the Committee and submitted their valuable suggestions on the
subject matter of the Bill.

9. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
AMAR SINGH
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
30th September, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary
Asvina 8, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill-2007 (hereinafter referred to as the
Bill) was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 4th December, 2007 and referred to the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare on the 14th December, 2007
for examination and report thereon.
2. The objectives of the Bill are to provide for the constitution of Central Councils of the
Paramedical (Medical Laboratory Technology), Paramedical (Radiology Technology) and the
Physiotherapy, the coordinated development in the education of paramedical and physiotherapy with
a view to regulating and maintaining standards of such education, maintenance of Register of
Paramedics and Physiotherapists and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The
Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Bill reproduced below explains the reasons
warranting the need for the Bill:
“In order to keep pace with the advancement of  medical science and development of
new diagnostic and therapeutic techniques, there has been a quantum jump in the demand
for paramedical personnel and physiotherapists/occupational therapists. This has resulted in
the establishment of a large number of institutions and centres for the training of these
professionals, many of which are run without any supervision and control as to the quality
and standard of education.
Maintenance of proper standards in the training and education of  paramedical
professions is considered essential as these personnel play a crucial role in healthcare
delivery. With a view to regulating these professions, it is considered necessary to set up
Councils on the lines already existing for pharmacy, nursing, etc. To begin with, it is
proposed to set up separate Councils for Medical Laboratory Technicians, Radiology
Technicians and Physiotherapists/Occupational Therapists. These Councils will be
responsible, inter alia, for maintenance of uniform standards of education in the respective
disciplines and registration of qualified personnel for practising the profession.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.”
3. In view of the objectives behind the proposed legislation and also its impact on diverse
categories of ancillary professions associated with health sector, the Committee decided to acquaint
itself with all shades of opinion on the Bill. The Committee, accordingly, gave wide publicity to
the Bill through a Press Release, inviting views/suggestions from all the stakeholders and general
public. An overwhelming response to the Press Release was received by the Committee. A very
large number of organizations/stakeholders/individuals/associations/fora submitted memoranda
containing their views. The Committee held extensive interactions with representatives of
associations/organizations as well as renowned experts/professionals from physiotherapy,
occupational therapy, medical lab technology and radiology technology. The Committee also heard
the Secretary of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and his team of officers and sought
clarifications on various provisions of the Bill. The Committee was also benefited by quite a few
documents including similar Acts-both State level and international brought before it.
4. The Committee acknowledges all these valuable and enriching contributions which have
proved to be of  immense help in formulating its views on the different provisions of the Bill.
5. Appearing before the Committee on the 11th February, 2008, representative of the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare apprised the Committee about the circumstances which necessitated

2
the bringing of  the Bill. He pointed out that health care services in the country have advanced
significantly over the years due to revolution in diagnostic and therapeutic tools. As a result,
following problem areas have also emerged which required regulation at the earliest:
– Para-medical professions are  not regulated.
– Entry level qualifications are different at different levels.
– Level of knowledge and skills is not uniform.
– Period of training is different in different places and has no uniformity.
– Course curricula are not uniform.
– Fee structure and facilities in these institutions are  not regulated.
– Ethics standards are not uniform and not being enforced.
A regulatory mechanism for all paramedical disciplines was being considered by the Ministry since
way back in 1995 with the setting up of Dr. S D Sharma Committee. The Committee proposed
to set up an Omnibus Council Act for all paramedical disciplines which was endorsed in a meeting
of Health Secretaries held on the 28th May, 1995. The Act was proposed to be an umbrella Act
under which there were to be a number of independent Central Professional Councils with uniform
constitution for all. The proposal to constitute the Omnibus Council was delayed due to various
reasons. Meanwhile, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in exercise of the powers
conferred by Section 2 of the. Rehabilitation Council of India Act, 1992 issued a notification dated
the 13th October, 1998 including Physiotherapists, Occupational Therapists and Ophthalmic
Technicians under the Act. The Associations related to these streams took serious objection to their
inclusion under the Rehabilitation Council of India Act. After prolonged efforts, the Ministry of
Social Justice and Empowerment rescinded the said notification through their Notification dated the
25th June, 1999.
6. Since then after due diligence and consultations with all the stakeholders, the Centre
proposed a Paramedical Council Bill, 2001 which was sent to the Department of Legal Affairs for
their concurrence. Ministry of Law was of the opinion that the profession of physiotherapy should
not be covered within the meaning of the term ‘paramedical’. Physiotherapy Associations had also
been representing themselves and through other channels to the Ministry to be excluded from the
proposed Paramedical Council. The Committee was given to understand that the proposed
Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill, 2007 was the culmination of intensive
Government efforts supplemented by considered views of all stakeholders.
7. The clauses where the amendments have been suggested by the Committee are given in the
succeeding paragraphs:—
8. Clause-1 (1)
8.1 Clause 1 (1) states as follows:—
“This Act may be called the Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Act, 2007.”
8.2 The Committee notes that the title of the Bill reflects its objective of setting up of separate
Councils for Medical Laboratory Technicians, Radiology Technicians and Physiotherapists/
Occupational Therapists. Physiotherapy being considered a discipline distinct from paramedical
disciplines finds a specific mention in the title. The Committee has also been given to understand
that the proposed legislation is an umbrella Act with the likely inclusion of other paramedical
disciplines in future.

3
8.3 During its interactions with stakeholders representing all the main paramedical disciplines
along with physiotherapy and occupational therapy, the Committee was surprised to observe that
divergent views started from the title itself. Quite a few alternative titles as indicated below were
put forth before the Committee:
– Paramedical Central Councils Bill, 2007.
– Allied Health Professionals Councils Bill, 2007.
– Medical Technology Central Councils Bill, 2007.
– Physiotherapy Central Council Bill, 2007 as a separate Bill.
– Paramedical, Physiotherapy and Optometry Central Councils Bill, 2007.
– Medical Technology (Laboratory/Radiology) and Physiotherapy Central Council Bill, 2007.
– Medical Technology and Physiotherapy Central Council Bill 2007.
– Health Professions Central Council Bill, 2007.
– Bio-medical Science Council Bill, 2007.
– Physiotherapy and the Health Professions Central Council Bill, 2007.
8.4 The first objection raised was absence of specific mention of discipline of occupational
therapy, a speciality having a distinct identity of its own from the title of the Bill. In contrast,
physiotherapy finding a specific place in the title was considered as discriminatory to other
paramedical streams which were considered to be having a similar status. Another view which was
put forth before the Committee was that a separate Bill was required for physiotherapy due to the
specialized nature of  services being provided by it. Stakeholders representing medical laboratory
technology, radiology technology, operation theatre technology, perfusion technology etc. raised
strong reservation to the use of nomenclature of paramedical in the context of their professions
as the same was not in consonance with what was in vogue in the present world scenario.
8.5 The Committee is of the view that title of an Act needs to reflect the basic objective
behind its enactment. It is also not practically possible to include each and every special
component in the title itself. However, nobody can also deny the fact that in the case of
a particular Bill envisaged for a variety of specialities having distinct identities of their own,
specific mention of one speciality and generalization of all the other specialities raises
uncalled for complications and resultant controversies. The present Bill before the
Committee is one such case. The Committee would like to point out that title of an Act is
only meant for indicating its very core content. Proposed legislation before the Committee
relates to setting up of three separate Central Councils for physiotherapy/ occupational
therapy, medical laboratory technology and radiology technology. The Committee also takes
note of the fact that an enabling provision is to be included in the Bill which would open
the way for future induction of other disciplines. The Committee feels that use of a
common term in the title of the Bill encompassing all the present disciplines and likely
additions in future will be the best option.
8.6 Taking the relative merits of all viewpoints into account, the Committee, concludes
that the words ‘Paramedical and physiotherapy’ in the title of the Bill may be replaced by
the words ‘Allied Health Professions’. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that clause
1(1) be amended to read as follows:—
“This Act may be called the Allied Health Professions Central Councils Act, 2007’’.

4
8.7. The Committee also recommends that in the light of its above recommendation the
preamble to the Bill be amended to incorporate the consequential changes.
9. Clause 2
9.1 Clause 2 deals with ‘Definitions’. Clause 2(1)(a) defines the term ‘Central Council’ in the
following manner:—
“Central Council” means the Central Council of Paramedical (Medical Laboratory
Technology) or Paramedical (Radiology Technology) or Physiotherapy, as the case may be,
constituted under section 3;
9.2 In view of its observation and recommendation with regard to the title of the Bill,
and Clause 3, the Committee is of the view that definition of Central Council may also be
modified as follows:
“Central Council” means the Central Council of Medical Laboratory Technology or
Radiology Technology or Physiotherapy or Occupational Therapy, as the case may be,
constituted under section-3’’.
9.3. Clause 2(1) (b)
Clause 2 (1) (b) defines the term’ education’ as reproduced below:—
“education” means programmes of education, research or training or such other
programmes or areas as the Central Government may, in consultation with the Paramedical
(Medical Laboratory Technology) Central Council or the Paramedical (Radiology
Technology) Central Council or the Physiotherapy Central Council, as the case may be, by
notification, declare in the discipline of medical laboratory technology, or radio diagnosis or
radiotherapy or nuclear medicine or physiotherapy;.
9.4 In the light of the Committee’s observations/ recommendations in respect of clause
1(1) and Clause 2(1)(a) above, definition of the term ‘education’ may be modified
accordingly with the words “or occupational therapy” added after “physiotherapy”.
9.5 Clause 2(1)(e)
Clause 2(1)(e) defines the term ‘medical laboratory technician’ as follows :
“Medical laboratory technician” means a person whose name has been entered in the
register of the Paramedical (Medical Laboratory Technology) Central Council.”
9.6 Strong objections were raised by representatives of a number of associations to the use of
word ‘technicians’ for those professionals carrying out pathological tests in medical labs and
handling other allied matters. It was pointed out that in the technical parlance, the term ‘technician’
indicates a person who operates an equipment or handles a machine or device with or without
technical knowledge and professional skills. Like other disciplines of health care, medical lab
technology has also shown significant advancement over the years. Modern medical laboratory
technology can no longer be equated with its earlier limited scope of basic pathological tests. It
was, accordingly, pointed out that the usage of the term ‘technologist’ indicating a qualified person
with technical knowledge and professional skills would be the most appropriate proposition in place
of ‘technician’.
9.7 The Committee finds substance in the above arguments and recommends that the
word “technician” in Clause 2(1)(e) be replaced by “technologist” and the term
“Paramedical” be deleted. The Committee strongly feels that the definition should also
specifically mention that a medical laboratory technician will be a person who possesses

5
recognized medical laboratory technology qualification. The same may, accordingly be
included in the definition of ‘medical laboratory technician’.
9.8 Clause 2(1)(f)
Clause 2(1)(f) defines ‘medical laboratory’ as follows:
“medical laboratory” means a laboratory for diagnostic, therapeutic and research purpose
being manned by qualified technical personnel.”
9.9 On a pointed query about the requirement of supervision/presence of a qualified pathologist
in a medical laboratory , it was clarified by the Ministry that all the laboratory reports have to be
verified by a qualified medical practitioner/specialist. Medical laboratories need to be manned by
medical professionals as directed by the Bombay High Court. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that the definition of medical laboratory may be modified accordingly.
9.10 Clause 2(1)(g)
Clause 2(1)(g) defines the term “member” in the context of the Central Councils, in the
following manner:
“member” means a member, of the Paramedical (Medical Laboratory Technology)
Central Council or the Paramedical (Radiology Technology) Central Council or the
Physiotherapy Central Council, as the case may be, and includes its Chairperson and
the Vice-Chairperson;
9.11 In the light of its observations/recommendations in respect of Clauses 1(1), and 2(1)
and Clause 3, the Committee recommends that in Clause 2(1)(g) after the words
“Physiotherapy Central Council” Occupational Therapy Central Council be inserted and the
word “Paramedical” be deleted from Clause 2(1)(g).
9.12 Clause 2(1)(j)
Clause 2(1)(j) defines “Occupational Therapist” in the following manner:
“occupational therapist” means a person whose name has been entered in the register
of the Physiotherapy Central Council;
9.13 In the light of its observations/recommendations in respect of Clauses 2(1)(a) and
2(1)(e) and 3 the Committee recommends that “Physiotherapy Central Council” in the
definition be replaced by Occupational Therapy Central Council and the words ‘who possess
recognized occupational therapy qualification’ may also be added.
9.14 Clause 2(1)(k)
Clause 2(1)(k) defines ‘occupational therapy’ as indicated below:—
“occupational therapy” means medically directed application of diagnosis, or treatment,
or both, of persons with the aim of preventing disability and maintaining health;
9.15 The Committee had the opportunity to ascertain the views of both associations representing
Occupational Therapists and Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation. The Committee found that the
definition of ‘occupational therapy’ was not acceptable to both the sides, although for different
reasons. Contention of the association representing Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation was that
occupational therapy was a paramedical subject where the patient was initially assessed by a
medical doctor and on the prescription of such a doctor, the occupational therapist executed the
occupational therapy programme without making any primary diagnostic assessment of the patient.
Accordingly, their suggestion was for retention of words ‘medically directed’ and deletion of the

6
words “application of diagnosis, or” and “or both” from the definition of ‘occupational therapy’.
The association representing occupational therapists informed the Committee that in India there
were 25 educational centres imparting Bachelor degree course in Occupational Therapy with 4
years and 6 months duration, Masters in OT with 3 years duration followed by research
programmes available in many universities. It was emphasized that the definition of ‘occupational
therapy’ neither made any sense nor was prevailing anywhere in the world. The inclusion of words
“medically directed” in the definition was not justified as any specialty with qualifications prevailing
upto the research level could not be directed by another specialty for evaluation, diagnosis and
management, which was not qualified in the specific field to do so. It was pointed out that such
a provision, if implemented, would adversely affect the treatment and rehabilitative care of persons
with disability.
9.16 Asked to share its views on the definition of occupational therapy, the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare submitted that due to some error in the Bill, the definition of ‘occupational
therapy’ according to the draft bill approved by the Cabinet was not incorporated. The Ministry
suggested the following definition:
“Occupational Therapy is defined as medically directed application of purposeful, goal
oriented activities which engage the individual’s body and mind in meaningful, organized,
and self-directed actions that maximize independence, prevent or minimize disability, and
maintain health for persons whose functions are impaired by physical illness or injury,
emotional disorder, congenital or developmental disability or ageing process. Specific
occupational therapy services include education and training in activities of daily living and
designing or fabricating selective temporary orthotic devices, and applying or training in the
use of assistive technology or orthotic and prosthetic devices (excluding gait training)”.
9.17 Committee’s attention was also drawn to the inclusion of ‘occupational therapy’ in
the definition of ‘physiotherapy’. The Committee finds it surprising that an independent
profession with entirely different course of study, mode of treatment and approach in
treatment and rehabilitation of patients has found place under another profession. The
Committee was informed that both occupational therapy and physiotherapy having entirely
separate curriculum were recognized as separate disciplines in educational institutions,
Hospitals and medical institutions across the country have separate departments of
occupational therapy and physiotherapy. The Committee strongly feels that reservations are
based on valid ground and accordingly recommends the deletion of words ‘occupational
therapy’ from the definition of ‘physiotherapy’.
9.18 The Committee notes that inclusion of words “medically directed” is the most
contentious part of the definition of ‘occupational therapy’ as indicated in Clause 2(1)(k).
There is no doubt in the mind of the Committee that occupational therapists are responsible
for detailed assessment, treatment planning and implementation of treatment regimen.
Even the representatives of Indraprastha Association of Rehabilitation Medicine, during the
course of their appearance before the Committee, admitted in the context of
physiotherapists/ occupational therapists that they work independently but according to the
prescription of a doctor. Keeping this fact in view and also their training period of four and
a half years, the Committee does not subscribe to the view that the words “medically
directed” need to be retained in Clause 2(1)(k).
9.19 During the course of its interaction, the Committee’s attention was drawn to the
definition of ‘occupational therapy’ given in the Delhi Council for Physiotherapy and
Occupational Therapy Act, 1997. After comparing the relative merits of the two definitions
of Occupational Therapy, i.e. the one given in the Delhi Council for Physiotherapy and
Occupational Therapy Act, 1997 and the other given in the Bill, the Committee finds the

7
definition given in the Delhi Council for Physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy Act, 1997
is more comprehensive: The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the following
definition of ‘Occupational Therapy’ as given in the aforesaid Act be included in the Bill:—
“Occupational therapy” means the “application of purposeful goal-oriented activity
through latest technology with computerized system and the like in the evaluation,
diagnosis, and or treatment of persons whose function is impaired by physical illness
or injury, emotional disorder, congenital or developmental disability, or the aging
process, in order to, achieve optimum functioning, to prevent disability, and to
maintain health.
9.20 To allay the apprehensions about the anticipated misuse, the Committee recommends
that a specific provision be included in the Bill to the effect that occupational therapists
practise their profession within the technical specification stipulated in the definition.
9.21 Clause 2(1)(I)
Clause 2(1)(I) which defines the term “paramedic” is produced below:—
“paramedic means a person whose name has been entered in the registers of the
Paramedical (Medical Laboratory Technology) Central Council and Paramedical
(Radiology Technology) Central Council.”
9.22 In the light of its observations/recommendations in respect of Clauses 1(1) and 2(1)
(a), the Committee recommends that the word “Paramedic” in Clause 2(1)(I) be replaced
by “Allied Health Professional” and the word “Paramedical” be deleted from the said clause.
9.23 Clause 2(1)(m)
Clause 2(1)(m) which defines the term “Paramedical” is reproduced below:—
“Paramedical” means the medical laboratory technology and the radiology technology;
9.24 In the light of its observations/recommendations in respect of Clauses 1(1) and 2(1)
(a) and (g) above, the Committee recommends that the word “Paramedical” be replaced by
“Allied Health Profession”.
9.25 Clause 2(1)(n)
Clause 2(1)(n) which defines the term “physiotherapist” is reproduced below—
“physiotherapist” means a person whose name has been entered in the register of the
Physiotherapy Central Council;
9.26 The Committee recommends that the words ‘who possesses recognized physiotherapy
education and’ may be added in the definition.
9.27 Clause 2(1)(o)
Clause 2(1)(o) defines the term “physiotherapy” in the following manner:
“physiotherapy” means medically directed therapy through physical agents including
heat, cold, light, water, massage, electricity or manual exercises to persons with the
aim of preventing or correcting any disability and includes occupational therapy.
9.28 The definition of physiotherapy was the most contentious issue and it was debated in great
detail. While stakeholders representing the profession of physiotherapy were vehemently opposed to
the inclusion of the expression “medically directed” in the definition of ‘physiotherapy’ with many
of them wanting it to be declared as an independent system of medicine, the representatives of

8
Indian Association of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Indraprastha Association of
Rehabilitation Medicine and the Indian Medical Association articulating the views of doctor
fraternity, argued that physiotherapy was not an independent system of medicine but actually an
outreach of the allopathic system of medicine and therefore retention of the words “medically
directed” in the definition of physiotherapy was a must, in the interest of patients.
9.29 Indian Medical Association, New Delhi submitted that independent systems of medicine are
systems which are inherently different from one another like Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani, Homeopathy
and Vetenary Science with totally different content altogether. Compared to these, Physiotherapy
does not constitute an independent system of medicine but is actually an outreach of the allopathic
medicine particularly Rehabilitation Medicine, which includes all paramedics like Physiotherapy,
Rehabilitation, Nursing, Occupational Therapy, Prosthetics and Orthotics (fabricating splints and
artificial limbs) and Clinical Psychology. They also stated that the team is headed by a specialist
in Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation (MD PMR after MBBS), a doctor who coordinates the
rehabilitation programme. If a paramedical course like physiotherapy is treated as an independent
system of medicine, then all the other paramedics can also make similar claims. Attention was also
drawn to the Supreme Court judgment delivered in 1998 as per which the systems of medicines
generally prevalent in India are Ayurveda, Sidha, Unani, modern system of medicine (Allopathic) and
Homoeopathic.
9.30 T hey added that with regard to the training, the major clinical subjects like Orthopedics,
Neurology, cardio-respiratory diseases, General Surgery, General Medicine, Pediatrics and
Rehabilitation Medicine and most of non-clinical subjects like Anatomy, Physiology , Microbiology,
Pathology and community medicine are taught to them by allopathic professionals. Physiotherapy
cannot, therefore, be considered an independent system of medicine. The scope of the clinical and
non-clinical subjects taught is only relevant to the scope of imparting physiotherapy education and
not diagnostic and therapeutic aspects of all the ailments. Hence, a physiotherapist cannot apply the
limited knowledge he has gained in diagnosing and treating patients.
9.31 Indian Medical Association thus supported retention of  the words “medically directed in the
definition, stating that physiotherapists are the paramedical technical staff who are trained to assist
a doctor/work under the guidance of the doctor. Most of these personnel work under the
specialties of Orthopedics, Neurology, Neurosurgery, Anesthesia and Pediatrics, which are the
branches of modern medicine. It was further informed that Maharashtra and Delhi Council
definitions of physiotherapy were not correct and IMA was urging respective state governments to
modify the same.
9.32 Indian Association of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation and Indraprastha Association of
Rehabilitation Medicine also expressed similar views.
9.33 Asked to acquaint the Committee with the international trend in this regard, the
representative of IARM stated that nowhere in the world are the physiotherapists allowed to treat
the patient independently. He cited the examples of the New York Physical Therapy Act, the
Australian Physical Therapy Act, the California Physical Therapy Act and the Louisiana Act and
claimed that as per these Acts only the medical doctor is authorised to do the diagnosis and refer
the case to a physiotherapist. He also added that first the history of the patient needs to be
evaluated; he has to be examined; his investigations carried out; the diagnosis done and then comes
the treatment part. In reply to a query, the representative explained that IARM was not against
giving physiotherapists independent treatment options but diagnostic option should be reserved for
the physicians under the modern system of medicine.
9.34 Asked to comment on whether “medically directed” should be limited to physiotherapy and
occupational therapy, or it should also be used in the context of  other paramedicals like radiology

9
and medical lab technology, radiologists and technicians, the representative of IARM stated that all
paramedical disciplines should have the word “medically directed.”
9.35 Physiotherapists Forum of AIIMS and Indian Association of Physiotherapists, along with
other stakeholders representing educational institutions, students, experts, practicing
physiotherapists and others voiced their serious reservations on the definition of physiotherapy as
proposed in the Bill. They strongly advocated the deletion of words ‘medically directed’ from the
definition of physiotherapy. It was argued that these words reduced the scope of independence of
physiotherapists in decision-making during the course of their clinical practice. It was also
emphasized that the entire definition of physiotherapy, as given in the above clause was wrong. The
Committee was informed that over the years, curriculum of physiotherapy education in different
institutions in the country has upgraded from Diploma level to 4 years and 6 months degree course,
followed by Post-graduate and Ph.D courses. Further, physiotherapy graduates undergo intensive
full time clinical training and are skilled to handle all varieties of patients of sports injury,
neurological disorders, orthopaedic disorders, Cardio-respiratory diseases, post-trauma cases and
geriatric care. The Committee was also given to understand that in countries like Australia, New
Zealand, UK, USA, Canada etc.; physiotherapists are given a regulatory status where one has the
independence and autonomy to practise the profession of physiotherapy.
9.36 Committee’s attention was also drawn to the parallel position of Naturopathy and Yoga when
compared with physiotherapy as both were based on physical and psycho-somatic methods of
diagnosis and treatment, with both claiming benefit to the patients in a drugless manner. It was
argued that both Naturopathy and Yoga are granted equal status along with A yurveda under AYUSH.
Thus, physiotherapy also deserved to be granted an independent status.
9.37 Another argument put forth before the Committee was that the exact nature of medical
direction not being specified in the definition would imply that it can be issued by any medical
practitioner such as Allopathic, Ayurvedic and Homeopathic practitioner. However, with
physiotherapy not being part of their curriculum, it would be beyond their expertise to give any
medical direction to physiotherapists.
9.38 It was also explained to the Committee that every health system has both referral and
independent practice. For example, a surgeon requires the views/reports or pathologist and
radiologist before going for a surgery. Similarly, physiotherapists also take referral case from
Orthopaedics, Neurologists, Neuro-surgeons etc. Thus, every medical consultant including
physiotherapist works as a part of the entire medical team. It was, accordingly, emphasized that
both physiotherapy and medical practice were professions, supplementary and complementary to
each other.
9.39 Committee also took note of the views expressed by Dr. M.K. Bhan, Professor of
Pediatrics, AIIMS and presently on deputation as Secretary, Department of Biotechnology who
pointed out that currently, access to high quality rehabilitation was very limited in our country and
physiotherapy deserved to be supported and promoted in a decisive manner, in terms of education
and training. While accepting the fact that in planning physical rehabilitation, assessment by medical
and surgical disciplines was important, it was also mentioned that only a small number of
physicians had a reasonable understanding of physical rehabilitation. In general it has been seen that
the medical profession does not always enable thriving of the support services and generally
reluctant to grant them proper professional status. This indirectly leads to much needed professions
such as physiotherapy becoming unattractive and in the process keeping good quality students
away. It was, accordingly, emphasized that adequate recognition should be granted to physiotherapy
through legislation and for ensuring adequate access to physiotherapy services in the country,
physiotherapists be allowed to open independent service centres. The education of physiotherapists
should in itself provide ample understanding of when physical therapy is required.

10
9.40 In the end, the Committee was given to understand that the definition of physiotherapy as
given in the Delhi Council for Physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy Act, 1997 and the
Maharashtra State Council for Occupational Therapy and Physiotherapy Act Number, 2004 were
comprehensive and the most widely accepted definition of physiotherapy and therefore either of the
above definitions reproduced below may be adopted in the present Bill.
(i) According to the Delhi Council for physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy Act, 1997.
“Physiotherapy” means physiotherapeutic system of medicine which includes
examination, treatment, advice and instructions to any persons preparatory to or for
the purpose of or in connection with movement dysfunction, bodily malfunction,
physical disorder, disability, healing and pain from trauma and disease, physical and
mental conditions using physical agents including exercise, mobilization, manipulation,
mechanical and electrotherapy, activity and devices or diagnosis, treatment and
prevention.
(ii) According to the Maharashtra State Council for Occupational Therapy and
Physiotherapy Maharashtra Act, 2004.
“Physiotherapy” means a branch of modern medical science, which includes
examination, assessment, interpretation, physical diagnosis, planning and execution of
treatment and advice to any person for the purpose of preventing, correcting,
alleviating and limiting dysfunction, acute and chronic bodily malfunction including life
saving measures via chest physiotherapy in the intensive care units, curing physical
disorders or disability promoting physical fitness, facilitating healing and pain relief and
treatment of physical and psycho-somatic disorders through modulating physiological
and physical response using physical agent, activities and devices using exercises,
mobilization, manipulations, therapeutic ultra-sound, electrical and thermal agents and
electrotherapy for diagnosis, treatment and prevention.
9.41 Asked to offer its comments on the definition of physiotherapy as given in the Delhi Council
for Physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy Act, 1997 and the Maharashtra State Council for
Occupational Therapy and Physiotherapy Act,  2004, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in
a written submission stated that both the definitions indicate physiotherapy as separate system of
medicine (Physiotherapeutic System of Medicine), which is not correct and there are chances that
these definitions can be misinterpreted. Following factors were highlighted in support of the stand
taken by the Ministry—
– There is no Physiotherapeutic System of Medicine existing anywhere in the world.
Also most of the syllabuses in the physiotherapy courses are extracted from the
modern system of medicine specialties.
– Physiotherapy is a 60-70 years old paramedical discipline created to train the
physiotherapy technicians. These physiotherapy technicians were trained to assist
Army Physicians (Doctors) to treat war victims during and after the 2nd world war
in USA, UK and Australia. The founders of physiotherapy were those Army Physicians,
Nurses and Medical Physicists and they gave medical scientific background for this.
– The Supreme Court in its Judgment (Civil appeal no. 69/1987) on 13/10/1998 says
“the systems of medicine generally prevalent in India are Ayurveda, Sidha, Unani,
modern system of medicine and homeopathy”.
– The suggested definitions convey a meaning that physiotherapist is the first contact
person in the diagnosis, treatment and prevention of various diseases and disorders
which infect should be done by the physicians (doctors) as registered in the Medical
Council of India.

11
– The term “bodily malfunction” may also mean conditions like Diabetes Mellitus,
Myocardial Infarction, Nutritional Deficiencies etc. which would require attention by
the medical doctors rather than a physiotherapist.
– The words “physical disorders” is a broad term and may also include disorders of the
heart, lungs, endocrine organs, ear, eyes, skin, including tumors, infections, trauma
etc. and would require the medical doctors to treat and may not require any
physiotherapy treatment at all or alone. The treatment of “pain” as mentioned in the
definition is not always possible with physiotherapeutic modalities, since it can be
because of variety of illnesses, thus it is likely to be misinterpreted.
– The words “healing from pain and trauma” would also mean treating fractures, nerve
injuries and acute abdominal injuries where the Orthopedic surgeon, Neuro-surgeon or
General surgeon may be needed rather than a physiotherapist.
– The words “medically directed therapy” are used in the interest of the safety of the
patient and not to reduce the scope of physiotherapy rather it protects therapists from
the medico legal risks.
– Other paramedics e.g.  Nurses, Pharmacists, Radiographers, Medical laboratory
technologists and Speech therapists etc. might also like to be first contact practitioners
without medical direction by the medical doctors.
9.42 On being asked what was the justification for inserting the words “medically directed” in
the definition of physiotherapy when in many developed countries like UK, USA, Canada, Australia
etc. physiotherapists have been given independent status and autonomy to practice, the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare informed that it has gone through various international Acts in USA,
Canada, Europe, Australia and other countries. The systems of health care in these countries were
entirely different as most of the health care services were covered by the public and private
insurance sector. Practices of most of the Paramedics/allied health care professionals were
indirectly regulated by this sector in the above mentioned countries and the same systems could
not be compared with India. However, in spite of this indirect regulation of health care practice,
the Department of Health and Human Resources, United States of America, under its Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid services (CMS Services - the foremost and largest health care provider in
USA) clearly says ‘Doctor’ order is a must for physical therapy/occupational therapy treatment and
for the reimbursement of the Bill.
9.43 It was also pointed out that most of that physical therapy Acts at international level also
say prescription from licensed physician, surgeon, dentist, podiatrist is mandatory to get the
Physiotherapy treatment (Louisiana Physical Therapy Act, Virginia Physical Therapy Act, New York
Physical Therapy Act, Texas Physical Therapy Act, Mississippi Physical Therapy Act, State of
Rhode Island Physical Therapy Act, Iowa Physical Therapy Act).
9.44 The Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, while replying to the various queries
raised by the Committee on the much debated issue of definition of Physiotherapy very specifically
mentioned that it was a conscious decision to include the words ‘medically directed’ in the
definition of physiotherapy.
9.45 The Committee finds that the issue of definition of physiotherapy has elicited very
strong and emphatic views both for and against from physiotherapists and medical
practitioners as well as from the Ministry. The Committee is constrained to observe that
instead of there being an objective assessment of the definition of physiotherapy,
unnecessary and unwarranted controversy on the status of physiotherapists versus medical
practitioners has been dwelt upon by all concerned. The Committee is somewhat disturbed
by the diametrically opposite stand taken by the physiotherapists and medical practitioners.

12
In the process, the academic exercise of defining a profession has been done away with and
element of professional insecurity and rivalry seems to have become more important.
9.46 The Committee has given deep thought to all the views and opinions aired before it
by all concerned. Voluminous material relating to both national and international arena
placed before it has also received full attention of the Committee. The fact that
physiotherapy education over the years has made significant advancements and has evolved
as a distinct profession seems to be well established. This is strengthened by the considered
opinion of Ministry of Law that physiotherapy profession should not be equated with the
paramedical professions.
9.47 The Committee also took an opportunity to go through the definition of
physiotherapy as given in different State Acts of USA, Canada,. New Zealand etc. The
Committee did not notice the specific use of words ‘medically directed’ in the definition of
‘physiotherapy’ given in these Acts. The Committee would also like to point out that a
definition should only describe the profession enumerating its different characteristics and
not its administrative part. The Committee also takes note of the fact as mentioned by the
representative of the Ministry that in USA, physiotherapy profession has reached a stage
where these professionals can practise independently. Not only this, in some of the
international Acts, it has been specifically provided that physiotherapists having the
required experience can give physiotherapy treatment without a referral. These Acts also
confer upon a physiotherapist the right to practise with or without referral governed by the
circumstances of the case. The Committee would also like to point out that the analogy of
including the words ‘medically directed’ should have been followed in the definitions of
medical Laboratory technology and radiology technology also. The Committee is, however,
surprised to note that definition of these two professions to be governed by separate Central
Councils is completely ignored by making a mere mention of these two professions under
the definition of ‘paramedical’. This confirms Committee’s apprehension that the words
‘medically directed’ have been deliberately used defeating the very basis of defining a
profession.
9.48 The Committee is not fully convinced by the reservations of the Ministry to the
definition of physiotherapy as given in the Delhi Council of Physiotherapy and Occupational
Therapy Act, 1997. The Committee feels that this definition is more comprehensive and as a
whole is confined to the specific role of a physiotherapist. Such a definition does not give the
right to a physiotherapist to practise as a doctor. Ministry’s objections to the use of words like
‘bodily malfunction’, ‘physical disorders’ and ‘healing from pain and trauma’ do not seem to
be very convincing. The Committee would like to point out that similar words have been
included in the definition of physiotherapy given in the relevant Acts of other countries.
9.49 The Committee also takes note of well-founded objection raised with regard to the
definition of physiotherapy as given in the Delhi Act. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that this definition may be included with the replacement of the words
‘physiotherapeutic system of medicine’ by  the word ‘therapy’ or ‘health care profession’.
Secondly, to set at rest the apprehensions expressed by  all concerned about physiotherapists
assuming the role of a doctor, following provision may be added at the appropriate place in
the Bill:
‘Physiotherapists cannot take over the responsibilities of a doctor and cannot
prescribe drugs.’
9.50 Clause 2(1)(q)
Clause 2(1)(q) defines ‘‘radiodiagnosis” in the following manner:

13
“radiodiagnosis” means any kind of diagnostic procedures involving ionizing radiation
(X-Rays);
9.51 Indian Association of Radiological Technologists and Indian Society of Radiographers and
Technologists submitted that the Radiodiagnosis Department makes use of  both ionizing and non-
ionizing radiations (like magnetic resonance, RF waves and ultrasonal) for diagnostic purpose. So,
the word “non-ionising” may also be added in the definition. The Committee feels that the
suggestion seems to be justified and, accordingly, recommends that necessary modification
may be carried out in the definition of radio-diagnosis’.
9.52 Clause 2(1)(r)
Clause 2(1)(r) defines “radiology technician” as follows:
“radiology technician” means a person whose name has been entered in the register of  the
Paramedical (Radiology Technology) Central Council;
9.53 Associations representing Radiographers pointed out that over the years Radiology
Technology has expanded to Imaging Technology, Radiotherapy Technology and Nuclear Medicine
Technology. Most advanced diagnostic and therapeutic equipments like CT Scan, MRI, SAD,
PETS, Mammography, Cobalt Therapy Equipments, Linear Accelerator, Gamma Camera,
Technicians were on the actual operational level of advanced and sophisticated equipments. It was
also mentioned that the term ‘technician’ has been replaced by the term ‘technologist’ all over the
world. Therefore, it was very much essential to denote Radiology Technician as Radiological
Technologist.
9.54 The Committee is convinced with the fact that highly skilled work force is required
to operate advanced medical equipments under the present health care delivery system. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the words “radiology technician” be replaced by the
words ‘radiology technologist’ and the word “Paramedical” be deleted from this Clause. The
words ‘who possess recognised radiology technology education’ may also be included in the
definition.
9.55 Clause 2(1)(s)
Clause 2(1)(s) which defines “radiotherapy” is reproduced below—
“radiotherapy” means any kind of therapeutic procedure involving sealed ionizing radiation
sources.
9.56 Central Government Hospital Radiographers Welfare Association submitted that the definition
of radiotherapy may be changed as follows:—
“Radiotherapy means any kind of therapeutic procedure that involves a sealed ionizing
radiation source or any other radiation including electron beam laser beam or proton etc.
The Committee recommends to the Ministry to examine the above suggestion and
incorporate the same if it is in consonance with the established scientific principles.
10. Clause 3
10.1 Clause 3 relates to constitution of the three Central Councils as indicated below :
(a) the Physiotherapy Central Council,
(b) the Paramedical (Medical Laboratory Technology) Central Council, and
(c) the Paramedical (Radiology Technology) Central Council.

14
10.2 During its interactions with associations/ experts representing occupational therapy and
physiotherapy, it was constantly impressed upon the Committee that the two professions were two
separate professions each having a distinct identity of its own. Occupational therapy being covered
under the Physiotherapy Central Council was not considered a viable preposition.
10.3 The Committee notes that as admitted by the Ministry, in the absence of any
registering and regulatory body, there was no exact data available about paramedical
professionals except pharmacists and nurses. However, the approximate number of
physiotherapists and occupational therapists based on their assumption was around 16,000
and 8,000 respectively.
l0.4 The Committee feels that the Physiotherapy Central Council as envisaged with two
separate registers for physiotherapy and occupational therapy will not serve the purpose.
The Committee would like to point out that an independent profession with entirely
different course of study, mode of treatment and approach in treatment and rehabilitation
of patients cannot be included under another profession. The Committee also takes note of
the fact that both the professions having entirely separate curriculum are recognized as
separate disciplines by UGC. Committee’s contention is strengthened by confirmation of
both the professions being entirely different and practitioner of one discipline not allowed
to practise the other in reply to a Parliament Question given on the 20th August, 2004. In
the light of the above facts and also its observations/recommendations in respect of Clauses
1 (1) and 2 (1) (a) above, the Committee recommends that Clause 3 (1) be amended to read
as follows:—
(a) The Physiotherapy Central Council,
(b) The Occupational Therapy Central Council,
(c) The Medical Laboratory Technology Central Council, and
(d) The Radiology Technology Central Council.
The Committee also recommends that the consequential changes be made in the Bill
to reflect the above proposition.
10.5 The Committee was surprised to observe that overall composition of the Central Councils
indicated lack of autonomy by virtue of these being purely nominated bodies. On a specific query
in this regard, it was clarified by the Ministry that the role of the Council was to lay down
technical standards, rather than becoming monopolies and therefore government control was
essential. The Ministry also argued that there had been past instances with existing Councils e.g.
Medical Council of India where Central Government was forced to exercise control over its affairs.
Keeping this experience in mind, the Central Government had proposed to have control over the
Councils and the Bill has been formulated with this opinion.
10.6 The Committee is disturbed by the line of argument offered by the Ministry with
regard to the proposed role of the Central Councils. The Committee is of the considered
view that in this era of liberalization when the general trend is towards according greater
autonomy to institutions for the purpose of making them centres of excellence, approach
of the Ministry is not justified. It is in this context that injecting the process of election
in the constitution of the Councils acquires added significance. Arming the Central
Government with overriding powers in all matters coupled with lack of any mechanism of
checks and balances will undermine the very purpose for which the Councils are proposed
to be set up. The Committee is appreciative of the fact that the Central Government, by
its very nature, is mandated to implement policies of national importance and to that extent
it is well within its right to exercise control over the affairs of the Councils. However, that

15
does not  warrant giving the Central Government over-riding powers in a way that is
prejudicial to their autonomous working. The Committee, therefore, recommends a new
clause be added to the Bill to shield the proposed Councils from undue government
interference.
10.7 The Committee received a number of requests from various associations/ fora/ organisations
for inclusion of more categories of paramedical professions in the Bill. Some of the stakeholders
pleaded that there should be one more Council for operation theater technical staff and one for the
remaining categories such as speech therapist, orthopist/ orthoptician, audiometric assistant, haemo-
dialysis technical staff like ECG technician, EEG Technician, EMG technician and mortuary
technical staff. It was also pointed out that all the above streams of paramedical staff played an
important role under the Modern Health Care Delivery System and if these categories were left out
of the purview of any such mechanism, the quality of health care delivery system would be badly
affected. It was, accordingly, suggested that either these categories should be clubbed with similar
groups in any of the Councils or a separate mechanism should be developed for accommodating
them.
10.8 Some other stakeholders submitted that the proposed Paramedical Council should also
include specializations like cardiac care, respiratory care, dialysis technology, etc. and also have a
scope to include other specializations as and when they develop. Committee’s attention was also
drawn to the fact that Extra Corporeal Technologists (also called perfusionists), though small in
number (approximately 500) , were also a very important part of medical technology as without
their support, a cardiac surgeon cannot operate. A separate Council was, accordingly, requested for
them.
10.9 During the course of their deposition before the Committee, a group of stakeholders
representing the interest of doctor fraternity submitted that medicine was a rapidly changing field
and what was today the state-of-the-art, became obsolete in five years. They, therefore, suggested
that this Act should be envisaged as an Umbrella Act for all the paramedicals whereunder the newer
and emerging technologies and paramedical professionals could get automatically adjusted. However,
the Bill in the present from, they opined, did not address that aspect.
10.10 Asked to respond to the apprehension that there was no enabling provision in the Bill for
the creation of more Councils/sub-councils, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare inter alia
submitted that the proposed Bill envisages creating an umbrella Central Council Legislation with a
provision to create number of separate Councils/Sub-Councils and as and when required an enabling
provision shall be incorporated for the purpose.
10.11 The Committee was also informed that with the development in modern medicine, there was
constant evolution in paramedical disciplines both in their assignment and in their terminology. The
major categories of Paramedical disciplines not covered in other existing Central Councils in India
(Rehabilitation Council of India, INC, Pharmacy Council) were as follows:—
1. Medical Imaging technologists (Radiographers, X-ray technicians, Dark Room Assistants).
2. Medical laboratory technologists
a. Biochemistry
b. Pathology
c. Bacteriology
d. Virology
e. Cytology

16
f. Histopathology
g. Haematology
h. Blood Bank Technology
i. Lab Medicine
3. Renal dialysis technologists
4. Physiotherapists
5. Perfusion technologists
6. Occupational therapists
7. Respiratory therapists
8. Optometrists
9. Ophthalmic assistants
10. Nuclear Medicine Technologists
11. Neuroscience technologists (EMG, EEG)
12. Cardiovascular technologists (ECG, ECHO)
13. Pre Hospital Trauma Technologists (Accident & Emergency care)
14. Anesthesia technologists
15. Operation theater technologists.
16. Medical radiation technologists
17. Dieticians/Nutritionists
10.12 The Committee observes that though the Bill envisages to enact an Umbrella Central
Councils Act, enabling provision for creation of new councils is missing as conceded by the
Ministry also. The Committee is, however, not in favour of creating separate Councils/ Sub-
Councils for each of the 17 paramedical professionals, as doing that would not only be time-
consuming but also cost ineffective. One must also not forget that this list of 17
paramedical professions is not an exhaustive one. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that Clause 3(1) be amended and a new Clause be added on the lines as suggested by the
Ministry above.
11. Clause 3 (4)
11.1 Clause 3 (4) provides that every Central Council shall consist of the following members,
namely:—
(a) the Chairperson, to be appointed by the Central Government From amongst the members
of the concerned Central Council;
(b) the Vice-Chairperson, to be appointed by the Central Government From amongst the
members of the concerned Central Council;
(c) one officer not below the rank of an Assistant Director General of the Directorate
General of Health Services in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare dealing with the
physiotherapy or medical laboratory technology or radiology technology, as the case may be;

17
(d) one officer of the Ministry or the Department of the Central Government having
administrative control of health not below the rank of a Deputy Secretary to the
Government of India, dealing with the physiotherapy or medical laboratory technology or
radiology technology, as the case may be;
(e) one member not below the rank of a Deputy Secretary to the Government of India to
be appointed by the Central Government to represent the Ministry of Finance;
(f) one member not below the rank of a Deputy Secretary to the Government of India to
be appointed by the Central Government to represent the Ministry of Science and
Technology;
(g) one member not below the rank of a Deputy Secretary to the  Government of India to
be appointed by the Director General, Armed Forces Medical Services to represent the
Ministry of Defence:
(h) four members not below the rank of a Deputy Secretary to the Government of India to
be appointed by the Central Government to represent,—
(i) the Central Board of Secondary Education; (ii) the University Grants Commission;
(iii) All India Council of Technical Education: and (iv) the Medical Council of India:
(i) four members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst the teachers of
the recognized institutions imparting education in physiotherapy or medical laboratory
technology or radiology technology, as the case may be;
(j) not less than three members to be appointed by the Central Government by rotation in
the alphabetical order to represent the States and one member to represent the Union
territories:
Provided that an appointment under this clause shall be made on the recommendation of
the Government of the State, or as the case may be, the Union territory concerned;
(k) four members to be appointed by the Central Government, respectively, from amongst
the practitioners in physiotherapy, occupational therapy, medical laboratory technology and
radiology technology:
(l) four members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent such organizations
which can represent the interest of physiotherapy, occupational therapy, medical laboratory
technology and radiology technology.
11.2 The Committee received an overwhelming response from a very large number of
stakeholders representing different professions on the proposed Central Councils. One persistent
line of thinking evident was the message of dissatisfaction with the envisaged composition of the
three Central Councils.
11.3 Some of the stakeholders submitted that 60% of the total members, of the Central Council
should be registered members and 40% should be non-professionals, appointed/nominated by the
Government. An overwhelming majority of the stakeholders were of the view that Chairperson and
the Vice Chairperson of the Central Council instead of being appointed by the Government, should
be elected from amongst themselves by such members of the Central Council, whose names appear
in the register of the concerned Council.
11.4 Another view which emerged was that for better functioning of the Councils for fulfillment
of their objectives, it is a precondition that the Councils function in a democratic way and are
mainly manned by the concerned professionals. It was, accordingly, suggested that 75 % members
should be elected professionals and 25%  non-professionals nominated by the Government.

18
11.5 Yet another group of stakeholders submitted that the composition of the Committee as
proposed in the Bill was in a disproportionate ratio and argued that the number of physiotherapists
should be increased in the Physiotherapy Council on the lines of other professional councils in the
country. They were broadly in agreement with the proposed representation of Ministry Health and
Family Welfare, Finance, Science and Technology and Defence as proposed in clause 3 (4) (c),
(d), (e), (f) and (g) but also wanted a representative of the Ministry of Law to be nominated in
the Central Physiotherapy Council. Representation of the All India Council of Technical Education
and Medical Council of India in the proposed Physiotherapy Council, however, did not find favour.
11.6 The association representing the occupational therapists submitted that the clause has
no provision for incorporating occupational therapist and physiotherapist from various fields in
clinical practice and academics except only one practitioner from occupational therapy and
physiotherapy.
11.7 It was also suggested that members under Clause 3 (4)(i), (k) and (l) categories must be
elected democratically as provided for in Medical Council of India, Dental Council of India, Nursing
Council of India etc., otherwise the principle or democratic representations of professionals in the
Council would be negated and only a handful of people having contacts within the Government
hierarchy would be nominated in the Councils.
11.8 Some of the stakeholders representing medical laboratory technologists submitted that the
terminology “organization” in clause 3 (4) (1) was not clear and therefore prone to
misinterpretation. They suggested that the four members from concerned organizations must be
defined clearly and written as four members from the Associations/Forums/Unions of concerned
registered professionals and the number of such members may also be increased substantially.
11.9 Another view put forth before the Committee was that the composition of the Council
should be along the lines of the Medical Council of India where there was more representation of
the universities and people working in the field. There should also be representation of  persons with
disabilities or their organizations and of the Office of the Disability Commissioner. Non
representation of  a medical practitioner in the Councils was also found improper. It was pointed
out that advances in modern medicine were rapid and if doctors were not included in the Council
then the future needs of syllabi and curriculum would not be met.
11.10 Some of the stakeholders were of the view that the absence of a State Council
representative in the Central Council may lead to contradiction in functioning and polices and hence
it was very much essential to include State Council Chairman and member in every Central Council.
11.11 The Committee was also informed that under Clause 3 (4) (i) four members are to be
appointed by the Central Government from  amongst the teachers of recognized institutions,
imparting education in Physiotherapy or  Medical laboratory technology or Radiology technology as
the case may be. However, there was ambiguity in the sense that any teacher teaching the allied
subject can become the member and it will dilute the interest of the Council related to this. It was
suggested that provision should be modified so that four members were appointed from amongst
the teachers whose name appeared in the Council Register of Physiotherapy, Occupational therapy
technology, Radiology technology etc. as the case may be and working in the recognized
institutions imparting education in the respective discipline.
11.12 From an analysis of Clause 3 (4) the first glaring deficiency that came to the notice of the
Committee was that the proposed Councils would be nominated bodies and there would be
preponderance of Central Government appointees and nominees in the Councils. The Committee
found that the 26 members proposed for each of the Councils, would be either Central/ State
Government officials or appointed by the Central Government.

19
11.13 Asked to  explain the rationale behind such preponderance of Central Government in the
Councils proposed, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in a written submission stated the
following:—
“In the first Council, the entire body will be either Government appointees or nominees as
there is no register or standardized qualification to classify the electorate. Thereafter the
representatives of the respective paramedical profession could be elected from amongst
those who are registered in the Council.
This is the view of the Ministry Health and Family Welfare as it is felt that all the
Paramedicals are an integral part of the modern system of medicine and the functioning of
any healthcare service would be impossible without them. It has been seen that over the
years there has been a lot of mushrooming of these professionals with little regard to
quality. Thus after the establishment of the Council and definition of certain minimum
standards, electoral rights may be given to the professionals and the Council.’’
11.14 The Committee appreciates the fact that since there is no Council and no register of
members either, the first Council may be a nominated body. However, the Committee is
unable to reconcile itself with the fact that the Bill is bereft of any provisions to the effect
that after the expiry of the term of the first Council, the next Council will be formed as an
elected body. The Committee feels that lack of clarity in this regard might lead to the election
of the Central Councils being put on perpetual hold. The Committee feels that the Bill itself
must provide that after the term of the first Council runs out, the next Council shall be
constituted by way of election. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a specific and
categorical provision be made in the Bill itself to the effect that after the term of the first
Council i.e. two years expires, the next Council coming into existence will be an elected body.
11.15 The Committee notes that the main concern expressed in respect of Clause 3 (4)(a)
and (b) was that there was no mention of the process of election of the Chairperson and
the Vice Chairperson after the expiry of the term of the first Council and the Bill was also
silent about the eligibility criteria under this Clause. The Committee finds the concerns
valid and recommends that the said Clause be amended to reflect that the Chairperson and
the Vice Chairperson of the next Councils shall be elected by the members of the respective
Councils from amongst themselves and the person so elected and his qualifications should
be directly relevant to the discipline of the concerned Council in such a way that he should
be eligible to be enrolled on the register of the concerned Council. The Committee would
also like to point out that election procedure for electing Council Chairman, Vice-Chairman
and other council Members on the expiry of the term of the first nominated Council needs
to be incorporated in the Act as it is done in the case of other similar Councils.
11.16 The Committee also takes note of the fact that the Ministry, during the interdepartmental
consultation had committed to the Ministry of Social Justice of Empowerment for inclusion of one
member from Rehabilitation Council of India (RCI) as member of the Council and therefore Clause
3(4) (h) (i) will be rectified by including a member from R.C.I. as member of the Central Council.
The Committee accepts the Ministry’s explanation and recommends to modify Clause 3(4)
(h) to include one member from the Rehabilitation Council of India.
11.17 The Committee notes that Clause 3 (4) (i) suffers mainly from two inadequacies, one is that
the principle of democratic representation of professionals in the Council has been given a go-by,
which is evident from the fact that the Clause is silent about any provision for the election of
members in the future; and the other is that the Clause is ambiguous in as much as it does not
specifically mention that the persons, so appointed would be professionals from the concerned
discipline, thereby making the clause prone to misinterpretation and misuse.

20
11.18 To rectify the above position, the Committee recommends that Clause 3 (4) (i) be
amended to ensure that (i) four members of the first Council shall be appointed by the
Central Government from amongst the teachers of the concerned discipline, of the
recognized institutions imparting education in Physiotherapy or Occupational Therapy or
Medical Laboratory Technology or Radiology Technology, as the case may be. The Committee
also recommends that specific provisions be made in the Clause to ensure that after the
expiry of the term of the first Council i.e two years, four members under this Clause shall
be elected from the amongst themselves by such teachers of the concerned discipline of the
recognized institutions imparting education in physiotherapy or Medical Laboratory
Technology or Radiology Technology, as the case may be, whose names appear on the
register of the concerned Council.
11.19 The Committee observes that Clauses 3(4)(k) and (I) suffer from similar
inadequacies as pointed out in respect of Clause 3(4)(i). The Committee notes that
apart from absence of any clause providing for election of the Members under this
Clause in future, the Clause leaves scope for favoritism and nepotism as any practitioner
in the concerned discipline, whether of eminence or not, could be appointed under this
clause.
11.20 With a view to insulating the Central Council from possible favoritism and nepotism,
the Committee recommends that under Clause 3(4)(k), four members of the first Council
should be appointed by the Central Government, from amongst the practitioners of
eminence in the concerned discipline, from the Institutes and Hospitals of repute and after
the expiry of the term of the first Council, four members under this clause shall be elected
from amongst the practitioners of repute of the concerned discipline, from Institutes and
Hospitals of repute, by members of the Institutes and the Hospitals, whose names appear
in the register of the concerned Council. The Committee also recommends that out of the
four members so elected, two shall represent the public sector Hospitals/Institutes and two
shall represent the private sector Hospitals/Institutes.
11.21 The Committee observes that the term “Organizations” occurring in Clause 3 (4) (l)
is vague and can be misinterpreted to mean any hospital or medical institution. The
Committee therefore, recommends that the word “Organizations” be defined clearly.
11.22 The Committee observes that clause 3(4) (l) also lacks provisions ensuring electoral
process in the constitution of the Councils formed subsequent to the first Council and
therefore recommends that four members of the first Council under Clause 3(4)(l) should
be appointed by the Government to represent such national/state level organizations which
can represent the interest of Physiotherapy, Occupational Therapy, medical laboratory and
radiology technology and after the expiry of the term of the first Council, four members
under the said Clause shall be elected from amongst themselves by such professionals of
national/state level organizations, whose names appear in the register of the concerned
Council.
11.23 The Committee feels that the criterion adopted in clause 3(4)(j) for the appointment
of three members to represent the States and one member to represent the Union
Territories is not fair in the sense that in a vast country like India, rotational appointment
in the alphabetical order may result in the skewed representation of the States and Union
Territories as it will take years before many of the States get their representation in the
Councils. The Committee therefore feels that the zonal grouping of the states for the
purpose of their representation in the Councils would be a better option. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that clause 3(4)(j) be amended in such a way that four members
shall be appointed by the Central Government by rotation in the alphabetical order from

21
within the zone to represent the States, i.e. North, South, East and West and one member
shall be appointed to represent the Union Territories.
11.24 To ensure that the Council is manned mostly by professionals, the Committee
recommends that the proviso to Clause 3(4) (j) be amended to ensure that the members of
the first Councils appointed under this clause should be from amongst the qualified
professionals of eminence and after the expiry of the term of the first Councils,
appointments under this Clause should be made from amongst the qualified professionals
of eminence, who are enrolled on the register of the concerned Council.
11.25 The Committee’s attention has been drawn to a very notable omission i.e.  lack of
representation of Members of Parliament in the Council. Asked to comment in this regard, the
Director General, Health Services during the course of his deposition before the Committee assured
to look into the matter. Subsequently, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in a written
submission stated that a provision may be introduced to have a MP nominated in the Council from
amongst those MPs who have qualification or experience relevant to the discipline of the Council
so that there can be contribution to the functioning of the Council.
11.26 The Committee is not inclined to agree with the contention of the Ministry that MPs
having qualification or experience relevant to the discipline of the Council can only be in
a position to make fruitful contribution. The Committee would like to point out that
Members of Parliament represent the will of the people and their representation in the
Councils will ensure that the popular aspirations are reflected in the policies and
programmes of the Council. The Committee notes that AICTE and Nursing Council of India
have two members each from Lok Sabha and one member from Rajya Sabha elected by the
respective Houses. The Committee in its 19th Report on the Indian Medical Council Bill,
2005 presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2006 had recommended
representation of MPs in the Medical Council of India in the same proportion as in AICTE
and Nursing Council of India. Taking a cue from its above recommendation, the Committee
recommends that a provision be made in the present Bill to nominate two MPs from Lok
Sabha and one M.P. from Rajya Sabha elected by the respective Houses.
12. Clause 4
12.1 Clause 4(1) which stipulates the tenure of a member of a Central Council is reproduced
below:—
4. (1) A member of a Central Council shall hold office for a term of five years from the date
of his appointment.
It was pointed out by some of the stakeholders that the tenure of five years for a member of a
nominated Council is too long a period which should be reduced to two to three years.
12.2 The Committee notes that though the tenure of elected Councils like Medical
Council of India, All India Council of Technical Education is of five years, it would not be
in the larger public interest to allow a wholly nominated body to continue for five years.
The Committee is of the considered view that tenure of two years should be sufficient for
the first Council to lay down and frame requisite rules and regulations. Thereafter, the
tenure of an elected Council could be on the lines of other statutory Councils. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that Clause 4(1) be amended to the effect that a
member of the first Council shall hold office for a term of two years and thereafter the
term of Member of an elected Council shall be five years.
12.3 The Committee also notes that Clause 4(3) which relates to filling up of a casual
vacancy does not lay down any time frame for the same. The Committee feels that such

22
a deficiency may be exploited to keep the filling up of a vacancy on perpetual hold. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that Clause 4(3) be amended to ensure that a period of
three months is prescribed for filling a vacancy.
13. Clause 6
Clause 6 relates to resignation of a member appointed/elected under Clause 3 ( 4) (a)(b) and
(h) to (I). Proviso to Clause 6 stipulates that a member who has submitted his resignation shall
continue to hold office of the Central Council until his resignation has been accepted by the Central
Government. The Committee noted that proviso does not indicate any time frame for acceptance
of the resignation and is thus likely to be misused inasmuch as such a member could be allowed
to remain member of the Council for a long time despite having submitted his resignation. On a
specific enquiry in this regard, the Ministry agreed to include a time-frame of three months in
Clause 6 for the Government to process the resignation of a member and decide on the appropriate
replacement of the same. The Committee recommends that Clause 6 may be modified
accordingly.
14. Clause 8
14.1 Clause 8 seeks to provide for the time, place and the procedure to be followed in the
meetings of Central Councils.
14.2 The Committee notes that the Bill prescribes that rules of procedure in regard to the
transaction of business at the meetings of the Central Councils including the quorum at
such meetings, may be determined by regulations. The Committee feels that in view of the
critical role envisaged for the Central Councils in formulating standards of education and
training, quorum of meetings of the Central Councils should be spelt out in unambiguous
terms in the Act itself. The Committee observes that such a provision is there in all the
Acts relating to similar bodies. This mandatory condition is required to be there from the
very beginning due to the protracted regulation rule making exercise. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that Clause 8 be amended to indicate the quorum required for the
meetings of the Central Councils.
15. Clause 11
15.1 Clause 11 seeks to empower respective Central Councils to constitute from amongst their
members an Executive Committee, Disciplinary Committee or any other Committee as may be
determined by regulations. The Committee notes that instead of specifically mentioning the
composition, tenure and functions of a Committee so formed, the Clause leaves it to the regulations
to determine the same.
15.2 The Committee observes that the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 not only specifies the
number of members constituting the Executive Committee, but it also lays down its constitution,
by way of ex officio nomination of President and the Vice-President of Medical Council of India
and election of members. Similarly in the Delhi Council for Physiotherapy and Occupational
Therapy Act, 1997, composition of the Executive Committee and Equivalence and Registration
Committee has been enumerated in the Act itself.
15.3 The Committee is of the considered view that contours of the composition of the
Executive Committee under clause 11 must be specified in the Bill. Making allowances for
the fact that the first Central Councils under the Bill are envisaged to be wholly nominated
bodies, the Committee can well understand the compulsions behind not adopting the
electoral process for the purpose of the constitution of the first Executive Committee.
However, what the Committee is unable to reconcile itself with, is that there is no mention
at all either of electoral process in the constitution of the future Executive Committees or

23
of the number of members required for constituting such a Committee. The Committee is
also surprised by lack of any provision concerning the functions of the Executive
Committee, presumably the most powerful Committee.
15.4 Taking all factors into account, the Committee recommends that Clause 11 be
amended so as to include specific composition of the Executive Committee and the
Disciplinary Committee. The Committee would also like to point out that normally the
Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of a Council are the ex-officio members of the Executive
Committee and automatically become the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the
Executive Committee. The Committee finds no justification for not adhering to this time-
tested convention. The Committee, therefore, recommends that clause 11 may be modified
accordingly.
15.5 The Committee also recommends that provisions be made in the Bill, specifically
indicating the powers and duties of the Executive Committees, so that there is complete
clarity about the role of the Executive Committee and occasions for overlapping of powers
and duties of the Executive Committee with other Committees of the Council do not arise.
16. Clause 12
16.1 Clause 12 relates to the functions of the Central Council.
16.2. The Committee notes that the Delhi Council for Physiotherapy and Occupational
Therapy Council Act, 1997 mandates the Delhi Council to  inter alia advise the Government
in matters relating to the requirements of manpower in the field of physiotherapy and
occupational therapy. In view of the yawning mismatch between demand and supply of
health care services in the country, the Committee feels that the Central Councils could
play a vital role in terms of acquainting the Government with requirements of allied health
professionals in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Clause 12 be
suitably amended to include therein the above referred function among the functions of the
Central Councils.
17. Clause 13 and 14
17.1 Clause 13 inter-alia seeks to provide for appointment of the Secretary, Officers and other
employees of the Central Council. First Secretary of each Central Council shall hold office for a
period of three years. On a specific query with regard to the justification for fixing the tenure of
the first Secretary for three years, it was clarified by the Ministry that this was done so as to
ensure the accomplishment of some basic task including framing of certain minimum rules and
guidelines during the tenure of the first Secretary who would be a person having contributed to
the regularization and growth of the concerned council. The Committee notes that as per clause
14, the Secretary shall be the Chief Executive Officer of a Central Council.
17.2 One suggestion which came before the Committee was that a Member Secretary can
perform duties and responsibilities of CEO in a more effective manner as compared to a non-
member Executive Secretary. The Committee observes that while the IMC Act, 1956 empowers the
Council to appoint a Registrar who shall act as Secretary, and who may also, if deemed expedient,
act as Treasurer, the Delhi Council Act empowers the Council to appoint a Registrar who shall be
the Secretary and the Executive Officer of the Council and attend all meetings of the Council, and
of its Executive Committee.
17.3 The Committee, therefore recommends that Clause 13 be amended so as to specify
the exact duties to be performed by the Secretary, on a similar pattern as envisaged in the
Delhi Council for Physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy Act, 1997. The Committee is also
of the opinion that the Secretary so appointed besides possessing qualification in public

24
administration or law, may also be well-conversant with the background and technicalities
of the concerned profession.
18. Clause 16
18.1 Clause 16 seeks to provide that prior approval of the Central Government shall be obtained
by each University or Institution for imparting education in physiotherapy, medical laboratory
technology and radiology technology.
18.2 The Committee observes that this provision is too general and does not give any idea
as to what would be the procedure for seeking permission for establishment of a new
institution, introduction of a new course of study or increase in the admission capacity of
a particular course. The Committee strongly feels that in the absence of specific provision
on the above-mentioned aspects, there is every possibility of emergence of element of
arbitrariness. The Committee would like to emphasise that this would go against the very
objective for which the Central Councils are envisaged to be set up.
18.3 The Committee fails to understand as to why the detailed provisions as made in the
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and the Delhi Council for Physiotherapy and Occupational
Therapy Act, 1997 regarding establishing an institution, opening a new or higher course of
study or training, increasing admission capacity in any course of study or training,
procedure for submission of an application for grant of permission etc. have not been
suitably incorporated in the present Bill. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
Clause 16 be suitably and comprehensively amended to incorporate detailed provisions on
the pattern of Section 10A of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and Section 18 of the
Delhi Council for Physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy Act, 1997.
19. Clause 17
19.1 Clause 17 seeks to empower the Central Government to notify recognized qualifications.
The Committee notes that the proposed provision in the Bill does not make any reference
to a schedule where-under all the recognized qualifications of relevant professions are to be
included. The Committee is of the opinion that in the absence of such a provision, it would
not be possible to identify the recognized qualifications at a glance. Schedule is the right
mechanism for this purpose. The Committee would like to point out that the proposed
legislation is envisaged for four categories of allied health professions having variety of
degrees with an enabling provision for future expansion. Provision of a schedule as indicated
above needs to be an essential feature. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that
necessary modifications in this regard may be carried out.
19.2 Committee’s attention has also been drawn by the absence of two very important
provisions covering very vital aspects, like non-recognition of qualification in certain cases,
time for seeking permission for certain existing colleges/institutions in the Bill. The
Committee fails to understand the rationale for non-inclusion of such provisions. The
Committee would like to point out that an enabling provision taking care of existing
institutions with all the required precautions along with powers to take action against
institutions coming up against the prescribed norms cannot be ignored. Such provisions are
required for safeguarding the interests of both students and institutions. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends the incorporation of such provisions in the Bill.
20. Clause 19
20.1 Clause 19 seeks to empower each Central Council to determine minimum standards of
education for granting recognized qualifications by Universities or Institutions.

25
20.2 It has been impressed upon the Committee that medical technology is a dynamic and rapidly
changing field and therefore warrants updation of knowledge and skills on an on-going and
continuous basis. Provisions should therefore may be made in the Bill to ensure that minimum
standards of education required for granting recognized qualifications by the Universities or
institutions are reviewed periodically to make them in tune with the latest innovations.
20.3 It was also suggested that there should be a provision in the Bill to provide adequate
opportunities for the professionals for upgrading their skills/education through in-service education/
training programme, Continuing Medical Education (CMF) programme and refresher courses etc.
20.4 The Committee fully appreciates the fact that allied health professions reflect a rapidly
changing field and if there is no mechanism for upgrading the skills of professionals, it would
deal a big blow to the advanced health care delivery system in the country. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that a provision be made in the above clause for a mechanism to be
put in place for the purpose of upgrading the skills of professionals through in service/
education/training programme. The Committee also finds the suggestion regarding periodic
review of minimum standards valid and recommends that provisions for a mechanism for
reviewing the minimum standards periodically be made in the Bill.
20.5 It was impressed upon the Committee that the U.N. Convention on Rights of Persons with
disabilities has been signed and ratified by India and therefore the Bill needed to be seen in that
context. It was pointed out that the U.N. Convention states that all professionals and staff working
in the disability field must be trained on the rights of people with disabilities so that they can
provide appropriate services. It was therefore suggested that the accreditation of Physiotherapy and
Occupational Therapy courses should assess whether these courses have a component on working
with people with disabilities and their rights.
20.6 The Committee feels that since India is a signatory to the U.N. Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the above suggestion needs to be examined with an open
mind. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Central Councils for Physiotherapy
and Occupational Therapy, once it is formed, may keep in mind the U.N. Convention on
Rights of Persons with Disability while formulating minimum standards of education for
Physiotherapists and Occupational Therapists.
20.7 To a poser of the Committee as to what is the general assessment of the functioning of
the State Councils for Paramedical and Physiotherapy professions, the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare in a written submission stated that five States, namely, Madhya Pradesh, Delhi,
Maharashtra, Himachal Pradesh and Kerala have a Paramedical Physiotherapy and Occupational
Therapy Council each, whereas Andhra Pradesh has a Paramedical Board. However, since there is
a lot of disparity in the working of the above Councils, the professionals from other States find
it difficult to work in the above States due to non-conforming standards. The Ministry further
stated that the present Bill envisages to address the issue and make uniform standards to be
followed all over the country.
20.8 The Committee feels that in a vast country like India utmost care needs to be
exercised while formulating the minimum standards of education so that the interests of the
students of allied health professions and physiotherapy/occupational therapy all over the
country are accommodated and the widest possible consensus on the curriculum is reached.
The Committee therefore, recommends that the draft minimum standards of education
prepared by the Central Councils be circulated to the States and all efforts be made to
address the genuine concerns, if any, of the State Governments.
21. Clause 21
21.1 Clause 21 seeks to provide for appointment of inspectors and also their powers and functions.

26
21.2 It was pointed out to the Committee that the word “Inspector” is not in tune with
the modern times as it reminds people of Inspector Raj of the olden days and should
therefore be replaced by a more gracious and modern terminology like “expert” or
“assessor.” The Committee is in agreement with the above suggestion and recommends that
the word “Inspector” in the above clause be replaced by “expert” or “assessor.”
21.3 The Committee is also of the opinion that leaving the job of inspection to a single
inspector may breed corruption in the name of regulation. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that provisions be made in Clause 21 to entrust the job of inspection to a team
of experts/assessors consisting of experienced professionals.
22. Clause 22
22.1 Clause 22 seeks to provide for the manner of withdrawal of recognition under certain
circumstances.
22.2 The Committee notes that Clause 22 is deficient to the extent that neither does it
speak of the action in terms of a decision on the part of the Central Government nor does
it lay down any time frame for such an action. The Committee therefore recommends that
the following expression be added at the end of Clause 22 :—
“which shall take final decision on the matter within a period of three months from
the date of receipt of the representation.”
22.3 The Committee also notes that there is no provision for appeal in case of withdrawal of
recognition to any course of study or examination under Clause 22. Asked to react to this state
of affairs, the Ministry in a written submission inter-alia stated that one appellate authority may
be introduced in the Act to enable the institution to make a representation against the
recommendation of the Council and Government’s decision before going to the court of law. The
Ministry also suggested that the appellate authority may consist of  two senior members of  the
Council and one senior officer of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
22.4 The Committee finds no merit in the suggestion of the Ministry that the appellate authority
may consist of two senior members of the Council and one senior officer of the Ministry. The
Committee feels that if the representatives of the very dispensation which has recommended the
withdrawal of recognition are allowed to become a part of the appellate authority, such an
arrangement will run counter to the established principles of natural justice. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that a mechanism may be evolved to ensure that the appellate authority
consists of independent persons of impeccable credentials.
23. Clause 28
23.1 Clause 28 seeks to provide for appeal against an order made by the Central Council and
the manner of its disposal.
23.2 The Committee notes that 30 days’ time has been allowed to a person to appeal against
any refusal to enter his/her name in the register or removal of his/her name from the register
of the concerned Council. The Committee observes that 30 days is too short a period for the
purpose and should be increased to 60 days. The Committee therefore, recommends that Clause
28 (b) be amended to increase the period of appeal from 30 days to 60 days.
24. The Committee adopts the remaining Clauses of the Bill without any amendment.
25. Miscellaneous
25.1 T he Committee would like to draw the attention to non-inclusion of three very
crucial provisions in the Bill. These relate to ‘Professional Conduct’, ‘Renewal of

27
registration’ and ‘Rights and privileges of the registered members’. The Committee is of
the opinion that all the three provisions need to be included in the Bill on the pattern of
similar provisions in the IMC Act, 1956 and the Delhi Council of Physiotherapy and
Occupational Therapy Act, 1997, subject to required modification.
25.2 The Committee observes that at present para-medical profession is being regulated
in only six States. Kerala, Madhya Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh have para-medical
Council, Delhi and Maharashtra have Physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy Council and
Andhra Pradesh has a Paramedical Board. The Committee was given to understand that
there was lot of disparity in the working of the said Councils/Boards and hence they did not
offer even ground for professionals from other  States to work in such States. However, with
the Central Act coming into effect, State Councils/Boards were expected to follow suit.
25.3 The Committee observes that the proposed Bill is silent about the fate of the
Councils/Board in existence in the States. On a specific query about the status of
professionals registered in their State Councils/ Board, it was clarified that every
professional in any part of the country, will have to be registered in the Central Council
register. A person registered in the State Council will have the license to practise only in
that State. It was also informed that the Central Councils may later develop their own
mechanism/rules to merge the State registers with the Central Register provided the State
Councils made amendments in accordance with the Central Act.
25.4 The Committee is of the view that the Centre must work for the removal of the
existing disparities in different State Councils/ Board and devise a mechanism so as to
entrust these State Councils/Board the responsibility of maintenance of uniform standards
of education in the respective States as per the guidelines formulated by the Central
Councils. The Committee also strongly feels that it would not be practical to restrict the
registration of professionals at the central level. The Committee would like to draw the
attention of the Ministry to the existing mechanism for registration at State level and
inclusion of the same in the Central Register in respect of other similar bodies for
allopathic and Indian Systems of Medicine. The Committee also understands that the
Planning Commission had suggested that State level para-professional Councils can be
established for maintenance of professional standards at State level. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that suitable modifications may be carried out in the Bill.
25.5 During the course of interactions, the Committee observed that there was a lot of
dissatisfaction among the allied health professionals particularly physiotherapists and
occupational therapists with regard to their pay scales. It was brought to the notice of the
Committee that their entry into Government service after completion of four and a half
years degree course in the respective profession was not being addressed properly. The
Committee was given to understand that their recurrent demands for bringing parity in the
pay scales have yielded no results so far. General perception was that discriminatory
treatment was being meted out to them as their pay scales did not commensurate with their
status and responsibility.
25.6 The Committee feels that all the allied health professionals including
physiotherapists and occupational therapists play a crucial role in the field of medicine and
physical rehabilitation. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that their
legitimate interests should be taken care of and their existing pay structure may be revised
according to their qualifications and duration of the course they have to put in before
entering into a Government job.

28
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Committee is of the view that title of an Act needs to reflect the basic objective
behind its enactment. It is also not practically possible to include each and every special
component in the title itself. However, nobody can also deny the fact that in the case of
a particular Bill envisaged for  a variety of specialities having distinct identities of their own,
specific mention of one speciality and generalization of all the other specialities raises
uncalled for  complications and resultant controversies. The present Bill before the
Committee is one such case. The Committee would like to point out that title of an Act is
only meant for  indicating its very core content. Proposed legislation before the Committee
relates to setting up of three separate Central Councils for physiotherapy/occupational
therapy, medical laboratory technology and radiology technology. The Committee also take
notes of the fact  that an enabling provision is to be included in the Bill which would open
the way for  future induction of other disciplines. The Committee feels that use of a
common term in the title of the Bill encompassing all the present disciplines and likely
additions in future will be the best option. (Para 8.5)
Taking the relative merits of all viewpoints into account, the Committee, concludes
that the words ‘Paramedical and physiotherapy’ in the title of the Bill may be replaced by
the words ‘Allied Health Professions’. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that clause
1 (1) be amended to read as follows:—
“This Act may be called the Allied Health Professions Central Councils
Act, 2007”. (Para 8.6)
The Committee also recommends that in the light of its above recommendation the
preamble to the Bill be amended to incorporate the consequential changes. (Para 8.7)
In view of its observation and recommendation with regard to the title of the Bill,
and Clause 3, the Committee is of the view that definition of Central Council may also be
modified as follows:
“Central Council” means the Central Council of Medical Laboratory Technology or
Radiology Technology or Physiotherapy or Occupational Therapy, as the case may be,
constituted under section-3’’. (Para 9.2)
In the light of the Committee’s observations/recommendations in respect of clause 1
(1) and Clause 2(1) (a) above, definition of the term ‘education’ may be modified
accordingly with the words “or occupational therapy” added after “physiotherapy”. (Para 9.4)
The Committee finds substance in the above arguments and recommends that the
word “technician” in Clause 2 (1) (e) be replaced by “technologist” and the term
“Paramedical” be deleted. The Committee strongly feels that the definition should also
specifically mention that a medical laboratory technician will be a person who possesses
recognized medical laboratory technology qualification. The same may, accordingly be
included in the definition of ‘medical laboratory technician’. (Para 9.7)
The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the definition of medical laboratory
may be modified accordingly. (Para 9.9)
28

29
In the light of its observations/recommendations in respect of Clauses 1 (1), and 2
(1) and Clause 3, the Committee recommends that in Clause 2(1)(g) after the words
“Physiotherapy Central Council” Occupational Therapy Central Council be inserted and the
word “Paramedical” be deleted from Clause 2(1)(g). (Para 9.11)
In the light of its observations/recommendations in respect of Clauses 2(1)(a) and
2(1)(e) and 3 the Committee recommends that “Physiotherapy Central Council” in the
definition be replaced by Occupational Therapy Central Council and the words ‘who possess
recognized occupational therapy qualification’ may also be added. (Para 9.13)
The Committee’s attention was also drawn to the inclusion of ‘occupational therapy’
in the definition of ‘physiotherapy’. The Committee finds it surprising that an independent
profession with entirely different course of study, mode of treatment and approach in
treatment and rehabilitation of patients has found place under another profession. The
Committee was informed that both occupational therapy and physiotherapy having entirely
separate curriculum were recognized as separate disciplines in educational institutions,
Hospitals and medical institutions across the country have separate departments of
occupational therapy and physiotherapy. The Committee strongly feels that reservations are
based on valid ground and accordingly recommends the deletion of words ‘occupational
therapy’ from the definition of ‘physiotherapy’. (Para 9.17)
The Committee notes that inclusion of words “medically directed” is the most
contentious part of the definition of ‘occupational therapy’ as indicated in Clause 2(1)(k).
There is no doubt in the mind of the Committee that occupational therapists are responsible
for detailed assessment, treatment planning and implementation of treatment regimen.
Even the representatives of Indraprastha Association of Rehabilitation Medicine, during the
course of their appearance before the Committee, admitted in the context of
physiotherapists/occupational therapists that they work independently but according to the
prescription of a doctor. Keeping this fact in view and also their training period of four and
a half years, the Committee does not subscribe to the view that the words “medically
directed” need to be retained in Clause 2(1)(k). (Para 9.18)
During the course of its interaction, the Committee’s attention was drawn to the
definition of ‘occupational therapy’ given in the Delhi Council for Physiotherapy and
Occupational Therapy Act, 1997. After comparing the relative merits of the two definitions
of Occupational Therapy,  i.e.  the one given in the Delhi Council for Physiotherapy and
Occupational Therapy Act, 1997 and the other given in the Bill, the Committee finds the
definition given in the Delhi Council for Physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy Act, 1997
is more comprehensive. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the following
definition of ‘Occupational Therapy’ as given in the aforesaid Act be included in the
Bill.
“Occupational therapy” means the application of purposeful goal-oriented activity
through latest technology with computerized system and the like in the evaluation,
diagnosis, and or treatment of persons whose function is impaired by physical illness
or injury, emotional disorder, congenital or developmental disability, or the aging
process, in order to, achieve optimum functioning, to prevent disability, and to
maintain health. (Para 9.19)
To allay the apprehensions about the anticipated misuse, the Committee recommends
that a specific provision be included in the Bill to the effect that occupational therapists
practise their profession within the technical specification stipulated in the definition.
(Para 9.20)

30
In the light of its observations/recommendations in respect of Clauses 1(1) and 2(1)(a),
the Committee recommends that the word “Paramedic” in Clause 2(1) (I) be replaced by
“Allied Health Professional” and the word “Paramedical” be deleted from the said clause.
(Para 9.22)
In the light of its observations/recommendations in respect of Clauses 1(1) and 2(1)
(a) and (g) above, the Committee recommends that the word “Paramedical” be replaced by
“Allied Health Profession”. (Para 9.24)
The Committee recommends that the words ‘who possesses recognized physiotherapy
education and’ may be added in the definition . (Para 9.26)
The Committee finds that the issue of definition of physiotherapy has elicited very
strong and emphatic views both for and against from physiotherapists and medical
practitioners as well as from the Ministry. The Committee is constrained to observe that
instead of there being an objective assessment of the definition of physiotherapy,
unnecessary and unwarranted controversy on the status of physiotherapists versus medical
practitioners has been dwelt upon by all concerned. The Committee is somewhat disturbed
by the diametrically opposite stand taken by the physiotherapists and medical practitioners.
In the process, the academic exercise of defining a profession has been done away with and
element of professional insecurity and rivalry seems to have become more important.
(Para 9.45)
The Committee has given deep thought to all the views and opinions aired before it
by all concerned. Voluminous material relating to both national and international arena
placed before it has also received full attention of the Committee. The fact that
physiotherapy education over the years has made significant advancements and has evolved
as a distinct profession seems to be well established. This is strengthened by the considered
opinion of Ministry of Law that physiotherapy profession should not be equated with the
paramedical professions. (Para 9.46)
The Committee also took an opportunity to go through the definition of
physiotherapy as given in different State Acts of USA, Canada, New Zealand etc. The
Committee did not notice the specific use of words ‘medically directed’ in the definition of
‘physiotherapy’ given in these Acts. The Committee would also like to point out that a
definition should only describe the profession enumerating its different characteristics and
not its administrative part. The Committee also takes note of the fact as mentioned by the
representative of the Ministry that in USA, physiotherapy profession has reached a stage
where these professionals can practise independently. Not only this, in some of the
international Acts, it has been specifically provided that physiotherapists having the
required experience can give physiotherapy treatment without a referral. These Acts also
confer upon a physiotherapist the right to practise, with or without referral governed by the
circumstances of the case. The Committee would also like to point out that the analogy of
including the words ‘medically directed’ should have been followed in the definitions of
medical Laboratory technology and radiology technology also. The Committee is, however,
surprised to note that definition of these two professions to be governed by separate Central
Councils is completely ignored by making a mere mention of these two professions under
the definition of ‘paramedical’. This confirms Committee’s apprehension that the words
‘medically directed’ have been deliberately used defeating the very basis of defining a
profession. (Para 9.47)
The Committee is not fully convinced by the reservations of the Ministry to the
definition of physiotherapy as given in the Delhi Council of Physiotherapy and Occupational

31
Therapy Act, 1997. The Committee feels that this definition is more comprehensive and as
a whole is confined to the specific role of a physiotherapist. Such a definition does not give
the right to a physiotherapist to practise as a doctor. Ministry’s objections to the use of
words like ‘bodily malfunction’, ‘physical disorders’ and ‘healing from pain and trauma’ do
not seem to be very convincing. The Committee would like to point out that similar words
have been included in the definition of physiotherapy given in the relevant Acts of other
countries. (Para 9.48)
The Committee also takes note of well-founded objection raised with regard to the
definition of physiotherapy as given in the Delhi Act. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that this definition may be included with the replacement of the words
‘physiotherapeutic system of medicine’ by the word ‘therapy’ or ‘health care profession’.
Secondly, to set at rest the apprehensions expressed by all concerned about physiotherapists
assuming the role of a doctor, following provision may be added at the appropriate place in
the Bill:
‘Physiotherapists cannot take over the responsibilities of a doctor and cannot
prescribe drugs. (Para 9.49)
The Committee feels that the suggestion seems to be justified and accordingly,
recommends that necessary modification may be carried out in the definition of radio-
diagnosis’. (Para 9.51)
The Committee is convinced with the fact that highly skilled work force is required
to operate advanced medical equipments under the present health care delivery system. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the words “radiology technician” be replaced by the
words ‘radiology technologist’ and the word “Paramedical” be deleted from this Clause. The
words ‘who possess recognised radiology technology education’ may also be included in the
definition. (Para 9.54)
The Committee recommends to the Ministry to examine the above suggestion and
incorporate the same if it is in consonance with the established scientific principles.
(Para 9.56)
The Committee notes that as admitted by the Ministry, in the absence of any
registering and regulatory body, there was no exact data available about paramedical
professionals except pharmacists and nurses. However, the approximate number of
physiotherapists and occupational therapists based on their assumption was around 16,000
and 8,000 respectively. (Para 10.3)
The Committee feels that the Physiotherapy Central Council as envisaged with two
separate registers for physiotherapy and occupational therapy will not serve the purpose.
The Committee would like to point out that an independent profession with entirely
different course of study, mode of treatment and approach in treatment and rehabilitation
of patients cannot be included under another profession. The Committee also take note of
the fact that both the professions having entirely separate curriculum are recognized as
separate disciplines by UGC. Committee’s contention is strengthened by confirmation of
both the professions being entirely different and practitioner of one discipline not allowed
to practise the other in reply to a Parliament Question given on the 20th August, 2004. In
the light of the above facts and also its observations/recommendations in respect of Clauses
1 (1) and 2 (1) (a) above, the Committee recommends that Clause 3 (1) be amended to read
as follows:—
(e) The Physiotherapy Central Council,

32
(f) The Occupational Therapy Central Council,
(g) The Medical Laboratory Technology Central Council, and
(h) The Radiology Technology Central Council.
The Committee also recommends that the consequential changes be made in the Bill
to reflect the above proposition. (Para 10.4)
The Committee is disturbed by the line of argument offered by the Ministry with
regard to the proposed role of the Central Councils. The Committee is of the considered
view that in this era of liberalization when the general trend is towards according greater
autonomy to institutions for the purpose of making them centres of excellence, approach
of the Ministry is not justified. It is in this context that injecting the process of election
in the constitution of the Councils acquires added significance. Arming the Central
Government with overriding powers in all matters coupled with lack of any mechanism of
checks and balances will undermine the very purpose for which the Councils are proposed
to be set up. The Committee is appreciative of the fact that the Central Government, by
its very nature, is mandated to implement policies of national importance and to that extent
it is well within its right to exercise control over the affairs of the Councils. However, that
does not warrant giving the Central Government over-riding powers in a way that is
prejudicial to their autonomous working. The Committee, therefore, recommends a new
clause be added to the Bill to shield the proposed Councils from undue government
interference. (Para 10.6)
The Committee observes that though the Bill envisages to enact an Umbrella Central
Councils Act, enabling provision for creation of new councils is missing as conceded by the
Ministry also. The Committee is, however, not in favour of creating separate Councils/ Sub-
Councils for each of the 17 paramedical professionals, as doing that would not only be time-
consuming but also cost ineffective. One must also not forget that this list of 17
paramedical professions is not an exhaustive one. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that Clause 3(1) be amended and a new Clause be added on the lines as suggested by the
Ministry above. (Para 10.12)
The Committee appreciates the fact that since there is no Council and no register
of members either, the first Council may be a nominated body. However, the Committee is
unable to reconcile itself with the fact that the Bill is bereft of any provisions to the effect
that after the expiry of the term of the first Council, the next Council will be formed as
an elected body. The Committee feels that lack of clarity in this regard might lead to the
election of the Central Councils being put on perpetual hold. The Committee feels that the
Bill itself must provide that after the term of the first Council runs out, the next Council
shall be constituted by way of election. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a
specific and categorical provision be made in the Bill itself to the effect that after the term
of the first Council i.e. two years expires, the next Council coming into existence will be
an elected body. (Para 11.14)
The Committee notes that the main concern expressed in respect of Clause 3 (4)(a)
and (b) was that there was no mention of the process of election of the Chairperson and
the Vice Chairperson after the expiry of the term of the first Council and the Bill was also
silent about the eligibility criteria under this Clause. The Committee finds the concerns
valid and recommends that the said Clause be amended to reflect that the Chairperson and
the Vice Chairperson of the next Councils shall be elected by the members of the respective
Councils from amongst themselves and the person so elected and his qualifications should
be directly relevant to the discipline of the concerned Council in such a way that he should

33
be eligible to be enrolled on the register of the concerned Council. The Committee would
also like to point out that election procedure for electing Council Chairman, Vice-Chairman
and other council Members on the expiry of the term of the first nominated. Council needs
to be incorporated in the Act as it is done in the case of other similar Councils.  (Para 11.15)
The Committee accepts the Ministry’s explanation and recommends to modify Clause
3(4)(h) to include one member from the Rehabilitation Council of India. (Para 11.16)
To rectify the above position, the Committee recommends that Clause 3 (4) (i) be
amended to ensure that (i) four members of the first Council shall be appointed by the
Central Government from amongst the teachers of the concerned discipline, of the
recognized institutions imparting education in Physiotherapy or Occupational Therapy or
Medical Laboratory Technology or Radiology Technology, as the case may be. The Committee
also recommends that specific provisions be made in the Clause to ensure that after the
expiry of the term of the first Council i.e two years, four members under this Clause shall
be elected from the amongst themselves by such teachers of the concerned discipline of the
recognized institutions imparting education in physiotherapy or Medical Laboratory
Technology or Radiology Technology, as the case may be, whose names appear on the
register of the concerned Council. (Para 11.18)
The Committee observes that Clauses 3(4)(k) and (I) suffer from similar
inadequacies as pointed out in respect of Clause 3(4)(i). The Committee notes that apart
from absence of any clause providing for election of the Members under this Clause in
future, the Clause leaves scope for favoritism and nepotism as any practitioner in the
concerned discipline, whether of eminence or not, could be appointed under this clause.
(Para 11.19)
With a view to insulating the Central Council from possible favoritism and nepotism,
the Committee recommends that under Clause 3(4)(k), four members of the first Council
should be appointed by the Central Government, from amongst the practitioners of
eminence in the concerned discipline, from the Institutes and Hospitals of repute and after
the expiry of the term of the first Council, four members under this clause shall be elected
from amongst the practitioners of repute of the concerned discipline, from Institutes and
Hospitals of repute, by members of the Institutes and the Hospitals, whose names appear
in the register of the concerned Council. The Committee also recommends that out of the
four members so elected, two shall represent the public sector Hospitals/Institutes and two
shall represent the private sector Hospitals/ Institutes. (Para 11.20)
The Committee observes that the term “Organizations” occurring in Clause 3 (4) (I)
is vague and can be misinterpreted to mean any hospital or medical institution. The
Committee therefore, recommends that the word “Organizations” be defined clearly.
(Para 11.21)
The Committee observes that clause 3(4) (I) also lacks provisions ensuring electoral
process in the constitution of the Councils formed subsequent to the first Council and
therefore recommends that four members of the first Council under Clause 3(4)(1) should
be appointed by the Government to represent such national/state level organizations which
can represent the interest of Physiotherapy, Occupational Therapy, medical laboratory and
radiology technology and after the expiry of the term of the first Council, four members
under the said Clause shall be elected from amongst themselves by such professionals of
national/state level organizations, whose names appear in the register of the concerned
Council. (Para 11.22)
The Committee feels that the criterion adopted in clause 3(4)(j) for the appointment
of three members to represent the States and one member to represent the Union

34
Territories is not fair in the sense that in a vast country like India, rotational appointment
in the alphabetical order may result in the skewed representation of the States and Union
Territories as it will take years before many of the States get their representation in the
Councils. The Committee therefore feels that the  zonal grouping of the states for the
purpose of their representation in the Councils would be a better option. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that clause 3(4)(j) be amended in such a way that four members
shall be appointed by the Central Government by rotation in the alphabetical order from
within the zone to represent the States, i.e. North, South, East and West and one member
shall be appointed to represent the Union Territories. (Para 11.23)
To ensure that the Council is manned mostly by professionals, the Committee
recommends that the proviso to Clause 3(4) (j) be amended to ensure that the members of
the first Councils appointed under this clause should be from amongst the qualified
professionals of eminence and after the expiry of the term of the first Councils,
appointments under this Clause should be made from amongst the qualified professionals
of eminence, who are enrolled on the register of the concerned Council. (Para 11.24)
The Committee is not inclined to agree with the contention of the Ministry that MPs
having qualification or experience relevant to the discipline of the Council can only be in
a position to make fruitful contribution. The Committee would like to point out that
Members of Parliament represent the will of the people and their representation in the
Councils will ensure that the popular aspirations are reflected in the policies and
programmes of the Council. The Committee notes that AICTE and Nursing Council of India
have two members each from Lok Sabha and one member from Rajya Sabha elected by the
respective Houses. The Committee in its 19th Report on the Indian Medical Council Bill,
2005 presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2006 had recommended
representation of MPs in the Medical Council of India in the same proportion as in AICTE
and Nursing Council of India. Taking a cue from its above recommendation, the Committee
recommends that a provision be made in the present Bill to nominate two MPs from Lok
Sabha and one M.P. from Rajya Sabha elected by the respective Houses. (Para 11.26)
The Committee notes that though the tenure of elected Councils like Medical
Council of India, All India Council of Technical Education is of five years, it would not be
in the larger public interest to allow a wholly nominated body to continue for five years.
The Committee is of the considered view that tenure of two years should be sufficient for
the first Council to lay down and frame requisite rules and regulations. Thereafter, the
tenure of an elected Council could be on the lines of other statutory Councils. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that Clause 4(1) be amended to the effect that a
member of the first Council shall hold office for a term of two years and thereafter the
term of Member of an elected Council shall be five years. (Para 12.2)
The Committee also notes that Clause 4(3) which relates to filling up of a casual
vacancy does not lay down any time frame for the same. The Committee feels that such
a deficiency may be exploited to keep the filling up of a vacancy on perpetual hold. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that Clause 4(3) be amended to ensure that a period of
three months is prescribed for filling a vacancy. (Para 12.3)
The Committee recommends that Clause 6 may be modified accordingly. (Para 13)
The Committee notes that the Bill prescribes that rules of procedure in regard to the
transaction of business at the meetings of the Central Councils including the quorum at
such meetings, may be determined by regulations. The Committee feels that in view of the
critical role envisaged for the Central Councils in formulating standards of education and

35
training, quorum of meetings of the Central Councils should be spelt out in unambiguous
terms in the Act itself. The Committee observes that such a provision is there in all the
Acts relating to similar bodies. This mandatory condition is required to be there from the
very beginning due to the protracted regulation rule making exercise. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that Clause 8 be amended to indicate the quorum required for the
meetings of the Central Councils. (Para 14.2)
The Committee is of the considered view that contours of the composition of the
Executive Committee under clause 11 must be specified in the Bill. Making allowances for
the fact that the first Central Councils under the Bill are envisaged to be wholly nominated
bodies, the Committee can well understand the compulsions behind not adopting the
electoral process for the purpose of the constitution of the first Executive Committee.
However, what the Committee is unable to reconcile itself with, is that there is no mention
at all either of electoral process in the constitution of the future Executive Committees or
of the number of members required for constituting such a Committee. The Committee is
also surprised by lack of any provision concerning the functions of the Executive
Committee, presumably the most powerful Committee. (Para 15.3)
Taking all factors into account, the Committee recommends that Clause 11 be
amended so as to include specific composition of the Executive Committee and the
Disciplinary Committee. The Committee would also like to point out that normally the
Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of a Council are the ex-officio members of the Executive
Committee and automatically become the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the
Executive Committee. The Committee finds no justification for not adhering to this time-
tested convention. The Committee, therefore, recommends that clause 11 may be modified
accordingly. (Para 15.4)
The Committee also recommends that provisions be made in the Bill, specifically
indicating the powers and duties of the Executive Committees, so that there is complete
clarity about the role of the Executive Committee and occasions for overlapping of powers
and duties of the Executive Committee with other Committees of the Council do not arise.
(Para 15.5)
The Committee notes that the Delhi Council for Physiotherapy and Occupational
Therapy Council Act, 1997 mandates the Delhi Council to inter alia advise the Government
in matters relating to the requirements of manpower in the field of physiotherapy and
occupational therapy. In view of the yawning mismatch between demand and supply of
health care services in the country, the Committee feels that the Central Councils could
play a vital role in terms of acquainting the Government with requirements of allied health
professionals in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Clause 12 be
suitably amended to include therein the above referred function among the functions of the
Central Councils. (Para 16.2)
The Committee, therefore recommends that Clause 13 be amended so as to specify
the exact duties to be performed by the Secretary, on a similar pattern as envisaged in the
Delhi Council for Physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy Act, 1997. The Committee is also
of the opinion that the Secretary so appointed besides possessing qualification in public
administration or law, may also be well-conversant with the background and technicalities
of the concerned profession. (Para 17.3)
The Committee observes that this provision is too general and does not give any idea
as to what would be the procedure for seeking permission for establishment of a new
institution, introduction of a new course of study or increase in the admission capacity of

36
a particular course. The Committee strongly feels that in the absence of specific provision
on the above-mentioned aspects, there is every possibility of emergence of element of
arbitrariness. The Committee would like to  emphasise that this would go against the very
objective for which the Central Councils are envisaged to be set up. (Para 18.2)
The Committee fails to understand as to why the detailed provisions as made in the
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and the Delhi Council for Physiotherapy and Occupational
Therapy Act, 1997 regarding establishing an institution, opening a new or higher course of
study or training, increasing admission capacity in any course of study or training,
procedure for submission of an application for grant of permission etc. have not been
suitably incorporated in the present Bill. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
Clause 16 be suitably and comprehensively amended to incorporate detailed provisions on
the pattern of Section 10A of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and Section 18 of the
Delhi Council for Physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy Act, 1997. (Para 18.3)
The Committee notes that the proposed provision in the Bill does not make any
reference to a schedule where-under all the recognized qualifications of relevant professions
are to be included. The Committee is of the opinion that in the absence of such a provision,
it would not be possible to identify the recognized qualifications at a glance. Schedule is the
right mechanism for this purpose. The Committee would like to point out that the proposed
legislation is envisaged for four categories of allied health professions having variety of
degrees with an enabling provision for future expansion. Provision of a schedule as indicated
above needs to be an essential feature. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that
necessary modifications in this regard may be carried out. (Para 19.1)
The Committee’s attention has also been drawn by the absence of two very important
provisions covering very vital aspects, like non-recognition of qualification in certain cases,
time for seeking permission for certain existing colleges/institutions in the Bill. The
Committee fails to understand the rationale for non-inclusion of such provisions. The
Committee would like to point out that an enabling provision taking care of existing
institutions with all the required precautions along with powers to take action against
institutions coming up against the prescribed norms cannot be ignored. Such provisions are
required for safeguarding the interests of both students and institutions. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends the incorporation of such provisions in the Bill. (Para 19.2)
The Committee fully appreciates the fact that allied health professions reflect a rapidly
changing field and if there is no mechanism for upgrading the skills of professionals, it would
deal a big blow to the advanced health care delivery system in the country. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that a provision be made in the above clause for a mechanism to be
put in place for the purpose of upgrading the skills of professionals through in service/
education/training programme. The Committee also finds the suggestion regarding periodic
review of minimum standards valid and recommends that provisions for a mechanism for
reviewing the minimum standards periodically be made in the Bill. (Para 20.4)
The Committee feels that since India is a signatory to the U.N. Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the above suggestion needs to be examined with an open
mind. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Central Councils for Physiotherapy
and Occupational Therapy, once it is formed, may keep in mind the U.N. Convention on
Rights of Persons with Disability while formulating minimum standards of education for
Physiotherapists and Occupational Therapists. (Para 20.6)
The Committee feels that in a vast country like India utmost care needs to be
exercised while formulating the minimum standards of education so that the interests of the

37
students of allied health professions and physiotherapy/occupational therapy all over the
country are accommodated and the widest possible consensus on the curriculum is reached.
The Committee therefore, recommends that the draft minimum standards of education
prepared by the Central Councils be circulated to the States and all efforts be made to
address the genuine concerns, if any, of the State Governments. (Para 20.8)
It was pointed out to the Committee that the word “Inspector” is not in tune with
the modern times as it reminds people of Inspector Raj of the olden days and should
therefore be replaced by a more gracious and modern terminology like “expert” or
“assessor.” The Committee is in agreement with the above suggestion and recommends that
the word “Inspector” in the above clause be replaced by “expert” or “assessor.”  (Para 21.2)
The Committee is also of the opinion that leaving the job of inspection to a single
inspector may breed corruption in the name of regulation. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that provisions be made in Clause 21 to entrust the job of inspection to a team
of experts/ assessors consisting of experienced professionals. (Para 21.3)
The Committee notes that Clause 22 is deficient to the extent that neither does it
speak of the action in terms of a decision on the part of the Central Government nor does
it lay down any time frame for such an action. The Committee therefore recommends that
the following expression be added at the end of Clause 22 :—
“which shall take final decision on the matter within a period of three months from
the date of receipt of the representation.” (Para 22.2)
The Committee finds no merit in the suggestion of the Ministry that the appellate
authority may consist of two senior members of the Council and one senior officer of the
Ministry. The Committee feels that if the representatives of the very dispensation which has
recommended the withdrawal of recognition are allowed to become a part of the appellate
authority, such an arrangement will run counter to the established principles of natural
justice. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a mechanism may be evolved to ensure
that the appellate authority consists of independent persons of impeccable credentials.
(Para 22.4)
The Committee notes that 30 days’ time has been allowed to a person to appeal
against any refusal to enter his/her name in the register or removal of his/her name from
the register of the concerned Council. The Committee observes that 30 days is too short
a period for the purpose and should be increased to 60 days. The Committee therefore,
recommends that Clause 28 (b) be amended to increase the period of appeal from 30 days
to 60 days. (Para 23.2)
The Committee adopts the remaining Clauses of the Bill without any amendment.
(Para 24.1)
The Committee would like to draw the attention to non-inclusion of three very
crucial provisions in the Bill. These relate to ‘Professional Conduct’, ‘Renewal of
registration’ and ‘Rights and privileges of the registered members’. The Committee is of
the opinion that all the three provisions need to be included in the Bill on the pattern of
similar provisions in the IMC Act, 1956 and the Delhi Council of Physiotherapy and
Occupational Therapy Act, 1997, subject to required modification. (Para 25.1)
The Committee observes that at present para-medical profession is being regulated
in only six States. Kerala, Madhya Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh have para-medical
Council, Delhi and Maharashtra have Physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy Council and
Andhra Pradesh has a Paramedical Board. The Committee was given to understand that

38
there was lot of disparity in the working of the said Councils/Boards and hence they did not
offer even ground for professionals from other  States to work in such States. However, with
the Central Act coming into effect, State Councils/Boards were expected to follow suit.
(Para 25.2)
The Committee observes that the proposed Bill is silent about the fate of the
Councils/Board in existence in the States. On a specific query about the status of
professionals registered in their State Councils/Board, it was clarified that every
professional in any part of the country, will have to be registered in the Central Council
register. A person registered in the State Council will have the license to practise only in
that State. It was also informed that the Central Councils may later develop their own
mechanism/rules to merge the State registers with the Central Register provided the State
Councils made amendments in accordance with the Central Act. (Para 25.3)
The Committee is of the view that the Centre must work for the removal of the
existing disparities in different State Councils/Board and devise a mechanism so as to
entrust these State Councils/Board the responsibility of maintenance of uniform standards
of education in the respective States as per the guidelines formulated by the Central
Councils. The Committee also strongly feels that it would not be practical to restrict the
registration of professionals at the central level. The Committee would like to draw the
attention of the Ministry to the existing mechanism for registration at State level and
inclusion of the same in the Central Register in respect of other similar bodies for
allopathic and Indian Systems of Medicine. The Committee also understands that the
Planning Commission had suggested that State level para-professional Councils can be
established for maintenance of professional standards at State level. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that suitable modifications may be carried out in the Bill.
(Para 25.4)
During the course of interactions, the Committee observed that there was a lot of
dissatisfaction among the allied health professionals particularly physiotherapists and
occupational therapists with regard to their pay scales. It was brought to the notice of the
Committee that their entry into Government service after completion of four and a half
years degree course in the respective profession was not being addressed properly. The
Committee was given to understand that their recurrent demands for bringing parity in the
pay scales have yielded no results so far. General perception was that discriminatory
treatment was being meted out to them as their pay scales did not commensurate with their
status and responsibility. (Para 25.5)
The Committee feels that all the allied health professionals including
physiotherapists and occupational therapists play a crucial role in the field of medicine and
physical rehabilitation. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that their
legitimate interests should be taken care of and their existing pay structure may be revised
according to their qualifications and duration of the course they have to put in before
entering into a Government job. (Para 25.6)

39
MINUTES

41
RECORD OF DISCUSSION OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEATH AND
FAMILY WELFARE
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 11th February, 2008, in Committee Room
‘‘D’’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
LOK SABHA
3. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
4. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
5. Shri Pannian Ravindran
6. Shri Uday Singh
7. Shrimati Yashodhra Raje Scindia
SECRETARIAT
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Deputy Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Dr. R. K. Srivastava, Director General, Health Services
2. Shri K. Ramamoorthy, Joint Secretary
3. Dr. H. C. Goel, Additional DGHS
** *
2. The Chairman also informed Members that a considerable number of memoranda had
already been received on the Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill-2007, referred to
the Committee for examination and report, in response to the Press Release issued thereon.
3. Though there was lack of quorum, the Committee heard oral evidence of the DGHS and
the Joint Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare on the Paramedical and Physiotherapy
Central Councils Bill-2007. Members raised a number of queries, some of which were answered
by the witnesses. The DGHS was asked to furnish written replies to those queries of Members,
which remained unanswered.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.02 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

42
42
*** Relates to other matters.
RECORD OF DISCUSSION OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEATH AND
FAMILY WELFARE
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 27th May, 2008 in Committee Room No.
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
2. Shrimati Maya Singh
3. Shri Digvijya Singh
4. Shri Rajeev Shukla
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Rajendra Kumar
6. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
7. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
8. Dr. Chinta Mohan
9. Shri Pannian Ravindran
10. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
WITNESSES
I. * * *
II. * * *
III. Representatives of the Physiotherapists' Forum of AIIMS:—
1. Dr. G .K. Meena (PT)
2. Dr. Harpreet Singh (PT)
3. Dr. Neeru Goel (PT)
4. Dr. Aravind. K. (PT)
5. Dr. Deepti Wardhan (PT)
IV. Representatives of the Indian Association of Physiotherapists (Delhi Branch):—
1. Dr. Dheerendra Kumar (PT)
2. Dr. Harpreet Singh (PT)

43
3. Dr. Prabhat Rajnjan (PT)
4. Dr. Poonam Mishra (PT)
5. Dr. Pramod Kumar (PT)
V. Representatives of the All India Occupational Therapists’ Association:—
1. Dr. R.K. Sharma, Convener, Council Act Committee, AI.O.T.A, Safdarjung Hospital,
New Delhi-29
2. Dr. Anil K. Srivastava, President, AI.O.T .A, Assistant Director (O.T.) Rehabilitation and
Artificial Limb Centre, Lucknow, U.P.
3. Dr. Pankaj Bajpai, Executive Member, AI.O.T.A, Associate Professor and H.O.D,
Department of Occupational Therapy, N.I.O.H. Bon Hooghly, B.T. Road, Calcutta.
4. Dr. Paroomal V aithi, Executive Member, AI.O.T.A, Professor and Head, Department of
Occupational Therapy, Institute of Medical Sciences, Indore, M.P.
VI. Representatives of the Physiotherapy Forum for Physiotherapists:—
1. Dr. (Mrs.) Neeraj Kalra
2. Dr. Sumit Sexena
3. Dr. Ajay Kumar
4. Dr. Rajeev Aggarwal
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the meeting and apprised them about
the progress made so far regarding the examination of the three Bills, viz. , the Clinical
Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007, the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment)
Bill, 2007 and the Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill, 2007.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. The Committee adjourned at 4.00 
P.M. for tea and after the break, in the absence of the
Chairman, Dr. Karan Singh Yadav, M.P. presided over the meeting.
6. The Committee then heard the views of the representatives of Physiotherapists Forum of
AIIMS, All India Occupational Therapists' Association, Indian Association of Physiotherapists (Delhi
Branch) and the Physiotherapy Forum for Physiotherapists on the Paramedical and Physiotherapy
Central Councils Bill, 2007. The representatives of the Associations/Fora also made a power-point
presentation regarding their suggestions/views on the Bill. Members sought clarifications which
were replied to.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 5.03 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

44
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
(2007-08)
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 9th June, 2008 in Committee Room No.
‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
2. Prof. P. J. Kurien
3. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
4. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
5. Shri Rajeev Shukla
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
7. Shri Rajendra Kumar
8. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
9. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
10. Shri Pannian Ravindran
11. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Dr. V . K. Agnihotri, Secretary-General
Shrimati V andana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
WITNESSES
I. * * *
II. * * *
III. * * *
IV. Representatives of Indraprastha Association of Rehabilitation Medicine
1. Dr. Shiv Lal Yadav, Addl. Professor, Dept of PMR, AIIMS
2. Col. Dr. S.N. Bhaduri,  Specialist, Dept. of PMR, R.R. Hospital, New Delhi
3. Dr. Ajay Gupta, Specialist PMR, Dr. R.M.L. Hospital, New Delhi
4. Dr. Mallikarjuna Nallegowda, Specialist PMR, Kalawati Saran Hospital, New Delhi
5. Dr. B.Ramachandran, Ex. CMO, Central Health Services and Secretary of IPARM
*** Relates to other matters.
44

45
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the meeting and apprised them about
the progress made so far regarding the examination of the three Bills, viz. , the Clinical
Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007, the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment)
Bill, 2007 and the Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill, 2007.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. The Committee then heard the views of the representatives of Indraprastha Association of
Rehabilitation Medicine on the Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill, 2007. Members
sought clarifications which were replied to.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 12.55 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

46
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
(2007-08)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 1st July, 2008 in Committee Room No.
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
2. Prof. P. J. Kurien
3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Rajendra Kumar
5. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
6. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
7. Dr. R. Senthil
8. Shri Nihal Chand
9. Shri Pannian Ravindran
10. Shri Uday Singh
11. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Deputy Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Indian Association of Physiotherapists
1. Dr. Ali Irani
2. Dr. Sanjiv Jha
3. Dr. A.K. Bhatnagar
4. Dr. Jayanta Biswas
5. Dr. Rajiv Agarwal
6. Dr. V . P. Gupta
7. Dr. Vikas Dhawan
Representative of the Symbiosis Institute of Health Sciences (SIHS)
1. Ms. Rachna Murdeshwar
46

47
Representative of the Rehabilitation Council of India
1. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Ian Cardozo, Chairman, RCI
Representatives of the Indian Society of Extra Corporeal Technology
1. Shri Sampath Anandan, Ex-General Secretary and Advisor ISECT
2. Shri Madhusudan Rao, Ex-General Secretary
3. Shri Virender Singh, President-ISECT
4. Dr. Kamla Rana, General Secretary-ISECT
5. Shri Mahesh Pal Singh, Vice-President-ISECT
Representatives of the Central Government Hospitals Radiographers Welfare
Association (Regd.)
1. Shri Manjeet R. Bahl, President
2. Shri Lalit Gupta, Vice-President
3. Shri Santosh Kumar, General Secretary
4. Shri P.K. Popli, Executive Member
5. Shri Rakesh Garg,  Executive Member
Representatives of the AIIMS D.T. Technologist Association (REGD)
1. Shri Ghanshyam Dagar, General Secretary
2. Shri Gulab Chand Rai, President
3. Shri Virender Kumar Rai
4. Shri Nathu Ram
5. Shri Kishan Chand, ESI Hospital
6. Shri Surinder Sharma, AIIMS
Representatives of the All India Medical Laboratory Technical Staff Association,
Dr. RML Hospital
1. Shri Sanjay Verma, General Secretary
2. Shri Pankaj
Representatives of the Joint Forum of Medical Lab Technical Staff
1. Shri V .S. Dahiya, LHMC and Associated SK and KSCH Hospital
2. Shri Kaptan Singh Seharwat, Kalawati Saran Children’s Hospital
3. Shri Satish Dubey, Red Cross Blood Bank
4. Shri Lakhpat, AIIMS
5. Shri M.S. Rana, Safdarjung Hospital
Representatives of the Paramedical Staff Association of India
1. Shri Birendra Nath Mukherjee, President
2. Shri Tapan Kumar Dey
3. Shri T.N. Mishra
4. Shri S.A. Wajid
5. Shri P. R. Reddy
6. Shri R.K. Goel

48
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the meeting and apprised them about
the progress made so far regarding examination of the three Bills, viz., the Drugs and Cosmetics
(Amendment) Bill, 2007, the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007 and the
Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill, 2007.
3. The Committee took note of the fact that deliberations on the Clinical Establishments
(Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007 and the Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils
Bill, 2007 were not likely to be completed within the extended time i.e. first week of Monsoon
Session. It, accordingly decided to seek further extension of time, till the first week of the Winter
Session, 2008, of Rajya Sabha for presentation of the Reports on the above two Bills, and
authorized its Chairman to seek necessary permission from Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in this
regard.
4. The Committee, thereafter, heard the views of the representatives of the Indian Association
of Physiotherapists; the Symbiosis Institute of Health Sciences (SIHS); the Rehabilitation Council
of India; the Indian Society of Extra Corporeal Technology; the Central Government Hospitals
Radiographers Welfare Association (Regd.); the AIIMS O.T. T echnologist Association (Regd.); the
All India Medical Laboratory Technical Staff Association, Dr. RML Hospital; the Joint forum of
Medical Lab Technical Staff and the Paramedical Staff Association of India on the Paramedical and
Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill, 2007. Members also sought clarifications from the
representatives, which were replied to.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 
P.M.

49
III
THIRD MEETING
(2008-09)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 10th September, 2008 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
2. Shrimati Maya Singh
3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
4. Shri Rajeev Shukla
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
6. Shri Rajendra Kumar
7. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
8. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
9. Shri Rasheed Masood
10. Shri Pannian Ravindran
11. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
12. Shri R.L. Jalappa
13. Shri B. Vinod Kumar
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Deputy Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri Naresh Dayal, Secretary
2. Dr. R.K. Srivastava, DGHS
3. Dr. H.C. Goyal, Addl. DG
4. Ms. Shalini Prasad, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri Vinod Kumar, M.P, Lok Sabha, who has been
re-nominated to the Committee and also the other Members of the Committee to the meeting.
Thereafter, he apprised them of the progress made so far with regard to the examination of the
two Bills, namely–the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007 and the
Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill, 2007.
49

50
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. The Committee, then, took up for discussion the Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central
Councils Bill, 2007. The Chairman and other members of the Committee raised a number of queries
to which the Secretary replied in detail. The discussion broadly centered around a mechanism to
establish uniformity in the course content of allied health professions recognized by the State
Councils and the proposed Central Councils, whether physiotherapy should be medically directed or
not, lack of certain very essential provisions in the Bill, etc.
9. * * *
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
11. The Committee adjourned at 4.35 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

51
V
FIFTH MEETING
(2008-09)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 30th September, 2008 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
3. Shri Rajeev Shukla
4. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
5. Shrimati Maya Singh
6. Shri Digvijay Singh
LOK SABHA
7. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
8. Shri Rajendra Kumar
9. Shri R.L. Jalappa
10. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
11. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
12. Dr. Chinta Mohan
13. Shrimati K. Rani
14. Shri Pannian Ravindran
15. Shrimati Yashodhara Raje Scindia
16. Shri Uday Singh
17. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
18. Shri B. Vinod Kumar
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Deputy Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri Naresh Dayal, Secretary
2. Dr. Sambasiva Rao, Spl.DGHS
3. Shri D. Panda, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Surinder Singh, D.C.G. (I)
51

52
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the meeting and briefed them about the
agenda of the day, i.e., consideration and adoption of the draft Report on the Paramedical and
Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill, 2007, hearing the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare and the representatives of the Medical Council of India on (i) public-private
partnership in AIIMS– like Institutions, Government Hospitals and district hospitals in the context
of four sets of regulations approved by the Ministry; and (ii) the feasibility of increasing seats at
PG level and reducing the duration of Specialty/Super-Specialty courses in medical education; and
hearing the views of the Drug Controller General of India on the reported US Food and Drug
Administration ban on certain drugs exported by Ranbaxy.
3. The Committee, first, considered the draft Report on the Paramedical and Physiotherapy
Central Councils Bill-2007 and adopted the same. The Committee decided that its Reports on the
Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill, 2007 and the Drugs and Cosmetics
(Amendment) Bill-2007 may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok
Sabha on Tuesday, the 21st October, 2008. The Committee authorized the Chairman of the
Committee and in his absence Prof. P.J. Kurien and Shri Digvijay Singh to present the Reports in
Rajya Sabha, and Dr. Karan Singh Yadav, and in his absence Shrimati Yasodhara Raje Scindia to
lay the Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. * * *
12. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
13. The Committee then adjourned at 4.48 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

53
ANNEXURE

04 Dec., 2007
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 96 of 2007
THE PARAMEDICAL AND PHYSIOTHERAPY CENTRAL COUNCILS
BILL, 2007
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title,  extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
THE C ENTRAL  C OUNCIL  AND THEIR  C OMMITTEES
3. Constitution of Central Councils.
4. Term of office and casual vacancy.
5. Cessation of membership.
6. Resignation by member.
7. Removal and vacation of membership.
8. Meetings of Central Council.
9. Vacancy, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Central Council.
10. Power to associate persons with Central Council for particular purposes.
11. Committees of Central Council.
12. Functions of Central Council.
13. Appointment of Secretary, officers and other employees of Central Council.
14. Secretary to act as Chief Executive Officer of Central Council.
15. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Central Council.
16. Approval of Central Government for imparting education.
17. Recognition of education.
18. Scheme of reciprocity for recognition of foreign qualifications.
19. Minimum standards of education.
20. Furnishing of information by University or institution to Central Council regarding education.
21. Appointment of inspectors.
22. Withdrawal of recognition.
55
ANNEXURE-I

56
CHAPTER III
THE REGISTER
23. Register of paramedics and physiotherapist.
24. Entry of name in register.
C
LAUSES
25. Professional conduct and removal of names from register.
26. Procedure in inquiries relating to misconduct.
27. Re-entry in register.
28. Appeal against order made by Central Council.
CHAPTER IV
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT
29. Payment by Central Government.
30. Fund of Central Council.
31. Budget.
32. Annual report.
33. Accounts and audit.
CHAPTER V
M
ISCELLANEOUS
34. Prohibition in employment as paramedic or physiotherapist by clinical establishment.
35. Penalty for violation of provisions of this Act.
36. Penalty for practising as professional by non-professional.
37. Punishment for dishonest use of certificates, etc.
38. Cognizance of offences.
39. Directions by Central Government.
40. Protection of action taken in good faith.
41. Power to make rules.
42. Power to make regulations.
43. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
44. Power to remove difficulties.

57
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 96 of 2007
THE PARAMEDICAL AND PHYSIOTHERAPY CENTRAL
COUNCILS BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of Central Councils of the Paramedical
(Medical Laboratory Technology), Paramedical (Radiology
Technology) and the Physiotherapy, the coordinated development in
the education of paramedical and physiotherapy with a view to
regulating and maintaining standards of such education,
maintenance of Register of Paramedics and Physiotherapists and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
P
RELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Paramedical and Physiotherapy
Central Councils Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, be notification, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for
constitution of different Central Councils and for different provisions
of this Act.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘Central Council’’ means the Central Council of,
Paramedical (Medical Laboratory Technology) or Paramedical
(Radiology Technology) or Physiotherapy, as the case may be,
constituted under section 3;
57
Short title,
extent and
commencement,
5
Definitions.

58
(b) ‘‘education’’ means programmes of education,
research or training or such other programmes or areas as the
Central Government may, in consultation with the Paramedical
(Medical Laboratory Technology) Central Council or the
Paramedical (Radiology Technology) Central Council or the
Physiotherapy Central Council, as the case may be, by
notification, declare in the discipline of medical laboratory
technology, or radio diagnosis or radiotherapy or nuclear
medicine or physiotherapy;
(c) ‘‘fund’’ means the fund of a Central Council
established under section 30;
(d) ‘‘institution’’ means any institution, by whatever
name called, established by law for imparting education under
this Act;
(e) ‘‘Medical laboratory technician’’ means a person
whose name has been entered in the register of the
Paramedical (Medical Laboratory Technology) Central Council;
(f
 ) ‘‘medical laboratory’’ means a laboratory for
diagnostic, therapeutic and research purposes being manned
by qualified technical personnel;
(g) ‘‘member’’ means a member, of the Paramedical
(Medical Laboratory Technology) Central Council or the
Paramedical (Radiology Technology) Central Council or the
Physiotherapy Central Council, as the case may be, and
includes its Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson;
(h) ‘‘notification’’ means a notification published in the
Official Gazette;
(i) ‘‘nuclear medicine’’ means any kind of diagnostic
and therapeutic procedure involving unsealed ionising
radiation source;
(j) ‘‘occupational therapist’’ means a person whose
name has been entered in the register of the Physiotherapy
Central Council;
(k) ‘‘occupational therapy’’ means medically directed
application of diagnosis, or treatment, or both, of persons
with the aim of preventing disability and maintaining health;
(l) ‘‘paramedic’’ means a person whose name has been
entered in the registers of the Paramedical (Medical
Laboratory Technology) Central Council and Paramedical
(Radiology Technology) Central Council;
(m) ‘‘Paramedical’’ means the medical laboratory
technology and the radiology technology;
(n) ‘‘physiotherapist’’ means a person whose name has
been entered in the register of the Physiotherapy Central
Council;

59
(o) ‘‘physiotherapy’’ means medically directed therapy
through physical agents including heat, cold, light, water,
massage, electricity or manual exercises to persons with the
aim of preventing or correcting any disability and includes
occupational therapy;
(P) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made
under this Act;
(q) ‘‘radiodiagnosis’’ means any kind of diagnostic
procedures involving ionising radiation (X-Rays);
(r) ‘‘radiology technician’’ means a person whose name
has been entered in the register of the Paramedical (Radiology
Technology) Central Council;
(s) ‘‘radiotherapy’’ means any kind of therapeutic
procedure involving sealed ionising radiation sources;
(t) ‘‘register’’ means the register maintained under sub-
section ( 1) of section 23;
(u) ‘‘regulations’’ means regulations made under this Act;
(v) ‘‘University’’ means a University defined under
clause (f
 ) of section 2 of the University Grants Commission
Act, 1956 and includes an institution declared to be a deemed
University under section 3 of the said Act.
(2) Any reference in this Act of a law which is not in force
in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall, in relation to that State,
be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in
force in that State.
CHAPTER II
T
HE C ENTRAL C OUNCILS AND THEIR C OMMITTEES
3. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification,
constitute, for the purposes of this Act—
(a) the Physiotherapy Central Council,
(b) the Paramedical (Medical Laboratory
Technology) Central Council, and
(c) the Paramedical (Radiology Technology) Central
Council.
(2) Each Central Council shall be a body corporate by the
name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal,
with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both inmovable
and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and
be sued.
(3) The head office of each Central Council shall be at such
place as may be determined, by notification, by the Central
Government and a Central Council may, with the previous approval
of the Central Government, establish regional offices at other places
in India.
Constitution
of Central
Councils.
3 of 1956.

60
(4) Every Central Council shall consist of the following
members, namely:—
(a) the Chairperson, to be appointed by the Central
Government from amongst the members of the concerned
Central Council;
(b) the Vice-Chairperson, to be appointed by the Central
Government from amongst the members of the concerned
Central Council;
(c) one officer not below the rank of an Assistant
Director General of the Directorate General of Health Services
in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare dealing with the
physiotherapy or medical laboratory technology or radiology
technology, as the case may be;
(d) one officer of the Ministry or the Department of the
Central Government having administrative control of health
not below the rank of a Deputy Secretary to the Government
of India, dealing with the physiotherapy or medical laboratory
technology or radiology technology, as the case may be;
(e) one member not below the rank of a Deputy
Secretary to the Government of India to be appointed by the
Central Government to represent the Ministry of Finance;
(f
 ) one member not below the rank of a Deputy
Secretary to the Government of India to be appointed by the
Central Government to represent the Ministry of Science and
Technology;
(g) one member not below the rank of a Deputy
Secretary to the Government of India to be appointed by the
Director General, Armed Forces Medical Services to represent
the Ministry of Defence;
(h) four members not below the rank of a Deputy
Secretary to the Government of India to be appointed by the
Central Government to represent,—
(i) the Central Board of Secondary Education;
(ii) the University Grants Commission;
(iii) All India Council of Technical Education; and
(iv) the Medical Council of India;
(i) four members to be appointed by the Central
Government from amongst the teachers of the recognised
institutions imparting education in physiotherapy or medical
laboratory technology or radiology technology, as the case
may be;
(j) not less than three members to be appointed by the
Central Government by rotation in the alphabetical order to
represent the Sates and one member to represent the Union
territories:

61
Provided that an appointment under this clause shall be
made on the recommendation of the Government of the
State, or as the case may be, the Union territory concerned;
(k) four members to be appointed by the Central
Government, respectively, from amongst the practitioners in
physiotherapy, occupational therapy, medical laboratory
technology and radiology technology;
(l) four members to be appointed by the Central
Government to represent such organisations which can
represent the interest of physiotherapy, occupational therapy,
medical laboratory technology and radiology technology.
4. ( 1) A member of a Central Council shall hold office for a
term of five years from the date of his appointment.
(2) A member shall be deemed to have vacated his office if,
in the opinion of the Central Council, he is absent without sufficient
excuse, from three consecutive ordinary meetings of the Central
Council, or he ceases to be a member under section 5.
(3) A casual vacancy in the Central Council shall be filled by
fresh appointment and the person so appointed to fill the vacancy
shall hold office only for the remainder of the term of the member
in whose place he has been appointed.
(4) A member of the Central Council shall be eligible for
reappointment.
5. ( 1) A member appointed by the Central Government under
clauses ( c) to (i) of sub-section ( 4) of section 3 shall cease to be a
member of the Central Council on his cessation to the service by virtue
of which he was appointed as a member of the Central Council.
(2) A member appointed by the Central Government under
clause ( k) of sub-section ( 4) of section 3 shall cease to be a
member of the Central Council on removal of his name from the
register of said Council.
6. A member appointed by the Central Government under
clauses ( a), ( b) and ( h) to ( l) of sub-section ( 4) of section 3 may
at any time resign his membership by writing under his hand
addressed to the Central Government:
Provided that a member who has submitted his registration
under this section shall continue to hold office of the Central Council
until his resignation has been accepted by the Central Government.
7. ( 1) A Central Council may, without prejudice to the
provisions of sub-section ( 2), by majority of its total membership
and a majority of not less than two-thirds of its members present
and voting, at any time recommend removal of a member to the
Central Government, if it is satisfied that for any reason the
continuance of that member in that Council is not in the public
interest or is prejudicial to the interest of said Council and the
decision of the Central Government in this regard shall be final.
Term of
office and
casual
vacancy.
Cessation of
membership.
Resignation
by member.
Removal and
vacation of
membership.

62
(2) The Central Government shall remove a member of the
Central Council, if he—
(a) has been convicted for an offence involving moral
turpitude; or
(b) is declared an undischarged insolvent by the
competent court; or
(c) becomes of unsound mind and is declared so by
the competent court; or
(d) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting as a
member; or
(e) has absented without intimation for three
consecutive meetings of said Council; or
(f) has abused the position of the Chairperson, the
Vice-Chairperson or a member, as the case may be, as to
render his or her continuance in the office detrimental to the
public interest:
Provided that no person shall be removed under clauses ( a), ( d),
(e) and ( j) unless he has been given an opportunity of being heard.
8. ( 1) Each Central Council shall meet at such time and place,
and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the
transaction of business at its meetings, including the quorum at such
meetings, as may be determined by regulations:
Provided that the Central Council shall meet at least once
every year.
(2) The Chairperson and in his absence the Vice-Chairperson
shall preside at the meetings of the Central Council.
(3) If for any reason the Chairperson and the Vice-
Chairperson both are unable to attend any meeting of the Central
Council, any other member chosen by the members present at the
meeting shall preside over the sittings of that meeting.
(4) All questions which come up before any meeting of the
Central Council shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the
members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes,
the person presiding shall have and exercise a second or casting vote.
9. No act or proceeding of the Central Council shall be
invalidated merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of,
said Council; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as
a member of said Council;
or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of that Central
Council not affecting the merits of the case.
Meetings of
Central
Council.
Vacancy, etc.
not to
invalidate
proceedings of
Central
Council.

63
10. ( 1) Each Central Council may associate with itself, in
such manner and for such purposes as may be determined by
regulations, any person whose assistance or advice it may require in
carrying out any of the provisions of this Act.
(2) A person associated with the Central Council under sub-
section ( 1) for any purpose shall have a right to take part in the
discussion relevant to that purpose, but shall have no right to vote
at a meeting of said Council, and shall not be a member for any
other purpose.
11. ( 1) Each Central Council shall, as soon as may be,
constitute from among its members an Executive Committee,
Disciplinary Committee, or any other Committee as may be
determined by regulations, for such general or specific purposes as
it consider necessary, for carrying out its functions under this Act.
(2) The composition, tenure and functions of a Committee
shall be such as may be determined by regulations.
(3) Every Committee constituted under this section shall
chose its own Chairperson:
Provided that—
(a) where the Chairperson is a member of such
Committee, he shall be the Chairperson of such Committee,
and in his absence, the Vice-Chairperson, if he is a member
of such Committee, shall be its Chairperson; and in the
absence of both, any member chosen by the members of that
Committee shall be its Chairperson;
(b) where the Chairperson is not a member of such
Committee but the Vice-Chairperson is a member, he shall be
its Chairperson, and in his absence any member chosen by
the members of the Committee shall be its Chairperson.
12. ( 1) It shall be the duty of each Central Council to take
such steps as it may think fit for ensuring coordinated and integrated
development of education and maintenance of its standards.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, the functions of the Central Council shall include—
(a) entry, removal or re-entry of names in the register;
(b) maintenance of a register of persons qualified to
practice in the respective discipline;
(c) determination of standards of education, training,
research, professional conduct or ethics of paramedics or
physiotherapists, as the case may be;
(d) to receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions
from the Central Government or a State Government and to
receive bequests, donations and transfer of movable or
immovable properties from testators, donors or transferers, as
the case may be;
Power to
associate
persons with
Central
Council for
particular
purposes.
Committees
of Central
Council.
Functions of
Central
Council.

64
(e) exercise of disciplinary powers conferred by this
Act; and
(f) to do all such things as may be necessary, incidental
or conducive to the attainment of all or any of the objects of
the said Council.
13.  ( 1) For the purpose of discharging its functions
efficiently under this Act, each Central Council shall, subject
to such regulations as may be made in this behalf, appoint a
Secretary, officers and other employees, as it may consider
necessary:
Provided that the first Secretary of each Central Council
shall be appointed by the Central Government on such terms
and conditions as that Government may deem fit and each such
Secretary shall hold office for a period of three years.
(2) The Secretary, officers, or other employees appointed
by the Central Council shall be subject to such conditions of
service and entitled to such remunerations as may be
determined by regulations.
14. The Secretary appointed under sub-section ( 1) of section
13 shall be the Chief Executive Officer of a Central Council.
15.  All orders and decisions of a Central Council shall be
authenticated by the signature of the Chairperson, or any other
member authorised by the said Council in this behalf, and all other
instruments issued by the said Council shall be authenticated by the
signature of the Chief Executive Officer or any other officer of the
said Council authorised by the said Council in this behalf.
16. On and from the date specified in the notification, as may
be issued by the Central Government, no Unviersity or institution
shall impart education for the purposes of this Act without seeking
prior approval of the said Government.
17. ( 1) The Central Government, after consulting the Central
Council, may, by notification, from time to time, declare the
education granted by any University or institution to be the
recognised qualifications for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The University or institution whose education has not been
notified by the Central Govemment under sub-section ( 1), may
apply to the said Government for reviewing its decision:
Provided that the Central Government may reject the application
made under sub-section ( 2) for reasons to be recorded in writing.
(3) The Central Government, after consulting the Central
Council, may, by notification, relax education for persons who are
practising as paramedics or physiotherapist, including occupational
therapists on or before the date specified under section 16.
Appointment
of Secretary,
officers and
other
employees of
Central
Council.
Secretary to
act as Chief
Executive
Officer of
Central
Council.
Authentication
of orders and
other
instruments of
Central
Council.
Approval of
Central
Government
for imparting
education.
Recognition
of education

65
18. The Central Government, after consulting the Central
Council, may, by notification make a scheme of reciprocity for the
purpose of recognition of foreign qualifications in the relevant
discipline for the purposes of this Act.
19. Each Central Council may, determine by regulations, the
minimum standards of education required for granting recognised
qualifications by the Universities or institutions.
20. Any University or institution imparting education shall
furnish information to the Central Council regarding course of study,
duration of course, scheme of examination and other eligibility
conditions as the respective Central Council may, from time to time
require.
21. ( 1) Each Central Council may appoint such number of
inspectors as it may deem fit to deal with recognition of its
education in any University or institution.
(2) An inspector may—
(a) inspect any University or institution which imparts
education;
(b) attend at any approved examination; and
(c) inspect any University or institution which has
applied for the recognition of its course of study or
examination under this Act, and attend at any examination of
such University or institution,
(3) An inspector while performing his functions under sub-
section ( 2) shall not interfere with the conduct of the examination but
he shall report to the Central Council on the adequacy of standards of
education including staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other
facilities for giving such education or the sufficiency of every
examination which he attends and on any of the matters in regard to
which the said Council may require him to report.
(4) The Central Council shall forward a copy of every such
report to the University or institution, as the case may be, and shall
also forward a copy together with any comments thereon which the
said University or institution may have made, to the Central
Government.
22. (1) Where a Central Council reports to the Central
Government that an approved course of study or an approved
examination does not continue to be in conformity with the
regulations, the Central Government shall give notice to the
concerned University or institution of its intention to take into
consideration the question of withdrawing of recognition accorded
to the course of study or examination, as the case may be, and the
Scheme of
reciprocity
for
recognition of
foreign
qualifications.
Minimum
standards of
education.
Furnishing of
information
by University
or institution
to Central
Council
regarding
education.
Appointment
of
Inspectors.
Withdrawal
of
recognitions.

66
said University or institution, as the case may be, shall within three
months from the receipt of such notice forward to the Central
Government such representation in the matter as it may deem
proper.
CHAPTER III
T
HE REGISTER
23. ( 1) Each Central Council shall maintain a register and
enter names in it of paramedics or physiotherapists, as the case may
be, in the manner determined by regulations.
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, any person
possessing education as notified by the Central Government under
section 17 or section 18, shall be eligible to have his name entered
in the register of the Central Council and to obtain certificate of
practice from it.
(3) No person shall be entitled to practise under this Act
unless his name is entered in the register of respective Central
Councils:
Provided that the name of any person possessing the
education as notified under section 17 by the Central Government
shall be deemed to have been entered in the register from the date
of such notification if he has made an application for entering his
name in the register within six months from the coming into force
of such notification or till his application is disposed of by the said
Council.
24. ( 1) Each Central Council may, on receipt of an application
made by any person in the manner and on payment of such fee, not
exceeding one thousand rupees, as may be determined by
regulations, enter his name in the register if the said Council is
satisfied that such person possesses the education.
(2) Any person whose name has been entered in the register
shall be entitled to be called the physiotherapist or occupational
therapist, or the medical laboratory technician, or the radiology
technician, as the case may be.
(3) The Central Council may refuse to enter the name of any
person in the register for reasons to be recorded in writing and in
the manner determined by regulations.
25. (1) Each Central Council shall determine by regulations
the standards of professional conduct and etiquette and a code of
ethics for the prac titioners under this Act.
(2) The regulations made by the Central Council under sub-
section ( 1) may specify as to which violations thereof shall
constitute professional misconduct, and such provisions shall have
effect notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force.
Register of
paramedics
and
physiotherapist.
Entry of
name in
register.
Professional
conduct and
removal of
names from
register.

67
(3) The Central Council may by order remove the name of a
person from the register, maintained under sub-section ( 1) of
section 23, where it is satisfied, after giving that person a
reasonable opportunity of being heard, and after such further
inquiry, if any, as it may deem fit to make,—
(i) that his name has been entered in the register by
error or on account of misrepresentation or suppression of a
material fact;
(ii) that he has been convicted of any offence or has
been guilty of misconduct in any professional respect, or
has violated the standards of professional conduct and
etiquette or the code of ethics determined under sub-
section ( 1) which, in the opinion of the said Council, renders
him unfit to be kept in the register.
(4) An order under sub-section ( 3) may specify that any
person whose name is ordered to be removed from the register shall
be ineligible for registration under this Act either permanently or for
such period, as may be specified.
26. (1) Where on receipt of information by, or on a complaint
made to it, the Central Council is prima facie of opinion that any
paramedic or physiotherapist has been guilty of any professional or
other misconduct, the said Council shall refer the case to the
Disciplinary Committee constituted under section 11, and the
Disciplinary Committee shall thereupon hold such inquiry and in
such manner as may be determined by regulations and shall report
the result of its inquiry to the said Council.
(2) If on receipt of such report, the Central Council finds that
a paramedic or physiotherapist, as the case may be, is not guilty of
any professional or other misconduct, it shall record its finding
accordingly and direct that the proceedings shall be filed, or the
complaint shall be dismissed, as the case may be.
(3) If on receipt of such report the Central Council finds that
a paramedic or physiotherapist, as the case may be, is guilty of any
misconduct in any professional respect or has violated the standards
of professional conduct and etiquette or the code of ethics
prescribed under this Act, it shall proceed against such person in
accordance with the provisions of sub-sections ( 3) and ( 4) of
section 25.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, ‘‘paramedic’’
or ‘‘physiotherapist’’ includes the person who was a paramedic or
a physiotherapist on the date of the alleged misconduct, although he
has ceased to be so at the time of inquiry.
(4) For the purposes of any inquiry under this section, the
Central Council and its Disciplinary Committee shall have the same
powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 in respect of the following matters, namely:—
5 of 1908.
Procedure in
inquiries
relating to
misconduct.

68
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any
person and examining him on oath;
(b) the discovery and production of any document; and
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits.
27. The Central Council may re-enter the name of a person
whose name has not been removed permanently from the register
under sub-section ( 4) of section 25, by an order, in such manner
and on payment of such fee, not exceeding one thousand rupees,
and after satisfying such conditions and requirements as may be
determined by regulations.
28. (1) Where a Central Council under this Act has,—
(a) refused to enter the name of any person in the
register; or
(b) ordered to remove the name of any person from the
register,
such person may appeal to the Central Government within thirty
days from the date of receipt of the order of the said Council by
him in the manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Central Government may entertain such
appeal after the expiry of said period of thirty days if it is satisfied
that for sufficient reasons such person could not file the appeal.
(2) The Central Government shall dispose of the appeal preferred
under sub-section ( 1) according to procedure as may be prescribed.
(3) The decision of the Central Government under sub-
section ( 2) shall be final.
CHAPTER IV
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT
29. The Central Government may, after due appropriation
made by the Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to each Central
Council in each financial year such sums as may be considered
necessary for the performance of functions of each Central Council
under this Act.
30. ( 1) Each Central Council shall have its own fund, and
all sums which may, from time to time, be paid to it by the
Central Government and all the receipts of a Central Council
(including any sum which any State Government or any other
authority or person may hand over to a Central Council) shall
be credited to the fund and all payments by a Central Council
shall be made therefrom.
(2) All money belonging to the fund shall be deposited in such
banks or invested in such manner as may, subject to the approval
of the Central Government, be decided by the Central Council.
Re-entry in
register.
Payment by
Central
Government.
Fund of
Central
Council.
Appeal
against order
made by
Central
Council.

69
(3) Each Central Council may spend such sums as it thinks
fit for performing its functions under this Act, and such sums shall
be treated as expenditure payable out of the fund of the Central
Council.
31. Each Central Council shall prepare, in such form and at
such time each year as may be prescribed, a budget in respect of
the financial year next ensuing showing the estimated receipts and
expenditure, and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central
Government.
32. Each Central Council shall prepare once every year, in
such form and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report
giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous
year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central
Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid
before both Houses of Parliament.
33. (1) Each Central Council shall cause to be maintained
such books of account and other books in relation to its accounts
in such form and in such manner as may, in consultation with the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, be prescribed.
(2) Each Central Council shall, as soon as may be, after
closing its annual accounts prepare a statement of accounts in such
form, and forward the same to the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India by such date, as the Central Government may, in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General, determine.
(3) The accounts of each Central Council shall be audited by
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such times and in
such manner as he thinks fit.
(4) The accounts of each Central Council as certified by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person
appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and
that Government shall cause the same to be laid before both Houses
of Parliament.
CHAPTER V
M
ISCELLANEOUS
34. No clinical establishment, such as hospital, nursing home
and other institutions of health care, shall appoint any person as
paramedic or physiotherapist unless his name has been entered in
the register of the concerned Central Council.
35. Any person who acts in contravention of the provisions of
this Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
year, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
Budget.
Annual
Report.
Accounts and
audit.
Prohibition in
employment
as paramedic
or
physiotherapist
by clinical
establishment.
Penalty for
violation of
provisions of
this Act.

70
36. Any person whose name has not been entered or whose
name is not deemed to have been entered in the register of the
Central Council under this Act and is practising as a paramedic or
physiotherapist, as the case may be, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with
fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with both.
37. Any person—
(i) who dishonestly makes use of his entry in the
register under the provisions of this Act; or
(ii ) who dishonestly attempts to practise under
provisions of this Act by making or producing or causing to
be made or produced any false or fraudulent declaration or
representation whether in writing or otherwise; or
(iii) who wilfully makes false representation in any
matter relating to the register under the provisions of this Act;
or
(iv) whose name has been removed from the register
wilfully practises as a paramedic or physiotherapist, as the
case may be, shall be punishable with simple imprisonment
which may extend to two years, or with fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees, or both; and for any
subsequent offence, with imprisonment which may extend to
three years, or with fine which may extend to twenty
thousand rupees, or with both.
38. No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this
Act unless upon complaint made by order of, or under authority
from the Central Government or the Central Council.
39. ( 1) The Central Government may, from time to time,
issue such directions to a Central Council as in the opinion of said
Government are conducive for the fulfilment of the objects of this
Act and in the discharge of its functions, that Central Council shall
be bound to carry out any such directions.
(2) Directions issued under sub-section ( 1) may include
directions to a Central Council to make any regulations or to amend
or revoke any regulations already made.
(3) If, in the opinion of the Central Government, a Central
Council has persistently committed default in giving effect to the
directions issued under this section, the Central Government may,
after giving an opportunity to the said Central Council to state its
case, by order, dissolve the Central Council whereafter a new
Central Council shall be constituted in accordance with the
provisions of this Act with effect from such date as may be notified
by the Central Government.
(4) Where the Central Government passes an order under sub-
section ( 3) dissolving the Central Council, it may, pending the
Penalty for
practising as
professional
by non-
professional.
Punishment
for dishonest
use of
certificates,
etc.
Cognizance of
offences.
Directions by
the Central
Government.

71
constitution of a new Central Council in accordance with the
provisions of this Act, authorise any person or body of persons to
take over the management of the affairs of the said Council and to
exercise such functions as may be specified in this behalf by the
Central Government.
40. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie
against the Central Government, Central Council, or the Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson, members, Secretary or any officer or other
employees of the Central Council in respect of anything which is in
good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.
41. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make
rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of filing an appeal under sub-section ( 1)
of section 28;
(b) the procedure to dispose of appeal under sub-
section ( 2) of section 28;
(c) the form and the time for preparation of budget of
the Central Council under section 31;
(d) the form and the time for preparation of annual
report of the Central Council under section 32;
(e) the form and the manner of maintenance of books
of account under section 33; and
(f) any other matter which is required to be or may be
prescribed.
42. (1) Each Central Council may, with the previous approval
of the Central Government, by notification, make regulations
consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out
the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the time, place, procedure and quorum of the meeting
of the Central Council under sub-section ( 1) of section 8;
(b) the manner and purpose for associating persons
with the Central Council under sub-section ( 1) of section 10;
(c) the composition, tenure and function of committees
under section 11;
(d) the appointment, conditions of service and
remuneration of the Secretary, officer and other employees
under section 13;
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Power of
make rules.
Power to
make
regulations.

72
(e) the minimum standards of education required for
granting recognised qualifications under section 19;
(f) the maintenance of register under sub-section ( 1) of
section 23;
(g) the manner and payment for fee for entry of name
in the register under sub-section ( 1) of section 24;
(h) the manner for refusing to enter the name in the
register under sub-section ( 3) of section 24;
(i) the standards of professional conduct and etiquette
and code of ethics under sub-section ( 1) of section 25;
(j) the manner to hold inquiry by the Disciplinary
Committee under sub-section ( 1) of section 26; and
(k) the manner, payment of fee, conditions and
requirement of re-entry of the name in the register under
section 27.
43. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule
or regulation, or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should
not be made, the rule or regulation shall, thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule
or regulation.
44. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order,
published in the Official Gazette, may make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to
be necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section
after the expiry of a period of two years from the commencement
of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

73
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In order to keep pace with the advancement of medical science and
development of new diagnostic and therapeutic techniques, there has been a
quantum jump in the demand for paramedical personnel and physiotherapists/
occupational therapists. This has resulted in the establishment of a large number of
institutions and centres for the training of these professionals, many of which are
run without any supervision and control as to the quality and standard of education.
2. Maintenance of proper standards in the training and education of
paramedical professions is considered essential as these personnel play a crucial
role in healthcare delivery. With a view to regulating these professions, it is
considered necessary to set up Councils on the lines already existing for pharmacy,
nursing, etc. To begin with, it is proposed to set up separate Councils for Medical
Laboratory Technicians, Radiology Technicians and Physiotherapists/Occupational
Therapists. These Councils will be responsible, inter alia , for maintenance of
uniform standards of education in the respective disciplines and registration of
qualified personnel for practising the profession.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; ANBUMANI RAMADOSS.
The 9th August, 2007.
PRESIDENTS RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. Z. 280l6/1/97-PMS, dated the 22nd August, 2007 from
Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss, Minister of Health and Family Welfare to the Secretary-
General, Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the proposed
Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill, 2007, recommends to the
House the consideration of the Bill under article 117(3) of the Constitution.
73

74
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 2 seeks to define various words and expressions used in the Bill.
Clause 3 provides for the constitution of three Central Councils as bodies
Corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal and also for the appointment
of members to those Councils.
Clause 4 provides for terms of office of members of the Central Councils
and also for filling up their casual vacancies.
Clause 5 seeks to provide for the cessation of membership of Central
Councils.
Clause 6 seeks to provide for resignation by a member of a Central
Council.
Clause 7 seeks to provide for the manner of removal of a member of a
Central Council.
Clause 8 seeks to provide for the time, place and the procedure to be
followed in the meeting of a Central Council.
Clause 9 seeks to provide that the acts and proceedings of Central Councils
shall not be invalidated by reason of any vacancies, defect in the constitution of
the Central Council, defect in the appointment of a member or any irregularity in
its procedure.
Clause 10 seeks to empower the Central Councils to associate with it
persons for particular purposes who shall have a right to take part in discussion
but no right to vote.
Clause 11 seeks to empower Central Councils to constitute Committees for
general or specific purposes and also provide for the composition, term and the
functions of such Committees.
Clause 12 seeks to provide for functions of a Central Council.
Clause 13 seeks to provide for appointment of the Secretary, officers and
other employees of the Central Council and also for remunerations and conditions
of service of the Secretary, officers and other employees.
Clause 14 seeks to provide that the Secretary shall act as the Chief
Executive Officer of a Central Council.
Clause 15 seeks to provide that all orders and decisions of a Central
Council shall be authenticated by the Chairperson and all other instruments shall be
authenticated by the Chief Executive Officer.
Clause 16 seeks to provide that prior approval of the Central Government
shall be obtained by each University or Institution for imparting education in
physiotherapy, medical laboratory technology and radiology technology.
74

75
Clause 17 seeks to empower the Central Government to notify recognised
qualifications.
Clause 18 seeks to empower the Central Government for making a scheme
of reciprocity for the purposes of recognition of foreign qualifications.
Clause 19 seeks to empower each Central Council to determine minimum
standards of education for granting recognised qualifications by University or
Institutions.
Clause 20 seeks to empower the Central Government to seek information
from Universities or Institutions regarding imparting education in physiotherapy,
medical laboratory technology and radiology technology.
Clause 21 seeks to provide for appointment of inspectors and also their
powers and functions.
Clause 22 seeks to provide for the manner of withdrawal of recognition
under certain circumstances.
Clause 23 seeks to provide for the maintenance of register and the manner
of making entry in the register of such persons who are entitled to practice.
Clause 24 seeks to provide for the manner of receiving applications and the
fee for entering the name of a person in the register and the manner of refusing
such applications.
Clause 25 seeks to provide for the code of ethics for the practitioners and
the manner for removal of name from the register.
Clause 26 seeks to provide for referring the cases relating to professional
or other misconduct to Disciplinary Committee for enquiry and lays down the
proceduce in inquiries relating to misconduct.
Clause 27 seeks to provide the manner for re-entering the name of a person
in the register.
Clause 28 seeks to provide for appeal against an order made by the Central
Council and the manner of its disposal.
Clause 29 seeks to provide for appropriation of money to the Central
Council.
Clause 30 seeks to make provisions for establishment of fund by each
Central Council.
Clause 31 seeks to provide for the form, the time and the manner of
preparation of the budget.
Clause 32 seeks to provide for the form, the time and the manner of
preparation of Annual Reports.
Clause 33 seeks to provide for the form and the manner of maintenance
of the books of accounts and other books.
Clause 34 seeks to prohibit clinical establishment from employing unregistered
paramedics or physiotherapists.
Clause 35 seeks to provide penalty for the violation of the provisions of the
Act.

76
Clause 36 seeks to provide penalty for practicing as a professional by
persons whose names have not been entered in the register of the Central Council.
Clause 37 seeks to provide punishment for dishonest use of certificates by
a paramedic or physiotherapist.
Clause 38 seeks to provide that no court shall take cognizance of any
offence unless a complaint has been made by order of or under the authority of
the Central Government or the Central Council.
Clause 39 seeks to provide that the Central Government may, from time to
time, issue such directions to the Central Council which are conducive for fulfilling
the objects of the act and also for making regulations and on default to give effect
to its directions, the Central Government may dissolve of the Central Council and
constitute a new Central Council.
Clause 40 seeks to provide for protection of action taken in good faith by
the Central Government, the Central Council, the members, secretary, officers and
other employees of the Central Council from suit, prosecution or other legal
proceedings.
Clause 41 seeks to empower the Central government to make rules to
provide for the filing and disposal of appeal and the form, the time and the manner
of preparation of budget and annual reports and the form and the manner of
maintenance of books of accounts.
Clause 42 empowers the Central Council to make regulations to provide
amongst other things for time, place, procedure and quorum for the meeting of the
Central Council, the composition, tenure and functions of the Committees, the
appointment, remuneration and conditions of service of secretary, officers and
other employees, etc.
Clause 43 seeks to provide for laying of the rules and the regulations made,
before each House of Parliament.
Clause 44 seeks to empower the Central Government to remove difficulties
which may arise in giving effect to the provisions of the Act.

77
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-Clause ( 1) of clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of three
Central Councils namely, the Physiotherapy Central Council, the Paramedical (Medical
Laboratory Technology) Central Council and the Paramedical (Radiology Technology)
Central Council.
2. Clause 13 of the Bill provides for appointment of Secretaries, Officers
and other employees of three Central Councils.
3. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 21 of the Bill provides for appointment of
Inspectors for all the three Central Councils.
4. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 30 of the Bill provides for establishment of
Funds of all the three Central Councils.
The Bill as and when enacted and brought into operation, will involve every
year, a recurring expenditure of rupees one crore and ninety lakhs from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
77

78
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 8 of the Bill empowers each Central Council to
make regulations to provide for the time, place, procedure and quorum for the
meeting of each Central Council.
Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 10 of the Bill empower each Central Council to
make regulations to provide for the manner and the purposes for associating
persons with itself whose assistance or advice it may require.
Sub-clause ( 1) of Clause 11 of the Bill empowers each Central Council to
make regulations to provide for the constitution of Committees. Sub-clause ( 2)
thereof also empowers each Central Council to provide for the composition, tenure
and functions of each such Committee.
Sub-Clause ( 1) of clause 13 of the Bill empowers each Central Council to
make regulations to provide for the appointment of a Secretary, officers and other
employees.
Sub-Clause ( 2) thereof also empowers each Central Council to determine
the conditions of service and entitlement to remunerations of the Secretary, officers
and other employees.
Clause 19 of the Bill empowers each Central Council to determine by
regulations the minimum standards of education required for granting recognised
qualifications by the Universities or Institutions.
Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 23 of the Bill empowers each Central Council to
make regulations to provide for the manner of maintaining and entering the names
in the Register of each Central Council.
Sub-clause ( 1) of cluase 24 of the Bill empowers each Central Council to
make regulations to provide for the manner of, and the fee for, making application
for entering the name in the register. Sub-clause ( 3) thereof also empowers the
Central Council to determine the manner of refusing to enter the name in the
Register.
Sub-clause ( 1) of cluase 25 of the Bill empowers each Central Council to
determine by regulations the standards of professional conduct and etiquette and the
code of ethics for the practitioners.
Sub-clause ( 1) of cluase 26 of the Bill empowers each Central Council to
determine by regulations the manner of holding inquiry by the Disciplinary Committee.
Clause 27 of the Bill empowers each Central Council to make regulations
to provide for the manner of, the fee for, and the conditions and requirement for,
re-entering the name in the Central Register.
Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 28 of the Bill empowers the Central Government
to make rules to provide for the manner of filing appeal from the order of the
Central Council relating to refusal to enter the name in, or removal of the name
78

79
from, the Register. Sub-clause ( 2) thereof also empowers the Central Government
to provide for the procedure for disposal of such appeal.
Clause 31 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to
provide for the form and the time for preparation of the Annual Budget of each
Central Council.
Clause 32 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to
provide for the form and the time for preparation of annual report of each Central
Council.
Clause 33 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to
provide for the form and the manner of maintenance of books of accounts of each
Central Council.
The matters for which the rules and regulations may be made pertain to
matters of procedure or detail and it is not possible to provide for them in the Bill.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of normal character.

80
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of Central Councils of the Paramedical (Medical
Laboratory Technology), Paramedical (Radiology Technology) and the
Physiotherapy, the coordinated development in the education of
paramedical and physiotherapy with a view to regulating and maintaining
standards of such education, maintenance of Register of Paramedics and
Physiotherapists and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss, Minister of Health and Family Welfare)

81
ANNEXURE-II
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE
Date of the Meeting - 1 1th FEBRUARY, 2008
(A) Representatives of Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Dr. R. K. Srivastava, Director General, Health Services
2. Shri K. Ramamoorthy, Joint Secretary
3. Dr. H. C. Goel, Additional DGHS
Date of the Meeting - 27th MAY, 2008
(A) Representatives of the Physiotherapists' Forum of AIIMS:—
1. Dr. G. K. Meena, BPT, President
2. Dr. Harpreet Singh, MPT, Member
3. Dr. Neeru Goel, BPT, Hon’ble General Secreatry
4. Dr. Aravind. K., BPT, Member
5. Dr. Deepti Wardhan, MPT, Member
(B) Representatives of the Indian Association of Physiotherapists (Delhi Branch):—
1. Dr. Dheerendra Kumar, BPT
2. Dr. Sanjeev Jha, BPT
3. Dr. Prabhat Ranjan, BPT
4. Dr. Poonam Mishra, BPT
5. Dr. Pramod Kumar, BPT
(C) Representatives of the All India Occupational Therapists' Association:—
1. Dr. R. K. Sharma, Convener, Council Act Committee, A.I.O.T.A, Safdarjung Hospital, N.D.-29
2. Dr. Anil K. Srivastava, President, A.I.O.T.A, Assistant Director (O.T.) Rehabilitation and Artificial
Limb Centre, Lucknow, U.P.
3. Dr. Pankaj Bajpai, Executive Member, A.I.O.T.A, Associate Professor and H.O.D, Department
of Occupational Therapy, N.I.O.H. Bon Hooghly, B.T. Road, Calcutta.
4. Dr. Paroomal Vaithi, Executive Member, A.I.O.T.A , Professor and Head, Department of
Occupational Therapy, Institute of N.I.O.H. Bon Hooghly, B.T. Road, Calcutta.
5. Dr. Paroomal Vaithi, Executive Member, A.I.O.T.A , Professor and Head, Department of
Occupational Therapy, Institute of Medical Sciences, Indore, M.P.

82
(D) Representatives of the Physiotherapy Forum for Physiotherapists:—
1. Dr. (Mrs) Neeraj Kalra, Sr. Physiotherapist and Head
2. Dr. Sumit Sexena, Physiotherapist, Physiotherapy Deptt.
3. Dr. Ajay Kumar
4. Dr. Rajeev Aggarwal, Physiotherapist, Physiotherapy Deptt.
Date of the Meeting - 9th JUNE, 2008
(A) Representatives of Indraprastha Association of Rehabilitation Medicine
1. Dr. Shiv Lal Yadav, Addl. Professor, Dept of PMR, AIIMS
2. Col Dr. S.N. Bhaduri, Specialist, Dept. of PMR, R.R. Hospital, New Delhi
3. Dr. Ajay Gupta, Specialist PMR, Dr. R.M.L. Hospital, New Delhi
4. Dr. Mallikarjuna Nallegowda, Specialist PMR, Kalawati Saran Hospital, New Delhi
5. Dr. B.Ramachandran Ex. CMO, Central Health Services and Secretary of IPARM
Date of the Meeting - 1st JULY, 2008
(A) Representatives of  the Indian Association of Physiotherapists
1. Dr. Ali Irani, President
2. Dr. Sanjiv Jha, General Secretary
3. Dr. A.K. Bhatnagar
4. Dr. Jayanta Biswas
5. Dr. Rajiv Agarwal
6. Dr. V . P. Gupta
7. Dr. Vikas Dhawan
(B) Representative of the Symbiosis Institute of Health Sciences (SIHS)
1. Ms. Rachna Murdeshwar
(C) Representative of the Rehabilitation Council of India
1. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Ian Cardozo, Chairman, RCI
(D) Representatives of the Indian Society of Extra Corporeal Technology
1. Shri Sampath Anandan, Ex General Secretary and Advisor ISECT
2. Shri Madhusudan Rao, Ex-General Secretary
3. Shri Virender Singh, President-ISECT
4. Dr. Kamla Rana, General Secretary-ISECT
5. Shri Mahesh Pal Singh, Vice-President-ISECT

83
(E) Represen tatives of the Central Government Hospitals Radiographers Welfare Association
(Regd.)
1. Shri Manjeet R. Bahl, President
2. Shri Lalit Gupta, Vice-President
3. Shri Santosh Kumar, General Secretary
4. Shri P. K. Popli, Executive Member
5. Shri Rakesh Garg, Executive Member
(F) Repr esentatives of the AIIMS O.T. Technologist Association (REGD)
1. Shri Ghanshyam Dagar, General Secretary
2. Shri Gulab Chand Rai, President
3. Shri Virender Kumar Rai
4. Shri Nathu Ram
5. Shri Kishan Chand, ESI Hospital
6. Shri Surinder Sharma, AIIMS
(G) Repr esentatives of the All India Medical Laboratory Technical Staff  Association, Dr. RML
Hospital
1. Shri Sanjay Verma, General Secretary
2. Shri Pankaj
(H) Representatives of the Joint forum of Medical Lab Technical Staff
1. Shri V . S. Dahiya, LHMC and Associated SK and KSCH Hospital
2. Shri Kaptan Singh Seharwat, Kalawati Saran Children’s Hospital
3. Shri Satish Dubey, Red Cross Blood Bank
4. Shri Lakhpat, AIIMS
5. Shri M. S. Rana, Safdarjung Hospital
(I) Representatives of the Paramedical Staff Association of India
1. Shri Birendra Nath Mukherjee, President
2. Shri Tapan Kumar Dey
3. Shri T. N. Mishra
4. Shri S. A. Wajid
5. Shri P. R. Reddy
6. Shri R. K. Goel

84
Date of the Meeting - 10th SEPTEMBER, 2008
(A) Representa tives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri Naresh Dayal, Secretary
2. Dr. R. K. Srivastava, DGHS
3. Dr. H. C. Goyal, Addl. DG
4. Ms. Shalini Prasad, Joint Secretary
SIXTH MEETING-DATE 30th SEPTEMBER, 2008
(A) Representa tives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri Naresh Dayal, Secretary
2. Dr. Sambasiva Rao,  Spl. DGHS
3. Shri D. Panda,  Joint Secretary
4. Shri Surinder Singh, D.C.G. (I)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.