  
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED FORTY NINTH REPORT 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in 
the Three Hundred Twenty Fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Science and Technology,   Environment, Forests and Climate 
Change on 'Status of Forests in India'  
 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2021) 
 
REPORT NO. 
349 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 

Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FORTY NINTH REPORT 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Three Hundred Twenty Fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Science and Technology,   Environment, Forests and Climate Change on 
'Status of Forests in India'  
 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
 


 
C O N T E N T S 
   
 
  PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION  (ii) 
  3. ACRONYMS  (iii) –(iv) 
 
4. 
 
REPORT 
 
1-25 
 Chapter I.       Recommendations/Observations which  have been 
                       accepted by the Government 
 
2-18 
 Chapter II.  Recommendations/Observations which the  Committee     
does not desire to pursue in view of  the Government’s 
replies 
 
19-21 
 Chapter III.     Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
             replies of the Government have not been accepted 
                       by the Committee 
 
22-23 
 Chapter IV.     Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
                       Final Replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
24-25 
5. FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS-  
 AT A GLANCE 
 
26 
6. MINUTES 
 
27-28 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2021-22) 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri Jairam Ramesh – Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2.    Shri Anil Baluni 
3.    Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
4.    Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
5.    Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
6.    Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
7.    Shri Parimal Nathwani 
8.    Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
9.    Shri Nabam Rebia   
10. # Vacant 
 
 
   LOK SABHA 
 
 
11.    Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
12.    Shri Pradan Baruah 
13.    Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
14.    Shri Jashvantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor  
15.    Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
16.    Shri Anantkumar Hegde 
17.    Shri S. Jagathrakshakan 
18.    Shri Mohammed Azam Khan 
19.    Shrimati Jyotsna Charandas Mahant  
20.    Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
21.    Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
22.    Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
23. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
24. Shrimati Satabdi Roy (Banerjee) 
25. Shri Francisco Sardinha  
26. Shri Anurag Sharma 
27. Shri Mahesh Sahoo 
28. Dr. M.P. Abdussamad Samadani  
29. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
30. Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi  
31. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
 
 
         SECRETARIAT 
 
         Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
         Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
         Shri Rakesh Anand, Additional Director 
         Smt. Monica Baa, Additional Director 
         Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
         Shri Harish Kumar, Committee Officer 
          
____________________________________________________________________                      
#Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha ceased to be the member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation 
from the Committee w.e.f. 11th October, 2021  
(i) 
 

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Departm ent-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science 
and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, having been authorised by the 
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred Forty Ninth  
Report on the re commendations/observations contained in the Three Hundred Twenty Fourth 
Report on 'Status of Forests in India' pertaining to the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate 
Change, which was presented/laid in both the Houses of Parliament on 12th February, 2019. 
2.   There were 33 recommendations/observations in the Three Hundred Twenty Fourth 
Report of the Committee.  Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations of the 
Committee were received from the Department on 7th August, 2019. 
3. In the meeting held on held on 30th November, 2021, the Committee considered the draft 
Report and adopted the same.  
 
 
 
 
 ( JAIRAM RAMESH ) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman, 
30th November, 2021   Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Agrahayana 09, 1943 (Saka)                                   Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, 
 Rajya Sabha 
                         
                                                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 

ACRONYMS 
                 
ATR Action Taken Report 
ATN Action Taken Note 
ISFR  India State of Forest Report  
ISFR  India State of Forest Report  
NAP  National Afforestation Programme  
GIM Green India Mission  
RFA  Recorded Forest Area  
ICFRE Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education  
FRI Forest Research Institute  
TFRI  Tropical Forest Research Institute 
AFRI  Arid Forest Research Institute  
IFB  Institute of Forest Biodiversity  
MGNREGS  Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme  
PMKSY  Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana  
CAMPA  Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority  
SSB  Sastra Seema Bal  
CAF  Compensatory Afforestation Fund  
PMUY  Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana  
PAHAL  Pratyaksh Hanstantarit Labh  
NDMA  National Disaster Management Authority  
NAPFF  National Action Plan on Forest Fire  
NRSC National Remote Sensing Centre  
WII  Wildlife Institute of India  
CSS-DWH  Centrally Sponsored Scheme-Development of Wildlife Habitat  
CDV  Canine Distemper Virus  
IVRI  India Veterinary Research, Institute  
NTCA  National Tiger Conservation Authority  
PPP  Public Private Partnership  
JFMCs  Joint Forest Management Committees  
(iii) 

MoTA  Ministry of Tribal Affairs  
NMHS  National Mission on Himalayan Studies  
UNFCC  United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  
SAPCCs  State Action Plans on Climate Change  
NDCs Nationally Determined Contributions  
CCEA  Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs  
SFDAs  State Forest Development Agencies  
NAP  National Afforestation Programme  
GIM  Green India Mission  
FRP  Fair &Remunerative Price  
CACP  Commission for Agricultural Costs & Prices  
DES Directorate of Economics & Statistics  
CoC Costs of Cultivation  
FCI Food Corporation of India  
NAFED National Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of India Limited  
NCCF National Cooperative Consumers' Federation  
CWC Central Warehousing Corporation  
SFAC Small Farmers Agri- Business Consortium  
CCI Cotton Corporation of India  
JCI Jute Corporation of India  
PM-AASHA Pradhan Mantri Annadata Aay SanraksHan Abhiyan  
PSS Price Support Scheme  
PDPS Price Deficiency Payment Scheme  
PPSS Private Procurement and Stockist Scheme  
SMC Soil and Moisture Conservation  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)   

1 
 
REPORT 
The Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in Three Hundred Twenty Fourth 
Report of the Committee on 'Status of Forests in India' of the Ministry of Environment, Forest & 
Climate Change. The Report was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 
12th February, 2019. 
2.  Action Taken Note (ATN) was received from the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate 
Change in respect of all the thirty three recommendations/observations contained in the Three 
Hundred Twenty Fourth Report. This has been categorized as follows:- 
Chapter I:        Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:  
Para:- 3.6, 4.9, 4.10, 4.12, 6.8, 6.10, 6.16, 6.23, 6.26,  7.6, 7.8,  8.4, 9.6, 9.7, 9.11, 
9.14, 9.16, 9.17, 9.22, 9.36, 9.38,  10.7, 10.24,  11.7 and 12.8.   
Total recommendations – 25.  Accepted. 
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations 
as mentioned in Chapter-1 of the Report. 
Chapter II:   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not    desire to    
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
                           Para:-. 5.4, 8.9 and 9.26   
                           Total recommendations – 3. Not to be pursued further. 
   The Committee is convinced with the replies furnished by the Ministry   and, 
therefore, does not want to pursue the recommendations further. 
Chapter III:     Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the  Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:  
                           Para:-    7.7, 8.7, 13.1 and 9.31 
         Total recommendations – 04.  Not convincing replies. 
  The Committee expresses its concern over the non -implementation of its     
recommendation contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should 
furnish convincing action taken steps in respect of those recommendations. 
Chapter IV: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:   
  Para:- 9.28  
       Total recommendations – 01. To be pursued further.  
  The Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish pointed and   detailed Action 
Taken Notes in respect of the further Recommendations/Observations made by the 
Committee in Chapter III of the Report.  The Department should also furnish the 
updated information regarding the paragraph mentioned in Chapter IV of the Report.  
4. The details of the ATR have been analyzed in the succeeding Chapters. 
  

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
DEFINITION OF FOREST 
Recommendation/ Observation  
1.1 The Committee observes that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has 
provided the Committee with a working definition as provided by the Supreme Court.  The Committee 
agrees that any narrow and specific definition of forests may leave out certain types of forests and 
open up the possibility of loopholes being exploited by vested interests. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry must come out with a comprehensive, clear-cut and legally sustainable 
definition of Forest to dispel any kind of doubt in this regard.                                       (Para 3.6) 
Action Taken 
1.2 The Ministry has drafted a comprehensive amendment of Indian Fores t Act, 1927. In this 
draft, a definition of forest has been attempted. The concerns of the Committee have been taken up in 
the said amendment. 
ASSESSMENT OF FOREST COVER  
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.3 It is evident that the anthropogenic pressure endured  by nation's forest is enormous. With 
rapidly growing population, this pressure is set to rise in future. This will seriously affect the quality 
of forests and their sequestration potential. The Committee is of the view that in a developing nation, 
the demand for development imperatives and for creation of infrastructure will always be there. The 
need is, therefore, that our policies are geared to judicious use of forests so that this resource is not 
depleted and the pace of increase of forest cover in the country continues in future too. The 
Committee, accordingly, recommends that Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change 
should judiciously manage the forests in the country, if required through necessary policy 
interventions, and ensure that whatever  forest depletion is there or diversion of forest land is 
permitted, we are able to make up more than the area depleted/permitted for diversion so that the 
forest cover of the country remains intact. Environment and Development are supplementary and 
complementary as the two sustain each other.  The need, therefore, is to strike a fine balance between 
the two and to pay due attention on both, within sustainable development framework.         (Para 4.9)                                                                                                                                 
Action Taken 
1.4 The Ministry considers the proposals for diversion of forest land for non -forestry purpose 
under Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. For such diversions of forest lands for non -forestry purposes, 
following measures are taken up to mitigate the possible advers e effects of diversion of such vast 
areas of forests:  
(i)  Compensatory Afforestation (CA) on equivalent non -forest land (except exempted 
category)  
(ii)  Catchment Area Treatment Plan (CATP). 
(iii)  Wildlife Habitat improvement. 
(iv)  Implementation of Rehabilitation & Resettlement. 
(v)  Levy of Net Present Value (NPV) 
(vi)  Monitoring of above activities. 
 

3 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.5 The Committee is also concerned about the decline in the forest cover in the North -Eastern 
States, which is 65.34% of  its geographical area in comparison to the national forest cover of 
21.54%. The Committee recommends that the concerned State Governments and the Union Ministry 
of Environment, Forest & Climate Change must look into the factors responsible for the decline  in 
the forest cover and take all necessary steps to ensure that the trend of decline in forest cover in these 
States is arrested at the earliest.                       (Para 4.10) 
Action Taken 
1.6 As per India State of Forest Report (ISFR) -2017, a decline of 630 sq. km. of forest area has 
been observed in the North Eastern States/UTs. As per India State of Forest Report (ISFR) 2017, 
shifting cultivation and development activities have been mentioned  as the reasons for decline in 
forest cover in North -Eastern States. 
1.7 The Ministry has implemented National Afforestation Programme (NAP) since 2000 -02, for 
regeneration of degraded forest area and due weightage is given for NE states in allocating the 
funds under the scheme. An amount of Rs. 828 crores have been released to NE states, since 
inception of the scheme in 2000 -02 till 2018 -19. The percentage relea se to NE States has been 
steadily increasing over 11th, 12th and beyond 12 th Plan Periods as 21%, 24% & 28% respectively.  
 1.8 Further, Green India Mission (GIM) activities were started in the FY 2015-16. So far, a sum of 
Rs. 237.067 crore has been released under GIM to twelve States for carrying out GIM activities. A sum 
of Rs. 79.723 crore has been released in three North -Eastern states namely Manipur, Mizoram and 
Sikkim. Proposals of other States will be considered based on fund availability and project norms.  
Progress reports indicate positive impacts in terms of increase in forest/plantation cover in the project areas 
under GIM.  
1.9 In addition to the above, steps are being taken by the State Forest Departments of North 
Eastern States to increase forest cover. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.10 The Committee notes that only 16 States/Union Territories have been able to provide details 
of digitized boundaries of Recorded Forest Area for incorporation in the India State of Forest Report, 
2017 and as such, it has not been possible to give forest cover inside and outside the recorded forest 
areas of such States. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change should impress upon the all the c oncerned remaining States/Union Territories to 
complete the task of digitization of forest boundaries of the Recorded Forest Area in their respective 
States/Union Territories in a time -bound manner, so that a more accurate picture of the forest cover 
area of the country can be made available.                                                               (Para 4.12) 
Action Taken 
1.11 As noted by the committee, only 16 States/UTs had provided digitized geo referenced 
boundaries of Recorded Forest Area (RFA) for use in India State of Forest Report -2017.  
1.12 The States and UTs have been requested to provide updated RFA boundary informa tion. If 
any other additional boundary information is received from States/UTs, the same will be used in India 
State of Forest Report-2019. 
MANAGEMENT OF FORESTS 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.13 The Committee notes that Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education (ICFRE), 
Dehradun and its regional research institutes inter alia work towards providing effective and feasible 
solutions to the problems of pests and diseases by undertaking region -specific research programmes. 

4 
 
Their research programmes have positively contributed to containing some of the ailments faced by 
our forests. The Committee hopes that ICFRE, in coordination, with the State Agricultural 
Universities and other research insti tutions working in the areas of pests and disease management, 
would continue to provide solutions to important forestry research needs of the country.     (Para 6.8)  
Action Taken 
1.14 ICFRE has been carrying out a number of studies on insect pest and diseases including 
their control. Some of the studies completed in the past are as under: 
1. Under a study on insects -pests of oaks in the western Himalaya, Forest Research 
Institute (FRI) , Dehradun conducted surveys for three oak species 
(Quercusleucotrichophora - Ban oak, Q. floribunda-Moru oak and Q. semicarpifolia -
Kharsuoak) and made collection of 17  insect species (comprising of lepidopteran 
defoliators, cerambycid borers, hemipteran  sap suckers and seed boring beetle). 
2. An android based mobile application "Polar Keet" was launched by FRI, Dehradun for easy 
identification and management of insects pests of poplar. 
3. A herbal based bio pesticide (Rakshak) was developed by FRI for management of poplar 
defoliators and conducted its field trial in Northern Region of India (Uttarakhand, 
Haryana and Uttar Pradesh) and organized awareness programme for farmers.  
4. Health study of trees of Rashtrapati  Bhawan was carried out. Recording of pathological 
and entomological problems was done in addition to other studies. In addition to this , 
maintenance studies of holy trees a t Bodhgaya, Smiriti Park, Patna;  papal trees at 
Koteshwarnath Dham, Beleganj were also carried out. 
5. Trichodermaspp based formulation was applied to seeds and nursery of Eucalyptus which 
showed significant improvement in seed germination, root stern and lead growth and 
form in nurseries. 
6. Tropical Forest Research Institute (TFRI) , Jabalpur carried out study on bio -control 
efficacy of spiders against insect -pests of rice agro -forestry system. Spider ecology was 
used for pest management in paddy agro forestry. 
7. Arid Forest Research Institute (AFRI) , Jodhpur carried out surveys of status of flower 
gall problem of Prosopiscineraria (Khejri) in Khejdhai, Gudha, Bishnoiyan, Phalodi, 
Lohawat, Osian, Nagaur, Pali and Lunuin Rajasthan.  
8. TFRI Jabalpur supplied packets of biofertilizers formulations for application in 
nurseries of 11 research and extension circles of MP Forest Development 
Corporation for application in bamboos.  
9. Screening for establishing bio -efficiency of ethno - insecticidal plants from the forest of 
Andhra Pradesh. 
10. Development of integrated pest management system (IPM) for Sapindustrifoliatus of Andhra 
Pradesh carried out by Institute of Forest Biodiversity (IFB), Hyderabad. 
1.15 ICFRE is committed to continue working in the area of pests and disease management and 
develop synergy with other expert research organizations in this discipline including State Agriculture 
Universities. ICFRE will continue its efforts to transfer the res earch knowledge to beneficiary 
organizations including State Forest Departments.  
 
 

5 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.16 The Committee is constrained to note that no action plan has been prepared by the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest & Climate Change for controlling the illegal cutting of trees in forests.  On the 
one hand, the Government is spending crores of rupees for environmental protection, while, on the 
other hand, illegal cutting of trees and transportation of the wood has been plaguing our forests  in a 
big way. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change 
must take due cognizance of the illegal felling of trees in the different parts of the country and, in 
coordination with the concerned State Governments/U nion Territory administrations, prepare an 
action plan for tackling this menace. The Ministry should impress upon all the concerned forest 
management authorities to take necessary action and utilize the constitutional provisions to restrict 
this illegal practice. Further, the report on illegal cutting of construction timber in forest near border 
area of Nepal in the Shravasti District of Uttar Pradesh, from the Uttar Pradesh Forest Department, 
should be shared with the Committee at the earliest.                            (Para 6.10)  
Action Taken 
1.17 The cutting of trees is regulated under the Indian Forest Act, 1927 and State Acts 
implemented by State Governments. Trees are also felled after diversion of forest land for non -
forestry development works unde r Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 after due permission of the 
Central Government for development activities. 
1.18 As per the latest India State of Forest Report i.e. ISFR – 2017 published by FSI, Dehradun, 
the total forest and tree cover in the country is 8,02,088 square kilometers (Forest cover  - 708273 
square kilometers, Tree cover – 93815 square kilometers) which is 24.39% of the geographical area 
of the country. There is an increase of 8021 square kilometer (Forest cover -6778 square kilometer, 
Tree cover – 1243 square kilometer) of total forest and tree cover compared to that of ISFR -2015. In 
order to increase the forest cover in the country, afforestation programmes have been taken up under 
various Centrally Sponsored Schemes such as NAP, GIM, Mahatma G andhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), Integrated Watershed Management Programme 
(IWMP), which has been amalgamated with as the Watershed Development Component of the 
“Pradhan Mantri  Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY)” from 2015 -16 and under Compensatory 
Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA). Local people are involved in 
afforestation activities by the State Forest Departments. 
1.19 As per information received from State Forest Department of Uttar Pradesh, illegal cutting in 
the forest near border area of Nepal in the Shravasti District is under control. There ar e sporadic 
incidents of illegal cutting of timber by local people. To control the illegal cutting of trees, regular 
patrolling is done in the forest area by  the State Forest Department Officials. In the forest area 
bordering Nepal, joint patrolling is being carried out by Forest Department, Uttar Pradesh and Sastra 
Seema Bal (SSB) to control and check forest offences. The State Forest Department takes immedia te 
action on any forest offences in the area. The Department also conducts regular meetings with local 
people to sensitize them about the importance of forest and wildlife. The local people are also 
provided training to protect wildlife in the area.    
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.20 Forests in India are treated primarily as a social and environmental resource and sustain full 
or partial livelihood for more than 300 million rural population. In this backdrop, the Committee is 
concerned to note that insuffi cient budget allocation to National Afforestation Programme has been 
hampering achieving the annual targeted area of afforestation during the last few years, which has 
already declined gradually over the last 4 years. The Committee, therefore, recommends t hat the 
Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change must ensure that adequate allocation is made for 
the National Afforestation Programme and the targets under the programme are achieved. Further, 
the concerned State Governments should also provide th eir share of the changed funding pattern to 

6 
 
make the National Afforestation Programme (NAP) a success.                                         (Para 6.16) 
Action Taken  
1.21 As observed by the committee, the financial allocation for the flagship scheme on 
afforestation was insufficient during last three years. However, there has been an increase in 
allocation during this period. The year-wise allocation and expenditure during the last three 
years under NAP is given below:  
 (Amount:  ₹ in crore) 
Year Budget Estimate  (B.E) Revised Estimate (R.E) Expenditure 
2016-17 60.00 60.00 59.35 
2017-18 60.00 80.00 80.00 
2018-19*  
(NAP & GIM)  
 160.00   160.00  92.01**  
*NAP was merged with GIM and separate allocation for NAP was not given. 
**Rs. 3.38 crores additional budget allocated on 29 th March, 2019 was released on 30 th March, 
2019, with which the total expenditure under NAP during 2018 -19 amounts to ₹ 95.39 
crores. 
1.22 NAP has been merged with GIM as per order dated 30 th January, 2018. However, 
functional modalities for implementation of these two schemes in merged form have not been 
finalized. The States have represented that NAP be continued in its present form to maximize the 
outreach. 
1.23 During 2018 -19, proposals fr om the states were received under NAP for committed 
activities and new afforestation. The APO of 18 states under NAP was approved under NAP and 
an amount of ₹ 95.39 crores was released as central share.  
1.24 Considering that NAP has been the flagship scheme of MoEFCC and has contributed 
significantly towards increasing and sustaining forest cover, it would be prudent to continue 
to take up new plantation area under NAP with adequate budget provisions under the NAP 
scheme until the functional modalities for implementation of the merged scheme are finalized, 
in order to complement efforts towards greening, besides meeting various national and international 
commitments.  
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.25 The Committee is of the view that although compensatory afforestation is ensured and Net 
Present Value (NPV) is collected, there is a need for striking the right balance between the 
developmental aspirations of the country on one hand and the conservation need s on the other.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that while the developmental aspirations of the nation  are not to 
be compromised, it should be ensured that forest land may be diverted for non -forestry purposes, if 
and only if, it is absolutely unavoi dable and essential and, in lieu of the diverted lands, adequate 
compensatory afforestation is done as per the prevalent guidelines/provisions and sufficient amount 
of Net Present Value is collected.                                                                                         (Para 6.23)        
Action Taken 
1.26 MoEFCC grants diversion of forest land under Section -2 of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 
1980 for various developmental activities. Use of forest areas for such activities is approved by the 

7 
 
Central Government under Section 2 of the Forest (Conservation) A ct, 1980 with adequate 
environmental safeguards and afforestation measures in lieu of forest land proposed to be utilised for 
developmental activities.  
1.27 The Compensatory Afforestation Fund (CAF) Act, 2016 was passed by the Parliament and 
notified on 3 rd August 2016. The Compensatory Afforestation Funds (CAF) Rules 2018 was also 
notified on 10th August 2018. The CAF Act and the Rules came into force from 30 th September 2018. 
The Compensatory Afforestation Fund (Accounting Procedure) Rules 2018 were also  notified on 
20.11.2018. The Rules were laid in the Parliament on 28.12.2018 in Lok Sabha and on 07.01.2019 in 
Rajya Sabha. 
1.28 The utilization of Compensatory Afforestation Funds shall be as per the provisions of the 
above said Act and Rules. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.29 The Committee is of the view that the LPG cylinders are still not available to a large number 
of forest dwellers and BPL households in many areas of the country. Further, the cost of the cylinders 
has gone up in absence of the subsidy on the cylinders. The  Committee recommends that Ministry of 
Environment, Forest & Climate Change should impress upon the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas to make efforts to bring more and more households under the Ujjwala scheme to reduce the 
pressure on forests.                                (Para 6.26) 
Action Taken 
1.30 As per information provided by Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, the forest dwellers 
are also covered under Pradhan Mantri  Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY). As on 15.03.2019, Oil Marketing 
Companies have released more than 7 crore connections which includes 8.34 lakh LPG connections to 
Forest Dwellers. On account of release of connections under PMUY, the pressure on firewood as 
cooking fuel has come down with resultant reduced pressure on forests. 
1.31 Further, the LPG consumers including the Forest Dwellers having LPG connections, registered 
under Pratyaksh Hanstantarit Labh (PAHAL) scheme, get LPG cylinders at non -subsidised price and 
admissible subsidy is directly transferred into the registered bank account of the customers. Domestic 
LPG prices are revised every month in line with international price of LPG with corresponding revision 
in monthly LPG subsidy under PAHAL Scheme. Any increase in non-subsidized LPG is compensated 
by the Government through enhanced subsidy. Entire subsidy burden upto the applicable cap of 12 
subsidized LPG cylinder to a domestic customer is borne by the Government. 
FOREST FIRES  
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.32 The Committee notes with concern the loss of lives in forest fires besides the severe 
degradation of forests & irreparable losses to valuable flora & fauna, there is a crucial need for 
developing an integrated approach for firefighting. The Committee feels that there should be a proper 
co-ordination mechanism between the State Governments, Forest Departments, National Disaster 
Management Authority (NDMA), local Air force authorities and the Central Ministry for quelling 
forest fires. The Committee also feels that public awareness programmes sh ould be conducted 
periodically in the vulnerable forest fire areas about the safety measures. Further, all  State 
Governments should make the registration of the mobile numbers of the concerned areas mandatory 
and ensure that the data base of the registered  mobile numbers of the State Forest Departments is 
kept up-to-date so that any information/alert is passed on to the maximum number of persons. 
            (Para 7.6)
            
 

8 
 
Action Taken 
1.33 Most of the forest fires in the country are ground fire. Forest fires do cause damage to the 
flora and fauna in the forests. However, due to various preventive and management measures taken 
by the forest departments in this regard, the loss of forest wealth is reduced to a great extent.   The 
Ministry coordinates with NDMA, National Institute of Disaster Management, (NIDM), and the 
Ministry of Defence to take any exigent measure to effectively control and douse forest fires taking 
the shape of disaster which are beyond the capacity of State Forest Department.  
1.34 The Ministry has also constituted a Crisis Management Group under the chairmanship of 
Secretary (EF&CC), which has representatives of various Ministries as its members to deal with 
crises arising due to disaster caused by forest f ire. The Ministry recognizes the fact that publicity and 
awareness programme for general public is important to prevent forest fires in the country.   States 
Forest Department also carry out awareness campaigns to educate people regarding forest fires.  
1.35 The Ministry has prepared a National Action Plan on Forest Fire (NAPFF) and sent it to all 
State/UT Governments for taking appropriate action for effective prevention and management of 
forest fire. The NAPFF emphasizes the role of local communities in p revention and control of forest 
fire.  
1.36 The Forest Survey of India, monitors fire incidences in the country based on the data received 
from various sources including National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC). Based on analysis of data, 
it provides fire ale rts to various authorities and the public in the States/UTs on registered mobile 
numbers at an interval of 6 hours every day. Early Warning System for forest fire is functional at FSI 
since 2016. The Early warning alerts are generated every Friday during t he Fires season (January -
June) and are valid during the ensuing week. The Early Warning alerts are sent to the Nodal Officers 
of concerned States/UTs for taking requisite action in the alerted forest areas. These alerts are based 
on parameters like forest cover, forest type, climate variables like temperature and rainfall and recent 
fire incidences over the area. About 50,000 users have been registered to receive fire alerts.  
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.37 The Committee also notes that it had presented a  detailed and exhaustive report i.e. Report 
No. 293 on 'Forest Fires and its Effect on Environment, Forests, Bio -Diversity and Wildlife and 
Remedial / Preventive Measures' to the both Houses of Parliament on 16th December, 2016 which 
could be a guiding for ce for the concerned agencies/ local authorities/ State Governments and their 
respective Forest Departments and Central Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change for 
effectively tackling the forest fires.                                     (Para 7.8)              
Action Taken 
1.38 Based on the recommendation of the report, the Ministry has prepared a National NAPFF 
which prescribes actions to be taken by State Governments and their respective Forest Departments 
and Central Ministry of Environment,  Forest and Climate Change for effectively tackling the forest 
fires. 
COMPENSATORY AFFORESTATION AND CAMPA FUNDS 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.39 The Committee feels that since the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Rules, 2018 have now 
been notified, the Central/State Governments would be able to utilise the amount available in the 
fund for the intended purposes. The Committee is also hopeful that the above rules will not give any 
scope for mis -utilisation or embezzlement of the funds by any of the stake h olders. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to devise a stringent 
monitoring mechanism for proper utilization of the funds.                                                  (Para 8.4)
                   

9 
 
Action Taken 
1.40 The utilization of Compensatory Afforestation Funds shall strictly be as per the provisions of 
The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2016 and The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Rules 
2018. 
CAUSES OF WILDLIFE DESTRUCTION: MAN -ANIMAL CONFLICT,  POACHING, 
FRAGMENTATION OF HABITAT 
Recommendation/ Observation 
2.41 The Committee notes with serious concern that wildlife is increasingly coming under pressure 
in all parts of the country. Reports of man - animal conflict threaten to tear apart the respec t for 
wildlife that has traditionally been the hallmark of conservation in India. The Committee feels that 
community led solutions must be explored in order to prevent fragmentation of habitats of wild lives 
besides policy interventions of the Ministry.          (Para 9.6) 
Action Taken 
1.42   Human-animal conflict has become a serious issue in several parts of the country during the 
recent times. Incidences of crop damage by straying wild animals are also reported from time to time. 
Management of such conflict situations is the primary responsibility of the respective State Governments. 
Central Government provides some financial and technical assistance to the State/UT Governments 
under the various Centrally Sponsored Schemes for management of wildlife including conflict situations.  
1.43 Under the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 there are provisions to deal with problematic wild 
animals, Section 11& 12 of the Act, inter-alia, empowers the Chief Wildlife Warden and authorized 
officers to take necessary steps to handle problematic wild animals and population management of wild 
animals responsible for damage and destruction of crops. 
1.44 This Ministry vide O.M. No. 1 -5212014-VVL-1 dated 24 th December, 2014 had issued an 
Advisory in the context of human-wildlife conflict wherein the States have been requested to take pro-
active steps including exercise of powers under the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 for mitigation of 
human-wildlife confli ct. Ministry has also issued a detailed advisory on 1 st June, 2015 to the 
State/Union Territory Governments on the priority actions for management of human wildlife conflict. 
1.45 Further, the Ministry has approved a pilot project on the immuno-contraception for controlling the 
population of wild animals responsible for damage and destruction of crops, namely; elephant, wild boar, 
monkey, and nilgai. 
1.46 Ministry has increased the ex-gratia rates for loss of life and damage to crops/property 
by wild animals vide letter No. 14 -2/2011 WL -1 (part) dated  9th February, 2018. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.47 The Committee is also of the view that wildlife protection requires concerted efforts and that 
growing incidents of poaching, encroachment and habitat destruction should be tackled in an 
effective manner and it also requires implementation of various Acts such as Wildlife Protection Act, 
1972 etc. and statutes in letter and spirit.                                                                                (Para 9.7)           
Action Taken 
1.48 Forest and Wildlife areas are managed by the State Governments. Forest and Wildlife areas 
are notified as per provisions of the Indian Forest Act, 1927, Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 or the State 
Forest Act. State Forest and Wildlife Departments are mandated for management in accordance with the 
Working/Management Plans prepared for this purpose.  
1.49 Both the Central and State Governments are taking steps for effective management of wildlife. 
The provisions contained in the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, enable the concerned authorities for 
taking steps for wildlife conservation. The important provisions in this regard are as given below: 

10 
 
i. Designation of Officers: The Act provides for designation of Officers by the State 
Government (e.g., the Chief Wildlife Warden, Honorary Wildlife warden, etc.) for implementation of 
the provisions of the Act. The Chief Wildlife Wardens are assisted by the respective Park Managers/ 
Field Directors and Range Forest Officers in management of Wildlife areas including pro tection and 
conservation of wild species,  their habitats, enforcement aspects for control of poaching and illegal 
trade in wildlife and their parts and products, regulation in entry in Protected Areas, scientific 
research, photography, etc. on wildlife and  their habitats; control of introduction of exotic and 
invasive alien species; protection of captive wild animals, including those in the zoo, rescue centres 
etc. 
ii. Measures for protection of National Parks and Sanctuaries: As a general practice, 
National Parks and Sanctuaries are declared by the respective State Governments. Section 33 of the Wild 
Life (Protection) Act, 1972 places responsibility on the respective State Chief Wildlife Wardens to take 
such measures, in the interest of wildlife and take such steps to ensure the security of wild animals in 
the Sanctuary and for the preservation of the Sanctuary and wild animals therein. 
iii. Regulating Hunting of wild animals: Hunting of wild animals is prohibited except under 
certain special circumstances wherein the State Chief Wildlife Wardens are empowered to grant permit. 
In case of a Schedule-I animal becoming dangerous to human life or is so disabled or diseased beyond 
recovery and that that such animal cannot be ca ptured, tranquilized or translocated, then the Chief 
Wildlife Warden maypermit any person to hunt such animal. In case the animal can be captured, then 
it should not be kept in captivity unless the animal cannot be rehabilitated in the wild. In case of any  
wild animal listed in Schedule -II, Schedule-III or Schedule -IV has become dangerous to human life 
or to property (including standing crops on any land) or is disabled or diseased beyond recovery, the 
Chief Wildlife Warden may permit any person to hunt suc h animal or group of animals in a specified 
area. 
iv. Regulation in entry to Protected Areas : Entry into a Sanctuary and National Park is 
regulated and a permission to enter a Sanctuary can be granted by the State Chief Wildlife Warden. 
The Wild life (Protecti on) Act, 1972 also empowers an officer, not below the rank of Assistant 
Conservator of Forests to evict any person from a Sanctuary/National Park, who unauthorisedly 
occupies Government land in contravention of the provisions of the Act. 
1.50 In addition, at the Central Government level, MoEFCC has adopted a National Wildlife 
Action Plan. The Action Plan was first adopted in 1983 and was revised in 2002 for a period till 2016. 
The Action Plan has been further revised for the period 2017 -2031 and envisages m anagement of 
wildlife on a Landscape level.  
1.51 Besides, the National Environment Policy adopted by the Ministry in 2006 also has actionable 
points for management of wildlife and its habitat, including Protected Areas. 
1.52 The Ministry, through its policies and programmes have also been concentrating in a more 
collective and coordinated governance approach wherein the Government, Non Government 
Organizations, communities, local bodies, Gram Sabhas facilitate decision making process. People 
are being made important actors in preserving the natural resources for their own future. The local 
and traditional knowledge base of the indigenous and local communities offers an excellent 
opportunity for enhancing the management interventions. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1. 53 The Committee notes that there exists a manual prepared by Wildlife Institute of India, 
Dehradun for making roads or any linear infrastructure and what care should be taken for wildlife 
and National Board of Wildlife has also made it mand atory that any linear projects whether it is a 
rail tracks, roads or canals or transmission lines, they have to follow the guidelines when the 
clearance is given particularly in the eco -fragile and wildlife areas. However, the Committee feels 

11 
 
that this is not being followed in right earnest and even some national parks/sanctuaries have 
roads/highways within its periphery. Therefore, the Committee recommends that prior to approval of 
any infrastructural/ development projects, this aspect must be looked into by the competent 
authorities or the concerned agencies. Further, the Committee hopes that Ministry shall sensitize the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways while considering the highway projects, and persuade 
them to spare the natural resources as well as wildlife sanctuaries/national parks/animal corridors 
etc. at the planning stage itself and wherever possible take a detour and completely leave it.                                                      
                       (Para 9.11) 
Action Taken 
1.54 This recommendation has been noted and the matter has been sent to Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways, all States/UTs Forest Department and Wildlife Division of the Ministry for 
necessary action.  
1.55 Wildlife Institute of India (WII) of the Ministry  has written guidelines on the Eco -friendly 
Measures to Mitigate Impacts of Linear Infrastructures on Wildlife. These guidelines provide standard 
template on structural and non-structural measures for mitigating the impact of roads, railway lines and 
power lines on wildlife including birds. 
1.56 The Standing Committee of National Board for Wild Life considers and recommends the linear 
projects inside the Protected Areas and within eco-sensitive zone of the Protected Areas in accordance 
with the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 along with the site specific conditions and mitigation measures 
imposed by the State Chief Wildlife Warden, State Board for Wildlife, National Tiger Conservation 
Authority and Wildlife Institute of India to safeguard the wildlife and eco-system as applicable. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.57 The Committee hopes that unprotected wells of all wildlife sanctuaries/ national parks of the 
country including the Gir Forest in Gujarat would be covered properly in order to save the wild 
animals falling into these wells and losing their lives. Also, the Ministry should take up the issue of 
non-availability of drinking water in various sanctuaries/national parks with the State Governments 
and their  respective Forest Departments in order to make necessary arrangements for providing 
drinking water to animals.         (Para 9.14)  
Action Taken 
1.58 The Ministry is providing technical and financial assistance under the Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme-Development of Wildlife Habitat (CSS -DWH) to all the States/ UT Governments including 
Gir Forests in Gujarat for developmental works within National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries such 
as provisions for providing water facilities through water holes, ponds etc., covering of unprotected 
wells in order to save the wild animals falling into these wells and losing their lives. 
1.59 The Wildlife Division of the Ministry has taken into account the recommendations of the 
Committee and advised the States to take necessary actions in the matter.  
1.60 In reference to the Committee's recommendation to consult wild life experts for exploring re-
locating/ shifting some of the Lions in nearby areas/other sanctuaries if feasible, it is to state that the 
Ministry has already constituted a high powered Committee in compliance to the order of Hon'ble 
Supreme Court of India dated April, 2013 comprising experts from the fields of Wildlife 
Management. Officials of the MoEF& CC and State Forest Departments and other organizations/ 
institutes etc. to monitor the process of translocation of Asiatic Lion from Gir, Gujarat to Kuno, Madhya 
Pradesh. The Expert Committee is looking into the matter of translocation of Asiatic Lion. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.61 The Committee expresses its deep concern over the deaths of 23 nos. of lions within a short 
span of time i.e. September - October, 2018 in Gir forest, Gujarat. Out of these 23 lion deaths, 4 nos. 

12 
 
had Canine Distemper Virus (CD V). The Committee recommends that Ministry should direct the 
various State Governments and their respective Forest Departments to take all necessary preventive 
measures in all the wild life sanctuaries across the country to avoid the situation like Gir for est in 
Gujarat. The Committee is also of the opinion that requisite steps to contain spread of any type of 
virus should be taken. The patrolling mechanism and constant vigil inside the wildlife sanctuaries 
and national parks also needs to be strengthened.                                                      (Para 9.16)         
Action Taken 
1.62 Action taken by the State Government of Gujarat 
 As precautionary action, nearly 50 lion from Sarasia and adjoining areas were  rescued 
and isolated to insulate the animals and check any effect on nearby animals. 
 Team of Veterinary doctors from S asan, Rajkot Zoo, Junagadh and IFS officers with 
veterinary background, were mobilized for treatment. 
 Blood sample were collected of lion from Sarasia, its immediate adjoining  areas, near 
adjoining areas, animal movement corridors and sent for testing at NIV, Pune, 
Veterinary College, Junagadh and Gujarat Biotech Research Center, Gandhinagar. 
 Blood sample were taken for all the animals for conduction of various tests. The 
animals showed bacterial and viral infections, affecting liver function, kidney function, 
very low hemoglobin and respiratory failures. In 25 samples presence of virus has 
been reported while in other 10 samples presence of Blood protozoan Babesia has 
been noticed. 
 Team from MOEF&CC, Government of India, including representative from Wildlife 
Institute of India, visited Gujarat from 22/09/2018 to 23/09/2018. The team  had made 
their observation and made suggestions for  vaccination of domestic cattle of adjoining  
villages, intensive patrolling of area during monsoon , strengthening of veterinary 
health facilities  and regular area screening for lion presence and movement. 
 On invitation from Government of Gujarat, 10 experts from India Veterinary 
Research, Institute (IVRI) Bareilly, National Zoological P ark, New Delhi and Etawah 
Lion safari, U.P. visited Gujarat, from 30 -09-2018 to 02 -10-2018. The teams visited 
Jasadhar and Jamwala Rescue Centres,  
examined the records, the treatment procedure followed, conducted po st mortem, 
collected samples and had detailed discussion with Forest Officers and veterinary 
officers of Wildlife wing of Gujarat Forest Department. 
  The team has taken note of  the prompt and timely action Government of Gujarat  in 
rescuing a large number o f the lions and bringing them  in isolation for 
observation, well executed  decision of separating infected and healthy animal‟s 
population, proper clinical observation done, medical record   maintenance, clinical 
observation of lions, under rescue and under treatment, disease observation and 
disease status of Lions in free ranging animals, facilities at various rescue center and 
lion of treatment followed, at all stages and mobilization of resources  in the crisis. 
 The tests report received from NIV, Pune and  Veterinary coll ege, have shown the 
presence of viral, bacterial and some Protozoan infection which spreads through ticks. 
However, there infections are noticed only in lion of one particular area (Roniya area 
Dalkhaniarange) whereas all other 33 lions res cued from semardi have been isolated 
and are healthy and under observation.    
 From 24-30th September, 2018, around 3200 sq km  of lion habitat in the State,  has 
been screened to locate any injured or ill lion by putting  240 teams comprising nearly 
550 fiel d Staff. During this screening nearly 600 lions were observed, out of which 
only 9 were found to be ill, 4 were treated at site while other 5 were brought to rescue 
center, and are under treatment. 

13 
 
 Disease screening is being done in approx.  200 sq km of ad joining area, within 25 km 
radius of incidence. Blood and swab samples of 100 lions from wild   population, have 
been collected and sent for testing at NIV Pune, IVRI, Bareilly and Gujarat Biotech 
Research Center. Besides this, samples from nearly 51 lions in captivity,  have also 
been collected and sent for testing. 
 Intensive administrative efforts  were initiated to  import the vaccine  from US and 300 
dosed of vaccine, which was received on 5 th October, 2018 by afternoon at 
Junagadh. As back up, arrangement, 200 more doses  of vaccine were borrowed from 
Etawa Lion Safari, U.P. Additional order for 1000 doses have also been given. 
 On the basis of advice from  people having experience & expertise, veterinary officers 
of state, international experts,  having worked in similar situation, blood 
reports, vaccination has been done,  in accordance with vaccination protocol. As 
precautionary measure, the lions in captivity also have been vaccinated. 
 As a precautionary measure,  63000 cattle  in adjoining  107 villages  have bee n 
vaccinated. Similarly,  vaccination of 500 dogs  from 20 adjoining villages, has been 
done and is being  continued. Strict enforcement of tourism bye laws, illegal 
hotels, sealing of facilities  not in conformity with legal provisions,  intensive night 
patrolling and area checking for any illegal tourist activity are some of the other 
measures. 
 To facilitate people‟s participation,  eco-development activities, like parapet walls 
around open wells, solar lanterns, water points, etc are being done. 
Short term action planned by State Government 
 Disease screening  system of wild animals through systematic process of  sample 
collection. 
 Tracking the lions through Radio-collaring program of lions along revenue border and 
other areas, permission sought and received from MOEFCC. 
 Drone based surveillance  for intensive monitoring of wildlife,  CCTV based 
surveillance in tourism areas, 
Middle term action planned by State Government: 
 Strengthening of  disease surveillance, through blood/swab/ faces collection and 
analysis. 
 Animal health care facilities by developing  new rescue and animal care 
centers, equipment etc. 
 Strengthening veterinary support system by  providing new veterinary manpower and 
human resources, 
Long term action planned by state government: 
 Creating a new division (300 sq km area)to ensure protection and conservation to lion 
habitat outside protected areas, 
 Creating lion habitat of 109 sq km area as conservation reserve, 
 Reducing man-animal conflict by providing  additional forest trekkers, Vanya Prani  
Mitra in adjoining village, additional rescue teams and new Rapid response teams, 
 Strengthening existing infrastructure and equipment, facilities, State  Government has 
declared a package of 231.00 Crore for lion conservation for above  and is considering 
availability of another 100 crores. 
 Recent death of lions was not an epidemic but was endemic to particular area.   It was 
caused by CDV, along with presence of protozoa, babesia which is spread through 
ticks, occurring in specific conditions, 

14 
 
 It has been almost two months and lion in wild as well as under isolation, are healthy 
and no death has occurred on this account. Of the report received, around 125 are 
negative for the CDV. 
 In entire GIR no further instance has taken place. The disease screening of wild 
population, in larger area, confirms that causative factor was confined only to this 
limited area and was endemic to that area only. 
 The increasing population of lions is finding its habitat in surrounding forest of 
Bhavnagar, Junagadh, Amrel, Botad, Gir –Somnath districts. 
 While straying of lion in areas outside sanctuary, is common, man -animal conflict, 
especially death of humans by lion, is rare. 
1.63 In addition to the above, MoEFCC is providing technical and financial assistance under the 
CSS-DWH to all the States/ UT Governments including Gir Forests in Gujarat for developmental 
works within National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries such as provisions for providing water 
facilities through water holes, ponds etc., covering of unprotected wel ls in order to save the wild 
animals falling into these wells and losing their lives. 
1. 64 The Wildlife Division of the Ministry has taken into account the recommendations of the 
Committee and advised the States to take necessary actions in the matter.  
1.65 In reference to the Committee's recommendation to consult wild life experts for exploring re-
locating/ shifting some of the lions in nearby areas/other sanctuaries if feasible, the Ministry has already 
constituted a high powered Committee in compliance to the order of Hon'ble Supreme Court of 
India dated April, 2013 comprising experts from the fields of Wildlife Management. Officials of the 
MoEF&CC and State Forest Departments and other organizations/ institutes etc. to monitor the process 
of translocation of Asiatic Lion from Gir, Gujarat to Kuno, Madhya Pradesh. The Expert Committee is 
looking into the matter of translocation of Asiatic Lion. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.66 The Committee also observes that infighting amongst the  lions of Gir forest, Gujarat might be 
due to over population of the lions in specific areas. The Committee recommends that wild  life 
experts may be consulted for exploring re -locating/shifting some of the lions in nearby areas/  other 
sanctuaries, if feasible.                                                                                      (Para 9.17) 
Action Taken 
1.67 The infighting amongst the lion population is a natural phenomenon. However, expert opinion 
may be sought to find out whether this needs to be addressed and also to find out remedial measures.   
1.68 In reference to the Committee's recommendation to consult wild life experts for exploring re-
locating/ shifting some of the Lions in nearby areas/other sanctuaries if feasible, it is to state that the 
Ministry has already constituted a high powered Committee in compliance to the order of Hon'ble 
Supreme Court of India dated April, 2013 comprising experts from the fields of Wildlife 
Management. Officials of the MoEF&CC a nd State Forest Departments and other organizations/ 
institutes etc. to monitor the process of translocation of Asiatic Lion from Gir, Gujarat to Kuno, Madhya 
Pradesh. The Expert Committee is looking into the matter of translocation of Asiatic Lion. 
TADOBA-ANDHARI TIGER RESERVE 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.69 The Committee notes with satisfaction that the number of tourists has been steadily increasing 
in the Tadoba -Andhari Tiger Reserve since 2012 -13 and it has positively impacted the revenue 
generation through wildlife tourism, thereby creating indirect econo my in the area. However, the 
Committee would like to caution that the tourism in the tiger reserve must be regulated as per the 
guidelines of the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) only. Further, the income generated 

15 
 
from tourism should be plough ed back in the development of the tiger reserve and for the 
development of the villages located in the buffer area of the tiger reserve.   (Para 9.22) 
Action Taken 
1.70 As per Tiger Conservation Plan of Tadoba  Andhari Tiger Reserve tourism is being regulated 
by the NTCA Guidelines. 
1.71 As per section 38X of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, income generated through 
eco-tourism is required to be reploughed into the Tiger Conservation Foundation, which is 
being done . 
1.72 The Tiger Reserve has  a Tiger Conservation Plan approved by NTCA. The tourism in the 
Tiger Reserve is regulated as per the NTCA Guidelines. All the revenue generated from tourism is 
ploughed back to the development works of the Tiger Reserve and the villages located in the buffer  
area of Tiger Reserve. 
CORBETT TIGER RESERVE 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.73 The Committee is constrained to note that there has been massive encroachment in the 
revenue and forest land around the tiger reserve, including the catchment area of the Kosi river.  The 
reports of some hotels and resorts dumping waste into Kosi river, wh ich is considered to be the 
lifeline of Corbett Tiger Reserve, are also equally disturbing. The Committee recommends that the 
concerned authorities must take all lawful action in this regard and ensure that there is no further 
deterioration of environment in Corbett National Park and the commercial activities around the 
national park are regulated.                                (Para 9.36) 
Action Taken 
1.74 The NTCA has concurred a proposal for notifying an Eco-sensitive zone around the Corbett 
Tiger Reserve in August, 2016 and communicated to ESZ Division of the Ministry. However, ESZ 
Division has sought some clarification from Uttarakhand Forest Department and the same are 
awaited. After this notification will be issued and the issue raised will be a ddressed.    
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.75 The Committee is aware that with majestic and swift tigers, Corbett Tiger Reserve is known as 
the most prestigious and oldest national park in the country. The Committee feels that the issues 
emerging out of the  discussions of the Committee must be accorded due consideration.  The 
Committee recommends that immediate attention should be paid to the eradication of invasive weeds 
like Lantana and Cannabis prevalent in the habitat to ensure conducive environment for herbivores. 
The connectivity of the corridor with the Rajaji National Park is crucial and should be taken up on 
priority. Further, all efforts should be made to ensure that the linear development of tourism 
infrastructure along the highway from Ramnagar to  Almora on the banks of Kosi does not adversely 
impact the habitat matrix.                                                                                      (Para 9.38)                                      
Action Taken 
1.76 Based on an Annual Plan of Op eration, which stems out from a legally mandated Tiger 
Conservation Plan, proposals are received from the States to manage invasive weeds like Lantana 
and Cannabis, which is being done on a regular basis. 
1.77 The issue of tourism infrastructure can be addressed once the Eco -sensitive zone (already 
concurred by the NTCA) is notified. 
 
 

16 
 
DRAFT NATIONAL FOREST POLICY, 2018 AND RELATED ASPECTS 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.78 The Committee also observed that the general perception of the public is that the Draft Policy 
emphasizes the commercialization of forests,  particularly refer to as the degraded forests, so as to 
serve the interests of industry and to bring the private sector in for the management of forests through 
the means of Public Private Partnersh ip Model. Similarly, apprehensions have been conveyed by 
various stakeholders that the Draft Policy envisages curtailing of rights of tribals, and tribal 
communities and Traditional Forest-Dwellers in ownership and control of non timber forest produce 
as also in community resources. Concerns are also being expressed that the Draft Policy aims to take 
away the rights of Gram Sabhas for management of forests and instead hands it over to the proposed 
centrally-controlled Corporations. The Committee feels that if too much emphasis given to Private 
Partnership Model in management of forests in the proposed DNFP, we might end up with losing the 
forest lands whether it is degraded or otherwise. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
adequate safeguards be taken after due consultations with the stakeholders in order to protect the 
forests from over exploitation by private parties alongwith the legitimate rights of tribals and Gram 
Sabhas.                                                         (Para 10.7)  
Action Taken 
1.79 The basic objectives, principles and goals of previous policy have been retained in the Draft 
New Policy. A massive need based programme of afforestation and tree planting on all degraded land 
for enhancing the forest cover in the country and meeting national needs while safeguarding rights of 
local people and tribal was also highlighted in the previous Policy of 1988. The present policy has 
only further emphasized the need to increase productivity of plantations for growing more wood, 
which is a carbon neutral renewable resource.  Role and responsibility of Gram Sabha, tribals and 
other traditional forest dwellers have been duly reflected at all relevant section of the present policy 
including in the preamble of proposed Policy. 
1.80 The policy  promotes afforestation in Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode only in scrub/ 
degraded forest areas which are not wildlife habitats or of any substantial ecological importance and 
also in areas outside forests. Further promotion of trees plantation in de graded areas will help in 
reducing the dependency on import of timber and its products by the country. Afforestation in PPP 
mode emphasizes that the communities, Van Sanrakshan  Samiti (VSS), Joint Forest Management 
Committees (JFMCs) will be equal partners  in the process and will get their due share from the 
harvest.  All the forestry operations in forests will take place as per approved working plans.  
1.81 It has been highlighted in the present Draft policy that management of forests will be done 
only as per the Central Government approved Working /Management Plans. It will be ensured that 
there is no violation of FRA, PESA and other Acts regarding rights of tribals and other forest 
dwellers. 
CLARIFICATIONS BY MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, FOREST AND CLIMATE 
CHANGE 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.82 The Committee was informed that during the formulation stage of DNFP, the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs wasn't consulted. It was also informed that many provisions of the FRA, 2006 and 
PESA, 1996 have been diluted or disregarded. Therefore, the Committee recommends that Ministry 
of Tribal Affairs must be taken on board for wider consultation alongwith State Governments/ Local 
Bodies/ NGOs/ Civil society members before finalizing the Draft Forest Policy and notifying it . 
Further, adequate safeguards must be taken for the protection of vulnerable forest communities such 
as tribals and other communities who are dependent on the forest for their sustenance and  survival. 
                                           (Para10.24)      

17 
 
Action Taken 
1.83 Draft National Forest Policy was prepared based on very exhaustive consultation processes at 
all stages with various stakeholders during 2014 to 2019.Adequate safeguard regarding role and 
responsibility including rights of Gram Sabha, tribals and other traditional forest dwellers as per 
FRA, 2006 and PESA 1996 have been reflected at all relevant places in the proposed National Forest 
Policy 2019.The Draft National Forest Policy 2016 document was circulated to all State 
Governments.  A core group for reviewing the NFP was constituted by MoEF&CC in 2014 wherein 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs (MoTA) has been made one of the members of the Committee.  From 2015 
to 2016, IIFM organized various meetings/ workshop/ consultation with all stak eholders including 
village level/ gram sabha etc. The concerns of focused group like tribal and communities (for which 
MOTA is nodal Ministry) were also discussed.  Various meetings were organized in Ministry from 
2016 to 2017 and Draft national Forest Pol icy 2017 was finalized. This was discussed again in 
Ministry including Senior Officer Meeting of Ministry.  Draft NFP 2018 was also placed in public 
domain for open consultation and obtaining comments of all concerned stakeholders. Comments 
received from various Tribal groups/ associations (for which MOTA is the nodal Ministry) were duly 
addressed.  The approved version of Draft National Forest Policy, 2018 was forwarded to MOTA for 
comments. 
1.84 A DO letter dated 19.06.2018 was received from the Secretary , MoTA communicating 
comments of MoTA.  After feedbacks received from MOTA and other stakeholders, Cabinet Note on 
Draft National Forest Policy, 2018 was prepared and the proposal was again circulated to all 
concerned Ministries including MOTA on 19.09.201 8 for inter -ministerial consultation.  Comments 
of MOTA on Cabinet Note were received on 11.10.2018.After incorporating suggestions of MOTA, 
the Cabinet Note was again modified and the Cabinet Note on the proposal was submitted to Cabinet 
Secretariat on 26.11.2018 and thereafter 19.12.2018 and finally on 4.01.2019 for consideration of the 
Cabinet. A consultation meeting with Secretary, MOTA was held recently in February, 2019 to 
incorporate all the concerns of MOTA. 
CONSERVATION OF BIODIVERSITY 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.85 The Committee hopes that ZSI and BSI would continue their good work in conserving the rich 
and varied biodiversity of our country through documentation of our animal and faunal diversity 
using modern techniques of conservation and that  will also promote preservation of relic, 
endangered and threatened species.                                                                                     (Para 11.7)  
Action Taken 
1.86 The Ministry through its funding supports majority of the research activities undertaken by the 
ZSI on conservation of threatened fauna of the country. Recently, through National Mission on 
Himalayan Studies (NMHS), the Ministry has supported ZSI by sponsoring a project on long -term 
monitoring of selected species of fauna in various plots spread across Eastern Himalayas. Apart from 
this, the Ministry also supports ZSI to carry out surveys on threatened and endangered species in 
various protected areas.   The number of threatened faunal species (as per IUCN Red List) in the 
country is on rise in India across all animal groups. Hence, the need of the hour is to enhance the 
research capacity of ZSI in terms of taking up projects on selected threatened species  especially using 
modern techniques.  
 
 
 
 

18 
 
INTERNATIONAL      COMMITMENTS:      CARBON      SEQUESTRATION / STOCK IN 
THE COUNTRY 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.87 The Committee is in agreement with the views expressed by the Energy and Resources 
Institute (TERI) as well as the Ministry that India has potential of achieving additional 3 billion 
tonnes of CO2 equivalent sequestration by 2030 with conservation and affo restation approach on 
forests, degraded forests and non-forest land. However, the Committee feels that the Country needs to 
have a holistic approach and at the same time concerted efforts are required from one and all and 
peoples' involvement, particularly  the tribals and traditional forest dwellers, for achieving this 
important commitment of United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC) for 
addressing the issues of climate change adaptation and mitigation.                                    (Para 12.8)  
Action Taken 
1.88 The Ministry has initiated the process to prepare the roadmap for achieving the targets under 
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs). A committee has been constituted under the 
chairmanship of DGF&SS for the purpose of preparing a strategy for implementation of NDCs.  
1.89 In addition to the above, Ministry has also initiated the process to take on board all the 
stakeholders who are involved in the tree plantation/ afforestation. The Ministry h as also advised 
States/UTs to revise their State Action Plans on Climate Change (SAPCCs) to align with the targets 
of NDCs. 
  

19 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S 
REPLIES 
DEGRADATION OF FORESTS IN THE COUNTRY 
Recommendation/ Observation 
2.1 The Committee takes note of the schemes/programmes initiated by the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change for improving the quality of degraded forests in the 
country. The mid-term evaluation study on National Afforestation Programme by ICFRE during 2008 
had highlighted the successful implementation of the plan as a result of which these forests were 
regenerating with vigour.  The Ministry has also informed the Committee that the forest depletion has 
by and large stabilized now. However, the Committee wishes to point out that nearly 10 years have 
passed by since the evaluation had been conducted by ICFRE. The Committee, therefor e, 
recommends that the Ministry should undertake a study to assess the impact of National Afforestation 
Programme and Green India Mission in improving the quality of degraded forests so that their actual 
impact on the forest cover is known and further stra tegies in this regard could be drawn accordingly. 
                                                                                                                                       (Para 5.4)  
Action Taken 
2.2 A mechanism of continuous independent eval uation has been introduced in the Revised 
National Afforestation Programme (NAP)Guidelines of 2009 approved by Cabinet Committee on 
Economic Affairs (CCEA) whereby, it is mandatory for the State Forest Development Agencies 
(SFDAs) to get the National Afforestation Programme (NAP) Projects evaluated by a third party.  
2.3 Positive outreach has been recorded for the scheme in the evaluation reports submitted 
by the SFDAs. Further, it is proposed to take up a comprehensive evaluation of NAP to assess 
the impact of the scheme during 12 th plan focusing on afforestation activities, people's 
participation, contribution to livelihood upliftment, soil -moisture regime etc. under the 
conditions of changed funding pattern, implementation through SFDAs, limited budg et 
availability convergence with other schemes etc. 
2.4 A comprehensive monitoring framework at four different levels has been proposed under 
Green India Mission (GIM). In addition to on-ground self-monitoring by multiple agencies, including 
communities, the Mission supports use of modern technology like Remote Sensing with GPS 
mapping of plot boundaries coupled with Satellite imageries for monitoring at the output/outcome 
level. The process of third party evaluation of GIM will be initiated by the NITI Aayog. 
COMPENSATORY AFFORESTATION AND CAMPA FUNDS 
Recommendation/ Observation 
2.5 The Committee recommends that the suggestions made by The Energy and Resources Institute 
should be duly considered by the concerned  Ministries/Departments of the Central Government to 
strengthen the afforestation process of the country.                                                           (Para 8.9)  
Action Taken 
2.6 The Government's price policy for agricultural commodities seeks to ensure remunerative 
prices to the growers for their produce with a view to encourage higher investment and production, 
and to safeguard the interest of consumers by making available supplies at reasonable prices. 

20 
 
2.7 Accordingly, Government fixes MSPs of 22 mandated Kharif and Rabi crops and Fair 
&Remunerative Price (FRP) for Sugarcane on the basis of recommendations of Commission for 
Agricultural Costs & Prices (CACP), after considering the views of State Governments and Central 
Ministries/Departments concerned & other relevant factors. I n addition, MSP for Toria and De , 
Husked coconut is also fixed on the basis of MSPs of Rapeseed/Mustard and Copra respectively. 
Government announces MSP for those agricultural commodities which are widely grown, have 
large area under cultivation, items of  mass consumption with fairly long shelf life and 
necessary for maintaining food security. These MSP crops cover approximately 98 per cent of the 
total agricultural production in the country. 
2.8 While recommending MSPs for the mandated crops, CACP considers the cost of production 
(CoP) and other important factors. Based on the latest three years actual cost estimates provided by 
the Directorate of Economics & Statistics (DES) compiled under 'Comprehensive Scheme (CS) for 
studying the Costs of Cultivation (CoC) of Principal Crops in India', CACP undertakes crop -wise, 
state-wise cost projection exercise for the ensuing season under certain implicit assumptions by 
utilizing statistical techniques. 
2.9 Regarding the suggestion made by representative of TERI to come up with MSP for 
wood/timber of minimum 10 -15 trees species which are remunerative for agro forestry, it is 
mentioned that there is no mechanism to collect cost data for such produce presently and such 
timber forestry is not like to be covered in the Crop Complex approach followed in the CS Scheme 
by DES, DAC&FW. It is therefore not feasible for DAC&FW to initiate a process of determining 
MSPs of agro forestry. 
2.10 Besides, as per the existing arrangements, procurement is made of the crops for which 
MSPs are announced through Central and State agencies.  
2.11 Food Corporation of India (FCI), National Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of 
India Limited (NAF ED), National Cooperative  Consumers' Federation (NCCF), Central 
Warehousing Corporation (CWC) and Small Farmers Agri - Business Consortium (SFAC) are the 
designated agencies for undertaking price support operations for paddy, wheat, coarse cereals, pulses 
and oilseeds. Cotton Corporation of India (CCI) and Jute Corporation of India (JCI) are the central 
nodal agency for undertaking price support operations for cotton and jute respectively. The recently 
launched Umbrella Scheme "Pradhan Mantri Annadata Aay SanraksHan Abhiyan (PM -AASHA) 
provides for a holistic arrangement for assurance of a remunerative and stable price environment for 
growers /farmers to increase agriculture productivity and production. This Umbrella Scheme 
comprises Price Support Scheme  (PSS) for pulses and oilseeds, Price Deficiency Payment Scheme 
(PDPS) and Pilot of Private Procurement and Stockist Scheme (PPSS) for oilseeds to ensure MSP to 
the farmers. However, farmers are free to sell their produce to Government agencies or in the o pen 
market as is advantageous to them. Given the above, it is not feasible for DAC&FW to build an 
institutional mechanism for ensuring MSPs for agro forestry product like timber. 
Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve 
Recommendation/ Observation 
2.12 The Committee takes note of the steps taken to provide safety to the wild animals from the 
various threats in the forests and to ensure the availability of sufficient drinking water in the tiger 
reserve for the wildlife. The Committee appreciates the invol vement of women in forest force in tiger 
reserves and recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change should 
impress upon other State Governments to follow suit and take requisite steps for the induction of 
women in the forest departments, especially in wildlife sanctuaries.                      (Para 9.26) 
 
 

21 
 
Action Taken 
2.13 Availability of water is ensured through management interventions prescribed in the legally 
mandated Tiger Conservation Plan, besides annual advisories during the pinch period.  Recruitment is 
a prerogative of the States and is done as per their extant rules. 
  

22 
 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE 
FOREST FIRES 
Recommendation/ Observation 
3.1 The Committee also feels that lack of human resources in the Forest Departments of the 
respective States is one of the very crucial reasons in its inability to deal with the forest fires affecting 
large stretches of the forests. Therefore, the Committee is of the view that Forest Departments of the 
State Governments should look into this aspect very seriously and fill the vacancies after completing 
the due procedures & approval of competent authorities. The Central Minist ry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change should monitor this important aspect for tackling the forests fire 
effectively.                                              (Para 7.7) 
Action Taken        
3.2 The Ministry issues advisories to all States/UTs before the fire season to tackle forest fire.  
The Ministry supports the efforts of State/Union Territory Governments in prevention and control of 
forest fire by providing financial assistance for various forest fire prevention and management 
measures such as creation and maintenance of fire lines in forest areas, engagement of fire watchers, 
creation of water storage structures in forest areas, strengthening of forest infrastructure, procurement 
of fire fighting equipments, Soil and Moisture Conservation ( SMC) works in high risk areas, 
awareness creation, incentivizing villages/communities for protection against forest fire etc. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
3.3 The Committee notes that the Ministry has not responded to Committee's observation 
regarding lack of human resources in the Forest Department of the States.  The Ministry 
should not ignore th is important aspect and submit the Action Taken on the recommendation 
of the Committee.  
COMPENSATORY AFFORESTATION AND CAMPA FUNDS 
Recommendation/ Observation 
3.4 The Committee observes that the Ministry had not undertaken any field survey to determine/ 
identify the total area/land available in the country for afforestation. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that necessary action in this regard sh ould be taken at the earliest so that the field 
survey could provide the necessary data to the State Governments to chalk out the necessary 
strategies for taking up the afforestation activities in their respective States.                    (Para 8.7)
                 
Action Taken 
3.5 The observation of the Committee has been noted.  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
3.6 The Ministry has merely stated that the observation of the Committee  has been noted.  
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should furnish its response to the above 
recommendation of the Committee and intimate the action taken in the matter.  
 
 

23 
 
CORBETT TIGER RESERVE 
Recommendation/ Observation 
3.7 The Committee feels that the genuine demands of the local people must be looked into 
administratively by the local authorities. The requirement of toilets for the people of the area must be 
given priority. Further, necessary action also needs to be taken for providing a proper garbage 
disposal and solid waste management system.                                                                       (Para 9.31)  
Action Taken 
3.8 The National Tiger Conservation Authority (Normative Standards for Tourism Activities and 
Project Tiger) Guidelines, 2012 prescribe co existence agenda in buffer and fringe areas around 
tiger reserves wherein this issue can be addressed based on receipt of demand from the States. 
3.9 It is submitted that 2201 toilets are constructed in the villages falling in the buffer of Tadoba 
Andhari Tiger Reserve during last 4 years by the Tadoba -Andhari Tiger Reserve. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.10 The Committee observes that although the recommendation of the Committee had been 
made in context of Corbett Tiger Reserve, the Ministry has fur nished its response with 
reference to the Tadoba Andhari Tiger Reserve.  The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change should furnish its response in the correct 
context.  
GENERAL OBSERVATION 
Recommendation/ Observation 
3.11 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, 
being the Central Nodal Ministry dealing with the subject, should make all out efforts to protect and 
conserve our forests, wildlife as well as invaluable biodivers ity and seek the cooperation of all 
State/Union Territory Governments and other stakeholders to see that the country does not lag 
behind in this monumental task.                                                                                             (Para 13.1)        
Action Taken  
3.12 The observation of the Committee has been noted. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
3.13 The Ministry has merely noted the observation of the Committee. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should furnish its response to the above recommendation of the 
Committee.  
  

24 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV   
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
TADOBA-ANDHARI TIGER RESERVE 
Recommendation/ Observation 
4.1 The Committee observes that Tadoba -Andhari Tiger Reserve has emerged as one the most 
important tourist destinations for wildlife lovers and enthusiasts  as a result of which the revenue 
generation by the tiger reserve has seen a consistent increase during the last few years. The tiger 
reserve has also become an important source of livelihood for a large number of people in the area. 
In this backdrop, the Committee is constrained to note the environmental issues pertaining to the 
Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve brought to the notice of the Committee and is of the view that these 
issues deserve a serious consideration. The Committee, accordingly, recommends tha t while 
establishing the irrigation project on the Human River, it should be ensured that the tiger corridor 
between Tadoba -Andhari Tiger Reserve and Bramhapuri Forest  Division that connects Satpuda -
Maikal Landscape is not cut -off. Similarly, it should be ensured that movement of animals across the 
corridors is not the least restricted while four -laning the Chandrapur -Mul-Gadchiroli road and 
Nagpur-Umred-Nagbhid-Bramhapuri road. The Committee also recommends that the environmental 
assessment of the coal min es of Western Coalfields Limited and the thermal power plant of 
Chandrapura Thermal Power Station located along the southern border of the tiger reserve on the 
activities of the wildlife needs to be carried out at the earliest and remedial measures in resp ect of 
adverse impact of the same be taken on priority.  The Ministry should also consider carrying out 
environmental assessment of other wildlife  sanctuaries/parks affected by such industries/power 
plants.                                                    (Para 9.28)  
Action Taken 
4.2  A team was constituted to suggest options for retaining vital tiger corridors vis -à-vis the 
proposed Hooman dam, which submitted its report in 2015 and suggested the following options:  
Option A : Shifting the location of the  human river project upstream by a distance of 5 Km, this 
will make sure that the structural corridor of 5 -6 km will be safeguard downstream and will also 
reduce human -wildlife interface on the northern side of the Tadoba and will help in reducing 
human-wildlife conflict in the area.  
Option B: Restore the structural corridor of 3 -4 km downstream by purchasing the private land and 
converting the purchased land into forest by planting native trees. The construction work will only 
start once the land is purcha sed and first phase of plantation work on the purchased land is 
completed. 
Option C : To look for other options for irrigation like developing Life irrigation, barrage, small 
dams etc. This option so far has not at all considered by Irrigation Department. T his is significant 
as the potential command area has come down due to Gosikhurd overlap.  
4.3  It may be mentioned that project coming up in Tiger corridors areas are being addressed 
through section 38 0 (1) (g) of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972.  
4.4 In so far as Environment impact assessment of Chandrapur of coal mines and thermal power 
plants near the Tadoba Andhari Tiger Reserve is concerned, the matter shall be taken up in the EIA 
Division, MoEF&CC.  
 
 

25 
 
Further Recommendation /Observation 
4.5 The Ministry has stated that environment impact assessment of Chandrapur of coal 
mines and thermal power plants near the Tadoba Andhari Tiger Reserve shall be taken up in 
the EIA Division, MoEF&CC.  The Committee recommends that the current status in this 
regard be communicated to the Committee.  
 
 
******* 
  

26 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry has not responded to Committee's observation 
regarding lack of human resources in the Forest Department of the States.  The Ministry 
should not ignore this important aspect and submit the Action Taken on the recommenda tion 
of the Committee.                                                                                                                   (Para 3.3) 
 The Ministry has merely stated that the observation of the Committee has been noted.  
The Committee recomme nds that the Ministry should furnish its response to the above 
recommendation of the Committee and intimate the action taken in the matter.          (Para 3.6) 
 The Committee observes that although the recommendation of the Committee had been 
made in conte xt of Corbett Tiger Reserve, the Ministry has furnished its response with 
reference to the Tadoba Andhari Tiger Reserve.  The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change should furnish its response in the correct 
context.                                                                                                                                   (Para 3.10) 
 The Ministry has merely noted the observation of the Committee. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry shoul d furnish its response to the above recommendation of the 
Committee.                                                                                                                           (Para 3.13) 
 The Ministry has stated that environment impact assessment of Chandrapur of coal 
mines and thermal power plants near the Tadoba Andhari Tiger Reserve shall be taken up in 
the EIA Division, MoEF&CC.  The Committee recommends that the current status in this 
regard be communicated to the Committee.                                                                    (Para 4.5) 
  

27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
 
MINUTES 
_________________________ 
  

28 
 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 10:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 30 th November, 2021 in Room No. 63, 
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
             MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Jairam Ramesh -- Chairman 
              RAJYA SABHA 
2.  Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
3.  Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
4.  Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
5.  Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
6.  Shri Nabam Rebia 
             LOK SABHA 
7.  Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
8.  Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
9.  Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
10.  Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
11.  Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
12.  Shrimati Satabdi Roy (Banerjee) 
13.  Shri Anurag Sharma 
14.  Shri Ram Shiromani 
             SECRETARIAT 
             Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
             Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
             Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
             Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
             Shri Harish Kumar, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee.  The 
Committee decided to take up the consideration and adoption of the draft 348th, 349th, 350th, 351st, 
352nd, 353rd, 354th, 355th, 356th and 357th  reports of the Committee on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 316th Report on 'Air Pollution 
in Delhi and National Capital Region'; the 324 th  Report on „Status of Forests  in India; the 325 th  
Report on „An Expanded Role for the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) in Cancer Treatment 
in India through An Enlarged Network of the Tata Memorial Centre (TMC)‟; and 351 st to 357th 
Reports on the Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of the M inistries/Departments of Atomic Energy; 
Biotechnology; Scientific and Industrial Research; Science & Technology; Space; Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change; and Earth Sciences, respectively.  The Committee, then, considered 
the draft 348th to 357th reports and adopted the same. 
3. The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned reports in both the Houses of 
Parliament on the 1 st December, 2021.  The Committee also authorised the Chairman to decide 
the names of the Members for presentation/laying of the reports in both the Houses of Parliament.  
4. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 10.25 a.m. 
 
 