 
 
 
 
 
  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND  
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
    Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
   March, 2026/ Chaitra, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FOUR HUNDRED SEVENTH REPORT 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2026-27) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY 
 (DEMAND NO. 90) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25thMarch, 2026) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 25th March, 2026) 
REPORT NO. 
407 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://www.sansad.in/rs 
Email: rsc-st@rss.sansad.in 

 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
 ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND  
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
FOUR HUNDRED SEVENTH REPORT 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2026-27) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY 
 (DEMAND NO. 90) 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25thMarch, 2026) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 25thMarch, 2026) 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2026/ Chaitra, 1948 (Saka) 
 


 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
   
  PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION  (ii) 
  3. ACRONYMS  
 
(iii-iv) 
4. REPORT 1-27 
5 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE 28-32 
6. *MINUTES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
 
* To be appended later 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
(Constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2025) 
 
 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita -    Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Narayanasa K. Bhandage  
3. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
4. Shri I.S. Inbadurai  
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
6. Shri Sandosh Kumar P 
7. Shri Sharad Pawar 
8. Shri Jairam Ramesh   
9. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy 
10.  Shri Paka Venkata Satyanarayana  
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Sajda Ahmed 
12. Shri Alfred Kanngam S. Arthur 
13. *Vacant 
14. Shri Phani Bhusan Choudhury 
15. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb 
16. Shri Vamsi Krishna Gaddam 
17. Shri Tapir Gao 
18. Adv K. Francis George  
19. Shri Eswarasamy K. 
20. Shri Mahesh Kashyap 
21. Dr. Anand Kumar 
22. Shri Mohibbullah 
23. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
24. Shri Jashubhai Bhilubhai Rathva  
25. Shri Trivendra Singh Rawat 
26. Shrimati Himadri Singh 
27. Shri Tejasvi Surya  
28. Shri Durai Vaiko  
29. Shri Yaduveer Wadiyar 
30. Shri Balwant Baswant Wankhade  
31. Shri Akhilesh Yadav  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Joint Secretary  
Shri Arun Kumar, Director  
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Deputy Secretary 
Ms. I. V. Rajya Laxmi, Under Secretary  
Shri Vaibhav Jain, Committee Officer 
 
 
(i) 
                                                 
* Shri Pradyut Bordoloi ceased to be member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation from the Lok Sabha w.e.f. 
20.03.2026. 

 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, having been authorised by 
the Committee, present this ‘Four Hundred Seventh Report’ on Demands for Grants (2026-27) of 
the Department of Biotechnology. 
2.   The Committee considered the Demands for Grants (2026-27) pertaining to the 
Department of Biotechnology in its meeting held on the 25th February, 2026. It held detailed 
discussion with the Secretary and other officers of the Department of Biotechnology.   
3.   The Committee expresses its thanks to the officers of the Department of Biotechnology 
for providing the material and information, to enable it to examine the Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry for the year 2026-27. 
4.    The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the              
24th March, 2026. 
 
 
 
 
 
 (BHUBANESWAR  KALITA) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman, 
24th March, 2026 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science 
Chaitra 03,1948 (Saka)                                  and Technology, Environment, Forests and  Climate Change, 
 Rajya Sabha . 
  
 
 
  
                                           
                                                                   
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 

 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
ACC Appointments Committee of the Cabinet 
BE Budget Estimates 
BIBCOL Bharat Immunologicals and Biologicals Corporation Limited 
BIG Biotechnology Ignition Grant 
BIRAC Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council 
BRIC Biotechnology Research and Innovation Council 
Bio-RIDE Biotechnology Research Innovation and Entrepreneurship Development 
BioCARe Biotechnology Career Advancement and Re-orientation 
BioE3 Biotechnology for Economy, Environment and Employment 
BioNEST Bioincubators Nurturing Entrepreneurship for Scaling Technologies 
CDFD Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics 
CIAB Centre of Innovative and Applied Bioprocessing 
CPSU Central Public Sector Undertaking 
DBT Department of Biotechnology 
E-Cadre Executive Cadre 
FY Financial Year 
GoI Government of India 
HRD Human Resource Development 
ICGEB International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology 
IED Industrial and Entrepreneurship Development 
IVCOL Indian Vaccines Corporation Limited 
JRF Junior Research Fellowship 
LEAP Launching Entrepreneurial Driven Affordable Products 
MoF Ministry of Finance 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
NABI National Agri-Food Biotechnology Institute 
NBRC National Brain Research Centre 
NCCS National Centre for Cell Science 
NGDG National Genomics Data Grid 
NGO Non-Governmental Organization 
NIAB National Institute of Animal Biotechnology 
NIBMG National Institute of Biomedical Genomics 
NII National Institute of Immunology 
NIPGR National Institute of Plant Genome Research 
PAC Project Advisory Committees 
PACE Promoting Academic Research Conversion to Enterprise 
PAMC Project Appraisal and Monitoring Committees 
PCP Product Commercialization Programme 
PM Prime Minister 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
PSU Public Sector Undertaking 
R&D Research and Development 
RCB Regional Centre for Biotechnology 
RE Revised Estimates 
SBIRI Small Business Innovation Research Initiative 
SDG Sustainable Development Goal 
 
 
 
                                                (iii) 

 
 
 
 
SEED 
 
 
 
 
Sustainable Entrepreneurship and Enterprise Development 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
THSTI Translational Health Science and Technology Institute 
UN United Nations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

1 
 
CHAPTER – 1 
INTRODUCTION 
 The Department of Biotechnology (DBT) was initially set up as an independent board in 
1982 and was later elevated to a full-fledged Department under the Ministry of Science & 
Technology in 1986. Its core mandate includes policy formulation, promoting research, and 
overseeing biotechnology-related manufacturing activities across the country. DBT designs and 
implements integrated biotechnology programs, ensuring they are effectively executed and aligned 
with national priorities. It identifies and supports research and development efforts, especially in 
biologicals and biotech manufacturing, and establishes Centres of Excellence to drive progress in 
key scientific areas. In addition, the department acts as a regulatory and advisory body for the 
import, transfer, and approval of new biotechnological products and technologies. It also formulates 
safety protocols for biotech research and production and serves as the central authority for the 
import of genetically modified materials, while simultaneously encouraging domestic production. 
1.2 A major responsibility of DBT is fostering inter-ministerial and international partnerships, 
managing technology transfers, and promoting the development of recombinant DNA products, 
cell-based vaccines, and biotech diagnostics. Human resource development is another critical focus 
area, carried out through various agencies, commissions, and research boards established by the 
Government of India. Furthermore, DBT leads national efforts in bioinformatics by facilitating 
training programs, building infrastructure, enabling data collection, and promoting knowledge 
sharing in the field of biotechnology research. 
1.3 The Department oversees a network of autonomous institutions engaged in advanced 
research fields such as genomics, immunology, neuroscience, regenerative medicine, and 
bioresource management. It also manages the International Centre for Genetic Engineering and 
Biotechnology (ICGEB) based in New Delhi. In addition, DBT supervises public sector 
undertakings that contribute to biotech innovation, vaccine development, and industrial research 
support. Together, these organizations play a vital role in strengthening and advancing India’s 
biotechnology landscape. 
1.4 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment, Forests and Climate Change considered the Demands for Grants (2026-27), Demand 
No. 90 of the Department of Biotechnology in its meeting held on 25th February, 2026. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
CHAPTER – 2 
COMPARATIVE BUDGET ANALYSIS 
 
 The following table shows the overall budgetary details of the Department of Biotechnology 
for the year 2025-26 (BE, RE & actual expenditure) and allocation made for the year 2026-27:-   
            
 (₹ in crore) 
 
 
 
2.2  It can be seen from the above table that in 2025-26, the budgetary allocation of the 
Department decreased from ₹3446.64 at B.E. stage to ₹2830.45 at R.E. stage (a reduction of almost 
17.8%). The Department spent ₹2723.68 crore till 9th February, 2026 which is around 96% of its 
R.E. allocation. 
 
2.3 The following table shows the budgetary details of the Department for the years 2024-25 
and 2025-26 (BE, RE & actual expenditure) and the details of B.E. allocation proposed and B.E. 
allocation made for the year 2026-27:-             
                                                               (₹  in crore) 
Financial Year B.E. R.E. Actual 
Expenditure 
2024-25 2275.70        2460.13 1998.00 
2025-26           3446.64 2830.45 2723.68 
S. No. Budget Head 
2025-26 
B.E. 
2026-27 B.E R.E. 
Actual till 
09th 
February 
2026 
% 
utilization 
of R.E. 
1. Secretariat 55.48 48.77 37.01 75.89 50.87 
2. 
 
Biotechnology 
Research Innovation 
and Entrepreneurship 
Development (Bio-
RIDE) 
2300 1717 1629.11 94.88 2300 
3. 
Assistance to 
Autonomous 
Institutions 
994.16 976.68 969.56 99.27 1002.13 
4. 
Biotechnology Industry 
Research Assistance 
Council (BIRAC) 
42 38 38 100.00 38 
5. 
International Centre for 
Genetic Engineering 
and Biotechnology 
(ICGEB) 
55 50 50 100.00 55 
Grand Total 3446.64 2830.45 2723.68 96.23 3446 

3 
 
2026-27 
Proposed B.E. Allocated B.E. 
4305.27 3446 
 
2.4 The Committee notes the fluctuating trends in budget allocation and utilization. In FY 
2024-25, the Department was allocated ₹2,275.70 crore at the B.E. stage, which was increased 
to ₹2,460.13 crore at the R.E. stage. Despite this increase, the actual expenditure stood at only 
₹1,998.00 crore, indicating a significant underutilization of approximately 19% of the revised 
estimates. In contrast, for FY 2025-26, the initial B.E. of ₹3,446.64 crore was reduced by 
17.8% to ₹2,830.45 crore at the R.E. stage. The Department utilized 96.23% of this reduced 
R.E. (₹2,723.68 crore) by 9th February 2026, demonstrating a much-improved capacity to 
spend the funds ultimately allocated to it. The Committee recommends that the Department 
should undertake a realistic assessment of its financial requirements at the B.E. stage itself, 
based on historical expenditure patterns, project pipelines, and absorptive capacity. 
Furthermore, the institutional mechanisms that led to improved utilization in FY 2025-26 
should be documented and institutionalized to ensure consistent performance. The 
Department should also engage with the Ministry of Finance to minimize steep cuts at the 
R.E. stage, as such reductions can disrupt program implementation despite high utilization 
efficiency. 
2.5 The Committee desired to know about the budgetary allocation demanded by the Department 
vis-à-vis the amount actually allocated to it for the year 2026-27. The Department informed that it 
has been allocated ₹3446 crore, against a proposed budgetary allocation of ₹4305.27 crore for the 
year 2026-27. Thus, there is an overall shortfall of ₹859.27 crore in the actual allocation to the 
Department, about 20% lesser than its budgetary demand.  
2.6 The following chart shows a comparison of B.E., R.E. and Actual expenditure for the years 
2024-25 and 2025-26 along with the proposed allocation demanded and actually allocated for the 
year 2026-27:- 
 

4 
 
 
*Till 9th February, 2026 
                            
2.7 The Committee questioned the Department about the potential impact on its key programs, 
schemes, and projects due to the significant difference between the budgetary allocation requested 
and the amount actually allocated for 2026-27. In response, the Department stated that shortfalls in 
the 2026-27 budget allocation vis-a-vis demands could delay high-priority research, reduce grants 
and start-up support, and can also impact capacity building. To address such challenges, it will 
prioritize new projects, continue to support the ongoing research projects and only cater for the 
requirements of new proposals planned under the already approved programs under, R&D, IED and 
Biomanufacturing programs. However, the major new programs which are being processed for 
approval under various verticals of biomanufacturing program will require an additional budget. It 
will seek an additional budget from the Department of Expenditure at the time of RE stage to meet 
the requirement of projects under these programs.   
2.8 The Committee sought details of the absolute bare minimum increase needed in the 
budgetary allocations for the year 2026-27 to sustain key programmes with the desired outcomes 
and efficiency. The Department replied that it requires an absolute bare minimum increase of 
approximately ~25% over the current Budget Estimate levels (of Rs. 3446 crore for FY 2026-27) to 
sustain key programmes with desired outcomes and efficiency. This translates to an additional Rs. 
800-850 crore, primarily to support ongoing R&D projects in health, agriculture, bio-resources, and 
infrastructure without cuts, maintain grants, start-up support via BIRAC, and Biotechnology 
capacity building initiatives, and ensure continuity in flagship program on biomanufacturing. It 
proposes to seek supplementary funds at the Revised Estimates stage from DoE to meet these 
essential requirements and achieve targeted objectives. This is illustrated in the below chart:- 
05001000150020002500300035004000450050002024-25 2025-26 2026-27Rupees (in crores) B.E. ProposedB.E.R.E.ActualsB.E.R.E.Actuals*B.E. Allocated

5 
 
         
 
 
2.9 The financial performance of the Department under major budgetary heads during the year 
2026-27 is shown in the below chart:-   
  
2.10 The Committee observes that the overall fund utilization by the Department during FY 
2025-26 stands at a commendable 96.23% of the R.E. allocation. The performance under the 
major Central Sector Scheme, ‘Bio-RIDE’, is also robust, with the Department utilizing 
94.88% (₹1,629.11 crore) of its R.E. allocation of ₹1,717 crore. This marks a significant 
improvement in financial management compared to the previous fiscal year. The Committee 
4305.2734468500500100015002000250030003500400045005000B.E. Proposed B.E. AllocatedRupees (in crores)B.E. proposed, B.E. allocated and additional bare minimum requiredAllocatedAdditional₹ 850crore additional required
94.8899.27100Utilization as % of R.E. across different heads in FY 2025-26Bio-RIDEAssistance to Autonomous InstitutionsBiotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC)

6 
 
expresses its appreciation for the significant improvement in fund utilization by the 
Department in FY 2025-26, particularly under the flagship Bio-RIDE scheme. This enhanced 
performance indicates that corrective measures are yielding positive results. However, given 
the substantial increase in the overall budget over the past two years and the critical 
importance of the programs, the Committee strongly recommends that the Department 
should maintain this momentum. It must continue its rigorous monitoring and proactive 
management to ensure that the funds allocated in the Budget Estimates (B.E.) for 2026-27 are 
utilized with equal efficiency, thereby maximizing the impact of its programs and achieving 
desired outcomes in a timely manner. 
       
 
2.11 It can be seen from the above chart that more than two third of the budgetary allocation for 
the year 2026-27 is earmarked for the only Central Sector Scheme Biotechnology Research 
Innovation and Entrepreneurship Development (Bio-RIDE), while about 29 per cent of the 
provision has been kept for Assistance to Autonomous Institutions, indicating the thrust areas for 
the Department. Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC) received just 1 per 
cent of the total outlay, while the allocations under the Head ‘Secretariat’ and International Centre 
for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB) together constitute the remaining 3 per cent 
of the total budgetary allocation of the Department.  
2.12 The Committee also made a cursory look at the general trends in total B.E allocation of the 
Department, as well as under its key schemes since 2022-23. The following graphs depict these 
trends: 
 
67%29%1%3%Major budgetary alloactions in FY 2026-27Biotechnology Research Innovation and Entrepreneurship Development (Bio-RIDE)Assistance to Autonomous InstitutionsBiotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC)Others

7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25812683.862275.73446.6434462022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 2026-27Trend in BE
168016451174230023002022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 2026-27Trend in Bio-RIDE
830.82902.47940.66994.161002.132022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 2026-27Trend in Assistance to Autonomous Institutions

8 
 
2.13 The Committee notes that the overall B.E. allocation of the Department increased 
from ₹2,581 crore in 2022-23 to ₹2,683.86 crore in 2023-24, before marginally declining to 
₹2,275.70 crore in 2024-25, and then substantially increasing to ₹3,446.64 crore in 2025-26. 
The allocation remained almost the same at ₹3,446 in FY 2026-27. A similar trend is observed 
in the allocation for the Central Sector Scheme, Bio-RIDE, which saw a significant jump in 
2025-26 after remaining relatively stable in the preceding years. In contrast, the allocation for 
Autonomous Institutions shows a continuous upward trend throughout the period from 2022-
23 to 2025-26. Given the substantial and increasing allocation to the flagship Bio-RIDE 
scheme, which constitutes over two-thirds of the Department's budget, the Committee 
emphasizes the need for sustained and stringent oversight. The Department must build on its 
improved utilization performance by further strengthening mechanisms for regular, 
milestone-based monitoring. This will ensure that the significant public investments translate 
into tangible, high-quality research outcomes and prevent the recurrence of the planning 
challenges caused by past fluctuations between budget estimates and revised estimates. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
CHAPTER – 3 
 BIO-RIDE: PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION AND KEY ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
In September 2024, the Union Cabinet approved the merger of the Department of 
Biotechnology's (DBT) two umbrella schemes—'Biotechnology Research & Development' and 
'Industrial & Entrepreneurship Development'—into a single, integrated scheme 
named "Biotechnology Research Innovation and Entrepreneurship Development (Bio-RIDE)." 
 
3.2 Approved for the 15th Finance Commission cycle (2021-22 to 2025-26) with a total outlay 
of ₹9,197 crore, Bio-RIDE introduces a third new component: 'Biomanufacturing & Biofoundry', 
which has a dedicated allocation of ₹1,500 crore. This merger aims to create a unified framework to 
foster research, innovation, and entrepreneurship across the biotechnology sector. 
 
3.3 The scheme's three key components are: 
A. Biotechnology Research and Development: This component focuses on building the 
foundational scientific capacity of the nation through human resource development, 
research infrastructure, competitive grants, international collaboration, and programs for 
societal and regional development, particularly in the North East. 
B. Industrial & Entrepreneurship Development: This component is designed to stimulate 
innovation within the Indian biotech industry. It supports public-private partnerships 
(PPP), the 'Make in India' initiative, and the establishment of biotech parks to help 
startups and SMEs create affordable, impactful products. 
C. Biomanufacturing and Biofoundry: This new, strategic component aims to propel India 
into a leadership position in the global bioeconomy. It will focus on high-performance 
biomanufacturing in areas like bio-based chemicals, smart proteins, and precision 
therapeutics, supported by cross-cutting national platforms such as Biofoundries and Bio-
AI Hubs. 
 
3.4 Bio-RIDE scheme is the only central sector scheme under the Department. The scheme was 
allocated Rs. 2300 crore in B.E. 2025-26 which was substantially reduced to Rs. 1717 crore at R.E. 
stage. Out of this reduced R.E., the Department spent Rs. 1629.11 crore which comes to around 
94% of its R.E. The Department has again been allocated the same amount as last year i.e. Rs. 2300 
crore.  
 
3.5 The scheme was allocated Rs. 1680 crore in 2022-23 which was marginally reduced to Rs. 
1645 crore in 2023-24. In the next fiscal year, this was substantially reduced to Rs. 1174 crore. 
However, in FY 2025-26, the budget allocation under the head was almost doubled to Rs. 2300 
crore which has maintained in the FY 2026-27 also.  
 
3.6 The budgetary trends for the Bio-RIDE scheme reveal a persistent pattern of volatility 
between initial allocation and final expenditure, coupled with a recent substantial increase 
that has been sustained. To enhance the effectiveness and predictability of this central sector 
scheme, the Committee recommends that the Department should prioritize improving the 
accuracy of its budget estimates to mitigate the sharp reductions witnessed at the Revised 
Estimate stage, thereby ensuring that the enhanced allocation of Rs. 2300 crore translates 

10 
 
into actual spending rather than a notional figure. Furthermore, given the Department's 
demonstrated efficiency in utilizing 94% of the reduced RE, it is well-positioned to absorb 
and effectively deploy this increased allocation, but this requires a strategic shift towards 
multi-year financial planning and robust implementation framework that can safeguard the 
scheme from future cyclical cuts. 
 
3.7 The Committee enquired regarding significant achievements made under the scheme in 
recent years. The Department informed that the Biotechnology Research and Development 
component has yielded remarkable achievements across multiple sectors. In healthcare, the 
Department completed the GenomeIndia project sequencing over 10,000 genomes from healthy 
individuals across 83 populations. Indigenous vaccines were developed including the quadrivalent 
Human Papillomavirus (qHPV) vaccine Cervavac against cervical cancer which received market 
authorization. The low-cost Rotavac vaccine became part of the Universal Immunization 
Programme (UIP). India's first gene therapy clinical trial for Hemophilia A was approved and five 
patients were infused with the therapy. The Interdisciplinary Group for Advanced Research on 
Birth Outcomes and Maternal and Infant Health (GARBH-INI) pregnancy cohort enrolled 12,000 
women and established a national biorepository with 15 lakh aliquots. Artificial Intelligence (AI)-
driven tools were developed for accurate assessment of gestational age and prediction of birth 
outcomes. 
 
3.8 In agriculture biotechnology, the Department developed numerous climate-resilient and 
disease-resistant crop varieties. Five climate-resilient rice varieties were developed with tolerance 
to drought, submergence, and salinity. Two chickpea varieties, ADVIKA and SAATVIK, were 
released with 11-15% higher yield under drought stress. Three Indian mustard varieties with white 
rust resistance were developed and provided to seed companies for commercialization. A sesame 
variety VRI-5 suitable for high-density sowing and resistant to multiple pests was developed. 
Genome editing through Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats 
(CRISPR)/Cas9 produced six mustard lines with reduced anti-nutrients. The AccelBreed speed 
breeding facility was established at Punjab Agricultural University (PAU) spanning 540 square 
metres with eight controlled chambers capable of cultivating over 40,000 plantlets. The National 
Certification System for Tissue Culture Plants (NCS-TCP) certified over 1.5 billion hardened plants 
since inception, with more than 227 million plants certified in the current year alone. Over 35 lakh 
virus-infected plants were identified and destroyed preventing potential viral epidemics. 
 
3.9 In animal biotechnology, the Translational Research Platform for Veterinary Biologicals 
(TRPVB) successfully transferred two technologies to industry including a Lumpy Skin Disease 
Virus vaccine candidate strain. Over 4,422 biological products were manufactured and distributed. 
An immersion vaccine for warm water lactococcosis in rainbow trout was developed with a 
confidentiality disclosure agreement signed for marketing. Diagnostic protocols for anthrax were 
standardized and field-usable diagnostic kits developed. 
 
3.10 In environmental biotechnology, bioremediation technology was developed for ecological 
restoration of degraded mangrove ecosystems demonstrated over 150 acres in Indian Sunderbans. 
Nearly forty institutions are engaged in developing biobased and biodegradable solutions including 
corn-derived biopolymers and algae-based plastics. A rapid test-tube enzymatic biodegradation 
model was developed for polycaprolactone (PCL) and polylactic acid (PLA) plastics showing up to 
49% molecular weight loss in seven days. Lignocellulose-based scalable luminous photonic 
biopolymers were developed from wheat and rice biomass waste with processing capabilities of 
200 kilograms. 

11 
 
3.11 In microbial biotechnology, researchers developed silk-fibroin carriers for corneal-
endothelial cell culture achieving cell density of approximately 500 cells per square millimetre. 
Four plant extracts showed over 80% inhibition against theileriosis including Calotropis procera 
and Withania somnifera. New virus-indexing Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) were 
developed for black pepper, citrus, and strawberry strengthening disease-detection capabilities. 
3.12 The Department further informed that the Industrial and Entrepreneurship Development 
component implemented through BIRAC has catalyzed remarkable growth in the start-up 
ecosystem. More than 10,000 biotech startups now exist in the country. The incubation centre 
network supported by BIRAC has expanded to 95 facilities across 24 States. India's bioeconomy 
reached $165.7 billion in 2024, growing 9.7% from the previous year and contributing 4.25% to 
national Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The sector has maintained a Compound Annual Growth 
Rate (CAGR) of 17.9% over four years driven primarily by BioIndustrial at 47.2% followed by 
BioPharma at 35.2%. Over 800 products and technologies have been launched in the market. The 
Fund of Funds Accelerating Entrepreneurs (AcE) initiative with 16 daughter funds has supported 
88 biotech startups with total funding support of ₹1,200 Crore. Follow-on funding raised by these 
startups amounts to over ₹4,300 Crore, putting together about ₹5,500 crore investment infused in 
biotech startups. The Biotechnology Ignition Grant (BIG) scheme has supported approximately 
1000 innovations with total commitment of ₹500 Crore. The SEED Fund has empowered 149 high-
potential biotech startups through strategic investment of ₹45 Crore. The Small Business 
Innovation Research Initiative (SBIRI) has supported 341 projects with commitment of ₹306.38 
crore leading to development of over 90 products. The Biotechnology Industry Partnership 
Programme (BIPP) has supported 249 projects with commitment of ₹577.7 crore resulting in 
development of over 90 products.  
 
3.13 The Department also apprised the Committee that the Biomanufacturing and Biofoundry 
component launched under the BioE3 Policy has made rapid progress since August 2024. The first 
DBT-BIRAC joint call for proposals received over 2000 proposals with more than 200 projects 
recommended for funding. India's first National Biofoundry Network comprising six Biofoundries 
was launched. Twenty-one proposals were recommended for setting up Biofoundries and 
Biomanufacturing Hubs including six from academia and fifteen from industry. A MoU was signed 
between DBT and ISRO for cooperation in space biotechnology and biomanufacturing with a joint 
working group constituted and call for proposals announced. The first MoU for Centre-State 
partnership was signed with the Government of Assam in March 2025 to formalize strategic 
collaboration. BioE3 Cells have been notified in the State of Sikkim. Operational Guidelines for 
Establishment of BioE3 Cells in States have been approved. The first BioE3 Strain Resource was 
setup at iBRIC National Centre for Cell Science (NCCS), Pune for sharing production strains with 
freedom-to-operate for high-performance biomanufacturing. A stakeholder consultation on 
emerging regulatory pathways for Cell and Gene Therapy Products was organized in February 
2025. A memorandum of understanding was signed between DBT and MeitY for mutually enabling 
AI-driven biological research ecosystem. 
 
3.14 The Committee enquired with the Department regarding mechanisms to ensure continuity 
between lab scale innovation and commercial deployment within BioE3. The Department replied 
that the BioE3 policy is designed to strengthen bio-innovation and biomanufacturing in India by 
creating a seamless pathway from laboratory research to commercial deployment. To enable this 
transition, advanced infrastructure with pilot-scale facilities are being established in close proximity 
to research institutions, allowing innovators to validate and scale technologies before market entry. 
In parallel, programs led by BRIC and BIRAC such as the Entrepreneur-in-Residence (EIR) 
initiative, focus on equipping research scholars with industry-relevant skills, entrepreneurial 
exposure, and translational training. Together, these mechanisms ensure continuity between lab-
scale innovation and commercialization while strengthening the national biomanufacturing 
ecosystem. The Department along with BIRAC is setting up BioEnablers i.e. Biofoundries and 

12 
 
Biomanufacturing Hubs across the country. These are shared infrastructure for scaling-up of bio-
based products. The Biofoundries are facilities for early scale up of proof-of-concept, while the 
Biomanufacturing Hubs are shared pilot-scale and pre-commercial-scale facilities designed to 
bridge the gap between laboratory research and full-scale manufacturing. India’s 1st National 
Biofoundry Network of 6 Biofoundries and ‘High-Performance Biomanufacturing Platform under 
the BioE3 Policy’ comprising 15 Biomanufacturing Hubs, have been launched to augment 
Biomanufacturing of Bio-based products. Setting up of next round of biofoundries and hubs is in 
the pipeline. Additionally under the BioE3 Policy, the "Bridging the Gap" category funds projects 
across the key sectors of bio-based chemicals and enzymes, functional food and smart proteins, 
precision biotherapeutics, climate-resilient agriculture, biofuels and carbon capture utilisation, and 
futuristic marine and space research to develop pilot-scale projects with potential commercial 
deployment to ensure continuity between lab scale innovation and commercial deployment. 
 
3.15 The Committee also enquired regarding plans to develop affordable biomedical equipment 
such as lenses for cataract surgery and stents for heart surgery. The Department submitted that the 
Biomedical Engineering and Biodesign programmes aim to promote multi-disciplinary research 
involving application of science and engineering for development of innovative technologies and 
products leading to affordable healthcare. The following projects are being supported at present 
related to eye lenses and cardiovascular devices: 
a) Microfluidic channel embedded contact lens for ophthalmic drug delivery glaucoma 
treatment 
b) 3D-Bioprinted Contact Lens Embedding Host-Defense Peptide S100A12 as Precision 
Medicine for Bacterial Keratitis 
c) At IIT-Guwahati DBT Biodesign Centre, a group of fellows are working towards 
development of prototype for a flexible surgical tool to assist cataract surgery. 
d) A Centre of Excellence on “Minimally Invasive Cardiovascular Devices” has been 
supported at SCTIMST, Thiruvanthapuram. The CoE is expected to develop 10 
minimally invasive cardiovascular devices including: Cardiac Devices – PDA closure, 
VSD occlude; Transcatheter Aortic Heart Valve; Cerebrovascular Devices – Flow 
Modulator, Vascular plug; Peripheral Vascular Devices – Abdominal ASG, SFA stent, 
Venous stent; and, Thromboemboli Treatment Devices – Clot Retriever, Inferior 
venacava filter. 
 
3.16 The Committee further enquired that whether there are any collaboration with private sector 
companies to accelerate the development and commercialization of these devices. The Department 
replied that BIRAC fosters collaboration with private sector companies through its various 
programmes to accelerate the development and commercialization of biomedical devices and 
advanced healthcare technologies. 
a) Under the Biotechnology Ignition Grant (BIG) scheme, early-stage innovators and startups 
receive proof-of-concept funding to validate novel technologies and develop initial 
prototypes. This enables high-risk ideas in medical devices and diagnostics to progress 
toward translational development. 
b) Further, under SEED and LEAP Funds, equity investments are made in eligible startups 
through selected BioNEST incubators acting as fund partners. While the SEED Fund 
supports post-proof-of-concept startups in early commercialization stages, the LEAP Fund 
enables scale-up, regulatory advancement, manufacturing readiness, and market entry for 
technologies above TRL-5. These startups function as private sector entities and collaborate 
closely with clinical institutions, technology partners, manufacturers, and industry 
stakeholders to advance product validation, obtain regulatory approvals, and facilitate 
commercialization. 
c) Through these programme frameworks, BIRAC enables co-development models, 
technology transfer arrangements, regulatory facilitation, and industry linkages, thereby 

13 
 
fostering effective public–private collaboration and accelerating the translation of 
biomedical innovations into market-ready products. 
d) BIRAC provides financial support to Start-ups/Companies/LLPs and academic institutions, 
through its PPP schemes i4 and PACE to encourage R&D for development of biomedical 
equipment.  
 
3.17 The Committee recommends that the Department should establish a robust, real-time 
monitoring and evaluation framework for the newly integrated Bio-RIDE scheme. Given the 
merger of two major schemes and the addition of a significant new component, it is crucial to 
track not just financial expenditure but also tangible scientific and industrial outcomes. This 
framework should set specific, time-bound milestones for each of the three components—
Research & Development, Industrial & Entrepreneurship Development, and 
Biomanufacturing & Biofoundry. Under the R&D component, the Committee recommends 
tracking the number of patents filed and technologies licensed, not just the number of 
fellowships awarded. For the IED component, the focus should be on the survival and growth 
rate of incubated startups beyond the initial funding stages. For the new Biofoundry 
component, the focus should be on the number of industry partners utilizing the national 
platforms and the successful scaling of bio-manufacturing processes. This data should be 
publicly accessible to ensure transparency and accountability. 
 
3.18 To build on the impressive start-up ecosystem supported by BIRAC, the Committee 
recommends creating a dedicated mentorship and industry-linking program for startups 
graduating from the BioNEST incubators. While seed funding and grants are vital, many 
promising ventures falter during the transition from proof-of-concept to commercial-scale 
manufacturing and market entry. The Committee recommends that BIRAC, in partnership 
with successful bio-pharma and bio-industrial companies, should establish a "Venture 
Development Program." This program would pair select startups with experienced industry 
mentors who can provide guidance on regulatory approvals, quality control, supply chain 
management, and market access strategies. This would increase the success rate of startups in 
attracting larger follow-on funding and ultimately launching their products, thereby 
converting innovative ideas into economic assets. 
3.19 To accelerate the development of affordable healthcare devices, such as the 
intraocular lenses and cardiovascular stents, the Committee recommends creating a focused, 
mission-mode programme. Instead of supporting isolated projects, this programme should 
bring together clinicians, engineers, and entrepreneurs to solve specific, high-priority needs 
identified by the healthcare system. The Committee recommends that this mission mode 
programme be structured with clear, end-to-end milestones: from prototype development 

14 
 
and clinical validation to regulatory approval and finally, volume manufacturing. Funding 
should be released in tranches tied to achieving these milestones, and a dedicated unit within 
BIRAC should be assigned to help these projects navigate the approval process with the 
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) from an early stage, thereby 
reducing the time to market. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
 
CHAPTER – 4 
AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS 
 
The Department of Biotechnology (DBT) oversees a vast ecosystem of research and 
development institutions. A significant restructuring was undertaken with the formation of the 
Biotechnology Research and Innovation Council (BRIC), an autonomous body that has subsumed 
13 of DBT's premier research institutes. The core objectives and recent performance of each 
constituent institute are detailed below:- 
 
iBRIC Institute Core Objectives 
BRIC-CDFD  
(Center for DNA Fingerprinting and 
Diagnostics) 
Provide DNA fingerprinting services to the judiciary; establish 
DNA diagnostics for genetic disorders; authenticate plant species 
(e.g., basmati rice); provide training; and conduct basic and 
translational research. 
BRIC-IBSD 
 (Institute of Bioresources and 
Sustainable Development) 
Focus on the sustainable development of Bioresources in the 
North-Eastern Region (NER) through biotechnological 
interventions for socio-economic growth, including biodiversity 
documentation, capacity building, and employment generation. 
BRIC-ILS  
(Institute of Life Sciences) 
Foster basic and translational research in Infectious Disease 
Biology, Cancer Biology, Plant and Environmental Biotechnology, 
and Tribal Health and Nutrition, while generating skilled human 
resources. 
BRIC-inStem  
(Institute for Stem Cell Science and 
Regenerative Medicine) 
Promote expertise in stem cell research and foster interactions 
between basic scientists and clinicians to overcome barriers to the 
therapeutic use of human stem cells. 
BRIC-NABI  
(National Agri-Food Biotechnology 
Institute) 
Provide leadership in agri-food biotechnology research to improve 
nutritional quality and availability of food products through 
innovation, aiming for food and nutritional security. 
BRIC-NBRC  
(National Brain Research Centre) 
Pursue research to understand brain function in health and disease; 
generate trained human resources in interdisciplinary neuroscience; 
and promote neuroscience nationally through networking. 
BRIC-NCCS  
(National Centre for Cell Science) 
Serve as a National Cell Repository; perform basic research in Cell 
Biology; and contribute to human resource development through 
teaching and training. 
BRIC-NIAB  
(National Institute of Animal 
Biotechnology) 
Develop a sustainable and globally competitive livestock-based 
economy through innovative science & technology, leading to 
commercialization in animal biotechnology. 
BRIC-NIBMG  
(National Institute of Biomedical 
Genomics) 
Conduct research, training, and capacity building in Biomedical 
Genomics to understand the genetic underpinnings of major human 
diseases in India and translate findings for disease prediction, 
prevention, and therapy. 
BRIC-NII  
(National Institute of Immunology) 
Conduct advanced research to understand the body's defense 
mechanisms and develop modalities for immune system 

16 
 
iBRIC Institute Core Objectives 
manipulation to intervene in disease processes. 
BRIC-NIPGR 
(National Institute of Plant Genome 
Research) 
Undertake research in fundamental and applied plant molecular 
biology for crop improvement; serve as a resource for plant 
genomics; and utilize advanced biotechnologies for developing 
improved crop varieties. 
BRIC-RGCB  
(Rajiv Gandhi Centre for 
Biotechnology) 
Conduct fundamental research into disease processes; pursue 
translational science for health decision-making; drive technology 
development and innovation; and provide training and education. 
BRIC-THSTI  
(Translational Health Science and 
Technology Institute) 
Act as a catalyst to translate fundamental discoveries into clinical 
applications by building clinical research capacity, supporting 
vaccine and biologics development, and fostering industry 
partnerships for product development. 
 
4.2 The Department was allocated Rs. 994.16 at B.E. stage in FY 2025-26 for assistance to 
autonomous institutions. This was reduced to Rs. 976.68 at R.E. stage. The Department spent Rs. 
969.56 crore till 9th February, 2026, which is more than 99% of its R.E. allocation. For FY 2026-27, 
Rs. 1002.13 has been allocated under this budget head. The Department has been getting 
marginally increased allocations under this head every year since last five years. The Department 
was allocated Rs. 830.82 crores in 2022-23, Rs. 902.47 crore in 2023-24, Rs. 940.66 crore in 2024-
25, Rs. 994.16 crore in 2025-26 and Rs. 1002.13 crore in 2026-27. 
 
4.3 The Committee observes that steady increase in budget allocations over the past five 
years, coupled with the Department's exceptional ability to utilize over 99% of its funds, 
indicates a well-managed and predictable funding stream for autonomous institutions. This 
strong track record of efficient expenditure justifies the marginal increase to Rs. 1002.13 
crore for FY 2026-27. The Committee recommends that the Department should leverage this 
stability to enter into multi-year funding commitments with these institutions. By providing 
greater financial certainty, the Department can enable them to plan long-term research 
projects. Furthermore, this consistent performance serves as a benchmark for other schemes, 
demonstrating that stable, incremental growth combined with high utilization rates can lead 
to more effective outcomes. 
4.4 The iBRIC network has demonstrated significant scientific and translational prowess. Some 
of the major achievements are described below:- 
1) Healthcare Breakthroughs: 
a. A consortium including BRIC-inStem developed a novel lentiviral-based gene 
therapy for Hemophilia A. India's first-in-human trial achieved a zero annualised 
bleeding rate in all five participants, with sustained Factor VIII production. 
b. BRIC-THSTI developed a recombinant protein-based Mpox vaccine 
candidate using a patented multivalent nanocage platform. 

17 
 
c. BRIC-NII, in a multi-institutional collaboration, developed India’s first indigenous 
malaria vaccine candidate, AdFalciVax. 
d. BRIC-THSTI developed novel monoclonal antibodies against the Nipah virus. 
e. BRIC-NII identified Clomipramine as a potential treatment for Alzheimer's disease. 
f. BRIC-ILS discovered a potential whole-cell vaccine (CNA25) against systemic 
candidiasis. 
g. BRIC-NIAB developed QuantM, a portable, affordable device for on-site 
quantification of somatic cells in milk. 
h. BRIC-NIAB and IIEST Shibpur developed an advanced method for 
detecting Salmonella enteritidis in food and water. 
2) Agricultural and Environmental Innovation: 
a. BRIC-NIPGR developed climate-resilient chickpea varieties, SAATVIK 
(NC9) and ADVIKA, approved for national cultivation. 
b. BRIC-NABI established the DBT SPEEDY Seeds Facility to accelerate gene-edited 
trait development and the PARAM SMRITI Supercomputing facility for data-
driven agricultural research. 
c. BRIC-inStem developed Kisan Kavach, an anti-pesticide fabric to protect farmers. 
3) Infrastructure and National Resources: 
 
a. Launch of India's first Ferret Research Facility at BRIC-THSTI (Feb 2025) for 
infectious disease research. 
b. Launch of an Animal Biosafety Level-3 Facility for non-human primates at BRIC-
NII, a rare global resource for high-containment research. 
c. Establishment of SAMARTH, a National Skill Development Centre for Forensic 
DNA Profiling and Molecular Diagnostics at BRIC-CDFD. 
d. BRIC-NCCS's repositories facilitated research by providing 2,573 cell cultures to 
458 organizations and 299 microbial cultures to 178 organizations. 
e. BRIC-RGCB’s LMMD facility was recognized by CDSCO, ICMR, DBT, and US-
FDA as a premier kit validation center. 
 
4.5 The future roadmap of key iBRIC Institutes is tabulated below: 
 
Institute Key Future Action Plans 
BRIC-CDFD Conserving indigenous crops and medicinal plants through genomic 
research, including genome sequencing and DNA barcoding. 
BRIC-inStem Establishing a human stem cell BioBank using Indian genetic diversity to 
accelerate biological discovery and improve health equity. 
BRIC-NABI Incubating multiple companies, commercializing developed technologies, 
and initiating collaborative research in agri-food biotech and 
biomanufacturing. 
BRIC-NBRC Expanding faculty by 100%; leading brain mapping of mental health 
disorders; establishing a brain organoid facility to study 
neurodevelopmental disorders. 
BRIC-NCCS Establishing a GMP-compliant National Repository for banking 
characterized mammalian cells for use in the biopharma industry. 

18 
 
Institute Key Future Action Plans 
BRIC-NIAB Developing new diagnostics, therapeutics, and vaccines for zoonotic 
diseases; exploring solutions for antimicrobial resistance; utilizing AI and 
omics for livestock productivity. 
BRIC-NII Expanding its Human Immunology Program and intensifying collaboration 
with IBSD on traditional medicine from the Northeast. 
BRIC-RGCB Advancing research in Raman Spectroscopy for diagnostics, RNA 
therapeutics, cancer epigenetics, and plant biotechnology. 
BRIC-THSTI Operationalizing the Medical Research Center and Translational Research 
Facility (TRF) in 2025-26 to bolster clinical research and vaccine 
development. 
BRIC-NIBMG Focusing on cancers (oral, breast, pancreas, colon) and chronic diseases; 
contributing to AI/ML studies through large dataset analysis. 
BRIC-NIPGR Developing Cas12-based gene editing technology in chickpea and brassica 
in collaboration with UC Berkeley. 
BRIC-IBSD Initiating a Synergy Research Programme to study the systemic interactions 
of phytomolecules in traditional medicine for treating complex diseases. 
 
4.6 Beyond the 13 iBRIC institutes, DBT also supports Regional Centre for Biotechnology 
(RCB), Faridabad and International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB), 
New Delhi.  
 
4.7 Regional Centre for Biotechnology (RCB) is an institution of national importance, created 
by an Act of Parliament, established by the Government of India through the Department of 
Biotechnology (DBT) under the auspices of UNESCO. The RCB Act was passed by the Parliament 
of India in 2016 after which RCB was recognized as an Institution of National Importance akin to 
IITs, IISERs etc. 
 
4.8 Being an institution of academic nature imparting high quality training, education and 
research, RCB offers structured degree programs as well as short-term training programs in highly 
specialized areas of biotechnology and life sciences. The Department informed the Committee that 
currently, 125 students are pursuing doctoral degree programs in Biotechnology, Bioinformatics, 
and Biostatistics in different RCB laboratories. So far, RCB has awarded 61 PhD degrees. RCB 
also has an integrated MS-PhD degree program where students with bachelor’s degrees are 
admitted. A total of 69 students are currently registered for this programme. RCB also offers 
research training to post-graduate students of life sciences areas from various universities/ 
institutions/ colleges of repute. RCB has also initiated a Post Graduate Diploma Programme in 
Industrial Biotechnology (PGDIB) since January 2025. The programme aims to enhance academia-
industry partnership and make students industry ready. RCB is partnering with multiple Biopharma 
companies for industry internships and guest faculty. The RCB Act 2016 empowers the Centre to 
recognise higher learning institutions for their various academic programs. In this direction, after 
due diligence, RCB has granted recognition to academic programs of 20 Higher Education 
Institutes including the 13 iBRIC institutions and ICGEB. Currently, around 800 students from 
these recognized centres are registered for their degrees with RCB. 

19 
 
4.9 The Department further informed the Committee that the scientists at RCB work at the 
interface of multiple disciplines in the areas related to structural biology, molecular medicine, 
infectious disease biology, agricultural biotechnology, systems and synthetic biology, and cancer & 
cell biology. RCB’s scientific achievements in terms of the quality of publications and the ability of 
our faculty to attract extramural grants have shown consistent growth. Their work is supported by 
various competitive extra-mural grants. During FY 2023-24 to FY 2025-26 the research outcome 
has resulted in 193 publications and 11 patents filed/granted.  
4.10 Regarding the International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB), 
New Delhi, the Department informed the Committee that ICGEB conducts pioneering research in 
life sciences, focusing on addressing challenges developing countries face. As an intergovernmental 
organisation with 69 member states, ICGEB fosters human resource development and collaboration 
on shared scientific interests. It is actively engaged in various programs supported by the 
Department of Biotechnology (DBT) and contributes significantly to India's science diplomacy 
efforts in the field of biotechnology. The institute has following objectives:  
 To conduct research in the field of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering to address the 
issues relevant to Member countries which are mostly developing countries. 
 Impart scientific long and short term training for scientists and students from Member 
countries such as Ph.D Programmes & Advanced Training Programmes. 
 Develop and Transfer cost effective technologies for Member countries. 
 
4.11 The Department informed that ICGEB has made the following achievements in recent 
times:- 
A. Biofoundry and Biomanufacturing: 
India’s first Biofoundry is set-up recently at ICGEB, New Delhi in 2025. The Biofoundry 
focuses on microbial biomanufacturing using E. coli and S. cerevisiae. It supports 
research, startups, and industrial translation of synthetic biology and metabolic 
engineering projects. 
B. Bioethanol Production: 
 Developed thermo-tolerant yeast (S. cerevisiae NGY10) for efficient 1G ethanol 
production from grain, reducing external glucoamylase needs by ~50%. 
 NGY10 successfully tested at industrial scale using molasses, offering a cost-
effective alternative to imported yeast, with commercialization discussions underway. 
C. Space Biotechnology:  
The following two experiments, designed by ICGEB scientists have been successfully 
conducted on board the International Space Station by Group Commander Subhanshu 
Shukla as part of the Axiom-4 mission.   
 In one experiment, the potential of microalgae for space-based applications has been 
successfully validated. Two edible microalgal species, Chlorella sorokiniana-I and 
Dysmorphococcusglobosus-HI, demonstrated a remarkable two-fold increase in 
growth in microgravity compared to ground controls. 
 The second experiment provided a first proof of concept for the growth of 
cyanobacteria on urea. This opens the possibility for developing methods to utilise 
human wastes (CO2 and urea) to generate useful nutritional supplements for 
astronauts during long-term space travel.  
 
4.12 The Department further informed regarding ICGEB’s Action plan for Year 2026-27: which 
is as follows:- 

20 
 
1) Development of direct-seeded rice for climate-smart agriculture:  
Genes have been shortlisted that will be edited for enhancing traits such as anaerobic 
germination, root system architecture, culm strength, herbicide tolerance, etc. Cloning of 
gRNAs and initiation of tissue culture for rice transformation will also be done. 
2) Genome edited Rice: 
 Release of Genome edited Rice lines after successful filed trials with ICAR. 
3) Development of Monoclonal Antibodies against viral Diseases:   
a. To move forward towards commercialisation of the already identified highly 
neutralising human monoclonal antibodies to SARS-CoV-2, Chikungunya and 
Dengue 
b. To Generate human monoclonal antibodies to the Chandipura virus  
4) Biofuel Research: 
a. Validation of DIBzyme-3 enzymes and work towards commercialisation.  
b. Development of robust yeast strains to employ in fuel and chemical production 
technology from agricultural waste residues. 
c. Validation of algal and cyanobacterial strains that have been developed for carbon 
capture 
 
4.13 The Committee recommends that the Department should capitalize on the Regional 
Centre for Biotechnology's (RCB) unique status as an "Institution of National Importance" to 
create a unified academic framework across all 13 iBRIC institutes and ICGEB. This can be 
achieved by developing a centralized portal for PhD and Integrated MS-PhD admissions, 
allowing students to apply to multiple institutes through a single process while receiving their 
degrees from RCB. Furthermore, mandating credit-sharing and joint coursework between 
institutes would foster interdisciplinary expertise, such as enabling a student at BRIC-NIPGR 
to take bioinformatics courses at BRIC-NIBMG or structural biology at RCB. This network 
could also launch a joint "iBRIC-RCB Postgraduate Diploma in Biomanufacturing and 
Translational Research," pooling faculty and industry connections from iBRIC, ICGEB, and 
RCB to create a robust talent pipeline for the growing biotech industry. 
4.14 To ensure that important scientific discoveries made in iBRIC labs actually reach 
ordinary people and the market, the Committee recommends that the Department should 
create clear and well-funded pathways from the laboratory to the clinic. For the most 
promising candidates, like the Mpox vaccine at THSTI, the malaria vaccine at NII, or the 
gene therapy for Hemophilia A developed by inStem, the Department should bring together 
dedicated teams consisting of the institute that made the discovery, BRIC-THSTI which 
specializes in translating lab discoveries into real treatments, and experts in 
commercialization from BRIC-NIAB or THSTI itself. Additionally, a shared "Foundry for 
Diagnostics" should be set up by combining the DNA fingerprinting and diagnostic skills of 
BRIC-CDFD with the ability of BRIC-NIAB to build practical devices like the QuantM milk 
tester, while also involving BRIC-RGCB which has experience in getting diagnostic kits 

21 
 
validated and approved by regulators. This foundry would help build and speed up the 
launch of new diagnostic tools. Finally, the upcoming Medical Research Centre and 
Translational Research Facility at THSTI should serve as the main hub for conducting 
human clinical trials for the entire iBRIC network, giving priority to home grown discoveries 
that are ready for first-in-human testing. 
4.15 The Committee further recommends that the Department should initiate large, 
mission-mode projects that bring together the strengths of different research institutes to 
solve major national problems that one institute cannot handle alone. For example, a project 
focused on the north-eastern region of India could connect BRIC-IBSD, which has deep 
knowledge of local plants and traditional medicine, with BRIC-NIPGR and BRIC-NABI, 
which specialize in understanding plant genes and improving crops. Together, they could 
develop health products from local plants and create crops that can withstand changing 
weather conditions. BRIC-NII could also join this project to study how these traditional 
remedies affect the human immune system. Another important project could focus on the 
connection between human health, animal health, and the environment, known as the "One-
Health" approach. This could bring together BRIC-NIAB's work on animal diseases that can 
spread to humans, BRIC-NIBMG's expertise in studying human genes, BRIC-NII and BRIC-
ILS's research on infectious diseases, and BRIC-THSTI's ability to develop vaccines. 
Together, they could create a system to watch for and quickly respond to new disease threats 
like the Nipah virus before they become major outbreaks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
CHAPTER – 5 
NATIONAL GENOMICS DATA GRID 
GenomeIndia (GI) is a pan-India initiative funded by the Department of Biotechnology 
(DBT), aiming to create a comprehensive catalogue of genetic variations across India’s diverse 
population. The project was conceptualized in late 2017 followed by two years of intense 
brainstorming and preparation by the GenomeIndia consortium. The project was officially 
sanctioned in late 2019 and was launched in January 2020. Centre for Brain Research (CBR), 
Bengaluru is the institution responsible for coordinating the GI project. Apart from this, the GI 
Consortium comprises institutions with the following responsibilities: 
Responsibility Institution  
Sample Collection, Sequencing and Analysis 
Centres 
BRIC - National Institute of Biomedical 
Genomics (BRIC-NIBMG), Kalyani 
Centre for Brain Research (CBR), IISc 
campus, Bengaluru 
CSIR - Centre for Cellular and Molecular 
Biology (CSIR-CCMB), Hyderabad 
CSIR - Institute of Genomics & 
Integrative Biology (CSIR-IGIB), New 
Delhi 
Sample Collection Centres All India Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Jodhpur 
BRIC-Institute of Bioresources and 
Sustainable Development, Imphal 
BRIC-Institute of Life Sciences, 
Bhubaneswar 
BRIC-Rajiv Gandhi Centre for 
Biotechnology, Thiruvananthapuram 
Gujarat Biotechnology Research Centre, 
Gandhinagar 
Indian Institute of Science Education and 
Research, Pune 
Mizoram University, Aizawl 
National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neurosciences, Bengaluru 
Sher-I-Kashmir Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Srinagar 
Method Development Centres BRIC-Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and 

23 
 
Responsibility Institution  
Diagnostics, Hyderabad 
Indian Institute of Information 
Technology, Allahabad 
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 
Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
Chennai 
National Centre for Biological Sciences, 
Bengaluru 
Biobank and Data Archival Centre Biobank : Centre for Brain Research 
(CBR), Bengaluru 
Data Archival: Indian Biological Data 
Centre (IBDC), Faridabad 
 
5.2 The project has the following goals:- 
a) Create an exhaustive catalogue of genetic variations: Sequence the whole genomes of 
10,000 individuals from 83 diverse Indian populations, representing the rich genetic 
diversity of the nation. 
b) Establish a Biobank for Future Research: Collect and archive 20,000 blood samples to 
enable future research in genomics. 
c) Enable Open Access to Genomic Data: Provide publicly accessible genomic data 
(sequencing data and other relevant data) to foster research collaborations and innovation. 
d) Develop Affordable Genetic Tools for Diagnostics: Conceptualize genome-wide and 
disease-specific arrays to support low-cost diagnostic solutions specific to India. 
e) Inspire the Next Generation of Genomic Innovators: Encourage young Indian minds 
and researchers to take up research and innovation in genomics, driving advancements in 
health and medicine for the nation. 
 
5.3 The Committee enquired about the working of the GenomeIndia project, its fund allocation 
for the upcoming fiscal year, and the nature of its collaborations. In response, the Department 
explained that the GenomeIndia Project successfully completed the Whole Genome Sequencing 
of 10,074 healthy individuals from 83 distinct populations across the nation. This sample was 
deliberately designed to reflect the country's vast diversity, with approximately 36.7% of samples 
from rural areas, 32.2% from urban areas, and 31.1% from tribal populations. The Department 
further clarified that the project captures the nation's linguistic diversity by including representation 
from all four major linguistic groups: Indo-European, Dravidian, Austro-Asiatic, and Tibeto-
Burman. All data generated is securely archived at the Indian Biological Data Centre (IBDC), 
established by the DBT, and is accessible to researchers under the provisions of the Biotech PRIDE 
Guidelines 2021 and the FeED (Framework for Exchange of Data) Protocols 2025. Regarding the 
timeline, the Department confirmed that the project formally concluded in July 2025. For the fiscal 

24 
 
year 2026-27, the Department stated that the focus has shifted from data generation to application. 
While the main project has ended, an allocation of approximately Rs. 20 Crore is targeted to fund 
around 75 translational research projects, each costing about Rs. 50 Lakhs over two years, aimed at 
deriving health benefits from the data. 
 
5.4 The Committee further enquired that whether the Department has formally shared findings 
or data subsets from the GenomeIndia project with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare or the 
Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR). In its reply, the Department noted that the 
GenomeIndia data was dedicated to the nation in January 2025, and is archived at the IBDC. The 
Department emphasized that the data can be accessed by all researchers, including those in health 
research institutions, as per the established Biotech PRIDE Guidelines 2021 and FeED Protocols 
2025.  
 
5.5 The Committee also sought to know if the analysis of GenomeIndia data has led to the 
discovery of novel genetic mutations or pathways responsible for rare diseases prevalent in specific 
Indian communities, and the strategy of the Department to translate these discoveries into 
interventions like carrier screening or targeted therapies. The Department informed the Committee 
that initial analysis has revealed a vast and unique genetic landscape, including hundreds of 
millions of genetic variations. Specifically, over 135 million single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNVs) and short insertions/deletions (INDELs) have been identified, many of which are ultra-rare 
or entirely absent in global genetic databases. Furthermore, more than 6.9 million common variants 
were found, which could significantly enhance gene-chip designs and association studies for Indian 
populations. Regarding rare diseases, the Department explained that this extensive catalogue of 
variants, including a large set of 'benign' variants from healthy individuals, is a powerful tool. It 
allows researchers studying rare diseases to refine candidate variant lists by excluding common, 
non-pathogenic ones. To translate these discoveries into clinical practice, the Department reiterated 
its strategy of making the data available to Indian researchers and has issued a call for proposals on 
"Translational Research in GenomeIndia Data." The overwhelming response—over 400 proposals 
received, with more than 70 being considered for funding—underscores the commitment to moving 
from discovery to application in areas like carrier screening and targeted therapies. 
 
5.6 The Committee also enquired about the timeline and funding plan to scale the project to a 
more comprehensive sample size, such as 100,000 genomes, to adequately capture India's full 
diversity. The Department outlined an ambitious and large-scale plan, stating that the scale-up is 
embedded within the early implementation phase of the proposed National Genomics Data Grid 
(NGDG) program. The proposed NGDG programme has a total duration of 10 years, with an initial 
total budget requirement of about Rs. 8100 Crore for the first 4 years, dedicated to genomics and 
multi-omics data generation. Within this initial period, the programme proposes the large-scale 
genome sequencing and biobanking of 1 Million samples. The Department explained that the first 
phase of the NGDG will prioritize rapid expansion beyond the current ~10,000 genomes, 
employing nationwide diversity-focused sampling across regions and communities to ensure 
maximum representativeness of all ethnic, linguistic, and geographic populations, thereby 
addressing the committee's concern for a truly comprehensive database. 
 
5.7 While the open-access model is commendable, the Committee recommends 
establishing a formal, proactive mechanism for knowledge transfer between the DBT's 
genomic databases and the policymakers at the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and 
ICMR. A joint working group should be formed to periodically review findings and 
commission specific analyses that can directly impact national health missions, essential drug 
lists, and disease control strategies. 

25 
 
 
5.8 The Committee strongly endorses the proposed National Genomics Data Grid. Given 
the immense diversity of the country, a target of 1 million genomes is essential and should be 
pursued without delay. The Committee recommends that the Department should work 
expeditiously to secure the necessary approvals and funding for the NGDG's first phase to 
maintain the momentum generated by the GenomeIndia project. However, the Committee 
observes that the Department has been allocated only Rs. 20 crore, that too for translational 
research projects. Thus, no funds have been allocated in FY 2026-27 for the National 
Genomics Data Grid. The Committee recommends that the proposed National Genomics 
Data Grid should be accorded the top most priority and should be launched as a National 
Mission with adequate funding in FY 2026-27 itself. 
 
5.9 The discovery of millions of novel and ultra-rare variants presents a unique, time-
sensitive opportunity. The Committee recommends launching a dedicated, mission-mode sub-
program under the NGDG focused on rare genetic diseases. This mission should specifically 
aim to identify founder mutations in endogamous communities, develop and validate cost-
effective carrier screening kits, and create a clear pathway for translating genetic insights 
into therapeutic strategies. 
 
5.10 As the funded translational research projects begin to yield results, a parallel focus 
should be placed on implementation science. The Committee therefore recommends that 
DBT, in collaboration with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and ICMR should 
develop pilot projects to test the integration of validated genetic findings (e.g., screening 
protocols) into the public healthcare system, studying the operational, ethical, and logistical 
challenges. 
 
5.11 The Committee further observes that genomic data holds significant potential not only 
for advancing healthcare but also for addressing longstanding questions about India's ancient 
history and cultural evolution. In light of this, the Committee recommends that the 
Department should take proactive steps to collaborate with key institutions such as the 
Anthropological Survey of India,  the Archaeological Survey of India, and leading universities 
across the country to facilitate interdisciplinary research in this area. 
 
 

26 
 
CHAPTER – 6 
HUMAN RESOURCE CHALLENGES 
 
The Committee enquired the details of sanctioned strength, in-position strength and 
vacancies in the Department along with Autonomous Bodies under the Department. In response, 
the Committee was informed that at the DBT Headquarters, out of total sanctioned strength of 237, 
172 are in position and 65 posts are vacant. The Department is already in the process of filling up 
the same expeditiously.  
 
6.2 The Department further informed that it continues to meet its core scientific and 
administrative mandates through the strategic realignment of existing personnel. The persistent 
manpower shortage has pushed operational capacity to its limit. The reliance on "optimum 
utilization" to bridge these gaps has resulted in an escalation of individual workloads. The 
Department also informed that the process of the recruitment for the post of Scientist ‘C’ has been initiated. 
Further, the issue of shortage of manpower in the administrative division is being overcome by hiring 
outsourced manpower. 
 
6.3 For Autonomous Institutions under DBT, out of the total sanctioned strength of 1492 posts, 
1031 personnel are in position, leaving 461 vacancies. Some of the institutes have high vacancy 
rate. The Department has informed that recruitment process is underway and in some of the cases 
final approval is awaited from the Department.  
 
 
6.4 The Department further informed that the manpower shortage has had a significant impact 
on operational efficiency, leading to increased individual workloads, delays in project timelines, 
sub-optimal scientific output, and an inability to take up new or challenging research initiatives. To 
mitigate these challenges, institutes have adopted interim measures such as engaging contractual 
project staff, hiring outsourced manpower, and redistributing work among existing employees. 
However, these are temporary solutions. To address the core issue, institutes are undertaking fresh 
recruitment drives to fill existing vacancies, while several—including NIPGR, RGCB, and 
THSTI—have also submitted proposals to the Department for the creation of additional sanctioned 
posts.  
 
6.5 The Committee was also informed that the Recruitment Rules for scientific posts across 13 
BRIC institutions are under finalization, which will ultimately determine the revised sanctioned 
strength for these bodies. Further, the number of sanctioned posts in the Administration and 
Technical Cadre for the BRIC Institutes would be scrutinized and finalized at the time of framing 
Recruitment Rules of these posts. 
 
Public Sector Undertakings 
6.6 Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC): The Department 
informed that BIRAC follows; Cabinet Approved, Contract Career Path and all appointments are 
contractual. The appointments are made on need basis/as per the requirement. The sanctioned 
positions approved by the Board of BIRAC for E-Cadre are 55 and S-Cadre are appointed on need 
basis. Presently, BIRAC’s core strength is 46 comprising 2 Directors i.e. 1 Managing Director and 
1 Director (Finance), appointed by Appointments Committee of the Cabinet (ACC), 34 E-cadre 
officials and 10 S-cadre.  As on date, twenty-one E-Cadre positions are vacant under BIRAC.  
 

27 
 
6.7 Indian Vaccines Corporation Limited (IVCOL): IVCOL is a Central Public Sector Undertaking 
(CPSU) under the Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science and Technology. The CPSU's project 
is on hold since 1992, and no business activities are carried out by the IVCOL. 
6.8  Bharat Immunologicals and Biologicals Corporation Limited (BIBCOL): BIBCOL is a 
Government of India Undertaking and its objective was to manufacture Oral Polio Vaccine and 
other pharmaceutical products. But for the last three years there is no production activities and the 
Canara Bank has seized all the bank accounts of BIBCOL due to non receipt of outstanding loan 
amount. Due to this BIBCOL could not incur any expenditure during given years. The total 
sanctioned strength of BIBCOL is 170 employees, but presently only 73 employees are in the pay 
roll and Government has decided to close this company.  
6.9 The Committee notes that against a sanctioned strength of 54 scientific staff in the 
Department, 13 posts (24%) are vacant. The Committee recommends that DBT should 
expedite the entire recruitment cycle for all levels of scientific staff and ensure that the 
process is completed within a defined timeline to restore its in-house scientific capacity. 
 
6.10 The data furnished by the Department also reveals that average vacancy rate of 31% 
across the 15 autonomous bodies, with some institutes like NABI, CIAB, and NII having 
higher rate. The Committee recommends that the Department should expedite the entire 
recruitment process and launch a special, time-bound recruitment drive for the worst 
affected institutes. 
 
6.11 The Committee also notes that the Recruitment Rules for scientific posts across 13 
BRIC institutions are under revision. The Committee recommends that the Department 
should prioritize and finalize these rules expeditiously. The Committee is also of the view that 
over-reliance on contractual staff creates job insecurity and can lead to a brain drain of 
experienced project personnel. The Committee recommends that the Department should 
establish clear guidelines to ensure that contractual staff is hired only for genuine, time-
bound projects and that core research activities are managed by permanent staff.  
 
  

28 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE 
 
COMPARATIVE BUDGET ANALYSIS 
 
 The Committee notes the fluctuating trends in budget allocation and utilization. In FY 
2024-25, the Department was allocated ₹2,275.70 crore at the B.E. stage, which was increased 
to ₹2,460.13 crore at the R.E. stage. Despite this increase, the actual expenditure stood at only 
₹1,998.00 crore, indicating a significant underutilization of approximately 19% of the revised 
estimates. In contrast, for FY 2025-26, the initial B.E. of ₹3,446.64 crore was reduced by 
17.8% to ₹2,830.45 crore at the R.E. stage. The Department utilized 96.23% of this reduced 
R.E. (₹2,723.68 crore) by 9th February 2026, demonstrating a much-improved capacity to 
spend the funds ultimately allocated to it. The Committee recommends that the Department 
should undertake a realistic assessment of its financial requirements at the B.E. stage itself, 
based on historical expenditure patterns, project pipelines, and absorptive capacity. 
Furthermore, the institutional mechanisms that led to improved utilization in FY 2025-26 
should be documented and institutionalized to ensure consistent performance. The 
Department should also engage with the Ministry of Finance to minimize steep cuts at the 
R.E. stage, as such reductions can disrupt program implementation despite high utilization 
efficiency. 
                                                                                                                 (Para 2.4)
          
 The Committee observes that the overall fund utilization by the Department during 
FY 2025-26 stands at a commendable 96.23% of the R.E. allocation. The performance under 
the major Central Sector Scheme, ‘Bio-RIDE’, is also robust, with the Department utilizing 
94.88% (₹1,629.11 crore) of its R.E. allocation of ₹1,717 crore. This marks a significant 
improvement in financial management compared to the previous fiscal year. The Committee 
expresses its appreciation for the significant improvement in fund utilization by the 
Department in FY 2025-26, particularly under the flagship Bio-RIDE scheme. This enhanced 
performance indicates that corrective measures are yielding positive results. However, given 
the substantial increase in the overall budget over the past two years and the critical 
importance of the programs, the Committee strongly recommends that the Department 
should maintain this momentum. It must continue its rigorous monitoring and proactive 
management to ensure that the funds allocated in the Budget Estimates (B.E.) for 2026-27 are 
utilized with equal efficiency, thereby maximizing the impact of its programs and achieving 
desired outcomes in a timely manner. 
 (Para 2.10)  
The Committee notes that the overall B.E. allocation of the Department increased 
from ₹2,581 crore in 2022-23 to ₹2,683.86 crore in 2023-24, before marginally declining to 
₹2,275.70 crore in 2024-25, and then substantially increasing to ₹3,446.64 crore in 2025-26. 
The allocation remained almost the same at ₹3,446 in FY 2026-27. A similar trend is observed 
in the allocation for the Central Sector Scheme, Bio-RIDE, which saw a significant jump in 
2025-26 after remaining relatively stable in the preceding years. In contrast, the allocation for 
Autonomous Institutions shows a continuous upward trend throughout the period from 2022-
23 to 2025-26. Given the substantial and increasing allocation to the flagship Bio-RIDE 
scheme, which constitutes over two-thirds of the Department's budget, the Committee 
emphasizes the need for sustained and stringent oversight. The Department must build on its 
improved utilization performance by further strengthening mechanisms for regular, 
milestone-based monitoring. This will ensure that the significant public investments translate 
into tangible, high-quality research outcomes and prevent the recurrence of the planning 
challenges caused by past fluctuations between budget estimates and revised estimates. 
(Para 2.13) 

29 
 
 
BIO-RIDE: PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION AND KEY ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
 The budgetary trends for the Bio-RIDE scheme reveal a persistent pattern of volatility 
between initial allocation and final expenditure, coupled with a recent substantial increase 
that has been sustained. To enhance the effectiveness and predictability of this central sector 
scheme, the Committee recommends that the Department should prioritize improving the 
accuracy of its budget estimates to mitigate the sharp reductions witnessed at the Revised 
Estimate stage, thereby ensuring that the enhanced allocation of Rs. 2300 crore translates 
into actual spending rather than a notional figure. Furthermore, given the Department's 
demonstrated efficiency in utilizing 94% of the reduced RE, it is well-positioned to absorb 
and effectively deploy this increased allocation, but this requires a strategic shift towards 
multi-year financial planning and robust implementation framework that can safeguard the 
scheme from future cyclical cuts. 
(Para 3.6) 
 
The Committee recommends that the Department should establish a robust, real-time 
monitoring and evaluation framework for the newly integrated Bio-RIDE scheme. Given the 
merger of two major schemes and the addition of a significant new component, it is crucial to 
track not just financial expenditure but also tangible scientific and industrial outcomes. This 
framework should set specific, time-bound milestones for each of the three components—
Research & Development, Industrial & Entrepreneurship Development, and 
Biomanufacturing & Biofoundry. Under the R&D component, the Committee recommends 
tracking the number of patents filed and technologies licensed, not just the number of 
fellowships awarded. For the IED component, the focus should be on the survival and growth 
rate of incubated startups beyond the initial funding stages. For the new Biofoundry 
component, the focus should be on the number of industry partners utilizing the national 
platforms and the successful scaling of bio-manufacturing processes. This data should be 
publicly accessible to ensure transparency and accountability. 
(Para 3.17) 
 
 
To build on the impressive start-up ecosystem supported by BIRAC, the Committee 
recommends creating a dedicated mentorship and industry-linking program for startups 
graduating from the BioNEST incubators. While seed funding and grants are vital, many 
promising ventures falter during the transition from proof-of-concept to commercial-scale 
manufacturing and market entry. The Committee recommends that BIRAC, in partnership 
with successful bio-pharma and bio-industrial companies, should establish a "Venture 
Development Program." This program would pair select startups with experienced industry 
mentors who can provide guidance on regulatory approvals, quality control, supply chain 
management, and market access strategies. This would increase the success rate of startups in 
attracting larger follow-on funding and ultimately launching their products, thereby 
converting innovative ideas into economic assets. 
(Para 3.18) 
 
 To accelerate the development of affordable healthcare devices, such as the 
intraocular lenses and cardiovascular stents, the Committee recommends creating a focused, 
mission-mode programme. Instead of supporting isolated projects, this programme should 
bring together clinicians, engineers, and entrepreneurs to solve specific, high-priority needs 
identified by the healthcare system. The Committee recommends that this mission mode 
programme be structured with clear, end-to-end milestones: from prototype development 

30 
 
and clinical validation to regulatory approval and finally, volume manufacturing. Funding 
should be released in tranches tied to achieving these milestones, and a dedicated unit within 
BIRAC should be assigned to help these projects navigate the approval process with the 
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) from an early stage, thereby 
reducing the time to market. 
(Para 3.19) 
 
AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS 
 
The Committee observes that steady increase in budget allocations over the past five 
years, coupled with the Department's exceptional ability to utilize over 99% of its funds, 
indicates a well-managed and predictable funding stream for autonomous institutions. This 
strong track record of efficient expenditure justifies the marginal increase to Rs. 1002.13 
crore for FY 2026-27. The Committee recommends that the Department should leverage this 
stability to enter into multi-year funding commitments with these institutions. By providing 
greater financial certainty, the Department can enable them to plan long-term research 
projects. Furthermore, this consistent performance serves as a benchmark for other schemes, 
demonstrating that stable, incremental growth combined with high utilization rates can lead 
to more effective outcomes. 
 (Para 4.3) 
The Committee recommends that the Department should capitalize on the Regional 
Centre for Biotechnology's (RCB) unique status as an "Institution of National Importance" to 
create a unified academic framework across all 13 iBRIC institutes and ICGEB. This can be 
achieved by developing a centralized portal for PhD and Integrated MS-PhD admissions, 
allowing students to apply to multiple institutes through a single process while receiving their 
degrees from RCB. Furthermore, mandating credit-sharing and joint coursework between 
institutes would foster interdisciplinary expertise, such as enabling a student at BRIC-NIPGR 
to take bioinformatics courses at BRIC-NIBMG or structural biology at RCB. This network 
could also launch a joint "iBRIC-RCB Postgraduate Diploma in Biomanufacturing and 
Translational Research," pooling faculty and industry connections from iBRIC, ICGEB, and 
RCB to create a robust talent pipeline for the growing biotech industry. 
(Para 4.13) 
To ensure that important scientific discoveries made in iBRIC labs actually reach 
ordinary people and the market, the Committee recommends that the Department should 
create clear and well-funded pathways from the laboratory to the clinic. For the most 
promising candidates, like the Mpox vaccine at THSTI, the malaria vaccine at NII, or the 
gene therapy for Hemophilia A developed by inStem, the Department should bring together 
dedicated teams consisting of the institute that made the discovery, BRIC-THSTI which 
specializes in translating lab discoveries into real treatments, and experts in 
commercialization from BRIC-NIAB or THSTI itself. Additionally, a shared "Foundry for 
Diagnostics" should be set up by combining the DNA fingerprinting and diagnostic skills of 
BRIC-CDFD with the ability of BRIC-NIAB to build practical devices like the QuantM milk 
tester, while also involving BRIC-RGCB which has experience in getting diagnostic kits 
validated and approved by regulators. This foundry would help build and speed up the 
launch of new diagnostic tools. Finally, the upcoming Medical Research Centre and 
Translational Research Facility at THSTI should serve as the main hub for conducting 
human clinical trials for the entire iBRIC network, giving priority to home grown discoveries 
that are ready for first-in-human testing. 
(Para 4.14) 

31 
 
 
The Committee further recommends that the Department should initiate large, 
mission-mode projects that bring together the strengths of different research institutes to 
solve major national problems that one institute cannot handle alone. For example, a project 
focused on the north-eastern region of India could connect BRIC-IBSD, which has deep 
knowledge of local plants and traditional medicine, with BRIC-NIPGR and BRIC-NABI, 
which specialize in understanding plant genes and improving crops. Together, they could 
develop health products from local plants and create crops that can withstand changing 
weather conditions. BRIC-NII could also join this project to study how these traditional 
remedies affect the human immune system. Another important project could focus on the 
connection between human health, animal health, and the environment, known as the "One-
Health" approach. This could bring together BRIC-NIAB's work on animal diseases that can 
spread to humans, BRIC-NIBMG's expertise in studying human genes, BRIC-NII and BRIC-
ILS's research on infectious diseases, and BRIC-THSTI's ability to develop vaccines. 
Together, they could create a system to watch for and quickly respond to new disease threats 
like the Nipah virus before they become major outbreaks. 
(Para 4.15) 
NATIONAL GENOMICS DATA GRID 
While the open-access model is commendable, the Committee recommends 
establishing a formal, proactive mechanism for knowledge transfer between the DBT's 
genomic databases and the policymakers at the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and 
ICMR. A joint working group should be formed to periodically review findings and 
commission specific analyses that can directly impact national health missions, essential drug 
lists, and disease control strategies. 
(Para 5.7) 
 
The Committee strongly endorses the proposed National Genomics Data Grid. Given 
the immense diversity of the country, a target of 1 million genomes is essential and should be 
pursued without delay. The Committee recommends that the Department should work 
expeditiously to secure the necessary approvals and funding for the NGDG's first phase to 
maintain the momentum generated by the GenomeIndia project. However, the Committee 
observes that the Department has been allocated only Rs. 20 crore, that too for translational 
research projects. Thus, no funds have been allocated in FY 2026-27 for the National 
Genomics Data Grid. The Committee recommends that the proposed National Genomics 
Data Grid should be accorded the top most priority and should be launched as a National 
Mission with adequate funding in FY 2026-27 itself. 
(Para 5.8) 
 
The discovery of millions of novel and ultra-rare variants presents a unique, time-
sensitive opportunity. The Committee recommends launching a dedicated, mission-mode sub-
program under the NGDG focused on rare genetic diseases. This mission should specifically 
aim to identify founder mutations in endogamous communities, develop and validate cost-
effective carrier screening kits, and create a clear pathway for translating genetic insights 
into therapeutic strategies. 
(Para 5.9) 
 

32 
 
As the funded translational research projects begin to yield results, a parallel focus 
should be placed on implementation science. The Committee therefore recommends that 
DBT, in collaboration with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and ICMR should 
develop pilot projects to test the integration of validated genetic findings (e.g., screening 
protocols) into the public healthcare system, studying the operational, ethical, and logistical 
challenges. 
(Para 5.10) 
 
 
The Committee further observes that genomic data holds significant potential not only 
for advancing healthcare but also for addressing longstanding questions about India's ancient 
history and cultural evolution. In light of this, the Committee recommends that the 
Department should take proactive steps to collaborate with key institutions such as the 
Anthropological Survey of India,  the Archaeological Survey of India, and leading universities 
across the country to facilitate interdisciplinary research in this area. 
(Para 5.11) 
 
HUMAN RESOURCE CHALLENGES 
 The Committee notes that against a sanctioned strength of 54 scientific staff in the 
Department, 13 posts (24%) are vacant. The Committee recommends that DBT should 
expedite the entire recruitment cycle for all levels of scientific staff and ensure that the 
process is completed within a defined timeline to restore its in-house scientific capacity.  
(Para 6.9) 
 
The data furnished by the Department also reveals an alarming average vacancy rate 
of 31% across the 15 autonomous bodies, with some institutes like NABI, CIAB, and NII 
having higher rate. The Committee recommends that the Department should expedite the 
entire recruitment process and launch a special, time-bound recruitment drive for the worst 
affected institutes. 
 (Para 6.10) 
 
The Committee also notes that the Recruitment Rules for scientific posts across 13 
BRIC institutions are under revision. The Committee recommends that the Department 
should prioritize and finalize these rules expeditiously. The Committee is also of the view that 
over-reliance on contractual staff creates job insecurity and can lead to a brain drain of 
experienced project personnel. The Committee recommends that the Department should 
establish clear guidelines to ensure that contractual staff is hired only for genuine, time-
bound projects and that core research activities are managed by permanent staff.  
 (Para 6.11) 
 
 
 
 