 
 
 
 
 
 
  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND  
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
    Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
   March, 2026/ Chaitra, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
 
FOUR HUNDRED EIGHTH REPORT 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2026-27) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH 
 (DEMAND NO. 91) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25th March, 2026) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 25th March, 2026) 
 
REPORT NO. 
408 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://www.sansad.in/rs 
Email: rsc-st@rss.sansad.in 

 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
 ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND  
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
FOUR HUNDRED EIGHTH REPORT 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2026-27) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH 
 (DEMAND NO. 91) 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25th March, 2026) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 25th March, 2026) 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2026/Chaitra, 1948 (Saka) 
 


 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
   
  PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)  
2. INTRODUCTION  (ii)  
  3. ACRONYMS  
 
(iii) 
4. REPORT 1-44  
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE 45-52 
6. *MINUTES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
 
* To be appended later 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
(Constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2025) 
 
 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita -    Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Narayanasa K. Bhandage  
3. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
4. Shri I.S. Inbadurai  
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
6. Shri Sandosh Kumar P 
7. Shri Sharad Pawar 
8. Shri Jairam Ramesh   
9. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy 
10.  Shri Paka Venkata Satyanarayana  
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Sajda Ahmed 
12. Shri Alfred Kanngam S. Arthur 
13. Shri Pradyut Bordoloi  
14. Shri Phani Bhusan Choudhury 
15. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb 
16. Shri Vamsi Krishna Gaddam 
17. Shri Tapir Gao 
18. Adv K. Francis George  
19. Shri Eswarasamy K. 
20. Shri Mahesh Kashyap 
21. Dr. Anand Kumar 
22. Shri Mohibbullah 
23. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
24. Shri Jashubhai Bhilubhai Rathva  
25. Shri Trivendra Singh Rawat 
26. Shrimati Himadri Singh 
27. Shri Tejasvi Surya  
28. Shri Durai Vaiko  
29. Shri Yaduveer Wadiyar 
30. Shri Balwant Baswant Wankhade  
31. Shri Akhilesh Yadav  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Joint Secretary  
Shri Arun Kumar, Director  
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Deputy Secretary 
Ms. I. V. Rajya Laxmi, Under Secretary  
Shri Vaibhav Jain, Committee Officer 
 
(i) 
_____________________________________________________ 
 
* Shri Pradyut Bordoloi ceased to be member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation from the Lok Sabha w.e.f. 
20.03.2026. 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, having been authorised by 
the Committee, present this ‘Four Hundred Eighth Report’ on Demands for Grants (2026-27) of 
the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research. 
2.   The Committee considered the Demands for Grants (2026-27) pertaining to the 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research in its meeting held on the 25th February, 2026. 
It held detailed discussion with the Secretary and other officers of the Department of Scientific 
and Industrial Research.   
3.   The Committee expresses its thanks to the officers of the Department of Scientific and 
Industrial Research for providing the material and information, to enable it to examine the 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry for the year 2026-27. 
4.    The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the              
24th March, 2026. 
 
 
 
 
 
 (BHUBANESWAR  KALITA) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman, 
24th  March, 2026 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science 
Chaitra 03,1948 (Saka)                                  and Technology, Environment, Forests and  Climate Change, 
 Rajya Sabha . 
  
 
 
  
                                           
                                                                   
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 

 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
Acronym Full Form 
A2K+ Access to Knowledge Plus 
APCTT Asian and Pacific Centre for Transfer of Technology 
BE Budget Estimates 
BIRD-CRF Biotechnology Industry Research and Development – Common Research Facility 
CEL Central Electronics Limited 
CRISP CSIR Research for Industrial, Scientific and Societal Progress 
CSIR Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
DSIR Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
FY Financial Year 
HRD Human Resource Development 
IP Intellectual Property 
IRD Industrial Research & Development 
MSME Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
MoEFCC Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
MoF Ministry of Finance 
NLS National Laboratories Scheme 
NRDC National Research Development Corporation 
PACE Promoting Academic Research Conversion to Enterprise 
PRISM Promoting Innovations in Individuals, Startups and MSMEs 
PSE Public Sector Enterprise 
R&D Research and Development 
RE Revised Estimates 
S&T Science and Technology 
SDG Sustainable Development Goal 
SRF Senior Research Fellowship 
STI Science, Technology and Innovation 
TRL Technology Readiness Level 
UN United Nations 
UNCTAD United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 
WIPO World Intellectual Property Organization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
CHAPTER – 1 
INTRODUCTION 
 The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR), under the Ministry of Science 
and Technology was established on January 4, 1985. Its primary objective is to promote industrial 
research by encouraging indigenous technology development, utilization, and transfer. The 
Department is responsible for the following areas: 
(i) All matters concerning the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR). 
(ii) All matters relating to National Research Development Corporation (NRDC). 
(iii) All matters relating to Central Electronics Limited (CEL). 
(iv) Registration and Recognition of R&D Units. 
(v) Matters relating to UNCTAD and WIPO. 
(vi) National Register for Foreign Collaborations. 
(vii) Matters relating to creation of pool for temporary placement of Indian Scientists and    
Technologists. 
 
1.2 DSIR’s core mission is to promote the development of advanced technologies and products 
through R&D, enhance industry participation in national R&D expenditure, support industrial R&D 
centres in building commercially viable technologies, accelerate the commercialization of lab-scale 
innovations, and strengthen consultancy and technology management capabilities. 
1.3 The Department administratively oversees the autonomous institution—CSIR, along with 
two public sector undertakings: NRDC and CEL. It also provides institutional hosting facilities to 
the Asian and Pacific Centre for Transfer of Technology (APCTT). 
1.4 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment, Forests and Climate Change considered the Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research in its meeting held on 25th February, 2026. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

2 
 
CHAPTER – 2 
BUDGET ANALYSIS 
 
 The following table shows the overall budgetary details of DSIR for the year 2025-6 (BE, 
RE & actual expenditure) and allocation made for the year 2026-27:- 
              (₹ in crore) 
 
Scheme 
 
B.E.  
2025-26 
 
 
R.E.  
2025-26 
 
Actual 
(upto 
31.01.2026) 
 
 
% of 
Expenditure 
vis-à-vis R.E. 
 
 
B.E.  
2026-27 
Establishment Expenditure 
of the Centre (Secretariat)  
17.33 15.91 12.22 76.80 16.79 
 
Central Sector Schemes 
Industrial Research & 
Development 
(IRD) 
16.50 18 12.80 71.11 17 
Assistance to PSEs for Other 
Scientific Research 
Schemes 
15.50 15.50 6 38.70 13.42 
Total 
(Central Sector Schemes) 
32 33.50 18.80 56.11 30.42 
 
Other Central Sector Expenditure 
National Laboratories 6127.57 5947.14 5000 84.07 6268.61 
Capacity Building and Human 
Resource Development 
473.08 428.34 359.49 83.92 442 
Total (CSIR) 6600.65 6375.48 5359.49 84.06 6710.61 
Contribution to Asian & Pacific 
Centre for Transfer of 
Technology (UN Body) 
7.8 8.27 5.64 68.19 7.8 
Grand Total 6657.78 6433.16 5395.90 83.87 6765.62 
 
2.2  The Committee observes that under the Budget Head “Assistance to PSEs”, there is 
extremely low expenditure (38.7% of RE by January, 2026), indicating serious 
implementation challenges or lack of demand. The Committee recommends that a thorough 
review is needed to identify bottlenecks, and if the scheme is not viable, the Department 
should consider reallocating funds to more effective programs or revising the budget 
downward.  
2.3 The Committee notes that the expenditure under the Budget head “Industrial 
Research & Development” is also below the expected pace (71.11%). While the BE for FY 
2026-27 is reduced as compared to RE 2025-26, it remains above the projected actual. The 
Committee recommends that the Department should strengthen monitoring and expedite 
project approvals to improve utilization. 

3 
 
2.4 The Committee further notes that the BE for 2026-27 for several schemes appears 
optimistic given the current year's actuals. For instance, Establishment Expenditure (₹16.79 
crore) is higher than the projected actual of ~₹14.66 crore. The Committee recommends that 
future budgetary allocation should be based on realistic assessments of expenditure patterns, 
considering the first 10 months' data, to avoid persistent underspending. The Department 
should use the current year's actuals to set more accurate targets, especially for schemes with 
consistent shortfalls. 
 
2.5 The Committee sought details of the budgetary allocation proposed by the Department vis-à-
vis the amount actually allocated to it for the year 2026-27. The Department informed that against a 
proposal of ₹8086.83 crore, an amount of ₹6765.62 has been allocated, which is about 16.33% 
lesser than its budgetary demand. Thus, here is an overall shortfall of ₹1321.21 crore in the actual 
allocation to the Department. The details of budget demanded and allocated under different heads 
are shown in the table below:- 
       (₹ in crore) 
Description BE 2026-27 
(Demanded) 
BE 2026-27 
(Announced) 
DSIR (Secretariat + APCTT) 28.53 24.59 
DSIR Umbrella Scheme 1(IR&D) 19.90 17.00 
DSIR Umbrella Scheme 2 (NRDC) 27.00 10.39 
DSIR Umbrella Scheme 2 (CEL) 57.50 3.03 
CSIR 7953.90 6710.61 
Total 8086.83 6765.62 
 
2.6 In response to a query about the likely impact of this shortfall in actual allocation over the 
proposed budget and the strategy of the Department for dealing with the challenges arising thereof, 
the Department submitted that:– 
 The Industrial Research Development (IRD) scheme of the Department comprises of the 
sub-schemes   PRISM, PACE, BIRD-crf and A2K+ for which the Department had 
projected a budgetary requirement of Rs. 19.90 crores. However, the budgetary 
allocation announced for the IRD scheme of DSIR is Rs. 17.00 crore, resulting in a 
shortfall of Rs. 2.90 crore. This reduction is expected to adversely affect the output and 
outcome for the projects funded under these schemes, as the budgetary allocation 
announced for the scheme will be insufficient to support the planned activities/ 
committed funding for projects, resulting the Department to scale down the funding 
commitments and prioritize activities to operate within the constrained budget. This may 
impact the reach, coverage, expansion of the schemes in terms of funding new research 
projects, reducing the number of beneficiaries, creation of infrastructure for assisting the 
MSMEs and undertaking technology development/ demonstration activities/ projects. 
DSIR may also need to reduce the proposed physical targets proportionately under the 
scheme for the FY 2026-27 on account of the reduction in the budgetary allocation 
announced for the schemes.  To address the challenge, DSIR may need to adopt a 
strategic approach for prioritizing funding of the high-impact projects to optimize 
utilization of available funds to mitigate the effects of the budgetary shortfall. 
 

4 
 
 CSIR demanded Rs. 7953.90 crore which was reduced to Rs. 6710.71 crore by the 
Finance Ministry. This may have happened due to unprecedented scenario affecting 
revenue generation. CSIR constituent laboratories across the country have been grouped 
into Theme-based Clusters to perform their activities and synergize to achieve the 
objectives of bringing sector-specific industry focus, aligning with Stakeholder needs and 
enhancing business. Although a reduction in the projected allocation and actual 
budgetary allocation may potentially affect financial planning and participative 
performance of the R&D projects in general and new future plans, CSIR internal 
resources may be utilized to supplement CSIR-driven R&D projects. Further, CSIR is 
collaborating with other Departments/Ministries to sponsor its projects. 
 
 Budget reductions in National Research Development Corporation can have a significant 
impact on the implementation of various activities under the two schemes. Most of the 
projects initiated under the grant-in-aid are currently underway and at various stages of 
completion. Under PIII, most of the funds are utilized for technology development and 
the projects have already been sanctioned and any delay in release of funds, which is 
done milestone-wise, can result in delay of completion of the projects or may even result 
in termination also. As most of the projects are being implemented by start-ups, which 
are already cash-starved, reductions in funds would adversely affect the progress and 
timely execution of these projects. Similarly other activities like IP protection, 
management of Incubation centre, seed funding, value addition and outreach centres 
would be adversely affected due to the shortage of funds in terms of reduction in 
operation and target achievement. 
 
 Central Electronics Limited demanded ₹57.50 but was allocated only ₹3.03 crore. Thus, 
certain activities may require rationalization or phased implementation. However, core 
and strategic programmes though will be affected, will be mitigated on best effort basis. 
Any funding shortfall will be managed through utilization of internal accruals and 
available reserves; prioritization of Government-mandated and time-bound activities; 
expenditure rationalization and operational efficiency measures; phased execution of 
non-critical components; and strengthening revenue generation efforts. Accordingly, 
CEL shall endeavour to meet the Government’s mandate through prudent financial 
management and optimal deployment of internal resources, with only minimal impact on 
overall deliverables. 
2.7 Recognizing the implications of the shortfall in allocation on the Department’s programmes 
and initiatives, the Committee asked about the absolute bare minimum increase needed to sustain 
its key programmes. The Department submitted that a minimum additional allocation of ₹653 crore 
over and above the B.E. 2026-27, is needed to meet its fund requirements. The below chart depicts 
the difference between proposed and actual allocation for 2026-27, along with bare minimum 
additional allocation required by the Department to sustain its key programmes. 

5 
 
 
 
2.8 The Department informed that it has additional requirement of ₹653 crore to fulfill the 
commitments of ongoing projects and achieving targets for FY 2026-27. The reasons and 
justifications for additional fund requirement given by the Department are summarized in the table 
below:- 
(₹ crore) 
Scheme BE 2026-27 Bare Minimum 
Increase needed 
Remarks 
DSIR 
Umbrella Scheme 1 
(IRD) 
17.00 3.00  To handle more Women 
Researchers and Entrepreneurs 
& CRTDH activities to 
promote Technology 
Development through 
individual and community 
centric programs 
DSIR 
Umbrella Scheme 2 
(NRDC + CEL) 
13.42 50.00  To encourage more equity 
mode participation by NRDC 
and to boost CEL’s expanded 
scope with the need of the hour 
technologies through 
indigenized attempts 
CSIR 
(National Laboratories 
Scheme: NLS) 
6268.61 600.00  To contribute towards Viksit 
Bharat-2047 Commitments, 
SDGs & Key Security driven 
STI demands through 
indigenous Research 
 Initiate Mission mode research 
in sunrise sectors, viz. Animal 
Free Organoid models for 
R&D and White Hydrogen, 
Projects specific to North-East 
region & Smart Villages 
 Pilot plants for Translational 
₹ 8086.83croreproposed₹ 6765.2crore allocated₹ 653 crore additional required20003000400050006000700080009000B.E. Proposed B.E. Allocated Rupees (in crores)B.E. proposed, B.E. allocated and additional bare minimum required

6 
 
Research, Strategically 
important Nuclear Battery & 
All Solid Batteries to ensure 
Energy Security for Strategic 
security 
CSIR 
(Research Schemes, 
Scholarships and 
Fellowships : Capacity 
Building & HRD) 
442.00 -- -- 
Total 6299.03 653.00  
 
2.9 During the meeting, the Department informed the Committee that in 2025-26, 65% of the 
allocated funds were spent on pensions and salaries, leaving only 35% for R&D, infrastructure and 
capacity building. Within this, 7% supports capacity-building initiatives such as Junior Research 
Fellowships (JRF), Senior Research Fellowships (SRF), and PhD programmes. 8% of the funds are 
spent on capital asset creation. Therefore, only 20 per cent is available for research. The average 
expenditure on R&D over the years has been a miniscule 22.5% of the total allocation to the 
Department. This leaves minimal scope for conducting any cutting edge research. 
 
 
2.10 The Committee observes the abysmally low share of funds used for research as 
compared to salary, pensions and other expenditure. This is significantly lower as compared 
to globally reputed R&D organisations. The Committee recommends that the Department 
should come up with a comprehensive five year roadmap to improve this situation with 
specific tangible outcomes. 
 


7 
 
2.11 The following Chart shows the sector-wise distribution of the B.E. 2026-27 allocation (₹ 
6765.62 crore) of the Department:- 
    
 
 
2.12 It can be observed from the above chart that out of the total B.E. allocation, more than 99% 
has been allocated to CSIR. The central sector schemes/projects of the Department, which 
comprise of two sub-heads ‘Industrial Research & Development’ and ‘Assistance to PSEs for 
Other Scientific Research’, together with establishment expenditures, constitute the remaining 
portion of the total outlay.  
2.13 The Committee inquired about the major thrust areas of the Department and the strategy for 
utilizing the allocation in B.E. 2026-27. The Department submitted that in 2026-27, it will focus 
on the following thrust areas:– 
The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research will focus its efforts in 2025-26 and 
2026-27 on addressing national priorities through a structured research agenda driven by its 
autonomous institutions and public sector enterprises. CSIR will guide its work through 
nine thematic areas spanning aerospace and strategic sectors, civil infrastructure, earth 
sciences, environment, mining and materials, chemicals, energy, agriculture, and 
healthcare, with specific projects ranging from indigenous aircraft development and 
defence technologies to sustainable construction, water purification, critical minerals 
recovery, renewable energy systems, crop productivity, and drug discovery. Beyond these 
themes, CSIR will pursue over twenty mission-mode initiatives including the Deep Sea 
Autonomous Underwater Vehicle, Himalayan geohazards assessment, Hydrogen Mission 
Phase II, cellular therapies for cancer, antimicrobial resistance mitigation, lithium-ion 
battery recycling, smart village applications, and phased missions in Phytopharmaceuticals, 
aroma, and floriculture. NRDC will continue commercializing technologies from national 
R&D institutions, leveraging its repository of innovations and extensive licensing network, 
while CEL will focus on delivering solutions in defence, green energy, strategic electronics, 
and railways to advance self-reliance in critical technology domains. 
2.14 The Committee analyzed the general trends in total B.E allocation towards the two major 
heads, viz., Central Sector Schemes/Projects and CSIR, since 2024-25. The following graphs depict 
these trends:    
0.81%99.18%Major budgetary allocationsOthers Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR)Total Gross Budget -₹ 6765.62crore

8 
     2.15 It can be inferred from the above charts that for the Central Sector Schemes, the allocations have sharply declined after 2023-24 and have further declined in FY 2026-27. However, in the case of allocations to CSIR, a general albeit marginal rising trend can be observed.          
3945.03323230.42B.E. 2022-23 B.E. 2023-24 B.E. 2024-25 B.E. 2025-26 B.E. 2026-27Trend in Allocation to Central Sector Scheme
5562.765675.516265.86600.656710.61B.E. 2022-23 B.E. 2023-24 B.E. 2024-25 B.E. 2025-26 B.E. 2026-27Trend in Allocation to CSIR

9 
 
 
CHAPTER – 3 
CENTRAL ELECTRONICS LIMITED (CEL) 
   
 Central Electronics Limited (CEL) is a Mini Ratna Category-I Central Public Sector 
Enterprise (CPSE) under the Department. It was established in 1974 with an objective to 
commercially exploit the indigenous technologies developed by National Laboratories and R&D 
Institutions in the country. The ccompany specializes in the manufacturing of strategic electronic 
components critical for defence applications of national importance. In addition, CEL produces 
advanced railway signalling systems, security and surveillance solutions, smart classroom systems, 
and solar photovoltaic products. The operations of the Company are organized into four major 
verticals, namely:  
a) Defence Business Group,  
b) Railway Signalling Systems,  
c) Solar Photovoltaic Group, and  
d) Integrated Solutions for Security & Surveillance 
3.2 Through these verticals, CEL has established a strong presence in both strategic and 
commercial sectors. As part of its diversification and long-term growth strategy, CEL is 
establishing a fully automated Solar Module Manufacturing Plant with an annual capacity of 200 
MW under the Public-Private Partnership (PPP) model. This initiative is expected to enhance 
domestic solar manufacturing capacity and strengthen the Company’s footprint in the renewable 
energy sector. Further, civil works have commenced for setting up a Green Tier-III Data Centre at 
Sahibabad, Ghaziabad under the PPP model, with a planned capacity of 30 MW. The Data Centre is 
envisaged to generate consistent revenue streams and significantly improve profitability in the 
coming financial years. 
3.3 The financial performance of CEL during FY 2024–25 reflects sustained growth and 
operational efficiency. As on 31st March 2025, the paid-up share capital of the Company stood at 
₹84.37 crore, and the Company remains completely debt-free, holding no secured loans. The Net 
Worth increased significantly to ₹266.94 crore in 2024-25 from ₹193.64 crore in the previous year, 
while Reserves & Surplus rose to ₹182.57 crore from ₹119.47 crore. The Company achieved its 
highest ever turnover of ₹390.01 crore during FY 2024–25 as compared to ₹344.03 crore in FY 
2023–24. PBT (Profit Before Tax) increased to ₹103.12 crore from ₹78.88 crore, while Profit After 
Tax rose to ₹74.96 crore from ₹58.87 crore in the previous financial year, reflecting better project 
execution, financial discipline, and strengthened business performance. During the year, the 
Company also met financial commitments from internal accruals, including a payment of ₹11.39 
crore towards interest on wage arrears from 2007. The Defence Business Group recorded its highest 
ever turnover of ₹148 crore, and the Company maintained a nil overdraft position with banks, 
demonstrating sound liquidity management. In view of the Company’s strong performance and 
profit earning during the financial year 2024-2025, it paid an interim dividend of ₹248 per equity 
share of ₹1,000 face value, aggregating to ₹20.92 crore for the financial year. Furthermore, it also 
paid a final dividend of ₹18.55 per equity share, aggregating to ₹1.57 crore. The financial 
performance of CEL has been summarized in the table below:- 
 (₹ crores) 
Year 2024-2025 2023-2024 
Production 260.00 288.68* 
Sales 390.01 344.03 

10 
 
* The Production Figures for the previous Financial Years have been rearranged as per Final Financial 
Statements. 
 
3.4 The Committee was informed that in addition to its strong financial performance, the 
Company achieved several major operational milestones. Continued support was extended to 
ordnance factories for the indigenous manufacturing of piezoelectric fuses for ammunition, 
specifically the HEAT Fuse-551 and 751, reinforcing self-reliance in critical defence components. 
Furthermore, the Company conducted successful trial testing of new strategic products, including 
antennas and circulators, thereby expanding its high-technology product portfolio. To strengthen 
backward integration and technical capability, the Company also established an in-house radome 
machining facility, with products from this facility currently under testing. 
 
3.5 The Committee was further informed that CEL enters FY 2026–27 in a comparatively 
challenging environment, as defence production orders have concluded and fresh or repeat orders 
for Weapon Locating Radar systems from DRDO are awaited. Despite these challenges, the 
Company has set an ambitious turnover target of ₹600 crore for FY 2026–27. The strategy to 
achieve this includes commercialization of the 200 MW Solar Module Plant, expansion of 
Integrated Solutions and Railway Signaling projects, operationalization of the Data Centre 
infrastructure, and enhanced product innovation through research and development collaborations. 
These diversification efforts are aimed at broadening the revenue base and reducing dependency on 
specific defence platforms. 
3.6 The Committee asked the Department that how CEL does collaborate with CEERI, Pilani 
and whether CEL has the Right of First Refusal over the technologies and products developed by 
CEERI, Pilani.  The Department replied that CEERI, Pilani is working in collaboration with CEL 
for indigenous development of critical component i.e. ASIC (being imported from Belarus) which 
is being used in Phased Array Radar for defence application.  Central Electronics Limited (CEL) 
does not have a formal, exclusive Right of First Refusal over all technologies developed by the 
CSIR-Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute (CEERI), Pilani. Also, CEL and CEERI 
have historically collaborated on technology transfer—such as the TV set production including 
magnetron etc. in the 1980s.  Therefore, while CEL remains a key public sector partner for defence 
and electronics, they do not hold an exclusive, pre-emptive right of first refusal for all CEERI, 
Pilani developments.  
 
3.7 In response to a query that can CEL achieve better synergy if it is placed under the 
administrative domain of MEITY, the Department replied that Central Electronics Limited (CEL) 
operates in multiple technology-driven sectors including Defence electronics, Railway signaling 
and safety systems, Solar photovoltaic solutions, and emerging digital infrastructure such as Data 
Centres. From a functional perspective, certain elements of its product portfolio do exhibit sectoral 
synergies with Ministries such as MeitY (electronics and IT systems), Ministry of Defence 
(strategic electronic components), Ministry of Railways (signaling and safety electronics) and 
MNRE (solar manufacturing and renewable energy solutions). However, CEL’s core identity and 
foundational mandate stem from its origin as a technology commercialization enterprise emerging 
Share Capital 84.37 74.17 
Net Worth 266.94 193.64 
Profit Before tax (PBT) 103.12 78.88 
Net Profit after Tax (PAT) 74.96 58.87 

11 
 
from the scientific ecosystem of CSIR laboratories. Its institutional character has historically been 
aligned with research translation, indigenization, and technology absorption — areas that are 
intrinsically linked with the broader mandate of the Ministry of Science & Technology (DSIR). 
Given that CEL’s diverse business verticals are unified by a common technological base — 
advanced electronics, material science, and system integration — its placement under the 
administrative domain of Science & Technology ensures a neutral, research-linked positioning 
rather than sector-specific alignment. This enables CEL to operate across Defence, Railways, Solar, 
Aviation and Digital sectors, without being confined to a single thematic ministry. Accordingly, 
while operational synergies with MeitY, Defence, Railways, MoES and MNRE are significant and 
continue through inter-ministerial collaboration, CEL’s continued placement under the Ministry of 
Science & Technology remains aligned with its origin, mandate and cross-sectoral technology 
character. 
3.8 The Committee sought details of the future course of action planned by CEL. The 
Committee was informed that with sustained profitability and conferment of Mini-Ratna Category-I 
status, Central Electronics Limited (CEL) has transitioned from revival to structured expansion. 
The future roadmap is guided by a revised Vision and Mission focused on diversification, 
indigenization, technological advancement, and long-term financial sustainability, aligned with 
Atmanirbhar Bharat. Looking forward, a major initiative is the establishment of a 200 MW Solar 
Module Manufacturing Line, with a proposed phased integration of solar cell manufacturing 
facility. The project is being implemented under a Public-Private Partnership (PPP) model, 
enabling capital-efficient growth, technology infusion, and risk optimization. In parallel, CEL is 
developing a Tier-III Green Data Centre, diversifying into digital infrastructure and building stable, 
technology-led revenue streams. In the Defence vertical, while business in certain legacy precision 
Phase Control Modules (PCM) has moderated, CEL is strategically repositioning itself. The 
company is exploring collaboration and tie-ups with Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) for TR 
Module manufacturing, aligned with globally emerging radar and advanced defence electronics 
requirements. CEL is also actively pursuing export orders for Radomes (radar domes for missiles) 
and strengthening its participation in global supply chains. Further, focused efforts are underway 
for indigenization and development of critical import substitutes, including Isolators, Circulators, 
HFDF antennas, and specialized RF components, thereby reducing import dependence and 
enhancing self-reliance in critical high end electronics. In addition, CEL continues to contribute 
towards the modernization of airport infrastructure across the country. The Company is already 
supplying Drishti System—India’s indigenous Runway Visual Range (RVR) transmissometer, to 
various customers and is further diversifying in the area by partnering with CSIR labs for acquiring 
the technology from CSIR- NAL, for production and supply of Automated Weather Observing 
Systems (AWOS) and other precision aviation instruments. These initiatives enhance aviation 
safety, promote indigenous technology adoption, and reduce reliance on imported aviation 
meteorological equipment. In Railways, CEL is expanding its RDSO-approved safety and signaling 
product portfolio. In the Smart Systems domain, the company continues to scale up Smart 
Classroom solutions aligned with NEP 2020. To ensure structural agility and innovation-led 
growth, CEL has also proposed formation of a Section 8 company for collaborative R&D and 
technology partnerships. Additionally, in consultation with DSIR and the Government, a proposal 
for listing on the stock exchange is under consideration to enhance transparency, unlock 
shareholder value, and provide disciplined access to capital markets. In summary, CEL’s post-
profitability strategy is centred on technological relevance, PPP-led expansion, defence electronics 
repositioning, export orientation, import substitution, and governance-driven growth. The objective 

12 
 
is to consolidate & leverage its Mini-Ratna Status and evolve into a diversified, innovation-driven 
technology enterprise of sustained profitability and strategic national importance. 
3.9 The Committee learnt through the replies to the detailed questionnaire sent to the 
Department that while CEL demanded Rs. 57.50 crore in B.E. 2026-27, it was allocated a meager 
Rs. 3.03 crores.  The Committee further learnt that CEL needs a bare minimum increase of 100% to 
sustain its key projects.  
3.10 The Committee observes that the revival of this loss-making Public Sector 
Undertaking stands as a remarkable success story, transforming its trajectory to emerge as a 
growth-oriented entity operating in strategic sectors. Having acknowledged this 
commendable turnaround, the Committee notes with concern that the allocation of a meager 
₹3.03 crore for a PSU which has just been revived, is currently in its critical growth phase, 
and functions in areas of national importance, appears insufficient and warrants more 
proactive support from the Government. The Committee therefore strongly recommends that 
CEL should prepare a comprehensive future roadmap outlining its strategic direction along 
with its corresponding financial requirements, and should subsequently approach the 
Government to secure a significant increase in its budget allocation to sustain its growth 
momentum. In this context, the Committee also feels that the decision to pursue listing in the 
capital markets is a step in the right direction, as this will provide CEL with the much-needed 
visibility, enhance operational transparency, and grant the Company access to market capital 
for funding its future expansion plans. The Committee recommends for early listing along 
with focus on contemplating other business opportunities to make CEL a truly flagship 
electronics PSU. 
3.11 The Committee further recommends that CEL should establish a more structured and 
intensive collaborative framework with CEERI, Pilani, given that both institutions operate 
under the same administrative department. In this regard, the Committee suggests that CEL 
should explore the feasibility and strategic potential of entering into a formal agreement that 
grants it an exclusive, pre-emptive right of first refusal for all technologies, innovations, and 
developments emerging from CEERI, Pilani. Such an arrangement would ensure that 
indigenous technologies developed at significant public expense are first offered to a 
departmental PSU for commercialization, thereby creating a streamlined pipeline from 
laboratory research to market-ready products. This exclusive access would not only provide 
CEL with a competitive advantage in accessing cutting-edge technologies but also accelerate 
the commercial deployment of CEERI's innovations, fostering greater synergy and self-
reliance within the departmental ecosystem. 
 
3.12 The Committee also observes that CEL is already making significant strides in the 

13 
 
aviation sector by supplying the Runway Visual Range (RVR) transmissometer and 
partnering with CSIR-NAL for the production and supply of Automated Weather Observing 
Systems (AWOS) along with other precision aviation instruments. The Committee commends 
CEL's strategic decision to enter the field of avionics, recognizing it as a forward-looking 
move that aligns with the national objective of technological self-reliance. In light of this, the 
Committee recommends that CEL should proactively identify and compile a comprehensive 
list of avionics-related products and systems for which the country is still dependent on 
foreign sources. Thereafter, the Company should dedicate its research, development, and 
production capabilities towards achieving complete self-reliance in these identified products, 
thereby reducing import dependencies, strengthening indigenous defence and aviation 
infrastructure, and positioning itself as a key player in the domestic avionics manufacturing 
landscape. 
 
3.13 The Committee further observes that with the Railways in the country embarking on a 
significant capital expenditure growth trajectory, there exists a substantial opportunity for 
CEL to align its capabilities with the evolving needs of the sector. In this context, the 
Committee recommends that CEL should work closely with the Research Designs and 
Standards Organisation (RDSO) and the Railway Board to collaboratively develop newer 
technologies that address both current and future requirements of the Indian Railways. The 
Committee notes that the Ministry of Railways has recently announced a new Rail Tech 
policy specifically aimed at engaging innovators and start-ups to drive technological 
innovation in the sector, and CEL should proactively endeavour to take advantage of this 
policy framework. The Company can explore development opportunities in a wide range of 
emerging innovation areas, including AI-powered elephant intrusion detection systems 
(EIDS) to reduce wildlife collisions on tracks, AI-based fire detection systems for passenger 
coaches, drone-based broken rail detection mechanisms, advanced rail stress monitoring 
systems, sensor-based load calculation devices for parcel vans (VPUs), integration of solar 
panels on railway coaches to enhance energy efficiency, AI-enabled coach cleaning 
monitoring systems for improved maintenance, obstruction detection technologies for safe 
operations in low-visibility and foggy conditions, AI-driven pension management and dispute 
resolution systems for employee welfare, newer and advanced versions of the Kavach 4.0 
train collision avoidance system, and machine vision inspection systems for automated track 
and coach monitoring. By leveraging the Rail Tech policy and collaborating with RDSO, CEL 
can position itself as a key technology partner to the Railways, driving innovation while 
simultaneously expanding its product portfolio and revenue streams in this high-growth 
sector. 

14 
 
 
3.14 The Committee also observes that with the recent rapid rise in Artificial Intelligence 
and its associated technologies, the prices of consumer memory and storage chips particularly 
RAM and SSDs have increased significantly due to the monopolistic control exercised by a 
few global companies dominating this critical segment. Furthermore, the Committee notes 
that while India has emerged as a leading global assembler of mobile devices, a substantial 
percentage of electronic components and parts are still imported. In this context, the 
Committee recommends that CEL should view this as a strategic opportunity and should 
proactively develop capabilities in the consumer electronics sector. By leveraging its existing 
technical expertise and institutional experience, CEL can contribute to import substitution 
efforts by indigenous manufacturing of electronic components, thereby reducing dependency 
on foreign suppliers, strengthening the domestic electronics ecosystem, and positioning itself 
to capture a share of the growing consumer electronics market. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – 4 
COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (CSIR) 
 
 Established in 1942, CSIR operates as an autonomous body under the administrative 
framework of the Department. It is widely recognized for its pioneering Research and Development 
(R&D) capabilities spanning a broad spectrum of scientific and technological domains. As a 
modern R&D institution with a extensive pan-India presence, CSIR's infrastructure comprises a 
formidable network of 37 national laboratories, 39 outreach centres, one Innovation Complex, and 
three specialized units, reflecting its extensive engagement in scientific advancement. 
4.2 In its background submitted before the Committee, the Department informed that CSIR did 
not operate any Central Sector Scheme or Centrally Sponsored Scheme from FY 2017-18 onwards. 
As per the rationalization process of Central Government expenditure, the budgetary outlay for 
autonomous bodies was allocated under "Other Central Sector Expenditure – Autonomous Bodies" 
to meet establishment and administrative expenses as well as project requirements. Under this 
arrangement, CSIR received financial support for its two Non-Central Sector Schemes, namely the 
National Laboratories Scheme and the Capacity Building and Human Resource Development 
Scheme, until FY 2025-26. The National Laboratories Scheme encompasses the entire gamut of 
CSIR's R&D and S&T activities, while the Capacity Building and Human Resource Development 
Scheme focuses on national S&T human resource development and various awards.  
4.3 However, as per the recent direction of the Ministry of Finance, DSIR and CSIR have been 
directed to review the categorization of their schemes and shift them from "Other Central 
Expenditure" to "Central Sector Scheme," with only establishment expenditure to remain under the 
former category. In order to implement this directive, CSIR is in the process of re-categorizing its 
National Laboratories Scheme and Capacity Building and Human Resource Development Scheme 
as Central Sector Schemes, and the EFC documents for the same are under active preparation. 
4.4 Under the re-categorized National Laboratories Scheme, three major sub-schemes are being 
conceptualized and proposed to continue supporting CSIR's R&D, S&T, and related intellectual 
activities. The first sub-scheme, CSIR Research for Industrial, Scientific and Societal Progress 
(CRISP), focuses on delivering innovation-driven solutions through developed intellectual property 
that targets specific industrial and national requirements while fostering essential skill sets. Its 
objectives include enhancing quality of life through innovative S&T initiatives, advancing 
technology readiness from TRL 3 to 8, reducing trade deficits through technology development, 
preparing human resources by kindling interest in industrial R&D among school children, 
supporting ecosystem development through robust IP protection systems and access to scientific 
resources, and promoting global collaboration. CRISP will provide financial support to priority 
programmes across CSIR laboratories under components including Core R&D and Mission 
Projects, Outreach and Skill Development Initiatives like CSIR Jigyasa, Modernisation of Scientific 
Infrastructure under MASS (Modernization of Assets for Sustainable Science), Human Resource 
Training programmes, Intellectual Property Management and Commercialisation Support, and 
Access to Scientific Knowledge Resources including the One Nation One Subscription initiative, 
apart from supporting global mobility of scientists. 

16 
 
4.5 The second sub-scheme, Unit & Laboratory In-house Projects (ULIP), aims to provide S&T 
outputs directly relating to individual CSIR unit or laboratory mandates while catering to specific 
stakeholders and society. ULIP seeks to nurture early-stage, exploratory, and mandate-specific 
research, strengthen in-house R&D capabilities, and support innovative ideas through objectives 
such as developing sector-specific innovations, establishing a solid fundamental research 
foundation for future needs, building skilled human resources for translating innovation from lab to 
market, strengthening the CSIR intellectual property base, bridging industry gaps through 
technology transfer, and aligning research initiatives with national missions and sustainable 
development goals. 
4.6 The third sub-scheme, Science Coordination, Outreach, Utilization and Technology 
Transfer (SCOUT), facilitates the global translation of research into industry applications through 
IT-enabled technology demonstration and dissemination, appropriate planning, human resource 
development, and management. Its major objectives include aligning research under CRISP and 
ULIP to avoid duplication and create complementary strengths around thematic priorities, 
facilitating interdisciplinary teams and shared infrastructure aligned with Government of India 
priorities, building and deepening international partnerships, attracting diverse talent to strengthen 
the CSIR S&T base, capturing and turning CSIR IP into strategic national assets while enabling 
commercialization through licensing and spin-offs, coordinating technology demonstration and 
advising on business enhancement for multi-laboratory projects, sparking curiosity and 
foundational scientific understanding among school students through outreach, widening the future 
STEM talent pipeline, and utilizing modern ICT practices to improve S&T planning and 
monitoring. 
4.7 In response to a query regarding major thrust areas of the Department, the Committee was 
informed that for the years 2025–26 and 2026–27, CSIR has identified nine thematic areas for 
advancements in research, scientific excellence, fostering technological innovation for responding 
effectively to national and societal needs with a focused, comprehensive and outcome-driven 
approach. These thematic areas are as follows:-  
1. Aerospace, Electronics, Instrumentation & Strategic Sectors 
2. Civil Infrastructure & Engineering 
3. Earth, Oceanography & Water 
4. Ecology, Environment & Sustainability 
5. Mining, Minerals, Metals & Materials 
6. Chemicals (including Leather) and Petrochemicals 
7. Energy (Conventional and Non-Conventional) and Energy Devices 
8. Agriculture, Nutrition & Biotechnology 
9. Healthcare 
 
4.8 Within these themes, CSIR is pursuing several priority research and development initiatives. 
In aerospace and strategic sectors, efforts focus on indigenous aviation platforms such as the 
SARAS 19-seater aircraft, RTA-70, the new-generation HANSA aircraft and UAV/MAV systems. 
Defence-related R&D includes fibre Bragg grating sensors, aerospace biofuels, advanced wind 
tunnel facilities and structural health monitoring technologies. Electronics and instrumentation 
research covers IP core development, MEMS accelerometers, gyrotrons, high-power klystrons, 
metrology, cybersecurity, IoT and advanced sensing systems. Materials research targets 
thermoplastic composites, carbon fibres, stealth coatings, and thermal barrier coatings while 
mechanical systems development encompasses aircraft subsystems, actuators, valves, and 
gearboxes. In civil infrastructure and engineering, CSIR emphasizes affordable housing, heritage 

17 
 
conservation, disaster mitigation, smart cities, and sustainable construction technologies. Robotics 
and automation initiatives support agriculture, Industry 4.0 applications and green manufacturing. 
Agriculture and biotechnology research prioritizes crop productivity, mitigation of malnutrition, 
synthetic biology, second-generation bioethanol and reduction of post-harvest losses. Chemical and 
petrochemical research promotes import substitution, specialty chemicals, and green chemistry 
approaches. Energy research spans conventional and renewable energy systems, energy storage, 
and advanced energy devices. Environmental initiatives focus on water purification, waste 
management, emission reduction, and sustainability, while Earth sciences research addresses 
natural resources, geohazards, and biodiversity. The 4M domain (Mining, Minerals, Metals, and 
Materials) focuses on advanced manufacturing, surface engineering, critical minerals, and waste-to-
wealth technologies. Healthcare research spans genomics, regenerative medicine, infectious 
diseases, and the development of drugs and medical devices. 
4.9 In addition to the above programmes/activities under the thematic areas, CSIR informed that 
it will continue to implement/initiate several mission-mode projects during FY 2026-27 which are 
as follows:- 
1. Design and development of a Deep Sea Autonomous Underwater Vehicle (DAUV) 
2. Comprehensive analysis of niche-specific microbial dysbiosis in human diseases 
3. Assessment and mitigation of geohazards in the Himalayan region 
4. Advancing Cellular Therapies for Cancers and Inflammatory Disorders (ACT-CID) 
5. APIs and Key Starting Materials for Affordable Health 2.0 
6. CLAIM – CSIR League for AI-based Industrial Manifestation 
7. Hydrogen Mission – Phase II 
8. CSIR initiative on solar panels, electronic appliances, and air-conditioner waste to 
 sustainable materials (C-SEAS) 
9. Smart Village Mission 
10. Developing Expertise and Leveraging Terahertz Technology Advancements in CSIR 
 (DELTA) 
11. Specialty Chemicals for Industrial Applications 
12. Phytopharmaceuticals Mission – Phase III 
13. Mapping and tapping of critical metals and minerals 
14. Battery-to-Battery: recovery of metal values from spent lithium-ion batteries and 
 fabrication of new lithium-ion batteries 
15. A comprehensive approach to address Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) 
16. Indigenous manufacturing of machines and assembly lines 
17. Sustainable Packaging Solutions 
18. CSIR Innovation Centre for Next Generation Energy Storage Solutions (Lithium-Ion 
 Battery) – Version 2.0 
19. CSIR-Aroma Mission – Phase IV 
20. CSIR-Floriculture Mission – Phase III 
 
4.8 The Committee sought details of the budget demanded and budget allocated to CSIR for FY 
2026-27. The Committee was informed that CSIR demanded Rs. 7953.90 crore but was allocated 
only Rs. 6710.61, thus resulting in a massive shortfall of Rs. 1243.29.  
4.9 The Committee then enquired about the absolute bare minimum increase needed in the 
budgetary allocations of the CSIR for the year 2026-27 to sustain its key programmes with the 
desired outcomes and efficiency. The Committee was informed that an additional allocation of 
₹600 crore under the National Laboratories Scheme is essential to sustain and accelerate India’s 
indigenous R&D ecosystem and deliver deployable technologies in priority sectors. The detailed 
justification submitted by CSIR to the Committee is as below:- 
I.  Meeting National Strategic Commitments 

18 
 
 
CSIR is implementing national-level mission projects across health, energy, 
environment, aerospace, defence, and advanced manufacturing. These include precision 
medicine initiatives such as Phenome India, geo-hazard mitigation in the North-East 
and Himalayas, commercialization of Sustainable Aviation Fuel, critical minerals 
recovery, Green Hydrogen R&D, and indigenous API development for affordable 
healthcare. Mission-mode research is also being initiated in sunrise areas such as 
animal-free organoid models for biomedical R&D, White Hydrogen exploration, Next-
generation nuclear and solid-state battery technologies, Sub-surface geo-technical 
mapping in critical zones and EMI/EMC testing facilities as per CISPR and IS/IEC 
standards. These initiatives directly support national security, energy independence, 
healthcare resilience, climate commitments, and industrial competitiveness. Without 
enhanced funding, these strategic missions will face delays, impacting India’s 
technological self-reliance. 
 
II. Supporting Viksit Bharat-2047 and SDG Targets 
 
CSIR’s programmes contribute to inclusive growth and sustainability through initiatives 
such as: 
• Aroma, Floriculture and Seaweed Missions for rural livelihood enhancement 
• Smart Village initiatives and region-specific projects in the North-East  
• Waste-to-Wealth, Sustainable Packaging, Climate-Resilient Buildings, and Carbon 
Capture missions 
• Precision agriculture, genome-editing for crop improvement and SHRI ANNA 
nutrition initiatives 
 
These projects address Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) related to health, clean 
energy, industry innovation, climate action and poverty reduction, while empowering 
women, rural communities and MSMEs. 
 
III. Strengthening National Security and Strategic Capabilities 
 
CSIR is undertaking critical programmes such as Regional Transport Aircraft 
technologies, Deep-sea Autonomous Underwater Vehicles, Loitering Munitions, 
Advanced Materials missions, AI-enabled Defence Technologies, and Indigenous 
Laboratory Instrumentation. These strategic projects are essential for reducing import 
dependence and enhancing defence preparedness, and require sustained multi-lab 
collaboration and modern infrastructure. 
 
IV.  Bridging the Lab-to-Market Gap 
 
CSIR is executing vital and crucial research projects under its FIRST, NCP/FBR and 
FTT/FTC categories aimed at translating scientific research into commercial 
technologies. These projects are executed with TRL-linked milestones, defined outputs 
and outcomes, and measurable deliverables such as patents, deployable technologies, 
industry partnerships and societal impact. Additional funding will support: 
• Pilot plants for translational industries 
• Benchmark testing and certification facilities 

19 
 
• Scale-up of industrial enzymes, specialty chemicals and advanced materials 
• Indigenous manufacturing systems and battery-to-battery recycling technologies 
 
Such investments are crucial for industrial competitiveness, startup ecosystem growth 
and export-oriented innovation. 
 
V. Modernization of Ageing Infrastructure 
 
A significant portion of CSIR’s laboratory infrastructure is decades old. Modernization 
of high-end R&D facilities, instrumentation and testing centres is urgently required to 
maintain global competitiveness and support advanced research domains such as AI, 
quantum-ready materials, advanced batteries, hydrogen technologies and aerospace 
systems. 
 
VI. Scientific Social Responsibility 
 
Additional funding will also strengthen skill development and outreach programmes 
such as CSIR Jigyasa and capacity building for emerging interdisciplinary research. 
Investing in human resource skilling and scientific temperament inculcation will ensure 
sustained innovation capacity for the country. 
VII. Fiscal Prudence and Outcome-Oriented Planning 
The proposed additional ₹600 crore is modest compared to the scale of national 
missions and will catalyse multi-lab collaborative projects, leverage industry 
participation and generate significant economic and strategic returns. 
 
4.10 In response to a query raised by the Committee during its meeting on 8th September 2025, 
the Department stated that CSIR needs an additional ₹1500 crore to achieve its ambitions. In this 
context, the Committee observed that the Department's allocation for FY 2026-27 stands at 
₹6710.61 crore, which is only a marginal increase over the previous year. The Committee has 
subsequently sought an explanation for this allocation trend and requested details on the measures 
the Department intends to take to enhance its budgetary outlay. 
4.11 The Department attributed the reduction in budgetary allocation to unprecedented 
circumstances affecting national revenue. While this may impact the pace of certain R&D projects, 
CSIR will optimize internal resources and pursue collaborative funding with other Ministries to 
sustain priority research initiatives. Additionally, as directed by the Department of Expenditure, the 
National Laboratories Scheme—currently covering all CSIR R&D and establishment costs under 
"Other Central Expenditure"—is being recategorized as a Central Sector Scheme, excluding 
establishment expenditures, in the upcoming 16th Finance Commission Cycle. CSIR believes this 
restructuring will enable more focused and structured funding for its core R&D activities and any 
additional requirements under the new scheme will be submitted to the Ministry of Finance for 
consideration. 
4.12 The Committee acknowledges the critical role of CSIR in driving India’s indigenous 
R&D ecosystem and notes the comprehensive justification for an enhanced budgetary 

20 
 
allocation of ₹600 crore under the National Laboratories Scheme for the fiscal year 2026-27. 
After examining the submissions, the Committee observes that the requested funds are not 
merely for routine expansion but are directed toward high-priority national missions, 
strategic defence capabilities, and translational research aimed at bridging the lab-to-market 
gap. The Committee, therefore, recommends the following: 
1. Given the direct linkage of CSIR’s projects to national security (e.g., loitering 
munitions, AUVs), energy independence (Green Hydrogen, critical minerals), and 
healthcare resilience (indigenous API development), the Department should accord 
the highest priority to meeting this funding demand. Any delay or shortfall in 
allocation could impede India’s technological self-reliance and strategic 
preparedness. 
2. The Committee endorses the initiatives aligned with the Viksit Bharat vision and 
SDG targets, particularly those focused on rural livelihood enhancement (Aroma, 
Floriculture, Seaweed Missions), climate action, and waste-to-wealth generation. 
The Committee recommends that these societal missions be sustained with adequate 
funding to ensure inclusive growth and grassroot-level impact. 
3. The Committee expresses concern over the ageing infrastructure in CSIR 
laboratories. It strongly recommends that a portion of the additional funds be 
specifically earmarked for the modernization of high-end R&D facilities, pilot 
plants, and testing centres. This is essential to maintain global competitiveness in 
emerging fields such as AI, quantum materials, and advanced batteries. 
4. Recognizing the importance of bridging the lab-to-market gap, the Committee 
supports the funding for TRL-linked projects under the FIRST, NCP/FBR, and 
FTT/FTC categories. The recommended outlay should facilitate the establishment of 
pilot plants and scale-up facilities to boost industrial partnerships, support the 
startup ecosystem, and promote export-oriented innovation. 
4.13 The Committee also takes note of the recategorization of the National Laboratories 
Scheme as a Central Sector Scheme, with exclusion of establishment expenditures, in the 
upcoming 16th Finance Commission Cycle. While this restructuring is expected to enable 
more focused and structured funding for core R&D activities, the Committee recommends 
that CSIR should appropriately formulate and submit any additional requirements under the 
new scheme to the Ministry of Finance at the earliest for favourable consideration. The 
Committee also urges the Department of Expenditure to ensure that this transition does not 
disrupt ongoing research programmes and those adequate safeguards are put in place to 
maintain continuity of funding for critical national missions. 

21 
 
4.14 The Committee strongly recommends that DSIR and the Department of Expenditure 
should consider the request for an additional ₹600 crore allocation to CSIR favourably. The 
Committee believes that this enhanced outlay is a fiscally prudent investment that will 
catalyse multi-laboratory collaboration, leverage industry participation, and yield substantial 
economic and strategic returns for the nation. The Committee expects a firm commitment 
from the Government to ensure that these mission-mode projects are sustained without 
interruption and that CSIR is enabled to deliver on its mandate of building a self-reliant and 
technologically advanced India. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
CHAPTER – 5 
A LOOK INTO THE ROLE OF KEY CSIR LABORATORIES 
 
 CSIR has a robust network of 37 national laboratories. The list of national laboratories of 
CSIR along with their respective areas of research is given in the below table:- 
S. No. Name of the Institute/Laboratory Key Research Area 
1 CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular 
Biology 
(CSIR-CCMB), Hyderabad 
Developmental Biology; Cell Biology; Molecular 
Biology; Disease Biology; Genomics and Genetics; 
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology; 
Biotechnology; Structural Biology 
2 CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute (CSIR-
CDRI), Lucknow 
Medicinal Chemistry; Pharmacology and Toxicology; 
Natural Products and Traditional Medicine; Molecular 
Biology and Biotechnology; Drug Delivery and 
Formulation; Infectious Diseases; Cancer Biology and 
Oncology 
3 CSIR-Central Food Technological Research 
Institute (CSIR-CFTRI), Mysore 
Food Processing and Preservation; Food Chemistry and 
Biochemistry; Food Microbiology and Safety; Food 
Biotechnology and Fermentation; Sensory Science and 
Consumer Research; Nutrition and Functional Foods; 
Food Engineering and Packaging 
4 CSIR-Central Institute of Medicinal and 
Aromatic Plants (CSIR-CIMAP), Lucknow 
Plant Breeding and Cultivation; Phytochemistry and 
Natural Product Chemistry; Pharmacology and 
Therapeutic Evaluation; Herbal Formulations and 
Product Development; Biotechnology and Molecular 
Biology; Conservation and Sustainable Utilization; 
Agrochemicals and Plant Protection 
5 CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative 
Biology 
(CSIR-IGIB), Delhi 
Human  Genetics and Disease Genomics; Functional    
Genomics and Transcriptomics; Proteomics and 
Metabolomics; Microbial Genomics and Microbiome 
Studies; Systems   Biology   and Computational Biology; 
Biomedical Informatics   and   Data Science; Precision       
Medicine and Personalized Healthcare 
6 CSIR-Institute of Himalayan Bioresource 
Technology 
(CSIR-IHBT), Palampur 
Medicinal and Aromatic Plants; Plant Biotechnology and 
Molecular Biology; Natural Product Chemistry; 
Agroforestry and Soil Conservation; Microbial 
Biotechnology; High-Altitude Crop Cultivation; 
Bioreource Valorization and Entrepreneurship 
7 CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology 
(CSIR-IICB), Kolkata 
Drug  Discovery  and Development; Immunology and 
Host-Pathogen; Structural Biology and Biophysics 
Interactions; Molecular Genetics and Genomics; 
Neurobiology and Neurodegenerative Diseases; Cell      
Biology and Signaling Pathways; Cancer   Biology   and 
Oncology 
8 CSIR-Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine 
(CSIR-IIIM), Jammu 
Natural Products Chemistry; Medicinal Chemistry and 
Drug Discovery; Pharmacology and Drug Development; 
Bioinformatics and Computational Drug Design; Natural 
Product-Based Therapeutics; Phytopharmaceuticals and 
Herbal Medicines; Biotechnology and Bioprocessing 
9 CSIR-Institute of Microbial Technology (CSIR-
IMTECH), Chandigarh 
Microbial Genetics and Molecular Biology; Genomics 
and Functional Genomics; Enzyme Technology and 
Biocatalysis; Fermentation Technology and 
Bioprocessing; Bioinformatics and Computational 
Biology; Microbial Biotechnology for Healthcare and 
Agriculture; Antimicrobial Resistance and Infectious 
Diseases 
10 CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research 
(CSIR-IITR), Lucknow 
Molecular Toxicology; Environmental Toxicology; 
Computational Toxicology; Toxicogenomics and 
Biomarkers; Risk Assessment and Regulatory 
Toxicology; Alternative Methods to Animal Testing 

23 
 
11 CSIR-National Botanical Research Institute 
(CSIR-NBRI), Lucknow 
Plant Taxonomy and Systematics; Plant Physiology and 
Biochemistry; Plant Biotechnology and Genetic 
Engineering; Medicinal Plants and Phytochemistry; Plant 
Ecology and Biodiversity Conservation; 
Phytoremediation and Environmental Biotechnology; 
Plant-Microbe Interactions and Symbiosis 
12 CSIR-Central Leather Research Institute (CSIR-
CLRI), Chennai 
Leather Processing Technology; Biotechnology and 
Enzyme Applications; Leather Product Engineering and 
Design; Leather Quality Assessment and Testing; Leather 
Waste Utilization and Pollution Control; Leather 
Conservation and Restoration 
13 CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research 
Institute 
(CSIR-CECRI), Karaikudi 
Energy Storage and Conversion; Functional Materials; 
Electrochemical Sensors and Biosensors; 
Electrochemical 
Synthesis; Environmental Electrochemistry; Corrosion 
Science and Engineering; Advanced Analytical 
Techniques 
14 CSIR-Central Salt & Marine
 Chemicals Research Institute CSIR-
CSMCRI), Bhavnagar 
Salt Chemistry and Technology; Marine Biotechnology; 
Desalination and Water Treatment; Marine Natural 
Products Chemistry; Environmental Science and 
Engineering; Sustainable Coastal Development; 
Renewable Energy from Marine Resources 
15 CSIR-Central Institute of Mining and Fuel 
Research (CSIR-CIMFR), Dhanbad 
Coal and Mineral Exploration; Mine Planning and 
Design; Rock Mechanics and Ground Control; Coal 
Beneficiation and Utilization; Environmental Impact 
Assessment; Mine Safety and Disaster Management; 
Clean Coal Technologies 
16 CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology 
(CSIR-IICT), Hyderabad 
Organic Chemistry; Catalysis and Chemical Engineering; 
Drug Discovery and Development; Materials Chemistry; 
Process Intensification and Green Chemistry; 
Agrochemicals and Crop Protection; Renewable Energy 
and Sustainable Technologies 
17 CSIR-Indian Institute of Petroleum 
(CSIR-IIP), Dehradun 
Refining Technology; Petrochemicals and Downstream 
Processing; Biofuels and Alternative Energy; Catalysis 
and 
Catalyst Development; Environmental Protection and 
Pollution Control; Process Optimization and Modeling; 
Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology 
18 CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory (CSIR-
NCL), Pune 
Organic Synthesis and Catalysis; Materials Chemistry 
and Nanotechnology; Polymer Science and Engineering; 
Catalytic Processes and Chemical Engineering; 
Sustainable Chemistry and Green Technologies; 
Analytical Chemistry and Spectroscopy; Drug Discovery 
and Medicinal Chemistry 
19 CSIR-North-East Institute of Science & 
Technology 
(CSIR-NEIST), Jorhat 
Natural Product Chemistry and Medicinal Chemistry; 
Organic Synthesis and Catalysis; Materials Science and 
Nanotechnology; Biotechnology and Bioengineering; 
Renewable Energy and Sustainable Development; 
Environmental Science and Pollution Control; 
Traditional Knowledge and Ethnopharmacology 
20 CSIR-National Institute of Interdisciplinary 
Science & Technology (CSIR-NIIST), 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Materials Science and Engineering; Nanotechnology and 
Nanomaterials; Chemical Sciences and catalysis; 
Biotechnology and Biomedical Sciences; Environmental 
Science and Engineering; Process Engineering and 
Optimization; Energy and Sustainability 
21 CSIR-Advanced Materials and Processes 
Research Institute (CSIR-AMPRI), Bhopal 
Material Synthesis and Characterization; Advanced 
Manufacturing Techniques; Biomaterials; Functional 
Coatings; Environmental Remediation Technologies; 
Nanomaterials; Composite Materials 
22 CSIR-Central Building Research Institute 
(CSIR-CBRI), Roorkee 
Building Materials Research; Structural Engineering; 
Housing and Urban Development Energy-Efficient 
Buildings; Disaster Mitigation and Management; 
Heritage Conservation 
23 CSIR-Central Glass and Ceramic Research Glass Technology; Ceramic Engineering; Biomaterials; 

24 
 
Institute (CSIR-CGCRI), Kolkata Nanomaterials; Advanced Functional Materials; 
Environmental Materials; Heritage Conservation 
24 CSIR-Central Mechanical Engineering Research 
Institute (CSIR-CMERI), Durgapur 
Renewable Energy Technologies; Advanced 
Manufacturing Technologies; Robotics and Automation; 
Sustainable Infrastructure Development; Agricultural 
Engineering; Automotive Engineering; Materials Science 
and Engineering 
25 CSIR-Central Road Research Institute (CSIR-
CRRI), New Delhi 
Bridge Engineering and Structures; Geotechnical 
Engineering; Flexible Pavements; Pavement Evaluation; 
Rigid Pavements; Traffic Engineering and Safety; 
Transport Planning and Environment 
 
26 CSIR-Institute of Minerals and Materials 
Technology 
(CSIR-IMMT), Bhubaneshwar 
Mineral Processing and Beneficiation; Extractive 
Metallurgy and Metal Extraction; Materials Synthesis 
and Characterization; Surface Engineering and Corrosion 
Protection; Biomaterials and Biomedical Applications; 
Nanomaterials and Nanotechnology; Environmental 
Remediation and Waste Utilization 
27 CSIR-National Aerospace Laboratories (CSIR-
NAL), Bengaluru 
Aircraft Design and Development; Propulsion Systems; 
Aerodynamics and Flight Dynamics; Aerospace 
Materials 
and Structures; Avionics and Control Systems; 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs); Space Technology 
28 CSIR-National Environmental Engineering 
Research Institute (CSIR-NEERI), Nagpur 
Air Pollution Control and Management; Water Resource 
Management and Treatment; Solid and Hazardous Waste 
Management; Environmental Biotechnology and 
Microbial Remediation; Environmental Impact 
Assessment and Risk Management; Climate Change and 
Adaptation; Environmental Policy and Regulation 
29 CSIR-National Metallurgical Laboratory (CSIR-
NML), Jamshedpur 
Alloy Development and Characterization; Materials 
Processing and Manufacturing Technologies; Extractive 
Metallurgy and Mineral Processing; Surface Engineering 
and Coatings; Welding and Joining Technologies; 
Materials Characterization and Testing; Advanced 
Materials For Specific Applications 
30 CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre 
(CSIR-SERC), Chennai 
Earthquake Engineering; Wind Engineering; Bridge 
Engineering; Structural Heath Monitoring; Advanced 
Materials and Construction Technologies; Performance-
Based Design 
31 CSIR-Central Electronics Engineering Research 
Institute (CSIR-CEERI), Pilani 
Semiconductor Devices and Materials; Integrated 
Circuits 
(ICs) and System-on-Chip (SoC) Design; Microwave and 
RF Engineering; Optoelectronics and Photonics; Sensor 
Technologies; Signal Processing and Data Analytics; 
Power Electronics and Renewable Energy Systems 
32 CSIR-Central Scientific Instruments 
Organization (CSIR-CSIO), Chandigarh 
Optics and Photonics; Electronic Instrumentation; 
Biomedical Instrumentation; Sensors and Transducers; 
Imaging and Vision Systems; Instrumentation for Space 
and Defense 
33 CSIR-National Geophysical Research Institute 
(CSIR-NGRI), Hyderabad 
Seismology and Earthquake Studies; Geodesy and 
Geodetic Surveying; Geomagnetism and 
Paleomagnetism; Gravity and Magnetic Studies; Remote 
Sensing and 
GIS Applications; Groundwater Exploration and 
Management; Geological And Tectonic Studies 
34 CSIR-National Institute of Oceanography 
(CSIR-NIO), Goa 
Physical Oceanography; Marine Geology and 
Geophysics; Marine Biology and ecology; Chemical 
Oceanography; Marine Technology and Instrumentation; 
Coastal Zone 
Management and Marine Resources; Marine 
Biotechnology and Blue Biotechnology 
35 CSIR-National Physical Laboratory  
(CSIR-NPL), New Delhi 
Metrology and Measurement Standards; Quantum 
Science and Technology; Nanotechnology and 
Nanomaterials; Materials Science and characterization; 

25 
 
Environmental 
Monitoring and Analysis; Instrumentation and Sensing 
Technologies 
36 CSIR-National Institute of Science 
Communication and Policy Research (NIScPR), 
New Delhi 
Science Communication Strategies; Science Journalism 
and Media Studies; Science Policy Analysis; Science 
Education and Outreach; Science Diplomacy and 
International Collaboration; Science and Society Studies 
37 Fourth Paradigm Institute (CSIR-4PI), 
Bengaluru 
Big Data Research & Supercomputing; Al & Data 
Science 
Infrastructure; R&D in cyber security and privacy; 
Development of domain agnostic data science tools & 
techniques; Interdisciplinary Data Research; Data 
research in Earth System, Agriculture, Health, 
Engineering;  Synthesis of Modelling, Measurements, 
and Data Analytics 
5.2 The Committee sought the Department's views on whether CSIR laboratories working in the 
domain of biological sciences—such as CCMB, Hyderabad; IGIB, Delhi; and CDRI, Lucknow—
should be placed under the administrative purview of the Department of Biotechnology (DBT) 
instead of CSIR, in order to achieve better synergy and more focused oversight in the biological 
research sector.  
5.3 The Department replied that the Biological Science laboratories of the Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research (CSIR), such as CSIR–Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology 
(CCMB), Hyderabad; CSIR–Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology (IGIB), Delhi; and 
CSIR–Central Drug Research Institute (CDRI), Lucknow, have been established as 
interdisciplinary institutions with mandates that are intrinsically aligned with CSIR’s national 
mission of scientific, translational and industrial research. CSIR–Central Drug Research Institute 
(CDRI), Lucknow, for example, has been established with the mandate of “discovery and 
development of therapeutics for nationally important diseases with global impact, understanding 
fundamental disease biology and training future drug researchers.” This mandate is aligned with 
CSIR’s vision of enhancing the quality of life of citizens through innovative science and 
technology, globally competitive R&D, sustainable solutions and capacity building to fulfill the 
objective of Atmanirbhar Bharat. In comparison, the vision of the Department of Biotechnology 
(DBT) is focused on advancing biotechnology research and capacity building within the life 
sciences domain. The vision, mission and mandate of CSIR biological laboratories extend beyond 
the specific ambit of DBT. Over the years, CSIR-CDRI has evolved into a unique national 
institution with integrated capabilities spanning the entire drug discovery and development value 
chain, from concept to clinical trials. Its multidisciplinary teams comprising expertise in life 
sciences, chemical sciences, medical sciences and pharmaceutical sciences jointly undertake 
biomedical and medicinal chemistry-driven drug discovery programmes. The institute’s product 
portfolio includes synthetic novel chemical entities, peptides, natural products, 
Phytopharmaceuticals, formulations, diagnostics and process technologies. As part of the CSIR 
ecosystem, these biological research laboratories benefit from seamless networking with other 
CSIR laboratories such as IIIM, IICB, IICT, NCL and IMTECH enabling end-to-end 
interdisciplinary and translational research. In the contemporary research landscape, biological 
challenges such as precision medicine, infectious diseases, antimicrobial resistance, gene and cell 
therapy, synthetic biology and AI-driven diagnostics inherently require convergence of biology 
with chemistry, physics, engineering sciences, materials science, computational modelling and data 
science. CSIR is uniquely structured to enable such convergence through its nationwide, mission-
oriented multidisciplinary laboratory network. Biological laboratories within CSIR function as part 
of a larger innovation ecosystem that facilitates seamless progression from fundamental discovery 
to translational research, industrial scale-up and technology deployment. While DBT plays a 
critical and complementary role in strengthening India’s biotechnology ecosystem, relocating 
CSIR’s biological laboratories under DBT would risk fragmenting the established cross-
disciplinary linkages that are central to CSIR’s translational and industrial R&D model. Several 

26 
 
national priorities, including affordable therapeutics, indigenous diagnostics, industrial 
biotechnology and bioengineering solutions, depend on close coupling between biology, chemistry 
and engineering pipelines, which is a defining strength of the CSIR framework. Further, CSIR 
biological laboratories actively collaborate with DBT and other scientific departments based on 
national priorities without requiring administrative restructuring. During the last three years, these 
biological laboratories have received extramural research funding from multiple Government of 
India agencies including DBT and thus, demonstrating effective inter-agency synergy through 
collaborative mechanisms. In fact, DBT has already led major programmes at some of these 
institutes, with substantial funding and guidance, including large initiatives like Genome India and 
InTGS. Transferring established CSIR laboratories to another administrative department would 
involve complex restructuring of human resource policies, financial and pension systems, 
procurement mechanisms, ongoing projects, intellectual property management and academic 
programmes under the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR). Such large-scale 
institutional transfers may disrupt ongoing research, translational outputs and national mission 
programmes, and could adversely impact scientific productivity. In view of the above, the 
suggestion to place CSIR biological science laboratories under the administrative domain of the 
Department of Biotechnology may not be considered appropriate. Retaining laboratories such as 
CSIR-CCMB, CSIR-IGIB and CSIR-CDRI within the CSIR framework best serves scientific, 
strategic and national innovation objectives. Strengthening inter-agency collaboration among CSIR, 
DBT, ICMR and other scientific departments through joint programmes, mission-mode initiatives 
and coordinated funding mechanisms remains a more effective and efficient approach to achieving 
synergy than administrative reorganisation. DBT can continue its strategic funding without 
disrupting existing collaborations. 
5.4 The Committee recommends that CSIR and DBT should formalize their collaborative 
mechanisms through structured frameworks such as Memoranda of Understanding, joint 
steering committees and coordinated research calls to ensure that the nation derives 
maximum benefit from the combined expertise of both the Departments.  
5.5 On similar lines, the Committee sought the Department's views on whether CSIR-NEERI, 
Nagpur, should be placed under the administrative domain of Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change (MoEFCC) to achieve better synergies, given that MoEFCC is one of the biggest 
clients of CSIR-NEERI. The Department replied that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change (MoEFCC) primarily functions as a policy-making and regulatory authority, 
whereas CSIR–National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (CSIR-NEERI), Nagpur, is 
a national research and technology development institution mandated to undertake scientific 
assessments, develop environmental engineering solutions, and provide independent technical 
advice. Placing a research institution under a regulatory Ministry may give rise to perceived or 
actual conflicts of interest and could compromise the independence, objectivity, and credibility of 
scientific assessments. Maintaining an institutional separation between regulatory authorities and 
scientific research organisations is therefore essential to safeguard scientific neutrality and public 
confidence in evidence-based decision-making. CSIR fully recognises MoEFCC as one of its major 
stakeholders and beneficiaries of CSIR-NEERI scientific and technical outputs. However, CSIR is 
of the considered view that CSIR-NEERI should continue to function as an autonomous national 
R&D organization under the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), Ministry of 
Science & Technology. The present arrangement enables CSIR-NEERI to provide independent, 
objective and science-based technical support not only to MoEFCC, but also to State Governments, 
regulatory agencies, industry, the judiciary and other stakeholders, without any conflict of interest. 
This institutional positioning enhances the credibility and acceptance of CSIR-NEERI’s 
assessments in policy formulation, regulatory processes, judicial proceedings and international 
engagements. At the same time, CSIR-NEERI maintains close and effective collaboration with 
MoEFCC through sustained technical assistance, mission-mode programmes, expert committees 

27 
 
and policy support, thereby achieving the required synergies while preserving institutional 
autonomy. Being part of CSIR allows CSIR-NEERI to leverage interdisciplinary expertise across 
CSIR’s national laboratory network in areas such as materials, chemicals, energy, biotechnology, 
data science and earth sciences. Under CSIR’s thematic approach on Ecology, Environment, Earth 
& Ocean Sciences and Water, CSIR-NEERI functions as a key anchor laboratory, ensuring 
integrated and long-term research on air quality, climate change, waste management, water and 
wastewater, natural resources and environmental policy. Any administrative separation from CSIR 
could weaken these interdisciplinary linkages and fragment national environmental R&D efforts. 
CSIR-NEERI also benefits from CSIR’s autonomous research environment and its strong academic 
ecosystem through the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), supporting Ph.D. 
programmes in science and engineering and contributing to sustained talent development. 
International best practices similarly emphasize a clear functional distinction between regulatory 
bodies and independent scientific institutions. Accordingly, CSIR is of the view that the existing 
arrangement—where CSIR-NEERI functions under CSIR while providing comprehensive scientific 
and technical support to MoEFCC—offers an effective framework for achieving synergy, 
safeguarding scientific independence and advancing national objectives related to environmental 
protection, climate change mitigation and sustainable development. Strengthening institutional 
collaboration mechanisms is therefore considered preferable to altering administrative control. 
5.6 The Committee emphasizes the need for strengthening institutional collaboration 
mechanisms between CSIR-NEERI and MoEFCC. The Committee recommends that both 
organizations should formalize their collaborative framework through structured 
mechanisms such as joint research programmes, regular consultation meetings, and 
coordinated approaches to addressing national environmental challenges. The Committee 
recommends that MoEFCC should leverage CSIR-NEERI's scientific expertise as its primary 
technical arm for environmental assessments and policy support, while CSIR should ensure 
that CSIR-NEERI maintains and enhances its interdisciplinary research capabilities and 
continues to provide independent, credible and objective scientific inputs to all the 
stakeholders.  
5.7 During its study visit to CSIR-NEERI, Nagpur in December 2025, the Committee enquired 
whether the current sanctioned strength of the Institute is enough to cater to the ever-growing 
demand in the field of sustainable and environment friendly solutions and if not, what is the 
optimum strength that the Institute must have to cater to these demands and what plans does the 
Institute take its sanctioned strength to this optimum level. The Institute replied that the present 
sanctioned strength of CSIR-NEERI, while adequate for its earlier mandate, is not fully aligned 
with the scale, complexity, and diversity of responsibilities currently emerging requirement to the 
Institute. Over recent years, CSIR-NEERI’s role has expanded significantly from pollution control 
and compliance support to include Net-Zero transition planning, clean air and water missions, 
circular economy, climate adaptation, environmental health, and sustained international 
engagement under multilateral environmental agreements.  This expansion has coincided with 
rising demand from Government bodies, industry, and Ministries for technical support, pilot 
projects, and implementation guidance, as well as additional responsibilities arising from 
international obligations and regional capacity-building roles. At the same time, natural attrition 
due to retirements and existing vacancies has reduced the Institute’s effective manpower base, 
while newer interdisciplinary skill requirements remain under-represented in the current staffing 
profile. Accordingly, the current sanctioned strength, though efficiently utilized, does not fully 
match present or anticipated future requirements of a mission-oriented national environmental 
institution. Based on benchmarking with comparable international environmental research 

28 
 
institutes, assessment of India’s national mission requirements and the need to function in a 
programme and mission mode manner, the following indicative optimum strength is proposed: 
 
Category Sanctioned 
Strength 
Current 
Strength 
Additional 
Strength 
Required 
Rationale 
Scientists 150 98 60 Mission-scale research, sectoral 
modelling, policy support, pilots 
Technical & 
Laboratory 
Staff 
176 63 60 Advanced analytics, field 
monitoring, pilot-scale operations 
Technology 
Transfer & 
Policy Interface 
Nil NIL 10 Scale-up, IP management, 
deployment, partnerships and 
policy interface 
Administrative 
& Support Staff 
156 92 30 For modernised administration 
Total 482 253 160  
 
This level of augmentation is modest yet adequate to support multiple national missions 
concurrently, maintain international competitiveness, and ensure continuity as senior personnel 
retire. This can be achieved in two phases as described below:- 
 
 Phase I (0–3 Years): The immediate objective is to arrest decline due to retirements and 
correct critical skill gaps. This phase will focus on fast-tracking recruitment against 
existing vacancies, targeted hiring in priority areas, expanded use of project-linked 
positions, and knowledge transfer from retiring experts. 
 Phase II (3–7 Years):  The second phase will support full-scale national mission 
delivery in Net Zero, Clean Air, Water Circularity, and Circular Economy, while 
strengthening technology translation and deployment. This will involve seeking 
sanctioned strength for the introduction of mission scientists and programme managers. 
 
CSIR-NEERI submitted that adequate and appropriately structured human resources are central to 
fulfilling its expanded national and international mandate. The proposed optimum strength and 
phased augmentation plan represent a measured and future-oriented investment in India’s 
environmental governance, Net-Zero transition, and sustainable economic growth. With augmented 
manpower, CSIR-NEERI will be well-positioned to function as a mission-ready national 
institution, delivering high-impact outcomes for the country and strengthening India’s leadership in 
environmental sustainability. 
 
5.8 The Committee recommends that the Department should consider the urgent need for 
augmenting the human resources of CSIR-NEERI to enable it to fulfill its expanded national 
and international mandate. The Committee endorses the proposed optimum strength of 642 
and recommends that the process of filling existing vacancies be expedited on priority. The 
Committee further recommends that the creation of new sanctioned positions, particularly in 
the scientific, technical, and technology transfer categories, be taken up with the concerned 
authorities at the earliest. The Committee emphasizes that adequate and appropriately 
structured human resources are central to CSIR-NEERI's ability to function as a mission-

29 
 
ready national institution, delivering high-impact outcomes for the country and strengthening 
India's leadership in environmental sustainability.  
5.9 Apart from request for increase in sanctioned strength of the Institute, CSIR-NEERI made 
the following submissions before the Committee during its study visit to the Institute:-  
 
1. Dedicated Budget Lines for National Environmental Missions: The Institute proposed 
creation of dedicated budgetary provisions for national environmental missions, including 
long-term environmental monitoring and data generation. Stable and predictable funding 
is essential for maintaining high-quality, continuous datasets on air, water, waste, 
emissions, and environmental health, which underpin evidence-based policymaking, 
regulatory confidence, and international reporting. Dedicated budget lines will enable a 
transition from short-term projects to sustained national missions with cumulative impact 
and accountability. 
 
2. Mission-Mode Funding and Governance Framework: Transition from fragmented, 
project-based funding to mission-mode programmes aligned with national priorities such 
as Net Zero, clean air, water security, and circular economy was emphasised. A mission-
mode governance framework with multi-year horizons, outcome-based evaluation, and 
inter-institutional coordination will enable integrated planning, efficient resource 
utilisation, and measurable national impact, consistent with global best practices. 
 
3. Formal Inclusion in National Environmental Frameworks and Flagship Missions: 
Formal institutional inclusion of CSIR-NEERI as a technical execution and integration 
partner within national environmental frameworks and flagship missions was requested. 
Such inclusion would ensure systematic embedding of scientific evidence, technological 
solutions, and implementation experience in programme design and execution, improving 
policy coherence and accelerating on-ground outcomes. 
 
4. Representation in International Environmental Delegations: Systematic inclusion of 
CSIR-NEERI experts in official Indian delegations to international environmental forums 
was proposed, given the Institute’s technical expertise and responsibilities under 
multilateral environmental agreements. This would strengthen India’s technical 
credibility, ensure continuity between domestic implementation and international 
commitments, and enhance India’s leadership in global environmental governance. 
 
5. Establishment of a National Environmental Data Repository: Anchoring a National 
Environmental Data Repository integrating air, water, waste, emissions, and related 
datasets at CSIR-NEERI was proposed. Such a repository would provide a trusted, 
science-based platform for regulatory decision-making, climate reporting, investment 
planning, and public accountability, leveraging CSIR-NEERI’s long-standing experience 
in environmental monitoring, standards, and data quality assurance. 
 
6. Strengthening Environmental Knowledge Diplomacy and Global South 
Cooperation: Positioning CSIR-NEERI as India’s scientific interface for Global South 
cooperation was highlighted as a strategic enabler. Through technology sharing, capacity 
building, joint research, and regional training programmes, CSIR-NEERI can support 
partner countries while enhancing India’s soft power and leadership in affordable and 
context-appropriate sustainability solutions. 
 
5.10 The Committee strongly endorses the creation of dedicated budget lines for national 
environmental missions, emphasizing that stable and predictable funding is essential for 

30 
 
maintaining high-quality, continuous datasets that underpin evidence-based policymaking 
and international reporting. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance should 
establish dedicated budgetary provisions for sustained environmental monitoring and 
mission-mode programmes, enabling a transition from short-term project-based funding to 
long-term national missions. 
5.11 The Committee recommends that DSIR, in consultation with MoEFCC and NITI 
Aayog, should develop a mission-mode governance framework with multi-year horizons and 
outcome-based evaluation for programmes aligned with national priorities such as Net Zero, 
clean air, water security, and circular economy. This will enable integrated planning and 
measurable national impact. 
5.12 The Committee supports the formal inclusion of CSIR-NEERI as a technical execution 
partner within national environmental frameworks and flagship missions. It recommends 
that MoEFCC and other concerned Ministries should formally engage CSIR-NEERI in the 
design and implementation of national environmental missions, leveraging its scientific 
expertise. 
5.13 The Committee finds merit in including CSIR-NEERI experts in official Indian 
delegations to international environmental forums. It recommends that the Ministry of 
External Affairs, in coordination with MoEFCC and DSIR, should evolve a mechanism for 
such inclusion to strengthen India's technical credibility and global leadership in 
environmental governance. 
5.14 The Committee strongly supports anchoring a National Environmental Data 
Repository at CSIR-NEERI, integrating air, water, waste, and emissions datasets. It 
recommends that MoEFCC, in collaboration with DSIR and CSIR-NEERI, take expeditious 
steps to establish this repository with adequate funding and technical support. 
5.15 The Committee appreciates the vision of positioning CSIR-NEERI as India's scientific 
interface for Global South cooperation in environmental sustainability. It recommends that 
MEA and DSIR should develop a comprehensive framework for leveraging the Institute's 
expertise in international development partnerships and Global South cooperation. 
5.16 The Committee also enquired about the role of the regional centres of the CSIR-NEERI and 
whether the Institute is planning to open more such centres in the future. The Committee also 
enquired whether the Institute can open such regional centres in different parts of the country to 
work on the local environmental issues of the region. The Institute replied that India’s 
environmental challenges are inherently diverse, region-specific, and context-dependent, shaped by 
variations in climate, geography, patterns of industrialisation and urbanisation, and local socio-
economic conditions. Recognising that centralised research alone cannot effectively address such 

31 
 
heterogeneity. CSIR-NEERI has established regional centres as decentralised extensions of its 
national expertise. These centres enable locally relevant, science-based solutions while remaining 
fully aligned with national priorities. The five regional centres and zonal laboratories of CSIR-
NEERI operate as field-level operational arms under a hub-and-spoke model, with the Nagpur 
Headquarters serving as the national hub. Located at Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, and 
Hyderabad, these centres translate national research capability into region-specific action by 
identifying and addressing local environmental challenges such as industrial pollution hotspots, 
urban air and water quality issues, waste management constraints, and impacts arising from mining, 
agriculture, and infrastructure development. Each centre functions with a defined regional mandate 
aligned to local environmental priorities, enabling scientific interventions that are practical, 
implementable, and responsive to ground realities. While this decentralised structure has 
significantly enhanced outreach, responsiveness, and stakeholder engagement, the centres currently 
serve very large geographic areas and operate under constraints of manpower and infrastructure. 
Consequently, their existing number and capacity are not fully commensurate with the growing and 
increasingly differentiated environmental demands across regions. A core function of CSIR-
NEERI’s regional centres is to support State Governments and local authorities, including State 
Pollution Control Boards and Urban Local Bodies, through technical assistance for environmental 
monitoring and compliance, preparation and implementation of action plans such as clean air 
programmes, river rejuvenation initiatives, and waste management strategies, as well as targeted 
capacity-building and training. The centres also serve as platforms for field research, pilot projects, 
and demonstration activities, enabling on-site validation of technologies developed by CSIR-
NEERI and providing feedback to strengthen laboratory research. Their proximity to stakeholders 
facilitates faster deployment of solutions and timely response to environmental emergencies and 
regulatory needs, thereby strengthening sub-national environmental governance and enhancing the 
effectiveness of national programmes. In this context, CSIR-NEERI supports a calibrated, need-
based expansion of its regional presence, emphasising that expansion should be phased, 
strategically targeted, and adequately resourced to ensure effectiveness. Priority for expansion lies 
in ecologically sensitive regions, high industrial concentration zones, rapidly urbanising areas 
facing acute air, water, and waste challenges, and climate-vulnerable regions such as drought- and 
flood-prone areas. The proposed expansion of CSIR-NEERI’s regional centres will continue to 
follow a hub-and-spoke model, with the Nagpur Headquarters providing national coordination, 
advanced research, standards development, and international engagement, while regional centres 
focus on applied research, monitoring, pilot projects, and stakeholder interaction. Expansion will 
adopt a modular, mission-driven approach, beginning with focused units and scaling up based on 
demonstrated demand and outcomes, with centres co-located wherever feasible with State 
institutions, academic partners, or industrial clusters to optimise resources and foster collaboration. 
The Institute has emphasised that such expansion is contingent upon appropriate enabling support, 
including augmentation of sanctioned manpower strength, dedicated capital and operational 
funding, delegated administrative and financial powers at the regional level, alignment with 
national missions such as Net Zero, Clean Air, Water, and Circular Economy. 
 
Present Status (Operational Centres): CSIR-NEERI currently operates five regional 
centres/zonal laboratories, in addition to its Headquarters at Nagpur. Each centre has a defined 
regional mandate tailored to the environmental priorities of its respective geographic area. 
 
Proposed Expansion (Need-Based and Phased): Subject to policy and resource support, CSIR-
NEERI proposes phased expansion of regional centres over the next decade in the following 
priority areas: 
 
Region / Focus Area Indicative Location Rationale 
Himalayan & 
Mountain Ecology North-West / North-East Himalayas Fragile ecosystems, 
climate sensitivity 
Coastal & Marine 
Environment 
East & West Coasts/Andaman & 
Nicobar/Lakshadweep 
Coastal pollution, climate 
resilience 

32 
 
High Industrial 
Clusters Western & Eastern Industrial Corridors Industrial emissions, 
waste, and compliance 
Climate-Vulnerable 
Regions Arid & Flood-Prone Zones Adaptation and resilience 
planning 
 
The regional centres of CSIR-NEERI constitute a critical institutional mechanism for translating 
national environmental science into local action. Strategic, phased, and well-resourced 
strengthening and expansion of these centres will significantly enhance India’s capacity to address 
region-specific environmental challenges, support national sustainability missions, and improve 
environmental and public health outcomes. CSIR-NEERI submitted that, with appropriate policy 
backing, the regional centres can evolve into a robust nationwide network supporting 
environmental governance, technology deployment, and sustainable development across the 
country. 
 
 
5.17 The Committee observes that CSIR-NEERI's five regional centres serve vast 
geographic areas under significant manpower and infrastructure constraints, limiting their 
effectiveness in supporting State Governments, Pollution Control Boards, and Urban Local 
Bodies. The Committee endorses the Institute's proposal for a calibrated, need-based 
expansion of its regional presence, emphasizing that expansion must be phased, strategically 
targeted, and adequately resourced. Priority should be given to ecologically sensitive regions, 
high industrial concentration zones, rapidly urbanizing areas, and climate-vulnerable zones. 
The Committee recommends that expansion should follow the hub-and-spoke model, with the 
Nagpur Headquarters focusing on national coordination and advanced research, while 
regional centres undertake applied research, monitoring, and stakeholder engagement. A 
modular, mission-driven approach should be adopted, with centres co-located wherever 
feasible with State institutions or academic partners to optimize resources. The Committee 
emphasizes that such expansion requires enabling support, including augmented manpower, 
dedicated funding, delegated financial powers at regional level, and alignment with national 
missions. With appropriate policy backing and resources, CSIR-NEERI's regional centres 
can evolve into a robust nationwide network supporting environmental governance and 
sustainable development. 
5.18 The Committee enquired with the Department regarding the future roadmap of CEERI, 
Pilani to make India a global hub for R&D and manufacturing in semiconductors and electronics. 
The Committee was informed that CSIR-CEERI has a vision and mandate to advance R&D in 
Electronics Engineering and to deploy technologies in support of national priorities. The Lab 
focuses on the development of Strategic, Mission-mode Electronic technologies spanning devices, 
systems, and indigenous manufacturing-oriented solutions. Aligned with national initiatives for 
technological self-reliance and the development of cutting-edge capabilities in Electronics, CSIR-
CEERI undertakes applied multidisciplinary research, system integration, and technology 
translation to address critical needs across societal and strategic areas, including healthcare, energy, 
space, defence, etc. We aim to enable the indigenization, standardization, and scalable deployment 
of Electronic technologies, contributing directly to India’s Electronics Ecosystem and long-term 

33 
 
strategic capacity, through active engagement with the Government, Industry, and Academia, and 
establish CSIR-CEERI as “Hub for Next Generation Electronic Devices and Systems for Strategic 
and Societal Applications”. The Department further informed that the following technologies are 
ready for transfer to Industries/Foundries:- 
 
 LED Chip with Red, Green, Blue LED Devices (InGaN, GaN-based) 
 Sensors: Accelerometer, Temperature, Pressure, Flexible Piezo-resistive Strain Sensor, 
MEMS Magnetometer, Ion-Sensitive Field-Effect Transistor, Acoustic Sensor for Launch 
Vehicles, Thick-film sensor electrodes, CNT-based sensors 
 Semiconductor Devices: Tunable Film Bulk Acoustic Resonator, Shadow Mask/Stencil 
Lithography Technology, SiC Schottky Diodes, Radio Frequency MEMS (SPST, SPDT, 
SP4T, Switch Matrix, Phase shifters), GaAs Hall elements, Planar, optical Waveguide 
components, GaN-based HEMT 
 
The Committee was also informed that CSIR-CEERI has a legacy Fab that needs to be upgraded to 
realize the vision of making India a global hub for R&D and manufacturing in Semiconductors and 
electronics. The lab has proposed the following strategy to achieve this: 
 Electronics System Design and Manufacturing (ESDM) Technologies Roadmap 
 Comprehensive Technology Roadmap proposed under the CSIR Aerospace, 
Electronics, Instrumentation & Strategic Sector (AEISS) Theme 
 Focus on semiconductors, strategic electronics, sensors, and advanced device 
technologies 
 Positioned to complement national semiconductor priorities under the India 
Semiconductor Mission 
 Rajasthan Government Partnership 
 Active collaboration with the Government of Rajasthan 
 Proposed to establish CSIR-CEERI as the Semiconductor Skill CoE 
 Assured support for: Land, Water, Uninterrupted power supply 
 Enabling Semiconductor Ecosystem through policy 
 ESDM Talent Development & Capacity Building (target to create 10,000+ trained 
professionals with upgraded facility) 
 Structured Skill Development Programs (SDPs) in semiconductor technologies 
 Continuing flagship Semiconductor High Impact Learning Program (SHILP)   
 Proposal for multi-level skilling architecture in ESDM:  
▪ Foundation-level semiconductor training 
▪ Advanced domain specialization tracks 
▪ Semiconductor Residency Programs (Research-Industry-Academia 
integrated model) like enhanced SHILP 
 Alignment with projected workforce requirements under ISM 
 ESDM Strength & Ecosystem Development 
 Leveraging core strengths in Electronic System Design & Manufacturing (ESDM) 
 Development of deep training pipelines across the device-to-system stack 
 
CSIR-CEERI will majorly focus on the following technologies to establish India’s ESDM 
leadership: 
 GaN & AlGaN power devices 
 MEMS & sensor sovereignty 
 UV-LED & Micro-LED manufacturing 
 Diamond-based high-temperature electronics 
 Strategic Electronics: Defence & Space-grade semiconductors 

34 
 
5.19 The Committee also enquired with the Department that  whether the Department has 
collaborated with other research bodies like SAMEER (Society for Applied Microwave Electronics 
Engineering and Research) under Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology to develop 
cutting edge technologies. The Department informed the Committee that CSIR vide its constituent 
research laboratory CSIR–Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute (CSIR-CEERI) and 
the Society for Applied Microwave Electronics Engineering & Research (SAMEER), an 
autonomous R&D laboratory under the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(MeitY), have entered into a strategic Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) to collaborate on the 
indigenous development of Vacuum Electronics devices and components. The partnership seeks to 
synergize the complementary strengths of both institutions to accelerate research, development, and 
deployment of critical high-power microwave technologies. The collaboration will focus on 
advanced devices including Pulsed and Continuous Wave (CW) Magnetrons, Pulsed and CW 
Multi-cavity Klystrons, High-Power Travelling Wave Tubes (TWT), Dispenser Cathodes for 
Diode-type Electron Guns, Thyratrons, and other microwave vacuum electronic devices. This 
initiative represents a significant step towards achieving self-reliance in strategic and high-
technology sectors under the vision of Atmanirbhar Bharat. Vacuum Electronics technology plays a 
vital role in applications such as Medical LINAC systems, high-power transceivers, radar systems, 
and advanced communication platforms, including 5G and emerging 6G technologies. CSIR-
CEERI’s expertise in microwave devices, including its involvement in mm-wave technologies 
under national 5G mission projects, complements SAMEER’s long-standing excellence in 
microwave engineering and applied electronics research. Both organizations aim to leverage their 
collective expertise, infrastructure, and research capabilities to build a comprehensive ecosystem 
for indigenous vacuum electronics development, reduce dependence on imports, and strengthen 
India’s technological sovereignty in critical electronic components. 
5.20 The Committee strongly recommends that the Government should provide the 
necessary policy backing, financial resources, and institutional support to CSIR-CEERI to 
enable it to fulfill its mandate of advancing India's semiconductor and electronics capabilities. 
The Committee also recommends that the upgradation of the fab facility, the expansion of 
skill development programmes, and the collaboration with SAMEER and other stakeholders 
be pursued expeditiously. 
5.21 The Committee enquired about the proactive and strategic role that CSIR-Central Food 
Technological Research Institute (CSIR-CFTRI), Mysuru, can play in addressing the widespread 
prevalence of food adulteration in India, particularly in light of perceived regulatory gaps in the 
enforcement mechanisms of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI). 
Specifically, the Committee sought to know whether CSIR-CFTRI can leverage its expertise in 
food science to develop a range of low-cost, affordable, and easy-to-use field testing kits that 
enable consumers and local food inspectors to detect common adulterants quickly. The Committee 
also asked how the Institute can effectively disseminate its knowledge and technological solutions 
to the masses, and what comprehensive strategy can be adopted to utilize various media 
platforms—including social media, traditional channels, and community engagement 
programmes—to empower citizens with the knowledge and tools to identify adulterated food. The 
goal, the Committee emphasized, is for CSIR-CFTRI to complement the regulatory system through 
grassroots innovation and public empowerment. 
5.22 The Department informed the Committee that CSIR-CFTRI has testing aid for oil 
adulteration, synthetic colours and adulterants of milk and water. It is in pipeline for development 
of iron detection that enables Fortified Rice Kernels (FRK) manufacturers to ensure quality. It also 
informed that CSIR-CFTRI organizes several workshops, seminars, awareness programmes etc. 
with wide participation of academia, industry, farmers, SHGs and general public.  In the past many 

35 
 
programs were conducted in association with FSSAI, rather, CSIR-CFTRI is an active partner for 
almost all the initiatives of FSSAI including the faculty of CSIR-CFTRI becomes panel members 
for policy making. In capacity building aspects, CSIR-CFTRI conducts 25-30 regular training 
programs every year encompassing all the major areas in Food Science and Technology and almost 
equal number of customized training programs sponsored by FPOs, Industries, and Academic 
Institutions etc.  The Institute also organized training programs for the benefit of staffs of FSSAI, 
Food Corporation of India (FCI), Agmark India etc.  These training programs are of short duration 
(3 to 15 days) comprising lectures and demonstrations. The demonstrations and practical classes are 
conducted in the state-of-the-art laboratories and pilot plants of CSIR-CFTRI, Mysuru. In addition, 
training programs under PM Formalization of Micro Food Processing Enterprises (PMFME) & 
ODOP related training programs are also being conducted time to time. Farmer-centric programs 
are also arranging as per requests from FPOs, farmer societies and Government Departments etc.  
Many programs are focused on food safety, hygiene, HACCP guidelines etc.; but all the training 
programs having at least one session on “Food safety standards and quality control”. The Institute 
also conducts Jigyasa programs- the student-scientists interactive programs, with active 
participation of school & college students along with teachers.  Demonstrations, quiz programs etc. 
arranged with focus on “Food Adulteration”. CSIR-CFTRI is part of FSS Digest magazine to create 
public awareness.  The Institute also publishes & distributes booklets on food safety, quality & 
nutrition parameters, food adulteration etc. 
5.23 The Committee drew attention to a systemic concern regarding the prevalence of inferior 
quality ingredients and comparatively relaxed regulatory standards in Indian food products, as 
opposed to the stricter norms prevalent in developed nations. Noting that the Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has established lower quality benchmarks in certain cases, 
the Committee sought to understand the proactive and multi-pronged role that CSIR-Central Food 
Technological Research Institute (CSIR-CFTRI), Mysuru, can play in addressing this issue. 
Specifically, the Committee enquired: First, whether CSIR-CFTRI can leverage its scientific 
expertise to establish and publish independent, higher-quality reference standards for common food 
products, and how these alternative benchmarks could serve as a voluntary gold standard for 
premium, health-conscious producers while also being used as a tool to advocate for upward 
revision of national regulations. Second, the Committee asked about the feasibility of CSIR-CFTRI 
developing a mobile application that enables consumers to identify subpar food products, and how 
such an app might function—for example, by allowing users to scan product barcodes to access 
independently verified quality ratings, flag ingredients of concern, or compare nutritional profiles 
against scientifically established benchmarks. The overarching goal, the Committee emphasized, 
would be to explore how CSIR-CFTRI can move beyond its traditional research role to become a 
catalyst for raising industry standards and creating a more discerning, quality-conscious consumer 
base in India. 
5.24 The Department replied that FSSAI recognized CSIR-CFTRI as a Referral Food Laboratory 
(RFL) and is authorized to analyze food samples sent by courts, ports, and FSSAI Designated 
Officers to provide authoritative, science-based opinions under the Food Safety and Standards Act 
(FSSA), 2006.  Also, FSSAI has recognized the Food Safety & Analytical Quality Control 
Laboratory (FS&AQCL) at CSIR-CFTRI as a National Reference Laboratory (NRL), specifically 
for testing Nutritional Information & Labelling. The high-quality reference standards play pivotal 
role for the analytical testing of food and food products. The quality control and quality assurance 
of the food products is often testing using advanced equipment. CSIR-CFTRI has set a benchmark 
of quality control materials for fortified rice and fortified oils. It is proactive in this area and in 
pipeline to demonstrate and disseminate the materials to FSSAI. CSIR-CFTRI also proposed for 
preparations of Certified Reference Materials (CRM) as the areas of importance as Vision-2030. 
The Department further informed that CSIR-CFTRI can explore development of mobile application 
with the use of Machine Learning techniques for the benefit of consumers to identify subpar food 

36 
 
products, nutritional intakes, calorie calculated food intakes etc. provided sufficient funding support 
from the Government.  
5.25 The Committee recommends that CSIR-CFTRI should leverage its scientific expertise 
to develop a comprehensive range of low-cost, affordable, and easy-to-use field testing kits 
that enable consumers and local food inspectors to detect common adulterants quickly. The 
Committee also recommends that the existing portfolio of testing aids for oil adulteration, 
synthetic colours, and adulterants in milk and water be expanded to cover a wider range of 
adulterants commonly found in Indian food products, and that these kits be made readily 
available to the general public. 
5.26 The Committee recommends that the awareness and capacity-building initiatives 
undertaken by CSIR-CFTRI be significantly scaled up and systematically integrated into a 
national mass awareness campaign on food adulteration. A comprehensive dissemination 
strategy should be developed utilizing all available media platforms—including social media, 
traditional media, and community engagement programmes to empower citizens with the 
knowledge and tools to identify adulterated food. The Committee also recommends that the 
Institute's publications, including booklets on food safety and adulteration be expanded and 
translated into regional languages for wider reach. 
5.27 The Committee recommends that CSIR-CFTRI should leverage its scientific expertise 
to publish independent, higher-quality reference standards for common food products. These 
alternative benchmarks should serve a dual purpose: first, as a voluntary gold standard for 
premium, health-conscious producers seeking to differentiate their products in the market, 
and second, as a scientific tool to advocate for gradual upward revision of national 
regulations. The Committee also recommends that the development of Certified Reference 
Materials under the Institute's Vision-2030 be accorded highest priority and that the Institute 
should proactively engage with FSSAI to demonstrate and disseminate these reference 
materials. 
5.28 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance and the Department of 
Scientific and Industrial Research should provide the necessary financial backing for the 
development of a mobile application to enable consumers to identify subpar food products. 
The proposed app should function by allowing users to scan product barcodes to access 
independently verified quality ratings, flag ingredients of concern and compare nutritional 
profiles against scientifically established benchmarks. 
 
 

37 
 
 
CHAPTER – 6 
FROM LAB TO MARKET: STRENGTHENING CSIR'S TECHNOLOGY 
TRANSFER MECHANISM 
 
 The Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) conducts cutting-edge, 
multidisciplinary research across diverse domains—including health, energy, defence, aerospace, 
food technology, and sustainable materials—to address national priorities and societal needs. The 
true impact of this research, however, is realized through its robust technology transfer mechanism, 
which serves as the critical bridge connecting laboratory breakthroughs to the marketplace and the 
end consumer. CSIR has strategically shifted from traditional R&D to an "R&D Innovation" model, 
where research is increasingly guided by market demand, ensuring that technologies are developed 
with translation, validation, and scalability in mind. This is achieved through active collaboration 
with industrial partners, start-ups, and entrepreneurs, who license and scale up CSIR-developed 
technologies for commercial deployment. Recent examples include the transfer of a high-protein, 
low-glycemic index fortified rice to Tata Consumer Products, an indigenous coffee foam 
technology, and advanced defence gloves, demonstrating the range of innovations moving from lab 
to market. To facilitate this, CSIR has established dedicated technology transfer hubs, partnered 
with the National Research Development Corporation (NRDC) for commercialization, and created 
a dynamic online portal showcasing over 1,200 ready-to-implement technologies for industry 
uptake. This institutionalized focus on technology transfer ensures that CSIR's scientific excellence 
translates into tangible economic growth, industrial competitiveness, and improved quality of life 
for citizens, thereby fulfilling its mandate as the "Innovation Engine of India"  
6.2 The Committee asked the Department regarding initiatives taken towards commercialization 
and revenue generation from its services, products, research capacities, technologies developed, etc. 
The Department informed that CSIR has taken significant initiatives to commercialize its 
technologies, services, and research outputs, thereby generating revenue.  Major avenues of 
revenue generation include: 
a) Technology Transfers: CSIR develops technologies and transfers them to industries 
for commercialization. This includes licensing agreements that provide industries access 
to CSIR's innovative solutions. 
b) Royalties: Revenue is generated through royalty payments from industries that adopt 
and utilize CSIR-developed technologies in their operations. 
c) Consultancy Services: CSIR offers expert consultancy services to industries in various 
domains, leveraging its advanced research capacities and knowledge base. 
d) Industry-sponsored Research Projects: Industries approach CSIR for research 
solutions tailored to their specific needs, often on a fully funded basis. 
 
6.3 The ECF (External Cash Flow) generated by CSIR is shown in the table below:- 
S. No. FY ECF 
(Rs. in lakhs) 
% w.r.t RE of CSIR- National 
Laboratories Scheme (NLS) 
1 2023-24 126287.26 
 
22.19% 
2 2024-25 116185.00 19.88% 

38 
 
3 2025-26 * 101877.00 20.46% 
 *till January, 2026 
6.4 The activities carried out under the scheme programmes of NRDC are for promotion of 
Innovation and as such no revenue is generated. However, the corporation generates its revenue 
under its commercial activities which are as follows: 
A. Technology Transfer: The technologies acquired by NRDC get transformed through value 
addition and are offered to industries for commercial exploitation. The technology transfer 
is facilitated by NRDC and the R&D organization to the industry for a consideration which 
forms the core revenue stream of NRDC.  
B. IP Consultancy: NRDC has the expertise and infrastructure to provide consultancy for the 
protection of intellectual properties originating from various sources. The services are 
provided to Pvt. Industry, R&D institutes as well as to individual inventors. With the 
knowledge and the experience in handling IP, NRDC conducts various IPR training 
programs to stake-holders.  
C. Consultancy Projects: With its inherent strength in handling technology transfer, 
managing IP, supporting start-ups, NRDC has undertaken several projects for providing 
support to various stake-holders. 
 
6.5 The revenue generated from all the commercial activities of NRDC is shown in the table 
below:- 
Year 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 
(31.12.2025) 
No. of Technologies 
Commercialized 
70 20 41 36 20 
Revenue earned from   
commercial activities  
(in Rs. Lakhs) 
1144.66 649.76 1412.38 1476.22 1740 
Average Revenue per 
technology 
commercialized 
(in Rs. Lakhs) 
16.35 32.49 34.45 41.01 87 
 
6.6 National Research Development Corporation provides comprehensive technology transfer 
services and acts as a catalyst for transforming innovative research into marketable industrial 
products.  During the years of its existence, the Corporation has developed strong links and has 
networked with various R&D organisations in the country for marketing of their technologies and 
providing IPR related services. The Corporation’s endeavour has resulted in transfer of 
technologies to about 5100 entrepreneurs in India and abroad and has filed more than 2100 patents. 
NRDC undertakes the translational activities necessary for commercialization of the technologies. 
The various steps taken by the Corporation for commercialization of the lab scale technologies are 
the following:  
• Signing of MOA between NRDC and Technology Supplier (Laboratory / University/R&D 
Organisation/ PSU/Individual Inventor) for Technology Assignment and 
Commercialisation.  
• Technology Evaluation of the list of technologies available with the Technology supplier. 
Technology Evaluation is carried out for determining a technology’s commercial potential 

39 
 
which requires thorough assessments of that technology. Some of the parameters on which 
the assessment is carried are: 
 
 IPR Status 
 Stage of development of the technology 
 Complexity involved in the Process (manufacturing) 
 Who would be the potential buyers of the technology 
 Existing technologies and products 
 Further work that needs to be taken-up like field trials, toxicity studies etc. 
 Plan for propagation of the technologies 
 Multiple licensing of technologies 
 Obsolescence of technology especially for fast changing sectors.  
 
6.7 In order to take the assigned technology to a commercialization scale the corporation carries 
out various value addition activities based on the nature of the technology like: 
 Carry out detailed Patent Search and filing of Patent and other IP’s, if required 
 Carries out Market Survey, Basic Engineering Design Package, Feasibility Reports 
 Provide Financial Support for Prototype Development / Field Trials / Product Testing 
 Give wide publicity on technologies available for commercialization through  
 Participation in Exhibitions 
 Advertisement in Newspapers/ journals 
 Hosting details on NRDC website 
 Sending preliminary technical notes on the technology through e-mails and letters to 
the target audience 
 Technology details are published in in-house magazine   
 Identifying credible entrepreneurs / industries  
 Licensing of the know-how to such industries and signing of License agreement against 
upfront charges (Premia) and royalty on ex-factory sales. 
 Demonstration of the technology by the technology developer. 
 Hand-holding of the Licensees for any technical or commercial issues they come across. 
 
6.8 The number of technologies licensed over the period is as below: 
Year 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 
(31.12.2025) 
No. of Technologies 
Commercialized 
70 20 41 36 20 
 
6.9 The Committee enquired whether the Department plans to establish a dedicated Marketing 
Wing to market its products and technologies in a better way. The Department replied that as part 
of its ongoing reforms, CSIR is actively strengthening its technology marketing and 
commercialization framework. It is contemplating the institutionalization of a dedicated technology 
marketing arm through its DSIR entities, such as the National Research Development Corporation 
(NRDC) and Central Electronics Limited (CEL) to enhance structured outreach, market linkage, 
and industry engagement for CSIR-developed technologies. At present, commercialization and 
marketing activities are undertaken both at the CSIR Headquarters and through its constituent 
laboratories. Each laboratory operates through dedicated Business Development Groups (BDGs), 
which facilitate industry interactions, licensing agreements, consultancy services, and technology 
transfer arrangements. CSIR has also entered into a MoU with NRDC to support systematic 

40 
 
marketing and commercialization of its knowledgebase and intellectual property portfolio. Under 
the proposed reform framework, a more integrated and coordinated model is being planned to 
strengthen market intelligence, branding, industry outreach, and faster deployment of technologies. 
These measures aim to ensure that CSIR’s research outputs are effectively translated into 
commercially viable products and services, thereby enhancing industrial competitiveness and 
societal impact. 
 
6.10 The Committee further enquired that whether the Department has any plans to take equity 
stake in the companies to which it transfers its technology, in order to achieve better revenue for its 
hard work. The Department replied that CSIR is exploring the legitimate option of Section 8 startup 
model for CSIR labs to allow for equity stakes.  
 
6.11 The Committee observes that the average revenue per technology commercialized by 
NRDC varies significantly and is generally low in absolute terms. To address this, the 
Committee recommends that the Department formulate a comprehensive Standard 
Operating Procedure (SOP) to govern the process of transferring technologies to its industrial 
partners. The Committee recommends developing a more sophisticated and flexible licensing 
framework that moves beyond standard upfront fees and royalties, incorporating milestone-
based payments that structure deals with payments linked to the licensee achieving specific 
commercial benchmarks, such as successful pilot production, first commercial sale, or 
reaching a sales target. Furthermore, the framework should involve strategic decision-
making regarding exclusive versus non-exclusive licensing, determining when to offer 
exclusive licenses for higher fees to attract major industry players and when to employ non-
exclusive licenses to ensure the wider dissemination of socially important technologies. 
6.12 The Committee also recommends that the Department should explore the idea of 
establishing more verticals under CEL under different categories like healthcare, aerospace, 
energy, ecology, etc. These PSUs would work in close collaboration with CSIR laboratories, 
not only commercializing indigenous technologies but also contributing to their further 
development. The profits generated by these enterprises would flow back to the Government 
in the form of dividends. Additionally, by ensuring competitive pricing, this would ultimately 
serve the national interest and benefit the broader public, besides developing other businesses 
by CEL as mandated by the Department of Public Enterprises. 
6.13 The Committee further recommends that the Department should establish a dedicated 
and centralized "Technology Marketing & Commercialization Wing" with its separate 
budget to serve as a single-window interface for industry, functioning proactively by 
providing market intelligence to identify industry needs and map them to existing CSIR 
technologies. This wing could also be responsible for strategic branding and outreach, 

41 
 
developing a strong CSIR brand through targeted global marketing campaigns, technology 
showcases, and industry-specific roadshows, moving beyond a reliance on passive online 
portals. Additionally, it could feature dedicated deal facilitation, employing professionals with 
business development and negotiation expertise to structure and close technology transfer 
agreements more efficiently. 
6.14 The Committee observes that the Department is exploring the option of Section 8 
startup model for CSIR labs to allow for equity stakes. The Committee opines that the 
Department is thinking in the right direction. The Committee recommends for early setting 
up of the proposed Section 8 Company so as to facilitate monetization of CSIR technologies at 
higher valuations. The Committee also recommends moving from exploration to a structured, 
time-bound implementation of this equity-based model. For breakthrough technologies with 
high commercial potential, CSIR should consider taking a strategic equity stake in spin-off 
ventures or licensing partners instead of, or in addition to, upfront licensing fees and 
royalties. This would align CSIR's long-term interests with the company's success, potentially 
yielding significantly higher returns that can be reinvested into future research. A clear 
policy framework with guidelines on equity percentage, exit strategies, and conflict of interest 
must be developed to enable this. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

42 
 
CHAPTER – 7 
HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 
 
 The Committee sought the category-wise details of sanctioned strength, in-position strength 
and vacancies in the Department. In response, the Department provided the following data:- 
 
Department of Scientific & Industrial Research (DSIR) 
Group Total 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Filled Vacant % of vacancies vis-
à-vis total 
sanctioned posts 
Scientific Posts 32 18 14 43.75 
Technical Posts 7 5 2 28.57 
Administrative Posts 73 51 22 30.13 
Total 112 74 38 33.92 
 
7.2 The Committee also sought details of the sanctioned strength, in-position strength and 
vacancies in CSIR.  In response, the Committee was informed that total sanctioned strength in 
CSIR laboratories is 15655 and out of these 7216 posts are filled up at present. In the scientific 
category, 3408 posts are filled against the sanctioned strength of 6050. 
7.3 The Committee observes with concern that so many posts are lying vacant in the 
Department and CSIR, at present. In various CSIR laboratories, 3408 scientific posts are 
filled against the total sanctioned strength of 6050. The Committee also notes that the grade 
of outstanding scientists is not properly staffed and only 8 posts out of total sanctioned 
strength of 23 have been filled. Similar situation has been observed in the grade of 
Distinguished Scientists also. In the light of this concerning situation, the Committee strongly 
recommends that the Department and CSIR undertake an expedited, time-bound 
recruitment drive to fill all the vacant posts on a priority basis, with special emphasis on 
scientific and technical grades as well as leadership roles, to ensure uninterrupted research 
activities, effective institutional management, and the fulfillment of CSIR’s mandate as the 
nation’s premier R&D organization. 
7.4 The Department further informed the Committee that CSIR has recently secured the revival 
of scientific positions that had earlier been deemed abolished due to non-filling within the 
prescribed time limits, as approved by the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. 
Pursuant to the revised sanctioned strength approved by DoE for all CSIR laboratories/institutes, 
the process of recruitment has already been initiated under the new Recruitment Rules (CSRAP 
Rules, 2025). This includes induction of scientists at both entry and lateral levels. CSIR plans to 
induct a significant number of scientists at the earliest to strengthen its scientific capabilities and 
enhance research productivity across its laboratories. 
 

43 
 
7.5 The Committee enquired regarding the CSIR Scientists Recruitment & Assessment 
Promotion (CSRAP) Rules 2025 effective from 01.01.2026 and how these Rules are better than the 
old one and how will they ensure a time-bound, transparent & more efficient system of recruitment 
of scientists in CSIR. The Department informed the Committee that the CSIR Scientists 
Recruitment & Assessment Promotion (CSRAP) Rules, 2025 have been notified and came into 
effect from 01 January 2026, replacing the nearly two-and-a-half-decades-old CSRAP Rules, 2001. 
The revised Rules have been introduced with the objective of attracting, recruiting, and retaining 
high-quality scientific talent in CSIR, while ensuring a time-bound, transparent, and efficient 
system of recruitment and career progression. Salient features of CSRAP Rules, 2025 include: 
 The Recruitment and Assessment Board (RAB) has been designated as the centralized 
recruitment agency for CSIR. 
 End-to-end recruitment of Scientists at all levels shall be conducted centrally by RAB, 
replacing the earlier decentralized, laboratory-wise process. 
 Re-introduction of Scientist-B level, creating a stronger entry-level pipeline and 
structured career progression. 
 Recruitment to Scientist-B posts will be carried out through a two-stage process: 
 Written Examination with 70% weightage 
 Interview with 30% weightage 
 Based on performance in the written examination, 3 to 12 candidates per post will be 
shortlisted for interview by the Selection Committee. 
 Recruitment to Scientist-C, D, E, and F levels will follow a structured two-stage 
process: 
 Shortlisting by a Screening Committee 
 Final selection through interview by a Selection Committee 
 Promotion of Scientists up to Scientist-F shall continue under the Flexible 
Complementing Scheme (FCS), ensuring merit-based progression. 
 All assessments and promotions shall be prospective, with the effective date being the 
date on which the Scientist assumes charge of the promoted grade. 
 A maximum of three chances will be available to a Scientist for assessment interviews 
at a given level. 
 Scientists who do not qualify within the prescribed attempts will be governed by 
Modified Assured Career Progression (MACP) as per Government of India 
instructions. 
 
7.6 The Department further informed the Committee that the CSRAP Rules, 2025 represent a 
significant improvement over the earlier framework. Centralized recruitment by RAB—on the lines 
of established practices in organisations such as DRDO and ISRO—introduces greater 
professionalism, uniformity, and objectivity in the selection process across all CSIR laboratories 
and institutes. The reintroduction of Scientist-B and the provision that nearly half of the sanctioned 
scientific strength is recruited through an All-India competitive written examination ensure a broad, 
merit-based talent pool. The clearly defined 70:30 weightage between written examination and 
interview enhances transparency and reduces subjectivity in selections. Further, issuance of 
consolidated advertisements at defined intervals provides predictability and clarity to aspiring 
researchers regarding recruitment cycles and career prospects in CSIR. This structured, centralized, 
and rule-based approach strengthens confidence among candidates, improves timeliness in 
recruitment, and supports long-term human resource planning in CSIR. Overall, CSRAP Rules, 
2025 are designed to modernize scientific recruitment and assessment in CSIR, making it more 
transparent, efficient, predictable, and aligned with national best practices in R&D organisations. 
 
7.7 The Committee appreciates that the Department has notified new recruitment rules, 
acknowledging this as a timely and crucial step towards addressing the persistent vacancy 
crisis in CSIR. The Committee views this as a positive development that, if implemented 

44 
 
effectively, will go a long way in filling the large number of vacancies across scientific and 
technical grades, strengthening research capacity, and positioning CSIR to meet the evolving 
challenges of science and technology in the years ahead. The Committee recommends that 
CSIR should fix a definitive timeline for completing the first round of recruitment under 
CSRAP Rules, 2025. Given that a large number of scientific and technical posts are vacant 
across CSIR laboratories, an urgent and time-bound recruitment drive is imperative 
particularly CBRI Roorkee, CIMFR Dhanbad, 4PI Bangalore, IGIB New Delhi, IIIM 
Jammu, IITR Lucknow, NBRI Lucknow, NCL Pune and NIScPR New Delhi — should be 
prioritized. The Recruitment and Assessment Board (RAB) should devise a special fast-track 
mechanism for these institutions. 
7.8 The Committee also recommends that CSIR/RAB should issue consolidated 
recruitment advertisements at fixed, pre-announced intervals — ideally twice a year — so 
that aspiring researchers can plan and apply without uncertainty. This will also prevent the 
recurrence of long gaps in recruitment that led to the current vacancy crisis. 
  

45 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE 
 
BUDGET ANALYSIS 
The Committee observes that under the Budget Head “Assistance to PSEs”, there is 
extremely low expenditure (38.7% of RE by January, 2026), indicating serious 
implementation challenges or lack of demand. The Committee recommends that a thorough 
review is needed to identify bottlenecks, and if the scheme is not viable, the Department 
should consider reallocating funds to more effective programs or revising the budget 
downward.  
       (Para 2.2)  
The Committee notes that the expenditure under the Budget head “Industrial 
Research & Development” is also below the expected pace (71.11%). While the BE for FY 
2026-27 is reduced as compared to RE 2025-26, it remains above the projected actual. The 
Committee recommends that the Department should strengthen monitoring and expedite 
project approvals to improve utilization. 
       (Para 2.3)  
The Committee further notes that the BE for 2026-27 for several schemes appears 
optimistic given the current year's actuals. For instance, Establishment Expenditure (₹16.79 
crore) is higher than the projected actual of ~₹14.66 crore. The Committee recommends that 
future budgetary allocation should be based on realistic assessments of expenditure patterns, 
considering the first 10 months' data, to avoid persistent underspending. The Department 
should use the current year's actuals to set more accurate targets, especially for schemes with 
consistent shortfalls. 
       (Para 2.4)  
 
The Committee observes the abysmally low share of funds used for research as 
compared to salary, pensions and other expenditure. This is significantly lower as compared 
to globally reputed R&D organisations. The Committee recommends that the Department 
should come up with a comprehensive five year roadmap to improve this situation with 
specific tangible outcomes. 
                             (Para 2.10)  
CENTRAL ELECTRONICS LIMITED (CEL) 
The Committee observes that the revival of this loss-making Public Sector 
Undertaking stands as a remarkable success story, transforming its trajectory to emerge as a 
growth-oriented entity operating in strategic sectors. Having acknowledged this 
commendable turnaround, the Committee notes with concern that the allocation of a meager 
₹3.03 crore for a PSU which has just been revived, is currently in its critical growth phase, 
and functions in areas of national importance, appears insufficient and warrants more 
proactive support from the Government. The Committee therefore strongly recommends that 
CEL should prepare a comprehensive future roadmap outlining its strategic direction along 
with its corresponding financial requirements, and should subsequently approach the 
Government to secure a significant increase in its budget allocation to sustain its growth 
momentum. In this context, the Committee also feels that the decision to pursue listing in the 
capital markets is a step in the right direction, as this will provide CEL with the much-needed 
visibility, enhance operational transparency, and grant the Company access to market capital 

46 
 
for funding its future expansion plans. The Committee recommends for early listing along 
with focus on contemplating other business opportunities to make CEL a truly flagship 
electronics PSU. 
                 (Para 3.10)  
The Committee further recommends that CEL should establish a more structured and 
intensive collaborative framework with CEERI, Pilani, given that both institutions operate under the 
same administrative department. In this regard, the Committee suggests that CEL should explore the 
feasibility and strategic potential of entering into a formal agreement that grants it an exclusive, pre-
emptive right of first refusal for all technologies, innovations, and developments emerging from 
CEERI, Pilani. Such an arrangement would ensure that indigenous technologies developed at 
significant public expense are first offered to a departmental PSU for commercialization, thereby 
creating a streamlined pipeline from laboratory research to market-ready products. This exclusive 
access would not only provide CEL with a competitive advantage in accessing cutting-edge 
technologies but also accelerate the commercial deployment of CEERI's innovations, fostering greater 
synergy and self-reliance within the departmental ecosystem. 
 
                                (Para 3.11)  
 
3.12 The Committee also observes that CEL is already making significant strides in the aviation 
sector by supplying the Runway Visual Range (RVR) transmissometer and partnering with CSIR-
NAL for the production and supply of Automated Weather Observing Systems (AWOS) along with 
other precision aviation instruments. The Committee commends CEL's strategic decision to enter the 
field of avionics, recognizing it as a forward-looking move that aligns with the national objective of 
technological self-reliance. In light of this, the Committee recommends that CEL should proactively 
identify and compile a comprehensive list of avionics-related products and systems for which the 
country is still dependent on foreign sources. Thereafter, the Company should dedicate its research, 
development, and production capabilities towards achieving complete self-reliance in these identified 
products, thereby reducing import dependencies, strengthening indigenous defence and aviation 
infrastructure, and positioning itself as a key player in the domestic avionics manufacturing 
landscape. 
                                                                       (Para 3.12)  
    
3.13 The Committee further observes that with the Railways in the country embarking on a 
significant capital expenditure growth trajectory, there exists a substantial opportunity for CEL to 
align its capabilities with the evolving needs of the sector. In this context, the Committee recommends 
that CEL should work closely with the Research Designs and Standards Organisation (RDSO) and the 
Railway Board to collaboratively develop newer technologies that address both current and future 
requirements of the Indian Railways. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Railways has recently 
announced a new Rail Tech policy specifically aimed at engaging innovators and start-ups to drive 
technological innovation in the sector, and CEL should proactively endeavour to take advantage of 
this policy framework. The Company can explore development opportunities in a wide range of 
emerging innovation areas, including AI-powered elephant intrusion detection systems (EIDS) to 
reduce wildlife collisions on tracks, AI-based fire detection systems for passenger coaches, drone-
based broken rail detection mechanisms, advanced rail stress monitoring systems, sensor-based load 
calculation devices for parcel vans (VPUs), integration of solar panels on railway coaches to enhance 
energy efficiency, AI-enabled coach cleaning monitoring systems for improved maintenance, 
obstruction detection technologies for safe operations in low-visibility and foggy conditions, AI-driven 
pension management and dispute resolution systems for employee welfare, newer and advanced 
versions of the Kavach 4.0 train collision avoidance system, and machine vision inspection systems for 
automated track and coach monitoring. By leveraging the Rail Tech policy and collaborating with 
RDSO, CEL can position itself as a key technology partner to the Railways, driving innovation while 
simultaneously expanding its product portfolio and revenue streams in this high-growth sector. 
                           (Para 3.13)  
 
The Committee also observes that with the recent rapid rise in Artificial Intelligence and its 
associated technologies, the prices of consumer memory and storage chips particularly RAM and 

47 
 
SSDs have increased significantly due to the monopolistic control exercised by a few global companies 
dominating this critical segment. Furthermore, the Committee notes that while India has emerged as a 
leading global assembler of mobile devices, a substantial percentage of electronic components and 
parts are still imported. In this context, the Committee recommends that CEL should view this as a 
strategic opportunity and should proactively develop capabilities in the consumer electronics sector. 
By leveraging its existing technical expertise and institutional experience, CEL can contribute to 
import substitution efforts by indigenous manufacturing of electronic components, thereby reducing 
dependency on foreign suppliers, strengthening the domestic electronics ecosystem, and positioning 
itself to capture a share of the growing consumer electronics market. 
                                                                                                           
                 (Para 3.14)  
COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (CSIR) 
The Committee acknowledges the critical role of CSIR in driving India’s indigenous 
R&D ecosystem and notes the comprehensive justification for an enhanced budgetary 
allocation of ₹600 crore under the National Laboratories Scheme for the fiscal year 2026-27. 
After examining the submissions, the Committee observes that the requested funds are not 
merely for routine expansion but are directed toward high-priority national missions, 
strategic defence capabilities, and translational research aimed at bridging the lab-to-market 
gap. The Committee, therefore, recommends the following: 
5. Given the direct linkage of CSIR’s projects to national security (e.g., loitering 
munitions, AUVs), energy independence (Green Hydrogen, critical minerals), and 
healthcare resilience (indigenous API development), the Department should accord 
the highest priority to meeting this funding demand. Any delay or shortfall in 
allocation could impede India’s technological self-reliance and strategic 
preparedness. 
6. The Committee endorses the initiatives aligned with the Viksit Bharat vision and 
SDG targets, particularly those focused on rural livelihood enhancement (Aroma, 
Floriculture, Seaweed Missions), climate action, and waste-to-wealth generation. 
The Committee recommends that these societal missions be sustained with adequate 
funding to ensure inclusive growth and grassroot-level impact. 
7. The Committee expresses concern over the ageing infrastructure in CSIR 
laboratories. It strongly recommends that a portion of the additional funds be 
specifically earmarked for the modernization of high-end R&D facilities, pilot 
plants, and testing centres. This is essential to maintain global competitiveness in 
emerging fields such as AI, quantum materials, and advanced batteries. 
8. Recognizing the importance of bridging the lab-to-market gap, the Committee 
supports the funding for TRL-linked projects under the FIRST, NCP/FBR, and 
FTT/FTC categories. The recommended outlay should facilitate the establishment of 
pilot plants and scale-up facilities to boost industrial partnerships, support the 
startup ecosystem, and promote export-oriented innovation. 
                 (Para 4.12)  
The Committee also takes note of the recategorization of the National Laboratories 
Scheme as a Central Sector Scheme, with exclusion of establishment expenditures, in the 
upcoming 16th Finance Commission Cycle. While this restructuring is expected to enable 
more focused and structured funding for core R&D activities, the Committee recommends 
that CSIR should appropriately formulate and submit any additional requirements under the 
new scheme to the Ministry of Finance at the earliest for favourable consideration. The 
Committee also urges the Department of Expenditure to ensure that this transition does not 
disrupt ongoing research programmes and those adequate safeguards are put in place to 
maintain continuity of funding for critical national missions. 
     (Para 4.13)  

48 
 
4.12 The Committee strongly recommends that DSIR and the Department of Expenditure 
should consider the request for an additional ₹600 crore allocation to CSIR favourably. The 
Committee believes that this enhanced outlay is a fiscally prudent investment that will 
catalyse multi-laboratory collaboration, leverage industry participation, and yield substantial 
economic and strategic returns for the nation. The Committee expects a firm commitment 
from the Government to ensure that these mission-mode projects are sustained without 
interruption and that CSIR is enabled to deliver on its mandate of building a self-reliant and 
technologically advanced India. 
     (Para 4.14)  
A LOOK INTO THE ROLE OF KEY CSIR LABORATORIES 
 
5.4 The Committee recommends that CSIR and DBT should formalize their collaborative 
mechanisms through structured frameworks such as Memoranda of Understanding, joint 
steering committees and coordinated research calls to ensure that the nation derives 
maximum benefit from the combined expertise of both the Departments.  
     (Para 5.4)  
The Committee emphasizes the need for strengthening institutional collaboration 
mechanisms between CSIR-NEERI and MoEFCC. The Committee recommends that both 
organizations should formalize their collaborative framework through structured 
mechanisms such as joint research programmes, regular consultation meetings, and 
coordinated approaches to addressing national environmental challenges. The Committee 
recommends that MoEFCC should leverage CSIR-NEERI's scientific expertise as its primary 
technical arm for environmental assessments and policy support, while CSIR should ensure 
that CSIR-NEERI maintains and enhances its interdisciplinary research capabilities and 
continues to provide independent, credible and objective scientific inputs to all the 
stakeholders.  
     (Para 5.6)  
The Committee recommends that the Department should consider the urgent need for 
augmenting the human resources of CSIR-NEERI to enable it to fulfill its expanded national 
and international mandate. The Committee endorses the proposed optimum strength of 642 
and recommends that the process of filling existing vacancies be expedited on priority. The 
Committee further recommends that the creation of new sanctioned positions, particularly in 
the scientific, technical, and technology transfer categories, be taken up with the concerned 
authorities at the earliest. The Committee emphasizes that adequate and appropriately 
structured human resources are central to CSIR-NEERI's ability to function as a mission-
ready national institution, delivering high-impact outcomes for the country and strengthening 
India's leadership in environmental sustainability.  
     (Para 5.8)  
The Committee strongly endorses the creation of dedicated budget lines for national 
environmental missions, emphasizing that stable and predictable funding is essential for 
maintaining high-quality, continuous datasets that underpin evidence-based policymaking 
and international reporting. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance should 
establish dedicated budgetary provisions for sustained environmental monitoring and 
mission-mode programmes, enabling a transition from short-term project-based funding to 
long-term national missions. 
     (Para 5.10)  

49 
 
The Committee recommends that DSIR, in consultation with MoEFCC and NITI 
Aayog, should develop a mission-mode governance framework with multi-year horizons and 
outcome-based evaluation for programmes aligned with national priorities such as Net Zero, 
clean air, water security, and circular economy. This will enable integrated planning and 
measurable national impact. 
(Para 5.11) 
The Committee supports the formal inclusion of CSIR-NEERI as a technical execution 
partner within national environmental frameworks and flagship missions. It recommends 
that MoEFCC and other concerned Ministries should formally engage CSIR-NEERI in the 
design and implementation of national environmental missions, leveraging its scientific 
expertise. 
(Para 5.12) 
The Committee finds merit in including CSIR-NEERI experts in official Indian 
delegations to international environmental forums. It recommends that the Ministry of 
External Affairs, in coordination with MoEFCC and DSIR, should evolve a mechanism for 
such inclusion to strengthen India's technical credibility and global leadership in 
environmental governance. 
(Para 5.13) 
The Committee strongly supports anchoring a National Environmental Data 
Repository at CSIR-NEERI, integrating air, water, waste, and emissions datasets. It 
recommends that MoEFCC, in collaboration with DSIR and CSIR-NEERI, take expeditious 
steps to establish this repository with adequate funding and technical support. 
(Para 5.14) 
The Committee appreciates the vision of positioning CSIR-NEERI as India's scientific 
interface for Global South cooperation in environmental sustainability. It recommends that 
MEA and DSIR should develop a comprehensive framework for leveraging the Institute's 
expertise in international development partnerships and Global South cooperation. 
(Para 5.15) 
The Committee observes that CSIR-NEERI's five regional centres serve vast 
geographic areas under significant manpower and infrastructure constraints, limiting their 
effectiveness in supporting State Governments, Pollution Control Boards, and Urban Local 
Bodies. The Committee endorses the Institute's proposal for a calibrated, need-based 
expansion of its regional presence, emphasizing that expansion must be phased, strategically 
targeted, and adequately resourced. Priority should be given to ecologically sensitive regions, 
high industrial concentration zones, rapidly urbanizing areas, and climate-vulnerable zones. 
The Committee recommends that expansion should follow the hub-and-spoke model, with the 
Nagpur Headquarters focusing on national coordination and advanced research, while 
regional centres undertake applied research, monitoring, and stakeholder engagement. A 
modular, mission-driven approach should be adopted, with centres co-located wherever 
feasible with State institutions or academic partners to optimize resources. The Committee 
emphasizes that such expansion requires enabling support, including augmented manpower, 
dedicated funding, delegated financial powers at regional level, and alignment with national 
missions. With appropriate policy backing and resources, CSIR-NEERI's regional centres 
can evolve into a robust nationwide network supporting environmental governance and 
sustainable development. 
(Para 5.17) 

50 
 
The Committee strongly recommends that the Government should provide the 
necessary policy backing, financial resources, and institutional support to CSIR-CEERI to 
enable it to fulfill its mandate of advancing India's semiconductor and electronics capabilities. 
The Committee also recommends that the upgradation of the fab facility, the expansion of 
skill development programmes, and the collaboration with SAMEER and other stakeholders 
be pursued expeditiously. 
The Committee recommends that CSIR-CFTRI should leverage its scientific expertise 
to develop a comprehensive range of low-cost, affordable, and easy-to-use field testing kits 
that enable consumers and local food inspectors to detect common adulterants quickly. The 
Committee also recommends that the existing portfolio of testing aids for oil adulteration, 
synthetic colours, and adulterants in milk and water be expanded to cover a wider range of 
adulterants commonly found in Indian food products, and that these kits be made readily 
available to the general public. 
(Para 5.25) 
The Committee recommends that the awareness and capacity-building initiatives 
undertaken by CSIR-CFTRI be significantly scaled up and systematically integrated into a 
national mass awareness campaign on food adulteration. A comprehensive dissemination 
strategy should be developed utilizing all available media platforms—including social media, 
traditional media, and community engagement programmes to empower citizens with the 
knowledge and tools to identify adulterated food. The Committee also recommends that the 
Institute's publications, including booklets on food safety and adulteration be expanded and 
translated into regional languages for wider reach. 
(Para 5.26) 
The Committee recommends that CSIR-CFTRI should leverage its scientific expertise 
to publish independent, higher-quality reference standards for common food products. These 
alternative benchmarks should serve a dual purpose: first, as a voluntary gold standard for 
premium, health-conscious producers seeking to differentiate their products in the market, 
and second, as a scientific tool to advocate for gradual upward revision of national 
regulations. The Committee also recommends that the development of Certified Reference 
Materials under the Institute's Vision-2030 be accorded highest priority and that the Institute 
should proactively engage with FSSAI to demonstrate and disseminate these reference 
materials. 
(Para 5.27) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance and the Department of 
Scientific and Industrial Research should provide the necessary financial backing for the 
development of a mobile application to enable consumers to identify subpar food products. 
The proposed app should function by allowing users to scan product barcodes to access 
independently verified quality ratings, flag ingredients of concern and compare nutritional 
profiles against scientifically established benchmarks. 
(Para 5.28) 
 
FROM LAB TO MARKET: STRENGTHENING CSIR'S TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER 
MECHANISM 
 
The Committee observes that the average revenue per technology commercialized by 
NRDC varies significantly and is generally low in absolute terms. To address this, the 

51 
 
Committee recommends that the Department formulate a comprehensive Standard 
Operating Procedure (SOP) to govern the process of transferring technologies to its industrial 
partners. The Committee recommends developing a more sophisticated and flexible licensing 
framework that moves beyond standard upfront fees and royalties, incorporating milestone-
based payments that structure deals with payments linked to the licensee achieving specific 
commercial benchmarks, such as successful pilot production, first commercial sale, or 
reaching a sales target. Furthermore, the framework should involve strategic decision-
making regarding exclusive versus non-exclusive licensing, determining when to offer 
exclusive licenses for higher fees to attract major industry players and when to employ non-
exclusive licenses to ensure the wider dissemination of socially important technologies. 
(Para 6.11) 
The Committee also recommends that the Department should explore the idea of 
establishing more verticals under CEL under different categories like healthcare, aerospace, 
energy, ecology, etc. These PSUs would work in close collaboration with CSIR laboratories, 
not only commercializing indigenous technologies but also contributing to their further 
development. The profits generated by these enterprises would flow back to the Government 
in the form of dividends. Additionally, by ensuring competitive pricing, this would ultimately 
serve the national interest and benefit the broader public, besides developing other businesses 
by CEL as mandated by the Department of Public Enterprises. 
(Para 6.12) 
The Committee further recommends that the Department should establish a dedicated 
and centralized "Technology Marketing & Commercialization Wing" with its separate 
budget to serve as a single-window interface for industry, functioning proactively by 
providing market intelligence to identify industry needs and map them to existing CSIR 
technologies. This wing could also be responsible for strategic branding and outreach, 
developing a strong CSIR brand through targeted global marketing campaigns, technology 
showcases, and industry-specific roadshows, moving beyond a reliance on passive online 
portals. Additionally, it could feature dedicated deal facilitation, employing professionals with 
business development and negotiation expertise to structure and close technology transfer 
agreements more efficiently. 
(Para 6.13) 
6.14 The Committee observes that the Department is exploring the option of Section 8 
startup model for CSIR labs to allow for equity stakes. The Committee opines that the 
Department is thinking in the right direction. The Committee recommends for early setting 
up of the proposed Section 8 Company so as to facilitate monetization of CSIR technologies at 
higher valuations. The Committee also recommends moving from exploration to a structured, 
time-bound implementation of this equity-based model. For breakthrough technologies with 
high commercial potential, CSIR should consider taking a strategic equity stake in spin-off 
ventures or licensing partners instead of, or in addition to, upfront licensing fees and 
royalties. This would align CSIR's long-term interests with the company's success, potentially 
yielding significantly higher returns that can be reinvested into future research. A clear 
policy framework with guidelines on equity percentage, exit strategies, and conflict of interest 
must be developed to enable this. 
(Para 6.14) 
 
 
 
 
 

52 
 
HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 
 
The Committee observes with concern that so many posts are lying vacant in the 
Department and CSIR, at present. In various CSIR laboratories, 3408 scientific posts are 
filled against the total sanctioned strength of 6050. The Committee also notes that the grade 
of outstanding scientists is not properly staffed and only 8 posts out of total sanctioned 
strength of 23 have been filled. Similar situation has been observed in the grade of 
Distinguished Scientists also. In the light of this concerning situation, the Committee strongly 
recommends that the Department and CSIR undertake an expedited, time-bound 
recruitment drive to fill all the vacant posts on a priority basis, with special emphasis on 
scientific and technical grades as well as leadership roles, to ensure uninterrupted research 
activities, effective institutional management, and the fulfillment of CSIR’s mandate as the 
nation’s premier R&D organization. 
 (Para 7.3) 
The Committee appreciates that the Department has notified new recruitment rules, 
acknowledging this as a timely and crucial step towards addressing the persistent vacancy 
crisis in CSIR. The Committee views this as a positive development that, if implemented 
effectively, will go a long way in filling the large number of vacancies across scientific and 
technical grades, strengthening research capacity, and positioning CSIR to meet the evolving 
challenges of science and technology in the years ahead. The Committee recommends that 
CSIR should fix a definitive timeline for completing the first round of recruitment under 
CSRAP Rules, 2025. Given that a large number of scientific and technical posts are vacant 
across CSIR laboratories, an urgent and time-bound recruitment drive is imperative 
particularly CBRI Roorkee, CIMFR Dhanbad, 4PI Bangalore, IGIB New Delhi, IIIM 
Jammu, IITR Lucknow, NBRI Lucknow, NCL Pune and NIScPR New Delhi — should be 
prioritized. The Recruitment and Assessment Board (RAB) should devise a special fast-track 
mechanism for these institutions. 
 (Para 7.7) 
The Committee also recommends that CSIR/RAB should issue consolidated 
recruitment advertisements at fixed, pre-announced intervals — ideally twice a year — so 
that aspiring researchers can plan and apply without uncertainty. This will also prevent the 
recurrence of long gaps in recruitment that led to the current vacancy crisis.  
(Para 7.8) 
 
 