PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY-NINTH REPORT
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in Two Hundred Eighty First Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2016-17) of the Department of
Science & Technology
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st December, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2016/ Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)
289
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha. nic. in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic. in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY-NINTH REPORT
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in Two Hundred Eighty First Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2016-17) of the Department of
Science & Technology
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st December, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2016/ Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................. 1-9
5. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 1 1-14

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2016-17)
(Constituted on 1st September , 2016)
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
5. Shri C.P. Narayanan
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani
7. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
8. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
9. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
10. Shri Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
(i)

(ii)
23. Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole
24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
30. Shrimati M. Vasanthi
31. Shri Prabhubhai N. Vasava
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science &
Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on
its behalf, present this Two Hundred and Eighty- ninth report on the Action Taken by the Department
of Science & Technology on the recommendations contained in Two Hundred and Eighty-first Report
of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2016-2017) of the Department of Science & Technology,
which was presented/laid in the both the Houses of Parliament on 9th May, 2016.
2. There were eighteen recommendations in the Two Hundred and Eighty-first Report of the Committee.
Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the Department on
12th August, 2016.
3. In the meeting held on 29th November, 2016, the Committee considered the draft Report and
adopted the same.
   N
EW D ELHI; RENUKA CHOWDHURY
1 December, 2016 Chairperson,
Agrahayana 10, 1938 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science & Technology, Environment & Forests,
Rajya Sabha.

(iv)
ACRONYMS
DST : Department of Science & Technology
IIA : Indian Institute of Astrophysics
IMPRINT : Impacting Research Innovation & Technology
NA TMO : National Thematic Mapping Organisation
NLST : National Large Solar Telescope
SERB : Sci ence and Engineering Research Board
SoI : Survey of India

REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Science &
Technology on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Eighty first Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
on the Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Department of Science & Technology, presented to both
the Houses of Parliament on 9th May, 2016. There were eighteen recommendations in the Two Hundred
and eighty-first Report of the Committee. Action Taken notes on the recommendations of the Committee
were received from the Department on 12th August, 2016.
The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee on the
Action Taken by the Department of Science & Technology are set out in the following paragraphs:-
BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2016-17
Recommendation
The Committee takes note of rationalisation and merger of some Heads and hopes that new merged
Heads will provide the required flexibility to the Department to run its schemes. (Para 7.3)
Action Taken by Government
No action required.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee expresses satisfaction over increase in budgetary allocation to the Department of
Science & Technology this year and maintaining the same level of allocation at R.E. Stage
2015-16 and hopes that enhanced allocation will be optimally utilised. The Committee is also
hopeful that the Department will make efficient use of allocated funds in a transparent and
objective manner so that targets set by the Department are achieved. (Para 7.6)
Action Taken by Government
Observation of the Committee has been noted.
Comments
The Committee would appreciate an affirmative commitment in the Action Taken note.

2
NEW INITIATIVES
Recommendation
The Committee welcomes the joint collaborative steps taken by the DST in association with Ministry
of Human Resources Development to implement Impacting Research Innovation & Technology
(IMPRINT) Projects and hopes that this collaboration will help much needed societal and
developmental needs. (Para 8.6)
Action Taken by Government
No action required.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee welcomes the initiatives taken to make India clean, healthy and global manufacturing
hub. The Committee also values the partnership of the Department of Science & Technology with
the Ministries of Railways and Human Resource Development, Departments of Heavy Industry and
Electronics and Information Technology and hopes that such efforts would give much needed philip
to the Railways and provide much needed capacity building in Human Resource Sector. The Committee
hopes that these initiatives will help India become cleaner and healthier. The Committee also hopes
that adequate budgetary provisions will be made for these ambitious schemes. (Para 8.13)
Action Taken by Government
Observation of the Committee has been noted.
Comments
The Committee expects that the Department gives details of the action taken on the
observation instead of simply noting it.
Recommendation
The Committee hopes that “Make In India” Programme will help India attain leadership in global
manufacturing. The Committee recommends that considering the significance of the initiative, the
Department should make every possible effort in assisting the lead Ministries for the success of the
Programme. The Committee also recommends that allocated outlays to the Department for the
Programme are fully utilised to make the Programme a success. (Para 8.14)
Action Taken by Government
The Department agrees with recommendations of the Committee. The Department will extend
appropriate advisory and technical support to lead Ministries for the success of the “Make in India”

3
Programme as per their demand and requirement. The Department will take sincere steps to utilize
allocated outlays fully to make the programme a success.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply. The Committee is hopeful that with necessary
support of the Department, the lead Ministries will make ‘Make In India’ Programme a success.
TREND OF UTILISATION IN THE LAST THREE YEARS
Recommendation
The Committee finds that though utilisation of allocated resources by the Department improved
considerably in the last three years, however budget has remained underutilised in 8 schemes. As
on 21st March, 2016, the Department could not utilise a quarter of funds allocated to aforementioned
eight schemes. The Committee notes underutilisation by the Department under these schemes and
would like the Department to improve its performance in terms of utilisation of funds.
(Para 9.5)
Action Taken by Government
The utilization of allocated budget is now being regularly monitored at the level of Secretary on
fortnightly basis and specific instructions are being given to the concerned Division Heads to meet the
monthly and quarterly utilization targets. Where underutilization is expected due to various reasons
beyond the control of the Department, allocation of funds to other schemes where these are needed more
will be done at the earliest possible.
Comments
Reply of the Department is noted. The Committee is hopeful that with monitoring of
utilisation of allocated budget at highest level on fortnightly basis, the Department would be able
to timely complete its projects and fully utilise the resources allocated.
Recommendation
The Committee, thus, is of the view that grounds cited by the Department are of routine administrative
nature which could have been avoided by the Department as delay in completion of infrastructure
projects leads to time and cost overrun and affects Research & Development work. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the loopholes which led to underutilisation of funds should be plugged
and delay in seeking administrative approval should be avoided. (Para 9.7)
Action Taken by Government
Observation of the Committee has been noted. In the fortnightly review by the Secretary, way and
means to plug loopholes and avoid delays are also discussed and decision on measures to expedite
utilization is being taken regularly.

4
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that robust monitoring would ensure effective
utilisation of resources and timely completion of projects.
MODERNISATION OF MAPPING ORGANIZATIONS (SOI AND NATMO)
Recommendations
The Committee notes that the Department is undertaking modernisation and upgradation of
infrastructure and technical capabilities of Survey of India and NATMO under the programme
“Modernisation of Mapping Organisations”. The Committee, however, notes that during the last
few years, the Department repeatedly failed to fully utilise funds made available to it under this
programme. The Committee is of the opinion that gross underutilisation of resources allocated,
presents a bad image of the Survey of India and NATMO. The fact that these organisations could
not utilise a quarter of funds allocated for their upgradation speaks volumes about their commitment
to do so. As per information furnished by the Department, it could utilise only 52.02% of the budget
allocated in 2015-16 under Modernisation of Mapping Organisations by 21st March, 2016.
(Paras 10.8 & 10.9)
The Committee, therefore, expresses its strong displeasure that the Department has not even been
able to fully utilise funds meant for up gradation of infrastructure of its two important organisations and
recommends that the Department should take all necessary measures to increase spend ability in order
to ensure timely and successful implementation of this programme.
Action Taken by Government
Two modernisation projects of Survey of India could not be got approved and hence the utilization
remained on the lower side. These projects are scheduled for approval before September 2016. It is also
proposed to fast track implementation of these projects so that funds allocated for 2016-17 under
Modernisation of Mapping Organisations are fully utilized. The organisations, especially Survey of India,
have been asked to streamline their procedures and implementation processes to ensure full utilization of
funds this year. The Surveyor General has been asked to get in touch personally with highest authorities
in CPWD and State Government Department to ensure timely completion of all major and minor works.
The Survey of India has reported that they have started monthly review meetings with these authorities
at different stations.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee however would like to be apprised of the
progress achieved on a regular basis.
MEGA FACILITIES FOR BASIC RESEARCH
Recommendation
The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken and infrastructure developed under Mega Facilities
for Basic Research in collaboration with national and international agencies. However, since

5
permission of Ministry of Defence has now been received for availability of the Merak site in
Ladakh, the Committee hopes that new roadmap for creating infrastructure will be drawn at the
earliest and the National Large Solar Telescope will established at the earliest. The Committee also
recommends that necessary budgetary provision should be made for creating such Mega facilities.
(Para 11.4)
Action Taken by Government
The National Large Solar Telescope (NLST) project is steered by the Indian Institute of Astrophysics
(IIA), Bengaluru at the national level. Subsequent to the Department of Science & Technology (DST)
receiving the clearance from the Ministry of Defence for the Merak site in Ladakh for installing the
NLST, IIA has applied for the environmental clearance. The matter was considered by the Standing
Committee of State Board for Wildlife, J&K Government after internal evaluation. The Standing Committee
of State Board for Wildlife, J&K Government held its meeting on 18th May 2016 at Srinagar. Its
recommendations will be submitted to the National Board for final clearance. IIA has also applied for
acquiring land in the proposed area on lease. A detailed site plan for the Merak site and updated Detailed
Project Report are presently under preparation.
Comments
The Committee takes notes of the reply and hopes that National Large Solar Telescope and
other Mega facilities will be completed as per schedule.
Recommendation
The Committee is disappointed with the fact that India could not achieve associate membership of
the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN), Geneva and fund to the tune of Rs. 30.00
crores remained unutilised under the Programme. The Department has cited that Associate Membership
of CERN could not be achieved due to elaborate formalities at CERN’ s end. The Committee is not
convinced by the logic put forward by the Department and is of the view that the Department should
have anticipated the time taken in completion of formalities at international institutions. However,
the Committee hopes that with the enhanced allocation of Rs. 120 crores, Department of Science
& Technology will be able to achieve its targets under Mega facilities for Basic Research and will
make concerted efforts to achieve Associate Membership of CERN, Geneva without any further
delay. (Para 11.6)
Action Taken by Government
The application for India’s Associate Membership of CERN has considerably advanced. We have
now received the draft Model Agreement from CERN. The Agreements are under examination in India
for signature. It is expected that the whole process will be completed by October, 2016 after a vote by
the CERN Council. The fee for Associate Membership of CERN will have to be paid thereafter. The
process for India to become an Associate Member of CERN is on course.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply and hopes that India will soon join CERN as an
Associate Member.

6
LASER INTERFEROMETER GRA VITATIONAL-WA VE OBSERVATORY (LIGO)
Recommendation
The Committee believes that the proposed LIGO-India project has tremendous potential to unravel
the myriad mysteries of the universe. It is likely to become a tool for the Indian astronomy in
keeping up the level of excellence in research in astronomy and astrophysics of the country. The
Committee hopes that the LIGO-India project would help the country to embark on world class
international science collaborations and help India become a force to reckon with in this field.
(Para 12.6)
Action Taken by Government
The Department of Science & Technology and the Department of Atomic Energy are grateful for
the observations of the Standing Committee that LIGO-India could become a major development in the
field of gravitational wave astronomy once the LIGO detector is established in India. Over 50 scientists
and research students from different institutions in the country are already actively participating in the
project. Site Selection Committee has finalised its recommendations, and shortly, a pre-project proposal
for acquisition of land and other prototyping activities is expected to be placed for approval of the
competent authority. In parallel, design work on the LIGO-India set-up in collaboration with US counterparts
is continuing.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the progress made in the matter.
DRUGS AND PHARMACEUTICAL RESEARCH PROGRAMME
Recommendation
The Committee taking serious note of the above observations made by the CAG and massive
underutilisation of funds under the Programme recommends that these deficiencies need to be
addressed by the Department in right earnest as such cases bring disrepute to the Drugs &
Pharmaceutical Programme and this does not put Department in right stead. (Para 13.8)
Action Taken by Government
In compliance of observations of the Committee, Department is in the process of streamlining
procedures to ensure full utilization of funds.
Comments
The Committee, while taking note of the reply, hopes that deficiencies in this Programme
will be addressed in right earnest. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the progress
made in the process of streamlining procedure to ensure full utilisation of funds when the
procedures are actually streamlined.

7
REV AMPING OF SCIENCE EXPRESS
Recommendation
The Committee welcomes the revamping of the Science Express in its new avatar of ‘Science
Express: Climate Change Special’. The Committee hopes that the joint collaboration of Ministries
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Railways; Departments of Science and Technology
and Biotechnology will show encouraging results in spreading awareness about the challenges posed
by Climate Change. The Committee also feels that there is a need for crowd management in a better
way in the Science Express and more such trains should be introduced so that viewers get more time
for viewing. (Para 14.6)
Action Taken by Government
It is accepted that there is a need for crowd management in a better way. In this regard, DST is
adding 2 new coaches in the next phase. During its run, platform activities, outreach programmes will
be organised. Press coverage through print and electronic will also take place as before.
For the recommendation on introduction of more such trains, the Department is examining the
feasibility to have another train considering that mobile exhibition buses are also running.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply and hopes that the steps taken by the Department
will increase the outreach of the Science Express.
EFFORTS FOR RETAINING RESEARCH TALENT IN THE COUNTRY
Recommendation
The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the Department of Science & Technology that have
resulted in brain-gain of 235 accomplished scientists to India. The Committee recommends that further
measures should be taken to attract Indian scientists to comeback to India. For that purpose, the
Department should further increase the scholarship/stipends provided to researchers and incentivise
performance based research. (Para 15.5)
Action Taken by Government
The Department is committed to attract the Indian brain from abroad and continue its attempt to
retain them to pursue world class research in Indian setting. The ongoing Ramanujan Fellowship of the
Department for brilliant scientists and engineers from all over the world to take up scientific research
positions in India has received utmost attention and the number of awards is increasing steadily. The
fellowship amount and the Research Grant had also been made more attractive. As recommended by the
Committee to increase the scholarship and stipend provided to researchers, the Government has enhanced
the fellowship of Junior Research Fellows, Senior Research Fellows and Research Associates to the tune

8
of 55.5% to 66.7% w.e.f. October, 2014. The Early Career Research Grant Scheme and National
Postdoctoral Fellowship Scheme of the Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) are linked to
the potential and performance of the research undertaken; and substantial funding is provided under these
Schemes. Track based research funding Scheme of the SERB is designed to support active scientists
based on their performance and utility of research.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
MECHANISM TO MONITOR AND REVIEW THE ONGOING SCHEMES
Recommendation
The Committee notes the mechanism devised by the Department of Science & Technology to monitor
and evaluate the progress of various schemes. However, the Committee feels that had the monitoring
mechanism of the Department been so robust, underutilisation would not have taken place under
some schemes particularly in Modernisation of Mapping Organisations. (Para 16.2)
Action Taken by Government
As already submitted, the utilization of funds is now being reviewed on fortnightly basis by the
Secretary and it is expected that during the financial year 2016-17, there will be marked improvement.
Comments
The Committee is hopeful that with monitoring of utilisation of allocated resources on
fortnightly basis at the highest level, the Department would manage to complete its projects on
time and fully utilise the precious resources.
Recommendation
The Committee is of the view that there is a considerable scope for improvement in the performance
of the Department and in the light of adverse audit observations made by the Controller & Auditor
General particularly on Drugs & Pharmaceutical Research Programme, the Department needs to
strengthen its monitoring mechanism so that misuse of funds could be prevented and timely completion
of projects and optimum utilisation of funds could be ensured. (Para 16.3)
Action Taken by Government
The observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
Comments
The Committee would like to be apprised when actual compliance is made along with the
results achieved.

9
Recommendation
It is high time that the Department of Science and Technology strives to be on par with international
standards in the long run in terms of the speed and quantum of scientific and technological
breakthroughs in order to expeditiously realise India’s rightful place as a global leader in various
domains of science and technology including particularly supercomputing. (Para 16.4)
Action Taken by Government
The Department has noted the recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee and
would make all efforts to meet the expectations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee expressed
therein.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

MINUTES

V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 29th November, 2016 in Room No.'67' First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury— Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
6. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA
7. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
8. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
9. Kum. Sushmita Dev
10. Shri Ninong Ering
11. Shri Laxman Giluwa
12. Shri Daddan Mishra
13. Shri Chirag Paswan
14. Shri Nana Patole
15. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
16. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
17. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
18. Shri Vikram Usendi
19. Shri Prabhubhai N. Vasava
13

14
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. She
informed the Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 286th, 287th,
288th, 289th, 290th and 291st reports of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in reports of the Committee on the Demands for Grants
(2016-17) pertaining to Departments of Biotechnology, Space, Scientific and Industrial Research, Science
& Technology, Atomic Energy and Ministry of Earth Sciences. The Committee then considered the draft
286th to 291st Reports and after some deliberations adopted the same.
3. The Committee also decided to present/lay its 286th to 291st reports to both the Houses of
Parliament on 1st December, 2016. The Committee authorised the Chairperson and, in her absence, Shri
Prasanna Acharya and in his absence Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan to present the reports in the Rajya
Sabha and Shri Vikram Usendi and, in his absence, Shri Laxman Giluwa, to lay the reports on the Table
of Lok Sabha.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 4.05 
P.M.
*** relate to other matters.