PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 232
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2012/AGRAHAYANA, 1934 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY SECOND REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY SECOND REPORT OF 
THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FOREST 
ON THE DEMAND FOR GRANTS (2012-13) OF 
THE DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 20  DECEMBER, 2012)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 20  DECEMBER, 2012)
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY-SECOND REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th December, 2012)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations Contained in the Two Hundred Twenty-
Second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment 
and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the 
Department of Atomic Energy
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
232
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY-SECOND REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations Contained in the Two Hundred Twenty-
Second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment
and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the
Department of Atomic Energy
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  20 th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  20 th December, 2012)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—24
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 25—28

MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2012-13)
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil H. Lad
3. Shrimati Maya Singh
4. Shri M. Rama Jois
5. Shri Alok Tiwari
6. Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi
7. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
8. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
9. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
12. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
@13. Vacant
#14. V acant
15. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
16. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase
17. Dr. Ajay Kumar
18. Shri O.S. Manian
19. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
20. Shri Basori Singh Masram
21. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
22. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
23. Shri Ramashanker Rajbhar
24. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
25. Shri Yashvir Singh
#26. Vacant
27. Shri Pradeep Tamta
28. Shri Joseph Toppo
29. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
30. Shri Ramakant Yadav
31. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
@ Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 14th December, 2012 on his resignation
from the Membership of the Committee.
# Shri Ninong Ering and Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon their
induction in the Union Council of Ministers w.e.f. 28
th October, 2012.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra,  Committee Officer
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Thirty-second Report on the Action Taken by the
Department of Atomic Energy on the recommendations contained in Two Hundred Twenty-second
Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
2. The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Atomic
Energy on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Twenty-second Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Atomic Energy which was
presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18
th May, 2012.
3. There were twenty three recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Twenty-second
Report of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were
received from the Department on 6
th August, 2012.
4. In the meeting held on 17 th December, 2012, the Committee considered the Draft Action
Taken Report and adopted the same.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
17th December , 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests

(iv)
ACRONYMS
AEC : Atomic Energy Commission
AERB : Atomic Energy Regulatory Board
AHWR : Advanced Heavy Water Reactor
AMD : Atomic Minerals Directorate
APSC : AHWR Plant Sitting Committee
ATTF : AHWR Thermal hydraulic Test Facility
BRIT : Board of Radiation and Isotope Technology
CFE : Consent for Establishment
CHTR : Compact High Temperature Reactor
CONSIST : Containment System Integral Simulation Test
CSR : Corporate Social Responsibility
DAE : Department of Atomic Energy
DBSKKV : Dr. Balasaheb Sawant Konkan Krishi Vidyapeeth
E B : Electron Beam
EC : Environmental Clearance
ESR : Electron Spin Resonance
FLD : Front Line Demonstrations
FMTF : Fuelling Machine Test Facility
FRFCF : Fast Reactor Fuel Cycle Facility
HTSE : High Temperature Steam Electrolyser
IGCAR : Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research
IHTR : Innovative High Temperature Reactor
ITSOFC : Intermediate Temperature Solid Oxide Fuel Cells
IWG : Internal Working Group
IWS : In-wall Shields
KPM : Kylleng Pyndengsotiong Mawthabah
LBE : Lead-bismuth eutectic
NPCIL : Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited
PET : Positron Emission Tomography
PFBR : Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor
PLDSC : Pre-Licensing Design Safety Committee
PMES : Performance Monitoring and Evaluation System
PRIS : Performance Related Incentive Scheme
RFD : Result Framework Document
RMC : Radiation Medicine Centre
SBO : Station Black Out
SGs : Specialist Groups
SHRI : Sludge Hygienization Research Irradiation
SOFC : Solid Oxide Fuel Cell
SSCs : Structures/Systems/Components
TL : Thermo Luminiscence
TMH : Tata Memorial Hospital

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Atomic
Energy on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Twenty-second Report of
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Atomic
Energy, which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 18
th May, 2012. There were
twenty-three recommendations in the Two Hundred and Twenty-second Report of the Committee.
Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the
Department on 6
th August, 2012.
The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee
on the Action Taken by the Department of Atomic Energy are set out in the subsequent
paragraphs:
Recommendation (Para 4.9)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that Financial Year 2012-13, being the first Financial
Year of the Twelfth Five Year Plan, the Department must ensure that the allocation made to the
Department is fully utilized not only during the current year but also throughout the entire Plan
period.
Action Taken by Government
The existing monitoring system developed by the Department to monitor and review the
progress of expenditure will eliminate possibility of underutilization/non-utilisation of allocated
funds. The recommendations of the Committee have been brought to the notice of all the Heads
of Constituent Units/Aided Institutions/Public Sector Undertakings of the Department. All efforts
will be made for full utilisation of the budget allocation.
Comments
The Committee notes that a similar plea was taken by the Department while
submitting the Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the 207
th Report
of the Committee on the Demands for Grants 2010-11. However, in spite of categorical
assurance given by the Department to the Committee that its monitoring mechanism is
potent enough to eliminate possibility of under-utilisation/non-utilization of allocated funds,
the fact remains that the Department was not able to fully utilise its funds in the year
2011-12. As such, pursuant to present recommendations of the Committee, the Department
ought to have taken further steps to plug the loopholes, if any, in its monitoring mechanism
so as to preclude any possibility of under-utilisation/non-utilisation of allocated funds in the
year 2012-13. The Committee views with serious concern, the inaction of the Department
in this regard. The Committee reiterates its recommendation and would like the
Department to make a critical review of various factors that led to under-utilisation/non-
utilisation of funds by the Department year after year and take necessary remedial
measures to put an end to this practice.
Recommendation (Para 4.10)
The Committee was, however, informed that reduced allocation of Non-Plan expenditure in

2
Demand No. 4 to the extent of Rs. 984.67 crores, if not restored would affect the production of
Heavy Water and Nuclear Fuel besides affecting O&M of various R&D units of the Department.
Similarly, the shortfall of Rs. 377.94 crores in Demand No.5, if not restored will affect the import
of nuclear fuel. The Committee takes note of adverse consequences arising from drastic cut in the
Non-Plan allocation under Demand No.4 and 5 and recommends that Non-Plan allocation be
suitably enhanced at R.E. stage to avoid adverse impact arising from reduction of Non-Plan
allocation.
Action Taken by Government
Secretary, DAE has already taken up the matter with Secretary Expenditure, Ministry of
Finance for restoration or Non-plan fund suitably at RE stage. The Ministry of Finance assured that
Department’s requirements will be considered favourably at RE stage. The recommendation of the
Committee is again being brought to the notice of the Ministry of Finance for consideration at RE
stage.
Comments
The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Finance has assured to consider
favourably provision of additional funds to the Department at RE stage.
Recommendation (Para 4.14)
The Committee observes that the Apex Committees were constituted in December, 2010 and
despite their existence there had been no significant progress in the improved utilisation of allocated
funds, particularly, under Plan Heads during the Financial Years 2011-12. The Committee, therefore,
feels that the existing monitoring system is not able to ensure full utilisation of funds and,
therefore, recommends that the monitoring mechanism needs to be so strengthened and revamped
as to preclude any possibility of underutilization/non-utilization of allocated funds on almost similar
grounds year after year.
Action Taken by Government
The existing monitoring system developed by the Department to monitor and review the
progress of ongoing schemes/projects before formulating/finalizing proposals for budgetary support
are being effectively used to eliminate the scope of shortage or surrenders of funds at a later stage.
The Department has strengthened the monitoring mechanism again vide office order 03/2011/2887
dated 16.03.11.
Comments
The Committee notes that the Department has not indicated as to how it has
strengthened its existing mechanism vide its order dated 16.03.2011. The Committee would
like the Department to make a critical review of the factors that led to under-utilisation/
non-utilisation of allocated funds year after year and take suitable remedial measures so
that more efficient allocation of the public money could be made. The Committee further
hopes that in the financial year 2012-13, the Department would be able to ensure the
optimum utilisation of allocated funds.
Recommendation (Para 4.16)
The Committee finds that silence on the issue of preparation of Result Framework

3
Document shows reluctance on the part of the Department to prepare the same. The Committee
fails to understand the reasons for its reluctance when other scientific Departments like the
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research and Department of Biotechnology have been
preparing the Result Framework Document since its inception in 2009-10. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should also strive to prepare the Result Framework
Document to objectively assess its performance index.
Action Taken by Government
Preparation of Result Framework Document (RFD) by the Government Departments was
introduced by the Cabinet Secretariat in the context of Performance Monitoring and Evaluation
System (PMES) approved by the Prime Minister of India in 2009. While RFD was intended to
provide a summary of the targets/results of Department in that financial year, it was also designed
to provide a fair basis to evaluate the annual performance of the Department.
Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) was established by the Government of India to
facilitate self-reliance in every aspect of nuclear technology including strategic as well as other
applications such as nuclear power, nuclear agriculture, etc. Owing to the specialized nature of
nuclear technology, DAE is under the direct charge of the Prime Minister of India. Atomic Energy
Commission (AEC) was constituted by the Government of India vide resolution dated March 1,
1958. The Commission has full powers of the Government of India, both administrative and
financial (within the limits of the approved budget) and has the responsibility to ensure
implementation of the Government’s policy in all matters concerning Atomic Energy. DAE is
responsible for the execution of policies laid down by the AEC from time to time. Performance
and new proposals of the various units of the Department are reviewed in every meeting of the
AEC. It may be mentioned that the composition of AEC include Minister of State-PMO, Principal
Secretary, PMO, National Security Adviser, Cabinet Secretary, Secretary for Expenditure, Member
for Finance and some eminent scientists from the field of Atomic Energy and/or Science and
Technology. Some of these members are also members of the committee constituted by the
Government to review the performance of the Department as stated in PMES.
Subsequent to the decision of Government of India to grant Performance Related Incentive
Scheme (PRIS) to Department of Atomic Energy, an evaluation methodology was formulated by the
Department which was approved after discussion in Atomic Energy Commission. It may be noted
that the existing PRIS structure in Department of Atomic Energy is particularly evolved for
‘mission-mode’ R&D organization. PRIS in Department of Atomic Energy consists of three
components namely PRIS-O, PRIS-G and PRIS-I. Performance of the Individual Scientists, those
of the Group and Organization are independently reviewed by three different committees and the
methodology/metric adopted is also different in the three cases. This serves to encourage individual
excellence, team work and organizational performance.
Considering that the Result Framework Document system is a methodology primarily for
performance monitoring and evaluation, and that these documents are made available in public
domain, the Department prefers not to adopt Result Framework Document system. The
achievements in Research and Development, Power Generation and other societal benefits-related
research are available in the outcome budget document and the performance in total are reported
to Prime Minister’s Office on monthly basis and to Atomic Energy Commission in every meeting.
Suitability of following Result Framework Document system in place of the existing monitoring
mechanism in DAE was discussed and considered at various levels and found that the existing
system in the Department would be appropriate to continue. Hence it is considered appropriate for
Department of Atomic Energy to continue with the current practice of Atomic Energy Commission
monitored system.

4
Comments
The Committee is not convinced with the reasoning, i.e., “considering that the Result
Framework Document system is a methodology primarily for performance monitoring and
evaluation, and that these documents are made available in public domain, the Department
prefers not to adopt Result Framework Document system” given by the Department. The
Committee notes with concern why Result Framework Document cannot be prepared when
the Department has multilevel and multifaceted, strict performance monitoring mechanism
and its achievements in Research and Development, Power Generation and other Societal
benefits related research are made available in the Outcome Budget document and the
performance in total also reported to PMO on monthly basis.
The Committee fails to understand as to why at least in areas where its
achievements are already being reported in the Outcome Budget document, RFD cannot be
introduced.
The Department has also not clarified that in case there were genuine difficulties in
preparing RFD in other areas, why it has not sought exemption from the Cabinet
Secretariat for it. The Committee, therefore, expresses its dissatisfaction with the casual
reply given by the Department and reiterates its recommendation.
Recommendation (Para 4.20.2 and 4.20.3)
4.20.2 The Committee feels that it is a matter of concern that as against the B.E.
allocation of Rs. 1190.00 crores under Plan Head, BARC could utilize only Rs. 1015.00 crores,
thus, leaving a gap of Rs. 175.00 crores. The Committee, therefore, recommends that these sort
of loopholes which lead to under-utilization of funds should be plugged in future.
4.20.3 The Committee was informed that the increase in provision for the year 2012-13
is mainly for the development of facilities at BARC, Visakhapatnam and for setting up of integrated
nuclear projects at Tarapur. The Committee is happy to note that allocation for BARC, a prestigious
research and development institution, has been increased notwithstanding its poor performance in
terms of financial achievements. It however, recommends all out efforts be made to fully utilize
the outlay and that no excuse whatsoever should be allowed to come in its way.
Action Taken By Government
The recommendations of the Committee on the underutilization of funds have been brought
to the notice of all concerned and the monitoring mechanism has been further strengthened for
effective implementation and to minimize surrender of funds. This consists of review of projects
at Group Board level and then in Trombay Council periodically. In addition, the review takes place
in specially convened meetings by Director, BARC and Internal Financial Adviser. The projects
under the Research and Development Sector are also reviewed by specially constituted Specialist
Groups (SGs) and Internal Working Group (IWG) in the Department.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the action taken and hopes that its monitoring/review
mechanisms have been sufficiently strengthened to ensure optimum utilisation of funds in
future.
Recommendation (Para 4.20.4)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should intensify its efforts in

5
developing more and more high yielding disease resistant crop varieties not only of pulses,
groundnuts, etc., but also of cereals like wheat and rice.
Action Taken By Government
The Committee’s appreciation of BARC’s crop improvement programme using radiation
induced mutation is gratefully acknowledged. BARC has a programme in nuclear agriculture which
focuses on the continuous development of new crop varieties with desirable characteristics to meet
the challenges of biotic and abiotic stresses emerging in Indian agriculture. Biotic stress is due to
microbe-mediated diseases and insect pests. Abiotic stresses include salinity, drought and increased
temperature, the latter two may also be associated with climate change. Thus 40 crop varieties
have been released and notified to date for commercial cultivation in different states by Ministry
of Agriculture, Government of India and are popular among farmers throughout the country. Oil
seeds and pulses, which continue to be in short supply in our country, form a major (38 out of
40) share of this development. The pulse requirement in the country to ensure self-sufficiency is
projected at 32 million tonnes by the year 2030. Seventeen pulse varieties have been notified for
commercial cultivation from BARC and are popularised through number of front line demonstrations
and mini kit trials in different states of India and sufficient quantities of quality seeds were
produced and supplied to farmers through different seed corporations and Universities.
Estimated share of BARC developed varieties in the national production could well be around
20 to 30% for groundnut, around 20 to 30% for black gram and around 10 to 15% for mungbean.
On an average 3 new BARC varieties have been released annually over last 5 years. This trend is
expected to continue; extending to other crop varieties as well.
As recommended by the Committee, BARC is already intensifying its efforts in this
direction. Programmes have also been taken up for nutritional and processing quality improvement.
To increase the area and production of pulse crops particularly in mungbean (greengram), urdbean
(blackgram) and groundnut, the rice fallow areas have been targeted, where residual soil moisture
after rice crop is used to raise subsequent pulse crops. It is a known practice among farmers but
the number of high yielding varieties are limited. Three Trombay mungbean varieties TARM-l, TM-
96-2 and TM-2000-2 (pairy mung) were released for rice fallow cultivation. These varieties have
resistance to a major disease called powdery mildew and have synchronous maturity. The present
research is focused on development of powdery mildew and yellow mosaic virus disease resistant
and drought tolerant varieties for rice fallow cultivation and high temperature tolerant varieties for
summer season in mungbean, urdbean and cowpea crops.
Further, with the help of State Agricultural Universities and ICAR Institutes, BARC is
evaluating newer breeding lines under various agro-climatic conditions, multiplying in large scale,
quality seeds (breeder seed) of most of the popular and recent crop varieties and supplying them
to National and State Seeds Corporation, Seed Agencies and farmers.
The Committee’s recommendation to develop more and more high yielding disease resistant
varieties in cereals like wheat and rice is in tune with our present R&D programmes. In rice,
salinity tolerance and tolerance to diseases like rice blast and blight and improvement of basmati
type rice for earliness, plant height and yield are the objectives. Some of the improved lines of rice
are currently in station trial on the field of Dr. Balasaheb Sawant Konkan Krishi Vidyapeeth, Dapoli,
Maharashtra (DBSKKV) under a MOU between BARC and the University.
In wheat, the objectives are improvement of resistance to rust disease and heat stress
tolerance. Radiation induced early maturing mutants of wheat variety C306 are being tested for their
field performance in collaboration with IARI, Indore. Other wheat selections derived from
intervarietal cross are also being tested for field performance on the fields of Agharkar Research

6
Institute, Pune. BARC is participating in an international programme supported by International
Atomic Energy Agency to develop mutants for resistance to wheat rust Ug99 which may be a
potential threat to wheat crop in India. These efforts will be further intensified during the Twelfth
plan period.
Comments
The Committee appreciates the effort made and success achieved by the Department
in developing high yielding disease resistant crop varieties of pulses, groundnuts and
extending it to wheat and rice. The Committee hopes that the Department would further
intensify its public awareness programmes to popularise crop varieties developed at BARC.
Recommendation (Para 4.20.5)
The Committee is also of the view that there is need for popularizing new high yielding
varieties developed at BARC, so that benefit of research done at BARC reaches all nooks and
comers of the country and does not remain restricted only to farmers of Maharashtra. The
Committee recommends that Department chalk out a popularization cum awareness campaign to
make people throughout the country aware of various varieties developed at BARC and for
popularizing them.
Action Taken By Government
The benefit of BARC’s research in crop improvement is not restricted to the state of
Maharashtra. Groundnut varieties developed by BARC in association with the agriculture universities
are popular in all groundnut growing states like Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Gujarat, Maharashtra,
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal. Trombay mungbean varieties are popular in Madhya
Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Chhattisgarh, Bihar and Maharashtra. Trombay blackgram
varieties are very popular in Maharashtra, Orissa, Chhattisgarh and Karnataka while Trombay Tur
is popular in Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh. Considering the large size of the country, there is
a need to further popularize the cultivation of these varieties through extensive public awareness
programmes.
BARC is conducting various awareness programmes like exhibitions, field demonstration to
popularize the new and popular crop varieties. MOUs are being finalized with State agriculture
universities and other agencies for this purpose. We are also taking help of the Ministry of
Agriculture, Government of India which conducts a large number of minikits/Front Line
Demonstrations (FLD) of Trombay new crop varieties in different states. Support of several
progressive farmers in different states will also be enlisted to intensify the efforts at popularization
of our varieties. In Twelfth Plan, the outlay for nuclear agriculture is being enhanced for more
collaborative research with Agriculture Universities and to support progressive farmers for
popularizing our varieties.
Comments
The Committee is happy to learn that benefits of BARC’s research in crop
improvement are being made available in a number of States and hopes that Department
shall take proactive steps to further popularise crop varieties developed by BARC so that
entire country gets benefited from the research of BARC in crop improvement.
Recommendation (Para 4.20.7)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should create a separate agency

7
of its own instead of depending on other agencies for popularizing and marketing of socially
beneficial technologies like Nisargruna Biogas Plant for handling biodegradable wastes; Sludge
Hygienization Research Irradiation (SHRI) for treatment of municipal sewage, etc. including its
technology on food preservation, nuclear medicine and healthcare, so that, the benefit ultimately
could reach the society at large.
Action Taken By Government
An independent unit of Department of Atomic Energy called Board of Radiation and Isotope
Technology (BRIT) has already been created in 1989 for popularizing and marketing of socially
beneficial technologies under nuclear medicine and healthcare etc. Further, Department is actively
engaged in development of various technologies for societal benefits such a Nisargruna Biogas
Technology, Food Preservation, Nuclear Medicine etc. which is briefed below:
NISARGRUNA Biogas Technology
Nisargruna biogas technology has been developed for processing biodegradable waste
resources. Initially the technology was developed for waste resources generated in kitchen. The
technology has matured in last 10 years. More than 140 Nisargruna plants have been installed in
9 States of the country. The concept of using Nisargruna technology is becoming popular amongst
Urban Local Bodies. In Maharashtra about 40 Municipal Councils and Municipal Corporations are
using this technology. Kerala is another State which is using this technology for processing
biodegradable waste. The scope and capacity of these plants has now increased. In Nasik and
Baramati two plants of 10MT/day capacity are functioning using cattle dung. Biogas is compressed
and used for running a vehicle at Nasik. At Baramati, it is exclusively used for generating
electricity. Government of Delhi has offered 33% subsidy for installation of this plant. Karnataka
Lokayukta has passed an order for installing several such decentralized Nisargruna units in
Bangalore and other parts of Karnataka. Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has supported this
technology financially at several places by giving a subsidy. BARC has transferred the technology
to more than 90 entrepreneurs so far.
Food Preservation
The project ‘R&D in radiation technology for food preservation and hygienization’ was
undertaken in Tenth Plan. The thrust area for the project was development of technology for
packaged food products with improved shelf life and stability. Several shelf stable products such
as ready to cook (RTC) Indian vegetables, fruit products and chicken and mutton products were
developed. A dip treatment using food grade chemicals and low temperature (40C) storage was
found to extend shelf life of packed litchi fruit by more than a month with acceptable sensory
quality allowing market access in India and for export. In the area of identification and
development of suitable packaging materials for irradiation processed food, functional clay filled
LLDPE nano-composite films with improved barrier properties and radiation resistance was
developed. Active films were prepared from biopolymers containing natural additives. In the area
of development of dosimetry protocols for accelerator based sources, a standard phenyl- β-D-
glucopyranoside based color dosimeter was developed and tested at plant level. Electron Spin
Resonance (ESR) and thermoluminiscence (TL) based detection methods were developed
for several irradiated food stuffs. During the Twelfth plan, efforts will be made towards
standardization of process parameters for different Electron beam (EB)/X-ray sources,
development of new products and processing protocols, and improved quality control techniques.
Efforts towards increasing public awareness and entrepreneur development for wider deployment
of the technology will continue.

8
Nuclear Medicine
The Radiation Medicine Centre (RMC) of BARC, established in 1963 is a premier national
centre carrying out R&D in nuclear medicine, teaching/training and providing nuclear medicine
services for a large number of patients at a very affordable cost and, at times, free of cost for
needy patients. RMC is also the major Centre in India for nuclear medicine education for doctors
and technologists since 1973 and, staff trained at RMC are present in almost all the 170 nuclear
medicine facilities in various hospitals in India. RMC is also the first Centre in India to install a
Medical Cyclotron and PET (Positron Emission Tomography)-scanner and, over the last 10 years
of its continuous operation, has shown that the production of short-lived PET-radioisotopes and
its use in patients for cancer and cardiology is commercially viable. This initiative resulted in
12 medical cyclotrons and over 50 PET-scanners being installed in government and private sectors
in various parts of India. RMC is also well known for nuclear medicine services for thyroid
diseases.
In 2011-12, 17500 patients had registered for various nuclear medicine investigations viz.,
[F-18]FDG-PET scans (done free of cost), SPECT studies with [Tc-99m ]-radiopharmaceuticals,
therapy with I-131 for thyroid cancer and hyperthyroidism, therapy with [1-131]MIBI for neural
crest tumours and [177-Lu]DOTATATE therapy for neuro-endocrine tumours. The latter three are
important patient services rendered at RMC and about 600 patients were treated last year, of whom
~30% are from West Bengal and the North East region. This makes RMC the largest centre in
South East Asia for radionuclide therapy.
New [F-18]-radiopharmaceuticals e.g. FLT for PET-imaging of rapidly growing tumours,
and F-MISO for hypoxia in tumours, have been produced by RMC and BRIT for the first time
using indigenous methods and with the approval of the DAE-Radiopharmaceutical Committee are
being supplied to users. Other [F-18]-radiopharmaceuticals for estrogen positive breast cancers and
prostrate tumours are in the process of development and clearance by the Radiopharmaceutical
Committee. [Ga-68]DOTA TE for imaging neuro-endocrine tumours is also in the process of
approval and will be available for patients soon.
A DAE committee has been specially constituted for the formulation and implementation of
additional socially important programmes during Twelfth plan to reach the benefits of the
technologies developed by the Department to the public at large.
Comments
The Committee is happy to learn that Department has not only developed a number
of technologies for societal benefits but has also taken steps for popularizing and marketing
of such technologies. The Committee, however, would like the Department to further
enhance its efforts towards increasing public awareness and entrepreneurship development
so as to ensure its reach on a much wider scale.
Recommendation (Para 4.21.3)
The Committee understands that receipt/grant of approval for the project is purely an
internal matter of the Department which could have been sorted out well in time. The Committee
does not find it to be a convincing cause for spill over of a project from one financial year to
the other and hence expresses its serious concern over such lame excuses. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the process of receipt/grant approval for projects for which allocation
has been earmarked must be completed in the same financial year, so that, the allocated outlay are
fully utilized in that year itself. The Committee also expresses its serious concern over such sort
of delay in crucial project like Fast Reactor Fuel Cycle Facility which is badly required for the

9
second stage nuclear power programme and recommends that such procedural delays should not
be allowed to come in the way of such an important programme in future.
Action Taken By Government
The proposal for the project Fast Reactor Fuel Cycle Facility (FRFCF) was presented to
the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) after completion of all internal processing in the Department
of Atomic Energy, AEC had approved the proposal in October, 2010 and thereafter, a cabinet note
was prepared and circulated to different ministries as a part of obtaining approval of Union Cabinet
for the project. Approval of Cabinet for the project is awaited.
In parallel, the design work on the project has been continued and completed. Prior
environmental clearance for the project has been obtained from MoEF. In anticipation of the
financial approval for the project, action for performance qualification of prospective bidders has
been initiated. Tender documents and drawings for issue of tenders for construction work are being
scrutinized to enable issue of tenders on receipt of sanction. Necessary infrastructure at the
construction site has been developed to enable speedy commencement of construction work. These
activities carried out during the period of waiting for approval for the project which will enable
minimizing time for start of construction and procurement work for the project.
Comments
The Committee is perturbed to learn that such a crucial project (Fast Reactor Fuel
Cycle Facility) has been pending for want of approval of Cabinet for over the last two
years. If such important projects are kept pending for such long, it escalates the cost of
the projects and burdens the exchequer unnecessarily. In this backdrop, the Committee
desires that the Department must pursue the matter seriously to obtain the cabinet
approval.
Recommendation (Para 4.22.2)
The total budgetary outlay at B.E. stage for Raja Rammana Centre for Advanced
Technology last year was Rs. 248.15 crores which was enhanced to Rs. 275.81 crores at R.E.
stage making the Centre an additional amount of Rs. 27.66 crores available over the budgetary
allocation. Budgetary allocation for 2012-13 is Rs. 268.00 crores which is less by Rs. 7.81
crores of R.E. allocation made last year. When the Committee enquired about the reduction in
budgetary allocation for this Centre despite its outstanding performance in utilisation of funds last
year, the Department explained that the reduction is mainly on account of keeping minimum
requirement for the new projects of Twelfth Plan pending approval of the new projects. While
the Committee tends to agree with the explanation given by the Department, it recommends that
requirement of further funds, if any, of the Centre should be favourably considered at the R.E.
level.
Action Taken By Government
The Department is also thankful to the Committee for its recommendation that “requirement
of further funds, if any, of the Centre should be favourably considered at the R.E. level”. The
Centre will continue to put in its best efforts towards utilizing the budget provided.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

10
Recommendation (Para 4.23.2)
VECC is also running a Regional Radiation Medicine Centre in Eastern part of the country
which caters to the nuclear imaging requirements of the patients from low income group at an
affordable cost. The Committee feels that this is a very noble act on the part of an organisation
of Department of Atomic Energy which would go a long way in winning the trust of the people
through such philanthropic acts. The Committee, therefore, recommends that such activities aimed
at helping the poor and the needy needs to be further expanded in other States of the country.
Action Taken By Government
It is a point of pleasure that the Parliamentary Standing Committee has appreciated in its
recommendations, the activities of the Regional Radiation Medicine Centre, Variable Energy
Cyclotron Centre for its philanthropic activities relating to catering to the nuclear imaging
requirements of the patients, especially of the low income group, at an affordable cost. Based on
the spirit of the recommendations, RRMC shall go ahead in helping the poor and needy class of
people, particularly in the expensive areas like treatment of thyrodism and cancer. This centre uses
low energy Isotopes for immuno assay, Gamma Scanner and Linear Accelerator for detection of
carcinogenic conditions and malignancy. This Centre has also a target in the near future for
installation and use of more sophisticated and high yielding monitors, scanners and accelerators to
provide most accurate diagnostic information. For up gradation of this Centre a fresh project
proposal has been submitted.
Comments
The Committee finds that the Department has not responded to the recommendation
of expanding the activities of Variable Energy Cyclotron Centre in other states of the
country and as such reiterates its recommendation.
Recommendation (Para 4.23.3)
The Committee is happy to note that the allocation for Variable Energy Cyclotron Centre has
been increased by Rs. 65.28 crores in comparison to the B.E. allocation of the last year which will
help the Centre effectively pursue its programmes for societal benefits. The Committee is, however,
constrained to observe that the allocations for the Centre were reduced to Rs. 136.68 crores at
the R.E. stage as against the budgetary allocation of Rs. 155.69 crores last year and the major
portion of reduction amounting to Rs. 20.00 crores was under Plan Head. Apparently allocations
were reduced at R.E. stage as the Centre was not able to utilize the amount allocated to it. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Centre should not only try to utilize the allocated
resources this year but also accomplish the task of development of software for hearing impaired
and medical cyclotron project within the stipulated targeted period.
Action Taken By Government
In regard to the observation of the Committee for reduction of Budget allocation at RE
stage of 2011-12, the fact is stated that the reduction had resulted due to some unavoidable factors
like non-materialisation of purchase orders, delay in delivery, etc., which were actually beyond the
control of the project authorities. However, suitable planning and programming are being made for
utilization of the Budget allocation to the maximum extent during the current financial year. As
regards the development of software for hearing impaired, the target as envisaged in the Eleventh
Plan has been satisfactorily achieved. The software for sign to text is in an advanced stage and
its completion is likely by the end of the financial year 2012-13.

11
As regards Medical Cyclotron Project, procurement of all essential components of the
facility has been completed and they are waiting for installation till the completion of the building
construction by March, 2014.
Comments
The Committee feels that the reasons advanced by the VECC for the delay are
routine lame excuses and could be avoided with the application of due diligence and
discretion.
Recommendation (Para 4.23.4)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that accomplishment of third stage nuclear power
programme using thorium as fuel for power generation on commercial basis, research on Compact
High Temperature Reactor (CHTR) and on Hydrogen energy needs to be intensified and results
achieved in a time bound manner.
Action Taken By Government
Department of Atomic Energy appreciates the view of the Committee that in the highly
competitive age what counts is time within which technology is developed and put in commercial
domain. BARC has been working for the third stage of Indian nuclear power programme and would
like to submit the accomplishments, present activities and future plans.
1. Third stage nuclear power programme using thorium as fuel for power generation
1.1 Accomplishments
Thorium plays a pivotal role in Indian Nuclear power programme. Right from the inception
of Indian nuclear power programme, work has been carried on various aspects of thorium
utilisation-mining and extraction of thorium, fuel fabrication, irradiation in reactors,
reprocessing and refabrication.
• Thorium fuel fabrication through powder pellet route has been well established. Few tons
of fuel have been made for CIRUS and Dhruva, PHWR and for blanket assemblies for
FBTR. Few pins have been fabricated using mixed oxides of (Th-Pu) for irradiation in
research reactors.
• Thoria bundles are used in the initial cores of PHWR. The irradiation experience of thoria
fuel in the research reactors CIRUS and Dhruva and PHWRs is satisfactory.
• The thoria pins of CIRUS have been reprocessed to obtain U233. The recovered U233
has been fabricated as fuel for KAMINI reactor at Kalpakkam. The Post Irradiation
Examination of one of the thoria bundle irradiated in PHWR has also been carried out
for validation of theoretical analyses.
• Studies have been carried out regarding use of thorium in different types of reactors
with respect to fuel management, reactor control and fuel utilisation.
• A small research reactor KAMINI with 30 kWth capacity utilises nuclear fuel based on
Uranium-233 derived from irradiation of thorium. It is in operation at Indira Gandhi
Centre for Atomic Research (IGCAR), Kalpakkam and is the only reactor in the world
to use U-233 as fuel.

12
• The 300 MWe Advanced Heavy Water Reactor (AHWR) designed by BARC is specially
meant for large scale commercial utilization of thorium, generating nearly 70% of its
power from insitu burnup of thorium.
• A Critical Facility for Advanced Heavy Water Reactor has been commissioned in 2008
and is being used for carrying out experiments to further validate the physics design
features of Advanced Heavy Water Reactor.
1.2 Current Activities
Advanced Heavy Water Reactor (AHWR):
• Several major experimental facilities such as Integral Test Loop, High Pressure Natural
Circulation Loop, Parallel Channel Loop, CHF and Instability Loop are being operated to
establish feasibility of the basic design:
• The design of major systems, structures and components as well as entire nuclear island
have been carried out. The reactor physics design of core has been completed.
• Peer Review of AHWR design was carried out by Nuclear Power Corporation of India
Limited (NPCIL). Safety appraisal of AHWR has been carried out by Atomic Energy
Regulatory Board (AERB) by Pre-Licensing Design Safety Committee for AHWR
(PLDSC-AHWR).
• In order to demonstrate the thermal design margin and fuelling operation of AHWR;
construction of a full power AHWR Thermal hydraulic Test Facility (ATTF) and Fueling
Machine Test Facility (FMTF) has been taken up at R&D Centre, Tarapur and is nearing
completion.
• The detailed engineering of major Structures/Systems/Components (SSCs) of AHWR is
being carried out in consultancy mode which includes’ preparation of technical
documents and specifications for design, 3D CAD modelling, 2D layout drawings, and
stress and seismic analysis of Structures, Systems and Components.
• The recent Fukushima incident has raised concern about the safety of reactors in case
of a prolonged Station Black Out (SBO) continuing for several days. In view of this,
a detailed study has been performed simulating such a low probable condition in
AHWR. The results indicate that the decay heat can be removed safely by passive
means using Isolation Condensers which dissipate the heat into the large pool water
called Gravity Driven Water Pool, which can absorb the decay heat for more than 50
days.
• Towards development of technologies for manufacture of Uranium- 233 bearing fuel,
setting up a Mock-up facility for. U-233 fuel fabrication has been taken up.
• Conceptual design of fuel fabrication facility to be co-located with AHWR has been
worked out
• Towards development of technologies for reprocessing of Uranium-233 bearing fuel, a
plant “Power Reactor Thoria Reprocessing Facility” to demonstrate the reprocessing
technology of thorium fuel irradiated in PHWRs upto 8000MWD/Te is under
construction. This reprocessing facility will address technology demonstration for
establishing commercial reprocessing of uranium-233 bearing spent fuels. This plant is
designed for a throughput of 1.5 Te of heavy metals per year.

13
1.3 Future Plans
• The Twelfth Plan apex project Safety Assessment and Technology Development for
Advanced Reactors aims at evaluation of design margins and thermal-hydraulic safety
assessment of various FOAK features and passive systems of AHWR. In continuation
of R&D infrastructure at R&D Centre, Tarapur (ATTF and FMTF), a test facility
Containment System Integral Simulation Test (CONSIST) facility’ will be created and
integrated with ATTF for design validation of containment and its associated systems.
The project essentially aims at enhancing the passive features in AHWR in view of
recent Fukushima incident and greater emphasis is placed on severe accident
management that ensures minimal impact on public following such a scenario.
• AHWR Plant Siting Committee (APSC) is examining the issues associated with siting of
AHWR at candidate sites. The design of the reactor, at present, has been carried out
taking site independent input for a coastal area to facilitate sea water based cooling. In
principle, however, it is possible to locate this reactor at any other site which meets the
required siting criteria prescribed by AERB and other statutory bodies. It is expected
that AHWR construction activities may commence as early as possible after completion
of detailed engineering design by consultant and consequent timely appraisal from
regulatory bodies. It requires about forty five months for getting all clearances and
starting first pour of concrete (FPC). From FPC, it requires about five years for the
construction and achieving first criticality. From here, another year is required to
commence commercial operation.
• It is proposed to launch construction of AHWR towards the end of Twelfth Plan.
• This reactor is intended to serve as a technology demonstrator for a range of
technologies for Thorium utilisation to provide long term energy security to our country
as well as for several advanced safety features that have been incorporated in the design
of this reactor.
2. Current status and future plans of Research on Compact High Temperature Reactor (CHTR)
and on Hydrogen energy
• Nuclear energy assisted hydrogen production has been identified as long term solution
and BARC is committed to this technology development and deployment. R&D work on
high temperature nuclear reactor and Iodine-Sulfur thermo chemical process constituted
main components of this development work. In addition R&D on electrolysis based
production and development of hydrogen storage methods was also planned. These
development works were included as “Hydrogen Energy” thematic PLAN Projects of
BARC.
2.1 Indian High Temperature Reactor Programme:
•. Compact High Temperature Reactor:
Under the programme, currently India is developing a Compact High Temperature
Reactor (CHTR) as a technology demonstrator for associated technologies. This lead-
bismuth eutectic (LBE) alloy cooled 100 kWth reactor, with core outlet temperature of
1000 °C, will use TRISO coated particle type fuel, and incorporate several advanced
passive safety features. The reactor is modular in design and is being designed to be
compact in weight and size for ease in its deployment in remote locations for its use
as a compact power pack.

14
• The technologies for the reactor would be demonstrated in stages. In the initial stage,
all engineering systems with surrogate materials and electrical heating system would be
demonstrated at 550°C. Subsequent to the manufacture of fuel, materials and other
systems, critical facility for CHTR would be set up.
• Currently many experimental facilities such as Liquid Metal Loop, Oxygen Probe Testing
Facility, High Temperature Material Test Facility, Test Facility for Corrosion Studies in
Fluoride Salts are in operation while the Molten Salt Test Facility is under construction
to carry out various studies related to liquid metals, and heat removal systems.
• Technological challenges overcome so far include:
➢ The manufacturing capabilities for BeO, carbon components, and fuel micro-spheres
have been demonstrated.
➢ Trials for TRISO coatings have been successfully carried out on surrogate materials
and characterised.
➢ Thermal hydraulics for the LBE has been established through analytical and
experimental studies. Various techniques for SiC coating on graphite have been
developed.
➢ Processes have been developed to produce high-density nuclear grade BeO
components.
➢ Nb-l %Zr-0.l %C alloy has been developed.
➢ Passive heat removal systems such as high temperature heat pipes and a gas gap
filling based heat removal systems are also under various stages of development.
• Innovative High Temperature Reactor (IHTR):
For the purpose of large-scale hydrogen generation using high temperature thermo-
chemical processes (>850 °C), design for a larger power reactor (600 MWth), called
Innovative high temperature reactor (IHTR) is also being worked out. Studies carried
out have resulted in selection of pebble bed reactor core with molten salt-based coolant.
Detailed design is underway for this reactor. It is expected that this reactor would be
able to produce 80,000 Nm
3/hr of hydrogen when coupled to a high efficiency (50%)
hydrogen production process. It is contemplated that reject heat after producing
hydrogen, could be utilised to produce electricity and potable water by desalination.
Currently studies related to reactor physics, thermal hydraulics, and pebble based fuel
handling systems are underway and other studies are planned in the current plan period.
2.2 Hydrogen production
Hydrogen production by both thermo chemical process and electrolysis process is under
development
(i) Hydrogen production by thermo chemical process
Iodine-Sulfur process
• R&D on nuclear heat based Iodine Sulfur thermo-chemical process for water
splitting has been identified for initial research in view of highest thermodynamic
efficiency reported. Theoretical and experimental investigation of all three sections
of IS process viz. Bunsen, Hydrogen Iodide and sulphuric acid section, has been

15
carried out. Catalyst for sulphuric acid decomposition (Fe 1.8Cro.2O3) and for HI
decomposition (Pt on activated carbon) have been developed. Glass close loop
system operating at atmospheric pressure has been erected and commissioned
successfully to investigate feasibility of operation.
• Metallic closed loop system is planned to obtain engineering data pertaining to
techno-economics, component/system service life etc. All three sections of Metallic
plant will be operated together to demonstrate the closing of loop at prototypical
conditions to generate data for design of pilot plant. The bench scale metallic plant
will be demonstrated at the end of Twelfth plan project.
Copper-Chlorine process
• In addition R&D on medium temperature thermo chemical process ego Copper-
Chlorine process which can be integrated with Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor
(PFBR), is initiated as part of Twelfth Plan research.
(ii) Hydrogen production by electrolysis process
Alkaline electrolyser
• Porous Nickel electrodes with high internal pore surface area has been developed in
BARC which provide high current densities without increasing the cell voltage.
Successful electrolyser plant operation has been demonstrated for 10 Nm3/hr high
purity hydrogen production up to 4 kg/cm2 pressure.
• Demonstration of 30 Nm3/hr hydrogen production plant at 15 kg/cm2 discharge
pressure is in progress. This relatively high discharge pressure is unique feature of
the plant, which can be directly connected to many applications without the
requirement of booster compressor.
High Temperature Steam Electrolyser/Solid Oxide Fuel Cell
• Based on the experience gained in materials development and fabrication of Solid
Oxide Fuel Cell (SOFC), over the last few years, BARC has started working on
development and demonstration of High Temperature Steam Electrolyser (HTSE).
• Process has been developed for fabrication of single tubular cell of 14 ID/18 OD x
150 mm long. The process is primarily based on co-pressing and co-firing. Cells
have been tested in SOFC mode and found to give maximum power density
62 mW.cm-2 at 900
0C. Work is under progress to demonstrate higher performance
(> 250 m W.cm-2) single cell through effective collection of current from cell
electrodes.
Studies related to Intermediate Temperature Solid Oxide Fuel Cells (ITSOFCs)
• Studies on oxide ion conducting as well as proton ion conducting SOFCs have been
carried out, which can operate at intermediate temperatures, i.e. 500-700°C, as
compared to high temperature SOFCs with operating temperatures in the range of
800-1000°C. This lowering of operating temperature can overcome several problems
encountered while operating SOFCs at higher temperatures.
2.3 Hydrogen storage
• A Sievert’s-type experimental apparatus for the study of hydrogen storage in metals

16
forming the hydride phase is developed. The apparatus is realized with commercial
components and allows the study of the hydrogen absorption and desorption kinetics
as well as the determination of the pressure-composition (P-C) diagram of the
material-hydrogen system.
• Transition metal based hydride having composition Ti
o.85VFe0.15 has the maximum
storage capacity of 3.7 wt%  among the various Ti-V-Fe compositions studied.
• Design and Synthesis of reversible high capacity lithium based metal hydrides are
also planned. Erection of the demonstration plant is in progress and experimental
trials will begin by this year end.
The above summary of work under taken would have given the Committee some
reassurance about the intense efforts being put in by the Department.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the efforts and progress made with regard to the third
stage Nuclear Power Programme which are laudable. Still, the Committee feels that there
must be a scientific approach-a well laid out time frame within which it should be targeted
to be accomplished. Such an approach would prove to be more assuring for the Committee.
Recommendation (Para 4.25.2)
Supply and availability of Uranium forms a critical component of expansion of nuclear
power programme of our country. Non-availability of fuel owing to shortage of Uranium continues
to be a major constraint in enhancing nuclear energy production. Worse, operation of PHWRs
fuelled with domestic Uranium is not able to attain full capacity factor. As per the Annual
Report – 2011-12 of the Department, the reactors operating with domestic fuel supply registered
capacity factor of about 67 per cent till December 31, 2011. However, the Committee is surprised
to note that out of B.E. allocation of Rs. 154.00 crores for the year 2011-12, of UCIL under Major
Head 4861 and Rs. 487.00 crores under Major Head 12861 was drastically reduced at R.E. stage
to only Rs. 25.00 and Rs. 274.00 crores respectively apparently due to non-utilisation or
underutilization of funds by UCIL. When the Committee enquired about the reasons for gross under
utilisation of funds by UCIL, it was informed that it was due to delay in sanctioning of the
Tummalapalle Expansion Project and Uranium Project at Gogi. The Committee understands that
sanctioning of the project is an internal matter of the Department, which could have been obtained
in time as such a vital project on which expansion of nuclear power programme so heavily
depends, cannot be made to suffer due to procedural reasons. The Committee expresses its serious
displeasure over such a lackadaisical approach of the Department.
Action Taken By Government
Uranium Corporation of India Limited had planned for construction of Gogi uranium project
in Kamataka and Expansion of Tummalapalle uranium project in Andhra Pradesh during 2011-12.
Accordingly, pre-project activities like land site selection, base lines studies, obtaining statutory
clearances were initiated.
In case of Gogi uranium project, after baseline studies and public hearing on 16
th November
2010, application for environmental clearance was made to MoEF on 14 th March, 2011.  It was

17
expected that following the final Environmental Clearance (EC) and subsequent CCEA approval,
site activities shall start during 2011-12. MOEF’s expert committee discussed Gogi project on
28th  November, 2011 and asked for some more clarifications which were submitted to MoEF on
14th May 2012. The matter has been pursued at different times with MoEF and as the final EC
was taking time, the fund allocation to Gogi was accordingly reduced. The final EC is yet to be
obtained and consequently, UCIL could not utilize the allocated funds for Gogi uranium project
during 2011-12.
In case of Expansion of Tummalapalle uranium project, it was expected that the project
approval shall be available to UCIL during October, 2011. All reports and studies for environmental
clearance of the project have been completed. Environmental Public Hearing will be conducted by
State Pollution Control Board in consultation with District Administration taking local public opinion
into consideration. Accordingly, the fund allocated in BE of 2011-12 and subsequently revised in
RE of 2011-12 could not be utilized.
It may be noted that in spite of all efforts by UCIL, statutory clearances could not be
obtained due the external reasons beyond the control of UCIL/DAE for which BE and RE allocation
for two of the above mentioned projects could not be utilised.
Comments
The Committee reiterates its recommendations with the hope that the Department
would sort out the procedural wrangles by taking up the matter at the highest level with
the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
Recommendation (Para 4.25.3)
The allocation for Uranium Corporation India Ltd. for this year under Major Head 4861 has
been increased from Rs. 154.00 crores B.E. last year to Rs. 216.00 crores this year, but under
Major Head 12861, it has been slightly reduced from Rs. 487.00 crores to Rs. 467.00 crores. The
Department has stated that the provision has been made in anticipation of sanction of the
Tummalapalle Expansion Project and Uranium Project at Gogi and also the new projects envisaged
under Twelfth Plan. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the budgetary allocation made this
year must be fully utilized and the Department should not come out with procedural excuses next
year. The Committee also recommends that the new potential heavy mineral zones identified by
Atomic Minerals Directorate in new areas must also be exploited so as to extract as much Uranium
ore as possible and for this purpose, the Department should prepare a time bound Action Plan.
Action Taken By Government
Uranium Corporation of India Limited shall make all efforts for pre-project activities
towards timely availability of all statutory clearances of all the projects listed under Twelfth Plan
period which will ensure full utilisation of budgetary allocation as envisaged in Twelfth Plan period.
New areas identified by Atomic Minerals Directorate for Exploration and Research (AMD)
are being regularly evaluated by UCIL for their techno-economic viability for exploitation. The
viable deposits shall be taken for development in a time bound manner in line with the requirement
of nuclear fuel.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.

18
Recommendation (Para 4.25.4)
The Committee also expresses its serious concern over the fact that the Lambapur Project,
Nalgunda District, Andhra Pradesh and Kylleng Pyndengsotiong Mawthabah (KPM), West Khasi
Hills District, Meghalaya, which are being pursued from Tenth Five Year Plan onwards have not
yet been set up owing to resistance by the local people. The Committee understands that large
amount of money has already been spent on these Projects. The Committee fails to understand as
to why for so long the Department has not been able to amicably sort out the problems with the
local people. The Committee feels that the concern of the people about health hazard posed by
Uranium mining needs to be allayed with extensive public awareness and outreach programmes
instead of standing firm on the notion that Uranium mining does not pose any health hazards and
a number of health surveys conducted confirm this fact. The fact that Uranium mining does not
cause health hazard needs to be appropriately conveyed to the people so as to convince them and
win their confidence. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should pay due
attention on the above observations of the Committee.
Action Taken By Government
Lambapur Project in Nalgonda district, Andhra Pradesh and Kylleng-Pyndengsohiong,
Mawthabah (KPM Project) in West Khasi Hills District, Meghalaya State are being pursued by UCIL
since Tenth Plan. No headway has been made for taking up site construction activities at both the
sites. However, UCIL continues to remain engaged with opinion makers of Meghalaya to create a
favourable environment.
In case of Lambapur Uranium Project, mining lease application, Consent for Establishment
(CFE) and land acquisition/transfer applications are pending since 2002. Part of the deposit,
amenable to open pit mining is located adjacent to Nagarjunsagar reservoir which is the source of
drinking water to large part of the State including Hyderabad. UCIL has made several studies and
generated sufficient data to expel the fear of water pollution by dust generated from open pit mine.
However, strong resentment against the project on the apprehension of drinking water pollution has
been expressed on different platforms. In addition, part of the land required for project falls under
Rajiv Gandhi Tiger Sanctuary.
In order to hasten the process of site construction, during 2010 the project activities were
split into two stages; Stage I - Pre-project activities and Stage II -Mining and Milling activities. It
was expected that all statutory clearances and the project approval from Government of India shall
be available to UCIL. As the approval process was not progressing, UCIL had made a token
provision in BE 2011-12. This also could not be utilised in absence of statutory approvals.
Uranium Corporation of India Limited is cautiously moving towards mobilising public
opinion in favour of uranium mining showcasing the benefit of Tummalapalle project in Andhra
Pradesh. Under the circumstances, UCIL has made a token fund provision of Rs. 45.00 crore in
Twelfth plan period towards Lambapur uranium project.
In case of Kylleng-Pyndengsohiong, Mawthabah (KPM Project), application for mining lease
is pending with State Government of Meghalaya since Jan.’07, Land lease agreement signed with
local land owners is awaiting State Governments approval since 2007. Construction of this project
is being opposed by sections of population, people’s representatives and opinion makers on
apprehension of potential health hazard, alienation of local population, influx of outsiders. These
issues have been extensively addressed on various platforms and widely circulated. People residing
in the neighbourhood of the proposed project site have been invited to see for themselves the
workings, environmental management and corporate social responsibility initiatives at the existing
operations of Uranium Corporation of India Limited. Uranium Corporation of India Limited

19
continues to remain engaged with different sections of the population and opinion makers to create
a favourable image of the company.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation (Para 4.26.2)
The Committee, although satisfied with the explanation given by the Department for the
shortfall in the allocation, feels that Atomic Minerals Directorate which is shouldering the
responsibility of identifying mineral resources for the nuclear power programme should continue to
intensify its survey and exploration activities, so that, the country could strive to attain, as far as
possible, self-dependence in Uranium. The Committee, therefore, recommends that AMD should
make efforts to cover those areas of the country to identify prospective mineral resources which
have been left untouched so far.
Action Taken By Government
As desired by the Committee, the Atomic Mineral Directorate is putting every efforts to
intensity its survey and exploration activities so that the country could strive to attain self
dependence in uranium. The details of the activities carried out are given below:
(i) Airborne survey during Eleventh Plan:
During Elventh Plan, AMD has carried out 2,09,678 line km heliborne survey, as detailed
on the following page.:
BASIN/AREA Achievement
(Line km)
MNC
Mohar, Madhaya Pradesh 6,500
Albitite Line, Rajasthan 9,945
Bhima NE Part and Central Part, Karnataka 36,013
Kaladgi Basin, Karnataka 36,004
Sonrai Basin, Uttar Pradesh 11 ,210
Southern extension of  Albitite Line, Rajasthan 30,131
NGRI
North Singhbhum, Jharkhand 13,545
Singhbum Shear Zone, Jharkhand 5,621
Chhattisgarh Basin 5,827
AMD
Cuddapah Basin, Andhra Pradesh 39,154
Shillong Basin, Meghalaya 2,263
Aravalli Fold Belt, Rajasthan 13 ,464
T
OTAL 2,09,678

20
(ii) Survey and Exploration activities for Twelfth Plan:
During Twelfth Plan (2012-17), exploration for uranium, thorium, zirconium, rare metal and
rare earth elements aided by the existing and expected additional facilities to be created would be
continued to support indigenous Nuclear Power Programme of the country. A total of 12 new
projects are proposed for Twelfth Plan besides nine Eleventh Plan continuing projects. Major thrust
will be on synergizing multi-disciplinary activities of AMD to achieve the goal of augmenting
resources of uranium, rare metal and rare earth elements, monazite and zircon to facilitate scaling
up of the indigenous Nuclear Power Programme.
During Twelfth Plan, AMD envisaged to establish 75,000 t of in situ U
3O8 to be identified
through airborne, ground geophysical, geochemical, reconnaissance and detailed radiometric/
geological surveys.
Airborne geophysical survey: 3,75,000 line km (Eleventh Plan continuing project: 1,95,000
line km and Twelfth Plan new project: 1,80,000 line km), ground geophysical survey: 2,500 sq.
km, reconnaissance survey: 25,000 sq. km. detailed survey: 1,000 sq. km. and geochemical survey:
10,000 sq.km. and 8,15,000m of drilling [Departmental: 3,25,000 m and contract drilling: 4,90,000
m] is planned.
Augmentation of rare-metal and rare-earth resources with the addition of 18t columbite-
tantalite (Nb-Ta) and 16t HREE mineral concentrate (xenotime) is also proposed. Augmentation of
beach sand mineral resources through systematic survey and exploration to identify thorium and
zirconium resources in unexplored areas in varied geological domains and at deeper levels along the
coast-line is also proposed.
(iii) Airborne Survey during Twelfth Plan:
As suggested by the Committee airborne survey including heliborne TDEM, magnetic and
gamma-ray spectrometric over 2,25,000 line km and ZTEM, gravity gradiometry and hyper spectral
survey (new technologies) over 1,50,000 line km will be taken up in new areas for identification
of potential targets for further exploration and augmentation of uranium resources.
From the above it may kindly be seen that the efforts taken up by Atomic Mineral
Directorate for survey and exploration of uranium is highly intensified.
Comments
The Committee notes the steps taken by the Department to intensify its surveys but
wonders as to what extent, the sarveys undertaken have been successful in identifying
mineral resources for our Nuclear Power Programmes.
Recommendation (Para 4.27.2)
The Committee feels that Cancer is emerging as a major deadly disease in our country and
adequate infrastructure facilities for its early detection, effective and economical treatment need to
be created on priority basis. This assumes importance also because the poor cannot afford to get
treatment, its cost being exorbitantly high. The Committee, therefore, feels that TMC can play a
lead role in achieving the above objectives and for this purpose it is imperative that it expands its
network in other major cities and various States. During its visit to Tata Memorial Hospital,
Mumbai, the Committee found that the Hospital was over crowded with patients mainly because
of the lack of economical and effective treatment facilities elsewhere. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that TMC should, in a time bound manner, try to establish its Centres in other parts
of the country with high cancer case rates. Simultaneously, it should also makes sincere efforts

21
to develop tertiary level cancer care facilities in each State/Region, so that, patients need not travel
from remote and far flung areas all the way to Mumbai. The Committee also recommends that
adequate financial allocation should be provided to the Centre, so that, it could not only undertake
research in the field of cancer, but also expand its activities and reach in different parts of the
country. The Committee expresses its displeasure over the reduction of allocation for the Centre
in B.E. 2012-13 which is Rs. 248.15 crores as against the B.E. of Rs. 289.78 crores last year and
recommends that adequate budgetary support needs to be provided to the Centre so that it is able
to cater to the needs of the cancer patients, especially the poor through expansion and outreach
programmes.
Action Taken By Government
Tata Memorial Centre has the responsibility to set standards of therapy for treatment
modalities for cancer and a centre to train Doctors, Scientists an Para Medical staff in the field.
TMC is expanding its activities and since of the significant ones are as stated below:–
• The Haematolymphoid services and Bone Marrow Transplant Unit have been moved to
ACTREC in Navi Mumbai. This has already improved survival significantly.
• There is a strong effort to establish women and children cancer hospital in the vicinity
of Tata Memorial Hospital (TMH) to take care of this niche area and simultaneously
achieve decongestion.
• During Twelfth Plan the Hospital has mooted a National Cancer Grid for seamless
integration of service, research and education in cancer for India. Under the National
Cancer grid it is proposed to establish Centres – one in Andhra Pradesh and one in
Punjab, and also to support two additional Centres, Dr. B. Borooah Cancer Institute,
Guwahati, Assam and Tata Medical Centre, Kolkata so that uniform state-of-art cancer
care is offered in respective parts of India at an affordable cost. These Centres in turn
will mentor regional facilities that will deliver care at patient’s door steps.
• A pro-active telemedicine activity covering almost all states is presently running at TMH
to reduce patient influx from outside Mumbai.
• To bring state-of-art technology for treatment DAE is planning a Hadron Beam therapy
unit in Mumbai.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the Action Taken.
Recommendation (Para 4.28.2, 4.28.3 and 4.28.4)
The Committee notes that out of the total B.E. allocation of Rs. 1204.63 crores under this
Head last year, an amount of Rs. 990.39 crores has been utilized resulting in underutilization of
Rs. 214.29 crores. When the Committee asked about the reasons for the underutilization, it was
explained that the amount of Rs. 109.00 crores could not be utilized by Institute of Plasma
Research as International organisation has not released the design of the International
Thermonuclear Experimental Reactors delaying payments for the same. Further, an amount of
Rs. 18.00 crores could not be used due to delay in sanction for the project – New Campus for
Fusion Reactor Related Activities. Tata Institute of Fundamental Research failed to utilize an amount
of Rs. 91.80 crores due to delay in obtaining statutory permission for infrastructure facilities, TIFR
New Campus Development, etc.

22
4.28.3 The Committee expresses its concern over underutilization of funds by these prominent
institutions as it would adversely affect our preparations/advancement in the field of nuclear
science.
4.28.4 The Committee is hopeful that the Department would give due consideration to the
recommendations of the Committee and take all necessary measures to obviate the possibilities of
underutilization of funds under various schemes.
Action Taken By Government
(1) Rs. 91.00 crore was sanctioned for the ‘In-wall Shields’ (IWS) package under ITER-
India Project. However, the designs of some ITER components were changed during
the last year, which had impact on manufacturing schedules of IWS components by
our contractors. The IWS design has now been finalized by ITER-IO and we have
started receiving imported materials needed for manufacturing IWS components, and
provisioned Rs. 91.00 crore for this package in the BE of year 2012-13.
(2) Rs. 18.00 crore was earmarked for the project ‘New Campus for Fusion Related
Activities’ at the BE stage. The project was not sanctioned because the discussion with
the State Government on the project land/location could not be finalized in time.
Therefore the earmarked money was surrendered at the RE stage. The project land/
location has now been agreed upon between IPR and the Government of Gujarat is
awaiting a proposal from DAE.
In both items, delays were caused due to involvement of outside agencies, namely ITER-
IO and the Government of Gujarat. Action will be taken to prepare/present more realistic budgetary
estimate in future, whenever outside agencies are involved.
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research failed to utilize an amount of Rs. 91.80 crore. due
to delay in obtaining statutory permission for infrastructure facilities. Out of the surrender of about
Rs. 91.80 crore, Rs. 62.00 crore is towards non receipt of sanction for revised cost proposals
such as Radio Astronomy-I, Inter Institutional III, Research Facilities, NCBS - I and II, and
Rs: 30.00 crore towards delay in statutory permission coupled with non issue of sanctions being
the last year of the plan period. The Department will take all necessary action to avoid under
utilization of Plan funds.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply but would like the Department to seek allocation of
funds for its various projects only to the extent it realistically hopes to spend during the
relevant period.
Recommendation (Para 4.30.5)
The Committee feels that a department like Atomic Energy is expected to be more
disciplined particularly in planning and execution of projects and hence slippage of target both
physical and financial reflects adversely on the overall performance of the Department. The
Committee also notes that setting up of Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor, the second stage of the
Indian Nuclear Power Programme is crucial for the commencement of the third stage nuclear
power programme for thorium utilisation. The Committee also notes that the target of achieving
three stage nuclear power programme leading ultimately to development of thorium fuel based
reactors has already been delayed considerably and to meet the ever increasing demand of energy,
we need to accelerate growth of installed capacity of nuclear power projects with indigenous

23
technology using domestic fuel. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should
make all out efforts to make the prototype fast breeder reactor operational by targeted date of
completion, i.e., September, 2014 and start its commercial operation by 2014-15 as scheduled.
Action Taken By Government
Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor (PFBR) has reached advance stage of construction. With
physical target of 86% achieved by end of Financial Year 2011-12, the reactor is heading for
mechanical completion of the reactor in Financial Year 2012-13.
Indigenisation has been the prime need for this advance technology reactor. Manufacturing
of all critical reactor and sodium circuit equipment was taken up within the country. Industries
faced many challenges in meeting the never attempted in the past specification for the critical
reactor and sodium circuit equipments. The challenges have been successfully accomplished.
Equipment below the reactor top shield are already in position and sodium circuit equipments are
in advance stage of erection.
Commissioning of the water, gas electrical and instrumentation systems will commence in
Financial Year 2012-13. This will be followed by integrated test before sodium is put in the reactor.
It is planned to put sodium in secondary system loop in first half of the Financial Year 2013-14.
Extensive trial run of the plant has been planned with sodium in Primary, Secondary and Safety
Grade Decay Heat Removal system loops to study and calibrate the equipment and system before
nuclear fuel is loaded in the reactor.
Current status of supply and erection of reactor and sodium circuit equipment provides
adequate confidence that the scheduled Criticality in September, 2014 and Commercial Operation in
March, 2015 is achievable target and will not slip. Further, success in achieving stringent
specification of manufacturing and erection of Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor has paved way to
move ahead with India’s second stage of nuclear programme with vigour.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply and hopes that the Department will make the
country proud by successfully achieving its target.
Recommendation (Para 4.30.8)
While the Committee appreciates the NPCIL motto of ‘Safety first and production next’ and
also the constraints the Department is facing both domestic and international, it feels that the time
has come when the Department must enhance its nuclear energy capacity in a big way to help the
country sustain its economic growth. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department
must not leave any stone unturned to ensure that nuclear power generation capacity is given a big
boost as the country cannot afford any laxity on this front any more.
Action Taken By Government
All efforts are being made to ensure timely launch and completion of nuclear power projects
considering the domestic and international constraints. The main domestic constraints are
acquisition of land for new projects and gaining public acceptances for nuclear power plants post
Fukushima incident. Nuclear Power Corporation India Limited has launched a massive public
outreach campaign based on multi-pronged approach to address the apprehensions of the people
about nuclear power in a credible manner. NPCIL has also enhanced its Corporate Social
Responsibility (CSR) activities at its sites for inclusive growth of the neighbouring communities.

24
The focus areas have been health, education and infrastructure. Upfront CSR activities have also
been initiated at the new sites.
The nuclear power expansion programme is being pursued vigorously, with full regard to
the safety, security and livelihood of the people.
Comments
The Committee appreciates the commitment of NPCIL towards Corporate Social
Responsibility and its efforts in securing acceptability of the people for Nuclear Power Plants
in their neighborhoods. The Committee hopes that NPCIL and its dedicated workforce will
continue to strive towards generating more nuclear power to fill the critical gaps in energy
needs of the country.

25
MINUTES

26

27
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Monday, the 17 th December, 2012 in Committee Room
‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri M. Rama Jois
3. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
LOK SABHA
4. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
5. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
6. Shri O.S. Manian
7. Shri Basori Singh Masram
8. Shri Ramashanker Rajbhar
9. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
10. Shri Pradeep Tamta
11. Shri Joseph Toppo
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Committee Officer
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and
informed them that the Committee would consider and adopt its draft 232
nd to 238 th Reports on
the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 222 nd to
228th reports on Demands for Grants (2012-13), pertaining to the Ministries/De partments of Atomic
Energy, Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, Space, Earth Sciences, Scientific and
Industrial Research and Biotechnology respectively.
2. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration, one by one, the Draft Action Taken
Reports and adopted the 232
nd to 238 th reports without any amendment.
27

28
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. The Committee, thereafter, decided to present/lay on the table of both the Houses of the
Parliament its 232 nd to 238 th Reports on 20 th December, 2012. The Committee authorised its
Chairman and in his absence Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra to present the Report in Rajya Sabha and
Shri Pradeep Tamta and in his absence Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde to lay the copy of the report
on the table of Lok Sabha.
The Committee, then, adjourned at 10.35 
A.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.