76th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/76threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:14:17]
   PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
SEVENTY-SIXTH REPORT
 
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2000-2001)
OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT
 
(DEMAND NO. 92)
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 24TH APRIL , 2000)
(LAID IN THE LOK SABHA ON THE  24TH APRIL , 2000)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL , 2000/VAISAKHA, 1922  (SAKA)
 
 
C O N T E N T S
 
1 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2 INTRODUCTION
3 REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
4 SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS
5 ANNEXURES
6 MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
 
        
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY        
STANDINGCOMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1999-2000)
 
 
1.   Shri C. Ramachandraiah - Chairman
           
RAJYA SABHA
 
       2.   Shri Debabrata Biswas
*3.   Shri K. C. Kondaiah
 4.    Smt. Chandresh Kumari       
5.
       Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra               
6.       Dr. D. Masthan                                             
7.       Shri Lalitbhai Mehta                       
8.       Prof.(Smt.) Bharati Ray                 
9.       Smt. Savita Sharda
     10.  Shri Lachhman Singh                           
     11.  Shri B.P. Singhal                                         
12.
   Shri Prakanta Warisa               
13.   Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
   $14.  Vacant

76th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/76threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:14:17]
 
      LOK  SABHA
 
15. Shri Bhan Singh Bhaura
16. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan                     
17. Shri Vishwendra Singh Chauhan         
18. Smt. Bhavana Chikhaliya                   
19. Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza              
20. Shri Laxman Giluwa                         
21. Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya
   %22.Shri Bali Ram Kashyap
   %23.Shri Hassan Khan
      24. Dr. Charan Das Mahant
25. Shri S. Murugesan                              
26. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan
27. Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                            
28. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik                
29. Shri B.K. Parthasarathi               
30. Shri Suresh Pasi                                         
31. Dr. Ashok Patel                                        
32. Shri Prahlad Patel                            
33. Prof. R.R. Pramanik                                
34. Shri Naresh Puglia                          
35. Shri Ramsagar Rawat
36. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy
      -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      *     Nominated w.e.f. 15th March, 2000 vice Shri Karma Topden ceased to be a Member of the  Committee w.e.f. 23rd
                   February,  2000 on expiry of his term in Rajya Sabha.
      $    Shri Rahasbihari Barik ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 2
nd April, 2000 on expiry of his term in         
              Rajya  Sabha.
      %   Nominated w.e.f. 7
th April, 2000.
     
            37.            Prof. I.G. Sanadi                                     
      38.      Shri Lakshman Seth
39.  Shri Ram Prasad Singh               
40.  Shri V.S. Sivakumar       
41.  Shri V. Vetriselvan
42.  Dr. (Smt.) Rajeswaramma Vukkala
43.Shri Balram Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri H. K. Chanana, Director
Shri D. P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
 
 
 
IN
TRODUCTION
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
 Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Seventy-
sixth Report of the Committee.  This Report deals with  the detailed Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the Department of
 Ocean Development (Demand No.92).
 
st

76th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/76threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:14:17]
2.         In the meeting of the Committee held on the 1  April, 2000 the Secretary and other Officers of the Department of
 Ocean Development gave an overview of the various activities of the Department and the Members sought clarifications on
 various aspects of the performance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
 
3.         The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by the
 Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the
 Department of Ocean Department.
 
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on 18
th April,2000.
 
NEW DELHI;
 April 18,2000 
C. RAMACHANDRAIAH
Chairman,
Committee on Science & Technology, Environment &
 Forests
 
 
 
R E P O R T
      The Department of Ocean Development was created in July, 1981 within the Cabinet Secretariat directly under the
 charge of the Prime Minister. In March, 1982 it became a separate Department and has since been functioning as a nodal
 Department for organising, coordinating and promoting ocean development activities in the country, in line with the Ocean
 Policy Statement of 1982. The programmes pursued by the Department over the years have also kept pace with
 developments World over and addressed National needs and issues.
      The programmes of the Department are directed towards:
(i)         Technology Development Programmes for future applications with strategic, industrial and economic
 significance.
(ii)        Societal Programmes with direct/indirect benefit for the community by technology applications and pilot
 project demonstration with the participation of the community for their socio-economic prosperity, and for
 coastal area development.
(iii)       Marine Resources Programmes for exploration of marine living and non-living resources, techno-economic
 studies to evolve strategies for sustainable exploration and utilisation, and resource enhancement.
(iv)       Multi-institutional and multi-disciplinary Polar Science Programmes and Antarctic Expeditions with
 scientific and geo-political significance.
(v)        Capacity Building Programme towards self-reliance through basic scientific research in ocean sector, human
 resource development and establishing Centres of Excellence in academic institutions.
(vi)
              Creation of public awareness on the potential and uses of ocean.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR 2000-01
2.   The   Secretary informed the Committee that the total budgetary  demand for the year 2000-01 is as follows:
                        Plan          - Rs.135.00 crores
                        Non-Plan  - Rs.  23.00 crores
                        Total        - Rs.158.00 crores
2.1The plan outlay for 2000-01 has been fixed at Rs.135.00 crores, which is Rs.45.00 crores more than that of 1999-2000
 level, of which Rs. 43.00 crores is meant for the delineation of outer limits of Continental Shelf and the remaining Rs. 92.00
 crores for the other Plan schemes.
3.   The Committee was apprised that for the Antarctic Research, the approved outlay was Rs.20.00 crores, of which Rs.
 19.00 crores would be given as Grants-in-aid to National Centre for Antarctic & Ocean Research (NCAOR) for launching
 the 20
th Scientific Expedition to Antarctica, carrying out scientific experiments, maintenance of the permanent research
 station “Maitri” at Antarctica and operation and manning of the NCAOR.
4.   In the case of Poly Metallic Nodules(PMN) programme, an outlay of Rs.19.31crore has been provided. This includes
 Rs.1.00 crore for survey and exploration, Rs.0.31crore for the Environmental  Impact  Assessment (both under the S&T

76th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/76threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:14:17]
 component), Rs.5.91 crores for  mining
technology development which includes chartering of the ship, Rs. 4.09 crores for development of Unmanned Submersibles
 under a joint programme with the Institute of Russian Academy of Sciences and Rs. 8.00 crores for metallurgy. The
 Technology Demonstration pilot plant for extraction of metals from Poly Metallic Nodules at Hindustan Zinc Limited
 (HZL) would be commissioned by October, 2000. The Secretary informed the Committee that due to financial constraints
 the Department have requested HZL to take up the programme for setting up the Pilot plant by advancing required funds
 from their own resources, during 1998 -1999.
5.   In the mission mode programmes of National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) including Ocean Thermal Energy
 Conversion (OTEC), an outlay of Rs.15.70 crores has been provided. The Expenditure Finance Committee has approved an
 outlay of Rs.35.25 crores for OTEC programme to be implemented during 1998-99 and 1999-2000. However, because of
 the resource crunch, an outlay of Rs.5.00 crores only was provided during 1998-99 and Rs. 18.00 crores during 1999-2000,
 though the requirement was Rs.29.00 crores. A sum of Rs. 10.32 crores has been provided for this programme for 2000-01
 to offset the shortfall in fund availability during the previous years. This pilot plant is expected to be commissioned off
 Tuticorin coast in September-October, 2000.  NIOT is also exploring the possibility of having a tie-up with some of the
 agencies involved in the power sector for technical and financial collaboration, for commercial operation once the pilot plant
 operation becomes successful.
6.   The Secretary informed the Committee that for the Delineation of Continental Shelf an outlay of Rs.43 crores has been
 provided in 2000-01. Since India ratified the UN convention on the Law of the Sea in 1995, the claim for extending the
 outer limits of our continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles Exclusive Economic Zone has to be made before 2005. The
 time frame for carrying out the bathymetric and seismic surveys and preparing necessary documents to submit to the
 Commission on the Limits of Continental Shelf is  5 years. Considering this, the Government approved the scheme with an
 outlay of Rs. 47.46 crores for implementation over a period of three years ending 2000-01.  The outlay was augmented to
 Rs. 4.00 crores at RE level from Rs. 0.50 crores at BE stage for 1999-2000.  The remaining amount of Rs. 43 crore has been
 provided in 2000-01 budget.  The NCAOR, Goa is coordinating the implementation of this programme.
 7.  Under Marine Living Resources Programme, the proposed outlay is Rs. 2.96 crore for assessment of resources and Rs.
 2.00 crore for the ongoing Drugs from Sea programme. The Department of Ocean Development have done away with the
 provision made for Marine Non-Living Resources such as Bengal and Nicobar Fan (BENFAN) Hydromass etc, in view of
 the IX Plan provision being restricted to Rs. 510.62 crores and diversion of additional funds amounting to Rs. 22.46 crores
 from this provision for the delineation of outer limits for Continental Shelf Programme. The Committee was also informed
 that for the Ocean Observation & Information Services, an outlay of Rs. 14.00 crores has been provided even through the
 requirement is about Rs.16.00 crores.
8.   An outlay of Rs. 2.05 crores and Rs. 2.50 crores has been made for Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction Systems
 (COMAPS) and Coastal Research Vessel (CRV) respectively during the Annual Plan 2000-01. An outlay of Rs. 6.70 crores
 has been provided for 2000-2001 for the Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management (ICMAM) Programme.  The
 provision made for Marine Biodiversity from the plan provision has been done away with pending finalisation of
 understanding on Allocation of Business with the Ministry of Environment & Forests.
9.   In line with the guidelines provided by the Island Development Authority the Department have kept a provision of Rs.
 1.00 crore for Island Development.  This is a coastal community programme implemented through National Institute of
 Ocean Technology (NIOT), by which viable technologies for enhancement of marine living resources would be developed
 and disseminated to the island community for their benefit.
10.The Department projected an outlay of Rs.152.32 crore for Annual Plan 2000-2001 to the Planning commission. 
 Considering the resources crunch the Department has restricted the outlay to Rs.135.00 crore as approved by the Planning
 Commission.  Consequently the Plan outlay for 2000-2001 the Department has rescheduled some of the initiatives,
 particularly the unmanned submersibles programme, Ocean Observation and Information Services, etc., with reduction in
 scope.
11.The Committee recommends that in order to ensure continuity of the programmes an addition allocation may be allotted 
 to the Department at the time of R.E. stage so that rescheduled programmes can be completed in the current year itself. 
12.The Details of budgetary projections for the programmes of the Department of Ocean Development during the year 2000-
01 are given at Annexure-I and comparative figures in terms of actually made/ approved and actually utilised during 1997-
98, 1998-99 and 1999-2000 are given at Annexure-II.
MAJOR DISPROPORTIONATE VARIATIONS AND REASONS
13.The Committee was informed about the  details of major disproportionate variations during the years 1997-98,1998-99
 and 1999-2000 as follows:

76th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/76threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:14:17]
1997-98
            National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT):
            B.E            -            Rs. 7.50 Crores                  Actual              -            Rs. 8.25 Crores
13.1 The variation in expenditure was due to significantly higher achievements in respect of the physical targets prescribed
 under the mission programmes and development of infrastructure for NIOT.
            Drugs From Sea:
            B.E            -            Rs. 2.00 Crores                  Actual              -            Rs. 2.50 Crores
13.2 The variation was mainly due to speeding up of the activities on phase -I   clinical trials and setting up of infrastructure
 for Project Monitoring Cell at Central Drug Research Institute (CDRI), Lucknow.
            Ocean Observation and Information Services (OOIS):
            BE            -            Rs. 19.00 Crores            Actual              -            Rs. 20.93 Crores
13.3  One of the projects under OOIS is National Data Buoy Programme being implemented with partial financial assistance
 from Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation (NORAD). During the year 1996-97, NORAD made a direct part
 advance payment to M/S OCEANOR, Norway, for supply of data buoys to India.  This amount had to be adjusted during
 1997-98 and hence the variation.
 
            Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management (ICMAM):
            BE            -            Rs. 9.00 Crores                  Actual              -            Rs. 3.22 Crores
13.4  The shortfall in utilisation of the funds to the budgeted levels was due to the approval of the scheme by Cabinet
 Committee on Economic Affairs(CCEA) and the Government towards the fag end of the financial year.  A major part of the
 un-utilised funds under this programme was used for meeting the needs of National Institute of Ocean Technology, Ocean
 Observation & Information Services, Coastal Research Vessels, etc.
1999-2000
            Continental Shelf:
BE            -           Rs. 0.50 Crores              Anticipated      -            Rs. 4.00 Crores
13.5  Government has given a major thrust to this time bound programme, which is aimed at staking a claim with United
 nations Convention on Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) the continental margin beyond the Exclusive Economic Zone(EEZ) of
 200 nautical miles by acquiring the seismic data in accordance with the stipulations of the UNCLOS and submit the claims
 to the UN Commission on Limits of Continental Shelf by 2002.  Hence, an outlay of Rs. 4.00 Crores has been provided at
 RE stage during 1999-2000.
            Poly Metallic Nodules Programme:
BE             -            Rs. 14.05 Crores            Anticipated      -            Rs. 11.05 Crores
13.6  A sum of Rs. 3.00 Crores was diverted from the Mining Technology Development component to Delineation of
 Continental Shelf programme and hence the variation.
            Integrated Coastal & Marine Area Management Programme
BE            -            Rs. 6.00 Crores                  Anticipated      -            Rs. 4.40 Crores 
13.7  The variation was mainly due to delay in Government approval of engagement of foreign consultant, under the
 component Professional Services.
            Ocean Observation & Information Services
BE            -            Rs. 11.50 Crores            Anticipated      -            Rs. 9.00   Crores
13.8  The variation was mainly due to reallocation of priorities among the programmes and reduction of the BE by Rs. 4.00
 Crores at RE stage, necessitating deferment of certain activities to the next financial year.
NON- PLAN  PROGRAMMES
14.The Non-Plan expenditure broadly falls under four heads, namely (a)  Oceanographic Research Vessel (ORV) Sagar
 Kanya (b)  Fishery and Oceanographic Research Vessel (FORV) Sagar Sampada (c) Secretariat and Economic Services and

76th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/76threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:14:17]
 (d) Administrative infrastructure. The Committee was informed about the exploration of  Living and Non-Living resources
 using   FORV Sagar Sampada and  ORV Sagar Kanya.
14.1  The Committee was informed that during the year 1999-2000 FORV Sagar Sampada conducted 10 cruises covering a
 total track length of 18,531 nautical miles in the Arabian Sea and
Bay of Bengal.  203  participants from eighteen organisations  conducted investigations on Living Resources and
 environmental factors influencing their distribution, physical transport and exchange process across the shelf of Arabian
 Sea, effect of winter cooling on bio-geo cycling in the Arabian Sea, quantification of the flux of green house gases in coastal
 upwelling regions, etc.
POLAR SCIENCES
Antarctic Expedition:
15.The Secretary informed the Committee that the 19
th Indian Scientific expedition to Antarctica was launched from Cape
 Town, South Africa, on 9 th December 1999, keeping in view the likely scientific and economic benefits and future
 international cooperation in the field of polar science between India and other countries. The 19 th Expedition to Antarctica
 consisted of a 47 member team including 30 scientists and 17 logistic personnel, under the leadership of Mr. Arun
 Chaturvedi a scientist of Geological Survey of India, including a two member lady team – one medical Doctor from India
 and a Geologist from Peru.  This included a contingent of 25 members who would winter-over in Antarctica for 16 months
 duration in pursuit of science.  The logistic support for the Expedition had been provided by a contingent of Army
 personnel, which is headed by Maj. Ravi Sangwan.
16.In addition to the ongoing programmes several new experiments have been initiated during the course of this expedition,
 which includes:
(i)                 Study of earth-air current systems to give an insight to the deep space processes.
(ii)        Experiments on crack propagation of the ice-shelf in order to understand the dynamics and processes of
 Iceberg generation.
(iii)       Installation of a number of automatic weather stations to measure energy balance and albedo factors of the
 ice, as a part of global change studies.
(iv)       Reconstruction of the past climatic and vegetative history through the study of organo-debris present in the
 fresh water lake sediments of Antarctica.
(v)        Establishment of an environment monitoring laboratory for the first time at Maitri in order to carry out an 
 assessment of the status of air, noise, water biological and land environment of Antarctica, throughout the
 year.
17.The summer team of the XIX expedition returned to India via Cape Town on 6 th March, 2000 along with the winter team
 members of the XVIII expedition.
18  The Committee observes that this heralds another scientific feat in the realms of polar science at the end of this
 millennium and demonstrates the capabilities and interest of the country to pursue a well-focussed scientific campaign from
 a pristine scientific platform provided by Antarctica.
18.1  The Committee recommends that  the National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research(NCAOR) Goa, should be
 designated as the nodal  agency of the Department in planning, coordinating and executing the XX Indian Scientific
 Expedition to Antarctica for continuation of the scientific/research programmes initiated during the XIX expedition. The
 Committee hopes that the scientific and logistics co-operation gained  with the  launching of the XIX Expedition from Cape
 Town would lead to the initiation of state-of-the-art research programmes in Polar Sciences and should be carried forward in
 initiating and executing Southern Ocean Oceanography & Paleoclimatology, and Antarctic Global Change.
 
MARINE LIVING RESOURCES
Assessment of Marine Living Resources
19.The Committee was informed about the general trend in the results of primary productivity measurements in the Arabian
 Sea by the Marine Living Resources (MLR) cruises which indicated that the maximum chlorophyll-a values were seen in
 the (20-50m) euphotic zone.  High density of secondary producers was observed off Bombay, Ratnagiri, Mangalore and
 Cochin regions. The maximum density of fish larvae was observed in Mangalore region. In Arabian Sea, the observations
 were characterised by an up sloping of oxygen and nutrient levels from western to eastern longitudes with significant

76th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/76threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:14:17]
 gradients in concentrations.  In Bay of Bengal, the environmental conditions  remained steady with oxygenated layer up to
 80m and having low nutrients.
20.Assessment for demersal fishery resources of the Indian continental slope by acoustic survey and trawling operations was
 undertaken through four cruises of FORV Sagar Sampada.  Presence of deep sea lobsters and  shrimps was reported from
 the Andaman sea at a depth of 300-330 m. Deep sea shrimps were also reported from south-west coast in the 300-620 m
 depth zone.  
21.The project Studies on the Deep Scattering Layer (DSL) envisage detailed studies on the bio-composition, abundance and
 distribution of the DSL resources in the Indian Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ).  DSL resources between 150 and 500 m
 depth were studied by bioacoustics through 6 cruises of FORV in the Arabian Sea, 3 cruises in the Bay of Bengal and one
 cruise in the Andaman Sea.  Surveys were conducted.    The DSL showed diurnal vertical migrations. 
22.Studies on Toxic algal Blooms are designed to foster the effective management of, and scientific research on toxic algal
 blooms, in order to understand their causes, predict their occurrence and mitigate their effects. Samples collected from 147
 stations in 5 cruises of FORV were analysed for toxic algal presence.  The micro flora included 152 species of algae. 
 Eleven harmful species have been recorded. 
23.Benthic Productivity studies envisage a comprehensive study of the productivity, nature of the resources, conversion of
 organic matters, process of mineralisation, taxonomy and community structure of the benthic fauna in the continental shelf
 of the Indian Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ).  Sediment samples were collected from 58 stations from 30,50,100 and
 200m depths.
24.The Committee was informed that the Sagar Sampada Cell at Kochi, which was operating and managing the Fishery and
 Oceanographic Research Vessel Sagar Sampada and coordinating the implementation of the Assessment of Marine Living
 Resources programme, would eventually emerge as the full-fledged Centre for Marine Living Resources and Ecology in the
 next few years. 
25.The Committee observes that under Marine Living Resources programme the Department would  continue its research
 towards studies to establish techniques for estimation of fish, zooplankton and Deep Scattering Layer(DSL) of the  biomass;
 large marine ecosystem  studies of the Arabian Sea; assessment of mesopelagic resources of the high seas and studies on the
 benthic productivity/biodiversity and the fish biodiversity of the continental slope area.
DRUGS FROM SEA
26.The Committee was apprised about the Programme in which the six marine organisms showing  potent anti-diabetic /anti-
diarrhoeal;  anti-hyperlipidaemic, anti-anxiety, anti-cholesterol cum antioxidant; anti-bacterial cum anti-fungal and larvicidal
 activities were taken up for product development. Bioassay guided modification of extraction procedure for CDR-134 for
 separation of active principles responsible for anti-diabetic and anti-diarrhoeal activities was found to be successful.  One of
 the preparations showed consistently anti-diabetic activity in animal models and was devoid of anti-diarrhoeal activity.  The
 other preparation showed anti-diarrhoeal activity.  Pre-clinical studies on these two preparations and on anti-
hyperlipidaemic fish oil preparations were progressing satisfactorily.  Product development work on anti-anxiety, anti-
cholesterol cum antioxidant; anti-fungal/anti-bacterial organisms would also be undertaken.
27.The Committee notes with satisfaction that under the  programme the Department has done a commendable work. The
 Committee trusts that  the Department would continue  the exploratory work relating to collection, identification and
 bioevaluation of the marine flora and fauna from the Indian coastal waters besides completing regulatory pharmacology and
 toxicology of the anti-diabetic and anti-diarrhoeal drug in the year ahead.  This would go a long way in strengthening the
 commercialisation of Indian drugs and  their quality comparable  to world standards. The Department should also strive for
 Patenting of anti-cholesterol molecule and achieve the Patenting of process for anti-HIV drug by Indian Institute of
 Chemical Technology(IICT), Hyderabad.
MARINE NON-LIVING RESOURCES
Polymetallic Nodule Programme
28.The  Survey & Exploration in the Central Indian Ocean Basin(CIOB) mine site was continued for updating relative
 concentration and quality characteristics of the polymetallic nodules in different pre-determined blocks.  Grab samples were
 collected during a cruise to CIOB as part of close grid sampling at 5 km in selected blocks initiated earlier.
29.The Department carried out Environmental Impact Assessment(EIA) Study as  part of Comprehensive Impact Assessment
 study at Central Indian Ocean Basin (CIOB ) mine site, where a monitoring cruise plan was finalised which included the
 recolonisation activity. In order to develop the technology for mining of the Poly Metallic Nodules from the Sea a joint
 collaborative programme has been initiated with Institute für Konstruktion (IKS), University of Siegen, Germany to develop
 a crawler based flexible riser - positive displacement pumping concept for deep sea mining. In the first phase, an underwater

76th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/76threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:14:17]
 crawler developed at IKS has been refurbished with a manipulator, cutter, slurry pump, hydraulics, electrical,
 instrumentation and control systems for sand mining operation at 500 m water depth.
30.The crawler has been designed to work on a soft sea bed and has a special track belt made of rubber with involute teeth to
 compact the bed during motion. The manipulator arm sweeps the seabed and mines sand and a positive displacement pump
 delivers the sand slurry to the mother ship through a flexible hose. The system has been tested for locomotion, pumping etc.
 on land. The launching and retrieval tests for the sand mining system were held off Goa coast at 50 m water depth in
 October 98. After the tests a new hose winch and a new Field Installable Termination Assembly (FITA) were designed and
 developed by National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) for the system. The system was launched up to 140 metre
 depth off Tuticorin coast in April 1999. Based on the tests and experience obtained therein, additional modifications
in the system have been incorporated at IKS and at NIOT. Arrangements were being made to test the modified system for
 sand mining at 500 m water depth in the country during February-March,2000. As a part of phase I of the joint programme,
 a design report for 6000 metre deep sea nodule mining system with a collector and crusher has been prepared and is under
 review by experts.
31.The Committee was apprised that in order to keep  pace with other developed countries, the Russian Academy of
 Sciences (RAS)  under  the MoU with Department of Ocean Development, has proposed to develop an unmanned
 submersible capable of operating up to 6000 m depth.  Under this MoU, NIOT, Chennai and Experimental Design Bureau of
 Oceanological Enginering (EDBOE), RAS, have initiated a proposal to design, develop and test the unmanned submersible
 capable of working up to 6,000 m water depth. The work under this joint collaborative effort was commissioned.
32.The Committee was informed about the initiatives for technology development in the field of metallurgy where a
 continuous demonstration pilot plant to process 500 kg. per day of polymetallic nodules from Indian mine site to validate the
 process package developed for extraction of metal values from nodules by Regional Research Laboratory,
 Bhubaneswar(RRL-B) and Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay(BARC), is being set up at Hindustan Zinc Limited
 (HZL), Udaipur. HZL (U) is also partially financing the programme and responsible for commissioning, maintaining and
 operating the pilot plant.  HZL (U) has already taken action to offer turn-key job for setting up of this demonstration plan at
 HZL (U).  The plant is scheduled to be commissioned by September, 2000.  The Department has already collected about 80
 tonnes of nodules for this demonstration plant with the help of research vessel R.V.A.A.Sidorenko. The demonstration
 campaigns will generate data for techno-economic studies.  R&D efforts were continued to optimise the process routes
 being pursued at National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jameshedpur  (NML (J), RRL(B) and HZL (U).
33.The Committee recommends that the Department should continue its efforts  for development of technology  for mining
 development of an integrated mining complex module of 25,000 tonnes/yr. capacity for 6000 m. depth  in joint collaborative
 effort so that the cost of Deep Seabed Mining system is reduced significantly. The Department should  also continue its
 efforts towards commissioning of the design, development and testing of unmanned submersible capable of working upto
 6000 m through  collaborative programme.
33.1  The Committee notes with satisfaction the   R&D activities of the Department for optimisation of extraction
 efficiencies  of metal values (Cu., Ni., Co., Mn.) at NML(J), RRL(B) and HZL(U) and hopes that the data generated in the
 demonstration plant and associated R&D work in other laboratories for selective scale up studies would be analysed with an
 ultimate objective of designing a commercial plant.
MARINE ENVIRONMENT AND COASTAL ZONE
Coastal Ocean Monitoring & Prediction  Systems (COMAPS) Programme
34.The investigations under the programme were continued by 11 institutions at 82 locations in the 0 - 25 km transects from
 the coast to the sea.  The data collected so far has indicated that in the sea off 2 km from the coast is clean, except in the case
 of Bombay, where the sea beyond 5 km is clean. 
 
35.The Committee doubts the claim of the Department particularly in respect of pollution of sea water at Bombay where one
 sees for about  25 minutes of journey on helicopter the water being totally polluted and   recommends that  Geographical
 Information System based information system for monitoring pollution in the coastal waters need to be carried out  with a 
 concerted  effort and a  reuse  urgency  and  the  data to  draw inference  on the levels of pollutants in different parts of the
 coastal ocean should be processed and the  knowledge so generated should be disseminated  to the State Pollution Control
 Boards  whenever the pollution levels reach  alarming levels for remedial action. The State Pollution Control Boards should
 also prepare Action Plan for mitigation of coastal pollution.
COASTAL RESEARCH VESSELS
Sagar Purvi      

76th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/76threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:14:17]
36.The vessel helped in regular Coastal Ocean Monitoring & Prediction System monitoring by Central Electro-Chemicals
 Research Institute (CECRI), Karaikudi and National Institute of Oceanography (NIO), Vizag and other oceanographic
 observations for Institute of Ocean Management (IOM), Anna University, University of Madras. The vessel was used for
 microbiology observations for the waste load allocation project under Integrated Coastal & Marine Areas Management.  The
 vessel was also used for survey for establishment of Solid Particulate Matter (SPM) for Bharat Petro Chemicals Limited at
 Gopalpur.
SAGAR PASCHIMI
37.The vessel Sagar Paschimi has completed all its scheduled programmes  in April and May 99. The vessel was deployed
 for COMAPS programs of five Institutions.
Both the vessels have completed 43 cruises as detailed below:
 
Vessel
 
No.of
 cruises
Stations
 covered
Samples collected
   Water Samples Sediment Plankton CTD
Sagar Paschimi 25 200 1300 336 336 336
Sagar Purvi 18 140 800 225 225 225
 
38.The Committee observes that the cruises involved by Coastal Research Vessel(CRV)  Sagar Purvi & Sagar Paschimi should
 be carried on frequent basis to monitor Pollution and they should be carried out with the participation of the scientists of Central
 Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi  and National Institute of Oceanography and other related institutions. The
 cruises should also observe critically the habitats including flora and fauna specially sea turtles in Lakshdweep Islands.
 
INTEGRATED COASTAL AND MARINE AREA MANAGEMENT (ICMAM)
39. During the 9th Plan period, the DOD has taken up for implementation infrastructure development and capacity building
 activities to facilitate adoption of the concept of ICMAM in the coming years.  These activities focus on development of
 expertise in ICMAM oriented activities, and dissemination of knowledge gained to the users like coastal states through
 organised training programmes.
40.This component of  Capacity Building is funded by the World Bank in the form of a  International Development Association
 (IDA) credit under the project ‘Environment Management Capacity Building’ which is coordinated by the Ministry of
 Environment and Forests. 
41.The details of activities carried out during the year 1999-2000 are as follows:
DEVELOPMENT OF GIS SYSTEM FOR CRITICAL HABITATS   
41.1  Under this project, it is proposed to develop a Geographical Information System (GIS) useful for the management of 11
 critical habitats like mangroves, coral reefs, areas rich in biodiversity etc. The tasks involved are: collection of data and
 information in the 11 critical habitats and designing of a database for integration in the GIS software like ARC INFO and ARC
 VIEW. 
41.2  A draft GIS for Pichavaram mangrove area has been completed and is being refined.  Similar information system is also
 being done for Karwar and Kadamat.  The task relating to development of information system for other habitats like Gulf of
 Mannar has been initiated. 
41.3  In order to take measures for control of marine pollution from the land based activities, it is necessary to know the
 information relating to assimilative capacity of coastal waters.  This would help in deciding the amount of pollutants that can be
 permitted to be discharged in the coastal waters.  In order to apply this consent in pollution control measures in India, capacity
 building exercises on Determination of Waste Assimilation Capacity (WAC) are being undertaken for Tapi estuary and Ennore
 creek and coastal waters as model areas. 
41.4  In order to assess the existing load of pollutants in the area, data relating to the characteristics of pollutants from Ennore
 has been completed.  Similar task for Tapi estuary is in progress.  The choice of model for determination of Waste Assimilation
 Capacity for Ennore has been finalised and collection of two season data to calibrate the model has been completed.   It is also
 proposed to undertake the task on collection of 3rd season data for validating the mode, in the current year itself.  Regarding the

76th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/76threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:14:17]
 Tapi estuary, the task on collection of first season data and choice of model has been initiated.
41.5  Under this project, it is proposed to develop guidelines for conducting EIA studies for coastal related activities like
 construction of ports, harbours and breakwaters, waste disposal from domestic and industrial wastes, marine transportation and
 coastal tourism.  National Institute of Ocean Technology, which has been assigned with the task of development of
 Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) guidelines for ports and harbours has completed the initial draft which was peer
 reviewed.  Based on the comments given by the experts, the draft is under revision.  The final version of the draft  would be
 available by March 2000. 
41.6  In order to introduce the concept of ICMAM Plan in India, it is necessary to have expertise in various aspects relating to
 development of ICMAM Plans.  These aspects include, application of modern tools and techniques like computer based
 modelling predicting the inter-impact of various activities prevailing along the coastal areas.  Several preparatory works have
 been undertaken  to initiate the task relating to development of ICMAM Plan for Goa and Gulf of Kachchh . A workshop held
 on ICMAM Plan for Goa has identified mining, sediment transport, waste disposal and impact due to tourism as some of the
 major issues to be addressed in the ICMAM Plan.  Regarding Gulf of Kachchh, the workshop identified oil spill threats,
 sediment transport, degradation of ecology as some of the major issues to be dealt in the ICMAM Plan.
41.7  During the year, the task relating to collection of basic information and data at the secondary and primary level for
 Determination of Use Classification and No Impact Zone has been initiated.  The National Institute of Oceanography is engaged
 in the collection of data and information relating to nearly 11 priority locations to determine use classification,  the task of
 collection of data for Determination of No Impact Zone for Coringa and Pulicat lake has been initiated.
42.  The Committee recommends that under the programme Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management (ICAMAM), the
 Department should complete development of Environmental Impact Assessment guidelines for waste disposal, marine
 transportation and tourism sector . The task towards determination of Waste Assimilation Capacity should also be carried out
 through development of Geographical Information System.
OCEAN OBSERVATIONS AND INFORMATION SERVICES (OOIS)
43.  The Committee was informed of the need to operationalise the oceanographic services, where the Department is
 implementing an integrated programme “Ocean Observation and Information Services (OOIS)” from the beginning of the 9th
 Plan.  The OOIS envisages generation and dissemination of reliable coastal and ocean data products such as waves, winds,
 temperature, current, salinity, upwelling, potential fishing zone information, coastal maps, etc., to support coastal and off-shore
 developmental activities and for furthering quality oceanographic research.  The OOIS also envisages development of systems
 for ocean state forecast, on experimental basis by terminal year of the IX plan.
44.The programme consists of four major components viz. Ocean Observing Systems, Ocean Information Services, Ocean
 Dynamics and Modelling and Satellite Coastal and Oceanographic Research.  
45.The  project consists of three sub-projects viz., National Data Buoy Programme, Sea Level observation and Drifting buoy and
 other Observing systems.
46.The National Data Buoy Programme, being implemented by National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT), Chennai,
 envisages assembly, deployment, operation and maintenance of state-of-the-art technology data buoys.  Under this programme,
 a set of 12 met-ocean data buoys have been deployed in the coastal and offshore of India for acquiring, surface meteorological
 and upper ocean parameters.  The buoys are equipped with state-of-the-art sensors for accurate measurement of winds, waves,
 currents, atmospheric pressure, atmospheric temperature, sea surface temperature, dissolved oxygen, chlorophyll, radioactivity,
 hydrocarbon and turbidity.
47.A shore station was commissioned at NIOT for retrieval, processing, analysis and storage of the data from the buoys.  The
 data is being disseminated daily at 3 GMT to India Meteorological Department and Coast Guard has contributed to the process
 of the forecast of cyclones in the Bay of Bengal and the Arabian Sea.
48.During the year two shallow water buoys were deployed one each at Pipavav and New Mangalore port for collection of met-
ocean parameters required for developmental activities of these ports.  Three  cruises  on-board  Sagar  Kanya   were  conducted 
 for  seven   retrieval  and   ten  deployment
operations towards maintenance of buoys deployed in the Bay of Bengal in the Arabian Sea. In order to prevent vandalism
 tamper proof frame on two Wave scan deep water buoys to prevent vandalism was carried out. Some of the meteorological
 parameters such as wind speed, direction, atmospheric pressure, temperature and sea surface temperature were made available
 on-line through Global Telecommunication System (GTS).
 49.  Nineteen low cost drifters and two multi-parameter drifters were deployed in the Northern Indian Ocean during the year for
 improved understanding of the surface circulation of the Bay of Bengal and the Arabian Sea.  The drifting buoy data are being
 transmitted via ARGOS-Satellite, whereas the XBT data are being processed and archived at NIO for a variety of uses in the

76th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/76threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:14:17]
 field of ocean research and developmental activities. Three special sea truth campaigns for validation of OCEANSAT sensors
 were conducted. 
50.10 modern tide gauges stations were established at Mumbai, Porbunder, Goa, Kochi, Chennai, Visakhapatnam, Paradip,
 Kavaratti,  Machlipatnam  and Tuticorin for systematic and  accurate monitoring the tidal level to derive long term variations in
 the mean sea levels. The data from these tide gauges are collected regularly and sent to the National Tide Data Centre at Survey
 of India, Dehradun.   Based on the sea level data collected along the Indian coast, a numerical model has been constructed to
 simulate circulation in the Northern Indian Ocean. 
51.While the Committee notes with satisfaction that the programmes under the Ocean Observation Information Service  have
 been successful, it observes that  the indigenisation of Data buoy technology and Operation and maintenance of 12 data buoy
 system by National Data Buoy Programme is yet to be achieved  The Committee further observes that the upgradation of
 existing tide gauge network both in terms of software and sensors redeployment of existing current meter and deployment of
 new current meter array along the equator would take place during this financial year. Similarly the Committee would
 appreciate if under the programme Ocean Dynamics and Modelling (INDOMOD), validation of Coupled Atmospheric Ocean
 Model (CAOM) to provide forcing parameter for ocean general circulation model and sensitivity test for CAOM for prediction
 of storm surges associated with tropical cyclone along the Indian coast would be conducted and validated. The experiments to
 determine the sensitivity for development of hybrid coupled model for prediction of Indian monsoon regions have  also to be
 achieved
COASTAL COMMUNITY PROGRAMMES
Marine Instrumentation (Shore to Fishing Vessel Communication System)
52.For demonstrating the usefulness of communication system to the fisherfolk who are at sea, shore stations were set up in
 seven places viz. Shankarpur and Frassergunj in West Bengal, Paradeep and Chandipur in Orissa, Salegeo in Noth Goa  and
 Periya Veereampattinam in Pondicherry.  Out of these, four centres in West Bengal and Orissa were operationalised. 
 Construction of shore stations and erection of towers/mast for fixing antenna in Andaman & Nicobar Islands is in progress.
53.The Committee recommends that the Department should develop the shore to vessel communication system  and 
 commission the system in A&N and Lakshdweep  Islands which would be helpful for fishermen going for fishing in high seas.
 The technology should  be handed over  to the State Governments for continuous operation and maintenance.
 
ISLAND DEVELOPMENT
54.NIOT has taken up new initiatives towards helping island communities in their needs relating to Ocan Science and
 Technology as well as marine resource enhancement. The first activity taken up by NIOT is a programme on lobster resource
 enhancement for islands under the DOD project on Living Marine Resources Enhancement (LMRE).
55.In a study conducted on lobster fattening using gray clam as live feed, a remarkable increment in body weight (i.e. around 35
 g/month) has been achieved. Another experiment was conducted using green mussel as a feed source in place of clam. The
 various biochemical analysis such as protein, free amino acids, carbohydrates, free & bound sugars, protease, a-amylase and
 chitinase indicate the suitability of mussel meat as a better alternative to the clam as feed source for lobsters.
56.During the fattening of lobsters, various hydrobiological parameters such as temperature, pH, salinity, dissolved oxygen,
 nitrite, nitrate, silicate, ammonia and phosphate in the source water as well as the experimental tanks were estimated. The
 phytoplankton species present in the source water were also identified in order to utilize them as feed for larvae. The occurrence
 of various protozoans, total heterotrophic bacterial population and Vibrios load was observed in the body surface of lobster, live
 feeds and water (both from tanks and source). The animals with tail rot syndrome were successfully treated with appropriate
 concentration of malachite green and 100% recovery was observed in 20-22 days.
57.At the new campus of NIOT,  R&D laboratories, which will cater to all the analytical requirements of the LMRE project,
 have been organised. All major and minor equipment were commissioned and the laboratory is fully operational.
58.A survey on landing of lobsters at various sites in Gulf of Mannar and Andaman islands has been completed by December
 1999. It indicates a decline in landings at various sites, a trend which was in evidence from previous surveys of lobster
 resources during the last few years.
59.The activities of erstwhile Andaman Nicobar Centre for Ocean Development (ANCOD) of Department of Ocean
 Development has been integrated with NIOT as Andaman and Nicobar Centre for Ocean Science and Technology (ANCOST)
 in order to implement the various core activities previously initiated under the LMRE programme. For this purpose, already
 existing facilities like boats and sea water pumps have been repaired and commissioned. A layout of new laboratory building
 has been finalised and the building is expected to be functional very soon. Using the farm facility in Minnie Bay, the problems

76th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/76threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:14:17]
 associated with the culture of lobster and sea ranching of its early life stages are under examination.    
60.The Committee  shares the perception that the genetic and biotic equilibrium should be maintained in the Indian
 environment.  However, it  is of the view that the Department should carry out further research on formulation of appropriate
 feeds for maximum growth of lobsters and also develop the  larval rearing technology in Indian spiny lobster. At the same time
 the Department should also implement  projects on development of technology for sustainable shrimp farming, lobster and
 seaweed culture and polyculture of marine organisms at ANCOST.
DELINEATION OF OUTER LIMITS OF CONTINENTAL SHELF
61.Traditionally the Coastal States had been claiming few nautical miles into the sea.  In accordance with the UN Convention on
 Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), now the States can establish 12 nautical miles of territorial sea and 200 nautical miles of Exclusive
 Economic Zone (EEZ) from baselines and there are no major technical difficulties in establishing the limits.  The States are also
 entitled for the
rights over the continental shelf, slope and rise extending beyond the EEZ.  The continental shelf comprises the seabed and
 subsoil of the submarine areas that extend beyond the territorial sea throughout the natural prolongation of the land territory. 
 The continental shelf is rich in non-living resources and the minerals, including hydrocarbon resources.
62.The UN Convention on the Law of the Sea stipulates that where the coastal state intends to establish the outer limits of the
 continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles, it shall submit particulars of such limits to the Commission on the Limits of
 Continental Shelf (CLCS), along with the supporting scientific and technical data as soon as possible, but in any case within 10
 years of entry into force of the Convention for that State.  The Convention came into force on 16.11.1994 and India ratified the
 same in June 1995.  India thus must submit all the necessary data to the CLCS by June 2005.  If delineation is done properly
 India would be in a position to claim more than 1 million sq.km beyond the EEZ.  India is represented as an elected member on
 the Commission on the Limits of Continental Shelf (CLCS).
63.The Committee observes that with the ratification of the UN Convention on Law of the Sea, a new international order has
 been established for the oceans and  India being represented in almost all the important bodies on oceans will stand to benefit
 enormously by provisions of the convention, only if we can build an integrated approach for scientific planning, formulation,
 implementation and overall management of the programmes with a comprehensive organisational and institutional back up.
64.After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development and assessing the progress of
 various programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the Demands for Grants of Rs. 158.00
 Crores as sought by the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2000-2001, under Demand No.92  may be
 approved.
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT GLANCE
 
1.   The Committee recommends that in order to ensure continuity of the programmes an addition allocation may be allotted 
 to the Department at the time of R.E. stage so that rescheduled programmes can be completed in the current year itself. 
(Para 11)
2.   The Committee observes that this heralds another scientific feat in the realms of polar science at the end of this
 millennium and demonstrates the capabilities and interest of the country to pursue a well-focussed scientific campaign from
 a pristine scientific platform provided by Antarctica.
(Para 18)
3.   The Committee recommends that  the National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research(NCAOR) Goa, should be
 designated as the nodal  agency of the Department in planning, coordinating and executing the XX Indian Scientific
 Expedition to Antarctica for continuation of the scientific/research programmes initiated during the XIX expedition. The
 Committee hopes that the scientific and logistics co-operation gained  with the  launching of the XIX Expedition from Cape
 Town would lead to the initiation of state-of-the-art research programmes in Polar Sciences and should be carried forward in
 initiating and executing specific and specialized programmes in the scientific disciplines of Polar Remote Sensing, Southern
 Ocean Oceanography & Paleoclimatology, and Antarctic Global Change.
(Para 18.1)
4.   The Committee observes that under Marine Living Resources programme the Department would  continue its research
 towards studies to establish techniques for estimation of fish, zooplankton and Deep Scattering Layer(DSL) of the  biomass;
 large marine ecosystem  studies of the Arabian Sea; assessment of mesopelagic resources of the high seas and studies on the
 benthic productivity/biodiversity and the fish biodiversity of the continental slope area.

76th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/76threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:14:17]
(Para 25)
5.   The Committee notes with satisfaction that under the  programme the Department has done a commendable work. The
 Committee trusts that  the Department would continue  the exploratory work relating to collection, identification and
 bioevaluation of the marine flora and fauna from the Indian coastal waters besides completing regulatory pharmacology and
 toxicology of the anti-diabetic and anti-diarrhoeal drug in the year ahead.  This would go a long way in strengthening the
 commercialisation of Indian drugs and  their quality comparable  to world standards. The Department should also strive for
 Patenting of anti-cholesterol molecule and achieve the Patenting of process for anti-HIV drug by Indian Institute of
 Chemical Technology(IICT), Hyderabad.
(Para 27)
6.   The Committee recommends that the Department should continue its efforts  for development of technology  for mining
 development of an integrated mining complex module of 25,000 tonnes/yr. capacity for 6000 m. depth  in joint collaborative
 effort so that the cost of  Deep Seabed  Mining  system is  reduced  significantly. The  Department  should 
also continue its efforts towards commissioning of the design, development and testing of unmanned submersible capable of
 working upto 6000 m through  collaborative programme.
(Para 33)
7.         The Committee notes with satisfaction the   R&D activities of the Department for optimisation of extraction
 efficiencies  of metal values (Cu., Ni., Co., Mn.) at NML(J), RRL(B) and HZL(U) and hopes that the data generated in the
 demonstration plant and associated R&D work in other laboratories for selective scale up studies would be analysed with an
 ultimate objective of designing a commercial plant..
(Para 33.1)
8.         The Committee doubts the claim of the Department particularly in respect of pollution of sea water at Bombay where
 one sees for about  25 minutes of journey on helicopter the water being totally polluted and   recommends that 
 Geographical Information System based information system for monitoring pollution in the coastal waters need to be carried
 out with a concerted effort and a reuse urgency  and  the  data to draw inference on the levels of pollutants in different parts
 of the coastal ocean should be processed and the  knowledge so generated should be disseminated  to the State Pollution
 Control Boards  whenever the pollution levels reach  alarming levels for remedial action. The State Pollution Control
 Boards should also prepare Action Plan for mitigation of coastal pollution.
(Para 35)
9.         The Committee observes that the cruises involved by Coastal Research Vessel(CRV)  Sagar Purvi & Sagar Paschimi
 should be carried on frequent basis to monitor Pollution and they should be carried out with the participation of the scientists
 of Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi  and National Institute of Oceanography and other related
 institutions. The cruises should also observe critically the habitats including flora and fauna specially sea turtles in
 Lakshdweep Islands.
(Para 38)
10.       The Committee recommends that under the programme Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management
 (ICAMAM), the   Department should complete development of Environmental Impact Assessment guidelines for waste
 disposal, marine transportation and tourism sector . The task towards determination of Waste Assimilation Capacity should
 also be carried out through development of Geographical Information System.
(Para 42)
11.       While the Committee notes with satisfaction that the programmes under the Ocean Observation Information Service 
 have been successful, it observes that  the indigenisation of Data buoy technology and Operation and maintenance of 12 data
 buoy system by National Data Buoy Programme is yet to be achieved  The Committee further observes that the upgradation
 of existing tide gauge network both in terms of software and sensors redeployment of existing current meter and deployment
 of new current meter array along the equator would take place during this financial year. Similarly the Committee would
 appreciate if under the programme Ocean Dynamics and Modelling (INDOMOD), validation of Coupled Atmospheric
 Ocean Model (CAOM) to provide forcing parameter for
ocean general circulation model and sensitivity test for CAOM for prediction of storm surges associated with tropical
 cyclone along the Indian coast would be conducted and validated. The experiments to determine the sensitivity for
 development of hybrid coupled model for prediction of Indian monsoon regions have  also to be achieved
(Para 51)

76th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/76threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:14:17]
12.       The Committee recommends that the Department should develop the shore to vessel communication system  and 
 commission the system in A&N and Lakshdweep  Islands which would be helpful for fishermen going for fishing in high
 seas. The technology should  be handed over  to the State Governments for continuous operation and maintenance.
(Para 53)
13.       The Committee  shares the perception that the genetic and biotic equilibrium should be maintained in the Indian
 environment.  However, it  is of the view that the Department should carry out further research on formulation of
 appropriate feeds for maximum growth of lobsters and also develop the  larval rearing technology in Indian spiny lobster. At
 the same time the Department should also implement  projects on development of technology for sustainable shrimp
 farming, lobster and seaweed culture and polyculture of marine organisms at ANCOST.
(Para 60)
14.       The Committee observes that with the ratification of the UN Convention on Law of the Sea, a new international order
 has been established for the oceans and  India being represented in almost all the important bodies on oceans will stand to
 benefit enormously by provisions of the convention, only if we can build an integrated approach for scientific planning,
 formulation, implementation and overall management of the programmes with a comprehensive organisational and
 institutional back up.
(Para 63)
ANNEXURES
ANNEXURE-I
DETAILS OF BUDGETARY PROJECTIONS FOR THE YEAR 2000-2001
(Rs.in crores)
Sl.No. Schemes/Programmes B.E. (2000-01)
   
A. Plan   
1. Polar Science (Antarctic Research) 20.00
2. Marine Living Resources  
 Drugs from Sea 2.00
 Assessment of Marine Living Resources 2.96
3. Marine Non-living Resources  
 Polymetallic Nodules Programme 19.31
4. Ocean Observation & Information Services  
 Ocean Observing Systems 7.00
 Ocean Information Services (INCOIS) 4.00
 Satellite & Coastal Oceanographic Research (SATCORE) 1.00
 Ocean Dynamics & Modelling (INDOMOD) 2.00
5. Marine & Coastal Area management  
 Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System (COMAPS) 2.05
 Coastal Research Vessels 2.50
 Integrated Coastal & Marine Area Management (ICMAM) 6.70
6. Marine Research & Capacity Building  
 Marine Research Programmes 2.70
 Fellowship/Training 0.30
7. Coastal Community Programmes  

76th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/76threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:14:17]
 Marine Instrumentation (Shore to Fishing Vessel Communication System) 0.02
 Island Development 1.00
8. Ocean Awareness  
 Exhibition & Fairs 0.25
 Seminar/Symposia/Workshop etc. 0.15
 Computerisation 0.30
9 National Institute of Ocean Technology  
 Mission Programmes & related activities 15.70
10 International Cooperation  
 
Sl.No.
 
Schemes/Programmes
 
 
B.E. (2000-01)
 
   
 Contribution to International Bodies, etc. 0.60
 Continental Shelf 43.00
11 Direction & Administration 1.46
                                                        SUB-TOTAL (A) 135.00
B. Non-Plan   
1. ORV Sagar Kanya           10.30
2. FORV Sagar Sampada 9.84
3. Secretariat & Economic Services             1.83
4. Administrative Support & Infrastructure 1.03
                                                       SUB-TOTAL (B) 23.00
                                                       TOTAL (A+ B) 158.00
 
ANNEXURE-II
 
BUDGET DEMANDS MADE/APPROVED AND ACTUALLY UTILISED
DURING 1997-98,1998-99 and 1999-2000
Statement showing scheme wise actuals and budget estimates
                                                                                                            (Rs. in Crores)
S.No Schemes / Programmes 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000
  B.E R.E* Actual B.E R.E Actual BE R.E** Ant.
 Exp.
A.
 Plan
          
1. Polar Science (Antarctic
 Research)
21.75 20.89 21.51 18.50 19.78 19.61 20.00 19.70 19.70
2. Marine Living Resources
         
 Drugs from Sea 2.00 2.50 2.50 2.50 2.71 2.71 1.60 1.64 1.64

76th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/76threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:14:17]
 Assessment of Marine
 Living Resources
0.05 0.01 0.01 0.30 0.02 0.01 2.00 2.00 2.00
 Mariculture -- -- -- 0.10 -- -- -- -- --
3. Marine Non-living
 Resources
         
 Polymetallic Nodules
 Programme
15.60 15.60 15.50 18.95 19.93 20.31 14.05 11.05 11.05
 BENFAN/Hydromas 0.05 0.04 0.005 0.10 0.01 0.10 0.50 -- --
4. Ocean Observation &
 Information Services
19.00 22.00 20.93 13.75 13.45 13.37 11.50 9.00 9.00
5. Marine & Coastal Area
 management
         
 Coastal Ocean Monitoring
 and Prediction System
 (COMAPS)
2.00 1.80 1.99 1.50 1.50 1.50 1.50 1.63 1.63
 Coastal Research Vessels 3.00 3.00 3.39 2.50 2.50 2.50 2.50 2.20 2.20
 Integrated Coastal &
 Marine Area Management
 (ICMAM)
9.00 3.00 3.22 9.00 6.00 5.82 5.00 4.39 4.39
 Marine Biodiversity 0.05 0.01 0.005 0.10 -- -- -- -- --
6. Marine Research &
 Capacity Building
         
 Marine Research
 Programmes
1.80 2.80 2.05 2.70 2.93 2.90 2.30 2.30 2.30
 Fellowship/Training 0.20 0.20 0.11 0.20 0.22 0.22 0.20 0.20 0.20
7. Coastal Community
 Programmes
         
 Marine Instrumentation 2.00 2.80 1.82 0.10 0.10 0.07 0.10 0.10 0.10
 Island Development 0.50 0.10 0.10 0.25 1.24 1.24 1.25 1.00 1.00
8. Ocean Awareness          
 Exhibition & Fairs 0.25 0.15 0.13 0.25 0.17 0.23 0.30 0.25 0.25
 Seminar/symposia/
Workshop, etc.
-- -- -- -- -- -- 0.15 0.15 0.15
 Marine Aquaria &
 Oceanaria etc.,
0.05 0.02 0.02 0.05 0.05 - 0.05 -- --
9. National Institute of Ocean
 Technology
7.50 7.50 8.25 13.50 14.49 14.49 24.00 24.00 24.00
S.No Schemes / Programmes 1997 - 1998     1998      - 1999 1999       - 2000
  B.E R.E* Actual B.E R.E Actual BE R.E** Ant.
 Exp.
 Contribution to
 International Bodies, etc.
1.10 1.00 0.96 1.50 0.70 0.50 0.75 0.75 0.75
 Continental Shelf 1.00 0.01 -- 0.50 0.50 0.49 0.50 4.00 4.00
11 Direction & 1.20 1.57 1.46 1.65 1.70 1.52 1.75 1.59 1.59

76th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/76threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:14:17]
 
S.
No
 
Schemes / Programmes
 
1997-98
 
1998-99
 
1999-2000
  B.E R.E* Actual BE R.E Actual BE RE Ant.
 Exp.
B. NON_PLAN Schemes          
1. ORV Sagar Kanya 8.78 8.70 8.70 9.48 9.48 9.48 10.15 10.15 10.15
2. FORV Sagar Sampada 7.10 6.35 6.35 7.50 7.50 7.50 8.02 8.02 8.02
3. Secretariat & Economic Services 1.23 1.26 1.07 1.48 1.41 1.24 1.61 1.53 1.53
4. Administrative Support &
 Infrastructure
0.74 0.80 0.71 1.04 1.02 0.81 1.10 0.97 0.97
 SUB-TOTAL
 (B)                                                    
17.85 17.11 16.83 19.50 19.41 19.03 20.88 20.67 20.67
 TOTAL (A+
 B)                                                     
105.95 102.11 100.79 107.50 107.41 106.61 110.88 106.67 106.67
 Administration
 SUB-TOTAL (A) 88.10 85.00 83.96 88.00 88.00 87.58 90.00 86.00 86.00
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* The outlay for the Plan schemes during 1997-98 was reduced to Rs.85 crore at R.E stage by the Ministry of Finance.
** The outlay for the Plan schemes during 1999-2000 was reduced to Rs. 86 crore at RE stage by the Ministry of Finance.
 
 
 
MINUTES
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
 
      The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Saturday, the 1
st  April, 2000 in the Room No. 139, First Floor, Parliament House
 Annexe, New Delhi.
 
      PRESENT
 
1.   Shri C. Ramachandraiah - Chairman
           
      RAJYA SABHA
 
2.   Shri Rahasbihari Barik
3.   Shri K. C. Kondaiah
4.   Shri Lalitbhai Mehta

76th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/76threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:14:17]
           
      LOK  SABHA
 
5.   Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
6.   Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya
7.   Shri E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan
8.   Shri Ali Mohd. Naik
9.   Shri B.K. Parthasarathi
10.Dr. Ashok Patel
11.Shri Y. S. Vivekananda Reddy
12.Shri V. Vetriselvan
13.Dr. (Smt.) Rajeswaramma Vukkala
           
      SECRETARIAT
 
      Shri H. K. Chanana, Director
      Shri D. P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
      Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
 
      REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT
 
      Dr. A. E. Muthunayagam, Secretary
      Shri C. S. Rao, Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser
      Shri Anil Misra, Joint Secretary
      Shri B. N. Krishnamurthy, Scientist
      Shri S. K. Das, Scientist
     
 
      Dr. V. S. Rao, Chintala, Scientist
      Dr. V. Sampath, Scientist
      Shri Girish Pillai, Director
      Smt. Krishna Tyagi, Deputy Secretary
      Shri R. K. Sharma, Scientist
      Dr. M. P. Wakdekar, Scientist
      Dr. S. A. S. Naqui, Scientist
     
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INTEGRATED COASTAL AND MARINE AREA MANAGEMENT PROJECT
 DIRECTORATE, CHENNAI
 
Dr. B. R. Subramanian, Scientist 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE SAGAR SAMPADA CELL, KOCHI
 
Shri V. Ravindranathan, Scientist 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF OCEAN TECHNOLOGY, CHENNAI
 
Prof. M. Ravindran, Director
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF OCEANOGRAPHY, GOA
 
Dr. E. Desa, Director
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CENTRAL DRUG RESEARCH INSTITUTE,  LUCKNOW
 
Dr. C. M. Gupta, Director
 

76th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/76threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:14:17]
2.   The Committee took up consideration of the Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the Department of Ocean
 Development.  The Secretary in the Department briefly explained for the benefit of members, the budgetary allocations on
 different heads as also the functioning of the Department with the help of an audio-visual presentation. The Members then
 sought clarifications on points relating to the Demands for Grants and other aspects.
      The Witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3.   The Committee   then   adjourned   at 2.10 P.M.  to  meet again at 11.00 A.M. on the              3rd April, 2000.
XVI
SIXTEENTH  MEETING
 
 
The Committee met at 9.30 A.M. on Tuesday, the 18 th  April, 2000 in the Room No. 53, First Floor, Parliament House ,
 New Delhi.
 
 
PRESENT
 
 1.  Prof. R.R. Pramanik          - In the Chair*
           
       RAJYA SABHA
 
2.    Shri Lachhman Singh
3.   Shri B.P. Singhal
           
       LOK  SABHA
 
4.
      Shri Bhan Singh Bhaura
5.      Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan
6.      Smt. Bhavana Chikhaliya
7.      Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
8.      Shri Hassan Khan
9.      Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan
10.  Shri Ali Mohd. Naik
11.  Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy
12.  Shri Lakshman Seth
13.  Shri Ram Prasad Singh
14.  Shri V. Vetriselvan
15.  Dr. (Smt.) Rajeswaramma Vukkala
 
       SECRETARIAT
 
      Shri H. K. Chanana, Director
      Shri D. P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
      Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
 
2.   The Chairman welcomed Shri Hassan Khan, a new member to the Committee.
______________________________________________________________________________
 
 * In the absence of the Chairman, Prof. R.R. Pramanik was voted to the Chair
 
3.   The Committee took up the consideration of the draft ***,***,***,***,Seventy-sixth, ***,  *** report on Demands for
 Grants (2000-2001) of the Department of ***,***,***,*** Ocean Development, ***, ***.

76th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/76threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:14:17]
4.   The  reports were adopted *                                  *                           *.
5.   The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri Lachhman Singh to present the reports to the Rajya
 Sabha and Prof. Radhika  Ranjan Pramanik and  in his absence Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza to lay the reports on the Table
 of the Lok Sabha on the 24th April, 2000.
6.   *                                  *                                              *.
 7.        The Committee then adjourned at 10.10 A.M. to meet again at 03.30 P.M. on 20th April, 2000.
 
____________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.