       Parliament of India 
     Rajya Sabha 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON 
 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS 
 84th REPORT 
 ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE DEPARTMENT OF SPACE ON THE  RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE SEVETY-SEVENTH   REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARYSTANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2000-2001)OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF SPACE| 
 
(presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27 March, 2001) 
(laid in the Lok Sabha on 18th April, 2001)   
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 April, 2001/Visakha, 1923  (Saka) 
 C O N T E N T S 
  
                                                                                                                                   
  
1.      COMPOSITION OF  THE COMMITTEE                                     
2.      INTRODUCTION 
3.      REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                                                    
4.      MINUTES OF THE MEETING                      
  
                                                                                                                                                             
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDINGCOMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR  2001) 
  
  
1.   Shri C. Ramachandraiah            — Chairman 
             
RAJYA SABHA 
  
      2.  Shri Debabrata Biswas 
 3.   Shri Yusuf Sarwar Khan alias Dilip Kumar 
 4.   Shri K. C. Kondaiah 
Page 1 of 9R E P O R T
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/84th.htm

5.      Smt. Chandresh Kumari 
6.       Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra                        
7.        Dr. D. Masthan                                      
8.        Shri Lalitbhai Mehta                               
9.        Prof.(Smt.) Bharati Ray              
10.    Smt. Savita Sharda 
      11  Shri Birabhadra Singh                             
12.  Shri Lachhman Singh                              
13.  Shri B.P. Singhal                                                
14. Shri Prakanta Warisa                              
15. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav  
    
      LOK  SABHA 
  
16. Shri Bhan Singh Bhaura  
17. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan                      
18. Shri Vishwendra Singh Chauhan  
19. Smt. Bhavana Chikhaliya                        
20. Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza                   
21. Shri Laxman Giluwa                               
22. Shri Gordhanbhai Javiy  
  23.  Shri Bali Ram Kashyap 
   24.  Shri Hassan Khan 
25. Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
26. Shri S. Murugesan                                  
27. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan  
28. Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                                
29. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik  
30. Shri B.K. Parthasarathi               
31. Shri Suresh Pasi                                                 
32. Dr. Ashok Patel   
33. Shri Prahlad Patel                                   
34. Prof. R.R. Pramanik                               
35. Shri Naresh Puglia                                  
36. Shri Ramsagar Rawat                             
37. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy     
38. Prof. I.G. Sanadi                                                
39. Shri Lakshman Seth                                
40. Shri Ram Prasad Singh               
41. Shri V.S. Sivakumar       
  42.  Shri Vaiko 
  43.  Shri V. Vetriselvan                                 
44. Dr. (Smt.) Rajeswaramma Vukkala  
45. Shri Balram Singh Yadav  
  
SECRETARIAT 
  
      Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
      Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary 
      Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary 
      Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer 
      Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
Page 2 of 9R E P O R T
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/84th.htm

  
    
INTRODUCTION 
  
            I, the Chairman of the Departme nt-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this
Eighty-fourth Report on the Action Taken by the Department  of Space on the recommendations contained in the
Seventy-seventh Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the Department of Space. 
  
2.         The Report of the Committee deals with  the Action Taken by the Department of Space on the
recommendations contained in the Se venty-seventh Report of the Depart ment-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Fo rests on the Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the 
Department of Space which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 24th April, 2000. 
  
3.         There are eleven recommendations containe d in the Seventy-seventh Repo rt of the Committee.  Action 
Taken Notes on the recommend ations of the Committee, were received from the De partment on 4th December,
2000. 
  
4.         In the meeting held on 27 th March, 2001, the Committee consider ed the draft Action Taken Report and 
adopted the same. 
  
  
 
NEW DELHI                                                                                                                     C. RAMACHANDRAIAH,
March 27, 2001                                                                                                                     Chairman, 
                      Committee on Science & Technology, 
                         Environment & Forests.     
 
R E  P O R  T 
  
The Report of the Committee deals with the Acti on Taken by the Department of Space on the
recommendations contained in the Se venty-seventh Report of the Depart ment-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Fo rests on the Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the 
Department of Space which was presented to the Ra jya Sabha on 24th April, 2000.  There are eleven
recommendations contained in the Seventy-seventh Re port of the Committee. Action Taken notes on the
recommendations of the Committee was received from the Department on 4th  December, 2000. 
On scrutiny of the Action Taken Note s as received from the Department of Space, the Committee finds tha t
all the eleven recommendations have been fully implemented.   
The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee on the action taken 
by the Department of Space are given in the succeeding paragraphs: - 
Launch Vehicles 
Recommendation 
      The Committee observes India is on e of the six countries with homemade satellites in orbit. Despite 
being a new entrant to the competitive global space club, India’s overall track record both in the field o f 
rocketry and satellites has been impressive. This , of co urse, does not overlook the fact that it had its share
of failures too, which needless to say can be expected in any hi-tech project. To cite a few, one can recall the 
failure of the ASLV and PSLV. But these failed missions onl
y proved to be another ste p on the ladder to
Page 3 of 9R E P O R T
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/84th.htm

success. The subsequent flights we re a resounding success. This endorse d India’s claim to be a growing 
super power. The Committee, however, would like th e Department to keep the analysis of each failed
mission in view so that corrective measures can be taken while executing future programmes. 
(Para 6)
Action taken by the Department 
      The observation of the Committee is noted. 
Comments 
      The Committee notes the reply and hopes that self- appraisal of the projects w ill enable the Department o f
Space to counter any possible failures.       
Satellite Navigation   
Recommendation 
      The Committee feels that in order to fall in  the line with international standards, the Department
should consider establishing a satellite based naviga tion system as that would facilitate modern air
navigation system.  The Committee is of the view th at the Airport Authority of India and the Department
of Space should work in close co-ordination to achieve the objective.  
(Para 13.2)
Action taken by the Department 
      The Department of Space is working in close co-o peration with Airports Authority of India in defining  a 
modern  satellite  based  air  navigation  system.  This   system  will  be  in  line   with  
  
International standards.  As a first step a Tech nology Demonstration System (TDS) for Space Based
Augmentation System (SBAS) has been worked out jointly with Airports Authority of India for implementation. 
Comments 
      While the Committee commends the efforts made by the Department for opera tionalising the TDS, it would,
however, like to be apprised of the pr ogress made in this dir ection at the time of consid eration of next year’s 
budgetary grants. 
Indian Remote Sensing Satellite 
Recommendation 
While the Committee appreciates the efforts being ma de by the Department in  augmenting its remote
sensing capability, what is important is not only e ffective management and utilization of natural resources
but locating more of such resources considering that such resources are on the verge of depletion in the
times ahead.  The Committee therefore observes that th e efforts should be so oriented with emphasis on
mapping more of natural resources as also the optimum utilization of the resources already tapped.  
(Para 14.2)
Action taken by the Department 
      As a nodal agency for the National Natural Resources Management System (NNRMS), Department of Space
has been interacting with the user agencies through various Standing Committees under NNRMS to co-ordinate 
various user projects.  Through the unique NNRMS arra ngements, the country has es tablished a comprehensive
institutional framework, technological capability and applications  expertise involving cent ral, state governments
and private entrepreneurs.  The responsibility of DOS is limited to helping the users in generating appropriate
information using satellite remote se nsing and collateral data for optimum  exploitation of natural resources. 
Ultimately, it is the user department s, which have to make use of the information made av ailable from remote
sensing for ground level implementation.  It is the end eavor of DOS to lay emphasis on mapping of natural
resources and assist in sustainable utilisation of the resources.  For example, in the area of ground water resources,
which are fast depleting, the Ministry of Rural Deve lopment under the National Dr inking Water Mission, has
Page 4 of 9R E P O R T
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/84th.htm

launched a major project in close co -ordination with National Remote Sens ing Agency to identify drinking wate r
sources in 1.1 lakh habitations in the first phase.  The pr oject also envisages ground water recharging, an essential
element in conserving the depleting wa ter resources.  NRSA is preparing detailed hydro-geomorphological maps 
giving full details for ground level implementation by Minist ry of Rural Development.  Similar projects are taken
up by various State Remote Sensing Centers also at the behest of the user agencies.  In addition, many States have
launched State Natural Resources Ma nagement System (SNRMS ) to actively coordinate the activities amongs t
various user departments to ensure  integration of remote sensing- based information with conventional data.  I t 
can, thus, be said, efforts are on at both Central and St ate level to effectively utilize the remote sensing based
information for sustainable utilization of natural resources. 
Comments 
      The Committee appreciates the work done by Depart ment of Space in mapping natural resources.  However,
being nodal agency of National Natural Resources Management System, the  
  
Department of Space should play a leading role in bringing better coordination with user agencies so as to achieve
optimum results from the programme. 
Integrated Mission for Sustainable Development(IMSD) 
Recommendation 
      The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation (68 th Report) that even though the programme 
was heading towards a right direction, the pace of the programme appeared slow.  The Committee feels
that the tempo of the programme needs to be geared up and it should have time bound targets.  
(Para 15.4)
Action taken by the Department 
The major aim of IMSD is to prepare scientific actio n plans for sustainable development of land and wate r
resources on watershed basis using satellite remote sensin g  data and other conventi onal collateral data. Unde r
IMSD, preparation of action plans was taken up in 24 7 study areas (i.e. 97% of the study area) have been
completed, the remaining study areas being in J&K,  Nagaland and Megha laya, wherein the work could no t
progress due to ground realities.  The outputs in terms of maps, accompanied with reports, which could be utilized
for preparing development plans by the district admini stration have been handed over to the district/State
administration.  While the DOS has th e programmatic responsibility for co ordinating the preparation of action
plan maps, the responsibility for the ground implemen tation of the action plans rest with the State
departments/district administration.  The centrally sponsored schemes such as NWDPRA/DDP would also help
the States to implement the action plan s.  DOS has taken proactive role to  catalyze ground implementation of the
action plans and towards this, DOS has been pursuing with Ministry of Rural Development for modification and
revision of watershed development gu idelines to appropriately incorporat e and institutionalize the use of IMSD
action plan in their implementation. 
Comments 
      The Committee notes the position.
 
Disaster Management System  
Recommendation 
      The Committee is constrained to observe that the perfection in the functioning of the Cyclone Warning
Dissemination Systems (CWDS) for predicting the cont ours of the cyclone is yet to be achieved. The
country has witnessed the fury of weather Gods in the form of cyclones and  other weather extremes
resulting in tremendous loss of life and property  in some States.  There is thus an imperative need to
perfect the system.  The projects therefore need to be taken up with sense of urgenc y and, if necessary, in  
co-operation with other Department s and agencies.  The Committee feel s that the constraint of funds 
should not be allowed to stand in the totality of these projects. 
(Para 16.4)       
Page 5 of 9R E P O R T
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/84th.htm

Action taken by the Department 
      Weather forecasting including  predicting the cyclones in the coun try is done by India Meteorological 
Department.  There  has  been  continuous   effort  in  the country to improve and  
perfect the weather forecast services by improvin g the data modeling and the related computer and
communication infrastructure.  The CWDS is a part of the cyclone prediction and warning system and efforts are
on to modernise  the CWDS with digital version. 
Comments 
      While the Committee notes the reply, it observ es that some time-frame s hould be fixed for complete 
modernization of  the CWDS, so as to pre-empt the frequent attacks  of any catastrophe in one or other part of the
country.        
Cryo-Upper Stage (CUS) Project 
Recommendation 
      The Committee observes that there is imperative need for the country to perfect its cryogenic 
capabilities.  Sustained effort and perseverance should he lp in that direction.  Added to this the analysis o f
past experiments would act as a guidance to the future. 
      (Para 18.4)
Action taken by the Department 
The observation of the Committee is noted. 
Comments 
      The Committee notes the reply.        
Direct-to-Home (DTH) TV Mission 
Recommendation 
The Committee feels that the Government should clear the fog on the issue as early as possible
or else its credibilit y to spread information technolo gy is bound to suffer. DTH is a part o f
information technolo gy and Government should cl ear the hurdles on the sub ject keepin g the
interest of the viewers uppermost while enacting any law on the subject. 
 (Para  19.1)
Action taken by the Department 
DTH policy has been cleared by the Union Cabinet in November, 2000 allowing Indian Companies to set up
DTH broadcast services.  Ministry of Information and Broadcasting will evolve guid elines/procedures in this
regard and issue necessary licenses for this service 
Comments 
      The Committee notes the reply. 
Second Launch Pad Project 
Recommendation         
The Committee feels that as the number of  launche s per year increases the need to have a second
launch pad cannot be underestimated.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the development o f
second launch pad should be accorded priority keeping in view of the requirements in this regard. 
             (Para 20.3)  
  
  
Page 6 of 9R E P O R T
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/84th.htm

Action Taken by the Department 
The observation of the Committee is noted. 
Comments 
      The Committee notes the position.
 
Development Educational & Communication Unit 
Recommendation 
      The Committee observes that  the Department is pro gressing w e l l  i n  i t s  p l a n  t o  e x t e n d  t h e
TDCC/JDCP pro jects to other states as well. The Comm ittee, however, observes that before
opening new fronts, the Department should  evaluate the results of the projects already in hand.  
                                                                                                                              (Para 23.3) 
Action Taken by the Department 
      The Department has already taken action for evalua tion of the Jhabua Develo pment Communication Projec t
(JDCP). 
Comments       
      The Committee commends the Department for show ing keen interest in the programme.  However, i t
recommends that more emphasis is required to be  given for wider dissemination of knowledge about the
programme. 
Sponsored Research Programme (RESPOND) 
Recommendation 
The Committee recommends that apart from initiating the research projects in the academic intuitions,
the Department should constantly monitor the perfor mance of these projects so that country could be
benefited by the completion of these projects.  It should be the endeavor of the Department to complete the
projects within the stipulated time frame.               
(Para 24.2)
Action taken by the Department 
The Department has instituted a system to review pe riodically the progress of the projects sponsored unde
r
RESPOND.  Committees have be en constituted at each ISRO Centre for this purpose.  The above review process
also identifies action wherever necessary to ensure the completion of the Project within the stipulated time frame. 
Comments 
The Committee notes the reply. 
Antrix Corporation 
Recommendation 
The Committee is happ y to note that Antrix Corporation is pro gressing well in
commercialising Indian Space product and services in the hi ghly competitive international space
market and that will set a stage  for further boost to the In dia’s multi faceted space pro gramme.  
E f f o r t  s h o u l d  b e  m a d e  t o  s e c u r e  the wider involvement  of the Industr y in marketin g and other
areas of its activities 
(Para 26.3)
Action taken by the Department 
Antrix has been putting  in concerte d efforts to maximally utilize the indu strial capability and support.  The
areas where Antrix continues to work closely with industries are for the ha rdware for launch services, hardware
and software required for the up gradation of international ground st ations receiving IRS data, supply o f
Page 7 of 9R E P O R T
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/84th.htm

spacecraft components and subsystems for international space agencies etc. 
The agreement with Space Imaging of USA for the acce ss and global marketing of remote sensing data has
now fructified with more than ten st ations across the globe now accessing and receiving IRS data.  The hardware
for the stations continue to be supplied by Indian Industrie s.  Discussions are being he ld with other international
space companies for the dissemination of  IRS data.  Efforts are on to bring in private agencies for the marketing
of remote sensing data in India, thus paving the way for private service providers in  this area. 
In the Satcom area, the announceme nt of the Satcom Policy has thrown  open a number of opportunities fo r
industry participation.  Antrix is currently exploring the market for te lecommunication satellite for private secto r
service providers. 
Launch services (for launching satellites) are expected to form a significant part of Antrix activities.  An
understanding has been reac hed with Arianspace to enlarge the launc h opportunities for small satellites using
complementary capabilities.  This is expected to provide increased scope for industrial participation. 
Comments 
      The Committee notes with satisfactio n the efforts made by the Corporat ion in augmenting the marketing o f 
Indian space products and would like th e Corporation to vigorously pursue its efforts to consolidate its position in
the space market.  
  
  
MINUTE 
  
  
I 
SEVENTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday the 27 th March, 2001 in Room No.63, First Floor, Parliamen t 
House, New Delhi. 
  
PRESENT 
  
1.   Shri C. Ramachandraiah —  Chairman 
             
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2.   Shri Birabhadra Singh 
3.   Smt. Chandresh Kumari 
4.   Shri Lalitbhai Mehta 
5.   Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray 
6.   Smt. Savita Sharda 
7.   Shri B.P. Singhal 
  
      LOK  SABHA 
  
8.   Shri Bhan Singh Bhaura 
9.   Shri  Bhavana Chikhaliya 
10.  Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza 
11.  Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya 
12.  Shri Hassan Khan  
Page 8 of 9R E P O R T
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/84th.htm

13.  Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
14.  Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
15.  Shri Ali Mohd. Naik  
16.  Shri Suresh Pasi 
17.  Dr. Ashok Patel 
18.  Shri Prahlad Patel 
19.  Prof. I. G. Sanadi   
20.  Shri Ram Prasad Singh 
21.  Shri Balram Singh Yadav 
  
      SECRETARIAT 
       
      Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary 
        Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary 
        Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer 
      Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer 
  
  
  
2.   *                                                                      *                                                                *                                   
  
3.   The Committee considered and adopted the draft 84 th Report on Action Taken by the Department of Space on
the recommendations contained in th e Seventy-Seventh Report of the Pa rliamentary Standing Committee on
Science & Technology and Environment & Forests on De mands for Grants (2000-2001) of the Department o f
Space.       
  
4.   *                                                                    *                                                                * 
       
                    A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
  
5.   The Committee then adjourned at 1.15 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 28th March, 2001. 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
*** Relates to other matters 
Page 9 of 9R E P O R T
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/84th.htm