R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/91st.html[29-08-2018 16:19:28]
 Parliament of India
     Rajya Sabha
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
 ON
 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 91th REPORT
 
 ON
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2001-2002) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF SPACE (DEMAND NO.90)
(presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th April, 2001)
 (laid in the Lok Sabha on 24th April, 2001)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 April, 2001/Visakha, 1923  (Saka)
 
C O N T E N T S                                            
1.     COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
2.     INTRODUCTION
3.     REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE   
4.     SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS                
5.     ANNEXURE          
6.      MINUTE OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE       
  
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
 ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2001)
1.   Shri C. Ramachandraiah — Chairman
            RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri Debabrata Biswas
3.   Shri Yusuf Sarwar Khan alias Dilip Kumar
4. Shri K. C. Kondaiah

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/91st.html[29-08-2018 16:19:28]
5.   Smt. Chandresh Kumari
6.   Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra               
7.   Dr. D. Masthan                                              
8.   Shri Lalitbhai Mehta                       
9.   Prof.(Smt.) Bharati Ray                 
10.  Smt. Savita Sharda
11.  Shri Birabhadra Singh                           
12.  Shri Lachhman Singh                           
13.  Shri B.P. Singhal                                         
14.  Shri Prakanta Warisa                         
15.  Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
               LOK  SABHA
16.  Shri Bhan Singh Bhaura
17.  Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan                      
18.  Shri Vishwendra Singh Chauhan 
19.  Smt. Bhavana Chikhaliya                    
20.  Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza                     
21.  Shri Laxman Giluwa                       
22.  Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya
23.Shri Bali Ram Kashyap
24.  Shri Hassan Khan
25.  Dr. Charan Das Mahant
26.  Shri S. Murugesan                               
27.  Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan
28.  Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                              
29.  Shri A. Venkatesh Naik                       
30.  Shri B.K. Parthasarathi                
31.  Shri Suresh Pasi                                          
32.  Dr. Ashok Patel                                         
33.  Shri Prahlad Patel                           
34.  Prof. R.R. Pramanik                         

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/91st.html[29-08-2018 16:19:28]
35.  Shri Naresh Puglia                          
36.  Shri Ramsagar Rawat                         
37.  Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy   
38.  Prof. I.G. Sanadi                                           
39.  Shri Lakshman Seth                       
40.  Shri Ram Prasad Singh               
41.  Shri V.S. Sivakumar
42.  Shri Vaiko
43.  Shri V. Vetriselvan                              
44.  Dr. (Smt.) Rajeswaramma Vukkala
45.  Shri Balram Singh Yadav
 
 SECRETARIAT
       Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
      Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
      Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
      Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
 
  
INTRODUCTION
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment
 & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Ninty-first Report
 of the Committee.  This Report deals with  the detailed Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the Department of Space
 (Demand No.90). 
2.         In the meeting of the Committee held on the 10 th April, 2001 the Secretary and other Officers of the Department of Space
 gave an overview of the various activities of the Department and the Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the
 performance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants. 
3.     The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by the
 Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the
 Department of Space. 
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on 19th April, 2001.  

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/91st.html[29-08-2018 16:19:28]
 
 New Delhi;                                                                                                         C. RAMACHANDRAIAH,
April 19, 2001                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                     Chairman,
                                    Committee on Science and
 Technology,Environment and Forests.
R E P O R T
 
 
Department of Space (DOS) and the Space Communication were set up in June, 1972 with the primary objective of promoting
 the development and application of Space Science & Technology for the socio-economic benefit of the nation through
 establishment of operational space services in a self-reliant manner.  The thrust areas of the programme are as follows: -
 
·
                     Satellite based communication for various applications.
·                     Satellite-based resources survey and management and environmental monitoring.
·                     Meteorological applications.
·                     Development and operationalisation of indigenous satellites, launch vehicles and associated ground segment for providing these space based
 services.
2.   The Secretariat of DOS and the Head quarters of ISRO are located in Bangalore.  The Policies of the Indian Space Programme are formulated by the Space
 Commission and implemented by DOS through the Indian Space Research Organisations (ISRO), the National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA), the Physical
 Research Laboratory (PRL), the National Mesosphere-Stratosphere-Troposphere Radar Facility (NMRF) and other  agencies.  The North Eastern-Space Applications
 Centre (NE-SAC) was set up during the year jointly with the North Eastern Council.  The Antrix Corporation established in 1992, is a wholly owned Government
 company for commercial marketing of space products and services.  A close coordination between DOS and other Departments is maintained in the establishment
 of space                 systems - INSAT system is coordinated and managed by the Secretary-level INSAT Coordination Committee (ICC) while the Planning
 Committee of NNRMS (PC-NNRMS) coordinates National Natural Resources Management System (NNRMS). NNRMS Standing Committees (NNRMS-SC), set up
 with user ministries and departments, ensure an efficient and coordinated functioning of different NNRMS elements.  An Advisory Committee on Space Sciences
 (ADCOS) guides the research in space science.
3.   The overall coordination of the Space Programme is carried out by programme offices of ISRO Headquarters in different areas like satellite communication, earth
 observation systems, launch vehicle programme, space science, technology transfer and industry coordination, international cooperation, publications and public
 relations, budget and economic analysis and human resources development.
The major establishments of Department of Space are as follows: -
(i)   Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre (VSSC) Thiruvananthapuram provides the technology base for the country’s indigenous
 launch vehicle (rocket) development.
(ii)  ISRO Satellite Centre (ISAC), Bangalore, is entrusted with the prime responsibility for the satellite development.
(iii)SHAR Centre, Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh, is the launch base.  Also, it provides the facilities for processing of solid
 rocket motors.
(iv)Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre (LPSC), with its facilities at Bangalore, Thiruvananthapuram and Mahendragiri, is
 responsible for development of liquid propulsion and cryogenic propulsion systems for satellite and launch vehicles.
(v)  Space Applications Centre (SAC) located at Ahmedabad conducts space applications research and development.  
(vi)            Development and Educational Communication Unit (DECU), Ahmedabad, is involved in the conception, definition,
 and planning and socio/techno-economic evaluation of space application programmes.
(vii) ISRO Telemetry, Tracking and Command Network (ISTRAC) with its ground stations at    Bangalore, Sriharikota,
 Lucknow, Car Nicobar, Biak (Indonesia), Brunei and Mauritius, provides the telemetry, tracking and command support
 and spacecraft mission management for the Indian remote sensing satellite missions, SROSS missions and satellite launch
 vehicle programmes.
(viii)INSAT Master Control Facility (MCF) at Hassan, Karnataka has the responsibility for control and operation of INSAT
 satellites.
(ix)ISRO Inertial Systems Unit (IISU) carries out research and development in the area of inertial systems for satellites and

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/91st.html[29-08-2018 16:19:28]
 launch vehicles.
(x)            National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA) at Hyderabad is an autonomous institution supported by DOS.  The
 agency is responsible for acquisition, processing and distribution of data from remote sensing satellites.
(xi)  Physical Research Laboratory (PRL), Ahmedabad, is a premier national  centre for research in space and allied sciences, namely, astronomy and
 astrophysics, planetary and space sciences, earth sciences, theoretical physics and laser physics and quantum optics.
(xii) Laboratory for electro-optics Systems, Bangalore has the responsibility for development and productionisation of electro optical sensors for satellites.   
4.   India’s march in space was marked by an impressive array of achievements in the field of modern space technology and its various  applications for the
 benefits of society.  During the year 2000, the Department had achieved a major milestone with the launch of INSAT-3B on March 22, 2000. The Indian Remote
 Sensing Satellite system, comprising five satellite, continues to provide valuable data for application in agriculture, forestry, surface and ground water harnessing,
 geology, urban planning, land use and land cover mapping and ocean resources survey.
5.   The most significant milestone in launch vehicle development would be the targeted launch of India’s Geo-synchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV) which
 would carry a spacecraft of about 2000-2500 kg into geo-stationary transfer orbit.  Preparations were underway for the launch of next Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle
 (PSLV-C3), which would carry three satellites - India’s Technology Experiment Satellite, Belgium’s PROBA and BIRD of the Germany. It was also planned to use
 PSLV to launch India’s geosynchronous meteorological satellite, METSAT.
6.   In order to promote space science research and its applications in far-flung regions of the country, DOS has set up a North Eastern-Space Applications Centre
 at Shillong in 2000, intended to provide access to high technology space infrastructure for focused development activities of North Eastern States    as well as  to
 encourage space science research.
7.   On the commercial front, the Antrix Corporation of DOS continues to make headway by providing space services and hardware to international customers. It has
 bagged a few launch services contract against global competition. Antrix  and Videsh Sanchar Nigam Limited have signed a Memorandum of Understanding for
 acquisition of satellite capacity in the Indian Ocean region.
8.   Thus, India has emerged as a front ranking space faring nation with a  well integrated space programme.   The planned launches of follow-on satellites in the
 IRS and INSAT series indicate that India would continue to play a major role in the coming years too.  With PSLV already in service and GSLV development test
 flights planned in the near future, the Indian space programme was poised to become fully self reliant to meet the needs of national space services.
9.   Despite having covered milestones, Indian Space programme was still looking on assistance rendered by the foreign countries in the areas  of (i) launching of
 INSAT satellites,   (ii) special alloy forgings & sheets, memory devices, few control components, highly reliable electronic components and space grade materials
 required for satellites and launch vehicles.  It would  not be economical to produce them indigenously in small quantities required for the space programme and the
 rate of obsolescence being very high. 
10.The Department has taken up an extensive programme to develop critical space components and materials indigenously on a selective basis in a progressive
 manner.   The indigenisation programme was managed by a high level national committee with experts drawn from ISRO and other agencies.  A number of
 electronic components such as linear and digital integrated circuits, semiconductor devices, passive components like wires, cables, connectors and space grade
 materials  such as thermal control materials, lubricants coating and special alloys have been successfully developed indigenously and were being used in launch
 vehicles and satellites.
11.   The Committee commends the milestones covered by the DOS.  What makes space technology unique is its ability to provide systematic, synoptic and rapid
 coverage over large areas from the vantage point in space, enabling the country to monitor and manage its national resources and environment.  Developing
 countries like India, which are burdened with large population density, low agricultural yield, unchecked deforestation, increasing wastelands, large scale illiteracy,
 recurrent natural disasters and poor communication and transportation infrastructure, could only leap-frog with the help of space technology to provide a better life
 style to its citizens in the shortest possible time.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
12.The Department of Space has been allocated an amount of Rs.2030 crores (Plan as well as non-plan) for the year 2001-2002 against Rs.2019.22 crores in the
 BE of the year 2000-2001 which declined to Rs.1908.52 crores in the BE of that year.  Asked about the reasons for the reduction in the budgetary support by
 about Rs.100 crores, the Committee was informed that based on the programmatic requirements and spendability analysis, Department projected a requirement of
 Rs.1699.06 crores for RE 2000-2001 Plan component which is very close to the Voted Grant of Rs.1700 crore.   While finalizing the RE allocations, the Ministry of
 Finance has fixed the ceiling for RE 2000-2001 plan component at Rs.1600 crore.  In order  to comply with the instructions of Ministry of Finance,  the Department
 has phased out some of the expenditure to the next financial year without any significant impact to the programmes.
13.The Plan and non-plan breakup of the provision for BE of 2001-2001 is as follows:
 
(Rs. in Crores)
 Non-Pan Plan Total
Budget Estimates 2001-2002 (Gross) 320.15 1714.80 2034.95
Budget Estimates 2001-2002 (Net) 320.00 1710.00 2030.00

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/91st.html[29-08-2018 16:19:28]
 
     The details of the budgetary provision (Plan as well as non-plan) are set out in  the Annexure.
14.A provision of Rs.553.97 crores has been sought in BE 2001-2002 under the Launch Vehicle Technology which is essentially for the major ongoing projects such
 as GSLV, PSLV/C1-C6 & CUSP and also the technology  development initiatives, advanced R&D, technical facilities  augmentation/replacement and organization and
 infrastructure maintenance (O&M) of related centers/units like VSSC, LPSC and IISU.  Further, it is also proposed to initiate development work on higher thrust cryo
 engine (C-20), higher thrust liquid stage (L-100) and large solid stage/booster (S200) for future vehicles.
15.The Department has informed that considering the critical need to provide on-orbit backup for the meteorological segment of   the INSAT system, a METSAT
 satellite project carrying meteorological payloads  has been taken up. The project  has been approved by the Government in December 2000.   The METSAT
 mission  has been conceived taking advantage of  the capability of the indigenous PSLV to place a 900 kgs satellite into Geo-stationary transfer orbit and the
 satellite is targeted for launch by end 2001/early 2002.  A provision of Rs.50 crores has been included in BE 2001-2002 towards METSAT project.
16.Rs.255.02 crore has been sought in BE 2001-2002 towards Launch Support, Tracking Network and Range Facilities.  This essentially includes the Second Launch
 Pad project at Sriharikota and operations and maintenance expenditure of Sriharikota and ISTRAC.
17.A provision of Rs.161.80 crore has been sought in BE 2001-2002 under  the major Space Applications programmes which is essentially for the NNRMS/NRIS
 programme, Remote Sensing application development, Integrated Mission for Sustainable Development, GRAMSAT pilot project, GSAT-1 application project, and
 other application programmes.  This also includes the budgetary support for application R&D, technical facilities  augmentation/replacement, O&M of related Centres
 like Space Application Centre, DECU and RRSSCs as well as Grant-in-aid to NRSA and North-Eastern Space Applications Centre (NE-SAC).
18.Rs. 104.60 crores has been sought under Other programmes/Direction and Administration in BE 2001-2002 which includes Indigenisation programme,  International
 cooperation, DOS Secretariat expenditure, ISRO Hq, Civil Engineering Division, Central management and Others. 
19.The major mission/projects in Satellite Technology area such as  IRS-P5 and IRS-P6, IRS-2A(Cartosat-2), METSAT & GSAT-2 are already in progress.  It is also
 planned to initiate work on GSAT-3 to  be  flown on  developmental  flights of GSLV and on  IRS-2B/2C   for  advanced oceanographic and resource survey
 applications. These mission/projects along with the technology development initiatives, R&D, technical facilities augmentation/replacement and O&M of related
 center/units like ISAC and LEOS would require Rs.347.21 crore during       2001-2002.
20.The major projects/missions under INSAT Operational essentially includes INSAT-2 project, INSAT-3 satellites and their launch services and the O&M expenditure
 of Master Control facility for on-orbit maintenance of INSAT satellites.  A provision of Rs.551.01 crores has been sought in BE 2001-2002 towards this programme.
 21.     The total plan outlay approved for 9 th plan(1997-2002) was Rs.6511.72 crores. The expenditure during the first three years of the plan period. i.e. 1997-
2000 was Rs.3446.13 crores on the plan side and Rs.683.46 crores on the non-plan side. The  outlay approved for space programme for the last two years of the
 9th plan period  was Rs. 3319.34 crores  (plan side) and Rs. 629.39 crores  (non-plan).  The allocation for 2001-2002 is based on the programmatic targets which
 remain to be realized and is as per the total outlay approved for the 9th five year plan.
22.   The Committee finds that the Department has been rigorously following  the Zero Base Budgeting  methodology for formulation of Annual Budgets.  Detailed
 reviews are carried out at various levels in  the organization in order to arrive at the minimum essential cash flow for each Project, Programme and Centre/Unit,
 based on the programmatic priorities, total cost, scheduled targets, progress achieved and the milestones planned for the budgeting period. Consistent with the
 programme directions and targets envisaged for the 9th Five Year Plan period, the specific activities/projects to be undertaken and the performance milestones to be
 achieved have been carefully prioritized while arriving at the Budget Estimates for 2001-2002.
23.     The Committee commends the utilization of the budgetary support which was to the extent of 99-92% of the funds allocated to it during 1998-99 and 99.76%
 in 1999-2000.
GEO-SYNCHRONOUS SATELLITE LAUNCH VEHICLE (GSLV)
24.The Geo-Synchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle(GSLV) launch was the most technologically challenging mission of the ISRO as its success would herald a
 significant milestone in establishing India’s  capability to launch communication satellites.  The 3-stage GSLV, India’s first satellite launch vehicle using cryogenic
 engines, was the culmination of a 10-year long project which cost the national exchequer Rs. 1,400 crore. The  successful launch of GSLV has enabled India  to
 enter the elite space bazaar and join the US, European Union, Russia, Japan and China which have already crossed the geostationary launch milestone.
25.The GSLV was designed to place a communication satellite into a geo-synchronous transfer orbit (GTO). The 49-metre tall GSLV, which weighs 401 tonnes,
 would place the Geo-synchronous Satellite (GSAT) weighing 1,540 kg in a highly elliptical GTO with a perigee of 185 km and an apogee of 36,000 km.  GSLV
 mission was a step after the PSLV in terms of enhancing the capabilities of  DOS in launch vehicles and orbiting heavier class of satellites. The GSLV mission
 was primarily to realise the launch capability with INSAT class of satellites that weigh between 2,000 kg and 2,500 kg.
26.   The Committee applauds the achievement of the Country’s most ambitious space project, the GSLV, launched successfully  on 18
th April, 2001.   The successful
 launch of GSLV would not only enable the country to launch its own satellites but also the satellites of other   countries.  The  Committee  hopes  that  the  GSLV  will 
 take  India a  step  closer to
realizing the dream of being a genuine space power which so far has been the exclusive preserve of a handful of advanced countries.
INDIAN REMOTE SENSING SATELITE

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/91st.html[29-08-2018 16:19:28]
27.Remote Sensing is a technology for sampling radiation and force fields to acquire and interpret geospatial data to develop information about features, objects, and
 classes on Earth’s land surface, oceans, and atmosphere.  Thus this activity includes  the detecting and measuring of electromagnetic energy emanating from
 distant objects made of various materials, to identify and categorize these objects by class of type, substance and spatial distribution.
28.The Indian Remote Sensing Satellite (IRS) System, which is the world’s largest constellation of remote sensing satellites comprising five satellites, IRS-IB, IRS-IC,
 IRS-ID, IRS-P3 and OCEANSAT-1 (IRS-P4), continued to provide  valuable data for application in agriculture, forestry, surface and ground water harnessing,
 geology, urban planning, land use and land cover mapping, flood mapping and ocean resources surveys, IRS-ID, which was launched by India’s PSLV in
 September 1997 has successfully completed its design life of three years and continues to function satisfactorily.  Data from OCEANSAT-1 was being used for
 retrieval of several important oceanic parameters.  Many institutions have been associated in the evaluation of data from this satellite and to explore new fields of
 application.  Development, fabrication and testing of follow-on satellites in the IRS series, namely, RESORCESAT and CARTOSAT-1 were progressing well.  
 Significant progress has been made in the development of a Technology Experiment Satellite TES that aims at testing and validating advanced spacecraft bus and
 payload technologies.  Work on the advanced cartographic satellite, CARTOSAT-2, has also been initiated. 
29.The remote sensing applications in the entire country were carried out under the broad umbrella of National Natural Resources Management System (NNRMS). 
 NNRMS continuously provided space based data related to land, water and ocean resources as well as atmospheric observations.  As the effective utilization of IRS
 database on an operational basis was possible with the involvement of the states in setting up appropriate mechanism to integrate the database for effective
 management of natural resources in the states, the idea of State Natural Resources Management System (SNRMS) was conceptualized,  on the pattern of existing
 NNRMS.  The nine NNRMS Standing Committees encompassing major natural resources and developmental areas like agriculture, bio-resources and environment,
 urban development, etc. periodically review the status of utilization of remote sensing in their respective fields and provide guidance for promoting remote sensing
 based activities.
30.The Committee was informed that after completion of first phase of the National (Natural) Resources Information System (NRIS) programme, a national review of
 the NRIS programme was held and it was recommended that the NRIS must be expanded to cover at least one district in each state and also cover the whole
 country in phased manner.   As a precursor to establishing NRIS for the whole country, initially  states of Orissa and NE states were identified for taking up the
 NRIS programme.  The enhanced provision sought in RE 2000-2001 was mainly towards establishment of NRIS in Orissa State and North-Eastern region.
31.     The Committee is of the view that in addition to providing data about country’s natural resources, the programme should emphasize on locating new
 resources in view of the requirements of country’s rising population.  The Department should also address all the State Governments to effectively manage and
 ensure optimum utilisation of the natural resources.
32.     The Committee would also like to impress on the DOS about the need to make an extra effort on mapping natural resources in the North-Eastern region.  It
 is because the region holds a vast potential of natural resources which do not appear to have been explored fully. On the other hand our inability to map these
 resources and ensure gainful utilisation could be one reason for the law and order problems being faced by that region.   Besides, such initiatives might help in
 improving socio-economic development of the region.
SECOND LAUNCH PAD
33.The work on Second Launch Pad (SLP) Project was initiated in 1997 with a view to  provide redundancy to the existing launch pad for current versions of Polar
 Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV) and Geo-Synchronous Satellite launch Vehicle (GSLV) and also enabled launch of advanced launch vehicle to Geo-Synchronous
 Transfer Orbit (GTO) with capability to launch four tones class satellite. The sanctioned cost of the project was Rs.289.00 crores.  The facilities conferred by the
 project include launch pad  with jet deflector, vehicle assembly bay, check-out  system, propellant and gas storage and transfer facilities for  earth storable etc. The
 Budgetary allocation for the programme in the year 2001-02 has been kept at Rs.132.00 crores as against Rs.125.65 crores and Rs.80.00 crores at the B.E. and
 R.E. stages respectively of the last years.
34.Asked about the reduction in allocation from Rs.125.65 crores at BE stage to Rs.80 crores at RE stage in 2000-2001, the Committee was informed that  the
 construction of Second Launch Pad at Sriharikota was executed by M/s Metallurgical & Engineering Consultants (MECON), a public sector undertaking, on turn-key
 basis.  The provision for Rs.125.65 crores was made for supply and erection of major systems like cryo propellant servicing system, control and instrumentation
 system, gas storage & servicing system and other mechanical, electrical and air conditioning systems. In view of complexities involved in the work covering multi-
disciplinary areas, detailed design analysis/verification by external experts and extensive evaluation & negotiation process to finalise the subcontracting arrangements
 involving foreign vendors, the prime contractor took considerable time to finalise the orders on the subcontractors.  Though orders for most of the major systems
 had been finalized/placed, the supply of subsystsems and the corresponding expenditure spilled over beyond March 2001.   Hence, the budget requirement of the
 project had been reduced during RE 2001-2002 and increased correspondingly in BE 2001-2002 to provide for the spill-over payments.
35.   The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in 77th Report for according priority to the work relating to second launch pad.  Accordingly, the Committee
 would like the Department to speed up the pace of the project, which would open up the opportunities for commercialization of the Indian Space programme.
LUNAR MISSION
36.The attention of the DOS was drawn to consideration of last year’s Demands for Grants when the Secretary, DOS had mentioned in the context of lunar launch
 that it was possible only if requisite international cooperation was forthcoming in this regard.  Asked whether any efforts have been made for securing international
 cooperation for the purpose or whether the project has finally been abandoned.  If  so, the reasons for abandoning the project.  
 37.The Committee was informed that the concept of realizing a lunar mission involving an instrumented spacecraft through Indian launcher was under examination.  
 A task force in ISRO was carrying out detailed studies of this proposal addressing the possible scientific and technological objectives of the lunar  mission in the
 context of contemporary global science pursuits in this area, the various mission options, configuration analysis of the spacecraft and technology developments
 required.  The study was intended to gain an in-depth knowledge about the various elements involved in lunar mission and identify the areas where India may have

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/91st.html[29-08-2018 16:19:28]
 to seek international co-operation.
38.      The Committee is of the view that India’s space programme having reached a plateau in terms of  technological development, it was time to consider
 exploring new horizons, the mission to moon being the one.  The Lunar mission, the Committee feels, would not only boost the country’s international standing but
 also provide new direction to the scientists to reach greater heights.  The Committee, however, recommends that instead of sending a spacecraft with high cost
 involved in it, ISRO may initially consider sending a lunar orbiter equipped with sophisticated equipments that would circle the moon for year, conduct scientific
 experiments and send feed back for analysis.
DEVELOPMENT & COMMUNICATION UNIT (DECU)
39.The Development & Communication Unit (DECU) was involved in the conception, definition, planning, implementation and socio-economic evaluation of space
 application.  DECU works closely with users to experiment innovative space system configurations to meet  specific requirements.  The primary functions of DECU
 include organizing space application experiments and demonstrations, providing communication support for application projects, production of video programmes for
 education and development, training of TV programme production personnel and social science research in application areas  on the society technology interface.  
 The total budgetary allocation for DECU for the year 2001-02 is Rs. 21.89 crore.
40.The budget under “Development and Educational Communication Unit “ (DECU) also includes funds towards execution of Jhabua Development  Communication
 Project (JDCP) and the Training and Development and Communication Channel (TDCC) programmes, besides institutional maintenance and operations  support of
 DECU.
41.JDCP Project was under expansion covering all the panchayat villages  of Jhabua district.  Besides, 200 more village had been identified in the neighboring Dhar
 and Bharwani districts of Madhya Pradesh for the implementation of same project.  The experiment would provide valuable inputs for extending the programme to
 other parts of the country.  Under TDCC, the facility was being used by  several agencies for interactive training and education of Panchayatiraj workers, banking
 staff, industrial workers and management students.
42.Asked to clarify about the new projects proposed to be undertaken under DECU in view of the enhanced budgetary support (i.e. Rs.21.89 crores) the Committee
 has been informed that the Satellite System for Rural Development (GRAMSAT) network programme of  the Department aims at providing a satellite based
 communication network at the State level connecting the state capital to districts and blocks for rural development purposes in the area of interactive training,
 distance education, telemedicine services, disaster management support    and   other    services.  The   programme   was being implemented  with co-operation
 from the respective state governments and the concerned ministries of Government of India.  The enhanced budgetary support sought in BE 2001-2002 is aimed at
 implementation of the GRAMSAT network programme.              
43.   The Committee is of the view that the Department should try to expand the network of TDCC/JDCP in other states in order to provide interactive training
 programme, development information network and broadcast capability.  Necessary infrastructure in this regard should be raised in coordination with concerned
 Ministries and users.  The Committee also observes the need to constantly monitor the activities undertaken under TDCC/JDCP by the Department.
SATELLITE NEWS GATHERING AND DISSEMINATION
44.Satellite News Gathering (SNG) using INSAT system enables real-time news coverages.  Prasar Bharati was  procuring five Outdoor-Broadcast SNG terminals in
 order to cover important  events in different locations for transmission via satellite to a central station at Delhi for rebroadcast over DD channels.  Press Trust of
 India (PTI) was also implementing a system to provide its news and information services at high speed and increased volume and variety directly to a wider range
 of media and other users by utilizing the broadcast facilities of INSAT-2C satellite.  The project utilizes a Radio Networking type of channel on one of the broadcast
 transponders of the satellite.  The PTI satellite news and facsimile dissemination project was working with 20 terminals.
45.     The Committee commends the satellite services being provided by the DOS in the field of transmission and broadcasting. Nevertheless, at  times, it is the
 private TV channels who are first in reporting important international events.  Something appears amiss somewhere, which needs to be looked into.
VIKRAM SARABHAI SPACE CENTRE
46.The Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre (VSSC) is  a National Center for Research and Development in Space technology.  The Centre aims for indigenous
 development of rockets and satellite launch vehicles with their  associated control and guidance systems and electronics, realization of the PSLV and GSLV. The
 recent technological achievements of the Centre in the recent years include enhancement of payload capacity of PSLV, development of  multiple launching capability
 and an improved onboard computer.
47.The Committee has been informed that on the basis of a detailed technical evaluation of the technologies developed in the center and options available, extensive
 reviews have taken place in defining the future advanced launch vehicle systems.  In view of the lead time for fructification of long term initiatives, VSSC has
 initiated technology developments on large solid stage booster which would lead to next generation GSLV, development of air breathing propulsion technologies for
 advanced launch vehicles and space capsule recovery experiment for microgravity research and future recoverable launch vehicle systems.  The Budgetary support
 for 2001-2002 has been made keeping in view the above initiatives.
48.   The Committee is of the view that other things being equal, VSSC should accord priority to the check-out system meant for second launch pad project .
 
WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
49.Remote sensing satellites provide quick and useful base line information on the occurrence and movement of ground water, like geology, geomorphology, soils
 etc.  A systematic study of these factors leads to better delineation of prospective ground water  zone.  IRS data was extensively used for surveying water
 resources.

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/91st.html[29-08-2018 16:19:28]
50.Preparation of groundwater prospect maps has been taken up for five states, namely, Andhra Pradsesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan under
 the National Drinking Water Mission of Ministry of Rural Development.  The work was being carried out by 70 work centers and involved use of precision geocoded
 IRS-IC/ID imagery in conjunction with field checks and existing data/literature to prepare the groundwater prospects maps.  The maps  would form a suitable
 database for narrowing down the target zones for carrying out detailed hydro geological and geophysical investigations, ultimately  leading to sites for drilling
 borewells.  Besides, these maps would help in selection of sites for construction of recharge structures for improving the sustainability of drinking water sources.  A
 digital database was also being created simultaneously.  Ground water prospects zone maps have been prepared for four drought-prone districts, namely, Sirohi,
 Rajsamand, Chittaurgarh and Bhilwara in Rajasthan and 80 ground water prospect sites identified for further exploration. Hydro Geomorphological maps of part of
 Meghalya and Assam States have also been prepared by the Department of Space on a request having been made by the Central Pollution Control Board in this
 regard.
51.Evaluation of 14 irrigation command areas has been taken up in Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and West Bengal under the centrally sponsored
 command area development programme. 
52.   The Committee feels that the current problem of fast depleting ground water is due to poor resource management.  Efforts to dig more and more bore wells
 for getting water led only to the depletion of water table in states like Gujarat, Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh as very little was done for recharging ground water.  The
 Committee has reasons to believe that the water shortage may be more acute in the times to come because of a variety of reasons.  Hence the need to augment
 our efforts. The water system management also needs to be more scientific and based on a balanced consideration of the requirements of people and the
 environment.
NORTH EASTERN-SPACE APPLICATIONS CENTRE (NE-SAC)
53.NE-SAC, established in December, 2000 at Shillong, would have facilities for remote sensing, satellite communications and space science research. The Centre
 would be turned towards overall developmental needs of the region, and, also as an initiative for establishing an institution of high-technology applications in the
 region.  The Centre was set up with a view to provide an operational high technology infrastructure that would enable the NE states to adopt space technology
 inputs into their developmental activities. The Centre would be able to provide developmental support to the region by undertaking specific projects, utilizing space
 technology inputs – both from remote sensing and satellite communications. In doing so, the Centre would generate solutions for developmental activities in the
 region. The Centre also proposes to promote space science research activities in the region and establish a network with the academic institutions in the region.
 The technical programmes, infrastructure, manpower and other related aspects have been worked out during the year.
54.   The Committee welcomes the setting up North-Eastern Space Applications Centre and hopes that the initiatives taken for the socio-economic development of
 the region would help meet, technological requirements apart, aspiration of the people in that region.
PHYSICAL RESEARCH LABORATORY
55.Space science research under Indian space programme was mainly  carried out at Physical Research Laboratory (PRL). PRL has a multidimensional research
 programme encompassing disciplines like astronomy and astrophysics; planetary and space sciences; earth sciences; theoretical physics; laser physics and quantum
 optics and quantum chaos and nonlinear dynamics.  The laboratory has research programme leading to Ph.D degree.  It also offers opportunities for carrying out
 post-doctoral research.
56.The Committee has been informed that the enhanced allocation sought in BE 2001-2002 is mainly for the purpose of Earth Science studies with the augmentation
 of a Thermal Ionisation Mass Spectrometer (TI-MS), which will enable high precision isotopic studies of nuclides in Earth system.
57.   The Committee would like the Department to examine whether ongoing areas of research as also new initiatives could also be taken alongwith the areas of
 microgravity research, air breathing technology,  reentry systems etc., for the benefit of the nation.  Moreover,  investigation on the question of   possible presence
 of water at the moon, and also about levitation of dust in the airless lunar environment, are also of interest and worth pursuing.
SPACE-INDUSTRY PARTNERSHIP
58.With a view to harnessing the industry’s potential, the  Space Programme has been encouraging transfer of technologies to Indian industry to support various
 space objects to remote space applications and market development, and for disseminating spin-off space technologies to diverse economic sectors.  Partnership
 with industry has been there for quite some time  through various initiatives and cooperative ventures with a view to  achieving self reliance in space technology. 
 Since then a number of technologies have been transferred to industry in the areas of electronics, communications, computers, optical and remote sensing data
 utilization equipment.  Besides, provision for technological consultancy and technology utilization has been promoted.   The association with the space programme
 has enabled industry to adopt advanced technologies and handle complex manufacturing jobs. So far, over 245 technologies developed under the space programme
 have been transferred to industries for commercial use and more than 190 technical consultancies have been provided in various areas of space technology.
59.   The Committee feels that self-reliance can be achieved only when the indigenous industry is in a position to absorb high technology and becomes  an active
 partner in the space programme.  The spin off from the future space technology programme would not only  result in the general upgradation of the industrial
 capability and development of new products, but also bring in a new culture to the industry in terms of  management structures, reliability standards, quality
 consciousness and time targeted activities, the benefit of which could be tremendous.   DOS should, therefore, consolidate its partnership with Industry with a view
 to achieve optimum utilization of the industrial capability, of the private as well as public sector 
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
60.DOS has emphasised international cooperation and partnerships.  In the present scenario of increasing costs and commercial competition, international cooperation
 could accomplish more than what can be achieved by individual countries .

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/91st.html[29-08-2018 16:19:28]
61.The impact of Satellite Instructional Television Experiment (SITE) using the US satellite, ATS-6; communication experiments using the Franco-German Symphonic
 on India’s satellite communication programme; use of the US LANDSAT and French SPOT spacecraft data on Indian remote sensing programme; availability of the
 US NOAA data for satellite meteorological programme; launch support from erstwhile USSR for India’s satellite programme, etc. are examples to show the benefits
 of international cooperation.   India has not only been able to work jointly with advanced space-faring nations, but also able to market its space hardware and
 services.  Besides, it has been contributing its space resources for the benefit of international community in addition to meeting its own requirements.
62.One of the recent examples of cooperation was the incorporation of the Modular        Opto-electronic  Scanner (MOS) instrument from the German Aerospace
 Centre (DLR) on board the Indian Remote Sensing satellite, IRS-P3, along with ISRO’s Wide Field Sensor (WiFS).    Data from this satellite was  being received
 and analysed not only by Indian and German scientists but also in USA and other parts of Europe.  ISRO and the French National Space Agency (CNES) were
 working together for a joint satellite  mission called Megha Tropiques that aims to study the atmosphere and climate.
63.DOS has also entered into agreements/memoranda of understanding with several countries and space agencies, namely, Australia, Brunei Darusslam, Canada,
 China, European Space Agency, France, Germany, Hungary, Indonesia, Italy, Mauritius, Norway, Peru, Russia, Sweden, Syria, Netherlands, Ukraine, United Kingdom
 and United States of America.  India has an active role in several international bodies such as the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
 (UN-COPUOS), United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UN-ESCAP), the International Astronautical Federation (IAF), the
 Committee on Earth Observation Satellites (CEOS), the Committee on Space Research (COSPAR), the Inter Agency Debris Coordination Committee (IADC), the
 Space Frequency Coordination Group (SFCG), the Committee on Geostationary Metorological Satellites (CGMS), the International Space University (ISU), the Asian
 Association for Remote Sensing (AARS), the International Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing (ISPRS), etc.
64.DOS  under a scheme called Sharing of Experience in Space (SHARES)  was providing   training in different applications of space technology    to scientists
 from other developing countries.  DOS supported selected candidates with living expenditure and allowances, while the international travel was borne by the country
 sponsoring the  candidates.
65.   The Committee recommends that the DOS should forge international cooperation to explore the areas, which have hitherto remained unexplored.
PUBLICITY OF SPACE PROGRAMME
66.Space programme encompasses a variety of activity in space science, technology and applications, which are of interest not only to the scientific community but
 students and the general public.  Wide publicity is necessary on achievements  of Space programmes. DOS has made efforts to disseminate information of space
 programme.  Information in respect of all major events under the space programme was being provided to the public  through print and visual media, exhibitions,
 public lectures and publications.  General information on the space programme was also available on the internet.
67.Department of Post has by now issued four postage stamps to commemorate the achievements under the Indian space programme.   Of these, two stamps are
 on OCEANSAT-1 and INSAT-3B satellites and the other stamps were on the theme ‘India in Space-2025’.
68.   The Committee is happy to note the efforts being made by the DOS in publicising its programmes and achievements.  The Committee feels that it is necessary to
 provide greater focus on dissemination of the current as well as future programmes with the help of print as well as electronic media.
ANTRIX CORPORATION
69.Antrix Corporation Ltd., the commercial  wing of ISRO, was marketing India’s space products and services.  The objective is to gain entry into  the highly
 competitive international market. Antrix markets subsystems and components for satellites, undertakes order for satellites to user specifications, provides  launch
 services and  tracking facilities and also organizes training of manpower and software development.  Some important achievements of the Corporation include
 marketing of IRS data, satellite launch contracts with Germany, Korea and Belgium, sale of a sounding rocket to Norway and supply  of  satellite hardware to major
 space companies in the world.  Antrix Corporation and Arianspace of France had also signed an agreement to enlarge the launch opportunities for small satellites. 
 The Corporation was also engaged in providing commercial aspects for transfer of ISRO’s spin-off technologies to Indian industries.
70.
     The Committee observes that with the clearance of Direct-to-Home (DTH) Policy in India, the market for telecommunication satellites and related products and
 services holds vast potential.  The Committee, therefore, feels that the Corporation should  explore the possibilities of production and supply of telecommunication
 satellites, facilitating augmentation of transponder capacity under the INSAT system and should also offer consultancy services for procuring, launching, operating and
 maintenance of communication satellites and  evolve its strategy accordingly.
DISASTER MANAGEMENT
71.The Disaster Management System (DMS) was visualised to provide  support for management of disasters in near-real time and also for disaster zonation studies
 and effective initation strategies.  Space-based disaster management system provides valuable inputs when appropriately integrated with the conventional ground-
based  systems.  In the Ninth plan period, the efforts were made to complete a system definition study of the DMS and also conduct pilot experiments for
 establishing a prototype DMS.  Plot project on DMS has been initiated in some flood-prone districts of Assam.
72.About 250 Cyclone Warning Dissemination System (CWDS) receivers have been installed in the cyclone-prone coastal areas of Andhra Pradesh, north Tamil
 Nadu, Orissa, West Bengal and Gujarat.
73.The Secretary  informed that  in pursuance of the earlier recommendation of the Committee, an advanced Cyclone Warning Dissemination system with digital
 version was under development.  This has several new features such as high quality digital transmission, variable duration of siren/audio message and confirmation
 of the receipt of the warning message.  The design and functional specifications have been completed.   The proto-type of the instrument has been fabricated by
 the Industries and the testing was in progress.  These proto units would be deployed in the field for trial runs.  After successfully completing  trial runs, Indian
 Meteorological Department would procure the system from Industries and deploy them in the coastal districts.

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/91st.html[29-08-2018 16:19:28]
74.   The Committee feels that it is necessary to ensure that an effective  Disaster Management System was in place to cope with the devastation occurring in the
 wake of natural  calamities.   The recent killer earthquake of Gujarat has given  an impression that the country was still unprepared to tackle  major disasters. 
 While the communication satellites were  available for timely dissemination of information about any disaster, the organisation of relief or a post-event  management
 still remains a weak area where it is necessary to harness national capabilities. DOS can take a lead in this direction and co-ordinate with the India Meteorological
 Department (IMD) and other concerned agencies.
INSAT
75.The Indian National Satellite (INSAT) System was one of the largest domestic satellite systems in Asia today.  A joint venture of the Department of Space, the
 Department of Telecommunication, the India Meteorological Department, All India Radio and Doordarshan, INSAT provides long distance telecommunications,
 meteorological earth observation and data relay, nationwide radio networking, TV programme distribution and rebroadcasting to terrestrial transmitters, etc.  DOS was
 responsible for establishment and operation of INSAT space segment.  The overall management of the INSAT system rests with the Secretary-level INSAT
 Coordination Committee (ICC).
76.The INSAT system which became operational with INSAT-1B, is a multi-agency, multi-purpose operational satellite system which provides domestic long distance
 telecommunications, meteorological earth observation and data relay, nation wide direct satellite TV broadcasting to augment TV receivers, nation wide radio
 networking, TV programme distribution and re-broadcasting to terrestrial transmitters, etc.  The system has enabled communication to and fro any part of India
 leading to training and awareness among rural masses on better agricultural practices, land and water resources management, family planning health care and
 hygiene, disaster warning and rescue operations, etc. 
77.The INSAT system has four satellites in operation at present – INSAT-2C, INSAT-2DT, INSAT-2E and INSAT-3B.  Besides, ten transponders have been leased
 from Thailand to augment the system capacity.
78.
     The Committee observes that the unprecedented growth of communication and TV and the projected requirements for the future, require an adequate expansion
 of INSAT services in order to cope with regional as well as national requirements.  Accordingly, any  planning of our future national space programme should take into
 account these requirements.
 
DIRECT-TO-HOME (DTH) TV MISSION
79.The basic concept of a Direct-to Home (DTH) TV Broadcasting Satellite System was a high power satellite operating in the Ku-band for direct telecast of TV
 programmes to homes.
80.Asked  about the current status of DTH mission, the Committee has been informed that during the formulation of 9th five year plan, the Planning Commission had
 given guidelines that the Department has to depend on user funding support for DTH mission. The Department would undertake DTH mission only  if there was a
 requirement and funding support forthcoming from DTH users. A token provision of Rs. 10 lakhs has been kept in the BE of the year 2001-2002 to enable
 configuration studies and preliminary development.
81.   The Committee notes the position and observes that instead of depending on  budgetary support, the Department should explore the possibilities of generating
 revenues from the user community or by inviting investment from private sector. This would  help the Department to execute the mission in right earnest, without  taking
 recourse to the budgetary support.
LONG TERM PLANS
82.The Committee has been informed that the Department has drawn up “Vision and Programme Directions: 2000-2010”  identifying the goals and technology
 requirements of the space programme during the coming decade.  This has been reviewed by the Space commission as well as the Planning Commission.
83.It has further been informed that the Department has planned several activities during     2001-02 in tune with the programme directions identified for 2000-
2010.  These include advanced GSLV MK III with the development of large solid booster (S-200), higher thrust cryogenic engine (C-20) and large liquid strapon (L-
100), developmental efforts towards air breathing propulsion systems, space recovery capsule experiments for micro gravity applications, missions on advanced
 cartography with improved resolution, national systems for satellite based navigation, pilot experiments  in disaster management support, establishment of GRAMSAT
 network for developmental applications, newer communication services for digital audio, tele medicine, mobile communication and a wide range of remote sensing
 applications related to land and water.
84.The Department has also taken up several study  initiatives of Long term plan to identify the thrust areas of the space programme beyond 2010.   A special task
 force was working on “Earth Observation: 2025 strategy”.  In order to elicit views and perspectives of younger generation, a team of young  scientists/engineers of
 the Department was working to generate inputs on “Long term plan: 2000-2025”.  A long term road map was also under finalization in the launch vehicle area.  A
 decade plan for the space science had also been drawn after extensive interactions with the scientific community in various institutions of the country.  Several
 other studies were also in progress in this direction.  These studies provide valuable input for the formulation of 10
th five year plan.
85.   The Committee observes that the Department of Space had started its journey in 1975 with the launch of  first indigenously built satellite Aryabhatta.   Then came
 Bhaskara – 1, first experimental earth observation satellite launched in 1979, followed by Bhaskara–II in 1981.  The first satellite in INSAT series, INSAT-1A was launched
 in 1982, followed by INSAT-1B,  INSAT-1C  and  INSAT-1D in  1983,  1988 and   1990 respectively.  Then came
INSAT-2E and IRS-P4 in 1999.  Last year of the Millennium i.e. year 2000 had to its credit INSAT-3B in March, 2000.    While the DOS has been trying to attain perfection

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/91st.html[29-08-2018 16:19:28]
 by achieving technological superiority all along its journey, it was time the DOS embarked on a long term plan bringing out  clearly what is its objective - whether merely a
 technological superiority over others or any particular definite mission.  It is necessary that a long term profile was drawn up.   It would necessitate careful planning,
 considerable deliberations and discussions.  The profile should bring out clearly the vision of the Department, give details of milestones to be covered and projects to be
 worked upon and fulfilled.  This would further enhance our standing in the comity of nations and help us secure necessary international cooperation for our Space
 programme.
86.   After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Space and assessing the progress of  various  programmes and projects administered by it, the
 Committee recommends that the Demands for Grants of Rs.2030.00 crores, as sought by the Department of Space for the year 2001-2002, under Demand No. 90, may be
 approved
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS AT GLANCE
1.The Committee commends the milestones covered by the DOS.  What makes space technology unique is its ability to provide systematic, synoptic and rapid
 coverage over large areas from the vantage point in space, enabling the country to monitor and manage its national resources and environment.  Developing
 countries like India, which are burdened with large population density, low agricultural yield, unchecked deforestation, increasing wastelands, large scale illiteracy,
 recurrent natural disasters and poor communication and transportation infrastructure, could only leap-frog with the help of space technology to provide a better life
 style to its citizens in the shortest possible time.
 (Para 11)
2.The Committee finds that the Department has been rigorously following  the Zero Base Budgeting methodology for formulation of Annual Budgets.  Detailed reviews
 are carried out at various levels in  the organization in order to arrive at the minimum essential cash flow for each Project, Programme and Centre/Unit, based on
 the programmatic priorities, total cost, scheduled targets, progress achieved and the milestones planned for the budgeting period. Consistent with the programme
 directions and targets envisaged for the 9 th Five Year Plan period, the specific activities/projects to be undertaken and the performance milestones to be achieved
 have been carefully prioritized while arriving at the Budget Estimates for 2001-2002.
(Para 22)
3.  The Committee commends the utilization of the budgetary support which was to the extent of 99-92% of the funds allocated to it during 1998-99 and 99.76% in
 1999-2000.
  (Para 23)
4.The Committee applauds the achievement of the Country’s most ambitious space project, the GSLV, launched successfully on 18th April, 2001.  The successful launch
 of GSLV would not only enable the country to launch its own satellites but also the satellites of other countries.  The Committee hopes that the GSLV will take India a step
 closer to realizing the dream of being a genuine space power which so far has been the exclusive preserve of a handful of advanced countries.
(Para 26)
5.  The Committee is of the view that in addition to providing data about country’s natural resources, the programme should emphasize on locating new resources
 in view of the requirements of country’s rising population.  The Department should also address all the State Governments to effectively manage and ensure
 optimum utilisation of the natural resources.
(Para 31) 
6.  The Committee would also like to impress on the DOS about the need to make an extra effort on mapping natural resources in the North-Eastern region.   It is
 because the region holds a vast potential of natural resources which do not appear to have been explored fully. On the other hand our inability to map these
 resources and ensure gainful utilisation could be one reason for the law and order problems being faced by that region.   Besides, such initiatives might help in
 improving socio-economic development of the region.
(Para 32)
7.The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in 77 th Report for according priority to the work relating to second launch pad.   Accordingly, the Committee
 would like the Department to speed up the pace of the project, which would  open up the opportunities for commercialization of the Indian Space programme.
(Para 35)
8.The Committee is of the view that India’s space programme having reached a plateau in terms of technological development, it was time to consider exploring
 new horizons, the mission to moon being the one.  The Lunar mission, the Committee feels, would not only boost the country’s international standing but also
 provide new direction to the scientists to reach greater heights.  The Committee, however, recommends that instead of sending a spacecraft with high cost involved
 in it, ISRO may initially consider sending a lunar orbiter equipped with sophisticated equipments that would circle the moon for year, conduct scientific experiments
 and send feed back for analysis.
(Para 38)
9.The Committee is of the view that the Department should try to expand the network of TDCC/JDCP in other states in order to provide interactive training
 programme, development information network and broadcast capability.  Necessary infrastructure in this regard should be raised in coordination with concerned

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/91st.html[29-08-2018 16:19:28]
 Ministries and users.  The Committee also observes the need to constantly monitor the activities undertaken under TDCC/JDCP by the Department.
(Para 43)
10.     The Committee commends the satellite services being provided by the DOS in the field of transmission and broadcasting. Nevertheless, at  times, it is the
 private TV channels who are first in reporting important international events.  Something appears amiss somewhere, which needs to be looked into.
(Para 45)
11.   The Committee is of the view that other things being equal, VSSC should accord priority to the check-out system meant for second launch pad project .
(Para 48)
12.   The Committee feels that the current problem of fast depleting ground water is due to poor resource management.  Efforts to dig more and more bore wells
 for getting water led only to the depletion of water table in states like Gujarat, Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh as very little was done for recharging ground water.  The
 Committee has reasons to believe that the water shortage  may be  more  acute in  the  times  to  come because of a variety  of
 
easons.  Hence the need to augment our efforts. The water system management also needs to be more scientific and based on a balanced consideration of the
 requirements of people and the environment.
(Para 52)
13.   The Committee welcomes the setting up North-Eastern Space Applications Centre and hopes that the initiatives taken for the socio-economic development of
 the region would help meet, technological requirements apart, aspiration of the people in that region.
(Para 54)
14.   The Committee would like to Department to examine whether ongoing areas of research as also new initiatives could also be taken alongwith the areas of
 microgravity research, air breathing technology,  reentry systems etc., for the benefit of the nation.  Moreover,  investigation on the question of   possible presence
 of water at the moon, and also about levitation of dust in the airless lunar environment, are also of interest and worth pursuing.
(Para 57)
15.   The Committee feels that  self-reliance can be achieved only when the indigenous industry is in a position to absorb high technology and becomes an active
 partner in the space programme.  The spin off from the future space technology programme would not only result in the general upgradation of  the industrial
 capability and development of new products, but also bring in a new culture to the industry in terms of management structures, reliability standards, quality
 consciousness and time targeted activities, the benefit of which could be tremendous.   DOS should, therefore, consolidate its partnership with Industry with a view
 to achieve optimum  utilization of the industrial capability, of  the private as well as  public sector. 
(Para 59)
16.   The Committee recommends that the DOS should forge international cooperation to  explore the areas which have hitherto remained explored.
(Para 65)
17.   The Committee is happy to note the efforts being made by the DOS in publicising its programmes and  achievements.  The Committee feels that  it is necessary to
 provide greater focus on dissemination of the current as well as future programmes with the help of print as well as electronic media.
(Para 68)
18.     The Committee observes that with the clearance of Direct-to-Home (DTH) Policy in India, the market for telecommunication satellites and related products and
 services holds vast potential.  The Committee, therefore, feels that the Corporation should  explore the possibilities of production and supply of telecommunication
 satellites, facilitating augmentation of transponder capacity under the INSAT system and should also offer consultancy services for procuring, launching, operating and
 maintenance of communication satellites and  evolve its strategy accordingly.
(Para 70) 
19.   The Committee feels that it is necessary to ensure that an effective  Disaster Management System was in place to cope with the devastation occurring in the
 wake of natural  calamities.   The recent killer earthquake of Gujarat has given  an impression that the country was still unprepared to tackle  major disasters. 
 While the communication satellites  were   available  for  timely  dissemination  of  information  about any disaster, the
organisation of relief or a post-event management still remains a weak area where it is necessary to harness national capabilities. DOS can take a lead in this
 direction and co-ordinate with the India Meteorological Department (IMD) and other concerned agencies.
(Para 74)
20.     The Committee observes that the unprecedented growth of communication and TV and the projected requirements for the future, require an adequate expansion
 of INSAT services in order to cope with regional as well as national requirements.  Accordingly any   planning of our future national space programme should take into
 account these requirements.
(Para 78)

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/91st.html[29-08-2018 16:19:28]
21.   The Committee notes the position and observes that instead of depending on  budgetary support, the Department should explore the possibilities of generating
 revenues from the user community or by inviting investment from private sector. This would help the Department to execute the mission in right earnest without taking
 recourse to the budgetary support.
(Para 81)
22.   The Committee observes that the Department of Space had started its journey in 1975 with the launch of  first indigenously built satellite Aryabhatta.   Then came
 Bhaskara – 1, first experimental earth observation satellite launched in 1979, followed by Bhaskara–II in 1981.  The first satellite in INSAT series, INSAT-1A was launched
 in 1982, followed by INSAT-1B, INSAT-1C and INSAT-1D in 1983, 1988 and 1990 respectively.  Then came INSAT-2E and IRS-P4 in 1999.  Last year of the Millennium
 i.e. year 2000 had to its credit INSAT-3B in March, 2000.    While the DOS has been trying to attain perfection by achieving technological  superiority all along its journey,
 it was time the DOS embarked on a long term plan bringing out clearly what is its objective - whether merely a technological superiority over others or any particular
 definite mission.  It is necessary that a long term profile was  drawn up.  It would necessitate careful planning, considerable deliberations and discussions.  The profile
 should bring out clearly the vision of the Department, give details of milestones to be covered and projects to be worked upon and fulfilled.  This would further enhance our
 standing in the comity of nations and help us secure necessary international cooperation for our Space programme.
(Para 85)
 
 
 
ANNEXURE
 
ANNEXURE
 
BUDGET ESTIMATES 2001-02
 
(Rs. in Crores)
SL.            PROGRAMMES/PROJECTS              BUDGET        REVISED               BUDGET
NO.                                                                    2000-01       2000-01       2001-02
 
 
(A)        SPACE TECHNOLOGY
 
I          LAUNCH VEHICLE TECHNOLOGY
 
1 .      Geo-Synchronous Satellite Launch              132.68                  86.26                98.66
Vehicle (GSLV) Project
 
2.           Cryogenic Upper Stage                                 25.51                  22.00                 21.30
          (CUS) Project
 
3.       PSLV-Continuation Project                          98.07                           92.00                  105.00
 
4.       GSLV MK-II/MK-III                                     0.10                   0.00                      5.00
Development
 
5.       C-20 Cryo Stage Development                      5.00                   0.00                      0.20
 
6.       Large Solid Stage/Booster (S200)                10.00                    0.00                     0.20
 
7.       GSLV-Continuation                        0.00               0.00                 5.00
 
8.       Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre             187.40              175.52                 206.89
          (VSSC)

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/91st.html[29-08-2018 16:19:28]
 
 9.      ISRO Inertial Systems                                    8.03                  6.57                    14.13
Unit (IISU)
 
10.        Liquid Propulsion Systems                            60.54                 55.93                  97.59
            Centre (LPSC)
 
S
UB TOTAL – LAUNCH VEHICLE      527.33             438.28               553.97
TECHNOLOGY
 
SL.      PROGRAMMES/PROJECTS               BUDGET                  REVISED        BUDGET      
NO.                                                            2000-01       2000-01       2001-02
II          SATELLITE TECHNOLOGY
 
11.      IRS-Continuation Project                                0.52                   0.52                   0.00
 
12.      IRS-P4 (Oceansat)                             3.12                1.30               0.50
 
13.      IRS-P5 (Cartosat)                                          67.50                 39.52                34.71
 
14 .     IRS-P6 (Resourcesat)                                     48.45                25.28                30.54
 
15.      IRS-IIA(Cartosat-2)                        10.00             10.00             40.00
 
16.      IRS-II B/C                                  5.00              0.00              5.00
 
17.      G.SAT-1                                                          3.50               3.50               3.00
 
18 .     G.SAT-2                                                    20.00                   14.00               30.00
 
19.      G.SAT-3                                      0.00              0.00               10.00
 
20 .     Direct to Home (DTH) Satellite                        0.10                    0.00                 0.10
 
21 .     METSAT                                            0.00              0.00               50.00  
 
22 .     ISRO Satellite Centre (ISAC)                       89.92             79.93                         125.01
 
23 .          Laboratory for Electro-                             17.72                      13.72             18.35
          Optics Systems (LEOS)
 
S
UB TOTAL – SATELLITE TECHNOLOGY 265.83              187.77              347.21
III       LAUNCH SUPPORT, TRACKING NETWORK & RANGE FACILITIES
 
24.      SHAR Centre                                         94.16               87.51                 91.57
 
25.      ISRO Telemetry, Tracking &                         26.11               26.82                 30.17
           Command Network (ISTRAC)
 
26.      Second Launch Pad &                            125.65              80.00               132.00
               Common Facilities
 
27.      Radar Development Cell                                1.19                  1.21                   1.28
 
S
UB TOTAL – LAUNCH SUPPORT       247.11             194.54               255.02
TRACKING NETWORK AND RANGE
FACILITIES
        TOTAL : (A) – SPACE TECHNOLOGY       1040.27              821.59             1156.20

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/91st.html[29-08-2018 16:19:28]
 
25
 
SL.      PROGRAMMES/PROJECTS              BUDGET         REVISED          BUDGET
NO.                                                                  2000-01            2000-01              2001-02
(B)            SPACE APPLICATIONS
 
1.       Space Applications Centre (SAC)          96.64                89.43                  94.10
 
2.           Development & Educational                   12.43                17.51                  21.89
Communication Unit (DECU)
 
3.       Remote Sensing Applications                   5.50                   5.50                    6.00
Mission (RSAM)
 
4.       National Natural Resources                      10.89                   19.97                        17.19
Management System (NNRMS)
 
5.       Regional Remote Sensing                        4.44                   5.75                    5.62
Service Centres (RRSSCs)
 
6.       National Remote Sensing                       12.77                 13.44                  11.30
Agency (NRSA)
including aid Equipment
 
7.       Digital Photogrammetric                         0.68                   0.55                   0.60
          Work Station etc.
 
8.       Integrated Mission for                                     1.00                   0.25                   0.10
Sustainable Development(IMSD)
 
9.       North Eastern - Space Applications                1.00                   2.00                  5.00
          Centre (NE-SAC)
 
 T
OTAL : (B) – SPACE
APPLICATION                                 145.35               154.40             161.80
(C)          SPACE SCIENCES
1.       Physical Research Laboratory(PRL)        21.28              22.20                25.72
 
2 .      ISRO Geosphere-Biosphere                                 2.12                   2.12                    2.50
             Programme
         
3 .      National MST Radar Facility(NMRF)      1.92                1.92                2.03
 
4.          Sponsored Research (RESPOND)                      5.50                   6.50                  7.00
 
5.       Other Schemes                                           8.26                 11.25                   24.09
 
 
             T
OTAL :(C)-SPACE SCIENCES          39.08                43.99              61.34              
 
 
26
 
 
SL.     PROGRAMMES/PROJECTS                  BUDGET       REVISED       BUDGET
NO                                                               2000-01           2000-01       2001-02

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/91st.html[29-08-2018 16:19:28]
 
 
(D)          DIRECTION & ADMINISTRATION/
OTHER PROGRAMMES
 
1.       Department of Space (DOS)                               4.15                  4.18                 4.18
 
2 .      Indian Space Research                               11.50                 12.40              12.72
            Organisation (ISRO)Headquarters
 
3.       Civil Engineering Division (CED)          12.55                 12.88              13.48
 
4.       International Cooperation                               3.85                   3.85                5.40
 
5.       Others                                                         41.70                40.56              68.82
 
 
           T
OTAL:(D)  - DIRECTION &                73.75                 73.87            104.60
            ADMINISTRATION/OTHER
       PROGRAMMES
 
(E)    INSAT OPERATIONAL
 
1        INSAT-2 Satellites                                     73.40                  100.07                  35.20
 
2.       INSAT-3 Satellites                                210.00               192.00                190.00 
 
3.       INSAT-3 Launch Services                    425.00               504.00                310.00
 
4.       Master Control Facility (MCF)               15.99                 23.12                  15.81
 
          T
OTAL: (E) – INSAT                  724.39                 819.93                 551.01
OPERATIONAL
 
       GRAND TOTAL : GROSS                  2022.84             1913.78          2034.95*
 
 
* The Net Budgetary Allocation is Rs.2030.00 crores.
 
 
 
 
MINUTES
 
 
 
 
 
 
XII
TWELFTH  MEETING
 

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/91st.html[29-08-2018 16:19:28]
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday the 10th April, 2001 in Room No.139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1.   Shri C. Ramachandraiah — Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.   Shri Birabhadra Singh
3.   Shri K. C. Kondaiah
4.   Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra
5.   Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
6.   Smt. Savita Sharda
7.   Shri B.P. Singhal
8.   Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
 
      LOK  SABHA
 
9.   Shri Bhan Singh Bhaura
10.Smt. Bhavana Chikhaliya
11.Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
12.Shri Baliram Kashyap
13.Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan
14.Shri Ali Mohd. Naik
15.Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
16.Shri Suresh Pasi
17.Prof. R. R. Pramanik
18.Shri Balram Singh Yadav
 
   SECRETARIAT
  
   Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
   Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
        Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
        Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
     Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
           
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SPACE
Dr. K. Kasturirangan, Secretary
Shri S. S. Meenakshisundaram, Additional Secretary
Shri V. V. Bhat, Joint Secretary
Dr. K. N. Shankara, Director, SCP
Shri Chandy Andrews, Chief Controller of Accounts
Shri K. R.Sridharamurthy, Scientific Secretary, ISRO
Shri V. Sundararamaiah, Associate Director, LVPO
Shri K.V. Venkatachary, Director, DMS
Shri V. Jayaraman, Director, EOS
Shri S. Krishnamurthy, Director, P&PR
Shri Mukund Rao, Dy. Director
Shri H. N. Madhusudan, Director, BEA
Dr. S. V. Kibe, Deputy Director, SCP
Shri V. S. Hegde, Deputy Director, EOS
Smt. Jayashri Krishna, Deputy Secretary
 

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/91st.html[29-08-2018 16:19:28]
2.   At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Secretary & other officials of Department and expressed his satisfaction for
 quickly retrieving the situation for launch of the GSLV from its initial problem.
3.   The Secretary gave a brief presentation of the activities and achievements of the Department and explained the
 budgetary allocation on different heads as also the functioning of the Department.  The Chairman and Members present
 sought clarifications on the points that emerged from the presentation of the Secretary.  The Secretary replied to the
 questions.
   Witnesses then withdrew.
            A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4.   The Committee then adjourned at 1.40 P.M. and to meet again on 18th April, 2001.
 
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Thursday the 19th April, 2001 in Room No.63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1.   Shri C. Ramachandraiah —  Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.   Shri Birbhadra Singh
3.   Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray           
4.   Smt. Savita Sharda
5.   Shri Lachhman Singh         
6.   Shri B.P. Singhal                    
 
     LOK  SABHA
 
7.   Shri Bhan Singh Bhaura
8.   Smt. Bhavana Chikhaliya             
9.   Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza         
     10.  Shri Laxman Giluwa
     11.  Shri Bali Ram Kashyap
12.Shri Hassan Khan
13.Dr. Charan Das Mahant
14.Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan
15.Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                
16.Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
17.Shri Suresh Pasi                   
18.Dr. Ashok Patel                       
19.Shri Y. S. Vivekananda Reddy                     
20.Prof. I.G. Sanadi                     
21.Shri Ram Prasad Singh
22.Dr. (Smt.) Rajeswaramma Vukkala
  
   SECRETARIAT
  
   Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
        Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
        Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
     Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
 
2.   At the outset the Committee expressed its happiness over the successful launch of GSLV from Sriharikota and

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/91st.html[29-08-2018 16:19:28]
 authorised the Chairman to convey its sentiments to the Secretary, Department of Space and his team of officers on the
 successful launch of GSLV development flight from Sriharikota on the 18th April, 2001.
 
3.   The Committee then took up for consideration draft *** & 91st Reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants
 (2001-2002) of *** and Department of Space respectively.  The Committee considered and adopted each of the reports. 
 
4.   The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Smt Savita Sharda, Member to present the Reports to the
 Rajya Sabha & Shri Bali Ram Kashyap and in his absence Dr. (Smt) Rajeswaramma Vukkala to lay the Reports on the
 table of the Lok Sabha.
 
5.   *                                                 *                                                *
 
6.   The Committee then adjourned at 10.30 A.M.
 
***Relates to other matters.
 