 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2021/ Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED FORTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2021-2022) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
 (DEMAND NO. 88) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th March, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th March, 2021) 
 
REPORT NO. 
344 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 

Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FORTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2021-2022) OF THE  
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
 (DEMAND NO. 88) 
 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th March, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th March, 2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2021/ Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) 

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
   
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
                              
 
   
 PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS (iii) 
4. REPORT 1-11 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE 12-15 
6. MINUTES 16-21 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2020-21) 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2020)  
 
  
1.  Shri Jairam Ramesh – Chairman  
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Anil Baluni 
3.  Shri R.S. Bharathi 
4.  Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
5.  Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
6.  Shri Parimal Nathwani 
7.  Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
8.  Shri Ashwini Vaishnaw 
9.  Shri Binoy Viswam 
10.  @Shrimati Seema Dwivedi  
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11.  Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
12.  Shri Pradan Baruah 
13.  Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
14.  Shri Jashvantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor 
15.  Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
16.  Shri Anantkumar Hegde 
17.  Shri S. Jagathrakshakan 
18.  Shri Mohammed Azam Khan 
19.  Shrimati Jyotsna Charandas Mahant 
20.  Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
21.  Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
22.  Dr. Ranjan Singh Rajkumar 
23.  Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
24.  Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
25.  Shrimati Satabdi Roy (Banerjee) 
26.  Shri Mahesh Sahoo 
27.  Shri Francisco Sardinha  
28.  Shri Anurag Sharma 
29.  Shri Ram Shiromani  
30.  Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
31.  Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi 
  
SECRETARIAT  
 
 Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri T. N. Pandey, Director 
 Shri Rakesh Anand, Additional Director 
 Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary 
 Shri Harish Kumar, Committee Officer 
Shri Ankit Chansoria, Assistant Committee Officer 
 __________________________________________________________________________ 
@ Nominated w.e.f. 23 rd December, 2020, in lieu of  Shri Ravi Prakash Verma who ceased to be a 
member of the   Committee on expiry of his  term  in  Rajya Sabha   on  25th November, 2020. 
(i) 

 
 
             INTRODUCTION  
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change , having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Three 
Hundred Forty Fourth  Report of the Committee.  This Report deals with the d etailed 
Demands for Grants (2021-2022) of the  Department of Science and Technology      
(Demand No. 88). 
 
2.   In the meeting of the Committee held on the 17th February, 2021, the Secretary 
and other officers of the Department of Science and Technology  gave an overview of the 
various activities of the Department and the Members sought clarifications on various 
aspects of the performance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for 
Grants. 
  
3.   The Committee expresses its thanks to the o fficers of the Department of Science 
and Technology for replying to the clarifications sought by the Members and placing 
before it the required material to en able it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the 
Department.  
 
4.    The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report in its meeting held on 
the 4th March, 2021. 
 
 
 
 
 
 (JAIRAM RAMESH) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman, 
March 4, 2021   Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science 
Phalguna 13, 1942 (Saka)                                  and Technology, Environment, Forests and  Climate Change, 
 Rajya Sabha. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)

 
ACRONYMS 
 
BE Budget Estimate 
CEO Chief Executive Officer 
COO Chief Operating Officer 
COVID Coronavirus Disease 
DAE Department of Atomic Energy 
DBT Department of Biotechnology 
DRDO Defence Research & Development Organization 
DST Department of Science and Technology 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GERD Gross Expenditure on Research & Development 
ISRO Indian Space Research Organization 
NATMO National Atlas and Thematic Mapping Organization 
NEP National Education Policy 
NRF National Research Foundation 
NM-ICPS National Mission on Interdisciplinary Cyber Physical System 
R&D Research and Development 
RE Revised Estimate 
S&T Science & Technology 
SME Small and Medium Enterprise 
STIP Science, Technology and Innovation Policy 
TDB Technology Development Board 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
REPORT  
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and 
Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change considered the Demands 
for Grants (2021-22) of the Department of Science and Technology in its meeting 
held on 17th February, 2021. 
2. BUDGETARY DETAILS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2020 -21 
AND ALLOCATION FOR 2021-22 
2.1 The following table gives the details of the B.E., R.E. and actual expenditure 
of the Department in 2020 -21 and budgetary allocations made to the Department  
for B.E. 2021-22: 
    (₹  in crore) 
 
2.2 The Committee observed a decrease of more than 20 percent in R.E.2020-21 
allocation of ₹ 5000.00 crore as compared to B.E. 2020 -21 allocation of                        
₹  6301.53 crore. The Committee desired to know the reasons and the impact of 
this substantial decrease in budgetary allocations on the implementation of the key 
programmes and initiatives of the Department. The Department informed the 
Committee that reduction in allocation in R.E. 2020-21 stage is, firstly, because of 
the stressed cash position and expenditure restrictions imposed by the Department 
of Economic Affairs due to the COVID -19 pandemic and, secondly, because of 
Sl. 
No PARTICULARS 
2020-21  Budget 
Estimates for 
FY 2021-22  B.E. R.E. Actual (till 
31.01.2021) 
1 SECRETARIAT 141.96 136.61 119.23 123.40 
2 SURVEY OF INDIA 453.42 449.01 352.40 533.60 
3 NATMO 42.25 39.68 20.66 46.90 
4 AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS & 
PROFESSIONAL BODIES 1357.00 1375.0
0 1299.26 1488.00 
5 SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING RESEARCH 
BOARD 1000.00 742.00 601.32 900.00 
6 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
INSTITUTIONAL AND HUMAN CAPACITY 
BUILDING 
1169.50 918.35 642.55 
1101.80 
7 RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT  718.00 402.50 286.02 593.94 
8 INNOVATION, TECHNOLOGY 
DEVELOPMENT AND DEPLOYMENT 1050.65 656.30 463.95 
951.95 
9 
NATIONAL MISSION ON 
INTERDISCIPLINARY CYBER PHYSICAL 
SYSTEM (NM- ICPS) 
270.85 270.85 254.56 
270.00 
10 TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT BOARD 100.00 10.00 10.00 50.00 
11 SCIENCE COUNSELLORS ABROAD 10.00 11.80 8.00 12.00 
GRAND TOTAL (Net of Recoveries) 6301.53 5000.0
0 4057.95 6067.39 

2 
 
the decrease in expenditure by the Department owing to closure of its institutions, 
restrictions on international travel and physical gatherings, etc.  
2.3 The Committee acknowledges that despite the restrictions imposed by 
Department of Economic Affairs and closure of some of its institutions, the 
Department has been able to utilise over 80 percent of the funds allotted 
during R.E. 2020 -21 upto 31.01.2021. The Committee is satisfied with the 
utilisation of funds and recommends the Department to ensure its full 
utilisation by the end of the financial year. 
2.4 The following table highlights the reduction in R.E. 2020 -21 allocations for 
the three Umbrella Schemes of the Department: 
 
(₹  in crores) 
Budgetary Head B.E. 2020-21 R.E. 2020-21 % reduction in 
allocation  
Science and technology institutional 
and human capacity building 1169.50 918.35 21.4% 
Research and development 718.00 402.50 43.9% 
Innovation, technology development 
and deployment 1050.65 656.30 37.5% 
 
2.5 The Committee observed that there was a reduction of more than 30 percent 
in R.E. 2020 -21 allocation across the three umbrella schemes of the Department, 
which is almost 74 percent of the overall reduction in R.E. 2020 -21 allocation of 
the Department. Furt her, the Committee has been informed through a public 
representation that a common thread in all the S&T departments is the delay in 
payment to scientific staff including PhD students and postdocs supported by the 
departments. 
2.6 The Committee is concerned about the impact of the reduction in 
budgetary allocation on the outcomes and physical targets of the Central 
Sector Schemes. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Department should prioritise the available resources and ensure full 
utilisation of funds, especially, under research and development initiatives 
and projects, disbursement of fellowships and technology development 
programmes. Further, the Committee stresses on the Department to take all 
steps possible to ensure timely disbursem ent of fellowships and continuously 
monitor the status. 
2.7 The Committee also noted significant under -utilisation under the following 
budgetary heads: 

3 
 
 
(₹  in crores) 
PARTICULARS R.E. 2020-21 Actual 
Expenditure (till 
31.01.2021) 
% expenditure vis-
à-vis RE 
NATMO 39.68 20.66 52.06 percent 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
INSTITUTIONAL AND HUMAN 
CAPACITY BUILDING 
918.35 642.55 69.96 percent 
RESEARCH AND 
DEVELOPMENT 
402.50 286.02 71.06 percent 
INNOVATION, TECHNOLOGY 
DEVELOPMENT AND 
DEPLOYMENT 
656.30 463.95 70.69 percent 
2.8 The Committee observed that the status of utilisation of funds under the 
budgetary heads Science and Technology Institutional and Human Capacity 
Building; Research and Development; and Innovation, Technology, Development 
and Deployment is unsa tisfactory. Moreover, the utilisation of funds under the 
head National Atlas & Thematic Map Organisation (NATMO) is only 52 percent. 
NATMO is an attached office under the administrative control of the Department 
and is mandated with the task of preparing t hematic and large-scale maps, digital 
cartography, management of Geo -informatics products, etc. Since one of the 
major initiatives of the Department for the year 2021 -22 pertains to high 
resolution mapping and liberalisation of geo-spatial data, the Committee expresses 
its concern over the impact of the under-utilisation of funds under NATMO.  
2.9 The Committee recommends that the Department should take 
necessary measures to ensure proper utilisation of these funds by end of the 
financial year so that the t argeted outcomes linked to the initiatives of the 
Department under these heads are not adversely impacted. 
2.10 The Committee further observed that the Department has received an 
allocation of ₹  6067.39 in B.E. 2021 -22 which is an increase of more than 21 
percent over R.E. 2020-21.  
2.11 The Committee expresses its satisfaction over the budgetary allocations 
for the Financial Year 2021 -22 made to the Department and hopes that the 
increased allocation will enable the Department to regain the momentum lost 
due to COVID -19 pandemic in the implementation of its various ongoing 
schemes and new initiatives.   
2.12 The Department submitted before the Committee that against the demand of 
₹  7923.15 crore the Department has been allocated ₹  6067.39 crores in B.E. 
2021-22.  The Committee enquired from the Department about the impact of the 

4 
 
difference in the budgetary allocations for 2021 -22 i.e. those demanded by the 
Department as compared to actual allocations made for 2021 -22. The Department 
informed the Committee tha t the shortfall might have impact on some of the key 
programmes being implemented including initiatives on International 
Cooperation, Grants to 28 State S&T Councils under the State Science & 
Technology Programme, establishment of Fab Labs in Eklavya Schoo ls, Science 
and Technology Communication initiatives, programme on Science Wiki in 
Indian Languages, etc.   
2.13 The Committee recommends the Department to prioritise its activities 
and optimise its resources in order to support critical projects under 
different schemes and sub -schemes, and if required, seek additional funds at 
the supplementary stage so that there is no adverse impact on the ongoing 
schemes/projects. 
3. REVENUE AND CAPITAL ALLOCATIONS IN B.E. 2021-22 
3.1 During the meeting of the Committee  held on 17 th February, 2021, the 
representatives of the Department of Science and Technology informed the 
Committee that the Department has increased budget allocation towards creation 
of capital assets from less than 25 percent two years ago to nearly 30  percent in 
B.E. 2021 -22. It was also brought to the notice of the Committee that the 
Establishment expenditure, which was about 15 percent of the allocated budget in 
2013-14, has been reduced to 10 percent of B.E. 2021-22 allocations.  
3.2 The Committee n oted that information regarding the detailed break -up of 
the budgetary allocation under revenue and capital heads, along with details of the 
activities planned to be undertaken by the Department with the increased 
allocation for creation of Capital assets was not available in the documents 
furnished by the Department and enquired about this data from the Department. 
Moreover, the detailed break-up of budgetary allocations for Revenue and Capital 
Expenditure as well as funds allotted for Establishment Expenditure under various 
Budgetary Heads were not readily available with the Department.  
3.3 The Committee is constrained to note that details of the activities 
planned to be undertaken by the Department with the increased allocation 
for creation of Capital assets was not available in the documents furnished by 
the Department and break -up of budgetary allocations for Revenue and 
Capital Expenditure as well as funds allotted for Establishment Expenditure 
under various Budgetary Heads has not been made available.   The 
Committee recommends that the Department should invariably furnish the 
above information to the Committee to facilitate a more detailed analysis of 
Demands for Grants.  
  
 

5 
 
KEY INITIATIVES TAKEN BY THE DEPARTMENT: 
4 GUIDELINES ON GEOSPATIAL DATA: LIBERALISATION AND 
DEMOCRATISATION  
4.1 Geospatial data combines location, attribute and temporal information 
about landforms, objects, events or other such phenomena having location on 
surface of Earth. Geospatial data may be static or dynamic. This data is crucial for 
many agencies, both government and private, and may be utilised across domains 
such as infrastructure development, town and city planning, e-commerce, logistics 
and transportation, agriculture, environment prot ection, healthcare, resource 
mapping, disaster management, etc.  
4. 2 The Committee was informed that the new guidelines issued by the 
Department for acquiring and producing Geospatial Data and Geospatial Data 
Services will help deregulate the previously e xisting tedious process and lead to 
easy access and acquisition of Geospatial data, barring that of prohibited areas,  
both between government agencies as well as with the private sector. It was 
further informed that, not only will this lead to significant  revenue generation for 
the Department, but shall also spur domestic innovation and enable Indian 
companies to compete in the global mapping ecosystem by leveraging modern 
geospatial technologies.  
4. 3 The Committee notes the economic, social, technologic al and 
developmental potential that lies in liberalisation and democratisation of the 
guidelines on acquisition and use of Geospatial data, and recommends that 
the Department should ensure better coordination between various agencies 
involved in the proces s to avoid duplicity of efforts, inordinate delays and 
waste of resources. The Committee is also concerned about the security 
related to sharing of geospatial information of sensitive and prohibited areas, 
and recommends the Department to develop fool proof mechanisms to ensure 
that the security of data is not compromised.  
4. 4 The Committee recommends that the Department should promote 
start-ups and SMEs in the geo -spatial mapping sector by providing 
handholding, expertise, technology resource, early stag e funding and 
incubation through its various entrepreneurship development programmes. 
The Committee also recommends the Department to actively promote the 
repository of geospatial data amongst possible buyers as a prospective 
revenue grosser.  
5 NATIONAL M ISSION ON INTERDISCIPLINARY CYBER 
PHYSICAL SYSTEM (NM- ICPS) 
5.1 The Committee sought to know from the Department, information with 
regards to the objectives and achievements of the Department under the National 
Mission on Interdisciplinary Cyber Physical System (NM - ICPS). The 
Department informed the Committee that under the Mission, a total of 25 

6 
 
Technology Innovation Hubs have been established across the country. Each hub 
has a component of “Technology Development” in the areas of Artificial 
Intelligence and Machine Learning, Internet of Things, Robotics, Data Analytics, 
Cyber Security, Augment and Virtual Reality, Quantum Technologies, etc. 
5.2 The details of B.E. and R.E. allocation and actual utilisation of funds during 
the years 2019-20 and 2020-21 made under NM-ICPS are as under: 
(₹  in crores) 
Financial 
Year 
B.E. 
allocations 
R.E. 
allocations 
Actual utilisation 
(till 31.01.2021) 
% utilisation (till 
31.01.2021) 
2019-20 124.00 123.83 122.79 99.16 percent 
2020-21 270.85 270.85 254.56  93.99 percent  
 
5.3 The Committee was informed that the Mission Target was to establish 4 
Hubs in initial two years. However, the Department went ahead and established 
25 Hubs in 2 years and released 1 st year grant for 16 Hubs and initial grant for 9 
Hubs totalling to ₹  392.00 crores.  
5.4 The Committee notes with appreciation the achievements of the 
Department under the Mission. The Committee recommends that the 
Department should ensure there are adequate mechanisms to avoid duplicity 
of efforts in these Hubs and that eac h Hub follows a life -cycle approach 
resulting in translation, commercialisation of knowledge and technologies 
developed.  
6 Draft 5th Science, Technology, and Innovation Policy (STIP) 
6.1 The Department informed the Committee that a new Science, Technology , 
and Innovation Policy (STIP) was initiated in mid year-2020 with the aim to bring 
about profound changes through short-term, medium-term, and long-term mission 
mode projects by building a nurtured ecosystem that promotes research and 
innovation on the pa rt of both individuals and organizations. The new policy, 
STIP, revolves around the core principles of being decentralised, evidence -
informed, bottom-up, experts-driven, and inclusive.  
6.2 The policy was put in public domain for consultation and involved nearly 
300 rounds of consultations with more than 40,000 stakeholders. Over 1 lakh 
suggestions were received by the Department. The process of public consultation 
was concluded on 31st January, 2021. 
6.3 The Committee recognises the need for a new Science,  Technology and 
Innovation (STI) Policy to strengthen the STI ecosystem and make it more 
competitive. The Committee advises the Department to share and interact 
with this Committee this important policy of national relevance, to further 
broaden the scope of consultation and inclusion of diverse ideas. 

7 
 
7. AUTONOMOUS BODIES OF THE DEPARTMENT 
7.1 The following table gives details of the allocation and utilisation of funds 
during the years 2019 -20 and 2020-21 along with B.E. 2021 -22 allocations made 
to the 25 Autonomous Bodies of the Department: 
 
(₹  in crores) 
Financial 
Year 
B.E. 
allocations 
R.E. 
allocations 
Actual utilisation(till 
31.01.2021) 
% utilisation (till 
31.01.2021) 
2019-20 1182.70 1217.70 1217.30 100 percent 
2020-21 1357.00 1357.00 1299.26  94.49 percent  
2021-22 1488.00 -- -- -- 
 
7.2 The Committee observes that the entire B.E. 2021 -22 allocation under this 
head has been mentioned as revenue expenditure. The Committee also observes 
that while some of these autonomous institutions are doing credible work in the 
field of basic sciences, t he translation of technology and commercialisation of 
research is very low. Further, many research institutes under different scientific 
Departments, including the Department of Science and Technology, are doing 
research in similar domains. Lack of coordin ation between these entities leads to 
duplicity of effort, thereby, resulting in wasteful use of resources.  
7.3 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should 
impress upon all the Autonomous Institutions to enlist 10 goals/objectives 
that each of these Autonomous Institutions propose to pursue in the medium 
to long term plan. The Autonomous Institutions should further indicate the 
goals/objectives that will be pursued during the year 2021 -22 along with the 
steps that the Department plans t o undertake to achieve these goals during 
the year. On its part, Department of Science and Technology should also 
develop a mechanism to periodically monitor the progress of the 
goals/objectives of each of these Institutions. The Department should also 
devise a framework of inter -Departmental consultation and coordination, 
with the aim of sharing research outcomes, optimising resource utilisation, 
avoiding overlaps and reducing redundancy. 
7.4 The Committee also recommends that these Autonomous Institutions  
should be advised to explore avenues to augment revenue generation through 
technology transfer, consultancy services, patents, etc. On its part the 
Department should also set targets for the same and actively monitor the 
progress.  
7.5 During the meeting, the Committee drew attention of the Department to the 
dilapidated state of the Birbal Sahni Institute of Palaeosciences, Lucknow and 
enquired whether the Department was taking any steps for the 

8 
 
overhaul/renovation of its building. The Committee was inform ed that the 
Department has given a grant to the institute for construction of a new campus and 
work on the new building has already started. The Committee notes that the Birbal 
Sahni Institute of Palaeosciences, Lucknow is an unique institution that carrie s 
research, both on fundamental as well as applied aspects of Palaeosciences.  
7.6 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should 
provide the necessary funds to the Birbal Sahni Institute to improve and 
upgrade its infrastructure. Further,  the Department should undertake a 
thorough assessment of the physical infrastructure of its 
Institutions/Autonomous Bodies and provide all help to strengthen their 
infrastructure.     
8. Gross Expenditure on R&D (GERD) 
8.1 The Committee desired to be appr ised about the details of the Gross 
Expenditure on R&D (GERD) as a percentage of GDP and the involvement of 
Private Sector Investment in promotion of Research and Development activities. 
The Department, in a written reply to the Committee, informed that th e GERD in 
the country has been consistently increasing over the years and has nearly tripled 
from Rs. 39,437.77 crore in 2007- 08 to Rs. 1,13,825.03 crore in 2017 -18. India‟s 
GERD as percentage of GDP remained at 0.7% during the years 2017 -18 and 
2018-19 r espectively. The Committee was also informed that India‟s GERD is 
low in comparison to most of the developed nations; many of them have GDP 
contribution of 2% or more. It was further brought to the notice of the Committee 
that only in India, less than 40% of GERD is contributed by private sector. The 
Committee further observes that The Science, Technology, and Innovation Policy, 
2013 had observed that GERD to 2% of GDP has been a national goal for quite 
some time. The Committee notes that the 2013 Policy ha d observed the target for 
GERD could be achieved by 2018 -19, if the private sector at least matches the 
expenditure level of the public sector. The Committee has been informed through 
a public representation that between 2004 -05 and 2018 -19, GERD reached i ts 
highest in 2008-09.  However, since then, GERD in terms of % of GDP has been 
declining and GERD in 2018-19 was the lowest since 2004-05. 
8.2 The Committee recognises the efforts of the Department in promoting 
R&D activities and  highlights the importance  of a higher allocation of 
resources in Research and Development activities. However, the Committee 
is concerned with the stagnatation and decline of Gross Expenditure on R&D 
as a percentage of GDP.  The Committee cannot stress enough on the urgent 
need to enhance the GERD as a percentage of GDP and, therefore, urges the 
Department to undertake aggressive steps towards promoting private sector 
investment in Research and Development, especially since October 2019, 
companies have been allowed to use corporate  social responsibility(CSR) 
funds for contributions towards research. 

9 
 
9. TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT BOARD  
9.1 The Committee in its Three Hundred Twenty Ninth Report on Demands for 
Grants (2020 -21) had recommended that the Department should take steps 
towards restructuring the administrative and financial framework of the   
Technology Development Board (TDB) and explore the possibility of establishing 
it as Section 8 Company on the lines of Biotechnology Industry Research 
Assistance Council (BIRAC) which is an entity of the Department of 
Biotechnology. In response, the Department had apprised the Committee that it 
has taken several steps including revision of Service and Recruitment Rules, 
filling up of vacancies, delegation of financial powers and decision maki ng, etc. 
towards the improvement of administrative and financial functioning of (TDB). 
The Department informed that two Committees have been constituted to explore 
fresh approaches of funding methods, especially for start -ups and to review the 
financial fr amework of TDB. The Department further informed the Committee 
that the possibilities of establishing TDB as a Section 8 Company has been noted 
for further examination. 
9.2 The Committee notes the steps taken by the Department towards the 
restructuring of T echnology Development Board and recommends that the 
Department should explore and implement all measures required to enable 
TDB function as a world-class entity. The Committee asks the Department to 
furnish updated status of the progress made with regard t o the restructuring 
of TDB as a Section 8 Company.   
10.  NATIONAL RESEARCH FOUNDATION (NRF) 
10.1 The Committee desired to know from the Department the details of the 
mandate, aims and objectives of National Research Foundation and how it could 
fit into the work programmes of the Department of Science and Technology. The 
Department, in their written reply, informed the Committee that the setting up of a 
„National Research Foundation‟ (NRF) was important and the Department 
supported the proposal.  The Department stated that that NRF should focus tightly 
on two aspects: (i) increasing the resources for R& D (ii) reach the unreached; and 
submitted the following comments on the proposal to greatly increase the 
effectiveness and value of NRF in strengthening the research ecosystem of the 
country: 
(i) The objectives, structure and processes of the proposed NRF larg ely 
duplicate or parallel the existing ones in the Ministry of Science & 
Technology, especially DST and DBT.  This is because the nature of 
proposed NRF is same as the major mandates of DST and DBT, i.e, 
providing extra-mural funding support (as opposed to  primarily funding of 
its own labs/agencies//autonomous institutions in intra -mural funding 
mode). In view of the above, duplication of NRF funding targets with DST 
and DBT‟s efforts and aims needs to be avoided.  

10 
 
(ii) To avoid such needless duplications, NRF m ust therefore focus tightly on 
the major gap area as identified for NRF in the National Education Policy 
(NEP) 2020. This gap is to be addressed by creating R&D infrastructure 
and supporting projects and fellowships and Centers of Excellence etc in 
universities and colleges  especially in the less endowed state universities 
and colleges, since bulk of our students and faculty are indeed trained 
there.   
(iii) National S&T missions launched or will be launched in the future should 
also be connected with universitie s to bring state of the art knowledge and 
research to universities. Additional resources required for this purpose may 
perhaps be provided by NRF.   
(iv) Another gap area identified in NEP 2020 is to support research in social 
sciences and humanities including their integration with S&T. NRF may 
support these initiatives. 
(v) NRF may also take up international mega projects in which India is a 
partner because these are large value projects often running into several 
thousands of crores and have a stakeholder base wh ich spans across several 
ministries and agencies such DAE, ISRO, DRDO, DST, Dept of Higher 
Education, Ministry of Earth Sciences, and many others., requiring 
effective coordination and pooled financial support.  
(vi) For the departments/ministries which are alr eady largely into extra -mural 
R&D support, like DBT, DST, the financial support proposed for NRF @ 
15% of their annual budget may be limited to only 15% of their R&D 
budget that must exclude their administrative, salary, fellowships, essential 
and committe d foundational budgets (e.g., for autonomous institutions). 
Essentially, re -distribution of the budget to NRF which is already being 
used for R&D by DST, DBT does not bring any additional value to overall 
R&D investment. This re -distribution is more approp riate for the 
ministries/departments which are currently contributing less to extra -mural 
R&D support.   
(vii) In view of above, DST and DBT may be exempted from contributing to 
NRF since their budget is already largely being spent for extra -mural 
support to R&D . Diverting resources from there will not add to the aim of 
strengthening the extramural R&D support, which should be the aim of 
NRF. 
(viii) Representation of major departments/ministries contributing to extra -mural 
R&D support such as DST and DBT may be included  as part of NRF 
council, also to avoid duplication and to bring synergy in all major extra -
mural support.  
(ix) The overall executive Head of NRF (COO/CEO) should be at the apex 
level.  

11 
 
10.2 The Committee welcomes the creation of a National Research 
Foundation to increase  the resources for Research and Development and 
strengthening its outreach, although the logic of its being managed by the 
Ministry of Education is not very clear.   Such a NRF must focus sharply on 
the natural sciences. Bringing social sciences also under its ambit is not 
advisable.  Since, as stated by the Department of Science and Technology, the 
objectives, structure and processes of the proposed NRF duplicate or parallel 
some of the existing initiatives in the Ministry of Science & Technology , 
especially DST and DBT, the Committee is of the view that the National  
Research Foundation should work closely with the Ministry of Science and 
Technology to avoid duplication of efforts. The Committee endorses the view 
of the Department that DST and DB T be included in the NRF council, to 
avoid duplication and to bring synergy in all major extra -mural support. 
Further, the Principal Scientific Adviser to the Government should strongly 
consider focusing NRF efforts in under -served regions and under -funded 
areas of research, building research capacity of states and the ability of state 
governments to spend on R&D, and amplifying important strategic initiatives 
of the Ministry of Science and Technology. 
 
  

12 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE 
BUDGETARY DETAILS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2020 -21 AND 
ALLOCATION FOR 2021-22 
 The Committee acknowledges that despite the restrictions imposed by 
Department of Economic Affairs and closure of some of its institutions, the 
Department has been able to utilise over 80 p ercent of the funds allotted 
during R.E. 2020 -21 upto 31.01.2021. The Committee is satisfied with the 
utilisation of funds and recommends the Department to ensure its full 
utilisation by the end of the financial year.        (Para 2.3) 
 The Committee is co ncerned about the impact of the reduction in 
budgetary allocation on the outcomes and physical targets of the Central 
Sector Schemes. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Department should prioritise the available resources and ensure full 
utilisation of funds, especially, under research and development initiatives 
and projects, disbursement of fellowships and technology development 
programmes. Further, the Committee stresses on the Department to take all 
steps possible to ensure timely disbursemen t of fellowships and continuously 
monitor the status.           (Para 2.6) 
 The Committee recommends that the Department should take 
necessary measures to ensure proper utilisation of these funds by end of the 
financial year so that the targeted outcomes linked to the initiatives of the 
Department under these heads are not adversely impacted.                (Para 2.9) 
 The Committee expresses its satisfaction over the budgetary allocations 
for the Financial Year 2021 -22 made to the Department and hopes tha t the 
increased allocation will enable the Department to regain the momentum lost 
due to COVID -19 pandemic in the implementation of its various ongoing 
schemes and new initiatives.                                                                  (Para 2.11) 
 The Committee recommends the Department to prioritise its activities 
and optimise its resources in order to support critical projects under 
different schemes and sub -schemes, and if required, seek additional funds at 
the supplementary stage so that there is no adverse impact on the ongoing 
schemes/projects.          (Para 2.13) 
REVENUE AND CAPITAL ALLOCATIONS IN B.E. 2021-22 
 The Committee is constrained to note that details of the activities 
planned to be undertaken by the Department with the increa sed allocation 
for creation of Capital assets was not available in the documents furnished by 
the Department and break -up of budgetary allocations for Revenue and 
Capital Expenditure as well as funds allotted for Establishment Expenditure 
under various Bud getary Heads has not been made available.  The 
Committee recommends that the Department should invariably furnish the 

13 
 
above information to the Committee to facilitate a more detailed analysis of 
Demands for Grants.           (Para 3.3) 
KEY INITIATIVES TAKEN BY THE DEPARTMENT: 
 GUIDELINES ON GEOSPATIAL DATA: LIBERALISATION AND 
DEMOCRATISATION  
 The Committee notes the economic, social, technological and 
developmental potential that lies in liberalisation and democratisation of the 
guidelines on acquisition a nd use of Geospatial data, and recommends that 
the Department should ensure better coordination between various agencies 
involved in the process to avoid duplicity of efforts, inordinate delays and 
waste of resources. The Committee is also concerned about the security 
related to sharing of geospatial information of sensitive and prohibited areas, 
and recommends the Department to develop fool proof mechanisms to ensure 
that the security of data is not compromised.       (Para 4. 3) 
 The Committee recommends that the Department should promote 
start-ups and SMEs in the geo -spatial mapping sector by providing 
handholding, expertise, technology resource, early stage funding and 
incubation through its various entrepreneurship development programmes. 
The Committee also recommends the Department to actively promote the 
repository of geospatial data amongst possible buyers as a prospective 
revenue grosser.          (Para 4.4) 
NATIONAL MISSION ON INTERDISCIPLINARY CYBER PHYSICAL 
SYSTEM (NM- ICPS) 
 The Committee notes w ith appreciation the achievements of the 
Department under the Mission. The Committee recommends that the 
Department should ensure there are adequate mechanisms to avoid duplicity 
of efforts in these Hubs and that each Hub follows a life -cycle approach 
resulting in translation, commercialisation of knowledge and technologies 
developed.              (Para 5.4) 
Draft 5th Science, Technology, and Innovation Policy (STIP) 
 The Committee recognises the need for a new Science, Technology and 
Innovation (STI) Policy to strengthen the STI ecosystem and make it more 
competitive. The Committee advises the Department to share and interact 
with this Committee this important policy of national relevance, to further 
broaden the scope of consultation and inclusion of diverse ideas.       (Para 6.3) 
AUTONOMOUS BODIES OF THE DEPARTMENT 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should 
impress upon all the Autonomous Institutions to enlist 10 goals/objectives 
that each of these Autonomous Institutions propos e to pursue in the medium 
to long term plan. The Autonomous Institutions should further indicate the 

14 
 
goals/objectives that will be pursued during the year 2021 -22 along with the 
steps that the Department plans to undertake to achieve these goals during 
the year. On its part, Department of Science and Technology should also 
develop a mechanism to periodically monitor the progress of the 
goals/objectives of each of these Institutions. The Department should also 
devise a framework of inter -Departmental consult ation and coordination, 
with the aim of sharing research outcomes, optimising resource utilisation, 
avoiding overlaps and reducing redundancy.       (Para 7.3) 
 The Committee also recommends that these Autonomous Institutions 
should be advised to explore avenues to augment revenue generation through 
technology transfer, consultancy services, patents, etc. On its part the 
Department should also set targets for the same and actively monitor the 
progress.               (Para7.4) 
 The Committee, therefore, reco mmends that the Department should 
provide the necessary funds to the Birbal Sahni Institute to improve and 
upgrade its infrastructure. Further, the Department should undertake a 
thorough assessment of the physical infrastructure of its 
Institutions/Autonomous Bodies and provide all help to strengthen their 
infrastructure.                (Para7.6) 
Gross Expenditure on R&D (GERD) 
 The Committee recognises the efforts of the Department in promoting 
R&D activities and  highlights the importance of a higher alloc ation of 
resources in Research and Development activities. However, the Committee 
is concerned with the stagnatation and decline of Gross Expenditure on R&D 
as a percentage of GDP.  The Committee cannot stress enough on the urgent 
need to enhance the GERD as a percentage of GDP and, therefore, urges the 
Department to undertake aggressive steps towards promoting private sector 
investment in Research and Development, especially since October 2019, 
companies have been allowed to use corporate social responsibi lity(CSR) 
funds for contributions towards research.        (Para 8.2) 
TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT BOARD  
 The Committee notes the steps taken by the Department towards the 
restructuring of Technology Development Board and recommends that the 
Department should explore and implement all measures required to enable 
TDB function as a world-class entity. The Committee asks the Department to 
furnish updated status of the progress made with regard to the restructuring 
of TDB as a Section 8 Company.           (Para 9.2) 
NATIONAL RESEARCH FOUNDATION (NRF) 
 The Committee welcomes the creation of a National Research 
Foundation to increase  the resources for Research and Development and 

15 
 
strengthening its outreach, although the logic of its being managed by the 
Ministry of Education is not very clear.   Such a NRF must focus sharply on 
the natural sciences. Bringing social sciences also under its ambit is not 
advisable.  Since, as stated by the Department of Science and Technology, the 
objectives, structure and processes of the proposed NRF duplicate or parallel 
some of the existing initiatives in the Ministry of Science & Technology, 
especially DST and DBT, the Committee is of the view that the National  
Research Foundation should work closely with the Ministry of Science and 
Technology to avoid duplication of efforts. The Committee endorses the view 
of the Department that DST and DBT be included in the NRF council, to 
avoid duplication and to bring synergy in all major extra -mural support. 
Further, the Principal Scientific Adviser to the Government shoul d strongly 
consider focusing NRF efforts in under -served regions and under -funded 
areas of research, building research capacity of states and the ability of state 
governments to spend on R&D, and amplifying important strategic initiatives 
of the Ministry of Science and Technology.     (Para 10.2) 
 
 
  

16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
MINUTES 
________________________ 
  

17 
 
 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 17 th February, 2021 
in Committee Room „A‟, Ground Floor, PHA, New Delhi. 
 
         MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Jairam Ramesh -- Chairman 
     RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ashwini Vaishnaw 
3. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
     LOK SABHA 
 
4. Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
5. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
6. Shri Asaduddin Owiasi 
7. Dr. Ranjan Singh Rajkumar 
8. Shri Anurag Sharma 
9. Shri Ram Shiromani 
10. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
11. Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi   
    SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
Shri Rakesh Anand, Additional Director 
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary 
Shri Harish Kumar, Committee Officer 
 
                Witnesses: 
 
            Department of Science and Technology   
 
(i) Prof Ashutosh Sharma, Secretary 
(ii) Shri Vishvajit Sahay, Additional Secretary & FA 
(iii) Smt. Anju Bhalla, Joint Secretary (Admin.) 
(iv) Shri Sunil Kumar, Joint Secretary 
(v) Prof. Sandeep Verma, Secretary, SERB 
(vi) Shri Akhilesh Jha, CCA 
(vii) Dr. Akhilesh Gupta, Scientist „G‟ & Head 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
the representatives of Department of Science and Technology (DST). He asked 
the Secretary to give a brief presentation on the Demands for Grants 2021 -22 of 

18 
 
the Department and inform the Committee about the allocation requested and 
actually made to the Department for the year 2021 -22; the potential impact of the 
shortfall on the current and proposed projects of the Department; and the s trategy 
devised by the Department for dealing with situation arising due to the reduced 
allocation. The Chairman also asked the Secretary to dwell briefly on National 
Research Foundation (NRF) and how it fits into DST‟s work programme.  
 
3. Thereafter, the Secretary, Department of Science and Technology made a 
power point presentation wherein the Committee was informed that the 
Department had made a demand of ₹  7923.15 crore for 2021 -22 against which 
they have been allocated ₹  6067.39 crore. The huge shortf all might have impact 
on some of the key programmes being implemented including initiatives on 
International Cooperation, Grants to 28 State S&T Councils under the State 
Science & Technology Programme, etc. The Committee was further informed that 
the Department‟s allocation has been reduced to ₹ 5000.00 crore in R.E. 2020-21. 
It was also explained that reduction in allocation in R.E. 2020 -21 was, firstly, 
because of the stressed cash position and expenditure restrictions imposed by the 
Department of Economic Affairs due to the COVID -19 pandemic and, secondly, 
because of the decrease in expenditure by the Department owing to closure of its 
institutions, restrictions on international travel and physical gatherings, etc. The 
Committee was also informed about the  new initiatives planned by the 
Department such as liberalisation and democritisation of Geospatial Data; 
National Mission on Interdisciplinary Cyber Physical System (NM - ICPS);  
development of Technology Innovation Hubs under the National Quantum 
Technology Mission and the National Mission on Cyber -Physical Systems, 
creation of a new Science and Technology Innovation Policy (STIP), etc . 
  
4. The Chairman and Members then raised various queries and concerns such 
as impact of reduction in budgetary allocation in R.E. 2020-21 on the initiatives of 
the Department; detailed break -up of allocation in B.E. 2021 -22 under capital, 
revenue and establishment expenditure; industrial use and potential of 
commercialisation of research being done by the Department; incre ase in 
expenditure towards research and development and the share of public and private 
investment; measures that may be taken to enhance revenue generation; security 
concerns relating to the liberalization of geospatial data; outcome and target based 
performance of autonomous institutions under the Department; dilapidated 
building of the Birbal Sahani Institute of Palaeosciences, Lucknow, etc.      
5. The representatives of the Department, while presenting their views, also 
responded to some of the queries  raised by the Chairman and Members of the 
Committee. The Chairman directed the representatives of the Department to 
furnish detailed written replies to queries/points/issues raised by him and the 
Members of the Committee during the meeting, to the Secretariat, at the earliest.   
 

19 
 
  
6. The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
7.    *             *     * 
 
8.   *             *     * 
 
9.   *             *     * 
 
10.     *             *     * 
 
11.   *             *     * 
12.    *             *     * 
13.      *             *     * 
14.    *             *     * 
15.    *             *     * 
16.    *             *     * 
17.     *             *     * 
18.   *             *     * 
19. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
20.  The Committee adjourned at 2:00 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________________________________________ 
*Relate to other matters. 

20 
 
 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 2:30 P.M. on Thursday, the 4 th March, 2021 in 
Committee Room No. 4, First Floor, PHAE, New Delhi. 
 
            MEMBERS PRESENT 
1.    Shri Jairam Ramesh -- Chairman 
            RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Anil Baluni 
3. Shri Ashwini Vaishnaw 
4. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
          LOK SABHA 
5. Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
6. Shri Pradan Baruah 
7. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
8. Shri Asaduddin Owiasi 
9. Shri Francisco Sardinha 
10. Shri Ram Shiromani 
         SECRETARIAT 
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
Shri T.N. Pandey, Director 
Shri Rakesh Anand, Additional Director 
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary 
Shri Harish Kumar, Committee Officer 
 
2.    *             *     * 
3.    *             *     * 
4.    *             *     * 
5.    *             *     * 
6.    *             *     * 
7.    *             *     * 
8.    *             *     * 
9. The Committee then considered the draft 341 st, 342 nd, 343 rd, 344 th, 345 th, 
346th and 347 th reports on Demands for Grants 2021 -22 of the 
Ministries/Departments of Atomic Energy, Biotechnology, Scientific & Industrial  
 
___________________________________________________________ 
*Relate to other matters. 

21 
 
 
Research, Science & Technology, Space, Environment, Forest & Climate Change; 
and Earth Sciences, respectively, and adopted the same. The Committee also 
decided to present/lay the reports to both the Houses of Parliament on the 8 th 
March, 2021.  
10.  The Committee also decided to nominat e the Chairman and, in his 
absence, Shri Ashwini Vaishnaw, and in his absence, Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj and, in his 
absence, Shri Fransisco Sardinha to lay the reports on the Table of Lok S abha on 
the 8th March, 2021. 
11. *             *     * 
12. *             *     * 
13. The Committee adjourned at 4:30 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________________________________________ 
*Relate to other matters. 