PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 231
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2012/KARTIKA, 1934 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY FIRST REPORT
ON
THE INDIAN FOREST (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 26 NOVEMBER, 2012)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 26 NOVEMBER, 2012)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
November, 2012/Kartika, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY-FIRST REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th November, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 26th November, 2012)
The Indian Forest (Amendment) Bill, 2012
REPORT NO. 
231


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY-FIRST REPORT
The Indian Forest (Amendment) Bill, 2012
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th November, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 26th November, 2012)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
November, 2012/Kartika, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)
4. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—7
5. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 9—16
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 17—24

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil H. Lad
3. Shrimati Maya Singh
4. Shri M. Rama Jois
5. Shri Alok Tiwari
6. Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi
7. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
8. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
9. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
12. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
13. Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury
#14. Vacant
15. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
16. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase
17. Dr. Ajay Kumar
18. Shri O.S. Manian
19. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
20. Shri Basori Singh Masram
21. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
22. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
23. Shri Ramashanker Rajbhar
24. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
25. Shri Yashvir Singh
#26. Vacant
27. Shri Pradeep Tamta
28. Shri Joseph Toppo
29. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
30. Shri Ramakant Yadav
31. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
# Shri Ninong Ering and Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon their
induction in the Union Council of Ministers w.e.f. 28 th October, 2012.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra,  Committee Officer
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred and Thirty First Report on ‘The Indian Forest
(Amendment) Bill, 2012’.
2. In its meeting held on 6
th November, 2012, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary,
Ministry of Environment and Forests and Additional Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice
(Legislative Department) and two experts on ‘The Indian Forest (Amendment) Bill, 2012’.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Ministries of Environment and
Forests, Law and Justice (Legislative Department) and experts for rendering their valuable views/
clarifications sought by the Committee.
4. In the meeting held on 15
th November, 2012, the Committee considered the draft Report and
adopted the same.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
15th November , 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.

(iv)
ACRONYMS
FRA Act, 2006 – The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition
of Forest Rights) Act, 2006.
IFA, 1927 – Indian Forest Act, 1927
PESA Act, 1996 – Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996

1
REPORT
INTRODUCTION
Forests occupied such an exalted position in ancient India that it was revered and deified
by the people as God-Van Devta, (God of forests). The relationship between the people and the
forest was characterized by co-existence, harmony, mutual care and concern. Forests, apart from
providing perfect ambience for spiritual and religious pursuits for the ascetics and saints sustained
their corporeal needs. Most of the centres of teaching and learning popularly known as gurukuls
were located in dense forests. People used to enjoy unhindered customary rights over forest
produce:– fruits, firewood, herbs, leaves, etc. Forest was for anybody and everybody and not the
monopoly of the state or Government for the purpose of revenue generation or collection. People
lived on the forest only to meet their day to day basic needs and not to satiate their greeds.
2. But as time progressed, people’s perception towards forests started changing and their
needs gradually gave way to their greeds. This paradigm shift culminated in enactment of Indian
Forest Act of 1865 through which British monopoly over Indian Forests was established for the
first time. Then, the Indian Forest Act of 1878 acquiring the sovereignty over all wastelands which
included all forests was brought into force. All local and traditional rights over forests were
abolished in the reserved forests and some rights were converted as a privilege in the protected
forests which could be taken away, if so felt necessary by the State. Thus, these colonial laws
brought forests under the centralized control of the State on the assumption that forest was a
natural resource to be utilized for the sake of Government and also that a particular section of the
people inhabited the forest and the adjoining area was merely an accident of history and can not
be claimed as a potent rationale to permit them to use forest resources for subsistence or
livelihood. Forest, thus, became a source of revenue generation for Government. These
developments also gave rise to the concept of Forest policy and forest management in India.
3. With the passage of time, it was realized that the provisions of the Indian Forest Act, 1878
together with its amendments were not adequate to deal with forests in a holistic manner. Indian
Forest Act, 1927 consolidated the laws relating to forests, transit of forest produce and the duty
leviable on timber and other forest produce within the ambit of one enactment.
4. Post independence, Indian Government treaded the path paved by the British Colonial
administrators and nationalized the forests along with most of the forest non-wood and wood-
industry. The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 made permission from the Central Government
mandatory for sustainable agro-forestry in the forest area and any violation of that was made a
criminal offence. Environment and Forest protection and recognition of rights of tribal communities
over forest and forest produce continued to be treated as mutually irreconcilable. The resulting
insecurity of tribal and their eviction from their ancestral forest lands led to the alienation of tribal
communities. However, their sustained agitation and unrest against the historical injustice
perpetuated even–post independence ultimately catapulted the Government to move in a positive
direction and concede some of their traditional rights over forest land and forest produce.
5. The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights)
Act, 2006 was a landmark step taken by Government in this direction. The present Bill i.e. the
Indian Forest (Amendment) Bill, 2012 is also a small initiative, but of far reaching consequences,
taken towards granting/conceding much needed relief to the tribal communities and other people
living in close proximity of forests from harassment of persecution for petty offences committed
sometimes even unknowingly.

2
6. This Bill proposes to achieve the desired objective, by amending section 68 of the Indian
Forest Act, 1927 which deals with power of a Forest Officer to compound offences instead of
taking the matter to courts for prosecution.
7. Making of the Bill
7. 1 A draft Cabinet Note to this effect  duly approved by the Minister of Environment and
Forests was circulated to Ministries of Agriculture, Commerce, External Affairs, Finance,
Panchayati Raj and Tribal Affairs to elicit their comments/views on 19
th November, 2010. After
incorporating the views/comments so received from the Ministry on the Cabinet Note, together
with the response of the Ministry of the Environment and Forests, the same was sent to the
Ministry of Law and justice (Legislative Department) for vetting on 3
rd January, 2011. Concurrence
of Ministry of Law and Justice on the draft note was received on 1 st February, 2011. The Cabinet
Note was sent to Cabinet Secretariat on 22 nd February, 2011. The Cabinet Secretariat on
23rd March, 2011 conveyed the approval of the Cabinet with the suggestion to insert a new sub-
section 68(4) as under:–
(4) In Scheduled V Areas the Forest-officer shall, before exercising the powers vested under
this section, obtain and record the views of the Gram Sabha concerned.
7.2 After inserting the suggestion made by the Cabinet, the Indian Forest (Amendment) Bill,
2012 was once again sent to the Ministry of Law and Justice for vetting on 14 th June, 2011 and
after vetting it was received in the Ministry of Environment and Forest on 22 nd June, 2011. After
completing all the formalities the Bill was finally introduced in Rajya Sabha on 26 th March, 2012.
7.3 “The Indian Forest (Amendment) Bill, 2012” as introduced and pending in Rajya Sabha, was
referred1 to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests, on the 28 th March, 2012 by the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for
examination and report.
7.4 The Committee issued a Press Release in various national and local dailies on the 26 th April,
2012 inviting memoranda containing suggestions/views/comments of experts/institutions/
organisations interested in the subject matter of the Bill. In response to the Press release, the
Committee received five memoranda. The first two memoranda were forwarded to the Ministry of
Environment and Forests for their comments on 20
th June, 2012 and the remaining three on
26th October, 2012. When no comments were received from the Ministry even after considerable
time had elapsed, two reminders were issued to the Ministry on 20 th September, and 26 th October,
2012. The replies to the Memoranda were finally received from the Ministry on 30th September
and 2
nd November, 2012.
7.5 The Committee at its meeting held on the 6 th November, 2012 heard views of the Secretary
Ministry of Environment and Forests and Additional Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice
(Legislative Department) on the Bill in the forenoon and in the afternoon also heard the views of
the two experts namely Dr. Rajesh Gopal, IFS, Inspector-General, Forests and Member  Secretary,
National Tiger Conservation Authority, Ministry of Environment and Forests and Shri Shankar
Gopalakrishnan, Secretary, Campaign for Survival and Dignity, New Delhi.
8. Features of the Bill
8.1 As mentioned earlier, the Bill seeks to amend some of the provisions of section 68 of the
Indian Forest Act, 1927.
1Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II, dated the 28 th March, 2012.

3
Section 68 of Indian Forest Act, 1927 is reproduced below:-
Power to compound offences
(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, empower a Forest-
officer–
(a) to accept from any person against whom a reasonable suspicion exists that he has
committed any forest-offence, other than an offence specified in section 62 or
section 63, a sum of money by way of compensation for the offence which such
person is suspected to have committed; and
(b) when any property has been seized as liable to confiscation, to release the same
on payment of the value thereof as estimated by such officer.
(2) On the payment of such sum of money, or such value, or both, as the case may be,
to such officer, the suspected person, if in custody, shall be discharged, the property,
if any seized shall be released, and no further proceedings shall be taken against such
person or property.
(3) A Forest-officer shall not be empowered under this section unless he is a Forest
Officer of a rank not inferior to that of a Ranger and is in receipt of a monthly salary
amounting to at least one hundred rupees, and the sum of money accepted as
compensation under clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall in no case exceed the sum of
fifty rupees.
2
8.2 The said section deals with the Power of a Forest Officer to compound offences, and
contains provisions prescribing the minimum rank and salary of such an officer and the maximum
sum of money that can be accepted as compensation in the process of compounding forests
offences. The word “compound” in the legal terminology means “A criminal act in which a person
agrees not to report the occurrence of a crime or not to  prosecute a criminal offender in exchange
for money or other consideration”
3.
8.3 The Bill proposes to introduce two changes in sub section (3) of section 68 of the Indian
Forest Act, 1927 and insert another sub section i.e. sub section 4 after 3. The first change is
omission of monthly salary limit of Rs. 100 of the forest officer concerned, who is empowered
to compound offences and retain only his or her minimum rank. The second one is about raising
the amount of compensation that can be charged for compounding offences from existing Rs. 50
to Rs. 10,000. The insertion of a new sub section requires the forest officer to obtain and record
the views of the Gram Sabha concerned before exercising the power of compounding offences.
9. Objective of the Bill
9.1 The chief objective of the Bill is to modify and suitably amend Indian Forest Act, 1927 to
make it relevant in the changed socio-economic scenario. The other one but related to the above
is to protect and save the tribals and forest dwellers from harassment of prosecution/litigation in
courts for petty forest offences which is generally a long drawn process.
10. Observations/Recommendations
10.1 General observations
10.1.1 The first and the foremost observation that the Committee would like to make in the context
2 The Indian Forest Act, 1927, Universal Law Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi 2009, page no. 87
3 http://legal-dictionary . thefreedictionary .com

4
of and not on the specific provisions of the proposed amendment Bill, is that Indian Forest
Act, 1927 is a Colonial legacy inherited from the British which has now become too old, archaic
and outlived its utility not only with reference to section 68 but also with regard to many, if not,
most of its section and hence needs a comprehensive and through review/revision whereas the
amendment attempted in the Bill is only a token and piecemeal amendment. The implicit ethos and
underlying tenet behind Indian Forest Act, 927 was monopolizing forest resources to harness
maximum revenue to the detriment of forest dwellers by denying them their traditional rights over
forest produce. But, now that the colonial and imperial era has long ago gone by, it is high time
that after so many years of independence, the Indian Forest Act is imbued with the traditional
Indian spirit of collective and participatory management and conservation of forest in tune with the
letter and spirit of the National Forest Policy, 1988. It also needs to be suitably modified so as
to make it Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 (PESA Act) compliant as rightly
demanded by Ministry of Panchayati Raj while offering its comments/suggestions on the Bill.
Furthermore, the Indian Forest Act, 1927 needs to be suitably harmonized with various provisions
contained in The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest
Rights) Act, 2006. While the latter confers certain forests rights such as right to hold and live in
forest land for habitation or for self-cultivation, for livelihood; and the right of ownership, access
to collect, use and dispose of minor forest produce i.e. non-timber forest produce of plant origin
including bamboo, brushwood, honey, wax, lacs, tendu or  kendu leaves, etc.; rights of uses and
entitlement, such as, fish and other products of water bodies, grazing, etc. to the forest dwelling
scheduled tribes and other traditional forest dwellers, clause 26 (1) of the Indian Forest Act, 1927
proclaims the above activities as criminal offence.
10.1.2 The Committee has been informed through memorandum that thousands of Adivasis and
forest dwellers are in jails across the country as a result of being charged in such cases and there
are lakhs of cases pending. It was further informed that displaced people and other forest dwellers
are harassed using such cases by forest officers.
10.1.3 The Committee is surprised to know from the reply of the Ministry that even though it
admits that amendment is required in certain provisions due to changing socio-economic conditions,
change in forest policy, focus on participatory forest management like Joint Forest Management,
subsequent legislations like PESA Act, 1996 and Forest Rights Act, 2006, etc. but refuses to go
ahead with amendments on the pretext that the issues involved in comprehensive amendments are
quite complex and consultation between various Ministries and the State Government are required.
The Ministry has categorically stated that at present, there was no immediate plan of the Ministry
for amendment of Indian Forest Act as a whole.
10.1.4 The Committee is not at all convinced with the argument advanced by the Ministry and is
of the considered opinion that it must at least amend the relevant sections of the Indian Forest
Act, 1927 so as to accommodate the changes required in it due to changing socio-economic
conditions, changes in Forest Policy and directions of the Supreme Court issued from time to time
in forestry matters. It is also of the view that the act must also be made compliant with subsequent
legislation like Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 (PESA Act) and The
Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006
in a time bound manner.
10.2 Specific observations/recommendations
The specific observations/recommendations of the Committee on the three amendments
proposed to be made through this Bill are as follows:–
10.2.1 Apropos the first amendment, the Committee feels that the mention of the rank of the forest
officer empowered to compound forest offences i.e. not inferior to that of  a Ranger serves the

5
purpose of specifying the minimum level of officer authorised to compound the offences. Further,
qualifying the rank of the officer with monthly salary does not seem necessary particularly as the
monthly salary of the forest officer of the rank of Ranger has risen since 1927 substantially and
even otherwise the said limit of Rs. 100 has become superfluous and meaningless.
10.2.2 Moreover, the salary of officials at Forest Ranger level are varying in different States and
there is regular revision of the salary every ten years due to recommendations of various Pay
Commissions, any salary limit set today apart from leading to inter-State disparities between forests
officers authorised to compound the offences, may, with increase in it, become infructuous with
the passage of time. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that the proposed omission of
the words “and is in receipt of a monthly salary amounting to at least 100 Rupees” is quite
justified and reasonable and hence, the Committee endorses the proposed amendment.
10.2.3 Through, the Second amendment in the Bill, for the words “fifty rupees” the words “ten
thousand rupees” are proposed to be substituted. As per the existing provision, sub-section 3 of
section 68 of the Indian Forest Act, 1927 provides that the sum of money to be accepted as
compensation from any person against whom a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed
forest offence, shall in no case exceed the sum of fifty rupees. The sum of fifty rupees in today’s
context is undoubtedly a very small or petty amount and has virtually made the provision to
compound offences meaningless. Some of the State Governments have already amended this
section and prescribed higher amount of compensation. For instance, Government of Goa, vide
Goa Act 15 of 1989 has revised it to ten thousand rupees while in Gujarat, it has been revised
to two thousand rupees vide Gujarat Act 19 of 1983. In Uttarakhand, it has been prescribed vide
Uttaranchal Act 2002 “five thousand rupees” for the first offence and for second and subsequent
offences of the same nature it shall not be less than five thousand or more than “ten thousand
rupees”.
10.2.4 The moot point is what could be the ideal or the condign amount to substitute the amount
of compensation which is Rs. 50? When the Committee enquired tram the Ministry the basis on
which the present proposal of Rs.I0,000 has been reached, it avoided a straightforward reply.
However, in reply to another question the Ministry stated “It may be with the relation of pay of
the official getting minimum monthly salary of Rs. 100/- so that he can compound forest offences
upto not exceeding Rs. 50/-. Though the pay of Forest Ranger varies tram States to States but
it can be safely assumed that they are getting a minimum of month salary of Rs. 20,000/- per
month. By that corollary the compounding limit of Rs. 10,000/- may be appropriate”.
10.2.5 However, while deposing before the Committee, Secretary, Ministry of Environment and
Forests submitted that it would be appropriate not to fix any amount in the Act and leave it for
inclusion in the Rules to be framed by the individual States as this amount under inflationary
pressure may soon become redundant. Alternatively, he also went ahead to suggest, subject to the
consent of the Committee, a higher amount of compensation as deemed appropriate by it.
10.2.6 While the Committee takes note of the fact that amount of Rs. 50 fixed in 1927 was
quite significant but does not feel inclined to draw a parallel between the two and fix an
amount higher than Rs. 10,000/- for the basic reason that the purpose of fixing a significant
amount of compensation during colonial rule might also be to serve as a deterrent apart
from realising the value of forest produce acquired illegally but the Committee feels that
for petty offences it would suffice if the compensation is decided only based on the value
of forest produce illegally acquired.
10.2.7 Secondly, the Committee feels that any further enhancement to the benchmark
amount of Rs. 10,000/- may give wide discretion to forest officer which at time may be
misused to exploit and harass the poor tribals and other forest dwellers. The Committee

6
further notes that maximum pecuniary penalty for petty offences enumerated in sections 26
(1) and 33 (1) of the Indian Forest Act, 1927 is only Rs. 500/-. As such, in view of the huge
gap between the fine prescribed in the Act and the proposed amount of compensation for
the purpose of compounding, it is quite likely that majority of the petty offenders may opt
for prosecution rather than Rajinama or compounding. This will totally negate the purpose
for which the proposed amendment is sought to be made unless the pecuniary penalty is
also suitably enhanced.
10.2.8 Thirdly and lastly, the maximum amount of compensation fixed by the State Governments
of Goa and Uttarakhand extends only to Rs. 10,000/-. In other States, this amount is far less. The
Committee does not agree with the Ministry’s contention to leave this amount open in the Act and
to be prescribed it by the Rules as it would make this provision vulnerable to discretion and
misuse.
10.2.9 In view of the above, the Committee is of the view that the amount of Rs. 10,000/-
as provided in the Clause 2 (b) of the Bill is reasonable and justified and hence,
recommends that the words “ten thousand” be retained in the Bill.
10.2.10 The last amendment-“In Scheduled Areas, the Forest Officer shall, before exercising the
powers vested under this section, obtain and record the views of the Gram Sabha Concerned” was
not originally envisaged to be included in the Bill by the Ministry and has been done at the behest
of the Cabinet. The Committee feels that it is a very welcome addition which would not only
ensure transparency in the process of compounding of offences but also lead to participation
of the people through Gram Sabha. This would open an avenue for local villagers to have
a much needed say in the management and protection of forests and utilization of forest
resources.
10.2.11 However, the Committee has certain reservations/apprehensions on the applicability and
implementation aspects of this provision. The first, reservation of the Committee is with regard to
this provision which says — the Forest Officer shall before exercising powers vested under this
section obtain and record the views of the Gram Sabha concerned, is that mere obtaining and
recording the view of the Gram Sabha would not serve any practical purpose unless and until the
officer concerned gives due consideration to and takes into account the views obtained from the
Gram Sabha while deciding on compounding of offences. The Committee, therefore, feels that
it would be appropriate to rephrase this Clause by categorically providing that the Forest
Officers shall obtain the views of Gram Sabha before exercising the powers vested under
section 68 and give due consideration to such views while passing an order in exercise of
powers under this section.
10.2.12 The second apprehension arises out of the practical difficulties faced in obtaining views
of the Gram Sabha which is mostly time consuming. The Committee, therefore, apprehends that
obtaining the views of the Gram Sabha may unduly delay the process of compounding of offences
and the fate of the offender would remain undecided for considerably a longer period causing
mental agony to him or her. It may, thus, negate the very idea of compounding offences i.e.
expeditious settlement of an offence. The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that the
Ministry must give a serious thought to  this problem and try to address this issue suitably.
10.2.13 Thirdly, the Committee expresses its concerns over the procedural matter that are involved
in obtaining the views of the Gram Sabha. Questions like how the Gram Sabha would be called,
who will call it, whether the Forest Officer is competent to convene the Gram Sabha, how and
in what manner the views of Gram Sabha would be recorded, whether there will be a separate
register in which the views of the Gram Sabha would be recorded, whether the views Gram Sabha
would be recorded on separate papers on case to case basis, whether such record would be

7
authenticated with the signature of the persons attending the Gram Sabha so as to ensure that the
authentic version of the views of the Gram Sabha has been recorded, what will happen if the Gram
Sabha is not able to arrive at a conclusive decision, etc. need to be clearly addressed as to remove
all or any ambiguity that may arise while implementing the Act. The Committee is of the view
that the Ministry must pay  due attention to these apprehensions and try to appropriately
address them before  framing rules.
11. The Committee hopes that Government would give due consideration to the observations
and recommendations of the Committee.

ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE
AS INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
Bill No. IX of 2012
THE INDIAN FOREST (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Forest Act, 1927.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Indian Forest (Amendment)
Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In sub-section ( 3) of section 68 of the Indian Forest
Act, 1927,—
(a) the words “and is in receipt of a monthly salary
amounting to at least one hundred rupees” shall be omitted;
(b) for the words “fifty rupees”, the words “ten
thousand rupees” shall be substituted;
11
Short title
and commence-
ment.
Amendment
of section 68
of Act 16 of
1927.

12
(c) after sub-section ( 3), the following shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘(4) In Scheduled Areas, the Forest-officer shall,
before exercising the powers vested under this section,
obtain and record the views of the Gram Sabha
concerned.
Explanation.—In this sub-section, the expressions,—
(a) “Gram Sabha” means a body consisting
of persons registered in the electoral rolls relating
to a village comprised within the area of
Panchayat at the village level;
(b) “Scheduled Areas” means the areas to
which the provisions of clause (1) of article 244
and the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution apply.’.

13
13
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Indian Forest Act, 1927 (16 of 1927) has been enacted
to consolidate the law relating to forests, the transit of forest-
produce and the duty leviable on timber and other forest-produce.
2. Section 68 of the Indian Forest Act, 1927 contains
provisions for compounding of offences. It inter alia , —
(a) confers power upon a Forest Officer, appointed by
the State Government, to accept from any person against
whom a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed
any forest-offence, (other than an offence specified in
section 62 relating to punishment for wrongful seizure or
section 63 relating to penalty for counterfeiting or defacing
marks on trees and timber and for altering boundary marks)
a sum of money by way of compensation for the offence
which such person is suspected to have committed;
(b) when any property has been seized as liable to
confiscation, to release the same on payment of the value
thereof as estimated by such officer.
Sub-section ( 2) of the aforesaid section 68 further provides
that the suspected person, if in custody, shall, on the payment of
such sum of money, or such value, or both, as the case may be,
be discharged on the payment of such sum of money, or such
value, or both, as the case may be, and the property, if any, seized
shall be released, and no further proceedings shall be taken against
such person or property.
3. Sub-section ( 3) of aforesaid section 68 of the Indian
Forest Act, 1927 provides that,—
(i) a Forest-officer referred to above for the purpose of
compounding of offence should not be inferior to that of a
Ranger and is in receipt of a monthly salary amounting to at
least one hundred rupees, and
(ii) the sum of money accepted as compensation under
clause ( a) of sub section ( 1) shall in no case exceed the sum
of fifty rupees.
4. The monthly salary limit of a Forest Officer specified in
sub-paragraph ( i) of the preceding paragraph empowered to
compound aforesaid offences has become redundant and it is
therefore proposed to omit salary limit from aforesaid sub-
section ( 3).

14
5. The sum not exceeding rupees fifty accepted as
compensation as mentioned in paragraph ( ii) of the preceding
paragraph fixed in 1927 is very less. It is also proposed to revise
the said limit from fifty rupees to ten thousand rupees.
6. It is also proposed to insert a new sub-section ( 4) in
section 68 of the Indian Forest Act, 1927 so as to make it
mandatory for the Forest-officer, to obtain and record the views of
Gram Sabha before compounding the offence so as to ensure the
transparency in compounding of the offences and participation of
the people at Gram Sabha level.
N
EW D ELHI; JAYANTHI NATARAJAN.
The 15th February, 2012

15
15
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE I NDIAN F OREST A CT, 1927
(16 OF 1927)
** * **
68. ( 1) * * * * *
(3) A Forest-officer shall not be empowered under this section
unless he is a Forest officer of a rank not inferior to that of a
Ranger and is in receipt of a monthly salary amounting to at least
one hundred rupees, and the sum of money accepted as
compensation under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) shall in no case
exceed the sum of fifty rupees.
** * **
Power to
compound
offences.

16
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Forest Act, 1927.
(Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan, Minister of State (Independent Charge)
in the Ministry of Environment and Forests)

MINUTES

18

19
II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 11.10 A.M. on Tuesday, the 6 th November, 2012 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil H. Lad
3. Shri M. Rama Jois
4. Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi
5. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
LOK SABHA
6. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’
7. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
8. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase
9. Dr. Ajay Kumar
10. Shri O.S. Manian
11. Shri Basori Singh Masram
12. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar
13. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
14. Shri Yashvir Singh
15. Shri Pradeep Tamta
16. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
17. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Committee Officer
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
Representatives of Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Dr. T. Chatterjee, Secretary
19

20
2. Dr. P.J. Dilip Kumar, Director General Forests, & Special Secretary
3. Shri Subhash Chandra, DIG
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
1. Dr Sanjay Singh, Additional Secretary
2. Shri K.R. Sajikumar, Additional Legislative Counsel
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee, Secretary, Ministry of
Environment and Forests and Additional Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative
Department) and other senior officers of the Ministries present in the meeting. Thereafter, he
informed that the Committee had been convened to hear the views of the aforesaid Ministries in
the fornoon and the experts in the afternoon on the Indian Forest (Amendment) Bill, 2012. He also
informed that the Report on the Bill had to be presented/laid on the table of both the Houses of
Parliament by 15
th November, 2012.
3. Then the Chairman in the first instance asked the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and
Forests to give his views on the Bill. The Secretary, informed the Committee that the amount of
Rs. 50/- which had been set as the maximum limit for compounding of offences in the Indian
Forest Act, 1927 (IFA) was too meager keeping in view the present value of the forest produce
and resulted in harassment of the poor forest dwellers as even cases of petty forest offences were
taken to courts for prosecution. He also added that instead of fixing the maximum limit at
Rs. 10,000/- as suggested in the amendment Bill, the discretion to fix the maximum limit might be
left to the respective state Governments as this amount would also lose relevance after a few years.
He also stated that during the inter-Ministerial consultations, the Panchayati Raj Department had
suggested that a provision may be kept in the Bill to obtain and record views of Gram Sabha before
compounding of offence. Based on their advice a provision in the Bill was incorporated. He
however, apprehended that this might delay the whole process of compounding, as it might be
difficult to have the quorum of Gram Sabha i.e. fifty per cent of the members of the Gram Sabha.
4. In response to a query regarding the basis for keeping the compounding limit at Rs. 10,000/-,
the Secretary explained that the existing figure of Rs. 50/- was half the salary of the Forest
Range Officer in 1927 and by the same corollary, now, it had been proposed to keep the limit at
Rs. 10,000/- which was also nearly half the salary of a Forest Range Officer today.
5. The Chairman, thereafter requested the Additional Secretary, Ministry of law and Justice
(Legislative Department), to give his views on the Bill. The Additional Secretary (Legislative
Department) briefed the Committee about the views of the Department with regard to the
amendments proposed in the Bill. In response to a query, whether the states may by law, raise the
limit of fine beyond the maximum limit for compounding of offences laid in Central Act, the
Additional Secretary stated that the maximum limit could not be increased beyond Rs. 10,000/- but
the power to fix the fine might be given to the respective state Governments. This was also
supported by the Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Forest.
6. When the Committee enquired whether the word ‘reasonable suspicion’ appearing in section
68 of the IFA, 1927 needed to be amply qualified, the Secretary, of the Ministry of Environment
and Forests stated that the consultation with the Gram Sabha had been introduced in the Bill,
mainly because of the vagueness of ‘reasonable suspicion’. Issues regarding the quorum for the
meeting of the Gram Sabhas, whether the views of the Gram Sabha could be ignored by the
officer, who would summon the Gram Sabha etc. were also discussed in the meeting.
7. When the Committee desired to know as to why it should be mandatory to go to Gram
Sabha if the offence was getting compounded, the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Law and

21
Justice explained to the Committee that the reasons for the introduction of the Gram Sabha was
felt because it was the central authority in respect of all such other Acts viz. Scheduled Tribes and
other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006, Panchayats (Extension
to Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996, as the Gram Sabha was better equipped to take care of the people
residing in the area and further to ensure that the compounding officer would not take a decision
on his own. Therefore, such a statutory provision had been made in the Bill. He, further, explained
that the forest officer before exercising the power vested under this Bill would obtain and record
the views of the Gram Sabha and on that basis would take a decision. He also suggested that if
the Committee recommended that acceptance of the views of the Gram Sabha be made compulsory
for the officer before compounding of offence, the provision in the Bill would be modified suitably.
8. It was also suggested that instead of fixing the maximum limit at Rs. 10,000/-, a minimum
amount could be fixed and the states might be empowered to fix anything over and above this limit.
The Committee was also of the view that the Gram Sabhas should be involved in the process of
compounding of offences as it would encourage participation of the people and make them
possessive about their forests. However, the finer details regarding the summoning of the Gram
sabha and the procedure to be adopted should be dealt with carefully, so as to avoid harassment
of the forest dwellers. The Ministry of Environment & Forests also suggested that if the Legislative
Department agreed, the Forest Management Committees (FMC) could be delegated the power
instead of Gram Sabha as FMCs had compulsory representation of women, socially backward
sections, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and forest dependent communities with the
Panchayat President or Vice-President as their ex officio  member.
9. In response to a query on the definition of ‘petty offences’, the Ministry of Environment
and Forests explained that most of the State Acts had explanatory clauses, which clearly defined
which of the offences were compoundable. He, further, explained that as per the Indian Forest Act,
1927, most of the offences were compoundable except those provided in sections 62 and 63. The
maximum monetary penalty stipulated under the Acts was only Rs. 500 for offences, other than
those prescribed under sections 62 and 63.
10. The Chairman of the Committee also pointed out that ‘The Scheduled Tribes and Other
Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006’(FRA) imparts certain forest
rights to the forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other Traditional Forest Dwellers, which were
treated as offences under the Indian Forest Act, 1927 (IFA) as such both the Acts were
inconsistent or in conflict with each other. The Chairman, therefore, enquired the reasons for not
making the Acts compliant with each other. The Ministry of Environment & Forests explained that
rights conferred under the FRA depended upon the entitlement, and once the rights were recognized
it would be recognized in the IFA as well. The officials, then, withdrew.
The meeting then adjourned at 12.29 
P.M. to meet again 2.30 P.M.
Witnesses:
1. Dr. Rajesh Gopal, Inspector-General, Forests(IGF) and Member Secretary, National Tiger
Conservation Authority.
2. Shri Shankar Gopalakrishnan, Secretary, Campaign for Survival and Dignity.
11. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests, Dr. Rajesh
Gopal, IGF and Member Secretary, National Tiger Conservation Authority and Shri Shankar
Gopalakrishnan, Secretary, Campaign for Survival and Dignity and asked them to persent their
views/suggestions on the Indian Forest (Amendment) Bill, 2012.
12. Commenting on the Bill, Member-Secretary, National Tiger Conservation Authority stated
that since the pay structure of the Range Officers had undergone several revisions since 1927 and

22
as their pay-scales vary from State to State; it might not  be relevant to retain a salary based limit
and hence, mention of rank of the Forest Officer compounding the offence not below the level of
a Range Officer was sufficient, as indicated in the Bill. On the second amendment regarding the
revision of the monetary limits from Rs. 50 to Rs. l0,000, he opined that this need not be included
in the legislation and could be provided in the rules to be framed by the State Governments. On
the third amendment seeking views of the Gram Sabha, he stated that the amendment was justified
because it harmonized the Indian Forest Act with the Panchayati Raj institutions of the States and
the Scheduled Tribes and Other Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 and it
would further facilitate the process of compounding of petty offences by ensuring transparency
and consultation with the local people through the Gram Sabha. However, the procedural aspects
needed to be worked out.
13. Secretary, Campaign for Survival and Dignity submitted that the IFA was completely
contradictory to and inconsistent with the FRA and the proposed amendments would not address
the problems or reduce harassment of people that was plaguing the tribals and forest dwellers in
this country. He, therefore, suggested that a comprehensive amendment in the IFA was required
to bring it in line with the rights of forest dwellers as provided in the FRA, 2006. He also
apprehended that increase in the maximum limit of amount for compounding might increase the
number of cases that would be filed. He was also of the view that Gram Sabha, should be
consulted before deciding whether to compound or not and not after decision to compound an
offence had been taken. He also suggested that the Gram Sabha itself should have the power to
file a few types of cases and that power should be removed from the Forest Officers. Regarding
the amendment to the IFA, he suggested that it should be amended to decriminalise all livelihood
activities, and particularly those that were listed in the FRA, as the rights of forest dwellers.
14. Responding the suggestion the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forest stated that
though it was possible to hand over the forests to the Gram Sabhas and give them legal powers
to even protect it, the same should be done in a phased manner after proper training and capacity
building of the Gram Sabhas. However, since, Gram Sabha, was an amorphous and large body it
would be difficult for them to arrive at a decision in most cases; hence giving them the powers
of the Forest Department should be thought of very carefully. Thereafter, some more points were
raised by the Members relating to the acts of people, which were considered rights under the FRA
but were offences under the IFA.
15. In reply to a query as to whether the Ministry of Environment and Forests was thinking
of bringing out comprehensive amendments to the IFA, 1927 the Ministry clarified that since such
a task would involve consultation with all State Governments it might take a long time. However,
through the proposed amendments, relief was being given to petty offenders who were mainly poor
forest dewellers and the consultation with Gram Sabha had been introduced to ensure community
representation.
16. At the end the Chairman of the Committee requested all the Members to send their views
on the Bill to the Secretariat at the earliest and also informed that the next meeting of the
Committee would be held on 15
th November, 2012 to consider and adopt the draft report.
The officials, then, withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The meeting adjourned at 3.49 
P.M.

23
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 15 th November, 2012 in Committee Room.
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri M. Rama Jois
3. Shri Alok Tiwari
4. Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Ajay Kumar
6. Shri O.S. Manian
7. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
8. Shri Yashvir Singh
9. Shri Pradeep Tamta
10. Shri Joseph Toppo
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Committee Officer
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
At the outset, Chairman, welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and
informed them that the meeting was convened to consider and adopt the draft report on the Indian
Forest (Amendment) Bill, 2012 as the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha had granted extension of time
up to 15
th November 2012 to present the report on the Bill.
2. Thereafter, The Chairman read out operative Paras contained in the draft Report and invited
the views/suggestions from the Members on them. After some discussions, the Committee adopted
the draft report.
3. The Committee, further, decided that in view of the fact that present extension of time
given to the Committee to present the report was expiring on the very same day, further extension
of time would be required until the report was presented to both Houses of Parliament. The
Committee also decided that since summons for the ensuing winter session of Parliament had been
23

24
issued and the Session was scheduled to begin on 22 nd November, 2012 the Report on the Bill
might be presented to/laid on the Table of both Houses of Parliament. The Committee, thereafter,
authorised the Chairman of the Committee and in his absence Shri T. Selvaganapathi to present the
Report in Rajya Sabha and Shri Pradeep Tamta and in his absence Shri Dayanidhi Maran to lay the
Rseport on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
4. During the course of the meeting, one of the Members of the Committee suggested that the
Committee might review the working of Indian Meteorological Department of Ministry of Earth
Sciences particularly on Doppler Radar System and weather forecasting system. The Chairman
assured the Member that the subject would be included in the agenda of future meetings.
5. * * *
6. * * *
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee, then, adjourned at 4.45 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.