 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2016/ Phalguna, 1937 (Saka) 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE TWO HUNDRED FIFTY SIXTH  REPORT OF THE 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS ON THE 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015-2016) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th February, 2016) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th February, 2016) 
 
REPORT 
NO. 
271 

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
     
                                       
PAGES    
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
 
2. INTRODUCTION   
 
*3.       ACRONYMS                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                             
4.  REPORT  
                                                                                                                                       
*5.       MINUTES                                                                                                                
         
 
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
_________________________________________ 
*To be appended at printing stage 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2015-16) 
 (Constituted on 1st September, 2015) 
---------- 
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar  –– Chairman  
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan 
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
   6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian 
7. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy  
8. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh  
 9. Shri Bhupinder Singh 
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal 
   12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig 
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakraborty 
     14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan  
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary 
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev 
17. Shri Ninong Ering  
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa 
      19. Dr. K. Gopal 
20. Shri Daddan Mishra 
21. Shri Chirag Paswan  
22. Shri Shivaji A. Patil 
23. Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole 
24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan  
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar  
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy  
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh  
28. Shri Nagendra Singh  
29. Shrimati Renuka Sinha  
30. Shri Vikram Usendi  
31. Shrimati M.Vasanthi  
          __________________ 
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Rohtas, Director 
 Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director 
 Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science & Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the 
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundr ed Seventy-first 
Report on the Action Taken by the Department of Atomic Energy on the 
recommendations contained in Two Hundred Fifty-sixth Report of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants ( 2015-2016) of the Department of Atomic Energy , which was 
presented/lad in the both the Houses of Parliament on 5th May, 2015. 
 
2. There were Thirty one recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Fifty-
sixth Report of the Committee.  Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the 
Committee were received from the Department on 3rd December, 2015. 
   
3. In the meeting held on 15th January, 2016, the Committee considered the draft 
Report and adopted the same. 
 
 
 
 
 
 ASHWANI KUMAR 
New Delhi: Chairman 
January 15, 2016 Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests 
25 Pausha, 1937 Rajya Sabha 
 

REPORT 
   
 The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Department of Atomic Energy on the recommendations contained in the 
Two Hundred and Fifty-sixth Report of the Department -related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment 
& Forests on the Demands for Grants (201 5-16) of the Department of 
Atomic Energy, which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 5th 
May, 201 5. The Committee had in all made thirty one  
recommendations/observations in the report.  Action Taken Note on the 
report was received by the Committee on 3rd December, 201 5.  The 
Department has accepted all the recommendations of the Committee.  The 
Committee, on examination of Action Taken Notes, is satisfied wit h action 
taken by the Department in respect of recommendations/observations . 
However, the Committee would like the Department to take further action in 
respect of two recommendations as indicated in the Report  (Para Nos. 6.5 
and 7.7). 
 The Committee's reco mmendations, action taken thereon and 
comments of the Committee on the Action Taken by the Department of 
Atomic Energy are set out in the subsequent paragraphs:- 
FINANCIAL PROGRESS IN XII FIVE YEAR PLAN  
Recommendation (Para 6.5) 
 The Committee takes serio us view of the fact that in the first three 
years of current Plan nearly 27% of the allocation have been disbursed.  The 
major share i.e. 73% of the allocation has accumulated for the remaining two 
years.  It seems impossible to utilise 73% of the plan all ocation during the 
remaining two years.  The very purpose of long term planning in the form of 
Five Year Plan comes to a naught. While taking serious view of the fact that 
pro-rata allocations are not made annually, the Committee recommends that 
in the rem aining two years of the Plan period, allocations should be made 
and utilised on pro-rata basis to catch up the Plan targets. 
Action Taken by Government 
DAE accepts the recommendation of the Committee. The 
recommendation has been brought to the notice of Mi nistry of Finance. 
Action Plan is put in place for utilisation of the approved allocation. ID Note 
to the PMO seeking special consideration in the matter of re-appropriation of 
funds for Science & Technology Ministries have also been issued for 
consideration so that approved allocation need not be surrendered for want 
of approvals for the re-appropriation of funds among the Projects. 
Comments 
 The Committee takes note of the reply but would like the 
Department to pursue the matter with Ministry of Finance/P MO 
regularly. 

UTILISATION OF THE APPROVED OUTLAY: A TREND 
Recommendation (Para 7.7 & 7.8) 
 The Committee feels that the budgetary restriction imposed by the 
Ministry of Finance, as pointed by the DAE, was not the only reason for 
reduction in allocation at RE stage in 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15, under-
utilisation of outlay by the Department might have also played a role in 
reduction at R.E. level.  
Action Taken by Government 
The Department accepts the observation of the honourable Committee 
that  the allocation has been under -utilised. The reasons for underutilisation 
has been discussed  and the action plan to overcome this has been chalked 
out in   the  review meeting conducted on 18.06.2015, by Secretary, DAE 
with the Heads of  Units/Aided Institutes/PSUs.  Further, it is submitted here 
that Plan review meetings have been conducted  by Secretary/Additional 
Secretary, DAE periodically. The Department could utilise about 58% of the 
budget under Plan head till October, 2015. 
Comments  
 The Committee takes note of the reply but would like the 
Department to constantly monitor the utilization of funds. 
Recommendation (Para 7.8) 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department needs to 
improve its capability to utilise the allocated resources particularly i n the 
Plan Head through strict monitoring at regular intervals of the physical and 
financial performance of the projects and obviate the possibility of any 
reduction at Revised Estimate Stage. It is felt that considering the strategic 
importance of the institutions of the Department of Atomic Energy, financial 
cuts should be minimized and should not be insisted upon if strategic 
programmes were to be delayed as a result thereof.    
Action Taken by Government 
Department accepts the recommendations of the hon ourable 
Committee.  Action taken in this regard is given below : 
Apart  from  monitoring  at  Unit level/Department  level,  monitoring  
of  the  Plan projects  at micro level has been introduced. This has enabled 
29% of utilisation of the  Plan  expenditure  by  June, 2015  end. The  micro 
level monitoring is likely to  increase the capacity of utilisation of the 
allocation.  Further, it is submitted here that the Department has utilised 58% 
of the budget under Plan head till October, 2015. 
Comments 
 The Committee appreciates the monitoring at micro level besides 
at unit/Department level by the Committee and hopes that this will 
result in increased utilization of allocated resources. 
PROJECTED    DEMAND    AND    APPROVED   OUTLAY   FOR   
2015-16  

VIS-A-VIS 2014-15 
Recommendation (Para 9.8) 
 The Committee feels that reduction at B.E. to the tune of Rs. 6,506.00 
Crores against the projected outlay of Rs. 23,457.00 crore s and especially to 
the tune of Rs. 4109.00 crores under Plan Head against projected Plan BE of 
Rs. 10009.00 crore s in Demand no. 4 substantially. It has adversely 
impacted the Plan projects of the Department. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry of Finance should consider the proposal for 
increase in outlay at RE stage.  
Action Taken by Government 
Department accepts the recommendations of the honourable 
Committee and the recommendations  has  been  brought  to the  notice of  
the Ministry of  Finance for providing sufficient funds at RE 2015 -16 stage 
vide this Office DO No.3/2(4)/2014-Budget/6518 dated 26.05.2015. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of 
the progress  made in the matter. 
IMPACT OF CUT ON PROJECTS 
Recommendations (Para 9.15) 
 The Committee takes note of the fact that the Department had earlier 
also brought to the Committee’s notice a similar reduction of Rs. 957.22 
crores in the non-plan allocation under Demand No. 4, during the Demands 
for Grants for the year 2013 -14, and its adverse effect on the operational 
needs of the Heavy Wate r Plants, Nuclear Fuel Complex and BARC.  The 
Committee had accordingly recommended in its 239 th Report 
(recommendation no.11.2) for the enhancement of allocation.  The 
Department in its Action Taken Note had replied that "the recommendation 
of the Committ ee that the Department's Demand for funds should be 
adequately accommodated to obviate adverse effects on the critical or core 
activities due to shortage of funds" will be brought to the notice of the 
Ministry of Finance at Revised Estimate stage.  
Recommendation (Para 9.16) 
 The Committee expresses its serious concern over the matter that the 
issue has not been resolved yet and has come up again. There has been 
reduction of Rs. 2397.00 Crores in the outlay projected by the Department.  
Recommendation (Para 9.17) 
The Committee finds that despite the fact that the Department has 
been vigorously and forcefully taking up the issue of enhancement of 
allocation for the last three years but the Ministry of Finance had not been 
acceding to the request. In the proce ss, the strategic and crucial programmes 
of the Department are suffering. The Committee recommends that in the 
area of critical national importance, the Ministry of Finance should give 

maximum financial support for the programmes of the Department under the 
appropriate financing mechanism.  
Action Taken by Government 
The  Department  accepts the  concern  of  the  Committee  and  has 
taken up with Ministry   of   Finance   vide  this  Office  DO No.3/2(4)/2014-
Budget/6518  dated 26.05.2015. 
Department accep ts the recommendation of the honourable 
Committee and  the recommendation  has been brought to the  notice of  
Ministry of Finance for their kind consideration. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of 
the progress during Demands for Grants-2016-17. 
BHABHA ATOMIC RESEARCH CENTRE 
Recommendation (Para10.5) 
 The Committee takes note of the increased allocation to BARC, a 
prestigious Research & Development institution and hopes that a concrete 
action plan would be prepared to fully u tilise the allocated budgetary 
resources and important projects would be completed on time. 
Action Taken by Government 
Department accepts the observations of the honourable Committee. 
The action taken in this regard is given below : 
All out efforts are bei ng made to utilize the allocated budgetary resources 
and also to complete the important projects on time. Project review meetings 
are being held at micro level. With this, BARC could achieve utilization of 
funds for more than  99% of RE and FG for the years  2013-14 & 2014 -15.  
During the current financial year (2015 -16) also, as against, approved BE  
provision of Rs.1424.40 crore, the expenditure during first two months 
(April & May, 2015) was 26% of BE. The Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP) 
targets have also be en met. Further, it is submitted here that BARC has 
utilised 50% of the budget till October, 2015. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the fact that BARC had utilised 99% of 
Revised Estimate 2013 -14 and BE 2014 -15 allocation and could utilise 
50% of the budget t ill October 2015 and hopes that the BARC will 
continue utilizing its entire allocated budget. 
Recommendation (Para Nos.10.8 & 10.9) 
 The Committee notes the contribution of BARC in genetic mutation 
of crop plants using ionising radiation aimed at improved yields, resistant to 
diseases which have resulted in increased and improved production of 
several new crop varieties. Farmers have, thus, far benefitted from over 42 
new crop varieties produced by BARC.  
The Committee is however of the view that the Depart ment's research 
in nuclear agriculture has become more relevant than ever before in today’s 

context when agricultural yields are getting influenced and affected by 
climate change. Therefore, in order to meet challenges, the Department 
should intensify its efforts in developing high-yielding disease-resistant crop 
varieties. 
Action Taken by Government 
The Department accepts the view of the honourable Committee and in 
order  to  meet  the  challenges  in  agriculture,  the  Department  has 
undertaken through Bhabha Atomic Research Centre further R&D work for 
high yielding and disease resistant  pulses, oilseeds, wheat,  and  rice with 3 
more  Agricultural Universities (Raichur, Pantnagar, and Jabalpur) 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply.   
Recommendation (Para 10.11) 
 The Committee, while acknowledging the significance of Bhabha 
Atomic Research Centre (BARC) for popularising and marketing its socially 
beneficial technologies, recommends to the Department to chalk out a 
strategy to market its socially benef icial technologies such as Nisargruna 
Biogas Plant for handling biodegradable wastes; Sludge Hygienization 
Research Irradiation (SHRI) for treatment of municipal sewage, etc. 
including its technology on food preservation, nuclear medicine and 
healthcare, t hrough Technology Transfer & Collaboration Division so that 
base line of their users is increased.   
Action Taken by Government 
The recommendation of the Committee has been accepted by the 
Department and following socially beneficial activities are being progressed.   
1.  Nisagruna technology is being transferred to many techno -
entrepreneurs.  Presently, the number of this technology holders 
is more than 125. There are  about 190 Nisargruna plants 
installed at various locations in the country.   Many Municipal 
Corporations are now coming forward to install decentralized  
Nisargruna plants. BARC has signed MOUs with Municipal 
Corporations of  Chandigarh, Mumbai, Chennai, Rajkot and 
Tuticorin during this year to put up  such plants. State 
Governments of Maharashtra , Goa, Karnataka, Tamilnadu,  
Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh through their Urban Department 
or Pollution Control Boards are interacting with BARC to put 
up more plants for decentralized waste management. Ten plants 
were commissioned in the  year 2014-15. Eight plants would be 
commissioned under MOU with BARC  and other parties this 
year. This is also in line with Swatchh Bharat mission of  the 
Prime Minister.  Recently an MOU has been signed between 
BARC and Ahmedabad  Municipal Corporation to implement 
Dry Sludge Hy gienization Research  Irradiation facility for 

treatment of municipal sewage. Talks are on with   Nagpur and 
Bangalore Municipal Corporations, Punjab Pollution Control  
Board and it is proposed to approach other Municipal 
Corporations of India also to implement this technology.   
2.  Food preservation using irradiation is being popularised by 
making this technology easily accessible in various parts of the 
country. Some of these  plants are now working with full 
efficiency and licences are issued for  irradiating cereals, fruits 
and many agricultural products. These steps will  definitely help 
in increasing the number of users of such irradiated preserved  
12 food. Mangoes have been cleared for export and USA 
permitted to import  irradiated mangoes from our country.  In 
last 4 years, BARC have exported  about 1277 MT of irradiated 
mangoes to USA. Twelve irradiation plants have  been installed 
in public domain so far and 3 plants are functioning in 
Government  sector. 
3.  With regard to nuclear medicine and healthcare, a bout 25% of 
the patients  referred for nuclear medicine 
investigations/treatment are from the East and  North-East of 
India. In view of this, a proposal to set up a full -fledged 
Radiation Medicine Centre at the DAE -VECC Campus in 
Rajarhat, Kolkata, to  provide tertiary nuclear medicine support 
to East and North-East States has been initiated. The centre will 
support the Chittaranjan National Cancer  Institute at Rajarhat, 
Kolkata which is close to the proposed RMC -Kolkata.The 
VECC Medical Cyclotron is expected to be producing FDG by 
mid 2016.   A medical cyclotron will be set up in ACTREC 
Campus at Kharghar to augment the availability of low cost [F -
18] FDG for cancer and other (noncancer) patients. 
4.  During 2014-15, fourteen BARC technologies were transferred 
to 34 private  parties. MOU has been signed between 
Technology Transfer and Collaboration Division of BARC and 
CSIR-Tech, a private company, for  marketing BARC 
technologies. As per the MOU, CSIR -Tech shall promote  
BARC technologies amongst various industrie s and suggest 
suitable industries to BARC for possible technology transfer. 
Comments 
 The Committee while takes note of the reply. 
INDIRA GANDHI CENTRE FOR ATOMIC RESEARCH (IGCAR), 
KALPAKKAM 
Recommendation (Para 11.4) 
 The Committee feels that any curtailm ent of funds for  institutes such 
as  Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research  which is involved in the 

high-end and innovative research in the Fast Breeder Reactor programme 
may slow down the pace of efforts towards second stage nuclear programme 
of developing Fast Breeder Reactor. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Department should impress upon the Ministry of Finance to increase 
budgetary allocation to the Centre to enable it to maintain its progress in the 
field of nuclear energy.  The Comm ittee, accordingly, recommends liberal 
financial assistance to the Department. 
Action Taken by Government 
Department  accepts  the observations of the Committee to provide 
sufficient funds to Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research (IGCAR) for 
activities of   high-end  and  innovative  research  in the   Fast Breeder 
Reactor programme.  Also recommendations of the Committee have been 
brought to the notice of Ministry   of Finance for providing sufficient funds  
for the above activities of  IGCAR.   Projects have been prioritised and 
additional funds have been provided through first  supplementary by re -
allocating the funds.  
A detailed review was under taken with a view towards prioritizing 
the requirements of new projects in XII Plan and to complete the ongoi ng 
schemes of XI Plan within XII Plan period. Based on the detailed review, the 
minimumrequirement of funds for 2015-16 is indicated as below: 
(Rs. Crores) 
 
Sector BE 
proposed 
BE 
approved 
Minimum allocation 
required for 2015-16 
R&D 510 275 320 
I&M 1250 225 490 
Power 50 50 1 
Total 1810 550 811 
Further it is submitted here that IGCAR has utilised 73% of budget till  
October, 2015  in   R&D  and  I&M   Sector.   An   additional   amount  of  
Rs.315   crore  is  
required   in  RE 2015-16 and the same has be en intimated to Ministry of  
Finance. 
Comments 
 The Committee while takes note of the reply.  
VARIABLE ENERGY CYCLOTRON CENTRE (VECC) 
Recommendation (Para 12.5) 
 The Committee notes the help the Centre is providing to people of 
North Eastern States in the field of nuclear medicine facilities especially 
facilities for Radioimmunoassay (RIA) tests, operation of Cancer of thyroid 
patients, its contribution in frontier areas of science like Large Hadron 
Collider and ALICE.  The Committee recommends that facilit ies for 

treatment of Thyroid Cancer patients of the North -East region be further 
expanded to other areas.  
Action Taken by Government 
Department accepts the recommendations of the honourable 
Committee. In  this regard, the following are further submitted.   Regional 
Radiation Medicine Centre (RRMC) at the Saroj Gupta  Cancer & Research 
Institute is engaged in high dose lodine -131 Therapy of  Thyroid Cancer 
patients on regular basis and it is the only facility of its  kind in the State of 
West Bengal for treatmen t of patients mainly from North - Eastern region of 
the country. More than 70 patients of Thyroid Cancer    underwent   therapy 
during   the  year  2014.  However,   action  has  been initiated  by  VECC  in  
collaboration with Bhabha Atomic Research Centre to build Radiation 
Medicine Centre (RMC) at Rajarhat Campus, Kolkata which  is expected to 
treat more than 400 Thyroid Cancer patients every year at a  cheaper rate as 
compared to other private hospitals. In addition to this, the  centre will also 
have bigger facility in Nuclear Scan and Imaging of Cancer  Patients using 
Gamma Camera. 
Comments  
 The Committee takes note of the reply. 
Recommendation (Para 12.7) 
 The Committee, recommends that the Variable Energy Cyclotron 
Centre should be allocated adequate reso urces at RE stage so that its 
contribution to socially useful applications and the frontier science 
experiments are not affected adversely. 
Action Taken by Government 
The Department accepts the recommendations of the honourable 
Committee and  has taken note  of the observations.   Variable Energy 
Cyclotron Centre (VECC) has been allocated  Rs.120 crore in  BE 2015-16.  
Further, Rs.202 crore is proposed  for VECC in BE 2016-17. 
Comments  
 The Committee takes note of the reply.  
MINERAL SECTOR 
URANIUM CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD. (UCIL) 
Recommendation (Para 13.7) 
 The Committee takes note of the fact that that Internal and Extra 
Budgetary Resources (IEBR) generated by UCIL have increased 
substantially. The Committee also takes note of the Relief & Rehabilitation 
policy put in place by the UCIL. As regards projects like Gogi Uranium 
Project, Karnataka; Lambapur Pedaguttu Project, Telangana and KPM 
Project, Meghalaya, the Committee finds that these projects are pending for 
want of environmental clearance. The Committee feels that the Department 
should pursue this matter with the Ministry of Environment, Forests & 
Climate Change vigorously to seek their early clearance.  

Action Taken by Government 
Department accepts the recommendations of the honourable 
Committee. The  matters related to above projects are being pursued at 
different levels in the Ministry of Environment and Forest (MoEF), New 
Delhi and with respective State  Governments.  Gogi uranium project in 
Karnataka After the successful Public Hearing (November 2010) a nd 
favourable recommendations of Expert Appraisal Committee (Mining) of 
MoEF (August 2012),  the Public Hearing was declared not valid by MoEF 
(December 2014) in terms of  Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
notification 2006 and UCIL was advised to  initiate the process of public 
hearing afresh. UCIL further enquired about the validity  of the baseline data 
which were older than three years. MoEF in August 2014  confirmed that 
fresh Terms of Reference (ToR) has to be submitted. Accordingly,  action 
has been in itiated for fresh TOR application. UCIL has already engaged  
NABET accredited consultant (M/s MECON Ltd.) in October 2014 for 
collection of post-monsoon one season baseline data and preparation of EIA 
report. Prefeasibility  and Form -1 under EIA Notification  2006 are under 
preparation.  Lambapur-Pedagattu uranium project in Telengana  After 
successful Public Hearing for setting up of the project at Lambapur,  
Telengana (previously in undivided Andhra Pradesh), and favourable  
recommendations of the expert commit tee, the No Objection Certificate 
(NOC) was not issued by Government of Andhra Pradesh. However, Andhra 
Pradesh Pollution Control Board (APPCB) had forwarded the application for 
NOC to MOEF on 3 rd  January 2005 mentioning certain issues and concerns 
regarding proximity of the  mining sites to Nagarjunasagar reservoir. The 
project was discussed with the expert  committee and formal clearance from 
MOEF was obtained on 23rd December 2005 with some specific conditions. 
An appeal was filed on 9th January, 2007 aga inst the  Environment 
Clearance awarded to the Lambapur -Pedadagattu Mining project by  MoEF. 
The appeal was heard by the National Environment Appellate Authority  
(NEAA) and was disallowed on merit on 21st November, 2008. However, 
the State Govt had not issued Consent for Establishment (CFE) necessary for 
taking up construction of the project. Application for mining lease and land 
acquisition etc. are pending. In 2011, proposal to divide the State of Andhra 
Pradesh was mooted. As  the proposed project at Lambap ur was falling 
within the future state of Telengana,  UCIL’s applications remained under 
uncertainty for a longtime. Now, fresh initiatives  are being taken to apprise 
of the project to the authorities of newly formed  Telengana State in which 
the project fal ls.  KPM Project in Meghalaya.  After successful Public 
Hearing in June 2007, the environmental clearance  from the Ministry of 
Environment & Forests (MoEF), Govt. of India was received in  December 
2007. An agreement has been made between UCIL and the land o wners in 
May 2007 for acquisition of land on annual lease rent basis. Grant of mining  

lease, Consent for Establishment (CFE), approval of land agreement etc are 
pending with State Government. A meeting with Chief Secretary, 
Government of Meghalaya  was orga nised by Additional Secretary DAE 
along with C&MD, UCIL in May 2013 in  which project details and issues 
related to start of activities were discussed.  Discussions were also held with 
Secretary (Home), Govt of Meghalaya and His  Excellency, Governor of 
Meghalaya. Follow up meetings were held in December  2014, March 2015 
and May 2015 with Chief Secretary, Principal Secretary, Principal  Secretary 
Mining and Geology, Director, Directorate of Mineral Resources and  
Deputy Secretary, Mining and Geology, Government of Meghalaya to speed 
up the project clearance. 
Comments  
 The Committee takes note of the reply.  
Recommendation (Para 13.8) 
 The Committee was given to understand that another major reason 
behind the delay in the projects of UCIL is public protests. The  Committee 
feels that the UCIL should go for massive public outreach in local language 
on the lines of public outreach programme of the Nuclear Power Corporation 
of India to allay the fears of the local people near UCIL mines. 
Action Taken by Government 
Department accepts the recommendations of the honourable 
Committee. In this regard, the following are further submitted.   Discussions 
were held with concerned officials of NPCIL regarding adoption  of suitable 
outreach programs in local languages as undertake n by them. Collection  of 
data and relevant documentations  have been initiated. 
Comments 
 The Committee takes note of the reply.  
INDIAN RARE EARTHS LIMITED 
Recommendation (Para14.6) 
 The Committee understands that India has second largest Rare Earths 
reserves after China and the prices of Rare Earths have increased 
significantly in the recent past. The Committee feels that the Department 
needs to seriously explore the possibilities of increasing the production of 
Rare Earths and if possible by involving pr ivate sector domestic companies 
forming joint ventures with State -run companies for extraction and 
processing of non -radioactive Rare Earth minerals and selling the same in 
international market.  
Action Taken by Government 
Department accepts the recommenda tions of the  honourable 
Committee.   In this regard, the following are further submitted.   As per the 
data available with USGS 2013, the Rare Earth (RE) reserves in  India is 
about 2.8% of the total explored reserves as against China, Russia & USA  
which have about 50%, 17% & 13% of the total reserves respectively.   It is 

important to note that China had dominated the world market in RE since  
mid 1980s by supplying the material at very competitive price. American & 
European processors of RE shifted their pro duction facilities from their 
respective countries to China for securing the supply chain during the 1990s. 
By 2000, China had captured more than 97% of the world RE market. IREL 
stopped its RE production facility at  RED, Aluva in April 2004 due to 
unfavorable market access considering the abundant cheap product available 
in Indian market.   In view of export controls imposed by Chinese 
Government on exports of RE  products, their market availability has 
substantially dried up and this has resulted in  the prices of RE to increase in 
a progressive manner from 2007 onwards. The RE prices peaked around end 
of 2011 and for certain products such as Cerium &  Lanthanum the price 
went as high as over 100 times the prices prevailing in 2005.   Extremely 
high price of th e product coupled with non -availability of the materials  on 
account of Chinese restrictions have triggered the following:  a) Recycle of 
waste RE bearing material and product containing RE after end of its service 
life b) Intense research looking for reduct ion of use of REs in the end 
product and  search for their substitute in various applications such as 
catalysts, magnets,  ceramics, metal alloys, etc.   From 2012, prices of RE 
started declining and presently the prices of Cerium &  Lanthanum have 
come back t o the levels prevailing in the year 2007. However,  prices of 
some products such as Neodymium, Praseodymium continue to be  
comparatively higher than the prices prevailing in 2007.   Monazite is the 
only commercial source of rare earths in India and it is a  prescribed 
substance as per the notification no. SO 61 (E) dated 18.01.2006 issued  
under the Atomic Energy Act 1962. Non radioactive source of RE minerals 
such as Loparite, Bastnaesite are not available in India.  However, RE is not 
prescribed substance and can freely be imported (without  any restriction) 
under the Industrial Policy. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
INDIA BASED NEUTRINO OBSERVATORY PROJECT (INO) 
Recommendation (Para 15.4) 
 The Committee hopes that all the pre -project activities, const ruction 
of the underground and surface facilities will be completed as per the 
schedule by 2016 and the Iron Calorimeter (ICAL) detector will be 
completely ready in four years. 
Action Taken by Government 
Department accepts the  observations of  the  honourable Committee.  
In this  regard, the following are further submitted.   With reference to the 
pre-project activities, Department is currently waiting for the reclassification 
of the Madurai site from residential to mixed educational zone.  We can only 
complete the detector laboratory and the engineering prototype module  after 

receiving this reclassification of land for the Madurai site by the Tamil Nadu 
Government. Another pre -project item is the construction of the approach 
road to the INO site at Pottipura m. This work is currently stalled due to the 
stay order passed  by the Hon’ble High Court. We are currently in the 
process of getting the Tamil Nadu  Pollution Control Board (TNPCB) 
clearance for the construction of INO facilities at  Pottipuram. We are very 
hopeful that Hon’ble High Court will withdraw the stay order after receiving 
the TNPCB clearance and will allow us to complete the remaining preproject 
activities related to the road construction.   It is also to be noted that as 
mentioned in para 15.8 of t he report, the  construction of the underground 
facilities is expected to be completed in four years  and the entire ICAL 
detector will be completed in next 3 years. We will certainly be  able to 
complete this project in a total of 7 years, after receiving th e necessary  
clearances from the Government of Tamil Nadu and the withdrawal of the 
stay order by the Hon’ble High Court. 
Recommendation (Para 15.9) 
The Committee takes note of the joint initiative taken by the 
Department of Atomic Energy and the Department  of Science & 
Technology, in setting up the India -based Neutrino observatory for cutting -
edge research in Neutrino studies.  The Committee recommends that 
necessary budgetary provisions should be made for the research facility in 
particle physics.  
Action Taken by Government 
Department accepts the recommendations of the honourable 
Committee and also  the  Department  is  thankful  to  the committee for   
recognising this important  cutting-edge research facility to be created in 
India and also for recommendin g that  necessary budgetary provisions be 
made available for this research facility in  particle physics. 
Recommendation (Para 15.10) 
 The Committee hopes that observatory in years to come will turn into 
an observatory of excellence providing high quality r esearch facility in 
Neutrino studies.   
Action Taken by Government 
Department accepts the observations of the honourable Committee 
that this Observatory in years to come will turn into an observatory of 
excellence providing high quality research facility i n neutrino studies. We 
are fully confident that Indiabased  Neutrino Observatory will provide high 
quality research facility not only for  neutrino research but also for other 
related science such as search for dark matter,  neutrinoless double beta 
decay and measurement of reactions of interest to 
Astrophysics. 
Comments (Para Nos.15.4, 15.9 & 15.10) 
 The Committee while takes note of the reply.  

Recommendation (Para15.13)  
The Committee, while taking note of the explanation given by the 
Department on disposal  of construction debris and utility of the ICAL 
detector, would like to emphasise that grievances and apprehensions of the 
local people need to be dispelled.  For that purpose, a proper public outreach 
programme to educate the local people about potential benefits of Indian -
Neutrino Observatory should be started in local language and through the 
social media tools.   
Action Taken by Government 
The Department accepts the view of the honourable Committee that  
grievances and apprehensions of the local people need to be dispelled. In this 
regard, action taken by the Department is as follows:  Many science outreach 
programmes at nearby schools and colleges and public outreach programmes 
in nearby villages have been carried out, it is clear that  more needs to be 
done. A network of volunteers in the nearby villages is planned to  be set up 
to take up some educational programs for the schools including organizing 
science camps and other science related activities. Several local area 
development activities are also plan ned through the office of District Rural 
Development Agency.  Many pamphlets on the benefits of INO in Tamil, the 
local language have been  made. An INO Facebook page has also been 
created and being used extensively  for disseminating information on the 
benefits of INO. At present, about 2400  followers are there for this face 
book page and it is hoped that the number of INO  Facebook followers will 
increase in near future. With these various outreach  activities the local 
people may be convinced about the benefits of INO. 
Comments  
 The Committee takes note of the reply. 
TATA MEMORIAL CENTRE (TMC) 
Recommendation (Para 16.4) 
 Reduction of allocation from Rs. 525.00 crore at BE stage in 2014 -15 
to Rs. 391.00 crore at RE for a Centre like TMC is hard to fathom.   
Therefore, considering the gravity of challenge of Cancer looming large over 
the country, the Committee strongly recommends that the Centre should be 
allocated adequate grants. 
Action Taken by Government 
Department accepts the strong recommendation of the C ommittee for 
providing adequate grants to TMC.  The allocation was reduced from Rs.525 
Crore to Rs.391 Crore as  the budget allocated for the procurement of the 
Hadron Therapy Equipment  could not be utilized as the procurement could 
not be finalized as scheduled. 
Comments  
 The Committee takes note of the reply. 
 

Recommendation (Para16.5) 
 The Committee also recommends to the TMC to ensure that the 
enhanced allocation is utilised fully and efficiently in expanding facilities 
and services, particularly in bor der districts and in the far flung area of the 
country especially in the north-east. 
Action Taken by Government 
Department accepts the recommendations of the honourable 
Committee and as recommended by the Committee the TMC is attempting 
to provide its expertise in cancer treatment through the National Cancer Grid 
to the National Cancer Centres spread across the length and breadth of the  
country. Two super specialty cancer centres and hospitals are also being  
established in Punjab and Visakhapatnam. Proposal  for taking over the  Dr. 
B. Barooah Cancer Institute is also under consideration with the Department. 
Comments  
 The Committee takes note of the reply.  
Recommendation (Para 16.9)  
 The Committee commends the work done by the TMC in the area of 
Cancer treatment and Cancer research.  However, in view of the prohibitive 
cost of treatment of cancer for poor and middle class people, the real 
challenge for the Centre is to provide/develop affordable treatment and 
develop tool/instrument for its early detection a nd preventive medicine 
particularly in the far-flung areas of the North East, bordering and backward 
districts of the Country. The Centre should try its level best to live up to the 
expectations.  
Action Taken by Government 
Department accepts the recommend ations of the honourable  
Committee.  Action taken in this regard is given below: 
A blue print has already been evolved for early detection, prevention 
and awareness of cancer as a public health intervention. This has been  
discussed with individual State Governments for implementation. 
Comments  
 The Committee takes note of the reply. 
Recommendation (Para16.13) 
 The Committee notes the functioning of Tata Memorial Centre 
National Facility for Hadron Beam Therapy in Punjab and at Visakhapatnam 
but establishment of cancer hospital at Visakhapatnam and in Punjab has not 
yet taken off the ground. The Committee recommends for upgradation of 
facilities of Cancer Research Centres in the Gangetic belt States and North - 
Eastern region to be completed as per the target  and efforts should be made 
to develop tertiary-level cancer care facilities in each State/Region.  
Action Taken by Government 
Department accepts the recommendations of the Committee in  
developing tertiary -level cancer care facilities in each State/Region.  The 

status of current activities of Tata Memorial Centre (TMC) are as detailed 
below: 
The  Sangrur Regional  Testing  (RT)  facility  is  functional  as  a  
part of the   spoke in  "the hub and spoke"  model cancer treatment. The 
drawings, plan and 
user ma ndate is under finalization for the main hospital in the Mullanpur  
District, Punjab. Tender has been released for pre -qualification of  
contractors. The contract for construction of the hospital in Visakhapatnam  
has been finalized. The work order will be released after obtaining necessary 
approvals. However, OPD services, Chemotherapy Services,  Pathology 
Services, Dispensary Services and Radiological services  (Mammography 
and Ultrasound) have been started at the site and more than  500 patients 
have been trea ted on OPD basis.   As regards the upgradation of Cancer 
Research Centres in the  Gangetic belt states, TMC is in discussion with the 
UP State Government and  the blue print for setting up a cancer hospital has 
already been shared with  them. With regard to se tting up cancer care 
facilities in the North Eastern Region, a proposal is under consideration with 
the Department for taking over  the Dr. B.  Barooah Cancer Institute. The  
National  Cancer Centre in Cachar is  also  being  actively  involved  in  the  
National  Cancer Grid to upgrade the cancer  treatment procedures being 
followed. 
Comments  
 The Committee notes the reply.  
Recommendation (Para 16.14) 
 The Department and its institutes/organisations should proactively 
engage with the State Governments, stake  holders and the farming 
community with a view to identifying the causes of cancer in different 
regions and ways to combat the menace.  
Action Taken by Government 
Department accepts the recommendations of the honourable 
Committee.  Action taken in this regard is given below: 
The Department and the Tata Memorial Centre are actively involved 
in setting up  cancer  registries  in  the  various  regions  of  the country to 
identify the  types and causes of cancer. All support in terms of treatment 
protocols, research and education are being provided to the State 
Governments as and when required. 
Comments  
 The Committee takes note of the reply. 
PUBLIC OUTREACH PROGRAMME 
Recommendation (Para 17.8) 
 The Committee notes that out of Rs. 700.00 crore promised for Reli ef 
& Rehabilitation in Kudankulam, only a miniscule amount of Rs. 89.335 
crore and Rs.75.00 crore for Public awareness and Neighbourhood welfare 

programmes and exhibitions respectively, has been allocated to the 
concerned agencies by the NPCIL and the Gove rnment of India.  The 
Committee notes with concern that there is an urgent need to develop greater 
interest and awareness among the masses, focussing especially in attracting 
the interest of the younger generation towards the subject matter of atomic 
energy and dispel their negative impression towards nuclear power. The 
Committee is of the opinion that the Department should allocate more funds 
for the neighbourhood welfare programmes, and public awareness 
campaigns in order to educate the local people about  the positive aspects of 
nuclear energy. The Department also needs to coordinate with the State 
Government in a better manner for disbursement of welfare packages and 
compensation to the title -holders. The Department should continue to make 
efforts to dispel the apprehensions of people regarding the safely of nuclear 
establishments considering that a comprehensive review of nuclear energy 
Plants has confirmed that our nuclear energy operations meet all the 
requisite international standards on safety. 
Action Taken by Government 
Department accepts the recommendations of  the honourable 
Committee.  In this regard, the following are further submitted.  The land for 
Kudankulam project was acquired in the 1980s. There was no  displacement 
involved. The rehabilitatio n of affected persons whose land was  acquired 
was completed then itself, before the start of construction of the project.   A 
neighbourhood development programme for areas around Kudankulam was  
announced by the Government at a cost of Rs. 500 crore. It comprised of Rs. 
200 crore for infrastructure to be funded by NPCIL and Rs. 300 crore for 
construction of 10,000 houses, to be funded by the DAE.  The projects under 
the programme are being implemented by the agencies of   Tamilnadu state 
government. The releas e of funds by DAE/ NPCIL is being done in  
accordance with a structured mechanism agreed with the state government. 
So far, NPCIL has released Rs. 119.72 crore towards infrastructure projects 
and DAE has  released Rs 75 crore for housing. There has been no s hortage 
of allocation of funds  for the neighbourhood development programmes of 
NPCIL.  DAE through NPCIL is working closely with state governments to 
arrive at  rehabilitation packages; evolving neighbourhood development 
programmes around nuclear power project sites and will continue to do so in 
future to ensure inclusive  growth of neighbourhood communities.  As far as 
public awareness is concerned, adequate funds are being provided  in the 
annual revenue budget by NPCIL separately and distinct from those for  
neighbourhood development programmes. The  programmes, taken up to 
spread awareness and allay apprehensions about nuclear power in a simple,  
understandable and credible manner are being enhanced to increase the 
outreach. In 2014-15, about 12.4 lakh people were reached out. 

The youth form a special thrust area in NPCIL’s public awareness  
programme. There are lecture / presentation programmes conducted in 
schools and  colleges, visits of students arranged to nuclear power stations 
and Hall of nuclear  power (p ermanent exhibition on nuclear power), 
exhibitions organized in various  college technical festivals (like IITs etc.). 
Special programmes like Media Students  Adaptation Programme for 
students of mass media have been instituted. Youth form  the bulk of people  
reached out by NPCIL.   DAE / NPCIL appreciates the recommendation of 
the committee to continue  public awareness programmes and dispel 
apprehensions of the people about  nuclear power and will strive to further 
enhance the ongoing programmes for increased outreach. 
Comments 
 The Committee takes note of the reply.  
POWER SECTOR 
Recommendation (Para 18.10) 
The Committee finds that the projections of the Department, 
particularly, regarding setting up of nuclear power plants are prone to time 
and cost over-run. NPCIL in 2014-15 had planned to produce 34,828 Million 
Units. However, upto December, it could produce only 27,284 Million units.  
Similarly, the operating performance of NPCIL in 2013 -14 was not very 
impressive.  Similarly, as per the Mid -Term Appraisal d ocument, the Fast 
Breeder Reactor at Kalpakkam was supposed to be commissioned by March, 
2012, finally that reactor achieved criticality on 31 December 2014. Target 
for Kudankulam unit -2 was rescheduled from September 2014 to January 
2016. The Committee understands the hurdles were faced by the Department 
but it is of the view that considering the enormous energy challenge and the 
grim energy situation of the country, the Department has to work harder and 
needs to be fully supported by all concerned in this regard. 
Action Taken by Government 
Department accepts the recommendations of the   honourable 
Committee.  In 
this regard, the following are further submitted.   NPCIL’s generation in 
2014-15 was 37,835 Million Units (MU), comprising of  2242 MU of infirm 
generation from KKNPP-1 and commercial generation of 35,593  MU. Thus 
the RE target of 34,828 MU was exceeded.   Similarly, the generation in 
2013-14 was 35,333 MU comprising of 1106 MU  of infirm generation from 
unit 1 of Kudankulam (KKNPP -1) and 34,227 MU of  commercial 
generation, against the RE target of 34,557 MU. 
NPCIL generation has shown an increasing trend, with improved 
availability of  fuel and commissioning of new units (KKNPP -1). 
Kudankulam project (KKNPP 1&2) was delayed because of local protests 
and subsequent time taken in complying with the directives of the Hon. 
Supreme Court,  obtaining various regulatory clearances for the first of a 

kind reactor. All efforts are being put to ensure early completion and start of 
generation from KKNPP-2 (1000 MW). NPCIL notes the recommendation 
of the committee and  will make all efforts to complete its projects on 
schedule. 
Comments  
 The Committee takes note of the reply 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 18.11 & 18.12) 
 The Committee is of the view that the Department need s to accelerate 
the pace of construction of nuclear reactors and reduce the average 
construction time taken from seven -eight years to five years.  Currently, 
India has an installed capacity of 5,780 MWe of nuclear power, including 
the 1,000 MW of electrici ty being generated by recently inducted Unit -I at 
Kudankulam.  The 1,000 mw Unit -II at Kudankulam is also slated to begin 
power production soon.  Five nuclear reactors with a total capacity of 3,300 
mw are under various stages of construction.  In addition , work on 19 new 
reactors, with a cumulative generation capacity of 17,400 MW, is scheduled 
to begin in the next few years.  If all these start producing electricity 
between 2025 and 2027, the total installed capacity would still come to only 
27,840 MW. However, the Integrated Energy Policy in 2006 had projected a 
target of 63,000 MW of nuclear energy by 2032. This still leaves the huge 
gap of 35160 MWe to be covered.  
  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should 
mobilise its resources and intensify its efforts to ensure that the proposed 
nuclear project are completed and commissioned within the scheduled 
deadline in order to achieve the target of producing 63,000 MW of 
electricity through nuclear energy by 2032. 
Action Taken by Government 
Department accepts the recommendations of the honourable 
Committee. In this regard, the following are further submitted. 
NPCIL has achieved gestation period (from first pour of concrete to 
grid connection) of about five years, comparable to internationa l 
benchmarks. While the  gestation period of nuclear power reactors is 
technology and unit specific, the efforts to reduce it are ongoing. 
As regards the ambitious target of reaching a nuclear power capacity 
of 63,000 MW by 2032, the present capacity of 578 0 MW is expected to 
reach 10,080  MW by 2019 on progressive completion of projects under 
commissioning/ construction. The Government had also accorded ‘in 
principle’ approval of the following sites for locating nuclear power projects 
in future, based on bot h indigenous technologies and with foreign co -
operation: 
Location  
 
In cooperation with Capacity (MW) 
Gorakhpur, Haryana  4 x 700 

Chutka, Madhya Pradesh  
Indigenous 
 
2 x 700 
Mahi Banswara, Rajasthan 4 x 700 
Kaiga, Karnataka  2 x 700 
Bhimpur, Madhya Pradesh  4 X 700 
Kudankulam, Tamilnadu  
Russian Federation 
 
4 x 1000 
Haripur, West Bengal 6 x 1000 
 
Jaitapur, Maharashtra France 6 x 1650 
Kovvada, Andhra Pradesh  
United States of America 
 
6 x 1000* 
Chhaya Mithi Virdi, Gujarat 6 x 1000* 
 
*nominal capacity 
It is proposed to set up nuclear power projects in phases of twin units at 
these sites, with an appropriate gap of about 3-4 years between phases.  Two 
projects, viz. GHAVP 1&2 (2X700 MW) at Gorakhpur, Haryana and  
KKNPP 3&4 (2X1000 MW) at Kudanku lam, Tamilnadu have already been 
accorded financial sanction and are being readied for launch. Pre -project 
activities are in progress at other sites. 
The installed nuclear generation capacity by 2031 -32 would depend on 
actual start of projects and their co mpletion, which in turn would be 
contingent to  completion of pre -project activities like land acquisition and 
obtaining statutory clearances, availability of resources, capacity of industry 
to manufacture  equipment, conclusion of techno -commercial discussion in 
respect of reactors to be set up with foreign co-operation etc. 
Comments  
 The Committee takes note of the reply. 
BHARATIYA NABHIKIYA VIDYUT NIGAM LTD. (BHAVINI) 
Recommendation (Para 19.5) 
 The Committee feels that a department like Atomic Energy sh ould 
retrieve both physical and financial the targets to give a philip to Indian 
civilian nuclear programme.  The Committee also notes that setting up of 
Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor, the second stage of the Indian Nuclear 
Power Programme is crucial for the commencement of the third stage 
nuclear power programme for thorium utilisation.  The Committee also notes 
that the target of achieving three stage nuclear power programme leading 
ultimately to development of thorium fuel -based reactors has already bee n 
delayed considerably and to meet the ever -increasing demand of energy, we 
need to accelerate growth of installed capacity of nuclear power projects 
with indigenous technology using domestic fuel.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Department should make concerted efforts to make the 
Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor Unit 2 operational by revised targeted date 
of completion, i.e. January, 2016 and start its commercial operation as 
scheduled.    

Action Taken by Government 
Department accepts the rec ommendations of the honourable 
Committee. In this  regard,  action  is  in  progress  and  efforts  are  being 
made to adhere to the milestones as scheduled. 
Comments  
The Committee notes of the reply. 
 