TWO HUNDRED FORTY EIGHTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 18th December, 2013)
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Forty First Report of the 
Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the 
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
248
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS


Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

41
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED FORTY EIGHTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Forty First Report of the
Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Environment and Forests
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  18 th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  18 th December, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)
4. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—22
5. M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS .................................................................................................. 23—26
6. I NDEX OF R EPORTS ................................................................................................................. 27—40

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
3. Shri M. Rama Jois
4. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
5. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
7. Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi
8. Shrimati Maya Singh
9. Shri Alok Tiwari
10. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
12. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
13. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
14. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase
15. Dr. Ajay Kumar
16. Shri O.S. Manian
17. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
18. Shri Basori Singh Masram
19. Shri Vincent H. Pala
20. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
21. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
22. Shri Ramashanker Rajbhar
23. Shri M.B. Rajesh
24. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
25. Shri Yashvir Singh
26. Shrimati Supriya Sule
27. Shri Pradeep Tamta
28. Shri Joseph Toppo
29. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
30. Shri Ramakant Yadav
31. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Assistant Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present
the Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Forty-eighth Report on the Action Taken
by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations contained in Two Hundred
Forty-first Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Environment and Forests.
2. The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment
and Forests on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Forty-first Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests which
was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8
th May, 2013.
3. There were twenty four recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Forty-first Report
of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received
from the Ministry on 27
th November, 2013.
4. In the meeting held on 17 th December, 2013, the Committee considered the draft Action
Taken Report and adopted the same.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
December, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests

(iv)
ACRONYMS
ACC : Appointment Committee of the Cabinet
ADB : Asian Development Bank
AICOPTAX : All India Coordinated Project on Capacity Building in Taxonomy
CEPI : Comprehensive Environmental Pollution Index
CPCB : Central Pollution Control Board
CSE : Centre for Science and Education
CSR : Corporate Social Responsibility
EFC : Expenditure Finance Committee
EIA : Environmental Impact Assessment
ES : Expenditure Statements
IAP : Integrated Action Plan
LWE : Left Wing Extremism
MEP : Monthly Expenditure Plan
MoEF : Ministry of Environment and Forests
NAP : National Afforestation Programme
NAEB : National Afforestation and Eco-Development Board
NGRBA : National Ganga River Basin Management
NRCD : National River Conservation Directorate
NRCP : National River Conservation Plan
PAPA : Public Health and Air Pollution in Asia Project
PCC : Pollution Control Committee
QEP : Quarterly Expenditure Plan
SOP : Standard Operating Procedure
SRE : Security Related Expenditure
SPCBs : State Pollution Control Boards
UC : Utilisation Certificates
UTPCC : Union Territory Pollution Control Committee
WHO : World Health Organisation
ZSI : Zoological Survey of India

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment
and Forests on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Forty First Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests, which
was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 8th May, 2013. The Committee had made a
total of twenty four recommendations/ observations which called for Action Taken Notes on the
part of the Ministry. Action Taken Notes on the report were received by the Committee on
13
th November, 2013. The Committee, on examination of Action Taken Notes, however is not
satisfied with action taken by the Ministry in respect of eleven recommendations/
observations and would like the Ministry to take further action in respect of such
recommendations as indicated in the Report.
The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee
on the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests are set out in the subsequent
paragraphs:–
Recommendation (Para 7.2)
When the Committee enquired from the Ministry about the achievements in respect of the
above targets, the Ministry did not come out with specific and pointed reply. Going through the
replies, it is very difficult to make out precisely the physical achievements. In reply to the targets
of increasing forest and tree cover by 5 percentage points, the Ministry replied that in order to
achieve the target of 5 per cent, an additional 16.5 million hectares forest and tree cover had to
be obtained by 2012. But the tree planting during the Plan period was around 1.52 million hectare
per year which if multiplied by 5, gives a figure of 7.6 million hectares during the Plan period,
thus showing an overall shortage of plantation in 8.9 million hectares. The Ministry further stated
that given the constraints of land and financial resources, the achievement of the target was
ambitious. With regard to the target of treating all urban waste water by 2011-12 in order to clean
river waters, the Ministry stated that the primary responsibility of treating sewage was with the
Municipalities. The Ministry further added that maintaining cleanliness of rivers required minimum
river water and it was the Ministry of Water Resources, which was the nodal Ministry to ensure
adequate water flow in rivers. The Ministry thus had limited role to play in achievement of this
target. On the target of attaining World Health Organisation standards of Air Quality in all major
cities by 2011-12, the Ministry had a very peculiar reply to offer. The Ministry felt that the notified
National Ambient Air Quality Standards in India, based mostly on United States Environmental
Protection Agency health Criteria (USEPA) documents and not WHO Guidelines which provide a
more realistic and appropriate goal for achieving better air quality in India. Responding to the
monitorable target of enhancing energy efficiency by 20 per cent points by 2016-17. The Ministry
tossed the ball in the court of the Ministry of Power stating that action on enhancement of energy
efficiency and lowering energy intensity was the responsibility of Ministry of Power. The
Committee feels that if the Ministry has to handle the socio-economic monitorable targets given to
it in such a casual and cavalier manner, the very purpose of devising and deciding a target becomes
meaningless. The Ministry should have, while or before fixing the target, thought as to whether
the targets pertained to it or not. But once the targets were set, the Ministry must have made
sincere and serious efforts to meet them in close coordination and cooperation with the other
concerned Ministries. The Committee takes a very serious view on the way and the manner in
which the targets given to the Ministry had been handled. The Committee feels that if the Ministry
was not serious in trying to seriously pursue the targets set, they must not have accepted these

2
monitorable targets at all. The Committee hopes that monitorable socio-economic targets set for the
Twelfth Five Year Plan would not meet the same fate as the targets of the Eleventh Five Year Plan
and therefore, recommends, that the Ministry should seriously and vigorously pursue the targets
and goals set for the Twelfth Five Year Plan and ensure that concrete achievements in respect of
each target are made.
Action taken by Government
No reply has been given.
Comments (Para 7.2)
The Committee is constrained to observe that the Ministry has not sincerely and seriously
studied the report of the Committee as a result of which it has failed to give action taken reply
to the recommendation made in the paragraph. It is also likely that the Ministry has tried to brush
the uncomfortable and hard-hitting observations of the Committee under the carpet. Whatever the
fact of the matter, the Committee takes a very serious view of such a casual approach of the
Ministry towards the recommendation of the Committee and desires that the Ministry would be
more careful in future. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that the
Ministry should seriously and vigorously pursue the targets and goals, so as to ensure that
concrete achievements in respect of each target are made and the repeat of the monitorable
socio-economic targets set in the mid-term appraisal document of the Planning Commission
for the Eleventh Five Year Plan period is obviated.
Recommendation (Para 8.1)
The Ministry was provided an outlay of R10,000.00 crores in the Eleventh Five Year Plan
(2007-12), out of which Environment and Ecology accounted for R3786.01 crores and Forestry
and Wildlife R6213.99 crores. Sector-wise distribution was R1246.01 crores for Environment;
R2540.00 crores for National River Conservation Directorate (NRCD); R2943.99 crores for Forests
and Wildlife; R3150.00 Crores for National Afforestation and Eco-Development Board (NAEB) and
R12.00 crores for Animal Welfare. However, by the end of the Plan period, the actual outlay, based
on year-wise allocation remained at R9231.00 crores with sectoral share of R1913.34 crores;
R2760.75 crores; R2611.44 crores; R1826.47 crores and R119.00 crores for Environment; NRCD;
Forests and Wildlife; NAEB and Animal Welfare respectively. Environment and Ecology thus finally
accounted for R4674.09 crores and Forestry and Wildlife R4556.91 crores. While Environment and
Ecology got R888.08 crores more, Forestry and Wildlife got R1657.08 crores less than the initial
earmarking of Budgetary allocation. There was, however, a reduction of R769.54 crores in the
original outlay for the Eleventh Five Year Plan which got restricted to R9231.00 crores as against
R10000.00 crores. On a comparative analysis of the original/initial vis-a-vis actual Sector-wise
outlay, it is found that while National Afforestation and Eco-Development Board which consists of
the key programme of national afforestation was the worst sufferer, Forests and Wildlife was the
second worst sufferer in terms of reduction in allocation. As against an initial amount of
R3150.00 crores and R2943.99 crores, earmarked under these sectors, the final outlay came down
to R1826.47 crores and R2611.44 crores, showing a reduction of R1323.53 and R332.55 crores
respectively.
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry has requested Planning Commission to enhance the total Plan Outlay of this
Ministry for the remainder of the Twelfth Plan period in order to bridge the gap between financial
outlays and requirements for meeting the physical targets in key programmes of the Ministry,
including for those covering national afforestation and forestry and wildlife sectors.

3
However, to the extent that during the Eleventh Five Year Plan period, attempts were made
through the Plan Coordination Division, in order to redress the lowering of overall annual
accumulative Plan allocations to this Ministry as well as for National Afforestation Programme
(NAP) and Forestry and Wildlife in particular, attention is drawn to the following:
(i) The Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-12) had approved an allocation of R10,000 crore
for the 5 year period. However, by the end of the Plan period, the actual allocation,
based on the year-wise cumulative totals, was lower at R9,231 crore. In terms of the
requests for funds made annually by the Ministry, and funds actually received, broad
sector-wise position is tabulated below. The variations in demand against the funds
received reflect the gap between expectations and realization.
Sector 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 T otal Eleventh
Plan
Annual Actual Annual Actual Annual Actual Annual Actual Annual Actual Annual Actual
Plan Outlay Plan Outlay Plan Outlay Plan Outlay Plan Outlay Plan Outlay
Request Request Request Request Request Request
Environ- 319.3 259.16 294.34 261.38 474.94 291.42 731.93 480.17 966.79 621.21 2787.3 1913.34
ment
NRCD 386.12 340 389.65 340 366.6 577.33 856.71 751.71 1116.2 751.71 3115.28 2760.75
Forests 822.57 371.61 702.31 475 1051.07 599.63 1399.05 592.12 2075.05 573.08 6050.05 2611.44
and
Wildlife
NAEB 2061.09 359.23 590 398.62 505.75 386.62 942.05 352 605 330 4703.89 1826.47
Animal 22.95 21 36.54 25 25.09 25 34.24 24 29 24 147.82 119
Welfare
T
OTAL : 3612.03 1351 2012.84 1500 2423.45 1880 3964.01 2200 4792.04 2300 16804.37 9231
(ii) It is added that concerted efforts were made particularly in the last two years of the
Eleventh Plan to bridge the funds deficit, so that Eleventh Plan activities could be
taken up in their entirety. Thus, against MoEF’s projected demand of R3,964.01 crore
for the Annual Plan 2010-11, Planning Commission approved Plan Outlay of
R2,200 crore. During the Annual Plan 2010-11, additional fund requirement of
R1,415.97 crore was proposed by the Ministry at RE stage. However, in Pre-Budget
meeting held by Secretary, Department of Expenditure, the Plan RE Budget 2010-11
was retained at same level as BE 2010-11, i.e. R2,200 crore. For the Annual Plan
2011-12, MoEF had estimated its fund requirement at R5,348.87 crore. However, the
actual allocation made by Planning Commission was only R2,300 crore. Due to lesser
allocation of Plan funds, the Ministry had no option but to reduce its targets.
(iii) Even for the Twelfth Plan period, the Ministry had requested Planning Commission to
enhance the total Plan Outlay of this Ministry for the remainder of the Twelfth Plan
period in order to bridge the gap between financial outlays and requirements for
meeting the physical targets in key programmes of the Ministry, including for those
covering national afforestation and forestry and wildlife sectors.
Comments (Para 8.1)
The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation (9.6)
The Committee expresses its deep anguish over the declining percentage of share for the
Ministry of Environment and Forests in the overall Central Plan outlay in the successive Five Year

4
Plans/Annual Plans despite increasing importance of environmental issues. The Committee takes
a very serious note of the fact that while in the Eleventh Five Year Plan, the percentage share
was 0.83 per cent, it has gone down by more than 50 per cent to 0.41 per cent in the Twelfth
Five Year Plan. The Committee is of the considered view that Planning Commission must not
consider Budgetary Support made to Environment and Forests as non-productive, non-priority
and hence avoidable. The Planning Commission needs to understand and realize that the damage
done to environment, disturbance made to the ecological balance can’t be easily repaired and
restored. It, therefore, becomes expedient that the very process of degradation and degeneration
of environmental resources be contained and minimized to the possible extent though preventive
and curative measures before it is too late and it is possible inter-alia by mounting environmental
surveillance and reinforcing monitoring mechanism – the task assigned to Ministry of
Environment and Forests. For doing all these sufficient monetary support is undoubtedly
required. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Planning Commission must act on its
own observation of allocating 5 per cent of the Annual Central Sector Outlay to Environment and
Forestry Sectors in right earnest. The Committee also recommends that Ministry of Environment
and Forests must not only forcefully and vigorously take up this matter with the Planning
Commission but also apprise it of the details of response gathered from the Planning Commission
in this regard. The Committee also recommends that the Planning Commission must ensure full
allocation of the approved outlay during the Twelfth Plan period and should not resort to any cut
at RE Stage in any of the Annual Plans unless Ministry itself is not in a position to utilise the
full allocation. In any case, full requirements of the Ministry of Environment and Forests must
be met. The Ministry must, at the same time, make all out efforts to make full utilisation of
allocated budgetary outlay so as not to provide any alibi to the Planning Commission for
reduction at RE Stage.
Action Taken by Government
The recommendations of the Committee have been forwarded to the Planning Commission
with the request to actively consider allocating 5% of the Annual Central Sector Outlay to this
Ministry as observed by them, which is being vigorously pursued. The Planning Commission has
also been requested to ensure that the full requirements of this Ministry are met so that the
Ministry is able to fulfill its mandated tasks more effectively and efficiently. The Committee would
be apprised of the response of the Planning Commission as soon as it is received.
For the purpose of fuller utilization of allocated budgetary outlays, regular monitoring of
expenditure under various Schemes administered by the Ministry has been instituted at Divisional
Head level, with review of progress made at higher levels. This monitoring is carried out both at
Central Government as well as field levels. Besides, major Schemes of the Ministry also have an
in-built independent monitoring mechanism to ensure effective and timely utilisation of funds.
Electronic Clearance of funds for various Schemes/Projects has also contributed to quicker and
faster disbursement of funds. In addition, inclusion of the Ministry in Modified Cash Management
System w.e.f. 2012-13 has also facilitated better financial planning and proper and effective
utilisation of funds.
Comments (9.6)
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Para 10.6)
The Committee feels that this phenomenon of underutilization of allocated outlay is a very
serious matter towards which the Ministry needs to focus its attention in a more pragmatic and

5
professional manner and initiate concrete measures. Merely, reemphasizing and reiterating that the
Ministry has already in place a robust and sound monitoring mechanism would not do any good
particularly in view of the fact underutilization of allocated budgetary resources has turned out
to be a recurring phenomenon. It becomes all the more imperative, because underutilization of
allocated resources provides the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance with an alibi
to make less allocation in the next year and also allows them to use it as a tool to reduce the
approved BE outlay at the RE Stage. The Minister of Finance has made it amply clear in his
budget speech. The Ministry can justify its demand for additional resources only when it is able
to first utilise the entire resources allocated to it. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that the Ministry of Environment and Forests must take sincere, serious and potent
efforts by way of meticulous planning, timely implementation and stricter monitoring of schemes/
projects and should not come out with the same lame and routine excuses for underutilization
year after year.
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry has taken up sincere, serious and potent efforts for ensuring maximum
utilisation of funds allocated to it covering all three aspects, namely, meticulous planning, timely
implementation and stricter monitoring. In conformance with the Modified Cash Management
System, Quarterly as well as Monthly Expenditure Plans (QEP/MEP) have been drawn up for each
Sub-Scheme. At the end of the first Quarter (April-June 2013-14), a detailed review has been
carried out and efforts intensified towards bridging any expenditure gap in any Sub-Scheme.
Monthly monitoring of progress made in timely implementation of each Sub-Scheme and meeting
the financial and physical targets has also been taken up. Apart from the tools already existing/
available for ensuring maximum utilisation of funds allocated to it, the Ministry also proposes to
require the Subject Divisions concerned to prepare a detailed schedule of expenditure against their
request/demand for grants well in advance of the following Financial Year. As a result of the
strengthened monitoring as well as review of progress of expenditures against the annual outlay of
R2,430/- crore in each of the two financial years (2012-13 and 2013-14) at BE stage, as of
31
st July, 2013 sanctions of expenditures across all Plan Schemes amounted to R672.06 crore,
resulting in a utilisation ratio of 27.66% which is significantly higher than expenditure amounting
to R458.80 crore or utilisation ratio of 18.80% achieved during the comparable period in the
previous year (as of 31
st July, 2012).
At the stage of finalisation of BE, the Subject Divisions would also be required to define
clear-cut and reasoned timelines according to which the schedule of expenditure vis-à-vis  the
finalised BE would be executed. In addition, executing agencies for the Plan Schemes would be
advised to take advance action with regard to submission of documents, including duly audited
Utilisation Certificates (UC) and Expenditure Statements (ES) along with requisite clearances/
approvals towards meeting the eligibility conditions for drawl of funds, so that the process of
expenditure could start immediately after allocation of grants, thereby minimising the timelag
between allocation of grants and actual incurring of expenditure. These strengthened efforts may
enable achievement of higher expenditures even when the actual outlay provided by the Planning
Commission falls short of the BE proposed by the Ministry as the Subject Divisions concerned
would have opportunity to raise expenditures further by the RE stage, thereby enabling placing
of demands for additional funds at RE stage for favourable consideration of the Planning
Commission.
Comments (Para 10.6)
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the steps taken by the Ministry would
help address the perennial problem of underutilisation of allocated funds.

6
Recommendation (10.7)
The Committee also notes that the Ministry has not been getting annual allocations as per
the ratio of outlay approved for the Twelfth Five Year Plan. If the total approved outlay of
R17874.00 crores for the entire Twelfth Plan period be evenly distributed among the 5 Annual
Plans, the average allocation comes to approximately R3547.80 crores as per Annual Plan. The
Committee finds that for 2012-13, the first year of the Plan period, the plan allocation at BE level
was less by R1144.80 crores and if it is seen in the perspective of the RE allocation, this gap
further widens to R1747.80 crores which is almost the half of the annual allocation during the
Twelfth Plan period. The Committee taking a serious view in this matter, feels that by doing this,
Planning Commission is making a mockery of approved outlay for the Twelfth Plan period. The
Committee therefore, recommends that the Planning Commission must desist from such practices
and allocate budgetary resources in the Annual Plans in proportion it is due to the Ministry or else
the very purpose of Five Year Plan allocations gets defeated and falsified.
Action Taken by Government
The recommendations of the Committee have been forwarded to the Planning Commission
for favourable consideration and higher allocation of Plan funds at RE stage for 2013-14 and also
for financing the remaining three annual plans and requirements of various schemes/programmes
of the Ministry in the Twelfth Plan period. The Committee would be apprised of the response of
the Planning Commission as soon as it is received.
Comment (10.7)
The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation (12.2)
The Committee takes a very serious view on the drastic cut imposed on the proposed
demand of the Ministry in the year 2013-14, which would adversely affect such important and
crucial projects, such as climate change, National River Conservation Plan, National Afforestation
Programme, Green Indian Mission, Project Tiger etc. Making such a drastic reduction for such
crucial programmes is not at all justified. The Committee feels that the Ministry was very much
within its rights to ask the Plan outlay of R4690.00 crores which included the 1/5th share out of
the approved outlay of R17874.00 crores for the Twelfth Plan period amounting to
R3574.80 crores plus the arrear of the last year allocation to the tune of R1144.80. Besides, aspects
like strengthening of the institutions, such as, Central Pollution Control Board and its zonal offices,
Wildlife Crime Control Bureau and Regional offices of the Ministry, National Green Tribunal, etc.
are long overdue and need to be addressed urgently. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
Planning Commission must restore the projected demand of the Ministry at the RE Stage so that
the Ministry is able to carry on its proposed activities properly. At the same time, the Committee
also recommends that the Ministry of Environment and Forests should make all out efforts to
spend the entire budgetary resources allocated to it.
Action Taken by Government
The recommendations of the Committee have been forwarded to the Planning Commission
for favourable consideration and higher allocation of Plan funds at RE stage for 2013-14 and also
for financing the remaining three annual plans and requirements of various schemes/programmes of
the Ministry in the Twelfth Plan period. The Committee would be apprised of the response of the
Planning Commission as soon as it is received.

7
The Ministry, on its part, would spare no efforts not only to utilise the budget allocated to
it but also to do so at a brisk rate that would ensure higher utilisation by RE Stage. This would enable
the Ministry to seek more funds for fulfilling its mandated tasks more effectively and efficiently.
Comment (12.2)
The Committee notes the reply.
Observation (Para 13.2)
While the Committee takes note of the huge gap between availability of fund vis-à-vis its
requirement, it feels that the entire required funding cannot be done by the Government of India,
owing to budgetary constraints, although, it is of the considered view that volume of funding from
the Government of India must be reasonably raised. In such a situation, the Committee feels that
the Ministry should explore the possibilities of generating resources from sources other than the
Government of India. These sources could be managing loans from the Asian Development Bank
(ADB), the World Bank or the Japanese aid. Yet another source could be strict enforcement of
Polluters Pay Principle, so as to raise additional resources; making adequate provision for civil
administrative adjudication to fast track levy of penalty, etc. by making environment laws more
stringent and effective. Integrating environmental elements/factors into cost benefit analysis while
making public, as well as, private investment decisions for more prudent allocation of resources.
The Ministry may also think in terms of persuading Ministry of Finance to levy some green tax/
cess, on the lines of Education Cess/service tax, etc. The Ministry may also synergize its activities
with projects/programmes of those sectors of the economy which contribute to the volume of
pollution the most, i.e., the Transport Sector, Energy Sector, Oil Sector, Mining Sector, etc. and
require diversion of more forest land for non-forestry purposes. One such effort has been made
in Visakhapatnam, where the local public sector Units have voluntarily undertaken the task of
planting 40 lakh saplings in a span of five years and the progress of this experiment has been quite
satisfying. Such initiative can very well be replicated in other such cities/towns which are bearing
the brunt of pollution because of Public Sector/ Private Sector units located there. Over and above,
the compensatory afforestation fund having huge amount of money, i.e. , R1718.20 Crores
(Approx.) as principal amount as on 31
st March, 2012 and R384.59 Crores in the form of interest
accrued on the principal amount put into the fund could also be utilised for the purpose of
afforestation and regeneration of degraded forestland. Expenditure being incurred towards Corporate
Social Responsibility by the Public Sector Undertaking, Banks, etc. may also be channelised
towards forestry activities by persuading them to earmark certain amount of funds available for
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) for this purpose.
Action Taken by Government
No reply given.
Comment (Para 13.2)
The crux of the observations made in the para was to make the Ministry think of
exploring possibilities of raising the much needed resources from sources other than
Government of India, particularly through such measures as strict enforcement of ‘polluters
pay principle’; fast tracking levy of penalty; making environment laws more stringent and
effective; persuading Ministry of Finance to levy some green tax/cess on the lines of
education cess/service tax, etc. Ministry by not responding to this observation, has shown its
lack of interest to tap sources others than public funds which is unfortunate. The Committee
is of the opinion that by resorting to these means, the Ministry would be in a position to mop

8
up much needed additional resources which would give boost to its afforestation programme.
The Committee desires that the Ministry should seriously try to tap these sources.
Recommendation (Para 14.2)
While, the Committee takes note of the efforts being made by the Ministry in this regard,
it feels that concerted efforts must continue to be made in this regard so as to ensure that this
additional source of funding becomes available for afforestation. The Committee also recommends
that since it is a policy matter to be decided at the higher level, the Ministry should, besides taking
up this matter with the Department of Public Enterprises, also take this matter to the Cabinet for
an early decision.
Recommendation (Para 14.3)
The Committee understands The Companies Bill, 2012 mandates that any company having -
(i) net worth of R500.00 crores or more; (ii) turnover of R1000.00 crores or more; and
(iii) net profits of R5.00 crores or more in a financial year, shall spend at least 2 per cent of
average net profits of the last three years in pursuance of Company’s Corporate Social
Responsibility. The Bill further lists the activity which may be included by Companies in their
Corporate Social Responsibility Policies. Ensuring environmental sustainability has inter-alia been
included as one such permissible activity. The said Bill is yet to be passed by the Parliament. The
Committee recommends that Ministry of Environment and Forests may take up the matter with the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs for making necessary amendments in the Bill to particularly provide
for afforestation as an activity which could be undertaken under CSR and further to make it
mandatory that at least 50 per cent of the funds available for CSR shall be spent on afforestation.
By doing this, Ministry would be able to generate huge additional resources for massive
afforestation.
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) has been consistently pursuing both with
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and Ministry of Heavy industries and Public enterprises, to make
provisions/guidelines to enhance the committed investment from CSR to 50% for massive tree
plantation in the interest of the welfare of our society.
Ministry has received response from Ministry of Corporate Affairs vide letter no 7/7/2011-
CL-I dated 8
th May, 2013, stating that the provisions on Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) have
been provided in the Companies Bill, 2012 under clause 135 read with Schedule VII of the Bill.
The said Bill has been passed by the Lok Sabha on 18.12.2012 and is awaiting approval of the
Rajya Sabha. The provisions of clause 135(CSR) shall be implementable after the Companies
Bill, 2012 is passed by both the Houses of Parliament, assented to by the President and notified
along with relevant rules.
As per latest observations of the Committee, MoEF has taken up the matter with Ministry
of Corporate affairs for making necessary amendments in the Companies Bill, 2012, and consider
bringing in a provision for earmarking 50% of the 2% CSR for afforestation and tree planting while
forming the CSR Guidelines.
Department of Public Enterprises has also been requested by MoEF to consider provisions
to enhance the committed investment from CSR to 50% in the area of afforestation and bring in
a proposal for cabinet approval to this effect, being the Nodal Department.

9
Comment (Paras 14.2 and 14.3)
The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation (Para 15.7)
The Committee expresses its serious concern over the sorry state of affairs as regards
monitoring/reinforcement of forestry and environmental laws which has resulted in serious
environmental and ecological problems badly affecting the inhabitants of the nearby areas. Some of
the industrial clusters have become so polluted due to reckless and blatant discharge of effluents
and emissions that the residents are facing serious health hazards and even congenital problems.
If the situation is allowed to go as it is, a time will come when people would be forced to rise
against the proposed projects and hamper their progress. The Committee, therefore, is of the
opinion that the before the situation goes beyond control and takes ugly turn, the Ministry needs
to act in a serious and sincere manner. It, therefore, recommends that the proposals for enhancing
the number of regional offices of the Ministry and strengthening the existing ones should be
undertaken at the earliest, possibly during this financial year itself. The Committee also
recommends that the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance should provide the Ministry with
adequate financial resources to enable the Ministry to achieve its desired objectives. The Committee
further recommends that apart from enhancing the number of regional offices and strengthening
them, the Ministry should consider further devolution of power and authority to the regional
offices.
Action Taken by Government
Regional Offices of the Ministry are responsible for monitoring of conditions stipulated in
the forest and environment clearances. To improve frequency and effectiveness of monitoring,
MoEF has imitated measures to increase number of Regional Offices from Six to ten by opening
four new Regional Offices at Dehradun, Ranchi, Chennai and Nagpur. Approval of Expenditure
Finance Committee (EFC) for the same has already been obtained. Approval of cabinet for creation
of posts in the Addl. Principal Chief Conservator of Forests at each of these four new Regional
Offices is being sought.
To facilitate monitoring in an organised and systematic manner, a draft policy for
Inspection, Verification, Monitoring, Identification of Forests and Overall procedure for grant of
forest clearance is being formulated.
Comment (Para 15.7)
The Committee is not at all happy with the progress made in regard to establishing
the four new regional offices of the Ministry which is moving at a snail’s pace. Further, the
Ministry has not responded to the issue of strengthening its existing regional offices by
supplementing staff strength and further devolution of power and authority to them. The
Committee, reiterating its recommendation desires that the bottlenecks in the effective
functioning of existing regional offices be removed and the process of setting up of four
additional regional offices be expedited so as to make them operational at the earliest.
Recommendation (15.8)
In view of the fact that the magnanimity of pollution has been slowly, but certainly
acquiring serious proportions, the Committee, in order to extract the views of the Ministry of
Environment and Forests on the perception that protection of environment has not been accorded
due priority by the State Governments, particularly in view of fact that without their support and

10
cooperation, it would not be possible for the Central Government alone to ensure environmental
protection. The Ministry of Environment and Forests evaded a direct reply and emphasised on the
fact that the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 empowered the Central Government to take
measures to protect the environment which included the measures with respect to coordination of
actions by the State Governments and such other matter as the Central Government deemed
necessary or expedient for the purpose of securing the effective implementation of the provisions
of the Act. The Committee is of the considered view that it may not be practically feasible for the
Central Ministry of Environment and Forests alone to fight and tackle the menace of rapid rise in
pollution witnessed all over - air, water, land, noise, etc. through out the length and breadth of the
country, it being a gigantic task. Necessary cooperation and support from the State Governments
is definitely required in this regard. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of
Environment and Forests should seriously think of including environment in the Concurrent List of
the Constitution of India so as to help the State Governments create their own institutional
mechanism like establishing a Department of Environment and Forests; enact, notify and enforce
own laws and rules to ensure compliance of relevant environmental norms and take such other
measures as deemed appropriate by the respective State Government. Appropriate action should be
taken by the Ministry in this regard and the action initiated in this direction may be intimated to
the Committee.
Action Taken Note
The recommendation of the Committee has been considered in the Ministry and it is felt
that the existing legislations/framework/institution are sufficient enough and the Constitution
amendment for inclusion of Environment in the Concurrent List is not desirable at this stage.
Comment (Para 15.8)
The Ministry’s stand to maintain the status quo gives an impression that the Ministry does
not want to loosen its stranglehold over mechanism to protect the environment and forests
notwithstanding the fact that its record in protecting the environment has not been very
encouraging, be it because of shortage of staff or inadequate infrastructure. The Committee is of
the opinion that the Ministry of Environment and Forests with its headquarters in Delhi and some
regional offices at various places, will always find it difficult to control the rapid pace at which
the health of environment and conditions of natural resources is deteriorating day by day unless
and until the State Governments are made effective partners in protection of the environment. The
Committee as such reiterates its recommendation and would like to be apprised of the factors that
have weighed in favour of maintaining status quo and what is the alternate solution with the
Ministry given the fact that Ministry has not been very successful in preventing environmental
degradation.
Recommendation (Para 16.2)
But the Committee finds that the institution of CPCB, although, enjoys autonomous status
on paper, its autonomy is often found to be compromised in practice. The Committee finds that
post of Chairman, CPCB has been lying vacant for the last over one year, and additional charge
given to a senior officer of Ministry of Environment and Forests. This is not the isolated incidence
of assumption of additional charge of Chairman, CPCB by officers of the Ministry of Environment
and Forests and it has happened in the past also. The Committee in its 192
nd Report on the
Functioning of Central pollution Control Board had recommended that the Chairman, CPCB should
be a person having knowledge, experience and expertise in dealing with environmental issues.
Moreover, such ad-hoc arrangements adversely impact functioning of CPCB. When asked about the
reasons for not filling up the vacancy on regular basis, the Ministry stated that the selection

11
process of the post of Chairman has been kept under abeyance on account of the interim orders
passed by the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi in Nagin Nanda Vs. Union of India. It was also assured
that the Ministry would undertake the process of screening the applications and interviewing the
candidates after partial stay orders of the Hon’ble Court was vacated. Ideally, the process of
selection of suitable/eligible candidate should be completed well before the date the Chairman is to
demit the office and every effort made to appoint a professionally qualified person to man the post.
In a situation where for reasons beyond control of Ministry, the post cannot be filled up by the
date the incumbent Chairman CPCB demits office, a practice may be adopted to give temporary
charge to the senior most Member of CPCB.
Action Taken Note
The process of selection to the post of chairman, Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB)
was started on 1st December, 2011 i.e. 3 months before the completion of the tenure of Prof. S.P.
Gautam the then chairman. However the selection could not be materialized as the Hon’ble MEF
expressed the view that the Recruitment Rules (RRs) for the post of chairman, CPCB were not
sound enough to attract the suitable candidates who should have the scientific knowledge, technical
expertise and the seniority to become the Principal Scientific Adviser to the Government of India.
The selection process was therefore cancelled and the RRs were re-visited to make them sound
enough as per the orders of Hon’ble MEF. Again the post was re advertised on 6.12.2012. The
applications have been received but as the Hon’ble Committee has rightly observed that the process
has remained in abeyance on account of interim orders passed by the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi
in Nagin Nanda Vs Union of India. The Appointment Committee of the Cabinet (ACC) has scrapped
the panel recommended by the then selection committee in its meeting held on 29.2.2012 in which
the names of Dr. Nagin Nanda was recommended. In view of the scrapping of the panel, this
Ministry has moved an application through the Central Government Counsel for withdrawal of the
partial stay ordered by Hon’ble High Court of Delhi and allow this Ministry to restart the selection
process. Since the writ petition filed by Dr. Nagin Nanda has been dismissed by the Hon’ble High
Court Delhi on 29.05.2013, the selection process will now be completed expeditiously. The
additional charge of the post of the Chairman, CPCB is entrusted to a Senior Officer of the
Ministry of the level of Joint Secretary/Additional Secretary who is well versed with the functions
of CPCB and is able to interact with senior authorities in various concerned Ministries and
Departments. These senior officers are quite sensitive to the importance of mandate of CPCB and
carry out the duties and responsibilities attached to the post of chairman, CPCB with diligence.
They are also quite sensitive to the autonomous nature of the organization.
Comment (Para 16.2)
The Committee is of the considered opinion that there can be no justification,
whatsoever, for assigning additional charge of Chairman, CPCB to one of its officers
howsoever senior and well versed with functions of CPCB he may be, as such an
arrangement impinges on the autonomous character of CPCB. The Committee also notes
with concern that though the writ petition filed by Nagina Nanda was dismissed in May,
2013, the selection of Chairman, CPCB is still not complete. The Committee, therefore,
reiterates its recommendation.
Observation (Para 16.5)
The Committee takes note of some of the disturbing news appearing in the media in the
recent past and disturbing data available with the Committee. One, such report stated that air
pollution was the 5th biggest killer in India, other reports related to hazardous smog like situation
in the making in the Indian cites due to excessive air pollution. As per the report appearing in the
media, close to half of cities are reeling under severe particulate pollution while newer pollutants

12
like Nitrogen Oxide, Ozone and air toxins are worsening public health challenge. As per the Annual
Report 2012-2013 of the Ministry, 131 cities exceed the permissible limit of PM 10 which is as high
as 62 per cent and 19 cities exceed the level of NO 2. Continuous growth of municipal solid waste
generation in urban areas of the country has also emerged as one of the biggest polluters of
environment. According to the latest survey of CPCB in 60 major cities of the country, the total
municipal solid waste generated is 50,592 tons per day, while the country wide generation is
estimated to be of the volume of 1,50,000 tons per day. Out of the above, only a small portion
is being processed and the remaining waste is dumped in an open air leading to environmental and
health hazards in cities and towns. As per CPCB assessment, India generates 56 lakhs tonnes of
plastic waste annually with Delhi alone amounting for a staggering 690 tonnes a day. Out of the
total plastic waste generated in the country only approximately 60 per cent is collected and
recycled, while the rest remain uncollected and littered. 43 out of the 88 prominent industrial
clusters have been found to be critically polluted, based on Comprehensive Environmental Pollution
Index (CEPI), which takes into account pollution in water, land (ground water) and air with
Ankaleshwar and Vapi in Gujarat scoring 88.50 and 88.09 respectively on the CEPI scale. The CEPI
score of the neighbouring towns of Delhi is as high as 87.37 of Ghaziabad; 78.90 of NOIDA and
77.07 of Faridabad. The Committee, in order to have an authentic information on the above matter
asked the Ministry as to whether air pollution, in fact, as per the assessment conducted by Centre
for Science and Education had actually emerged as the fifth leading cause of death in the country
and whether close to half of cities of our country were under severe particulate pollution. The
Ministry admitted that the Centre for Science and Education (CSE) had published a Report titled
“Mobility Crises Agenda for Action – 2010” which included the results of study conducted by
World Health Organisation (WHO), Health Effect Institutes, Public Health and Air Pollution in Asia
(PAPA) Project, World Bank, etc. on air pollution, health, cancer on mortality studies in India.
However, it was stated that the results were indicative and appeared to be not conclusive because
the effects of air pollution were additive and synergistic and included range of variation and
cumulative factors like food habits, socioeconomic status, medical history, genetic problems, stress,
etc. The Ministry further went on to add that it seemed that the estimate was based on correlation/
estimation in absence of any documentary evidence since details of death/illness were not
documented in majority of hospitals. Finally, it stated that CPCB had not conducted any study on
mortality due to air pollution in the country.
Action Taken by Government
No reply has been given.
Recommendation (Para 16.6)
The Committee feels that the Ministry should not outrightly reject the findings of the study
conducted jointly by national and international institutes of repute and credible background unless
it has credible evidence to prove otherwise. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should
conduct a study of its own, on mortality due to air pollution in major Indian cities and in case
the study confirms the findings of the Report published by the Centre for Science and Education,
take urgent remedial measures to prevent the adverse impacts of air pollution on health of citizens.
Action Taken by Government
Any study on mortality due to Air Pollution in major Indian cities and the subsequent action
on the findings of such a study is the domain of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Therefore
this Ministry can only collaborate in the area of activity of that Ministry as the public health is their
concerned. In case the Ministry of Health and Fa mily Welfare undertake such a study this Ministry/

13
CPCB may provide necessary assistance expertise in their endeavor. This recommendation may
therefore be taken up by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
Comment (Para 16.5) and (Para 16.6)
The Committee had enquired from the Ministry to ascertain the authenticity and veracity of
the study conducted by the Centre for Science and Education, which inter-alia claimed that air
pollution has emerged as the fifth leading cause of death in the country and close to half of cities
of our country were under severe particulate pollution. The Ministry responded with a very detailed
and authoritative rebuttal saying that results were indicative and appeared not to be conclusive
because the effects of air pollution were additive and synergistic and included range of variation
and cumulative factor like food habits, socioeconomic status, medical history, genetic problems,
stress, etc. Surprisingly, the Ministry has now taken a different view and come out with the
response that the matter falls under the domain of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. What
is more baffling is the Ministrt’s stand that this recommendation may be taken up by the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare. It seems the Ministry has not taken the trouble of even forwarding
the recommendations of the Committee to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The
Committee expresses its serious displeasure at the callous and casual manner in which the Ministry
has dealt with the recommendation of the Committee.
Recommendation (16.9)
The Committee expresses its serious concerns over the rapid rise in all types of pollution
and feels that unless some serious and effective steps are taken by the CPCB, the situation would
continue to go from bad to worse; assume alarming proportions in days to come and prove to be
detrimental for the entire country. The Committee feels that in the given alarming scenario,
adequate expansion and strengthening of monitoring and enforcing agencies is the need of the hour
so that the situation, at least, does not deteriorate further. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the zonal offices of CPCB proposed to be opened in Chennai and Chandigarh must be
expedited and made functional at the earliest possible. Efforts should also be made to further
increase the number of zonal offices so that effective and successful monitoring of projects /
polluting units could be undertaken. Besides, the report of CPCB for strengthening the existing
zonal offices of CPCB must also be given due consideration and follow up action on it be taken
in a time bound manner. The Committee also expresses its concern over the fact that the CPCB
has not been making optimum utilisation of the budgetary resources made available to it during the
last 2 years. In 2011-12 as against the Plan allocation of R40.00 crores, it could utilise R38.81
crores while in 2012-13, out of R42.00 crores, RE allocation came down to R34.00 crores,
the expenditure was only to the tune of R25.50 crores as on 13th March, 2013. The Committee
is happy to note that this year budgetary allocation under Plan Head has been substantially enhanced
to R57.72 crores as compared to the last year which in percentage terms works out to 2.4 per-
cent. The Committee recommends that the Central Pollution Control Board should fully utilize this
allocated outlay and the Ministry of Environment and Forests should take prompt steps to address
the problems afflicting the CPCB, i.e., appointment of its regular Chairman, expansion and
strengthening of zonal offices, etc.
Action Taken by Government
CPCB envisages intensifying and strengthening the network of Water Quality, Ambient Air
Quality and Noise Monitoring stations with the active involvement of State Pollution Control Boards
(SPCBs), Pollution Control Committee (PCCs). The strengthening of zonal offices and opening of
two new zonal offices at Chennai and Chandigarh are priority items and all efforts are underway

14
to materialize the decision. As regards the optimum utilization of the budgetary resources available
to CPCB, it is worthwhile to mention here that on account of austerity measures and other financial
decisions like reduction of the budget allocation in the RE are the major causes for CPCB not being
able to utilize the allocated outlay. In fact CPCB has fully utilized the released money from its Plan/
Non-Plan allocation. In case of continuing project, the request for the current financial year’s the
non-plan allocation have been submitted by CPCB to the Ministry and amounts have been allowed
to carry forward to the current financial year with due approval of the competent authority.
Comment (Para 16.9)
The Committee is not convinced by the response given by the Ministry as it had
categorically mentioned in its report that CPCB, out of its RE allocation of R34.00 crores
in 2012-13 could utilise only R25.50 crores as on 13
th March, 2013. Since, it has been
mentioned in the reply that CPCB has fully utilised the released money from its Plan/Non-
Plan allocation, it means that in the month of March, 2013 CPCB has utilised more than
30 per cent of its annual allocation, which indicates heavy rush of spending at the end of
the financial year. The Committee would like to know the details of expenditure made
between 14
th to 31 st March, 2013 and the reasons for heavy rush of utilisation of funds at
the end of financial year. So far as strengthening of zonal offices and opening of two new
zonal offices are concerned, the Ministry has simply stated that they are priority items and
all efforts are underway to materialize the decision. Instead of making a general statement,
the Ministry should come out with the detailed efforts made by it thus far. The Committee,
therefore, reiterates its recommendation and wants that the details of the steps taken to
setup new zonal offices and strengthening of the existing zonal offices may be furnished to
the Committee.
Recommendation (Para 17.2)
While, the Committee appreciates the measures taken by the Ministry to streamline the
environment and forestry clearances which would facilitate speedy execution of large developmental
projects in the plains, it finds that even smaller projects in the hilly Himalayan Region are held up
in the absence of required clearances. Smaller projects involving requirement of forestry clearance
for some 5 kms. or 10 kms. roads, building hospital has been hanging fire since long. The
Committee feels that there is a need to adopt to positive approach to give clearance to these
Projects which are badly required for development of the Himalayan States, particularly,
Uttarakhand. The Committee also came to know that permission for small irrigation projects,
cutting of dry bamboo, etc. in tribal areas is not given in the garb of various laws. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry should look into all such issues and take necessary measures to
facilitate speedy clearance of projects required for development of the Himalayan and tribal region.
Action Taken by Government
To boost development of rural and tribal areas, general approval has been granted under
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, for diversion of forest land for public utility development projects
of area involving less than one hectare in each case, to be executed by Government Departments,
namely, Schools, Dispensary/hospital, Electric and telecommunication lines, Drinking water, Water/
rainwater harvesting structures, Minor irrigation canal, Non-conventional sources of energy, Skill
up-gradation/vocational training centre, Power sub-stations, Communication posts and Police
establishments like police stations/outposts/border outposts/watch towers, in sensitive areas.
General approval has also been granted under Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, for
underground laying of optical fibre cables, underground laying of telephone lines and underground
laying of drinking water supply pipelines.

15
As a special measure to boost development of basic infrastructure in Left Wing Extremism
(LWE) affected districts in nine States of the country, the general approval has been accorded for
diversion of the forest land upto 5.00 ha. in each case for execution of 13 categories of public
utility projects by Government Departments and quarrying of materials for construction of public
roads in 117 left wing extremism (LWE) affected districts identified for implementation of
Integrated Action Plan (IAP) by the Planning Commission and Security Related Expenditure (SRE)
Scheme by Ministry of Home Affairs.
Similarly, recently Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) received requests to
expedite grant of approval under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 for use of forest land for
rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts in flood affected areas in Uttarakhand. To facilitate
restoration and strengthening of the communication network to ensure expeditious rehabilitation of
flood affected areas in Uttarakhand, the MoEF has taken the following measures:
Opened a Camp Office of its Regional Office (Central Zone), Lucknow, at Dehradun for
a period of six months to expedite consideration and disposal of cases of diversion of forest land
for non-forest use pertaining to the State of Uttarakhand. The Camp Office has started functioning
with effect from 19
th July, 2013.
Accorded general approval under section 2 of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, for a
period of one year, for diversion of forest land, not more than one hectare in each case, for
restoration/reconstruction including realignment, by the Government Departments, of roads/bridges
damaged in the recent floods and construction of helipads and ropeways in flood affected areas
in Uttarakhand; and
Norms for providing land for creation of compensatory afforestation in respect of proposals
seeking diversion of forest land above one hectare and upto five hectares in each case for
restoration/reconstruction including realignment, by the Government Departments, of the roads/
bridges damaged in the recent floods have been relaxed by providing that in place of normal
provisions, compensatory afforestation over degraded forest land equal in extent to the forest land
proposed to be diverted, shall only be insisted. This relaxation shall be applicable subject to a
maximum of 50 (fifty) hectares of forest land for all such cases, during the next one year from
24
th July, 2013.
Diversion of forest land for non-forest purpose and felling of trees in hill districts,
especially in the biodiversity rich, ecologically fragile Hill districts, which apart from being highly
prone to soil erosion and landslides, are also the habitat for several endangered species of flora and
fauna, need careful scrutiny to ensure long term ecological security of the State. Any relaxation
in the existing norms for these areas may not be desirable.
Comment (Para 17.2)
The Ministry has not indicated as to why smaller projects of State of Uttarakhand like
construction of 5 or 10 kms. of road; Hospitals, small irrigation project remain pending for
long for want of Environment/Forest clearances and measures taken to expedite clearances
for such projects in the interest of the State. No relaxation as such was recommended by the
Committee. The Committee takes a serious view of the manner in which the recommendation
has been dealt with by the Ministry and reiterates its recommendation.
Recommendation (18.13)
In view of the above, the Committee recommends that the engineering centric approach
adopted by the Ministry should be supplemented with social centric approach. In addition, the
Ministry should seriously consider the observations/suggestions contained in the preceding

16
paragraphs, particularly, for increasing ecological flow of rivers so that a holistic approach is
adopted to restore Ganga, Yamuna and other rivers to their pristine glory. The Committee also
recommends a potent monitoring and accountability mechanism be also put in place to ensure
proper utilisation of funds for National River Conservation Programme.
Action Taken by Government
Under the National Ganga River Basin Management (NGRBA) Programme, a framework to
facilitate preparation of detailed project reports has been prepared. The framework not only aims
to fulfill the engineering requirements but also covers environment and social assessment of
projects, which include aspects relating to the public and society. Measures are also being initiated
for public awareness and their involvement, including mobilization of youth volunteers, conducting
public awareness campaigns during festival/melas on the banks of rivers, community participation
and discussions with stakeholders, etc. as part of the programme.
2. Under the NGRBA programme, a comprehensive River Basin Management Plan for Ganga
is being prepared by a consortium of seven IITs (Kanpur, Delhi, Madras, Bombay, Kharagpur,
Guwahati and Roorkee). The objective of the River Basin Management Plan is to suggest
comprehensive measures for restoration of the wholesomeness of the Ganga system and improving
its ecological health taking into account the issue of competing water uses in the river basin. As
a part of the Ganga River Basin Management Plan, a separate thematic group on ‘E-flows’ in the
main stem of river Ganga has been constituted by the IIT consortium. The expected completion
of the deliverable on ‘Assessment of Environmental flows’ is proposed by September, 2013.
3. Further to regulate the flow affected due to construction of dams in upper reaches of river
Ganga, two studies on assessment of cumulative impacts of dams have already been carried out
by IIT Roorkee and Wildlife Institute of India. The Ministry had also constituted an Inter-Ministerial
Group (IMG) under the chairmanship of Shri B.K.Chaturvedi, Member Planning Commission to
review issues related to river Ganga, which includes environmental flow requirements for various
stretches of Bhagirathi, Alaknanda and other tributaries of river Ganga. The recommendations of
the IMG have been sent to Ministries of Power and Water Resources and Government of
Uttarakhand for comments.
4. For effective monitoring and coordination in implementation of the pollution abatement
projects under the NRCP and NGRBA programmes, following measures have been taken :–
Tripartite Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) is signed after sanction of the project with the
State Government and the implementing agency/urban local body which spells out the role and
responsibilities of the various agencies involved in the project, including adherence to timelines,
proper O&M of the assets being created, timely release of State share, etc.
The physical and financial progress reports of the projects are submitted by the
implementing agency on a monthly basis in a prescribed format to National River Conservation
Directorate (NRCD), MoEF/National Mission Clean Ganga. The Utilization Certificates in respect of
the funds utilized on the project and the unspent amount at the end of the period is submitted by
the implementing agency on a quarterly basis.
The concerned officers in MoEF carry out review and monitoring of ongoing projects by
visiting project sites in the respective States on a regular basis. From time to time, review meetings
are also held by the senior officers of MoEF with the officials of respective State Governments.
Funds requirement submitted by the project implementing authority is evaluated with respect
to progress of the project before releasing next installment.
Monitoring of projects is also carried out by an independent third party. The Third Party
Inspection (TPI) mechanism by independent institutions has been introduced for effective review

17
and monitoring of the performance of the projects through the entire life cycle of implementation
on the basis of detailed onsite review, examination of appropriate documents and discussion with
the project implementing agencies and other key stakeholders.
Comment (18.13)
The Committee had in its twelve Paras viz. Para 18.1 to 18.12 made an elaborate and
extensive analysis of ills afflicting the major rivers of the country including the Ganga,
suggested several measures and recommended that the Ministry should seriously consider
them for restoring the rivers to their pristine glory. But ironically it is not enough to stir
the Ministry to any action worth its name. The Committee expresses deep anguish over the
routine reply of the Ministry to suit all and any query or comment of the Committee, be
it the consideration of Demands for Grants or the concerns raised in the report. The
Committee is constrained to observe that NGRBA programme, even after four long years
of its existence is still struggling to come out of formalities of paper work to take some
practical shape. With the Ministry more than happy to engage itself in paperwork, the
possibility of the project yielding any substantive results on ground does not appear to be
real. But the ultimate reality is that the Ministry has the final say. It is ironical that
monetary spending has been made the sole yardstick to gauge the success of river
conservation programme and the NGRBA programme is not any different. The Committee,
therefore, reiterates its recommendation to give serious consideration to the observations
contained in Para No. 18.1 to 18.12 and directs the Ministry to furnish pointed and specific
reply to each one of them.
Recommendation (Para 19.1)
While public hearing has been made mandatory in the scheme of things of according EC/
FC Clearance for some of the projects particularly those which affect the local inhabitants, the
Committee has been given to understand that public hearing is not conducted in an objective and
impartial manner. Often public hearing becomes a state managed and an eye-wash show conducted
in the presence of the project proponents where their representatives use it as a platform to
persuade, convince and coax the affected public to give their nod for the project to the detriment
of their interest and welfare. The Committee is of the view that such instances give rise to
discontentment among the public and sometimes also result in protest putting the entire project in
jeopardy. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government must take necessary measures
to curb such malpractices in public hearing so that public hearing serves the purpose for which
these are intended. The Committee further recommends that genuine concerns of the people must
find place in the environment management plan and the project proponents take necessary
preventive and curative measures to address the genuine concerns of the public.
Action Taken by Government
As per Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Notification, 2006, following measures have
been adopted for restricting any kind of malpractices and insuring the transparency during the
process of public hearing so that it can serve the purpose.
1. Public hearing is to be conducted by the State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) or the
Union Territory Pollution Control Committee (UTPCC) in the specified manner as
mentioned in the EIA Notification, 2006 within 45 days of receipt of request and
proceedings are to be sent to the regularity authority same day.
2. Soft (electronic) copies of the draft EIA Report with the generic structure given in
Appendix III including the Summary EIA report in English and in the local language,
prepared strictly in accordance with the Terms of Reference are submitted by the

18
applicant to the concerned SPCB, Ministry of Environment and Forest (MoEF) and
to the following authorities or offices within whose jurisdiction the project will be
located:
(a) District Magistrate/s
(b) Zila Parishad or Municipal Corporation
(c) District Industries Office
(d) Concerned Regional Office of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
In order to invite adequate public participation in the decision making process, it is also
provisioned in the EIA Notification, 2006 that:
1. The above mentioned authorities widely publicize the project within their respective
jurisdictions requesting the interested persons to send their comment to the concerned
regulatory authorities. They shall also make available the draft EIA Report for
inspection electronically or otherwise to the public during normal office hours till the
Public Hearing is over. The MoEF also make the full draft EIA available for reference
during normal office hours in the Ministry at Delhi.
2. The SPCB or UTPCC concerned also make similar arrangements for giving publicity
about the project within the State/Union Territory and make available the Summary of
the draft EIA report for inspection in select offices or public libraries or panchayats
etc. They shall also additionally make available copy of the draft EIA report to the
above mentioned authorities/offices.
3. The Member-Secretary of the concerned SPCB or UTPCC shall finalize the date, time
and exact venue to conduct of public hearing within 7 (seven) days of the date of
receipt of the draft EIA report from the project proponent, and advertise the same in
one major National Daily and one Regional Vernacular Daily. A minimum notice period
of 30 (thirty) days is provided to the public for furnishing their responses.
4. The advertisement also informs the public about the places or offices where the public
could access the draft EIA report and the Summary EIA report before the public
hearing.
5. No postponement of the date, time, venue, of the public hearing is permitted, unless
some untoward emergency situation occurs and only on the recommendation of the
concerned District Magistrate the postponement is notified to the public through the
same National and Regional Vernacular Dailies and also prominently displayed at all the
identified offices by the concerned SPCB or UTPCC.
6. The District Magistrate or his or her representative not below the rank of and
Additional District Magistrate assisted by a representative of SPCB or UTPCC, shall
supervise and preside over the entire public hearing process.
7. The SPCB or UTPCC arranges video film the entire proceedings and is forwarded to
the Regulatory Authority.
8. Every person present at the venue is granted the opportunity to seek information or
clarifications on the project from the Applicant. The summary of the public hearing
proceedings accurately reflecting all the views and concerns expressed are recorded by
the representative of the SPCB or UTPCC and read over to the audience at the end
of the proceedings explaining the contents in the vernacular language and the agreed

19
minutes are signed by the District Magistrate or his or her representative on the same
day and forwarded to the SPCB/UTPCC concerned.
9. A Statement of the issues raised by the public and the comments of the Applicant are
prepared in the local language and in English and annexed to the proceedings.
10. The proceedings of the public hearing are displayed at the office of the Panchyats
within whose jurisdiction the project is located, office of the concerned Zila Parishad,
District Magistrate and the SPCB or UTPCC. The SPCB or UTPCC displays the
proceedings on its website for general information. Comments, if any, on the
proceedings which may be sent directly to the concerned regulatory authorities and the
Applicant concerned.
Comment (Para 19.1)
The Committee notes the reply which reproduces what has been prescribed and
provided on paper whereas the Committee in its recommendation hinted at what was, in
many places, perceived as actual practice. The Committee would like the Ministry to take
up monitoring in a few sample cases of actual implementation of various safeguards for
public hearing laid in EIA notification so as to find out as to what extent the provision of
EIA notifications are being adhered to in actual practice.
Recommendation (Para 20.2)
The Committee expresses its serious concern over the slow and tardy progress in setting
up of Benches of National Green Tribunal and underutilization of allocated outlay of the order of
R7.07 crores as against the B.E. allocation of R10.50 crores. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry must take all necessary steps to make remaining regional benches of the Tribunal
functional at the earliest and in any case during the current financial year itself and make full
utilisation of the allocated B.E. resources of R14.00 crores.
Action Taken by Government
The Bhopal and Chennai Benches of the National Green Tribunal have been operationalized.
The Pune Bench of the Tribunal is expected to be functional shortly. The operationalization of the
remaining regional Bench at Kolkata is likely to take a while. In so far as utilization of funds is
concerned, from the available trend of expenditure in NGT, there is every likelihood that the BE
2013-14 of R14 crores will be spent fully.
Comment (Para 20.2)
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Para 21.2)
“In view of the above, the Committee feels that there is an urgent need to save the species
facing extinction and reduce significantly, if not eliminate altogether, incidents that kill animals like
man-animal conflict, rail or road accidents etc. and recommends that Ministry must take all
necessary measures in this regard. The committee also recommends that local inhabitants should
be involved in a big way for providing protection to the wild animals, as well as, to forest cover.
The Committee understands that deployment of local workforce is being undertaken under Project
Tiger in Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Uttarakhand, etc. The
Committee appreciates this measure and feels that such efforts need to be replicated in other States
as well for protection of wildlife and forest cover”.

20
Action Taken by Government
Protected Areas, viz., National Parks, Sanctuaries, Conservation Reserves and Community
Reserves covering important wildlife habitats have been created all over the country under the
provisions of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 to conserve wild animals and their habitats.
Ministry provides financial assistance under Centrally Sponsored schemes like ‘Integrated
Development of Wildlife Habitats’, ‘Project Tiger’ and ‘Project Elephant’ for the protection and
conservation of wildlife, which includes the species facing extension.
Under the ongoing Centrally Sponsored Schemes funding assistance is provided for
mitigation of tiger/wild animal-human conflict, compensation for crop depredation, cattle and
human deaths. Financial assistance is also provided in the Centrally Sponsored Schemes for
construction of barriers like boundary walls and solar-powered electric fences, increasing the
food and water availability in forests areas, which can reduce migration of animals from forests
to the habitations. A standard operating procedure (SOP) has been also issued to deal with
emergency arising out of tiger staying in human dominated landscape. Central assistance is also
provided for deployment of local people including tribals like Chenchus, Baigas, Gujjars etc. in
Protected Areas including tiger reserves. Necessary infrastructure and support facilities were also
developed for immobilization of the identified problematic animals through tranquilization, and
their relocation to the natural habitat or rehabilitation in rescue centers. Training/workshops have
been organized at Chandrapur and Dudhwa for capacity building of field officers/staff to deal
with human tiger conflicts.
Ministry of Railways in consultation with the Ministry of Environment and Forests had
issued a general advisory to all the railway zones suggesting measures to prevent collision of trains
with wild elephants. A permanent coordination team has been constituted jointly by the Ministry of
Railways and Ministry of Environment and Forests to share information and monitor the
implementation of the advisory on quarterly basis. Ministry of Railways has also been requested to
regulate the speed of trains in vulnerable sections. Nodal officers have been designated in the
vulnerable sections to facilitate quick sharing of information.
Comment (Para 21.2)
The Committee takes strong exception to the Ministry being in denial mode ignoring
the actual mishappenings. Its attitude to have done its duties by providing measures on paper
is a classic case of flawed and erroneous judgment. The Committee finds that incidents like
man-animal conflict, death of elephants due to rail accidents, etc. continue unabated and the
Ministry seems to bask in the glory of laid down measures taking no firm action to really
address them. The Committee would like Ministry to get a comparative study done so as to
know as to what extent its measures laid on paper have helped reduce killing of animals.
Recommendation (Para 22.3)
The Committee feels that a sound taxonomic base is a pre-requisite for environmental
assessment, ecological research, effective conservation management and sustainable use for
biological resources and despite a coordinated project on taxonomy, setup some 12 years back,
the Ministry laments that the existing taxonomic base is rapidly declining due to non-availability
of professionals and lack of trained manpower. In the name of taxonomic capacity building
project, the Ministry is extending financial support to Universities, research Institutes, etc. It is
not able to utilize the budgetary allocation fully because the release of grants is linked to proper
utilization of earlier released grants and progress on activities. The Committee feels that besides
supporting research projects and organizing training workshops, the Ministry should explore the

21
feasibilities of setting up a Centre in a reputed university for studies in Taxonomy or establish
its own Institute for higher education and research in Taxonomy in order to produce expert and
trained professionals in T axonomy. For attracting bright and promising students in this area, the
Ministry should also think in terms of awarding scholarships for higher studies and research in
Taxonomy. In addition, the Ministry should take on a priority basis all other measures necessary
to build a pool of processionals in taxonomy for meeting the requirements of trained professional
in this field.
Action Taken by Government
In order to address the problems of inadequate taxonomic knowledge due to limited number
of taxonomists available in the country, an All India Coordinated Project on Capacity Building in
Taxonomy (AICOPTAX) was launched in 1999–2000. The project identified 30 gap areas and was
continued during Tenth and Eleventh Plan periods and also has been allowed to continue during XII
Plan.
Out of the 30 thematic areas identified, 13 thematic areas of research have been completed
and 2 thematic areas in training have been taken up. The important achievements include: discovery
of about 500 species new to science, about 450 species new to India, floristic and faunal accounts,
status of species, about 450 persons trained in taxonomy through the training centres (a) at School
of Environmental Studies, University of Delhi for training in Plant Bio-systematics and (b) at
ZSI, Kolkata for training in Animal Bio-systematics, about 105 students registered for doctoral
studies etc.
The Ministry with the technical support from BSI and ZSI has brought out programme brief
on taxonomy on Taxonomy Capacity Building: Indian Initiative based on outcome of research work
done between 1999–2007 and the same was released as showcase document by the Government
of India during the 10th Conference of Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity held in
October, 2010 at Nagoya, Japan.
The SFC Memo for continuation of the scheme from Eleventh Five Year Plan to Twelfth
Five Year Plan has also been got appraised and approved.
During the Twelfth Five Year Plan, 17 thematic areas including 15 thematic areas of
research and 2 training centres viz. (i) Plant Bio-systematics and (ii) Animal Bio-systematics have
already been initiated. Of the 15 thematic areas, the Steering Committee has identified 5 priority
areas of research. These include: (i) Crustacea (ii) Coleoptera (iii) Hymenoptera (iv) Arachnidae
(v) Floristic and Faunistic Surveys of North Eastern Region of the country. About 18 research
projects are being launched in the first four identified thematic areas of research and projects in
the Vth thematic areas of research are being appraised.
The SFC Memo on AICOPTAX Scheme during the Twelfth Five Year Plan details the
strengthening of the management structure and organization and implementation arrangements
through coordinating centres and collaborating units in the respective thematic area of research and
the role of BSI and ZSI as implementing agencies for the scheme. Further, it also provides for
strategies for ensuring regular inflow of trained human r esources in Taxonomy. These include:
I. Training Centres
The two training centres (i) at School of Environmental Studies, University of Delhi for
training in plant Bio-systematics and (ii) at Zoological Survey of India (ZSI), Kolkata for training
in Animal Bio-systematics were set up during Tenth and Eleventh Plan periods. In the Twelfth Plan
the training activities would be strengthened and continued for imparting advanced training in
taxonomy and bio-systematics to various target groups.

22
II. Chairs in Taxonomy
Chairs in Taxonomy are being set up in the name of eminent scientist during Twelfth plan
in order to attain academic excellence in taxonomy to undertake high standards of taxonomic
research in the identified gap areas.
III. Associateship, Scholarship and Career Awards
To train in service and pre-service scientists in taxonomic groups, foreign and National
Associateships of six month duration are being instituted during Twelfth Plan.
About 100 post-graduate scholarships are being instituted in order to encourage talented
students to pursue a career and to opt taxonomy as one of their optionals and or undertake a full
core course in taxonomy as part of M.Sc programme in plant sciences, animal sciences,
microbiology and environmental sciences/biology.
About 12 career awards for young scientists (five for plants, five for animals and two for
microbes) would be created to encourage young talented scientists who have established
competence and good potential in taxonomy to promote their promotional growth.
IV. National Award in Taxonomy
The Janaki Ammal National Award in Taxonomy has been instituted in order to encourage
work of excellence in taxonomy and also to encourage young students and scholars to work in
this area of science. This award carries in cash prize, medallion and citation. It has been decided
to continue this award and have three awards one each for Plant Taxonomy, Animal Taxonomy and
Microbial Taxonomy during the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
Comment (Para 22.3)
The Committee takes note of the reply.

23
MINUTES

24

25
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 17 th December, 2013 in Committee Room
No. ‘67’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
3. Shri M. Rama Jois
4. Shri Alok Tiwari
5. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
6. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
LOK SABHA
7. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
8. Dr. Ajay Kumar
9. Shri O.S. Manian
10. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
11. Shri Basori Singh Masram
12. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
13. Shri Ramashanker Rajbhar
14. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
15. Shri Pradeep Tamta
16. Shri Joseph Toppo
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Assistant Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Committee Officer
The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and invited
suggestions/amendments to the draft 246
th to 252 nd Reports of the Committee on the Action Taken
by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 239 th to 245 th Reports on
Demands for Grants (2013-14), pertaining to the Ministries/Departments of Atomic Energy, Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, Space, Earth Sciences, Scientific and Industrial
Research and Biotechnology respectively.
25

26
*** Relate to other matters.
2. The Committee, after brief discussion, adopted 246 th to 252 nd draft Action Taken Reports
without any amendment.
3. The Committee decided to present/lay on the table of both the Houses of the Parliament its
246th to 252 nd Reports on 18 th December, 2013. The Committee authorised its Chairman and, in his
absence, Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra to present the Report in Rajya Sabha and Shri Pradeep Tamta
and, in his absence, Shri Dayanidhi Maran to lay the copy of the reports on the table of Lok Sabha.
4. * * *
The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 
P.M.

27
27
INDEX OF REPORTS PRESENTED BY DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY , ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
Report No. Subject of the Report
12
1. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1993-94.
2. ‘National Environment Tribunal Bill, 1992’.
3 Annual Report of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1992-93.
4. Annual Report of the Department of Electronics for the year 1992-93.
5. Annual Report of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1992-93.
6. Annual Report of the Department of Science and Technology for the year 1992-93.
7. Annual Report of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1992-93.
8. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1994-95.
9. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1994-95.
10. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1994-95.
11. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1994-95.
12. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
1994-95.
13. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1994-95.
14. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1994-95.
15. Annual Report of the Department of Space for the year 1993-94.
16. Annual Report of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1993-94.
17. Annual Report of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1993-94.
18. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
1995-96.
19. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1995-96.
20. Annual Report of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1993-94.
21. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1995-96.
22. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1995-96.
23. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1995-96.
24. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1995-96.
25. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1995-96.

28
12
26. Annual Report of the Department of Science and Technology for the year 1993-94.
27. Annual Report of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the year
1993-94.
28. Annual Report of the Department of Electronics for the year 1993-94.
29. The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Bill, 1995.
30. Annual Report of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1994-95.
31. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
1996-97.
32. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1996-97.
33. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1996-97.
34. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1996-97.
35. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1996-97.
36. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1996-97.
37. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1996-97.
38. Demonstration of Herbal Fuel by Shri P. Ramar at IIP, Dehradun.
39. Action Taken by Ministry of Environment and forests on the recommendations
contained in the 9
th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants of Ministry
of Environment and Forests for the year 1994-95.
40. ‘Mid-term appraisal’ of programmes and functioning of the Department of
Biotechnology with special emphasis on the role of Biotechnology in Agriculture and
allied areas.
41. ‘Mid-term appraisal’ of programmes and functioning of the Department of Science
and Technology.
42. ‘Mid-term appraisal’ of programmes and functioning or the Department of Space.
43. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the Thirty-fourth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(1996-97) of the Department of Biotechnology.
44. Action Taken by the Department of Electronics on the recommendations contained
in the Thirty-second Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (1996-97)
of the Department of Electronics.
45. Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the Thirty-fifth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (1996-97)
of the Department of Ocean Development.
46. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology of the year
1997-98.
47. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1997-98.

29
12
48. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1997-98.
49. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1997-98.
50. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1997-98.
51. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1997-98.
52. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1997-98.
53. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1998-99.
54. Demands for Grants of the Department of Bio-technology for the year 1998-99.
55. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
1998-99.
56. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1998-99.
57. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1998-99.
58. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1998-99.
59. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1998-99.
60. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the Fifty-fourth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(1998-99) of the Department of Biotechnology.
61. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the Fifty-sixth Report of the Committee on Demands
for Grants (1998-99) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
62. Action Taken by the Department of Electronics on the recommendations contained
in the Fifty-eighth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
the Department of Electronics.
63. Aspects related to Food Preservation and Safety Measures.
64. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
1999-2000.
65. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year
1999-2000.
66. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1999-2000.
67. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1999-2000.
68. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1999-2000.
69. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1999-2000.
70. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year
1999-2000.

30
12
71. Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout-Design Bill, 1999.
72. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
2000-01.
73. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2000-01.
74. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2000-01.
75. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Information Technology for the year 2000-01.
76. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2000-01.
77. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2000-01.
78. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 2000-01.
79. ‘The Information Technology Bill, 1999’.
80. Preservation of Gir Forests and Protection of Wild Life.
81. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-second Report of
the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of Science
and Technology.
82. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-third Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research.
83. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-fourth Report of
the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of
Biotechnology.
84. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-seventh Report of
the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of Space.
85. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-sixth Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of Ocean
Development.
86. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2001-2002.
87. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2001-02.
88. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2001-02.
89. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
2001-02.
90. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 2001-02.
91. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2001-02.
92. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Ninety-first Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of Space.

31
12
93. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighty-seventh Report of
the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of
Biotechnology.
94. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighty-sixth Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research.
95. ‘The Biological Diversity Bill, 2000’.
96. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighty-ninth Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of Science and
Technology.
97. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighty-eighth Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of Ocean
Development.
98. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Ninetieth Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry of Environment
and Forests.
99. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2002-03.
100. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2002-03.
101. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2002-03.
102. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
2002-03.
103. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2002-03.
104. Demands for Grants of the Minis try of Environment and Forests for the year 2002-03.
105. The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Bill, 2000.
106. Action Taken by the Department of Science and Technology on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred-second Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the Department of Science and Technology.
107. Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred-first Report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2002-03) of the Department of Ocean Development.
108. Action Taken by the Department of Space on the recommendations contained in the
Hundredth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the
Department of Space.
109. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the Ninety-ninth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(2002-03) of the Department of Biotechnology.

32
12
110. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred-third Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.
111. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred-fourth Report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2002-03) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
112. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 2003-04.
113. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2003-04.
114. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2003-04.
115. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2003-04.
116. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2003-04.
117. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
2003-04.
118. Conservation and Environmental-Management Plan for Dal-Nagin Lake.
119. Action taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred-fifteenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the Department of Ocean Development.
120. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred-thirteenth Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology on Demands
for Grants (2003-04) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
121. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in One Hundred-twelfth Report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on Demands for Grants
(2003-04) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
122. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred-sixteenth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the Department of Biotechnology.
123. Action taken by the Department of Space on the recommendations contained in the
One Hundred-fourteenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2003-04) of the Department of Space.
124. Action taken by the Department of Science and Technology on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred-seventeenth Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the Department
of Science and Technology.

33
12
125. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
2004-05.
126. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2004-05.
127. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2004-05.
128. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2004-05.
129. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2004-05.
130. Demands for Grants of the Department of Atomic Energy for the year 2004-05.
131. Demands for Grants of the Minis try of Environment and Forests for the year 2004-05.
132. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred-eighteenth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the conservation and Environmental Management Plan for Dal-Nagin
Lake, Srinagar.
133. Action Taken by the Department of Science and Technology on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Twenty-fifth report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department
of Science and Technology.
134. Action Taken by the Department of Space on the recommendations contained in the
One Hundred Twenty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Space.
135. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Twenty-seventh Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Biotechnology.
136. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Twenty-sixth Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department
of Scientific and Industrial Research.
137. Action Taken by the Department of Atomic Energy on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Thirtieth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
138. Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Twenty-eighth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Ocean
Development.

34
12
139. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Thirty-first Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests.
140. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Science and Technology.
141. Demands for Grants (2005-06) if the Department of Biotechnology.
142. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.
143. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Ocean Development.
144. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Space.
145. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
146. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
147. Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Forty-third Report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2005-06) of Department of Ocean Development.
148. Action Taken by the Department of Atomic Energy on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Forty-fifth Report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2005-06) of Department of Atomic Energy.
149. Action Taken by the Department of Science and Technology on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred-fortieth Report of the Committee
on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Department of Science and Technology.
150. Action Taken by the Department of Space on the recommendations contained in
the One Hundred Forty-forth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(2005-06) of Department of Space.
151. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Forty-second Report of the
Committee on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research.
152. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the One-Hundred Forty-first Report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2005-06) of Department of Biotechnology.
153. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in  the One Hundred Forty-sixth Report of the Committee on the Demands
for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
154. The Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2005.
155. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Science and Technology.
156. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.

35
12
157. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Biotechnology.
158. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Ocean Development.
159. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
160. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
161. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Space.
162. Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research Programme including Herbal Medicines.
163. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Sixtieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
164. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Ocean Development (renamed as Ministry
of Earth Sciences).
165. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Sixty-first Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Space.
166. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
167. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Biotechnology.
168. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-2007) of the Department of Science and Technology.
169. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
170. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Science and Technology.
171. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.
172. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Biotechnology.

36
12
173. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
174. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
175. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Space.
176. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
177. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Sixty-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research Programme including Herbal
Medicines.
178. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Science and
Technology.
179. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Biotechnology.
180. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-first Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
181. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
182. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Space.
183. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-2008) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
184. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
For Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
185. Demands For Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Science and Technology
(Ministry of Science and Technology).
186. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research (Ministry of Science and Technology).
187. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.

37
12
188. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
189. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Space.
190. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Biotechnology (Ministry of
Science and Technology).
191. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
192. Functioning of Central Pollution Control Board.
193. Global Warming and its Impact on India.
194. The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008.
195. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Science and Technology.
196. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Ninetieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of’ the Department of Biotechnology.
197. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
198. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Ninety-first Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
199. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Space.
200. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
201. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
202. Coastal Management Programmes.
203. The National Green Tribunal Bill, 2009.
204. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.

38
12
205. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Biotechnology (Ministry of
Science and Technology).
206. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Space.
207. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
208. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research (Ministry of Science and Technology).
209. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department Science and Technology
(Ministry of Science and Technology).
210. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
211. “The Protection and Utilisation of Public Funded Intellectual Property Bill. 2008”.
212. “The Civil Liability For Nuclear Damage Bill, 2010”.
213. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
214. Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Biotechnology.
215. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Sixth Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Space.
216. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
217. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Eighth Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
218. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Ninth report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Science and Technology.
219.s A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Tenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry or Environment and Forests.

39
12
220. The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Bill, 2010.
221. The Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Bill, 2011.
222. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
223. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Science and Technology
(Ministry of Science and Technology).
224. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
225. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Space.
226. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
227. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research (Ministry of Science and Technology).
228. Demands For Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Biotechnology (Ministry of
Science and Technology).
229. Report on “The Regional Centre for Biotechnology Bill, 2011”.
230. S teps Taken by various Sectors of the Indian Economy to Control Pollution.
231. The Indian Forest (Amendment) Bill, 2012.
232. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
233. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Science and Technology.
234. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
235. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Space.
236. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-sixth Report of the Department- related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
237. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.

40
12
238. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Biotechnology.
239. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
240. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Science and Technology.
241. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
242. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Space.
243. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
244. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.
245. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Biotechnology.
246. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Thirty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
247. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Fortieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Science and Technology.
248. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-first Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
249. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Space.
250. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
251. Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
252. Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-2014) of the Department of Biotechnology.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.