PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 228
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2012/VAISAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)MAY, 2012/VAISAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON SCIENCE  AND TECHNOLOGY , 
ENVIRONMENT  AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-2013) 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY)
(DEMAND NO. 87)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18  MAY, 2012)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18  MAY, 2012)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18  MAY, 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18  MAY, 2012)TH

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-2013)
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY)
(DEMAND NO. 87)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18 TH MAY , 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18 TH MAY , 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY , 2012/V AISAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—21
4. S UMMARY OF THE R ECOMMENDATIONS .................................................................................. 22—25
5. M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ................................................................ 27—35

MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2011-12)
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
**2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Anil H. Lad
4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
5. Dr. Chandan Mitra
@6. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
7. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
@8. Shri A.V . Swamy
9. Dr. Barun Mukherji
10. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan
LOK SABHA
11. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
12. Shri Ninong Ering
#13. Vacant
14. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
15. Shri Abdul Rahman
16. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
17. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
18. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana
19. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
20. Shri Cosme Francisco Caitano Sardinha
21. Shri Shibu Soren
22. Dr. Rajan Sushant
23. Shri Pradeep Tamta
24. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava
***25. V acant
26. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
*27. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
28. Vacant
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
** Shri Janardan Dwivedi re-nominated w.e.f. 2 nd February, 2012.
@ Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra and Shri A.V. Swamy nominated w.e.f. 15th May, 2012.
# Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 3 rd January, 2012 on his resignation
from the Membership of the Committee.
***Shri Akhilesh Yadav ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  2 nd May, 2012 on his resignation from the
Membership of the Lok Sabha.
* Nominated w.e.f.  25 th November, 2011.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Twenty Eighth Report of the Committee. This
Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2012-2013) of the Department of
Biotechnology (Ministry of Science and Technology) (Demand No. 87).
2. In the meeting of the Committee held on the 12
th April, 2012 the Secretary and other
Officers of the Department of Biotechnology gave an overview of the various activities of the
Department and the Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the
Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the
clarifications sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the
Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 16
th May, 2012.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
May 16, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests

1
REPORT
The Department of Biotechnology, celebrated the Silver Jubilee of its existence in the year
2011-12. Initially set up in 1982 as an Independent Board, it became a full-fledged Department
under Ministry of Science and Technology in 1986. Biotechnology developments, in last 25 years,
experienced five distinct phases: initial foundation phase followed by capacity building; Research
and Development; institution building and promotion of innovation and excellence. The mission of
the Department inter-alia includes accelerating the pace of research, innovation, development, and
technology transfer to advance biotechnology as strategic area by taking India’s strengths in
foundational sciences to globally competitive levels and expanding the application of biotechnologies
for overall growth of bio-economy within the framework of inclusive development.
2. MANDATE
2.1 The main mandate of the Department of Biotechnology is as under:–
(i) To evolve policies and integrated programmes in biotechnology and ensure their
implementation and monitoring.
(ii) To identify specific programmes of Research and Development and manufacturing in
biological and biotechnology and oversee the initiation in pursuit of related research
and manufacturing activities;
(iii) To identify, set up and support Centres of Excellence for Research and Development
in biotechnology and ensure proper dovetailing of their activities as per national
priorities and objectives;
(iv) To create biotechnology tools and technologies that address the problems of
agricultural productivity, food production, nutrition security, health care and
environmental sustainability by providing new and emerging products and services at
affordable prices, generate employment opportunities and make India globally
competitive in the emerging bio-economy;
(v) To evolve safety guidelines for biotechnology Research and Development and
manufacturing in India;
(vi) To act as the central agency for the import of genetically manipulated materials,
culture, cells, specimens, tissues and biotech products including DNA and RNA of
any type or size and for promoting their production in the country;
(vii) To serve as the inter-ministerial and interagency nodal point for all specific
international bilateral and multilateral Research and Development collaborations and
agreements in the area of biotechnology; act as the nodal point for all technology
transfers in the area of biotechnology;
(viii) To manufacture and ensure application of recombinant, cell-based and DNA vaccines,
diagnostics and other biotechnological products;
(ix) To evolve programmes for Human Resource Development in the area of biotechnology;
(x) To serve as an administrative and implementing Department of agencies,
commissions, boards, etc. specifically formed by the Government for fulfilling the
national objectives in biotechnology and also to serve as the nodal point for Bio-
informatics including training and creation of infrastructure, collection, dissemination
and exchange of information relating to biotechnology;

2
(xi) To deal with all matters relating to following institutions:
•  National Institute of Immunology (NII), New Delhi;
• National Centre for Cell Sciences (NCCS), Pune;
• Centre for DNA Fingerprinting & Diagnostics (CDFD), Hyderabad;
• National Institute for Plant Genome Research (NIPGR), New Delhi;
• National Brain Research Centre (NBRC), Manesar, Gurgaon;
• Institute for Bioresource and Sustainable Development (IBSD), Imphal;
• Institute of Life Sciences (ILS), Bhubaneshwar;
• Translational Research in Health Science and Technology Institute, Faridabad;
• Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, Thiruvananthapuram;
• UNESCO Regional Centre for Education, Training and Innovation in
Biotechnology, Faridabad;
• National Institute of Biomedical Genomics, Kolkata;
• Institute for Stem Cell Science and Regenerative Medicine, Bangalore;
• National Agri-Food Biotechnology Institute and Bioprocessing Unit at Mohali,
Punjab;
• National Institute of Animal Biotechnology, Hyderabad
(xii) Also to deal with all matters relating to following units:
• Bharat Immunologicals and Biologicals Corporation Limited (BIBCOL),
Bulandshahar, Uttar Pradesh; and
• Indian Vaccines Corporation Limited (IVCOL), Manesar, Gurgaon
2.2 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests considered the detailed Demand for Grants (2012-13) of the Department
of Biotechnology (DBT) in its meeting held on 12
th April, 2012.
3. MECHANISM TO MONITOR AND REVIEW THE ONGOING SCHEMES
The Committee has been informed that the progress of projects/schemes of the Department
are monitored and reviewed biannually or annually by 20 subject specific Task Forces and high
level expert committees besides site visits and annual reports. The Department also has a
mechanism for internal assessment of schemes/projects implemented vis-a-vis Eleventh Five Year
Plan proposal and overall goals and new initiatives are undertaken within the scope of overall goals.
Proposals for budgetary support are finalized on the recommendations of the Task Forces/expert
group and internal assessment besides considering current international trends and national needs
in different sectors in terms of R & D, technology development and institutional requirements. The
department has also introduced a system of independent external evaluation of Autonomous
institutions consisting of experts from abroad and India for periodical assessment of performance.
Besides, the independently selected one or two international experts are also nominated as members
of Scientific Advisory Committees of the institutions for a rational review with global perspective.
The Planning Commission also deputes experts and their officials for a special review every year
through site visits. Apart from this, Results-Framework Document (RFD) initiated by the Cabinet
Secretariat also serves as an important mechanism to monitor and review ongoing schemes.

3
4. PERFORMANCE ON RESULTS-FRAMEWORK DOCUMENT (RFD)
4.1 RFD is an exercise to formulate a summary of the most important results that a Department
aspires to achieve during the financial year. It is a system, initiated by the Government of India,
which determines the performance index to ensure success in achieving the set objectives by the
Ministry. This document contains not only the agreed objectives, policies, programs and projects
but also success indictors and targets to measure progress in implementing them. To ensure the
successful implementation of agreed actions, RFD also includes necessary operational autonomy.
4.2 Performance of the various Departments is measured through a third party review set up
by the Performance Management Division of Cabinet Secretariat via mechanism of Results
Framework Document (RFD). Various programmes, schemes and activities are defined in
quantitative terms and achievements get reviewed by Ad Hoc  Task Force.
4.3 When asked to provide the details of the Result Framework Document (RFD) the
Department replied that it has been implementing the system since its inception at pilot scale and
in financial year 2010-11, it stood 3 rd amongst the 58 ministries by the Cabinet Secretariat in the
Government’s Performance Review.
4.4 The Committee is happy to note that the Department has developed a strong and
potent monitoring mechanism and commends it for being amongst the best three Ministries/
Departments in the financial year 2010-11 in the Government’s performance review. The
Committee hopes that the Department would not only continue to maintain at least the
same level of performance but would also endeavour to perform even better in the Twelfth
Five Year Plan.
5. PERFORMANCE IN THE ELEVENTH FIVE YEAR PLAN
5.1 On being enquired about whether the Department was successful in fulfilling its targets of the
Eleventh Five Year Plan, the Department has replied that  the main strategy of the Eleventh Plan period
was to take science in this sector to the next higher level, to push new frontier areas in
interdisciplinary manner, to create such tools and technologies that address the problems of largest
section of the society, provide products and services at affordable prices through synergistic efforts
of public and private sector and make India globally competitive in the emerging bio-economy.
5.2 A chart showing Plan outlay, allocation made and actual expenditure incurred during
Eleventh Five Year Plan is given below:–
Financial Summary of Eleventh Five Year Plan 2007—2011
(Rs. in crores )
Y ear Proposed Budget Revised Actual
Estimated Estimates Expenditure
2007-2008 900.00 675.00 683.00 618.00
(90.48%)
2008-2009 1406.00 900.00 879.00 871.77
(99.17%)
2009-2010 1927.70 1000.00 900.00 882.78
(98.11%)
2010-2011 1700.00 1200.00 1200.00 1121.48
(93.65%)
2011-2012 1600.00 1400.00 1350.00 983.00
(as on 31.01.2011)

4
5.3 The Committee observes that from the year 2007-08 onwards there is no significant
variation between financial allocations in BE and RE stages. The utilisation also ranges from
93.65 per cent in 2010-11 to as high as 99.17 per cent in 2008-09. These figures are
indicative of effective financial planning and robust monitoring of expenditure by the
Department. The Committee commends the excellent financial performance made by the
Department and hopes that the Department would even better this performance in the
Twelfth Five Year Plan.
5.4 As regards the achievement of physical targets by DBT during the Eleventh Five Year Plan,
the Committee has been informed of the following:–
(i) Overall implementation of proposals of Eleventh Plan, aligned to strategies formulated
in the National Biotechnology Development Strategy, has brought about a paradigm
shift in the ways and means biotechnology programmes and projects are formulated
and supported.
(ii) The Biotechnology R & D enterprise was designed previously to support good
competitive science but not mid-level innovation. Work has been carried out on
several fronts towards the goal of increasing mid-level innovation.
(iii) An assessment of first four years (2007-2011) has been undertaken for measuring
indicators of performance. About 2410 R & D projects in key sectors have been
implemented in Institutions/Universities with 26% (535) in the area of medical
biotechnology covering vaccines, diagnostics, human genetics and host-pathogen
interaction followed by agriculture and allied areas of biotechnology (22%); basic research
and emerging areas (20%); bioresources and bioprospecting (19%) and capacity building
(12%; International collaboration/bioinformatics and HRD). Fifty five undergraduate
colleges were also identified and funded for imparting quality life science education at the
graduate level and designate them later as “Star colleges” based on performance.
(iv) During the period an overall growth of 12 to 16 per cent per year in SCI publications
of life sciences and biotechnology in institutes/universities supported was seen. The
limited data in projects indicated a total 1104 publications of impact factor 5 and above.
Approximately 312 patents (national/international) were filed and 110 patents have been
granted; 105 technologies developed, 21 transferred to industry and 5 commercialized.
(v) In terms of Human Resource, a total of 5900 research personnel were supported in
R & D projects and through HRD programmes in the categories of Junior Research
Fellows (1800), Senior Research Fellows (1850), Research Associate (1060) and 70
professorships. In addition, about 2140 post graduates students in life sciences and
biotechnology were given biotechnology industry training fellowships involving 200
industries; about 30% of these trainees were provided employment in the same industries.
(vi) Capacity for R & D in cutting edge areas for global competitiveness has been built
in the areas of genomics and proteomics, stem cell research, systems biology, RNAi
and Nano-sciences and technology and applications in agriculture and health care;
metabolomics; bioengineering for medical devices and implants; biofuel and bioenergy
sciences. With success of Indian laboratories sequencing 16 Mb of chromosome 11
(against a target of 14 Mb) containing 1,443 genes out of a total of 3,754 genes
present in rice genome at the beginning of Eleventhth Plan, sequencing of
Chromosome 5 of tomato genome, Chromosome 2A of wheat genome and oral cancer
has been taken up as a partner in respective international genome consortia.
(vii) Seven grand challenge programmes were launched in the areas of microbial
prospecting of genes and molecules, vaccines, food science and nutrition, accelerated

5
molecular breeding, biodesign, genomics and bioenergy, and biofuels. Major
translational research initiatives through grand challenge schemes and network
programmes in the areas of agriculture and health care resulted in several
technological developments. Vaccines for malaria, dengue, cholera, and rotavirus are
at various phases of clinical trials. Rota viral vaccine is in phase-III trials and may
be commercialized by the end of Eleventh Plan. Public-Private-Partnership projects
with novel technology transfer arrangements facilitated by DBT will ensure availability
of the world’s cheapest vaccines against pneumococcal pneumonia, rotavirus, HPV ,
chikungunya and Japanese encephalitis. Similarly, in agriculture, GM crops such as
insect resistant chickpea, rice, brinjal: drought tolerant groundnut, sunflower: mustard
with hybrid vigour are in regulatory pipeline.
(viii) New international collaborations to add value to the ongoing National initiatives with
Canada, Australia, Denmark, Sweden, Finland, UK and EU were started. These
initiatives resulted in high quality publications, patents and technology transfer. Strategic
alliance for affordable health care soluti ons has been established with Wellcome Trust,
NIH, Gates Foundation, WHO, DFID and multiple other bilateral programmes.
(ix) The seven autonomous institutions of department existed before Eleventh Plan have
performed with excellence. The Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology,
Thiruvananthapuram was recently taken over from the Government of Kerala. These
institutes have generated 604 publications in SCI journals, 32 patents were granted/
filed, while 13 patents are in the pipeline; and 25 technologies were developed/
transferred to the industry.
(x) New institutions in basic and translational research have been established to address
critical areas of scientific competence vital to India’s progress. Six new institutions
in the areas of stem cell and regenerative medicine, agri-food biotechnology, animal
biotechnology, health science, biomedical genomics and biotechnology training and
education have been started with interim facilities, appointment of faculty and
research activities pending construction of main buildings.
(xi) Establishing research resources and facilities has also been undertaken to promote
research and education. The Department of Biotechnology-International Crops Research
Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (DBT -ICRISAT) platform for translational research
on transgenic crops started operations for facilitating contract R & D on validation,
regulatory tests, and commercialization of agri-biotechnology products.
(xii) Establishing biotechnology parks has also been supported to facilitate small and
medium enterprises in translational research, product advancement and innovation,
and to produce biotech entrepreneurs. A biotechnology park in Hyderabad has become
operational and the contract has been awarded. The IIT Guwahati biotech incubator
is progressing well.
(xiii) To nurture the ideas and providing the mechanism for proving the proof of the
concept as well as to take them forward is a pre-requisite to give shape to the
emerging technology. SBIRI scheme resulted in six Indian patents and development of
16 technologies in agriculture, health care and instrumentation. 60 projects supported
under BIPP scheme benefited 51 companies (27 small, 12 medium and 12 large
companies). BIPP supported H1N1 vaccine was recently approved by Drug Controller
General of India (DCGI) for marketing.
(xiv) A legal framework in the form of ‘The Protection and Utilization of Public Funded
Intellectual Property Bill, 2008’ is in the process of approval.

6
5.5 The Committee expresses satisfaction with the overall performance of the
Department during the Eleventh Plan period. The Committee is happy to know that
technology transfer agreements facilitated by DBT in Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) mode
will ensure availability of the world’s cheapest vaccines against Pneumococcal pneumonia,
rotavirus, HPV, Chikungunya and Japanese encephalitis. The Committee would further like
the Department to make concerted efforts to complete the clinical trials of vaccines for
malaria, dengue, cholera and rotavirus at an early date and make these vaccines available
in the market as soon as possible.
6. THRUST AREAS OF THE TWELFTH FIVE YEAR PLAN PERIOD
6.1 The focus of Twelfth Five Year Plan proposals of DBT is around the overall strategy of
“accelerating the pace of research, innovation, development and technology transfer to advance
biotechnology” as strategic area by taking India’s strengths in foundational sciences to globally
competitive levels and expanding the application of biotechnologies for overall growth of bio-
economy within the framework of inclusive development”. This requires visualizing the
biotechnology sector as a national enterprise with functional connectivity and a common goal rather
than focus on individual components in the public, not for profit or for profit space, a system that
functions effectively as a whole.
6.2 The Department has informed that its strategy for Twelfth Five Year Plan is to strengthen
the foundation it has laid during the Eleventh Plan and prime objective is to achieve the target
through focused investments, policy support, reforms in governance and management of projects
with the following goals:–
(i) Expand available pool of research scholars and scientist at all levels (Ph.D, PDFs,
young faculty) in biological and interdisciplinary space by 3-5 folds
(ii) Connecting and augmenting existing competences across institutions and universities
for bio-economy and social impact;
(iii) Expanding, diversifying career paths with a linkage to high-end interdisciplinary
sciences, innovation, translation and entrepreneurship;
(iv) Strengthening regulatory science and infrastructure;
(v) Expanding existing autonomous R & D institutions;
(vi) Expansion and commissioning of bio clusters at Faridabad, Mohali, Kalyani and
Hyderabad;
(vii) Establish DBT grant-in-aid or partnership research and translational centres through
long term (EFC) support;
(viii) Reorient and Launch “Grand Challenge Programme” scheme of Eleventh Plan to
address national priorities;
(ix) Rejuvenate existing and establish new research resources, facilities and services;
(x) Leverage international collaboration for partnerships in cutting edge areas of research,
education and technology development, access and acquisition;
(xi) Continued and Sustained support to public private partnerships with new innovative
funding schemes;
(xii) Promoting discovery led innovation and strategic investments in priority sectors;

7
(xiii) Promoting new generation biotech industries;
(xiv) Technology acquisition, transfer and licensing for product development;
(xv) Communication platform/system for creating awareness and public understanding of
biotechnology;
(xvi) Expedite legal framework and legislations;
(xvii) Strengthening and consolidation of major Eleventh Plan initiatives;
(xviii) Promote policy research and analysis in biotechnology;
6.3 The major initiatives and programme starting during the year 2012-13, include setting-up of
inter-institutional centres connecting fundamental research with translational and product
development activities and DBT partnerships centres in agriculture and health care jointly with
agriculture/veterinary universities and medical colleges. Grand challenge programmes in the areas of
molecular breeding for improved varieties for agriculture productivity; biotech interventions in
pregnancy and childbirth and nutrition will be launched with separate management and governance
mechanisms. Key initiatives will be taken-up to establish network projects in system biology,
synthetic biology, computational sciences, nano-biology and other emer ging areas. The programmes
of human resource development such as Wellcome Trust DBT biomedical fellowship,
Ramalingswami fellowships for attracting scientist from abroad to work in Indian Institutions/
universities will be strengthened. Star undergraduate life science colleges and finishing schools for
skill development and teachers training centres will be supported. At least two new national
research centres in the areas of bioinformatics and computation biology and marine and microbial
technology shall be started. The public private partnerships schemes such as Small Business
Innovative Research Initiatives (SBIRI) and Biotech Industrial Partnership Programme (BIPP) shall
be reformed for implementation.
6.4 Besides new initiatives such as ignition grant schemes, university-industry incubators and
facilities shall be established. Research resources such as regulatory testing facilities, knockout
animal house and large animal facilities, translational platform and agriculture health care shall be
established for services to industries and academia. Construction activities of six newly established
autonomous institutions during the Twelfth Plan will be accelerated for completing major building
Plans. The ongoing programmes in the north eastern region on human resource development, R & D
and biotech based societal programmes shall be continued and strengthened with focused new
initiatives in the form of centres/units of excellence in agriculture and health care.
7. BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2012-13
7.1 The Committee desired to know from the Department about any drastic reduction in
allocation under any programme/scheme as against the projected demand with detail thereof. The
Department has informed that it had projected a demand for Plan allocation of Rs. 2025.00 crores
for B.E. 2012-13. However, the total Plan allocation made is Rs. 1485.00 crores in B.E. 2012-13.
Considering the minimum requirement of Rs. 1800.00 crores for 2012-13 to initiate new
programmes and schemes proposed for Elventh Plan, the allocation is short by Rs. 315.00 crores.
7.2 The Committee also desired to know whether the funds allocated were sufficient to carry out
the activities of the Department and if not, the schemes/projects likely to be affected by the reduced
allocations. The Department has explained that the new programmes/schemes that will be affected due
to this shortage include establishment of inter-institutional/DBT partnership programmes; expansion of
autonomous institutions established before Elventh Plan; and strengthening and expansion of
bioclusters. Shortfall in allocations is likely to affect all the schemes proportionally. The department
will prioritize and phase-out initiating the new programmes of T welfth Plan.

8
7.3 A statement showing scheme-wise outlay proposed by the Department and the outlay
approved by the Planning Commission is given below:–
(Rs. in crores )
Sl. Name of the Scheme Proposed Allocations
No. made by the
Planning
Commission for
B.E. 2012-13*
S&T SECTOR
1. Human Resource Development 132.00 85.00
2. Programme for Promotion of Excellence and Innovation 100.00 65.00
3. Biotech Facilities 60.00 60.00
4. Bioinformatics 40.00 35.00
5. Research & Development 649.00 500.00
6. Grand Challenge Programmes 120.00 65.00
7. International Cooperation 80.00 40.00
8. Biotechnology for Societal Development 37.00 15.00
9. Autonomous Institutions 622.00 480.00
10. I&M Sector 185.00 140.00
Total Plan Allocation 2025.00 1485.00
Non Plan Allocation – 15.39
GRAND T OTAL : 2025.00 1500.39
* Also includes allocation made for North-east Region
7.4 The department informed that since total shortfall in the Budget is about Rs. 525 crores
rupees, allocation for most of the programmes will have to be cut down and an exercise to
reprioritize the expenditure on new initiatives has to be done. For example, in case of Autonomous
Research & Development institutions, though a realistic estimate was made by the Department, the
allocation is much less at Rs. 480 crores as against the projected demand of Rs. 622 crores.
Accordingly, in case of all new institutions, the activities scheduled for 2010--2011 have been
reassessed and prioritized by the Department. The various sectoral Research & Development
activities have been reviewed, reorganized and focused as per the overall goals of XI Five Year
Plan. The Department has made some special allocations under Human Resource Development (item
3.01) for meeting the ongoing commitments and Grand Challenge Programmes (item 3.05) XI Five
Year Plan by the Planning Commission. Partnership with Indian Council of Medical Research for
sharing costs and activities has also been considered to make up for the gap in the areas of
agriculture biotechnology reviewed, reorganized and focused as per the overall goals of XI Five
Year Plan. The Department has made some special allocations under Human Resource Development
(item 3.01) for meeting the ongoing commitments and Grand Challenge Programmes (item 3.05)

9
XI Five Year Plan by the Planning Commission. Partnership with Indian Council of Medical
Research for sharing costs and activities has also been considered to make up for the gap in the
areas of agriculture biotechnology.
7.5 The Committee expresses serious concern over the significant reduction of Rs. 524.61
crores between the Plan demand projected by the Department and the actual allocations
made even though Department maintains that it had projected reasonable demands. Due to
this reduction in allocation, the Department will need to re-prioritize allocation within
various heads to initiate work and will even have to defer some of the activities planned
for that year to next year due to paucity of funds. The Committee is, of the view, that
considering the immense potential of Biotechnology in providing affordable health care and
increasing agricultural productivity as also India’s emergence as one amongst the global
leaders in biotechnology, adequate funds should be made available to the Department so
that our Research & Development activities are not adversely impacted. The Committee,
therefore, takes a very serious view of blind cuts made in the projected Demands of the
Department and recommends that the Government should provide adequate funds at R.E.
stage to the Department so that its important programmes and Research & Development
activities are vigorously pursued and our global competitiveness in biotechnology sector gets
further strengthened.
7.6 The Committee enquired from the Department the reasons for reduction of allocation of
R.E. stage for the programme Support to Autonomous R&D Institutions, Research & Development,
and wanted to know if reduction was due to underutilization of budgetary allocations provided for
those programmes or due to some other reasons.
7.7 The Department replied that even when it was able to incur an expenditure of more than
54 per cent of B.E. allocations as against the target of 50 per cent, the Ministry of Finance
exercised a mandatory cut of 10 per cent of B.E. outlay resulting in reduced allocation at R.E.
stage. The same reason holds good for the reduction of funds at R.E. stage for other programmes.
Hence, the reduction at the R.E. level is due to a policy decision taken by the Ministry of Finance
and not because of underutilization of funds by the Department.
7.8 The Committee is surprised to know that the reason for reduction in overall
allocations of the Department at R.E. stage was to meet the ceiling fixed by the Ministry
of Finance. The Committee feels that even if reduction is to be done, it should be achieved
by imposing suitable cuts in non priority spending areas and priority areas like R&D
programmes of Department of Biotechnology should either be spared or minimum necessary
cuts alone be imposed on.
8. SUPPORT TO AUTONOMOUS R&D INSTITUTIONS
8.1 The Autonomous Institutions have been established by the Department to demonstrate the
increasing emphasis on research and process-product development. These institutions generate a
new synergy towards capturing research leads and converting them into products. Presently, there
are 14 existing Autonomous institutions. The Department has mentioned that six new institutions
in basic and translational research have been established to address critical areas of scientific
competence vital to India’s progress. These institutions in the areas of stem cell and regenerative
medicine, agri-food biotechnology, animal biotechnology, health science, biomedical genomics and
biotechnology training and education have been started with interim facilities, appointment of
faculty and research activities pending construction of main buildings.
8.2 A chart showing allocations for Autonomous Institutions for the year 2012-2013 is given
below:–

10
(Rs. in crores )
Sl. Name of the Centres Plan
No. Allocations for
2012-13*
AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS
1. National Institute of Immunology 55.00
2. Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics 40.00
3. National Centre for Cell Science 37.00
4. National Brain Research Centre 27.00
5. National Institute for Plant Genome Research 26.00
6. Institute for Bioresource Sustainable Development 0.15
7. Institute of Life Sciences 30.00
8. Rajiv Gandhi Research Centre for Biotechnology 24.90
9. Translational Health Science and Technology Institute 29.00
10. UNESCO Regional Centre for Education & Training, Faridabad 34.00
11. National Agri-Food Biotechnology Institute & Bioprocessing Unit, Mohali 28.00
12. Institute of Stem Cell Research and Regenerative Medicine, Bangalore 28.00
13. Institute of Biomedical Genomics, Kalyani, West Bengal 27.95
14. National Institute of Animal Biotechnology, Hyderabad 15.00
15. International Centre for Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology 13.00
16. Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC) 25.00
17. Bioclusters and Incubators 15.00
TOTAL 455.00
* Excluding allocation made for North-East Region
8.3 The Secretary, DBT during Demands for Grants meeting also informed the Committee that
the following 6 newly formed institutions have also started functioning:–
(i) Translational Health Science & Technology Institute (THSTI), Faridabad, Haryana;
(ii) Regional Centre for Biotechnology (RCB), Faridabad, Haryana;
(iii) Institute of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine (InStem), Bangalore, India;
(iv) National Agri-Food Biotechnology Institute (NABI), Mohali, Punjab;
(v) National Institute of Biomedical Genomics (NIBMG), Kalyani, West Bengal; and
(vi) National Institute of Animal Biotechnology (NIAB), Hyderabad.

11
8.4 When the Committee enquired about the substantial increase in allocation made under the
programme of ‘Support to Autonomous R&D Institutions’ from Rs. 370.51 crores at R.E. stage
in 2011-2012 to Rs. 455.00 crores at B.E. stage this year, the Secretary apprised that the increased
allocation during 2012-2013 is due to new subheads and provisions made for proposed expenditure
on accounts of ICGEB (Rs. 13.00 crores), Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council
(Rs. 25.00 crores) and Bioclusters/Incubators (Rs. 15.00 crores). The remaining amount of
Rs. 23.65 crores has been allocated mainly for construction of main campus to new institutions
for which major expenditure is scheduled during this year. The Department informed that this was
due to implementation of action Plan of six new institutions approved by the Government in terms
of construction, procurement of equipments, appointment of manpower, establishment of interim
facilities etc.
8.5 The Committee notes that the plan allocation under the head of R&D for the year
2012-13 is to the tune of Rs. 455 crores which is significantly higher than B.E. Plan
allocation of Rs. 376.10 crores made in 2011-12. The Committee is of the view that higher
allocation on R&D are need of the hour and help India strengthen its position as one of
the global leaders in biotechnology.
9. INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR GENETIC ENGINEERING & BIOTECHNOLOGY
(ICGEB)
9.1 International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology is a Centre of repute in the
field of Genetic engineering. It has made significant contributions in developing medicines for
control of Malaria, has developed novel intervention strategic medicines for tuberculosis, the
Hepatitis E studies and development of recombinant gene products.
9.2 In response to a query made by the committee, in regard to the status and functioning and
contribution by Italian government to ICGEB, the Department informed that in the last five years,
the contribution of Italian government to ICGEB has been more or less static and contribution was
marginally reduced during financial year 2011. Considering this, the Department proposed to
increase the contribution to ICGEB for the year 2012-2013 to Rs.13.00 crores from Plan budget
under Research & Development so that it could function smoothly.
9.3 The Committee, however, notes that the Centre was till 2011-12 also receiving non-plan
allocation of Rs. 10 crores from Government which has been discontinued from this year. The
Committee, in principle, is of the view that research centers engaged in applied science and
technology should not be supported from Government funds for unduly long period and the centre
must develop capacity and capability to raise its own resources by commercially exploiting its
product and services. However, discontinuation of non-plan grant by the Government to the Centre
has come at a time when external aid, it has been receiving from Government of Italy, has also
been reduced. The Committee fears that the cumulative effect of these cuts may create financial
difficulties for the center and may adversely affect its functioning and progress of research being
undertaken by it in many important areas of interest to us.
9.4 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the government must ensure the
functioning of this important centre of research and quality of research being done there
is not adversely impacted due to reduction in financial allocation to the centre and, if
necessary, interim financial assistance be provided to the centre to tide over its immediate
financial problems. The Committee would also like the Centre to make concerted efforts so
that it is able to meet its expenses from its own income in a short time and it does not
remain dependent on government funds for its very survival.

12
10. BIOTECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY RESEARCH ASSISTANCE COUNCIL (BIRAC)
10.1 The committee desired to know from the Department about status of BIRAC. The
Committee recalled that the President in her address to both the houses of Parliament this year has
stated that in order to facilitate innovation a Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council
is being set up as a not-for-profit company to facilitate the growth of biotech industry to help small
and medium enterprises. The Department informed that BIRAC, was approved by the Cabinet on
24
th November, 201 1 and incorporated as ‘not-for-profit’ section 25 Company under Companies
Act, 1956 on 20 th March, 2012. Stating the vision of BIRAC the Department informed that it was
set up to stimulate, foster and enhance the strategic research and innovation capabilities of the
Indian biotech industry particularly SMEs, to make India globally competitive in biotech innovation
and entrepreneurship and to create affordable products and services. It has been set up as a
separate body for supporting product innovation and providing required infrastructure and services
at different stages of the value chain for promoting innovation and product development.
10.2 The Committee welcomes the decision to establish BIRAC with a view to support
product innovation and providing required infrastructure and services at different stages of
the value chain for promoting innovation and product development to public sector and
private sectors through facilitating bioindustrial growth. The Committee hopes that with the
establishment of BIRAC, global competitiveness of Indian biotech industry would increase
and it would help us to increase our market share in the global biotech products and
services.
11. HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
11.1 In the sphere of HRD, the Department has been making an important contribution by
facilitating generation of skilled human resource in multi-disciplinary area of Biotechnology and
popularization of the various aspects of this field. The Committee was informed that the
allocation for ‘Human Resource Development’ has been marginally increased from Rs. 63.00
crores at B.E. 2011-12 to Rs. 70.00 crores at R.E. 2011-12 and then to Rs. 75.00 crores at the
B.E. stage, 2012-13. While apprising the Committee of reasons behind the increased allocation and
achievements of the Department in this area, the following was informed.
(i) Revised pay scales of research fellows and research associates have been granted
since April, 2010 and settlement of arrears done.
(ii) Increase in number of fellowships particularly under Biotechnology Industry Training
Programme (BITP) aimed at training post graduate students through industry
attachments: about 2300 students have been trained during 2007-2011.
(iii) Launching of Biotechnology Career Advancement and Reorientation Programme for
Women Scientists (Bio-CARe); 50 women were awarded fellowships in 2011-2012
and implementation of ‘Star Colleges Programmes’ for strengthening of undergraduate
science colleges through the scheme; about 57 colleges have been supported through
competitive grant system. It has been, informed that all these new programmes would
be continued during 2012-2013 requiring additional allocation of Rs. 5.00 crores.
11.2 The Committee feels that quality human resource forms the backbone of research
activities in a country and as such the Department needs to accord greater priority to
lapping, nurturing and involving talented students in biotechnology. The Committee is of the
opinion that the Department must play a pro-active role in this regard. The Committee
appreciates the efforts being made by the Department in creating capable human resource
in the biotechnology sector and extending support to students at the college level through
fellowships, short term training courses, providing industrial training to B.Tech./M.Sc./M.

13
Tech biotechnology students. The Committee also commends that the Star College scheme
initiated by the Department, which aims towards strengthening of life science, biotechnology
education and training and provides experience to biotechnology students in the cutting
edge-technologies needed for modern biological studies at undergraduate level in life
sciences. The Committee hopes that these schemes would help creating sufficient scientists
and technocrats needed by the expanding field of biotechnology. The Committee
recommends that the Department should carefully work out future requirements of human
resources in the Biotechnology sector and, if necessary, expand its existing schemes, to
ensure availability of required manpower in years to come.
12. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
12.1 The Department supports research programmes in basic and specialized fields of
biotechnology across a wide range of areas and sectors to develop basic knowledge, technologies,
processes and products relevant to health, environment, industry and agriculture. The Department
has launched a new online project submission and monitoring system (e-ProMIS) and has adopted
a new competitive research grant process.
12.2 Informing about the new Research & Development programmes that are proposed to be
initiated, the Department has informed that the allocation made for ‘Research and Development’
(R&D) has been decreased in Budgetary allocation to other Scientific bodies from Rs. 418.90
crores in B.E. 2011-12 to Rs. 420.00 crores in R.E. 2011-12. In B.E. 2012-13 allocation has
remained the same as in RE 2011-12. However, total allocation for Research & Development
scheme in 2012-13 is Rs. 500.00 crores which includes Rs. 80.00 crores for North Eastern region
and Sikkim; in effect the increase in allocation to R&D during 2012-13 is about 12%-16% over
2010-2011 and 2011-2012 respectively.
12.3 The Committee, however, expresses its serious concern over inadequate allocation for
R&D purposes made by the private sector. Funding provided by the private sector in India
is significantly lower as compared to international norms of 1.3-1.4 of GDP. In France,
Industry performs over 63 per cent (of all R&D) and funds around 54 per cent projects
while this figure is 69 per cent in Japan. In India, contribution of private sector industries
is estimated at around 25 per cent of national R&D expenditure which needs to be enhanced
to at least 50 per cent in the Twelfth plan.
13. SCHOLARSHIPS, FELLOWSHIPS AND STEPS TAKEN TO ARREST BRAIN DRAIN
13.1 The Department has informed that it has initiated a number of very good fellowships to
attract younger generation to biotechnology. ‘Wellcome Trust’ Fellowship a programme in
collaboration with ‘Wellcome trust’, UK with a total corpus fund of Rs.1300 crores shared equally
with DBT, to attract scientist from abroad in biomedical science for joining Indian institution. So
far, 60 scientists have been awarded competitive fellowship. This scholarship is expected to help
generate leaders in the field of biotechnology in future.
13.2 When the Committee specifically desired to know from the Department about the steps
taken to prevent Brain drain both at faculty and students level, the Department has apprised that
several steps have been taken for preventing the brain drain and providing incentives to outstanding
scientists. Tata Innovation fellowships have been instituted for providing additional financial
incentives to outstanding scientists. A revised Bill for Intellectual Property Management in public
funded projects after considering amendments suggested by this Committee, has been formulated
to ensure that Innovators get 1/3 of royalties from technology transfer and commercialization.
Number of fellowships has also been increased at post doctoral, Ph.Ds and M.Sc. levels.

14
13.3 Rapid Young Grant scheme is a very new kind of empowerment particularly focusing on
younger generation especially for the people below 35 years of age, so called as within twelve
weeks time they are funded. About 340 scientists below the age of 35 years have been granted
R&D projects on merit basis 90 scientists has become a part of Ramalinagaswami Fellowships,
instituted with attractive salary packages and incentives for scientists willing to come back from
abroad and work in Indian laboratories/ institutions.
13.4 The Committee appreciates the Department for taking initiatives for encouraging
youth across various streams of Biotechnology through a range of scholarships such as
wellcome trust fellowship, Rapid Young Grant scheme, etc. The Committee also commends
introduction of Ramalinagaswami Fellowships aimed at attracting Indian scientist coming
back to their mother land and hopes that schemes like this will help check brain-drain.
13.5 The Committee, however, would like the Department to follow a transparent and
objective criterion for award of these scholarships/fellowships so that only deserving and
talented persons get them. The Committee would also like the department to devise ways
and means so that talented students coming from rural background, belonging to deprived
sections of society and women scholars could also be encouraged to join the stream of
Biotechnology.
14. BIOTECHNOLOGY FOR SOCIETAL DEVELOPMENT
14.1 The main objectives of the programme is to promote use of biotechnological processes and
tools for the benefit of entrepreneurs and create platform for employment generation among the
target population and diffusion of proven and field-tested technologies through demonstration,
training and extension activities. The main focus areas are biofertilizer production,
vermicomposting, honey production, poultry, fish production, artificial insemination, mushroom
cultivation, goat rearing, silk worm rearing, fruit Plant nurseries, ambulatory clinics, sericulture and
women health care.
14.2 An amount of Rs. 15.00 crores at B.E. stage in the year 2011-2012 was allocated for
“Biotechnology for Societal Development” which was brought down to Rs. 13.00 crores at R.E.
2011-12 was allocated to. In the financial year 2012-13 at B.E. Stage the programme has been
allocated Rs. 13 crores out of which Rs. 2 crores are allocated for expenditure in North Eastern
region and Sikkim.
14.3 Highlighting the achievements of this programme during the Eleventh Five Year Plan the
Department has informed that 45000 rural, SC/ST and women population were benefited through
implementation of these programmes. Excellent examples of innovative societal programme is
“Network Project on Prasad Kit” using local bioresources and running of mobile ambulatory clinics
for the farmers. Low cost poly house construction for raising nursery-Planting material has been
developed for cultivation of medicinal and aromatic Plants. The Department has, further, informed
that most of the projects are submitted by NGOs, voluntary organizations and self-help groups in
collaboration with local universities, institutions and Krishi Vigyan Kendras of ICAR. During the
Twelfth Plan, it has proposals to strengthen implementation of the scheme with reforms in funding
and larger coverage.
14.4 The Committee appreciates the fact that the Department has been contributing to
societal development by making use of biotechnology processes and tools and notes that
during Eleventh Five Y ear Plan, 45000 rural, SC/ST & women were benefited from this
programme. The Committee is of the view that Department should expand its programme
significantly to provide for skill development, employment and income generation in the
field of agriculture, sericulture, etc. The Committee, also feels, that the Department should

15
particularly focus on extending help to Self Help Groups, Cooperatives etc. so that larger
number of people could be benefited from its programmes. The Department must also try
to focus finding innovative opportunities for income generation by using biotechnological
tools and processes on locally available resources.
15. THE GRAND CHALLENGE PROGRAMMES
15.1 The objective of the Grand Challenge Programme is to support biotechnology interventions
which can bring about significant value addition, cost effectiveness and competitiveness in products
and processes. Seven grand challenge programmes were launched in the areas of microbial
prospecting of genes and molecules, vaccines, food science and nutrition, accelerated molecular
breeding, biodesign, genomics and bioenergy, and biofuels.
15.2 Allocation for “Grand Challenge Programme” was decreased from Rs. 59.00 crores at B.E.
2011-12 to Rs. 54.00 crores at R.E. 2011-12 due to underutilisation of allocated amount.This year
at B.E. stage allocation has been increased to Rs. 60 crores. When the Committee asked about the
reasons for underutilisation,the Department informed that underutilisation was due to the fact that
Department of Expenditure since 2011-12 has introduced breakup of budget into capital cost
covering non-recurring expenditure and grant-in-aid covering recurring expenditure. The annual
releases in the ongoing projects are affected based on utilization certificates by the implementing
institutions. Any balance in recurring or nonrecurring budgets of each projects is deducted from
the provisions for releases in each subsequent year. The breakup of budget into nonrecurring and
recurring cost has affected almost all the schemes during 2010-2011. In case of several ongoing
projects under grand challenge programmes due to availability of positive balances under recurring
cost, the under utilization of allocated amount has occurred. However, the same has no effect on
the implementation of programmes supported.
15.3 The Committee is happy to note that introduction of breakup of budget will not
adversely impact this programme. The Committee considers the programme as of great
importance for common man and would like the Department to make all out efforts to
ensure that the programme achieves its objectives. The Committee would particularly like
the Department to ensure that cheaper vaccines for ailments of common man become
quickly available in the market.
16. PROGRAMME FOR PROMOTION OF EXCELLENCE AND INNOV ATION
16.1 Programme of excellence and innovation can be divided under two major heads namely
Centres for Excellence and setting up of translational research centres and platforms.
16.2 The Centres for Excellence schemes were initiated in 2007-08 to augment and strengthen
institutional basic and translational research capacity in areas of biotechnology with a focus of
development of technology. The Department has informed that it has established 14 Centres of
Excellence in Biotechnology and 5 Centres of Excellence in Bioinformatics. The specific goal of
these centres is to enhance the innovative ability of the institutions and investigators with well-
developed research programme in specific areas of biotechnology. These Centres of Excellence are
carrying out research in advanced and cutting-edge areas of biotechnology and bioinformatics.
These Centres have published research papers in various high impact factor journals of international
repute and filed/obtained patents. The Centres of Excellence in Bioinformatics have also developed
Bioinformatics Softwares, Servers and databases for the scientific utility.
16.3 Translational research centres and platforms were set up to cater the needs of the translational
research. These centre and platforms help in validation, technology perfection, clinical/field trials and
product development in the areas of vaccines, GM crops, energy and implants and devices.

16
16.4 Allocation to the programmes for Promotion of Excellence and Innovation has been
marginally increased from Rs. 54.00 crores in B.E. in 2011-12 to Rs. 55.00 crores in R.E. 2011-12.
However, in B.E. 2012-13, allocation has remained at same level i.e. Rs. 55.00 crores. The
Committee enquired as to how the Department would manage to set up more centres for excellence
around national priorities in life science and biotechnology with funding remaining the same.
16.5 In reply to the query raised, the Department has informed that, the overall allocation for
the year 2012-13 has been pegged at Rs. 1485.00 Crores as against minimum requirement of
Rs. 1820.00 Crores demanded. This has resulted in marginal increase in priority schemes and
decrease of B.E. in some other ongoing schemes. The department has proposals for establishment
of new centres of excellence in life sciences and inter-institutional centres connecting competences
across disciplines for development of biotechnologies. During 2012-13, it is proposed to start few
of these novel centres with necessary approval and with seed money for operationalisation. Due
to non-availability of funds, the department would prioritise the Planned programmes in terms of
numbers and relevance.
16.6 The Committee would like the Department to pursue with the Planning Commission
and Ministry of Finance for allocation of higher funds for this programme at the RE stage
2012-13 so that the objective of establishment of new Centres of Excellence in life Sciences,
Biotechnology and Bioinformatics during 2012-13, as originally planned by the Department
could be achieved. The Committee recommends Ministry of Finance and Planning
Commission to make sufficient funds available for establishment of sufficient number of
Centers of Excellence for carrying out research in advance and cutting-edge areas of
Biotechnology and Bioinformatics so that country not only maintains its competitive edge in
Biotechnology but further strengthens it.
17. INDUSTRY AND MANUFACTURING SECTOR (I&M)
17.1 The department has informed that During the Twelfth Plan, in order to rationalize the budget
heads, the schemes i.e. ‘Assistance for Technology Incubators, Pilot Projects, Biotechnology Parks
and Biotech Development Fund programme that were allocated Rs. 20.00 crores at B.E. 2011-12,
have been merged with I&M Sector-Public Private Partnership since it involved partnership and
association with private enterprises and the merger of heads provides larger scope for
implementation of more programmes.
17.2 Commenting on Biotech Industrial Parks, the Department has informed that Rs.20 crores
would be required for the Annual Plan 2012-13 i.e. Rs.10 crore would be required for ongoing
Biotech Parks and Incubation Centers and Rs.10 crores for the new projects. Highlighting the
achievements in Biotechnology Parks it has been stated that, during Eleventh Plan the Department
has informed that it supported establishment of biotechnology parks at Lucknow with incubator and
also proposals on incubators in IIT, Guwahati, TICEL Park, Chennai and Karnataka Biotech Park.
Seed money has been provided for techno-economic feasibility studies to establishment of
incubators at Mohali, Kochi, Trivandrum and Solan.
17.3 The Committee welcomes the step taken by the Department to merge the schemes
with overlapping mandates particularly as it would provide larger scope for implementation
of more programmes. The Committee also feels that special attention needs to be given to
promote women scientists to forefront in order to bring gender equality in the field of
biotechnology. All women Biotech Park can be a step in this direction. The Committee
recommends that under the head of I&M Sector considerable investment should be made
in collaboration with private sector for setting up more women’s Biotechnology parks in
other areas of the country such as in Jammu & Kashmir which is having considerable
number of women Muslim science graduates.

17
18. PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP
18.1 Public Private Partnership is a buzz-word of 21 st century. The Department of Biotechnology
has given attention to this innovative scheme. An allocation of Rs. 139 crores has been made at
B.E. 2012-13 and during the Twelfth Five Year Plan programme for assistance for Technology
Incubators, Pilot Projects, Biotechnology Parks and Biotech Development Fund is merged with the
Public Private Partnership Programme.
18.2 The Committee desired to know about the efforts made by the Department to encourage
and involve industries in the field of biotechnology. The Department replied that it is running a
programme, named, Public Private Partnership which has two components, i.e. Small Business
Innovative Research Initiative (SBIRI) and Biotechnology Industry Partnership Programme (BIPP).
18.3 To nurture ideas and provide the mechanism for proving the concept as well as to take
them forward is a sine-qua-non  for giving shape to the emerging technology, more often, such
initiatives need the intervention of the private sector at a massive scale. Funding through the
mechanism of Public Private Partnerships (PPP) schemes such as SBIRI and launching of new
scheme BIPP has paid rich dividends in terms of promoting R&D in small and medium bio-
industries. About 100 PPP projects have been launched so far. SBIRI scheme resulted in six Indian
patents and development of 16 technologies in agriculture, health care and instrumentation. 60
projects supported under BIPP scheme benefited 51companies (27 small, 12 medium and 12 large
companies). BIPP supported H1N1 vaccine was recently approved by Drug Controller General of
India (DCGI) for marketing.
18.4 The Department has informed that SBIRI will be modified/ expanded. Efforts will be made
to publicize the leads through publications, video programmes and other modes of publicity. SBIRI
Science Meetings in specified areas like Vaccines & Diagnostics, Biosimilars, Stem-Cell Research,
Bio-Therapeutics, Bioinformatics, Agriculture etc. will be undertaken inviting the Industry as well
as the Academia to get some leads. SBIRI Road Shows will be undertaken in various parts of the
country to tap the entrepreneurs at the grass-root level in addition to this, new entrepreneurs’ will
be encouraged. Funding of projects by the eligible private firms/ companies in collaboration with
institutions or independently would continue. The scheme will be advertised 3 to 4 times a year.
In BIPP, more rounds with special calls will be advertised in 2012-13. As per the scheme- 3 regular
calls with at least 2 special calls will be announced.
18.5 The Department has, further, informed that going beyond SBIRI and BIPP schemes, it is
expanding the Industry Innovation Funding Schemes for Twelfth Plan:
• Ignition Grant Scheme:  is being launched by the end of Eleventh Plan. The grant will
be available to individuals or a team of individuals (and not institutions) – in partnership
with private investment agencies as a co-investment – that will help mature nascent
ideas into to a stage where a start up company can be envisioned. This will be for all
the potential entrepreneurs and Biotechnology industry focused researchers who have an
exciting idea which may be in the nascent and Planning stage and have an unmet need
for mentorship and funding from Angel Investors in India. BIRAC would enter this
space as a facilitator along with an able partner to support and nurture these high risk
early starters and their concepts.
• Provision for “Bridge Funding”  will be started  for firms to function while they are
between successive private equity funding or when they are Planning for their IPOs.
Funds also should be made available for start-ups, to file for patents across different
geographies as the cost for filing such patents could be prohibitive.

18
18.6 The Committee feels that huge investment needed in Science & Technology research
can only be mobilised by introducing significant changes in current interaction of publicly
owned S&T establishment with industry both in public and private sectors. The Committee
feels that if India has to emerge as a scientifically developed nation, private sector
investment in Science &Technology has to increase substantially from the present levels
and Public Private Partnership can prove to be a great source of resource mobilisation.
18.7 After going through the details of SBIRI and BIPP programmes, the Committee is
of the opinion that these are well intended and useful programmes. It notes that BIPP has
diverse components covering health, environment and industry, etc. and the utility of the
scheme stands established by breakthrough research concepts which have already led to
commercialisation of various projects benefiting 51 companies apart from leading to
development of H1N1 vaccine which was recently approved by Drug Controller General of
India (DCGI) for marketing. The committee strongly recommends that this scheme must
continue during the Twelfth Plan as proposed by the Department since such investment may,
bring out sea change in the entire scenario of health, environment and industry combined.
19. INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATIONS
19.1 Growing importance of international collaboration in biotechnology and biosciences is
evident from the fact that as against six per cent of projects in India being internationally partnered
earlier, the figure has now reached to 16 per cent, and in some areas, particularly, medical related
areas, international collaboration has, actually, boosted up the sector in a big way. The collaboration
with international partners has gone beyond to Canada, Ireland, Japan, Australia, etc. There is an
increase in collaboration with India of Joint projects with Finland on  Synthetic Biology; agreement
with EU on Biotechnology waste water treatments and reuse in agronomical systems; ERANET
programme on ‘Global strategic alliances for the coordination on the major infectious diseases of
animals and zoonoses’; Plant sciences and related Biotechnology; Food & Nutrition and Medical
Biotechnology with Netherlands; Trilateral Programme with Canada, Israel; and Australia will be
implemented besides continuation of ongoing projects has been signed.
19.2 International collaboration is major highlight of Bio-design alliance programme which is
spread all over India and is supported by the Stanford University. The Budget allocated for
international collaboration has seen an increase of Rs. 8.50 crores in B.E. 2012-13 as compared
to R.E. 2011-12. The Secretary, DBT has informed that they have brought Rs.1000 crores, through
international collaboration like NIH and wellcome trust collaborations contributing 50 per cent of
funding.
19.3 The Committee is happy at increased international collaborations with various
countries. The committee notes that there has been an increase of allocation amounting to
Rs. 8.50 crores under this head. Mutually beneficial international collaborations in the field
of Biotechnology needs to be encouraged so as to boost the pace of progress and growth in
the key areas of Biotechnology and recommends accordingly.
19.4 The Committee is particularly happy at the result of international collaboration
under Biodesign Alliance Programme being run with the support of the Stanford University,
USA. The Committee notes that DBT has been able to mobilise through international
collaborations funding to the tune of Rs. 1000 crores out of which National Institute of
Health (NIH), USA and Wellcome Trust, UK have contributed 50 per cent of the money. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that in view of the mutually beneficial potential of
international collaborations in Biotechnology, increase in allocation beyond Rs 8.50 crores be
made in the subsequent years of Twelfth Five Year Plan so as to adequately fund the
programme.

19
20. PROJECTS/SCHEMES FOR THE BENEFIT OF  THE NORTH-EASTERN AREAS AND
SIKKIM
20.1 The Department of Biotechnology has taken proactive steps to promote Biotechnology in the
North Eastern part of India. The main objectives of the programme has been setting up of new
institutes, human resource development at all levels in healthcare, agriculture and bioresource
biotechnology; upgradation of research facilities in universities, colleges of agriculture and medicine;
implementation of North Eastern relevant product oriented R&D projects such as swine fever
network for vaccine and diagnostic development and demonstration of proven technology for the
benefit of society to promote skill development, entrepreneurship and self-employment.
20.2 A statement showing scheme-wise allocation made for North-Eastern Region 2012-13 is
given below:–
Budget Allocation for the North East Region for year 2012-13
Sl. Name of the Scheme Allocation to
No. North East Region
(Rs. in crores)
I. S&T SECTOR
1 Human Resource Development 10.00
2 Programme for Promotion of Excellence and Innovation 10.00
3 Biotech Facilities 10.00
4 Bioinformatics 5.00
5 Research & Development 80.00
6 Grand Challenge Programmes 5.00
7 International Cooperation 0.50
8 Biotechnology for Societal Development 2.00
II. AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS
9. National Institute of Immunology 0.00
10. Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics 0.00
11. National Centre for Cell Science 0.00
12. National Brain Research Centre 0.00
13. National Institute for Plant Genome Research 0.00
14. Institute for Bioresource Sustainable Development 25.00
15. Institute of Life Sciences 0.00
16. Rajiv Gandhi Research centre for Biotechnology 0.00
17. Translational Health Science and Technology Institute 0.00
18. UNESCO Regional Centre for Education & Training, Faridabad 0.00
19. National Agri-Food Biotechnology Institute & Bioprocessing Unit, Mohali 0.00

20
20. Institute of Stem Cell Research and Regenerative Medicine, Bangalore 0.00
21. Institute of Biomedical Genomics, Kalyani, West Bengal 0.00
22. National Institute of Animal Biotechnology, Hyderabad 0.00
23. International Centre for Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology 0.00
24. Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC) 0.00
25. Bioclusters and Incubators 0.00
III. I&M SECTOR
26. Public-Private partnership 1.00
TOTAL 148.50
crores
20.3 The Department informed the Committee that since 2008-09 DBT has been mandated to
earmark 10% of its total budget for the promotion of Biotechnology based programmes for the
benefit of people of the North Eastern States and therefore, the total allocation made for provision
for projects/schemes for the benefit of “North Eastern Areas and Sikkim” stood increased from
Rs. 140.00 crores in B.E. 2011-12 to Rs. 148.50 crores at B.E. 2012-13  This is because of the
total allocation at BE 2011-12 is Rs. 1485.00 crores and ten per cent of which i.e. 148.50 crores
have been allocated to North Eastern and Sikkim as per policies of the Central Government.
20.4 Major achievement of Programmes for North Eastern States and Sikkim are 63 overseas
associateship to North East Region (NER) Scientists, 93 biotech hubs, consortium on developing
digital database on Bioresource of NER networking, 8 NER institutions, consortium on biotech
interventions for effective utilization of selected medicinal and aromatic Plants networking, 4 NER
institutions, Development of online repository of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics resources of
NER (BABRONE), DBT-Assam Agricultural University Centre in Agri-biotechnology for local
solutions for local problems. Establishment of North Eastern Bioinformatics Network (NEBINet),
100 Twining R&D projects to NER institutions in collaboration with several institutions/universities
outside NER region, providing DelCON E-journals access to the researchers. The Department has
informed that it has been able to spend 80 to 85 per cent of the budget allocated for the North East.
20.5 In response to a query raised by one of the members of the committee on the functioning
of Institute of Bioresources and Sustainable Development (IBSD), Imphal during its deliberations
with Department of Biotechnology for Demand for Grants, the Secretary, DBT apprised the
committee that despite the illness that has crept into the overall functioning of the said institute,
it has considerably been put on the right track. It has got more staff and the land and a larger
building has been approved by the Building Committee, and thus it is now much more stable. It
has opened a centre in Sikkim as well.
20.6 The Committee is happy to note that the programme is bringing positive
transformation in North Eastern States and Sikkim. Keeping in view of the good
performance of the programme, the committee not only feels that mandatory 10 per cent
allocation should continue for the programme but budgetary allocations to the extent
possible should be leveraged to bring more funds in North Eastern states through PPP mode
for biotechnology applications. The Department should also Plan towards cooperation with
other scientific departments to boost pace of growth in this region. The Committee, further,
wants the Department to explore the possibility of earmarking certain per cent mandatory
allocation for other backward regions of the country such as the Himalayan Region as well.

21
20.7 The Committee commends the fact that in successive years the Department has been
able to utilize the progressively increasing allocations in Plan outlays. The Committee also
notes that the Department has been able to utilize an amount of Rs 1376.70 crores, out of
total allotted 1426.92 crores in the year 2011-12. For the financial year 2012-13 period, it
is hoped that the Department will be able to optimally utilize the total outlay of Rs. 1500.39
crores. After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology, the
Committee is of the view that the Department of Biotechnology, by and large, is making
good use of the public money and hopes that the Department would continue making proper
use of public funds in future also.

22
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
1. The Committee is happy to note that the Department has developed a strong and
potent monitoring mechanism and commends it for being amongst the best three Ministries/
Departments in the financial year 2010-11 in the Government’s performance review. The
Committee hopes that the Department would not only continue to maintain at least the
same level of performance but would also endeavour to perform even better in the XII Five
Year Plan. (Para 4.4)
2. The Committee observes that from the year 2007-08 onwards there is no significant
variation between financial allocations in BE and RE stages. The utilisation also ranges from
93.65 per cent in 2010-11 to as high as 99.17 per cent in 2008-09. These figures are
indicative of effective financial planning and robust monitoring of expenditure by the
Department. The Committee commends the excellent financial performance made by the
Department and hopes that the Department would even better this performance in the
Twelfth Five Year Plan. (Para 5.3)
3. The Committee expresses satisfaction with the overall performance of the
Department during the Eleventh Plan period. The Committee is happy to know that
technology transfer agreements facilitated by DBT in Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) mode
will ensure availability of the world’s cheapest vaccines against Pneumococcal pneumonia,
rotavirus, HPV, Chikungunya and Japanese encephalitis. The Committee would further like
the Department to make concerted efforts to complete the clinical trials of vaccines for
malaria, dengue, cholera and rotavirus at an early date and make these vaccines available
in the market as soon as possible. (Para 5.5)
4. The Committee expresses serious concern over the significant reduction of Rs. 524.61
crores between the Plan demand projected by the Department and the actual allocations
made even though Department maintains that it had projected reasonable demands. Due to
this reduction in allocation, the Department will need to re-prioritize allocation within
various heads to initiate work and will even have to defer some of the activities planned
for that year to next year due to paucity of funds. The Committee is, of the view, that
considering the immense potential of Biotechnology in providing affordable health care and
increasing agricultural productivity as also India’s emergence as one amongst the global
leaders in biotechnology, adequate funds should be made available to the Department so
that our Research & Development activities are not adversely impacted. The Committee,
therefore, takes a very serious view of blind cuts made in the projected Demands of the
Department and recommends that the Government should provide adequate funds at R.E.
stage to the Department so that its important programmes and Research & Development
activities are vigorously pursued and our global competitiveness in biotechnology sector gets
further strengthened. (Para 7.5)
5. The Committee is surprised to know that the reason for reduction in overall
allocations of the Department at R.E. stage was to meet the ceiling fixed by the Ministry
of Finance. The Committee feels that even if reduction is to be done, it should be achieved
by imposing suitable cuts in non priority spending areas and priority areas like R&D
programmes of Department of Biotechnology should either be spared or minimum necessary
cuts alone be imposed on. (Para 7.8)
22

23
6. The Committee notes that the plan allocation under the head of R&D for the year
2012-13 is to the tune of Rs. 455 crores which is significantly higher than B.E. Plan
allocation of Rs. 376.10 crores made in 2011-12. The Committee is of the view that higher
allocation on R&D are need of the hour and help India strengthen its position as one of
the global leaders in biotechnology. (Para 8.5)
7. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government must ensure the
functioning of this important centre of research and quality of research being done there
is not adversely impacted due to reduction in financial allocation to the centre and, if
necessary, interim financial assistance be provided to the centre to tide over its immediate
financial problems. The Committee would also like the Centre to make concerted efforts so
that it is able to meet its expenses from its own income in a short time and it does not
remain dependent on Government funds for its very survival. (Para 9.4)
8. The Committee welcomes the decision to establish BlRAC with a view to support
product innovation and providing required infrastructure and services at different stages of
the value chain for promoting innovation and product development to public sector and
private sectors through facilitating bioindustrial growth. The Committee hopes that with the
establishment of BIRAC, global competitiveness of Indian biotech industry would increase
and it would help us to increase our market share in the global biotech products and
services. (Para 10.2)
8. The Committee feels that quality human resource forms the backbone of research
activities in a country and as such the Department needs to accord greater priority to
lapping, nurturing and involving talented students in biotechnology. The Committee is of the
opinion that the Department must play a pro-active role in this regard. The Committee
appreciates the efforts being made by the Department in creating capable human resource
in the biotechnology sector and extending support to students at the college level through
fellowships, short term training courses, providing industrial training to B.Tech./M.Sc./
M.Tech biotechnology students. The Committee also commends that the Star College scheme
initiated by the Department, which aims towards strengthening of life science, biotechnology
education and training and provides experience to biotechnology students in the cutting
edge-technologies needed for modern biological studies at undergraduate level in life
sciences. The Committee hopes that these schemes would help creating sufficient scientists
and technocrats needed by the expanding field of biotechnology. The Committee
recommends that the Department should carefully work out future requirements of human
resources in the Biotechnology sector and, if necessary, expand its existing schemes, to
ensure availability of required manpower in years to come. (Para 11.2)
9. The Committee, however, expresses its serious concern over inadequate allocation for
R&D purposes made by the private sector. Funding provided by the private sector in India
is significantly lower as compared to international norms of 1.3-1.4 of GDP. In France,
Industry performs over 63 per cent (of all R&D) and funds around 54 per cent projects
while this figure is 69 per cent in Japan. In India, contribution of private sector industries
is estimated at around 25 per cent of national R&D expenditure which needs to be enhanced
to at least 50 per cent in the Twelfth plan. (Para 12.3)
10. The Committee appreciates the Department for taking initiatives for encouraging
youth across various streams of Biotechnology through a range of scholarships such as
wellcome trust fellowship, Rapid Young Grant scheme, etc. The Committee also commends
introduction of Ramalinagaswami Fellowships aimed at attracting Indian scientist coming
back to their mother land and hopes that schemes like this will help check brain-drain.
(Para 13.4)

24
11. The Committee, however, would like the Department to follow a transparent and
objective criterion for award of these scholarships/fellowships so that only deserving and
talented persons get them. The Committee would also like the department to devise ways
and means so that talented students coming from rural background, belonging to deprived
sections of society and women scholars could also be encouraged to join the stream of
Biotechnology. (Para 13.5)
12. The Committee appreciates the fact that the Department has been contributing to
societal development by making use of biotechnology processes and tools and notes that
during Eleventh Five Y ear Plan, 45000 rural, SC/ST & women were benefited from this
programme. The Committee is of the view that Department should expand its programme
significantly to provide for skill development, employment and income generation in the
field of agriculture, sericulture, etc. The Committee, also feels, that the Department should
particularly focus on extending help to Self Help Groups, Cooperatives etc. so that larger
number of people could be benefited from its programmes. The Department must also try
to focus finding innovative opportunities for income generation by using biotechnological
tools and processes on locally available resources. (Para 14.4)
13. The Committee is happy to note that introduction of breakup of budget will not
adversely impact this programme. The Committee considers the programme as of great
importance for common man and would like the Department to make all out efforts to
ensure that the programme achieves its objectives. The Committee would particularly like
the Department to ensure that cheaper vaccines for ailments of common man become
quickly available in the market. (Para 15.3)
14. The Committee would like the Department to pursue with the Planning Commission
and Ministry of Finance for allocation of higher funds for this programme at the RE stage
2012-13 so that the objective of establishment of new Centres of Excellence in life Sciences,
Biotechnology and Bioinformatics during 2012-13, as originally planned by the Department
could be achieved. The Committee recommends Ministry of Finance and Planning
Commission to make sufficient funds available for establishment of sufficient number of
Centers of Excellence for carrying out research in advance and cutting-edge areas of
Biotechnology and Bioinformatics so that country not only maintains its competitive edge in
Biotechnology but further strengthens it. (Para 16.6)
15. The Committee welcomes the step taken by the Department to merge the schemes
with overlapping mandates particularly as it would provide larger scope for implementation
of more programmes. The Committee also feels that special attention needs to be given to
promote women scientists to forefront in order to bring gender equality in the field of
biotechnology. All women Biotech Park can be a step in this direction. The Committee
recommends that under the head of I&M Sector considerable investment should be made
in collaboration with private sector for setting up more women’s Biotechnology parks in
other areas of the country such as in Jammu & Kashmir which is having considerable
number of women Muslim science graduates. (Para 17.3)
16. The Committee feels that huge investment needed in Science & Technology research
can only be mobilised by introducing significant changes in current interaction of publicly
owned S&T establishment with industry both in public and private sectors. The Committee
feels that if India has to emerge as a scientifically developed nation, private sector
investment in Science &Technology has to increase substantially from the present levels
and Public Private Partnership can prove to be a great source of resource mobilisation.
(Para 18.6)

25
17. After going through the details of SBIRI and BIPP programmes, the Committee is
of the opinion that these are well intended and useful programmes. It notes that BIPP has
diverse components covering health, environment and industry, etc. and the utility of the
scheme stands established by breakthrough research concepts which have already led to
commercialisation of various projects benefiting 51 companies apart from leading to
development of H1N1 vaccine which was recently approved by Drug Controller General of
India (DCGI) for marketing. The committee strongly recommends that this scheme must
continue during the Twelfth Plan as proposed by the Department since such investment
may, bring out sea change in the entire scenario of health, environment and industry
combined. (Para 18.7)
18. The Committee is happy at increased international collaborations with various
countries. The committee notes that there has been an increase of allocation amounting to
Rs. 8.50 crores under this head. Mutually beneficial international collaborations in the field
of Biotechnology needs to be encouraged so as to boost the pace of progress and growth in
the key areas of Biotechnology and recommends accordingly. (Para 19.3)
19. The Committee is particularly happy at the result of international collaboration
under Biodesign Alliance Programme being run with the support of the Stanford University,
USA. The Committee notes that DBT has been able to mobilise through international
collaborations funding to the tune of Rs. 1000 crores out of which National Institute of
Health (NIH), USA and Wellcome Trust, UK have contributed 50 per cent of the money. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that in view of the mutually beneficial potential of
international collaborations in Biotechnology, increase in allocation beyond Rs 8.50 crores be
made in the subsequent years of Twelfth Five Year Plan so as to adequately fund the
programme. (Para 19.4)
20. The Committee is happy to note that the programme is bringing positive
transformation in North Eastern States and Sikkim. Keeping in view of the good
performance of the programme, the committee not only feels that mandatory 10 per cent
allocation should continue for the programme but budgetary allocations to the extent
possible should be leveraged to bring more funds in North Eastern States through PPP mode
for biotechnology applications. The Department should also Plan towards cooperation with
other scientific departments to boost pace of growth in this region. The Committee, further,
wants the Department to explore the possibility of earmarking certain per cent mandatory
allocation for other backward regions of the country such as the Himalayan Region as well.
(Para 20.6)
21. The Committee commends the fact that in successive years the Department has been
able to utilize the progressively increasing allocations in Plan outlays. The Committee also
notes that the Department has been able to utilize an amount of Rs 1376.70 crores, out of
total allotted 1426.92 crores in the year 2011-12. For the financial year 2012-13 period, it
is hoped that the Department will be able to optimally utilize the total outlay of Rs. 1500.39
crores. After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology, the
Committee is of the view that the Department of Biotechnology, by and large, is making
good use of the public money and hopes that the Department would continue making proper
use of public funds in future also. (Para 20.7)

MINUTES

28

29
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 12 th April, 2012 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Anil H. Lad
4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
5. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
6. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan
LOK SABHA
7. Shrimati Bijoya Chkarabarty
8. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
9. Shri Pradeep Tamta
10. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
11. Prof (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
12. Shri Kristapa Nimmala
13. Shri Abdul Rahman
14. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
Representatives of the Department of Biotechnology
1. Dr. M.K. Bhan, Secretary
2. Shrimati Anuradha Mitra, JS & FA
3. Shri T.S. Rao, Scientist ‘G’
4. Shri S.R. Rao, Scientist ‘G’
5. Dr. (Ms.) Renu Swarup, Scientist ‘G’
2. At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members, the Secretary
Department of Biotechnology along with his team of officials to the meeting of the Committee and
informed that the Committee proposed to discuss the functioning and the Demand for Grants of
29

30
the Department of Biotechnology for the financial year 2012-13. He asked the Secretary to apprise
the Committee on the budgetary allocation made and physical targets set for major programmes of
the Department as also the status of the ongoing programmes and also whether the allocations were
sufficient to implement the programmes of the Ministry.
3. The Secretary, Department of Biotechnology in his presentation referred to 21
st century as
the ‘Century of Biology’, and stated that challenge before the Department was to discover, new.
knowledge, process of storing it and making the knowledge accessible to people, students and
scholars across the Board and also developing translational system, people and institutional
mechanisms who can use such new knowledge for the benefit of the society.
4. One of the Members of the Committee raised certain issues such as the production of bio-
fuel, non-availability of jobs in biotechnology sector and shortage of medicine for swine flu etc.
in Assam. While responding to the Member’s queries, the Secretary mentioned that 40% of
Biotechnology students were getting employed in industries. Regarding production of bio-fuels, the
Secretary stated that a research was going on, particularly regarding jatropha, but it had serious
limitations. He, therefore, felt that new science was required to be developed for generation of bio-
fuel. The Secretary, was however, hopeful that alternative solution regarding the production of bio-
fuel by ethanol facility would be developed soon.
5. While elaborating on the performance of DBT in North-East, he mentioned that there were
63 scientists from the North-East who were undergoing overseas training at the DBT expenses. He
further informed that 93 biotechnology hubs in universities located in North Eastern region, had
been established. A major agriculture-related DBT partnered centre had been established at Jorhat,
Assam which was performing well. He also stated that Institute for Bioresource and Sustainable
Development (IBSD) Centre at Imphal was also performing well. However, a request from Tripura
Government to open IBSD Centre was under active consideration.
6. He further informed that in view of the importance of animal husbandry, DBT-
partnered veterinary centre was being planned for North-East. Apart from this, he himself was
also, taking 10 to 15 trips every year to North-East for ensuring greater use of biotechnology
in the region.
7. Elaborating on the international collaboration in biotechnology, the Secretary, mentioned that
6% of projects in India were being partnered internationally. He further stated that in the field of
medicine, international collaboration had taken place in a big way as was evident from the fact that
16% projects in the field were internationally collaborated. He further, mentioned that there was a
noticeable departure from US centric collaboration to other countries like Canada, Australia and
Japan etc. during last year 300-400 projects had been funded across the globe on international
partnership basis. In the field of medicine, Secretary mentioned that Tuberculosis (TB), cancer,
biofertiliser etc. were the areas that were being partnered on international basis.
8. He also referred to the development of Biodesign Alliance Programme across India with the
help of Stanford University, USA.
9. While responding to a question raised by one of the Members of the Committee on child
malnutrition, the Secretary mentioned that DBT in collaboration with ICMR is producing zinc tablet
and under ASHA Kit, Zinc tablets were being given to newborn for treatment of diarrohea and zinc
deficiency.
10. The Secretary also referred to Golden Rice Project on Vitamin A and he, stated that the
programme on Nutrition and Food Security was a joint programme of DBT, ICMR, DST and
ICAR. Secretary, express the view that issues of gross under-nutrition could be solved only by
providing more access to food.

31
11. Thereafter, Secretary, stated that there were 8 million children, that is about 2 per cent of
the total children in the country, who were suffering from malnutrition. Thereafter, the issue of
Cancer was discussed by the Committee and while replying to some of the queries raised by
members in that regard, Secretary mentioned that basic duty of the Department was to develop
drugs and diagnostics regarding that dreaded disease. The discussion on cancer, further, continued
with the Secretary, mentioning that early detection and treatment of cancer was more life saving.
He, therefore, highlighted the need for such programmes that helped people to go for early check
up and detection of cancer as the cure rates were higher in case of early treatment.
12. Responding to a question on decrease in allocations, the Secretary stated that reduction of
Rs.47 crores in 2012-13 in budgetary allocation was due to readjustment of heads as some of the
activities were changed to international head which was a rationalization issue and not actual
decrease.
13. He further informed that as against an initial demand of Rs.2025 crores, minimum
requirement of DBT was Rs. 1800 crores but in the current fiscal, the Department has got only
Rs.1485 crores i.e. short by Rs.315 crores. At this stage, the Chairman of the Committee observed
that some kind of prioritization of important programmes would need to be done by the Department
because of the aforesaid reduction.
14. The Secretary also informed the Committee that Rs. 1000 crores was brought to DBT
through NIH collaboration and Wellcome Trust Collaboration.
15. At this juncture, a member raised issues relating to returning of scientists from abroad. In
response, the Secretary mentioned the DBT Wellcome Fellowship which was like a Nobel prize for
young persons and in the next 10 years time, the Department would have a new crop of 500 to
600 scientists under this fellowship programme.
16. The Members also raised some other issues relating to brain drain, which were replied to
by the Secretary, DBT.
17. While coming to, the factor of maintaining biological information for public knowledge,
Secretary, mentioned that information needed to be stored in one place.
18. Thereafter, the Committee discussed about the Genetically Modified Organisms (GMO) and
the status of Biotechnology Regulatory Authority of India (BRAI).
19. Pointing out to the basic flaws in the system, Secretary mentioned that issue of
commercialization had been mixed up with safety aspect of GMO in India which was a unfortunate
part and as the regulators were purely scientific people, they should not interfere in the domain
of commercialization for which a decision had to be taken at the Government level. He was of the
opinion that appropriate leaders including the Parliament should look into the issue.
20. In response to a member’s query regarding availability of any information regarding the
biotechnology, Secretary, responded that DBT had got a well maintained website which provided
information on important projects and anybody could access it to have information. This system
was known as e-ProMIS system.
21. The Committee, thereafter, discussed environmental metagenomics and in response to a
query in this regard from a member of the Committee, Secretary gave detailed information on it.
22. Afterward, the Committee discussed certain issues regarding the B.Sc. and M.Sc. level
training and education in biology. The Committee also had a discussion on H
1N1 vaccine.
23. The Committee, further, discussed issues like Women’s Biotechnology Park and certain
aspects of Bio-resource Development Board. With regard to the bio resource issue, the Secretary

32
informed that the matter was being discussed with Madhya Pradesh and J&K Governments and
possibilities were also being explored for establishing a bio resource complex in the North East.
About women’s biotechnology parks, the Committee took note that in its 228
th Report it had
recommended that special attention needs to be given to promote women scientists to forefront in
order to bring gender equality in the field of biotechnology. All women Biotech Park can be a step
in this direction. The Committee further feels that under the head ‘I&M Sector’ considerable
investment needs to be made in collaboration with private sector for setting up more women’s
Biotechnology parks in other areas of the country as well particularly in Jammu and Kashmir which
is having considerable number of women Muslim science graduates.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
24. The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 12.53 
P.M.
** *
25. * * *
26. * * *
27. * * *
28. * * *
29. * * *
30. * * *
31. * * *
32. * * *
33. * * *
34. * * *
35. * * *
36. * * *
37. * * *
** *
38. * * *
39. * * *
40. * * *
41. * * *
42. * * *
43. * * *
44. * * *
45. * * *
*** Relates to other matter.

33
46. * * *
47. * * *
48. * * *
49. * * *
50. * * *
51. * * *
52. * * *
53. * * *
54. The Committee adjourned at 6.02 
P.M. in the evening.
*** Relates to other matter.

34
XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday the 16 th May, 2012 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri Francisco Sardinha — In Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil H. Lad
3. Dr. Chandan Mitra
4. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
5. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
7. Shri Ninong Ering
8. Shri Abdul Rahman
9. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
10. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
11. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
12. Dr. Rajan Sushant
13. Shri Pradeep Tamta
14. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
15. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them
that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft reports on Demands for Grants
(2012-13) pertaining to Ministries/Departments of ***; ***; ***; ***; ***; *** and Biotechnology.
He also informed that the draft reports, approved by the Chairman of the Committee had already
been circulated to Members and that they must have gone through the reports. ***.
34
*** Relates to other matter.

35
3. The Committee then took-up for consideration, its draft ***, ***, ***, ***, ***, *** and
228th Reports, one by one. ***.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. While deliberating on the 228 th report pertaining to the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of
the Department of Biotechnology, the Chairman desired that the recommendations in the report may
be read out for the benefit of the Members. Accordingly the recommendations were read out. The
Committee also observed that the Department has been mandated to earmark 10 per cent of its total
budget for the promotion of Biotechnology based programmes in the North-Eastern States. In this
context the Committee desired to know as to whether this 10 per cent allocation is the same as
the allocation required to be made by various Ministries for the development of North-Eastern
Region. The Secretariat clarified that as per the directive of the Planning Commission, a mandatory
10 per cent of the total budgetary allocation of various Departments/Ministries is required to be
made for the development of the North-Eastern Regions. The Committee, thereafter, adopted its
228
th report without any amendments.
7. The Committee, thereafter, decided to present/lay the Report Nos. 222 nd to 228 th on both
the Houses of Parliament on the 18 th May, 2012. The Committee authorised Shri Francisco Sardinha
and in his absence Shri Pradeep Tamta to lay the reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha and in
Rajya Sabha Shri Janardan Dwivedi and in his absence Dr. Barun Mukherjee to present the reports.
8. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 3.40 
PS.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.