 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2016/ Phalguna, 1937 (Saka) 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE TWO HUNDRED SIXTIETH  REPORT OF THE 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS ON THE 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015-2016) OF THE 
MINISTRY OF EARTH SCIENCES 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th February, 2016) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th February, 2016) 
 
 
REPORT 
NO. 
275 

       
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
     
                                       
PAGES    
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
 
2. INTRODUCTION    
 
*3.        ACRONYMS                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                             
4.  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                                         
              
 *5.       MINUTES OF THE MEETING                                                                                                               
         
 
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
_________________________________________ 
*To be appended at printing stage 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2015-16) 
 (Constituted on 1st September, 2015) 
---------- 
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar  –– Chairman  
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan 
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
   6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian 
7. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy  
8. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh  
 9. Shri Bhupinder Singh 
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal 
   12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig 
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakraborty 
     14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan  
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary 
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev 
17. Shri Ninong Ering  
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa 
      19. Dr. K. Gopal 
20. Shri Daddan Mishra 
21. Shri Chirag Paswan  
22. Shri Shivaji A. Patil 
23. Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole 
24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan  
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar  
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy  
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh  
28. Shri Nagendra Singh  
29. Shrimati Renuka Sinha  
30. Shri Vikram Usendi  
31. Shrimati M.Vasanthi 
          __________________ 
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Rohtas, Director 
 Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director 
 Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director 
           
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science & Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the 
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Seventy-fifth 
Report on the Action Taken by the Ministry of Earth Sciences on the recommendations 
contained in Two Hundred Sixty Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2015-
2016) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences, which was presented laid in  the both the Houses 
of Parliament on 7th May, 2015. 
 
2. There were Twenty recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Sixty Report 
of the Committee.  Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were 
received from the Ministry on 21st July, 2015.  
 
4.     In the meeting held on  15th January, 2016 , the Committee considered the Draft 
Report and adopted the same. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ASHWANI KUMAR 
New Delhi: Chairman 
January 15, 2016          Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests 
25  Pausha, 1937 Rajya Sabha 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT 
 
The report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry 
of Earth Sciences on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Sixtieth 
Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Stand ing Committee on Science 
& Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2015 -2016) of 
the Ministry of Earth Sciences, which was presented to both the Houses of 
Parliament on 7 th May, 2015. There were twenty -four recommendations in the 
Report of the Committee. Action Taken notes on the recommendations of the 
Committee was received from the Ministry on 2 1st  July, 2015. The Ministry has 
intimated that it has accepted all the recommendations of the Committee. The 
Committee, on examination of Ac tion Taken Notes, however is not satisfied with 
action taken by the Ministry in respect of one recommendation (para 6.2)  and 
would like the Ministry to take further action in respect of such recommendations 
as indicated in the Report. 
 The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of 
the Committee on the action taken by the Ministry of Earth Sciences are set out in 
the succeeding paragraphs:- 
FINANCIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS FOR THE EARTH 
COMMISSION 
Recommendation (Para 4.3) 
The Comm ittee feels that without the devolution of financial and 
administrative power to the Earth Commission, the functioning of the Ministry 
seriously gets hampered. The Committee reiterates the recommendation made in 
its 243rd Report that immediate measures sho uld be taken to devolve financial and 
administrative power to the Earth Commission for its effective functioning.  
Action Taken by Government 
A  note for the Cabinet for giving financial and administrative powers to 
the Earth Commission, on the lines of Sp ace Commission and Atomic Energy 
Commission, was submitted to the Cabinet Secretariat for necessary action with 
the approval of the then Hon'ble Minister for Earth Sciences.  In reply, as advised, 
inter-ministerial consultations with relevant Ministries/De partment were carried 
out.  All relevant Ministries/Departments had supported the proposal.  However, 
D/Expenditure had raised certain observations which were examined in the 
Ministry.  Accordingly, with the approval of Hon'ble Minister for Earth Sciences 
on 24th December, 2014 the comments of the Ministry to these observations have 
been sent to D/Expenditure on 9 th February, 2015 with the request to convey their 
approval to the proposal to enable this Ministry to prepare revised Note for the 
Cabinet and su bmit to the Cabinet Secretariat for necessary approvals.  The 
approval of D/Expenditure is still awaited.  
Comments    
 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be further apprised of 
the development in this regard. 
FINANCIAL ACHIEVEMENTS OF MINISTRY-AN ANALYSIS OF 
TREND OF UTILISATION 
Recommendation (Para 5.2) 
 The Committee observes that in the last three years, B.E. allocation has 
been reduced at the RE level.  The Committee takes strong exception to such 
reduction which causes unnecessary delay i n the completion of 

programmes/projects.  The Committee, therefore, recommends to avoid 
curtailment of funds at RE stage which has been a regular trend in all the years and 
which severely hampers the programmes/projects.   
Action Taken by Government 
 The o bservations of the Committee have been noted with 
acknowledgement. 
Comments    
 The Committee recommends that the steps taken to avoid curtailment 
of funds at RE stage may be communicated. 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2015-16 
Recommendation (Para 6.2) 
 The Committee observes that there has been a drastic reduction in the 
budgetary allocation in the financial year 2015 -16 to the tune of Rs. 79.30 crore 
which is a serious blockade in taking up new activities/initiatives by the Ministry 
for whi ch additional finds of Rs. 371 crore are required.  The Committee 
recommends that efforts be made by the Ministry by prudently utilizing the given 
allocated budget and by planning and targeting the missions and programmes in an 
efficient manner.  
Action Taken by Government 
 The observations of the Committee have been noted with 
acknowledgement. 
Comments    
 The Committee has not been informed of the concrete action taken by 
the Government in pursuance of the above recommendation and would like 
to be apprised of the same. 
RATIONALIZATION OF THE SCHEMES 
Recommendation (Para 7.4) 
 The Committee expresses its unhappiness that for most of the programmes 
there has been a reduction in the budgetary allocation including the programme of 
High Performance Computing wh ich is an important programme of the ministry. 
The Committee feels that reduction in the number of programmes the budgetary 
reduction in allocation of programmes after clubbing them together will not ensure 
rationalisation of expenditure as the funds requi red for the programme will not be 
sufficient enough to meet the expenses of the programmes. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that along with clubbing of programmes, adequate funds 
should also be allocated to ensure efficient functioning. 
Action Taken by Government 
 The observations of the Committee have been noted with 
acknowledgement.  It is submitted that due to reduction in BE, several new 
activities/programs are forced to be deferred including the HPC.  It is also 
submitted that efforts have been ma de by the Ministry for consideration of 
additional fund of Rs. 371 crore at the RE stage for ensuring efficient overall 
functioning of the Ministry.  
Comments  
 The Committee notes the reply.    
POLAR SCIENCES AND CRYOSPHERE 
Recommendation (Para 8.7) 
 The Committee is of the view that the programme is one of the most 
important programmes of the Ministry and the activities pursued in the Antarctica, 

Arctic and Himalayan region is of extreme use for better understanding of Indian 
Climate and other societal be nefits. The Committee also observes that the 
programme is of strategic importance and in order to make our country’s presence 
in Arctic and Antarctica felt, this programme is of utmost importance.  The 
research undertaken in polar regions will help underst and the fragile Himalayan 
region. The Committee recommends that the programme should be undertaken 
diligently and in a well-planned manner.   
Action Taken by Government 
 Polar Science programme is undertaken diligently and the activities and 
their schedule are progressing in well-planned manner. 
Comments   
  The Committee notes the reply. 
POLAR RESEARCH VESSEL 
Recommendation (Para 9.3) 
The Committee observes that the progress of the research activities on the 
polar regions depends upon the infrastructure th at includes Polar Research Vessel.  
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the vessel be acquired expeditiously.  
The Committee notes that the amount for the vessel had been approved but more 
funds to the tune of Rs. 175 crore are required to acquire th e vessel. The 
Committee, therefore, also recommends that adequate funds be made available to 
the Ministry for acquisition of the vessel. 
Action Taken by Government 
 The observations of the Committee have been noted with 
acknowledgement.  It is submitted th at efforts have been made by the Ministry for 
consideration of additional fund of Rs.371 crore at the RE stage including Rs. 175 
crore for acquisition of the vessel.  
Comments    
 The Committee hopes that the requisite additional funds would be 
made availa ble to the Ministry so that it could acquire the vessel  at the 
earliest.  
SEISOMOLGICAL AND GEOSCIENCE (SAGE) PROGRAMME 
Recommendation (Para 10.7) 
 The Committee takes note of the activities undertaken in the preparatory 
phase which is relevant for collect ing seismological data and for continuing the 
seismological research activities in the main phase. The Committee recommends 
that the main phase of the programme be carried on taking inputs from preparatory 
phase and to complete the deep drilling of the bor e holes essential for 
understanding the regular occurrence of the earthquakes in the region.   
Action Taken by Government 
 Based on the preparatory studies the location of the pilot boreholes has 
been fixed.  Also the information gathered from the shallow deep boe boles will be 
used as the input to undertake the pilot borehole drilling as well as to carry out the 
measurements.  
Comments    
 The Committee notes the reply. 
Recommendation (Para 10.8) 
 The Committee takes serious note of the fact that additiona l Rs. 48 crore is 
required and only meagre amount of Rs. 4 crore are available to the Ministry for 
such an important programme which is critical in nature seeing the regular 

occurrence of earthquakes in the region. The Committee recommends that 
ensuring fu nds to the programme should be a high priority as the research on 
earthquakes will serve two purposes of monitoring critical parameters in the “near 
field” of earthquakes and providing India a unique opportunity to take global 
leadership role in this important scientific issue.  
Action Taken by Government 
 Subsequent to the Parliamentary Standing Committee meeting the total 
allocation of Seismology and Geosciences (SAGE) has been re -
organized/readjusted for different components and an amount of Rs. 20 crore  has 
now been allocated for Koyna deep drilling.  The remaining required funds will be 
sought through the supplementary at RE stage.  
Comments    
 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry would be 
allocated required funds at the RE Stage.  
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR SEISMOLOGY 
Recommendation (Para 11.2) 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry created a National Centre for 
Seismology as an attached office of the Ministry of Earth Sciences. The 
Committee also takes note of the fact that the separatio n of manpower, 
infrastructure etc. from IMD to NCS and creation of present posts still needs to be 
done. The Committee, therefore, recommends for the early creation of manpower, 
posts, infrastructure etc. necessary to start the functioning of National Cent re for 
Seismology.  
Action Taken by Government 
 The Ministry had issued a detailed Office Order No. MoES/25/15/2012 -
Estt. Dated 26 th May, 2015 appointing Director, National Centre for Seismology 
(NGS) and declaring him as HoD under SR2(10) for the purpose of FRs & SRs, 
GFRs, Leave Rules, Conduct Rules etc., and 13(2) of DFPR, 1978.  Further action 
in this regard is to be initiated by the Director, NCS.  
Comments    
 The Committee notes the reply.  Further action taken in the matter by 
the concerned authority should be intimated to the Committee.  
MICROZONATION OF CITIES 
Recommendation (Para 12.2) 
 The Committee takes note of the importance of microzonation of cities on 
account of vulnerability of India’s land to severe earthquakes and recommends to 
Government to take such purposive measures in consultation with State 
Governments and stakeholders as would mitigate the consequences of a potential 
earthquake in the vulnerable areas. The Committee also recommends that 
microzonation of cities particularly those fa lling in seismic zone V, IV and III 
should be taken up expeditiously and necessary geophysical, geological and other 
information/data should be acquired from Geological Survey of India so that delay 
in microzonation of cities is avoided.  
Action Taken by Government 
 Necessary action would be taken as per the recommendation of 
Parliamentary Standing Committee. 
Comments    
 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the 
developments in the matter. 

OCEAN SERVICES, TECHNOLOGY OBSERVATIONS, R ESOURCES 
MODELLING AND SCIENCE (O-STORMS) 
Recommendation (Para 13.4) 
 The Committee takes strong exception to the overall reduction of the 
budgetary allocation to the Ministry that resulted in the reduction in the budgetary 
allocation to the O -STORMS programme which is a significant programme of the 
Ministry. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should 
make all efforts to seek additional funds for this programme at the RE stage 
without which the activities under this programme will suffe r setback and 
unnecessary delays.  
Action Taken by Government 
 The observations of the Committee have been noted with 
acknowledgement.  The Ministry would like to thank the Committee for 
recommending additional budgetary support for the current financial y ear.  Efforts 
have been made by the Ministry for consideration of additional fund of Rs. 371 
crore at the RE state. 
Comments    
 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the O -STORMS 
programme would not be adversely affected because of  inadequate funds. 
POLYMETALLIC NODULES AND GAS HYDERATES 
Recommendation (Para 14.4) 
The Committee notes the efforts made by the Ministry for the development 
of technology for extraction of polymetallic nodules and gas -hydrates and the 
explorations significant for economi c and strategic purposes. The Committee 
recommends to undergo further exploration, especially the exploration of 
Polymetallic Sulphides after getting approval from the International Seabed 
Authority and more needs to be done by the Ministry in the field of  gas-hydrates 
exploration. The Committee urges upon the Ministry to take this programme with 
full vigour and with all serious efforts so that it plays important role in bridging 
the gap in energy availability. 
Action Taken by Government 
 In order to enhanc e exploration activities in respect of exploration of 
polymetallic sulphides further, there is a need of a dedicated research vessel.  The 
Ministry has initiated activities for acquisition of the vessel.  In the meanwhile, 
services of Geological Survey of India have been sought for providing their newly 
acquired vessel Samudra Ratnakar.  Presently, the main focus is on laboratory 
experiments for extraction of gas from gas hydrates.  As of new, there is no proven 
technology available worldwide for extraction of gas from gas hydrates.  
Comments    
 The Committee notes the reply.  The Committee recommends that 
there should be no let up in the efforts of the Ministry to acquire the vessel for 
exploration activities.  
Recommendation (Para 14.6) 
 The committee rec ommends that additional funds as required for the 
development of the manned submersible be made available to the Ministry.  
Action Taken by Government 
 The observations of the Committee have been noted with 
acknowledgement.  It is submitted that efforts ha ve been made by the Ministry for 
consideration of additonal fund of Rs. 371 crore at the RE stage.  

Comments    
 The Committee notes the reply. 
HIGH PERFORMANCE COMPUTING (HPC) 
Recommendation (Para 15.8) 
 The Committee recommends enhancement of budgetary a llocation to High 
Performance Computing programme so that strategic and essential activities 
requiring High Performance Computing are not adversely impacted.  The 
Committee therefore, recommends increase in the budgetary allocation to the 
programme at the RE stage. 
Action Taken by Government 
 Due to overall reduction in BE, th ere is minimal fund available for new 
initiatives/activities (approved by the Cabinet) including the HPC.  As a result, the 
budgetary allocation of HPC has been lowered.  Steps have be en undertaken by 
the Ministry for enhancement of the Budget Allocation at the RE stage in this 
regard. 
Comments    
 The Committee hopes that the Ministry would get the requisite funds 
at the RE state for High Performance Computing programme.  
ATOMOSPHERE & CLIMATE RESEARCH - MODELLING OBSERVING 
SYSTEMS & SERVICES (ACROSS) 
Recommendation (Para 16.5) 
 The Committee observes that the integrated budgetary allocation for the 
programme ACROSS had been reduced to the tune of Rs. 87.00 crore which is a 
matter of se rious concern and which will greatly hamper the planned activities of 
the programme. The Committee takes note that additional funds are needed to 
meet the requirements of important programmes including Himalayan 
Meteorology Programme. The Committee, theref ore, recommends that requisite 
funds be made available to the Ministry so that the programmes of national 
interest are not mired in unnecessary delays. 
Action Taken by Government 
 The observations of the Committee have been noted with 
acknowledgement.  Due  to overall reduction in BE , there is deficiency of funds 
available for new initiatives/activities (approved by the Cabinet) including 
Himalayan Meteorology Programme.  Steps have been taken by the Ministry for 
additional funds at the RE stage.  
Comments    
 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that additional funds are 
made available to the Ministry at the RE stage for this programme. 
Recommendation (Para 16.7) 
 The Committee notes that the funds available to the Ministry to procure a 
research aircraft for all airborne atmospheric research is very meagre. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the additional requirement of Rs. 59 crore 
be met to avoid any obstruction in the procurement of aircraft.  
Action Taken by Government 
 The observations of the Committee have been noted with 
acknowledgement.  It is submitted that efforts have been made by the Ministry for 
consideration of additional fund of Rs. 371 crore at the RE stage which includes 
Rs. 59 crore required for the procurement of aircraft. 
 

Comments    
 The Committee notes the reply. 
ACCURACY IN WEATHER FORECASTING  
Recommendation (Para 17.7) 
 The Committee notes the improvement in the accuracy of weather 
predictions including the predictions of the recent flash floods in J&K. The 
Committee feels t hat the accuracy in prediction of weather depends upon the 
augmentation in High Computing Systems. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the accuracy be improved further to bring it at par with other 
nations.  The Committee further recommends that allo cation of adequate funds to 
improve the infrastructure needed to enhance the accuracy of weather predictions 
including augmentation of High Computing Systems be ensured.  
Action Taken by Government 
 The Ministry thanks the Parliament Standing Committee for  its 
appreciation and acknowledgment of improvement in weather prediction.   
Towards this direction the Ministry has made considerable efforts in upgrading the 
HPC facility existing in MoES units to 1.2 peta flops.  With this augmentation of 
HPC, global mo dels with horizontal resolution of about 17 km and regional 
models with a horizontal resolution of 1.5 km will be run which would 
resolve/predict the embedded mesoscale weather systems in a better manner.  This 
will also enable running of higher resolution  model ensemble prediction system 
with more number of members for generating probabilistic forecasts.  However to 
continuously improve these forecasts there is a need for continuous augmentation 
of HPC to 7 -10 P flops for which Cabinet has given approval a t an estimated 
budget of Rs.569.69 crores.  As per the requirement, appropriate allocation of 
funds will be made. 
Comments    
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should prioritise the 
work for augmentation of High Performance Computing to 7 -10  P fl ops and 
seek requisite funds for which Cabinet has given approval. 
Recommendation (Para 17.9) 
 The Committee recommends to the Ministry to come out with an action 
plan on how the Ministry is dealing with changing climatic variability in various 
fields such  as agriculture, disaster management etc. The Committee further 
recommends that the additional funds required i.e. Rs. 14 crore should be made 
available to the Ministry for installing the system for the improvement of air 
quality forecasts in Ahmedabad and Mumbai.  
Action Taken by Government 
 Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (ESSO -IITM) under the Ministry 
through the activities of Centre for Climate Change Research (CCCR)  is doing 
extensive research work on climate variability and its impact on var ious sectors on 
agriculture, water resources, disaster management etc.  ESSO -IITM has developed 
an Earth System Model which provides high -resolution regional climate change 
scenarios to the Ministry of Environment and Forests for impact assessment 
studies.  The concerned ministries make use of these scenarios for mitigation 
purposes.  During the next 5 -10 years, ESSO -IITM will fully develop test and 
validate the Earth System Model (ESM) with regard to simulation of the global 
climate including the Indian an d Asian monsoons, coupled climate phenomena 
like ENSO, IOD, Pacific and Atlantic decadal variability, etc.  This will be used to 

give high resolution projections of future monsoon climate required for various 
impact assessment studies (eg., climate, water resources, agriculture, health, etc.) 
Steps have been taken by the Ministry for additional funds of Rs. 371 crore at the 
RE stage which includes Rs. 14 crore for System for Air Quality Forecasting and 
Research (SAFAR) programme. 
Comments    
 The Committee notes the reply and stresses that Ministry should 
continue its extensive research and studies on changing climatic variability 
and its impact. 
MODERNISATION OF INDIAN METEOROLOGICAL DEPARTMENT 
Recommendation (Para 18.4) 
 The Committee is of the opinion tha t the Modernisation of Indian 
Meteorological Department is of utmost importance and should be taken up 
earnestly. The Committee, however, expresses serious concern on the fact that the 
modernisation of IMD – Phase II has not been taken up due to non -availability of 
funds.  The Committee feels that in view of dependability of farmers on the rains 
for agriculture and the unpredictable weather changes because of climatic 
variability and increasing magnitude of natural disasters in the country, the 
modernisation of IMD is imperative for correct prediction. The Committee, 
therefore, makes strong recommendation that the Ministry should make all efforts 
to initiate Phase II of Modernisation of IMD and merely because of the funds 
crunch, the programme should not suffer.  
Action Taken by Government 
 The observations of the Committee are gratefully acknowledged.  Keeping 
in view the paucity of grants the targeted activities are prioritized in terms of:- 
(i) Himalayan Meteorology Program. 
(ii) Integrated Meteorology Services for NE region. 
(iii) Priority Augmentation of Doppler Weather Radar Network from the 
allocations so far made to the Ministry during XII Plan. 
The Modernization Phase-II of IMD is essentially required at estimated cost 
of Rs. 1305 crores for augmentation and enhance ment of various observation 
systems as per requirement over different parts of the country.   Preliminary works 
including identification of sites, preparation of Detailed Project Report, 
Expenditure Finance Committee documents have been prepared and the pr oject 
can be implemented as soon as approval is accorded by the Government. 
Comments    
 The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the Ministry 
should pursue the matter for early approval to the proposal. 
AGRO - METEOROLOGICAL SERVICES 
Recommendation (Para 19.5) 
 The Committee observes that weather forecasts are being disseminated to 
the farmers through SMSs/Mobile technology and the outreach of agromet 
services to 8 million farmers and to selected districts. The Committee notes that 
the improvement in forecasts has not been satisfactory at sub district scale which 
needs to be improved by installing weather observing networks. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends to improve the forecast at the sub district level and also to 
increase the outreach from  the district level to the block level. The Committee 
further recommends to increase the number of farmers to 10 million receiving the 
agro met services from the Ministry and in this regard, the Ministry should 

continue its coordination efforts and discuss ions with other related 
agencies/institutions and the setting up of District Agro Meteorological Units 
should be taken up to enhance the dissemination of agro-advisories to farmers.    
Action Taken by Government 
 The observations of the Committee are grate fully acknowledged.  The 
number of registered farmers to receive crops specific farm advisories now stands 
at 10.24 million and efforts are on with the partners to enhance it further so as to 
assist the farming community by all means.   Pilot mode efforts are made to 
develop sub -district scale forecasts wherever sub -district scale surface 
observatories as well as Automatic Weather Station (AWS), Automatic Rain 
Gauges (ARG) and other meteorological networks are available. 
 ESSO-IMD is actively coordinating w ith Indian Council for Agriculture 
Research (ICAR) for setting up of District Agrometeorological Units (DAUMUs) 
at Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs).  In first phase, ~50 KVKs have been identified 
to work as DAMU which is likely to be rolled out in FY 2015 -16 in preparation as 
well as dissemination of block level agromet advisories to the farmers in the 
respective block. 
Comments  
 The Committee notes the reply.   
AIRBORNE PLATFORMS FOR INSITU OBSERVATIONS - OCEAN 
RESEARCH VESSELS (APOORV) 
Recommendation (Para 20.3) 
 The Committee takes serious note that the amount required by the Ministry 
to acquire two ocean vessels needed to replace Sagar Purvi and Sagar Paschimi is 
Rs. 36 crore and the funds made available are only Rs. 1 crore. The Committee 
fails to understand how the grant of only Rs. 1 crore serve the critical purpose and, 
therefore, strongly recommends to ensure the availability of adequate funds for 
acquiring the vessels which has great utility in oceanic research.  
Action Taken by Government 
 The observa tions of the Committee have been noted with 
acknowledgement.  It is submitted that efforts have been made by the Ministry for 
consideration of additonal fund of Rs. 371 crore at the RE stage including Rs. 35 
crore for acquisition of two Coastal Research Vessels.  
Comments    
 The Committee notes the reply.  
RESEARCH, EDUCATION AND TRAINING OUTREACH  
Recommendation (Para 21.6) 
 The Committee notes the importance of trained manpower and coordination 
in research activities including international cooperation. The Committee observes 
that the setting up of Institute for Operational Oceanography is still not complete 
and requires more time. The Committee further notes that the paucity of funds is 
becoming the major obstacle in ensuring the extramural activities an d fulfilling the 
objectives of the programme.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
additional funds needed for the programme should be sought by the Ministry to 
ensure continuation of research and extra mural activities. The Committee further 
recommends that the Institute for Operational Oceanography should be set up in 
the scheduled time frame.  
 
 

Action Taken by Government 
 Under the program on "Research, Education, Training and Outreach 
"various activities including extra -mural support, capacity bu ilding programms, 
International cooperation etc are undertaken.  The International oceanography 
being established at ESSO-INCOIS Hyderabad at a total estimated cost of Rs. 100 
crore is partially functional using the existing infrastructure available at ESS O-
INCOIS. 
 In general the program is moving as per the expected timelines, however 
there has been some delay in establishing the physical structures including 
technical buildings and hostel due to paucity of funds.  Notwithstanding this, some 
academic activities have been initiated using the present INCOIS set up. 
 State of art E -class room facility under the Institute of Operational 
Oceanography Program has been operational sine March, 2015.  The centre has so 
far successfully trained 297 trainees includin g 52 from 22 countries abroad, 
through 5 International and 6 National programmes. 
 However to make the centre fully operational, it is essential that the 
physical infrastructure is in place at the earliest. 
Comments    
 The Committee notes the reply and re commends that the resources 
required for making the Institute for Operational Oceanography fully 
functional should be made available to the Ministry.   
ENVIRONMENT MONITORING AND RESEARCH 
Recommendation (Para 22.3) 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry is  having a coordination mechanism 
with the Central Pollution Control Board to measure the concentrations of various 
pollutants over the Delhi region. The Committee, however, feels that coordination 
between the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Chang e and the Ministry 
of Earth Sciences needs to be improved further so as to monitor changes related to 
climate and the efficient coordination mechanism will speed up the 
studies/activities related to combating the environmental degradation and effects 
of pollution.   
Action Taken by Government 
 ISSO-IITM is coordinating with t he Ministry of Environment,  Forest and 
Climate Change and t he data from the SAFAR system set up by ESS O-IITM are 
being shared with that  Ministry on real time basis for national monitori ng of air 
quality. 
 SAFAR data provides region -specific health impact assessments within 
megacity during control and extreme air pollution conditions.  The short lived 
greenhouse pollutants have substantial effects on agriculture, human health, 
natural biosphere, aviation and surface transport industry due to winter fog in the 
Indo-Gangetic plain.  However , there are substantial research gaps in these areas 
which can be addressed by coordinated interaction of scientists of SAFAR and 
CPCB to combat the environmental degradation and effects of pollution.  
Comments    
 The Committee notes the reply and recommends that all necessary 
steps should be taken by SAFAR and C entral Pollution Control Board to 
bridge the stated research gaps.  
Recommendation (Para 22.4) 

 The Committee recommends that special efforts should be made to 
disseminate information and knowledge of the schemes of the Ministry in far flung 
districts and particularly in the states of North East. 
Action Taken by Government 
 Dissemination information  and knowledge of Ministry's schemes (Earth 
Sciences) were made in ten districts of six NE states (viz. Manipur, Meghalaya, 
Assam, Mizoram, Tripura, Arunachal Pradesh) and four far flung districts of 
Kerala and Gujarat during 2014-15. 
 Further, efforts are continued for disseminating information and state of art 
knowledge of schemes of Ministry on various topics of Earth Sciences like Geo -
Hazards (Earth -quake etc.), Atmosphere (Cyclone, monsoon, Agro -advisories, 
etc.),  Ocean (Tsunami, Potential Fishing Zon e, resources, etc.)  in far flung 
districts and states of North -East through exhibition on wheel and enhancing and 
support to seminar/workshops etc.  
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply.  
 