Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT FORESTSAND
REPORT NO.
297
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on st March, )31 2017
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on st March, )31 2017
TWO HUNDRED NINETY SEVENTH REPORT
March, 2017/Chaitra, 1939 (Saka)
Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
(Demand No. 86)


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

49
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED NINETY SEVENTH REPORT
Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
(Demand No. 86)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 31st March, 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 31st March, 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2017/Chaitra, 1939 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-33
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE .............................................................. 34-40
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 41-47

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2016-17)
 ( Constituted on 1st September , 2016)
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury  —  Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
5. Shri C.P. Narayanan
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani
7. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
8. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
9. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
10. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK  SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
16. Kumari Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
23. Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole
24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
30. Shrimati M.Vasanthi
31. Shri Prabhubhai N. Vasava
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report
on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Ninety Seventh Report of the Committee. This Report deals
with the detailed Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
(Demand No. 86).
2. In the meeting of the Committee held on the 15th February, 2017, the Secretary and other Officers of
the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research gave an overview of the various activities of the
Department and the Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the Department
to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications
sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the
Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 29th March, 2017.
(RENUKA CHOWDHURY)
N
EW D ELHI; Chairperson,
29 March, 2017 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Chaitra 8, 1939  Science and Technology, Environment and Forests,
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

      ACRONYMS
CIS : Commonwealth of Independent States
CEL : Central Electronics Limited
CGCRI : Central Glass Ceramic Research Institute
C-MMACS : Center for Mathematical Modelling and Computer Simulation
CSIR : Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
CSIR-YSA : CSIR Young Scientist Awards
DSIR : Department of Scientific & Industrial Research
FDI : Foreign Direct Investment
GDP : Gress Domestic Product
IICB : Indian Institute of Chemical Biology
JRF : Junior Research Fellowship
LCA : Light Combat Aircraft
MoU : Memorandum of Understanding
NAL : National Aerospace Laboratories
NEITCO : North Eastern Industry & Technical Consultancy Organisation Limited
NET : National Eligibility Test
NRDC : National Research Development Corporation
NPL : National Physical Laboratory
PDTC : Programme For Development of Technologies for Commercialisation
R&D : Research and Development
RA : Research Associateship
SCI : Science Citation Index
SPMF : Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Fellowship
SRA : Senior Research Associateship
SRF : Senior Research Fellowship
TDDP : Technology Development & Deployment Program
TDUPW : Technology Development and Utilization Programme for Women
USA : United States of America
(iv)

1
REPORT
INTRODUCTION
The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research is one of the three Departments of the
Ministry of Science and Technology. The mandate of Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
includes promotion of industrial research for indigenous technology promotion, development, utilisation
and transfer.
1.1 The primary endeavour of DSIR is to foster development of state-of-the-art technologies and
products through research and development (R&D), encourage industry to increase their share in
the country’s R&D expenditure, support industrial units in developing competitive technologies of
high commercial potential, catalyze faster commercialisation of laboratory-scale R&D, and strengthen
consultancy and technology management capabilities.
1.2 The DSIR has two public sector undertakings viz. National Research Development Corporation
(NRDC) and Central Electronics Ltd. (CEL) and two autonomous organizations viz. Council for
Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) and Consultancy Development Centre (CDC). The
Department also provides host facilities and assistance to Asian and Pacific Centre for Transfer of
Technology (APCTT) as the focal point in the country.
1.3 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests considered the Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research in its meeting held on 15th February, 2017.
2. FINANCIAL ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT
2.1 A chart showing the BE and RE allocation made and actual expenditure incurred by the
Department during 2014-15, 2015-16, 2016-17 and allocation made in 2017-18 of the Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research is as under:
(` in Crore)
Year B.E. R.E. Actual Percentage
Expenditure Utilisation
2014-15 3707.15 3400.00 3385.56 99.57
2015-16 4031.00 4036.70 4028.57 99.79
2016-17 4062.80 4062.80 3203.45 78.84
(upto 31.01.2017)
2017-18 4446.00 - - -
2.2 The Committee observes that financial performance of the Department has been
satisfactory in the past few years. However, the Committee notes that the Department has
utilized ````` 3203.45 cr. (upto 31.01.2017) against the allocated amount of ````` 4062.80 cr. only
during 2016-17 which shows that proper and timely planning for utilization of the allocated
fund was not done. In view of this, the Committee recommends that the Department must

2
have proper and robust monitoring mechanism for utilising the allocated funds so that optimum
utilization of allocated funds may be ensured.
3. REQUEST & JUSTIFICATION FOR ADDITIONAL BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR
FY 2017-18
3.1 The Committee during its meeting held on 15th February, 2017 was informed by the Department
that against the Projected BE of ` 5751.36 cr., the Department has been allocated an amount of
` 4446.00 cr. during 2017-18. The Committee enquired from the Department how it would cope up
with the gap between the allocated amount of ` 4446.00 cr. against the projected amount of ` 5751.36
cr. for BE 2017-18.
3.2 The Department submitted before the Committee that the DSIR especially CSIR has been
under tremendous financial strain. The allocated amount of ` 4446.00 cr. does not include the 7th
Pay Commission impact which they had projected. The Government has committed that 70 percent
of it will be borne by the Government and 30 percent by the CSIR through its internal resources.
But that 70 percent component has not been included in allocated amount of ` 4446.00 cr. for BE
2017-18. The Department expects it at the RE stage. But other than that, for research work also the
Department had asked for additional ` 500.00 cr. which the Department did not get.
3.3 On being enquired by the Committee as how the Department proposes to deal with this situation,
the Secretary, DSIR submitted before the Committee that this is of great concern in CSIR, especially
in the cutting edge National Labs. He further said that the CSIR is not a company and the Department
is contributing to the society by various means like education through fellowship and technologies
that make a difference to the lowest base of the pyramid. The return on investment may not be
impressive, but in terms of the social economic impact, it can be translated into money in actual
figures. The return is tremendous. If the Department is not supported financially, it will have
demoralizing influence on the scientists. The Department is still having a shortfall of about ` 350.00
cr. in core areas of Research & Development besides another shortfall of ` 150.00 cr. in salary and
pension. CSIR, thus, has been facing great challenges in pursuing the envisaged activities.
3.4 In view of the foregoing, CSIR sought intervention of the Committee for allocating an additional
budget of ` 500.00 cr. for the aforesaid activities during FY 2017-18. This will not only help CSIR
overcome the hardships but will also enable the Council to make continued contribution to the national
S&T programmes.
3.5 In view of the above submissions of the Department, the Committee feels that request
for the enhancement in the budgetary allocation to the tune of ````` 500.00 cr. for the financial
year 2017-18 is fully justified and the matter should be taken up by with the concerned
Ministry/Department vigorously. The Committee also observes that scientific institutions like
CSIR should not suffer due to lack of money especially in the cutting edge national labs
which are involved in various researches in the field of science.
4. SCHEMES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
4.1 The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research intimated that during 2017-18 under
Umbrella Scheme “Industrial Research and Development”, it will be pursuing the following
Sche mes:

3
(i) Promoting Innovations in Individuals, Start-ups and MSMEs (PRISM): Under this
programme, financial assistance is extended to the independent innovators for converting
innovative ideas into demonstrable working models/prototypes/processes that may take
the form of new or improved products, processes, or services and assist them to become
incubatees/techno-entrepreneurs.
4.2 The BE and RE allocation made and actual expenditure incurred by the Department during
2014-15, 2015-16, 2016-17 and allocation made in 2017-18 of the above scheme are as under:
(` in Crore)
Year B.E. R.E. Actual Expenditure
2014-15 18.00 2.50 2.0
2015-16 7.00 3.00 1.67
2016-17 4.00 2.50 1.18 ( upto 31.01.2017)
2017-18 5.00 - -
4.3 The Committee was informed by the Department that Programmes and Targeted Deliverables
during 2017-18 are as under:
(` in Crore)
Sl. No. Head Physical
Deliverables
1. Support to on-going PRISM/TePP Projects 20 nos. 1.00
2. Support to on-going/ new TePP Outreach 20 nos. 1.50
cum Cluster Innovation Centre
3. Support to new Projects under PRISM 30 nos. 2.15
4. Participation in workshops 5 nos. 0.35
TOTAL 5.00
(ii) Patent Acquisition and Collaborative Research and Technology Development (PACE): Under
the programme, support is provided to industries and institutions for development and
demonstration of innovative technologies.
4.4 The BE and RE allocations made and actual expenditure incurred by the Department during
2014-15, 2015-16, 2016-17 and allocation made in 2017-18 for the PACE scheme are as under:
(` in Crore)
Year B.E. R.E. Actual Expenditure
2014-15 20.00 2.85 2.02
2015-16 7.00 5.00 3.29
2016-17 6.00 7.00 3.88 (upto 31.01.2017)
2017-18 6.50 - -

4
4.5 The Committee was informed by the Department that ` 6.50 cr. has been allocated for PACE
scheme with the following Programmes and Targeted Deliverables during 2017-18:
Y ear B E Targets Outcome
2017-18 6.50  Negotiations with 15 sets  3 Technology Transfers
of institutions and SMEs or Acquisitions by SMEs;
for technology transfer /
acquisition;
 Support to 8 on-going  Completion of 2 projects
and 4 new technology and development and
development and demon- demonstration of 2 tech-
stration projects; nologies for commercia-
lization;
 Support to IMPRINT
projects
(iii) Building Industrial Research & Development (BIRD): Under this programme, R&D in
industry is encouraged and supported; and support is provided for creation of Common
Research and Technology Development Hubs for Small and Micro Industries. It also
helps in creating an IT enabled work environment in the Department through accelerated
usage of various Information Technology opportunities.
4.6 The BE and RE allocation made and actual expenditure incurred by the Department during
2014-15, 2015-16, 2016-17 and allocation made in 2017-18 of the BIRD scheme are as under:
(` in Crore)
Year B.E. R.E. Actual Expenditure
2014-15 20.00 6.45 5.89
2015-16 9.00 6.30 2.10
2016-17 5.50 5.50 3.60(upto 31.01.2017)
2017-18 7.50 - -
4.7 The Committee was informed by the Department that ` 7.50 cr. has been allocated for BIRD
with the following Programmes and Targeted Deliverables during 2017-18:
 Industrial Research & Development Programme (IRDP)
 It is anticipated that about 250 new in-house R&D centres of Industry and
organizations will be evaluated for recognition and registration.
 Around 90 approvals to new companies for availing fiscal benefits u/s 35(2AB)
will be issued in Form 3CM
 Around 620 renewals to be granted to in-house R&D centres of Industry and
organizations

5
 To promote industry to enhance the R&D expenditure of recognized in-house
R&D units by the end of twelfth five year plan period.
 Common Research and Technology Development Hubs ( CRTDHs)
 Continued support to seven DSIR-CRTDHs set up in the sectors of Electronics/
Renewable Energy, Affordable Health, Environmental interventions, Low cost
machining and new materials / Chemical Processes for industrial R&D innovation,
dedicated for Micro and Small Scale Enterprises (MSEs). R&D equipment shall
be procured and installed by the already approved CRTDHs with partial grants
released
 Providing assistance in technological problem-solving and capacity building to
MSEs thereby enhancing their productivity and competitiveness
 Facilitation of MSEs to conduct their research and development activities, including
testing of innovative products and new technologies using the infrastructure and
equipment established at these CRTDHs
 Invoking industrial participation through networking and nation-wide publicity of
the created facility. Each CRTDH shall cater to a maximum number of MSEs
within a time-frame of five years
 To initiate the process for setting up of 04 new CRTDHs in third phase
 Information Technology e-Governance (IT-eG)
 Support to on-line automation for e-office and programmes/ schemes
(iv) Access to Knowledge for Creation of Innovative Capacity and Dissemination (A2K+):
Under this programme, studies and conferences in up-coming areas of industrial research
are taken up besides carrying forward the Technology Development and Utilization
Programme for Women from the previous plan period and completing on-going projects
under the Technology Development and Demonstration Programme pursued in the 11th
Plan or earlier and have spilled over in the 12th Plan period.
4.8 The BE and RE allocation made and actual expenditure incurred by the Department during
2014-15, 2015-16, 2016-17 and allocation made in 2017-18 of the A2K+ scheme are as under:
(` in Crore)
Year B.E. R.E. Actual Expenditure
2014-15 22.00 12.20 9.08
2015-16 11.00 8.70 6.90
2016-17 9.00 6.50 1.05 (upto 31.01.2017)
2017-18 5.00 - -
4.9 The Committee was informed about the achievements of this Scheme during 2016-17 which
are as under:

6
 12 TDDP projects were successfully completed.
 2 TACs was held in the TDUPW programme for recommending 5 new projects.
 20 events supported.
4.10 The Committee was also informed about the Targeted outcome/deliverables from the scheme
during 2017-18 which are as under:
 2 TDDP projects completed
 2 TACs would be held and 8 new TDUPW projects shall be initiated.
 20 fresh proposals to be supported / organized.
4.11 The Committee notes that there has been gross underutilization of allocated resources
not only during 2016-17 but in the past too, in all the four Schemes viz. Promoting Innovations
in Individuals, Start-ups and MSMEs (PRISM), Patent Acquisition and Collaborative Research
and Technology Development (PACE), Building Industrial Research & Development (BIRD)
and Access to Knowledge for Creation of Innovative Capacity and Dissemination (A2K) of the
Department. The reasons for underutilization of allocated funds have also not been given by
the Department. Because of underutilizations, allocation at BE stage for 2017-18 in some of
the said schemes have been reduced substantially. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that the Department should strengthen its administrative and monitoring
mechanism for utilizing the allocated resources right from beginning and evaluation be done
in each quarter.
5. PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS
5.1 The Department has two Public Sector Undertakings namely (i) National Research Development
Corporation (NRDC); and (ii) Central Electronics Ltd. (CEL).
NATIONAL RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (NRDC)
5.2 NRDC was incorporated on 31st December, 1953 as a Section 25 company under the Companies
Act with the objective to promote, develop and commercialize indigenous technologies. As per the
objectives set out in its Memorandum and Articles of Association, NRDC was mandated to
commercialise the technologies developed by all the research laboratories and institutes of CSIR and
other public funded research institutes, universities including autonomous research institutions.
5.3 To meet the objectives, the Corporation, therefore, has been carrying out both commercial and
promotional activities. The details of activities carried out are summarized below: -
Development and Commercialization of Technologies
 Technical evaluation of the technology.
 Licensing of technologies to companies and end user organizations.
 Development of Technologies through R&D laboratories to validate or scale-up laboratory
processes prior to commercialization.
 Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) consultancy to R&D Institutes and Corporates.

7
 Export of Indian technologies / know-how and services.
 Execution of turnkey projects abroad based on indigenous technologies.
5.4 NRDC also carries out the following promotional programmes with support from DSIR:
PROGRAMME FOR INSPIRING INVENTORS & INNOV ATORS (PIII)
The programme is planned to encourage the innovators/inventors in developing new innovative
technologies and products and tap these technologies for NRDC’s business activities.
The programs would be catering to all aspects, concerned with transformation of an invention
to innovation. The Corporation would be assisting entrepreneurs with innovative ideas towards setting
up of potentially successful knowledge based companies, supporting upscaling of technologies at
the proof of concept stage upto pre-commercialization and also providing techno-commercial support
for marketing of such technologies for commercial application.
The Scheme, PIII has the following components:
 Promotion and Propagation of inventions and Innovations
 Intellectual Property and Innovation Facilitation
 Technology Knowledge Management
PROGRAMME FOR DEVELOPMENT OF TECHNOLOGIES FOR COMMERCIALISATION
(PDTC)
The objective of this programme is to propagate the technological developments evolving through
the scientific and applied research work carried out at our R&D institutions, universities, corporate
R&Ds, private inventors etc. and successful transfer to industries through further development of
the lab-scale technologies required for their successful manufacturing and marketing to achieve
commercial success. This programme includes value-addition of technologies for making it acceptable
by the industry and dissemination of information on such developed technologies to industries for
generating business for the Corporation.
There has been substantial demand of Indian technologies in other developing countries like
Africa, Latin America, South East Asia and CIS countries. The Corporation proposes to tap the
opportunities for transfer of technologies and services and undertaking various turn-key projects in
these countries.
To fulfil these objectives the programme covers a wide range of activities. The major
components of the Plan scheme PDTC are as follows:
(a) Digital Knowledge Base
(b) Technology Value Addition
(c) Promotion of innovations in Rural & North East Regions
(d) Promotion of technology commercialization in the country and abroad.
5.5 The BE and RE allocation made and actual expenditure incurred by the Department during
2016-17 and allocation made in 2017-18 of the NRDC are as under:

8
(` in Crore)
PSU B.E.2016-17 R.E.2016-17 Utilisation till % utilization BE 2017-18
31.01.2017 of RE
NRDC 5.50 5.68 3.22 57% 6.00
5.6 The Committee notes that NRDC plays a significant role in transfer of technologies
emanating from R&D laboratories and its operation covers entire spectrum of technologies.
However, the Committee expresses its deep concern over underutilization of allocated amount
during 2016-17. The Committee hopes that proper planning would be done for optimum
utilization of allocated amount during 2017-18. The Committee further recommends that
NRDC should have close co-ordination and constant interactions with CSIR- labs in order to
promote, develop and commercialize the technology emanating from various labs so that it
could be reaches to the masses of the country.
6. CENTRAL ELECTRONICS LTD. (CEL)
6.1 Central Electronics Limited (CEL) is a Public Sector Enterprise under the Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR), Ministry of Science & Technology, Government of India.
It was established in 1974 with an objective to commercially exploit the indigenous technologies
developed by National Laboratories and R&D Institutions in the country. CEL is one of the rare
companies, which utilized the home-grown technologies during all these years of its existence.
6.2 CEL has developed a number of products for the first time in country through its own R&D
efforts and in close association with the premier National and International Laboratories including
Defense Laboratories. Presently the company has been carrying out commercial production as well
as R&D on four fields:
 Solar Photovoltaic
 Railways Safety and Signaling Systems
 Strategic Electronics – Defence Application
 Security and Surveillance Systems
6.3 As a public sector undertaking of the Government, CEL’s programmes and business plan
projections are aligned with the national mission and other strategic opportunities that have opened
up in the context of the resurgent Indian economy. CEL has already established partnerships and
linkages with various state-holders and business associates in the areas of telecom, railways, police,
power generation and distribution companies, service providers in the energy sector, public funded
institutions and even rural communities through the state governments. The existing marketing
channels are being consolidated and expanded harnessing the unique advantage CEL has in terms of
its Government backing.
6.4 The Committee was informed about the proposed Programmes/ Projects undertaken by CEL
during 2017-18 which are as under:
(i) Development of Centralized Battery Storage System for Solar Power Plants/DG/Grid

9
(ii) Development of Solar Warehouse
(iii) Development of Solar Train
(iv) Development of Mini Grid with Distribution Network at Home Appliance
(v) New products for Railways
(vi) Development of New technologies for solar cells/module
(vii) Establishment of Solar Park by:
 Solar Mini Grid with Metering
 Solar Water Pumping System
 Drip Irrigation
 Development of Home Lighting System (HLS)
 Street Lighting System (SLS)
 Smart Street Lights with centralized Controller
6.5 The BE and RE allocation made and actual expenditure incurred by the Department during
2016-17 and allocation made in 2017-18 of the CEL are as under:
(` in Crore)
PSU B.E. 2016-17 R.E.2016-17 Utilisation till % utilisation BE 2017-18
31.01.2017 of RE
CEL 6.50 8.00 5.75 72% 9.75
6.6 The Committee feels that Department should be more proactive in utilizing the allocated
amount during 2017-18 in order to attain the objectives of CEL by strengthening the monitoring
mechanism.
7. AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS:
The Department has two Autonomous Institutions namely (i) Consultancy Development Centre
(CDC); and (ii)) Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR).
CONSUL TANCY DEVELOPMENT CENTRE (CDC)
7.1 Consultancy Development Centre (CDC) is an Autonomous Institution of the Department set
up for promoting and strengthening of consultancy skills and capabilities including exports and promote
cooperation with other countries.
The objectives of CDC are as follows:
 To be the Nodal Agency on Professional Services
 To Promote Development of Consultancy Sector
 To Promote Quality, Integrity and Sustainability Development in Professional Services

10
 To Enhance Capacity of Consultants/ Experts
 To be Export Promotion Council of Professional Services
 To be Regulator of Professional Services in India
7.2 The Committee was informed about the proposed Programmes/ Projects undertaken by CDC
during 2017-18 which are as under:
 Status and consulting opportunities for Indian Consulting Industry
 Certificate Programme in R&D Management
 Study on Solutions and Business Opportunities for consultants in facilitating Start-ups
in Consulting/CSIR technologies
 Success stories and failures in waste Management sector i.e. waste to energy conversion,
recycle and reuse ( Swachh Bharat Abhiyan ) -A way forward
 Building Capacities for Consultancy Development & Knowledge Management with Partner
Institution (KMPI) Existing programme
 Scheme on Registration of Consultants and Consulting Firms
 To create and maintain a dynamic consulting database along with business and
employment opportunities
 Conduct of 60 number of Capacity Building programme on “ Use of consultancy services
by Ministries/ State Government / PSUs, etc” in Bihar Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh and
West Bengal ( Existing activity )
 ISO 9001 Consulting
7.3 The BE and RE allocation made and actual expenditure incurred by the Department during
2016-17 and allocation made in 2017-18 of the CDC are as under:
(` in Crore)
Institution B.E.2016-17 R.E.2016-17 Utilisation till % utilization BE 2017-18
31.01.2017 of RE
CDC 1.00 0.50 0.40 80% 2.00
7.4 The Committee hopes that no cut or reduction in the allocated amount would be done
during 2017-18 at RE stage for smooth and effective functioning of CDC.
8. COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (CSIR)
8.1 The Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, constituted in 1942 is an autonomous body.
The detailed functions assigned to the Council are as follows:
(i) Promotion, guidance and coordination of scientific and industrial research in India,
including the institution and financing of specific researches;
(ii) Establishment or development and assistance to special institutions or departments of

11
existing institutions for scientific study of problems affecting particular industries and
trade;
(iii) Establishment and award of research studentships and fellowships;
(iv) Utilization of the results of the researches conducted under the auspices of the Council
towards the development of industries in the country and the payment of a share of
royalties arising out of the development of the results of researches to those who are
considered as having contributed towards the pursuits of such researches;
(v) Establishment, maintenance and management of laboratories, workshops, institutes and
organizations to further scientific and industrial research and to utilize and exploit for
purposes of experiment or otherwise any discovery or invention likely to be of use to
Indian industries;
(vi) Collection and dissemination of information in regard not only to research but also to
industrial matters generally;
(vii) Publication of scientific papers and journals;
(viii) To enter into arrangements with foreign scientific agencies and institutions for exchange
of scientists, study tours, training in specialized areas of science and technology,
conducting joint projects, providing technical assistance in the establishment of scientific
institutions and for other matters consistent with the aims and objectives of the Society;
(ix) To do all other such things as the Society may consider necessary, incidental or conducive
to the attainment of the above subjects, etc.
The CSIR has been striving to perform these functions in accordance with the priorities laid
down in Five Year Plans and perceived needs of the nation from time to time.
8.2 The Council of Scientific and Industrial Research is known for its cutting edge R&D knowledge
base in diverse S&T areas. Having pan-India presence, CSIR has a dynamic network of 38 National
Laboratories, 39 Outreach Centres, 3 Innovation Complexes and 5 units. CSIR’s R&D expertise and
experience is embodied in about 4000 active scientists supported by about 7000 scientific and technical
personnel.
8.3 CSIR covers a wide spectrum of science and technology from radio and space physics,
oceanography, earth sciences, geophysics, chemicals, drugs, genomics, biotechnology and
nanotechnology to mining, aeronautics, instrumentation, environmental engineering and information
technology. It provides significant technological intervention in many areas with regard to societal
efforts which include environment, health, drinking water, food, housing, energy, leather, farm and
non-farm sectors. CSIR is the Nation’s custodian for Measurement standards of Mass, Distance,
Time, Temperature, Current etc. CSIR has created and is the custodian of Traditional Knowledge
Digital Library (TKDL) which is a powerful weapon against unethical commercial exploitation of
Indian traditional knowledge. CSIR maintains Microbial Type Culture collection (MTCC) and Gene
Bank.
8.4 CSIR has been pursuing cutting edge science and advancing new knowledge frontiers. The
scientific staff of CSIR only constitutes about 3-4% of India’s scientific manpower but they contribute

12
to 9.61% of India’s scientific outputs. In 2013, 2014 and 2015 CSIR published 5086, 5824 and 5776
papers in SCI Journals with an average impact factor per paper of 2.86, 2.97 and 3.005 respectively.
During the year 2016, CSIR has published 5337 research papers in International SCI journals.
8.5 The Committee during its meeting on 15th February, 2017 was informed by the Department
that our scientific journals/papers in terms of scientific indices, its impact factor, quality, number of
citations our papers get, India is amongst top ten countries of the world. However, the Committee
had observed that some of the scientific journals/papers/ publications etc. of the research scholars
does not come out on time and also good work in respect of researches and inventions made very
often does not translate into sustainable technology for benefit of the citizens of the country.
8.6 The Committee notes and appreciates the efforts of CSIR in publishing large number
of research papers in International SCI journals every year. However, the Committee observes
that good work done by the CSIR in the form of research papers do not translate into
sustainable technologies for use of the masses. Hence, the Committee recommends that
Department should make all out efforts so that research and inventions may be translated
into sustainable technologies. The Committee further recommends that the scientific journals/
papers/ publications etc. should come out on time and with high standards.
8.7 The Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) is implementing following Ten Plan
Schemes to achieve its objectives of 12th Five Year Plan:
(i) National Laboratories;
(ii) National S&T Human Resource Development;
(iii) Intellectual Property & Technology Management;
(iv) R&D Management Support;
(v) New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative;
(vi) Innovation Complexes;
(vii) CSIR Scheme for Open Innovation;
(viii) CSIR-800;
(ix) CSIR Initiative for Inclusive, Participative, and Collaborative Research & Development;
and
(x) National Programme: National Civil Aircraft Development Programme.
However, the Department had informed the Committee that subsequent to the discussions held
in Ministry of Finance, the Schemes at Serial Numbers (iii), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii), (ix) and (x) have
since been merged with National Laboratories Scheme (Sl. No.i). Scheme at Serial Number (iv) has
been merged with Serial Number (ii ) i.e.  National S&T Human Resource Development.
8.8 Thus, all the above mentioned Ten Plan Schemes of CSIR have been merged in two schemes
i.e. (I) National Laboratories Scheme; and (II) National S&T Human Resource Development.
Following table provides details of BE/ RE allocation, utilization alongwith % utilization during
2016-17 and approved allocation for 2017-18 of the above mentioned Schemes:

13
(` in Crore)
Sl. No. Scheme 2016-17 Approved
B.E. R.E. Utilisation % BE 2017-18
till 31.1.2017 Utilization
of RE
1. National Laboratories 3710.20 3713.06 2948.50 79% 4062.91
2. National S&T 300.00 300.00 225.00 75% 325.00
Human Resource
Development
TOTAL 4010.20 4013.06 3173.50 79% 4387.91
9. NATIONAL LABORATORIES SCHEME:
9.1 The CSIR is pursuing R&D activities in cluster mode. Each of the clusters has evolved a
mission for itself to be pursued in the 12th Five Year Plan.
The Committee enquired from the Department about the physical and financial achievements
w.r .t. this Scheme during 2016-17. In response, the Department informed the Committee that
` 2948.50 cr. has been utilized under National Laboratories scheme till 31.01.2017 as against allocation
(R.E.) of ` 3713.06 cr. CSIR recognizing that inclusive innovation in the country would be the way
for achieving socio-economic growth and competitive advantage globally has facilitated the national
endeavour of achieving faster and inclusive growth by undertaking R&D programmes that focus on
innovation. The CSIR has thus been providing the S&T knowledgebase needed for the benefit of the
Nation, its industries, including MSMEs and the common people. The efforts are focused at bringing
in desired S&T interventions for enhancing the socio-economic development while improving the
quality of life, removing drudgery and augmenting income of the people. The projects undertaken by
CSIR have been contributing to the generation of valuable knowledgebase and S&T interventions
with immense value and potential to create a niche for the country. The Department also informed
about the key achievements made during 2016-17 in various scientific fields under this Scheme such
as CSIR’s Global Positioning, Scientific Excellence, Value Generation through Intellectual Property,
Creating and Nurturing S&T Human Resource, S&T Initiatives (like Affordable Healthcare, Strategic
Sector, Catalyzing Industrial Growth, Societal Interventions) and Skill Development.
9.2 The Committee enquired as how the Department proposes to utilize the allocated amount of
` 4062.91 cr. with respect to this Scheme during 2017-18. In response, the Department informed
the Committee that following programmes would be undertaken during 2017-18:
(i) National Lab Programs/projects: Focused R&D at fundamental research, applied research
and translational research, as per the mandate of the CSIR. Promising leads identified
from ongoing activities, especially targeted at National Goals, will be taken up for further
development;
(ii) Fast-Track Translation Projects: Pursuit of ‘Fast-Track’ Translation Research projects
aimed at development and translation/ commercialization/ implementation of over 100
technologies/ products/ processes/ services in next 3 years addressing the societal

14
problems, requirements of the strategic sector and domestic industries as well as creating
significant socio economic value;
(iii) Mission mode Projects: Initiating 6 Mission mode Projects targeting cutting edge,
internationally benchmarked cost effective technologies of high national impact in next
3 years and its subsequent field implementation; These Mission mode projects will have
significant stakeholder focus;
(iv) S&T interventions for common people: Through “CSIR 800” program focused on the
people at the base of the economic pyramid, bringing in desired S&T intervention for
removing the drudgery and for economic upliftment. The objective is to develop and
provide innovative R&D based products and technologies which may be useful for
launching micro enterprises in rural settings;
(v) Inter-ministerial/agency projects: Fostering institutional linkages with stakeholder
Ministries and Micro, Small & Medium Enterprise (MSME) Clusters; Programs/projects
focused at development of R&D based products and technologies, in collaboration or
sponsored by other Central/State Departments and Ministries;
(vi) New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative (NMITLI): Projects focused
at development of technology/product, so as to achieve leadership position for Indian
industry in the identified technology areas;
(vii) International S&T collaborations: Programs/projects focused at enhancing the R&D
capacity in basic research as well as technology development & deployment, with
international partners in the domain;
(viii) Technology Incubation Centres: Setting up of 30 Technology Incubation Centres in next
3 years and creating at least 100 start-up and spin off companies;
(ix) Technology Parks: Setting up of 5 Technology Parks in next 3 years to nurture at least
a 100 industries in these technology parks; and
(x) Skill Development: Operationalizing structured Skill Development Courses in next 3 years:
Industry specific diploma/certificate courses are proposed targeting XII Std students,
Under-graduates, Graduates, Post-graduates etc. in various domains.
9.3 The Committee observes that the National Laboratories Scheme of the Department is
very significant in improving lives of citizens of the country through scientific advancement.
The Committee notes that during 2016-17 only ````` 2948.50 cr. was utilised under National
Laboratories scheme till 31.01.2017 as against allocation (R.E.) of ````` 3713.06 cr. by the
Department. At the one hand, the Department is pursuing for more allocation but on the
other hand allocated amount could not be spent fully by the Department. Therefore, the
Committee recommends that Department should have a proper monitoring and planning
mechanism in place so that allocated amount must be utilized fully during 2017-18.
9.4 The Committee also feels that creation of national labs under this scheme and other
significant activities may further be extended in those states where its presence is negligible
especially in states like Bihar, Jharkhand, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh etc.

15
10. EXAMINATION OF SOME OF THE CSIR-LABS /INSTITUTES/ORGANISATIONS:
The Committee has selected functioning of various scientific organisations/laboratories/
institutions as one of the subject for examination. The Committee after having a meeting on 23rd
August, 2016 on this subject with DSIR undertook a field visit to the National Physical Laboratory,
New Delhi to have the first hand information about the functioning of the Laboratory, scientific
facilities available at the laboratory and discussion with the scientists there. Before proceeding to the
visit of NPL, New Delhi, the Director, NPL had briefed about the functioning of the Laboratory in
the meeting itself.
NATIONAL PHYSICAL LABORATORY, NEW DELHI
10.1 The National Physical Laboratory was conceptualized in 1943 by the Governing Body of CSIR,
with a view to pave way for using science and technology as a means for industrial growth and
development, as well as to give fillip to the fledgling Indian industry. Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, the
then Prime Minister of India, laid the foundation stone for the laboratory on January 4, 1947 and it
was one of the first National Laboratory to be set-up under the CSIR. On January 21, 1950, Sardar
Vallabhbhai Patel, the then Deputy Prime Minister of India, inaugurated the NPL building. Over the
years, the Laboratory has more than realized its primary mandate as the keeper of Measurement
Standards for the nation while also substantially expanding its research activities to emerge as a
leading national institution for research in a whole gamut of areas in the Physical Science.
10.2 In the case of India, CSIR-NPL (internationally known as NPL-India) was designated the
National Metrology Institute (NMI) of the country through act of Parliament in 1957, with a
responsibility of realisation, establishment, maintenance and dissemination of seven base units and
derived units. Therefore, CSIR-NPL provides the metrological traceability at apex level and has
acted as growth engine of nation’s R&D and industries. Metrological traceability is property of a
measurement result whereby the result can be related to a reference through a documented unbroken
chain of calibrations, each contributing to the measurement uncertainty, and is very important for
international trade as it ensures the quality of the resultant products.
10.3 CSIR-National Physical Laboratory (NPL-India) is mandated to be India’s “National Measurement
Institute” (NMI) by act of Parliament and is the custodian of “National Standards” with a responsibility
of the dissemination of measurements to the needs of country.
10.4 Mission of the laboratory is as under:
(a) Developing India’s measurement standards that are internationally accepted and
disseminating the measurement capabilities to industry, government, strategic and
academia that underpin the India’s prosperity and quality of life.
(b) Conducting multidisciplinary R&D with a mission to establish the futuristic quantum
standards and upcoming technologies so that India remains on par with international
measurement laboratories.
(c) Developing sophisticated analytical equipments ( i.e. import substitutes) under “Make in
India” programme to cater the ever increasing demands of emerging India.
(d) Training of young scientists and industry personnel in the areas of measurements under
“Skill India” programme.

16
Vision of the laboratory is as under:
 To be “Giant in measurements” to support needs of the country
 To make NPL a “National hub” for the development of calibrated sophisticated instruments
 To make NPL a “Centre of Excellence” for skill development in the area of measurements
10.6 The Committee was informed that in order to achieve its mandated goals, the NPL has finalized
following five Mission Proposals (MP):
 Up-gradation and development of “National Apex Calibration Facilities”
 Setting up of “New Apex Calibration Facilities for Solar Cells, Biomedical- equipments
and Environmental-pollutants”
 Setting up of R&D Centre for “Quantum Standards”
 Materials & Devices for Strategic, Renewable-energy and Societal Applications
 Extending NPL facilities for Research and Industrial growth
10.7 The Committee was also briefed about the some major scientific contributions made by the
NPL in the past such as- Tractability of SI units to Indian R&D and Industries; Formula of Indelible
Ink for Election; Providing Indian Standard Time (1ST) to the country; Maitri - India’s permanent
research station in Antarctica; Advanced Carbon Product for strategic applications; and Providing
Indian Reference Materials.
The Committee during its visit to NPL also interacted with the Research Scholars / Scientists/
Faculty Members etc. there and also seen some of the labs of NPL.
10.8 The Committee commends the role of NPL for its glorious achievements in the past in
the field of scientific research activities and emerging as a leading national institution for
research in a whole gamut of areas in the physical science. The Committee hopes that NPL
would be able to excel in its field and also strive hard for its contribution towards nation
building.
11. CSIR - NATIONAL AEROSPACE LABORATORIES (NAL), BENGALURU:
During its study visit to Bengaluru in August 2016, the Committee visited the CSIR-National
Aerospace Laboratories (NAL) and CSIR- Fourth Paradigm Institute (4PI) on the 31st August, 2016
and interacted with representatives of DSIR and these institutions.
11.1 At NAL, the Committee visited the exhibition at Autoclave facility, Wind Solar Hybrid Energy
Farm, Flight Simulator, Wind Thermal Facility and the Civil Aircraft Hanger and had a look at the
functioning and activities of these facilities. The Mandate of CSIR-NAL is to develop aerospace
technologies with strong science content, design and build small and medium-sized civil aircraft, and
support all national aerospace programmes. During the discussions, the Committee desired to know
the activities and achievements of NAL. Director, NAL, while giving a glimpse of the research,
scientific and technical work and the vision of NAL, informed that CSIR-NAL started in 1959 with
focus on development of technologies for Strategic Missions. The 1st blow down in the wind tunnel
facility was conducted in 1967. In early 70’s NAL developed the radomes for the meteorological

17
department and successfully completed the extension of Total life (TTL) of MiG 21s. In 80’s, NAL
successfully developed India’s 1st parallel computer. In 90’s NAL was the first laboratory to develop
the Composites technology and Autoclaves. During 1990 to 2000 NAL developed the 1st of its kind
in India safety critical flight control software for Fly by wire control systems of LCA. NAL has also
developed the critical composite parts like Fin, Rudder, Trouser ducts, Doors etc. In civil aircraft
development, NAL has indigenously developed and certified the two seater trainer HANSA in 1990s.
NAL has indigenously developed the Light Transport Aircraft (LTA) – SARAS and the 5 seater Air
Taxi with Mahindra during 2000-2010.
11.2 The vision and road map of NAL up to 2030 was also presented before the Committee. It was
informed that the short term goal is to certify the 5-seater aircraft with DGCA in partnership with
Mahindra and put it into air taxi service for short haul and commuter transport at a very nominal rate
of about 20-30 % higher than luxury road taxi service. As a mid-term goal, NAL is planning to
develop a 19 seater aircraft which is the extension of the SARAS programme for Regional Transport.
As a long term goal, CSIR-NAL is looking for upgradation of wind tunnel to 2.5 mtr advanced
continuous facility, wind solar hybrid system for extreme climatic conditions, and development of
70 to 100 seater aircraft with an industry partner. It was also stated that NAL has an annual budget
of ` 280 cr. of which 80% funds come from CSIR and 20% is earned through external sources. It
was also informed to the Committee that NAL has 996 employees of which there are 362 Scientists
and 80+ are Ph.D.s and NAL is certified as ISO 9001-2008. NAL has so far generated a value of
` 630/- cr. and the expected value generation is about ` 3,500/- cr. over the next eight years. Further,
Director briefed the Committee that the core competence of NAL is in development of products for
strategic sector, civil aircraft design and societal needs. NAL’s main areas of expertise include the
Aerospace Materials & Surface Engineering, Structural Design & Analysis, Aeroelasticity & Testing,
National Wind Tunnel Test Facilities, Full Scale Fatigue Testing, Acoustic Test facility which is used
by ISRO, Failure Analysis and Accident Investigation which is an unique group wherein we have
done almost 1000 investigations, Airport Instrumentation, Computational and Experimental
Aerodynamics, Aerospace Electronics and Systems, Composites, Wind Energy, Meteorological
Modelling, Turbo Machinery and Combustion, Electromagnetic and Flight Mechanics & Controls.
The Committee was also informed about the Technologies and Products commercialized by NAL and
the status of technologies at advanced stage of commercialisation.
11.3 The Committee desired to know about the other activities of NAL and whether any further
revenue was being generated through other resources. The Committee was informed about the NAL’s
unique National facilities like Acoustic Test facility, Wind tunnel facility, fatigue test facility and
informed that the average cash flow generated in 3 years is around ` 27 cr. per year from NTAF,
`2.6 cr. per year from ATF and ` 5cr. from other facilities. Finally, the Committee was briefed about
the following short term, medium term and long term technologies which are under development and
likely to be commercialized shortly:
 ABHIAS - Acoustic Based Hit Identification and Analysis System
 Fully Autonomous Fixed Wing mini UA Vs under 5.0 kg. class
 Reviving of 14 seater SARAS - Multi Role Light Transport Aircraft
 Next Generation HANSA Aircraft

18
 5 seater CNM5 aircraft
 Development of 19 seater Aircraft by enhancing SARAS design
 Regional T ransport Aircraft (70 - 100 seater)
 Renewable Energy for Societal Applications
 2.5 meter Advanced continuous Trisonic Wind Tunnel
11.4 When the Committee desired to know the status of the proposal for funds for 70-seater Regional
Transport Aircraft and Trisonic wind Tunnel, the Committee was informed that NAL had submitted
the proposal for these projects three years ago for which the government approval was awaited.
11.5 The Committee observes that CSIR-NAL is a premier research institution of the country
and, over the last five decades, NAL has successfully contributed towards the growth of
aerospace activities in the country which has resulted in achieving expertise in many disciplines
of the aerospace technology. The Committee appreciates that the Scientific and Technological
research of NAL which has helped the nation in overcoming technological challenges, without
compromising the confidentiality of the strategic data. The Committee recommends that CSIR-
NAL should identify its future challenges, continue its research, scientific and technical work
and its contribution to the civil, strategic and aerospace sector.
11.6 The Committee is also constrained to note that CSIR-NAL’s proposal for funding of
70-seater Regional Transport Aircraft has been awaiting the Government’s approval since
the last three years. The Committee recommends that DSIR should immediately take the
required action in the matter and ensure that approval for the project is granted at the earliest
so that further action in respect of the project can be taken up by the CSIR-NAL.
12. CSIR-FOURTH PARADIGM INSTITUTE (4PI), BENGALURU
12.1 At CSIR-Fourth Paradigm Institute, the Committee visited the High Performance Computing
Facility. During the meeting, Director-4PI informed the Committee that CSIR Center for Mathematical
Modelling and Computer Simulation (C-MMACS) was set up in 1988 in NAL and was repositioned as
the Fourth Paradigm Institute (4PI) in 2013. The new Institute envisions creating expertise in
simulation, modelling and data science driven by high performance computing and data informatics.
It was informed that both these steps were forward looking since around 1988 the world’s fastest
supercomputer delivered only 333 MegaFlops whereas today the number stands at 93 PetaFlops.
Today modelling and simulation is taken for granted and is used across industries. On the other hand,
data science is gaining importance now and has already been commercially exploited by such industries
as Uber, Paytm etc. It was informed that data science has huge potential in scientific domain as well
and CSIR–4PI primarily aims to provide Knowledge products in the areas of Earth System and
Hazard with focus on Indian sub-continent and the data science will bring in new dimension in the
future and will synthesize the existing capabilities. Further elaborating on the Solid Earth Modelling
programme, it was informed that 4PI (C-MMACS) had many “firsts” to its credit. This group had,
for the first time in India, initiated work on Tomographic imaging of Earth, Kinematics and Crustal
Deformation of Indian Sub Continent and Seismic hazard map of India. Also, India’s first reference
GPS (Global Positioning System) station was set up in 1994 in Bangalore, which serves as a core
station for International terrestrial reference frame definition. Following these initiatives, C-MMACS

19
was instrumental in setting up National Network of GPS stations, precise quantification of continental
deformations, development of slip and rupture models associated with Bhuj and Sumatra–Andaman
earth quakes, development of crustal deformation models of Himalayas, probabilistic and deterministic
earthquake hazard map of India. Under the 12th Plan, GNSS and Broadband based Seismic Network
in Kashmir Himalayas were established to investigate some puzzling features of the kinematics and
stress field in Kashmir Himalaya in collaboration with Kashmir University, Srinagar. These programmes
have resulted in C-MMACS being a leader in this field.
12.2 The Committee was also informed about the work being carried out in the High Performance
Computing (HPC). He said that in this regard 4PI is entrusted with the job of providing access to
High Performance Computing environment to all CSIR laboratories. Realizing that cyber security
will become an important issue in the ever growing digital world, 4PI also initiated cyber security
research in this area to protect our systems and data from intrusion. He also briefly described the
features of CSIR Supercomputer and informed that the centralised HPC facility is rated at 360 Teraflops
peak performance with 334 Teraflops of sustained performance and was India’s top system when
installed in 2013. The facility is presently 6th in India and 414th in the world.
12.3 The Committee was also informed that soon after the repositioning, CSIR-4PI saw exit of the
then head. Owing to various reasons, a regular head was not appointed which resulted in delays of
further progress of the Institute. A new head has taken charge as of 1st June, 2016 and the goals of
the new institute are now being taken forward.
12.4 The Committee commends the various activities of CSIR-Fourth Paradigm Institute,
especially the High Performance Computing Facility. The Committee, however, recommends
that DSIR should closely look into the affairs of CSIR-4PI and ensure that the shadow of
factors which slowed down the progress of the Institute does not adversely affect its functioning
for long. The Committee hopes that CSIR-4PI would continue the good R&D in supercomputing
and cyber security research. The Committee recommends that 4PI should strengthen the
present modelling and simulation capability with focus on earth system and hazard by bringing
in new capability in data and computational science.
13. CSIR- CENTRAL GLASS & CERAMIC RESEARCH INSTITUTE (CGCRI), KOLKATA
During its study visit to Kolkata in October 2016, the Committee visited the CSIR- Central
Glass and Ceramic Research Institute (CGCRI) and CSIR- Indian Institute of Chemical Biology
(IICB) on 21st October, 2016 and interacted with representatives of DSIR and these institutions.
13.1 The Committee was briefed that need to establish a glass and silicate based materials laboratory
in British India was felt during Second World War due to emergent need of such materials for
purpose of war. The fledgling glass industry in particular was a hard hit and among many needs,
there were pleas by scientific community to open scientific research laboratories. In 1942, CSIR
was founded as Board of Scientific & Industrial Research (BSIR) in Kolkata, then Calcutta. At the
initiatives of renowned scientists, Prof. M. N. Saha, and Sir S. S. Bhatnagar, an exploratory report
was submitted to the BSIR for the possibility of organizing an Institute of glass research and the
Board appointed a Central Glass Research Institute Committee in March, 1942, as an advisory body.
After few important meetings, the body submitted its report to the BSIR for consideration in July,
1942. On July 12, 1943, on the recommendation of the BSIR, the Governing Body of the Board

20
decided that the proposed Institute for glass research be styled as the Central Glass and Silicate
Research Institute. The Institute ultimately took shape although in a limited ma nner in 1944 with
Dr. Atma Ram as officer-in-charge.
After Independence, the name of the Institute was changed to Central Glass and Ceramic
Research Institute and on August 26, 1950 the Institute was formally inaugurated.
13.2 Over last two decades, the R&D mandate of CGCRI has undergone major transformation in
order to adapt to the winds of globalisation. Today CGCRI is a premier organization pursuing R&D
in glass and various aspects of ceramics and ceramic based composite materials. In tune with the
national mission and CSIR’s theme-centric R&D paradigm, CGCRI is engaged in some of the high-
tech research-areas.
13.3 In addition to the two outreach centres, CGCRI comprises of 12 major R&D Divisions which
deal with various branches of glass and ceramics. These are namely: Advanced Clay and Traditional
Ceramics, Bioceramics and Coating, Ceramic Membrane, Glass Technology, Fibre Optics and
Photonics, Fuel Cell and Battery Nanostructured Materials, Non-oxide Ceramics Refractories Sensor
and Actuator and SoI-gel Processing.
13.4 Basically, CGCRl’s R&D programmes are focused towards: Technology Development, Training
and Entrepreneurship Development, Overseas/Sponsored/Contract Research Consultancy, Testing
and Materials Characterisation and Development and Supply of Special Materials. To meet the objective
of the country’s 12th Five Year Plan, CGCRI is engaged in six technology sectors of national priority
viz: Communication and Photonics, Energy and Environment, Health Care, Materials, Minerals and
Manufacturing, Rural Development and Water Technology.
13.5 During the meeting with the Committee, Director, CGCRI presented the overall activities of
the institute since its inception. This included an account of the scientific and technological activities,
patents and publications, technologies, the existing expertise of scientists, the different category of
employees, human resource, the students, project fellows, the national missions and technologies
for translation to industries with an aim to earn 30 to 40% revenue in coming years, existing number
of vacancies, plans for filling, training programs, technology dissemination and skill developments
initiated by the lab and other outreach centers in various areas and in various places, contributions
improving Industrial environment etc.
13.6 On being asked about the time required for transferring technologies from lab to products, the
Director, CGCRI informed the Committee that it takes about 20 years. The Committee also enquired
about the work /training carried out in the North-Eastern States of the country. On this, Director,
CGCRI replied that CGCRI has reached out to all the North -Eastern States of the country but the
numbers are less as this depends on the cooperation and encouragements from the local governments.
The Committee suggested disseminating the activities of the CGCRI lab to national level by initiating
discussion and interactions with state governments. The Committee enquired about earning revenue
while transferring technologies to many companies; the kind of agreements; subsidy given, if any;
and industry investments in the R&D. In response, Director, CGCRI answered that there is a unit
which looks at intellectual property rights, doing market survey and every time a technology is ready
an expression of interest is advertised. It was informed that some of the industries invest in the
R&D.

21
13.7 The Committee also enquired that whether ceramic membrane which removes arsenic and iron
from water is mostly confined to west Bengal; Lakshadweep islands have water desalination plants
and consequent to that whether there is any reduction of water borne diseases in that population. To
this, Director, CGCRI replied that the water plants have been installed in many places in South India
also. Regarding the reduction of water borne diseases, said he was not aware of it and would find
out.
13.8 It was further informed to the Committee that considering average consumption per day @3000
Liter per plant for 90 Arsenic and Iron removal plants installed by CSIR-CGCRI, total production is
270000 Litre per day and considering per capita consumption of 5 Litre, total number of consumers
comes to be 54000. The health benefit is in terms of reduction in gastroenterological problems to a
great extent and reduction and eventual elimination of skin lesions due to Arsenic exposure in case of
not so affected consumers. This has led to reduction in medical expenditure of the consumers.
13.9 The Chairperson suggested that all the laboratories involved in manufacturing these
membranes to put it on a single platform and then as the Govt. of India should direct that
municipalities, coming under urban planning, all must access this platform. The Chairperson
also suggested that Govt. could have a forum to put all the developments of these labs in
Doordarshan, after taking steps to protect the intellectual property.
On this, Director CGCRI told that wherever CGCRI gets cooperation, things are moving forward.
But, it has to be done on a national level.
13.10  The Chairperson also asked about the ceramic hip joint developed at CGCRI and its current
status and how it is different from other joints in the market. Director, CGCRI replied that 100
operations have been done by the famous Orthopedician Dr. Sancheti at Pune by using alumina-
alumina joints which are mechanically strong and biocompatible and now it is planned to replace it
with zirconia toughened alumina. The problem with this technology is that proper machining facilities
are not available at a lower cost in India. CSIR-CGCRI is developing some vendors for this purpose.
13.11 The Committee notes the activities and achievements of CGCRI in the field of ceramic
& glass research in order to maximize the economic, environmental and social benefit for
people of the country. The Committee feels that Department should take proactive measures
so that technologies developed by the CSIR Scientific Institutions like CGCRI reaches the
masses faster through industries/ companies. The Committee also recommends that proper
mechanism must be in place for disseminating the activities and achievements of scientific
labs at national level by involving universities and initiating discussion & interactions with
State Governments and also through media.
13.12 The Committee appreciates the work done by CGCRI by using ceramic membrane
technology for water purification which removes arsenic and iron from the contaminated
water making it potable. The Committee notes that mostly these plants have been installed
in West Bengal besides some other states like Sikkim and North- East States. The Committee
feels that this technology should be extended in other States also including far remote places
like Lakshadweep islands. Further, the Committee recommends that DSIR should co-ordinate
with all scientific laboratories which are involved in manufacturing these membranes to put
it on a single platform and then concerned Ministries/ Departments should direct that

22
municipalities, coming under urban planning, must access this platform in order to provide
clean & safe water to its citizens.
14. CSIR - INDIAN INSTITUTE OF CHEMICAL BIOLOGY (IICB), KOLKATA:
14.1 The Committee also visited IICB for on the spot study in October 2016 and was informed that
at present, the institute has six academic divisions: Cancer Biology & Inflammatory Disorder, Cell
Biology and Physiology, Organic and Medicinal Chemistry, Infectious Diseases and Immunology,
Molecular Genetics and Structural Biology and Bioinformatics. While the major research focus rested
on cholera and leishmaniasis in the early years, chemical biology in this institute gradually embraced
other important disciplines pertaining to human health and disease. Research areas focusing on asthma,
diabetes, cancer and inflammation came into being reinforcing the potential of our institute to meet
the everincreasing challenges of our society.
14.2 CSIR-IICB embodies a symbiosis between chemistry and biology that translates to a commitment
to higher standards of health for all. While biologists are working on comprehending physiological
processes and disease pathogenesis, chemists are making tools to harness and redefine biological
phenomena. Such operational integration of chemistry and biology that focuses on human health as
an institutional mandate is perhaps the first of its kind in our nation, if not the whole world. The
institute is now poised to make an impact in understanding the chemistry of life, finally removing the
veil of mystery around the life. The spin-offs are bound to have a major impact on the health scenario
of the nation. Today, by its mandate, CSIR-IICB is engaged in research on diseases and certain
biological problems of global interest. CSIR-IICB is putting emphasis on quality basic research, on
projects having applied potential and is looking forward to a successful Industry-Institute liaison
towards closer partnership.
14.3 During the meeting of the committee, Director CSIR-IICB gave a presentation before the
Committee on 21st October, 2016 about the activities of the institute right from its inception and
journey of the glorious past from a small house to the current state and achievements. This presentation
included the facilities built, research work on cholera, leishmaniasis detection kit and other
achievements translated medicine for asthma namely Asman, Prostalyn, compounds from Paan leaf,
mentoring of NIPER, Kolkata and futuristic research focused on Dengue and Alzheimer’s. The
presentation also included the development work of the land that CSIR is having at Baripur, originally
meant for an innovation complex. Director CSIR-IICB requested the committee to extend support to
use the ready land for building innovation complex for all the CSIR labs in the eastern region.
14.4 The Chairperson desired to know a whether the Cryo TEM can identify Alzheimer proteins
etc. on which Director, IICB replied that it cannot be used for such applications. The Chairperson
also desired to know whether the small molecules that he described for anticancer and antiinflammatory
are from natural plants. Director IICB replied that the natural ones are toxic, and the molecules IICB
researched are analogs of the natural molecules.
14.5 The Chairperson further asked whether toxicity and phase 1-3 trails could be done by tie up
with other scientific laboratories for which he replied that in India such concept is not working out
except the initial testing which are now done in many CSIR laboratories.
14.6 The Committee enquired about the studies of Diabetes carried out at IICB. Director, IICB
mentioned that the molecules can be used for diabetes type II and the molecule identified was a

23
transcription factor that will prevent going to critical stages. On the work of Parkinson’s and
Alzheimer’s, Chairpersons opined that for Parkinson’s disease they have identified dopamine and for
Alzemiers the protein has been identified. On being asked about the MoU between IICB and NRDC
with regard to technology transfer, Director IICB replied to the Committee that it would be done
within three months.
14.7 The Committee felt that a number of Biotechnology related inventions have come up
but has not gone as people program. NRDC is the right agency that can assimilate and initiate
our up gradations and asked about steps taken in this regard.
14.8 Director IICB informed the Committee that earlier the new center of IICB was not having
clearance as a research lab. Now MoU has been done with NRDC and they can develop our technologies
in 3-4 months time.
14.9 One of the Members of the Committee asked about the Kala-azar  which affected in Gorakhpur
and Bihar areas, and the time required for the kit to be developed by IICB to come to market. On this,
IICB Director replied that the diagnosis and detection of Kala-azar  was through urine and blood at
this institute. But enough samples were not tested at this level. He further clarified that it is now
planned to distribute one lakh kits to a number of hospitals in Kolkata and other centers to monitor
and know how many cases have happened and for this time and energy is required. This is expected
to be done in 18 months.
14.10  The Committee also enquired whether IICB is doing some work on Japanese encephalitis
virus. Responding to this, Director IICB replied that IICB is dealing with Dengue at first, which is a
major problem and how quickly they can detect it as the patients come with platelet numbers that fall
very low .The Committee observed that Dengue in Delhi and other big cities, causality is very high
and even if patients get well they remain very week. On this, IICB Director replied that this institute
has less number of people working on Dengue, though many others are doing work on Dengue in
other labs. One of the members of the Committee asked why dengue is so resistant. Director IICB
replied that in all these diseases starting from Malaria to HIV , the parasites are very opportunists and
when parasites go and infect our immune system they will start changing. He said that if something
is made today it is good for today only. After 10 years it is evolving and changing to a new epidemic.
As an example of Malaria he stated that we studied it for 50 years with so much work, money and
funding spent by the Government yet still even today it is not solved and now Malaria has is affecting
many other organs. The Chairperson added that the country should deal with Malaria related anemia
also.
14.11  One of the Members of the Committee asked on Alzheimers having identified, whether IICB is
in a position to come out with a new medicine? Director, IICB replied that the problem is with beta-
amylase getting aggregated. The second problem is that if any drug is given in blood majority is not
reaching the brain due to bloodbrain barrier. So the issue is that by the time the medicine is given the
aggregates have already formed. So the drug needs to be given much earlier.
14.12  During the meeting, the Committee was of the view that in both presentations there
are two major disconnects, firstly a disconnect between work done in the labs and industry
and secondly between work done in the labs and universities. The Committee felt that the
pharmaceutical industry is going in one direction which is quite unfortunate. About 10 year

24
back we developed significant pharmaceutical industries. After the FDI policy, things changed.
Today R&D of pharmaceutical company is generally poor in the country. The Committee
recommends that since, CSIR being the eyes and ears of the government in R & D, it should
make efforts to remove disconnect between the R&D and industry, particularly for the benefit
of Indians.
14.13  The Committee opined that second thing is work done in universities. In countries like USA,
the R&D work is primarily done in Universities. The Universities are not separate and then they have
realized that the type of energy and innovation needed for this type of research applications are best
done by highly qualified research scholars. The US Government has even got a body which is in
constant touch with students of all major universities and they identify scholars who are doing
excellent work.
14.14  In view of the foregoing, the Committee opined that there should be much more connect
between CSIR labs and the universities. We are proliferating Universities without looking into quality
but at least we should identify good universities and good institutions and there should be a proper
connection. The Chairperson asked whether IICB and CGCRI have any connection with University
on which both the Directors informed the Committee that they interact with universities and even
IICB has lot of connectivity with Universities and they feel as if they are part of the universities,
because many scientists teach course in universities give training for PG students etc.
14.15  One of the Members of the Committee asked whether this is limited to the Universities in the
geographical areas where these institutions are located. Director, IICB replies that there are no
geographical restrictions on this. The Chairperson asked whether the labs are getting students from
all over the country. Director, CSIR -IICB answered that the research students are NET qualified
through all India selection and are coming from all over the country. He also mentioned that institutes
get students from different universities and colleges, especially students who are in 3rd year and the
scientists teach them. Institute is also making every scientist to teach in universities.
14.16  The Chairperson enquired whether any of these labs involved with chicken guinea and Zika
virus. On this, Director, IICB informed that out of these 4 institutes, Institute of Genomics and
Integrative Biology (IGIB) doing work in these lines, but it has not gone very far. The Chairperson
also asked what has been done in chicken guinea and in vector borne diseases and whether pheromone
type traps can be used to trap female mosquitoes. People should work in this direction as these are
available in Korea and US and even Karnataka has there for about ` 15,000/- which she has bought
and used. On responding to this, Director, CSIR -IICB stated that in the next month meeting with
CSIR-Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute (CEERI) they will propose this idea to develop
traps that can kill the female mosquitoes.
14.17  The Committee appreciates the good work done by IICB in the field of chemical and
biological sciences, and extensive research work done in containing diseases such as cholera,
developing leishmaniasis detection kit and achievements made in translating medicine for
asthma namely Asmon, Prostalyn, compounds from Paan leaf, mentoring National Institute
of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER), Kolkata and futuristic research focused
on Dengue and Alzheimer’s etc. The Committee feels that these research outcomes/findings
should be disseminated all over the country involving various stakeholders and universities
so that general public at large may benefit.

25
14.18  The Committee also observes that a number of bio-technology related research and
inventions of IICB have not reached to the masses in the absence of proper agencies or
mechanism with regard to technology transfer. In view of this, the Committee recommends
that National Research Development Corporation (NRDC) of the Department should be engaged
by doing MoU in order to promote, develop and commercialize the technology emanating
from IICB at the earliest.
14.19  The Committee further observes that both the above said institutions of CSIR i.e.
Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute (CGCRI) and Indian Institute of Chemical
Biology (IICB) have two major disconnects, firstly work done in the labs and industry and
secondly work done in the labs and universities . The Committee, therefore, Recommends
that there should be much more interactions between CSIR labs and the industries as well as
Universities.
15. NATIONAL S&T HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
15.1 Human Resource Development is of paramount importance in the national building process
and creating a knowledge society. CSIR has focused in a significant manner on the development of
S&T Human Resource and has been rendering yeoman service by fostering, sustaining and helping in
upgradation of the stock of highly specialized scientists, engineers and technologists in diverse
disciplines of S&T, in the country. It awards fellowships, gives grants, and recognizes excellence
through various prizes and awards.
15.2 The main objectives of the National S&T Human Resources Development Programme are as
under:
 To promote and foster the upgradation of the stock of well qualified, highly specialized
scientists, engineers and technologists for R&D in all disciplines of Science & Technology
in the country
 To have an integrated approach to National Human Resource Development for Science,
Engineering & Technology by encouraging and promoting research in the Universities
and Institutes of higher learning
 To invest in basic and interdisciplinary research that is harbinger of the ‘high-tech’ and
technology of tomorrow.
15.3 The Committee desired to know as to what steps had been taken by CSIR for enhancing and
nurturing S&T human resources. The Committee was informed that CSIR has a mandate to develop
and nurture S&T manpower at the national level. It also promotes scientific research through research
grants to scientists/professors working in universities/R&D institutes. To attract the young science
students at early stages of their career towards scientific research, CSIR conducts CSIR-UGC National
Eligibility Test (NET) for Junior Research Fellowship (JRF-NET) to the science undergraduates.
Amendments have been made in the NET scheme with regard to qualification and validity of CSIR-
JRF to widen the scope of NET and to attract bright students at early stages of their career to opt
science subjects for higher studies. The validity to avail the JRF-NET has been increased to two
years and students with BS-four year programme/BE/B. Tech/B. Pharm/MBBS/Integrated BS-MS/
M.Sc. or equivalent degree, B.Sc. (Hons.) or equivalent degree are eligible for appearing in NET. The

26
number of JRF-NET awarded has recently been increased from 1200 to 2000 in June-2016 NET.
Further, the number of JRF-GATE fellowship which is tenable only in CSIR laboratories has recently
been enhanced to 120 each year for pursuing the doctoral research in engineering, technology and
pharmaceutical sciences.
15.4 The Committee was further informed that CSIR enhanced the rate of stipend in respect of
JRF-NET, JRF-GATE, SRF-Direct, SPMF, CSIR-Nehru PDF, and RA w.e.f. 01-10-2014 in accordance
to DST OM NO. SR/S9/Z-09/2012 dated 21st October 2014 with the approval of its Governing
Body. Furthermore, a proposal for enhancement of rate of stipend in respect of JRF/SRF working in
EMR funded projects (Research Schemes) is under consideration. Department of Higher Education
has given its concurrence and the proposal is now to be submitted to Department of Expenditure for
its concurrence.
15.5 The details of budget allocation and utilisation of National S&T Human Resource Development
Scheme during 2014-15 , 2015-16 , 2016-17 and 2017-18 are as under:-
(` in Crore)
Period B E RE Actual Expenditure
2014-15 288.00 288.00 288.00
2015-16 288.00 295.00 225.00
2016-17 300.00 300.00 225.00 (upto 31.01.2017)
2017-18 325.00 - -
15.6 The Committee desired to know about the physical and financial achievements of the Department
w.r.t. Capacity Building and Human Research Development during 2016-17. In response, the
Department informed the Committee that during the current financial year (2016-17) till 31st January
2017, CSIR under its “National S&T Human Resource Development Programme” has awarded 2666
fellowships/associateships for pursuing doctoral and postdoctoral research in universities and R&D
institutions including CSIR laboratories. The scheme-wise break-up of fellowships/associateships is
given in the table below:
Sl. No. Scheme Number of fellowships
1. JRF-NET through CSIR-UGC National Eligibility T est* 2132
2. Senior Research Fellowship (SRF)-Direct** 313
3. Research Associateship (RA)** 108
4. Senior Research Associateship (SRA)** 61
5. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Fellowship (SPMF) 27
6. JRF-GATE** 25
TOTAL 2666
* Number of fellowships pertains to CSIR-UGC NET JRF held in June 2016 only. These figures will be revised on
declaration of the result for NET held in December 2016.
** The interview process for the award of SRF, JRF-GA TE, RA, SRA and CSIR-Nehru PDF for the financial year is in
progress. The final figure will be available on 31st March 2017.

27
15.7 The Committee also enquired from the Department as how the allocated amount of ` 325 crore
w.r.t. Capacity Building and Human Resource Development would be utilized during the year 2017-18.
Responding to this query, the Department informed the Committee that an allocation of ` 325 crore
has been made during 2017-18 for “National S&T Human Resource Development Programme”. The
department will utilize the allocated funds on award of fellowships to doctoral & postdoctoral students,
emeritus scientists, research schemes, partial travel grants to research scholars for attending seminars
abroad, partial financial assistance to institutes for holding seminars in India, recognition of excellence
through CSIR-YSA awards, SSB Prizes and GN Ramachandran Gold Medal etc. Scheme-wise break-
up of fellowships/associateships proposed to be awarded by CSIR during 2017-18 is given in the
table below:
Sl. No. Scheme Number of
fellowships
1. JRF-NET through CSIR-UGC National Eligibility T est 3500
2. Senior Research Fellowship (SRF)-Direct 500
3. Research Associateship (RA) 150
4. Senior Research Associateship (SRA) 100
5. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Fellowship (SPMF) 50
6. JRF-GATE 120
7. CSIR-Nehru Postdoctoral Fellows 20
TOTAL 4440
15.8 The Committee welcomes the enhancement in allocations for this Scheme from ````` 300
crore in 2016-17 to ````` 325 crore in BE 2017-18. However, the Committee takes serious note
that during 2016-17, an amount of ````` 225 crore only (upto 31.01.2017) was spent against the
allocated RE of ````` 300 cr. which clearly states that physical targets could not be achieved fully
and many of the deserving students might have been denied the opportunities to get the
fellowships/ Scholarships. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in future, the
Department should be more careful in utilizing the allocated amount.
15.9 The Committee also feels that to catch young students and nurture, groom and develop
them into budding scientists, it is imperative that a concerted and co-ordinated strategy is
made on a long- term basis. Since, CSIR has vast chain of scientific labs and the biggest
institution as employer of scientists; it has to actively play a major role in this direction. Just
by awarding some fellowships/ Scholarships, this mammoth task is not going to be accomplished.
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Department must come out some concrete
proposals to trap, harness and retain human resources in the field of science.
16. FILING AND GRANT OF PATENTS:
16.1 The Committee desired to know from the Department about the efforts made and results
achieved to improve upon its performance in terms of filing and grant of patents. The Department

28
informed the Committee that the Department (CSIR) is pursuing cutting edge R&D in diverse domains
and the IP emanating has been secured systematically. It maintains close interaction with Inventors/
IP coordinators of respective CSIR laboratories, Indian Patent Office, IP Attorneys (both in India
and Abroad) to enhance the IP filing and securing. CSIR files patent application in India without
engaging any attorney and subsequently handles prosecutions to get the application granted in India.
Indian prosecution starts, 4 to 5 years after the date of filing the patent applications, therefore, CSIR
gets patents granted after five to six years of initial filing of applications. During the last three years
CSIR has been granted 270 patents. For filing the foreign patents, CSIR engage patent attorney who
help in filing, prosecution and get grant of foreign patents on behalf of CSIR. During last three years
CSIR has been granted 1033 foreign patents.
16.2 The Committee was informed by the CSIR last year that around 150 patents, in the field of
Biological Sciences, shall also be filed with Indian Patent Office upon receiving necessary clearance
from National Biodiversity Authority. The Committee desired to know about the present status in this
regard. In response, the Department informed the Committee that CSIR is pursuing the matter with
National Biodiversity Authority (NBA) to clear the pendency.
16.3 The Committee was also informed by the CSIR about the Patents filed in India & Abroad vis-
a-vis Patents granted for the last five years i.e.  2011-12,2012-13,2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16
which are as under:
Y ear Patent Filed Patent Granted Patent Filed Patent Granted
(India) (India) (Abroad) (Abroad)
2011-12 197 99 290 282
2012-13 199 108 381 272
2013-14 263 92 349 373
2014-15 310 65 448 336
2015-16 318 115 430 303
16.4 The Committee appreciates the efforts of CSIR in obtaining patents in India and abroad.
However, the Committee feels that ratio in respect of Patents filed and Patents granted in
India and abroad is not encouraging. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Department
should have constant vigil on this front and also the matter may be taken up vigorously with
National Biodiversity Authority (NBA) for clearance of around 150 patents, in order to file
the same with the Indian Patent Office in the field of Biological Sciences, at the earliest.
17. WORLD RANKING OF CSIR
17.1 The Committee desired to know the world ranking of CSIR and the various steps taken by
CSIR to improve its ranking and overcome the factors adversely affecting its ranking. In response,
the Committee was informed by the Department that CSIR is a globally benchmarked and positioned
organization today and the Department (CSIR) is continuously endeavouring to improve its global
ranking through achieving desired outputs and outcomes. CSIR has been ranked 12th in the world
amongst the government institutions as per the prestigious SCImago Institution Ranking. It has

29
improved thus its position after being at 14th spot for three consecutive years. The overall global
ranking of CSIR has also improved from 105th position in 2015 to 99th position in 2016.
17.2 The Committee was further informed that CSIR is the pioneer of India’s intellectual property
movement. CSIR today is strengthening its patent portfolio to carve out global niches for the country
in select technology domains. Commercialization of CSIR patents is 13.33% in comparison to ~3%
global average. Amongst its peers in publicly funded research organizations in the world, CSIR is a
leader in terms of filing and securing patents worldwide. Thus in terms of S&T outputs, besides
scientific publications in scholarly journals CSIR is also mindful of protecting its Intellectual Property
(IP) through patents. Thus CSIR is consciously and continuously endeavouring to improve its global
ranking, the results of which are quite evident.
17.3 The Committee notes with satisfaction that CSIR has improved its world ranking among
government institutions as well as its overall global Ranking. However, the Committee observes
that CSIR is still far behind amongst the globally benchmarked scientific organisations in
the world. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to place India in the list of
the top countires in the scientific world , CSIR should aim to become amongst at least first 10
global organisations in its field and it should strive hard to achieve that ranking.
18. PROJECTS/ SCHEMES IN NORTH – EASTERN STATES
18.1 The Committee desired to know about the Projects/Schemes undertaken in North-Eastern
States by the Department and whether Department has any plan to initiate new Schemes/Projects
during 2017-18 in the North-Eastern States. Responding to this query, the Department informed the
Committee that CSIR runs a number of projects for North-Eastern States. A constituent laboratory
of CSIR namely, CSIR- North East Institute of Science & Technology (CSIR-NEIST), Jorhat is
located in the State of Assam, which pursues focused R&D activities and the proceed of which have
been gainfully utilized in the states of North Eastern region has executed a number of projects. The
said Institute proposes to undertake new projects during 2017-18 in the following areas:
 Exploration of plant resource/traditional knowledgebase of NE India and development of
Affordable healthcare products, Nutraceuticals & functional foods, Herbal pest control agents;
 Exploration and sustainable utilization of plants and microbes;
 Development of high yielding varieties of medicinal and aromatic plants;
 Bioremediation and restoration of degraded environment;
 Development of formulations/technologies for supporting MSMEs;
 Advance materials for water and air purification;
 Carbon based composite materials;
 Heterogeneous catalysts for organic transformations;
 Eco-friendly pulping for paper industry;
 S & T solution to geo-hazards, safe and sustainable exploitation of geo-resources and
climate change; and
 Membrane technology for separation.

30
18.2 The Committee was also informed that CSIR-NEIST has undertaken following Fast Track
Translational Projects also which targets time-bound delivery of product/ process/ technology:
 In-situ bioremediation technology;
 Herbal product for management of pain;
 Membrane Based Process Technology for Commercial Production of Biomolecules; and
 Modular Bricks from Brahmaputra River Bed Sand.
Also CSIR-Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute (CSIR-CMERI), Durgapur is
implementing a project on ‘Appropriate Technological Interventions for Ensuring Sustainable
Livelihood for Womenfolk in Mizoram’. CSIR-CMERI in collaboration with NGOs has also set up
High Efficiency Post Harvest Drying & Processing Centres in the States of Mizoram and Arunachal
Pradesh for post harvest processing of Ginger, Big Cardamom, Turmeric, Chillies etc.
18.3 The Committee was further informed that DSIR, under its PRISM programme has set up
outreach centres at IIT-Guwahati and CSIR- North East Institute of Science & Technology (CSIR-
NEIST), Jorhat, which scout proposals and provide mentorship to individual innovators in the region
to convert their innovative ideas into models/prototypes.
18.4 It was also brought to the notice of the Committee that National Research Development
Corporation (NRDC), a PSU of DSIR during 2016-17 organized 4 Entrepreneurship Development
Programmes (EDP) in 4 districts of Assam and has scheduled one Industry Interaction meet on
Herbal Technologies developed by various research institutes at Guwahati in collaboration with
NEITCO, Guwahati. NRDC has also signed a MoA with Guwahati Biotech Park (GBP) to assist its
incubatees in creating start-ups by providing technology and IPR management services.
18.5 During the course of the meeting of the Committee, it was informed by the Secretary that
there are lot of technologies available which are being offered free of cost to North- Eastern States
and some of them will be launched soon as well as required training would also be imparted to the
people there.
18.6 The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the Department in the form of various
projects/ schemes being run in the North-Eastern States of the country which will bring the
qualitative changes in the lives of the people of that area and also generate employment
opportunities. However, the Committee feels that lot more is needed to be done in order to
augment the incomes and improve the quality of lives of millions of people geographically
spread across the North-Eastern states of the country.
19. SKILL DEVELOPMENT
19.1 The Committee enquired from the Department about the key achievements made during
2016-17 in the field of Skill Development in order to provide employment opportunities for unemployed
youths of the country and imparting such training so that they may be skilled enough to fit in the
industries.
19.2 In response, the Department informed the Committee that CSIR constituent laboratories have
organized several training programmes/workshops in diverse S&T areas so as to disseminate the

31
valuable knowledgebase developed in-house for societal/MSME/industrial benefits. CSIR has also
launched One Year Post-graduate diploma in Patinformatics (Patent Informatics). The course has
been designed to impart the training in the field of patent searching, reading and analysis for the
purpose of creating patent landscapes, identifying research gaps, competitive intelligence, new venture
evaluation, patent portfolio management and techno-legal studies (Patentability, Validity, Infringement
and Freedom to operate).
19.3 On being enquired by the Committee about proposed initiatives being taken during 2017-18 in
Skill Development, the Department informed the Committee that in order to connect skill development
and High-Tech training with job opportunities and entrepreneurship, CSIR has launched its ambitious
program “CSIR Integrated Skill Initiative” with a target of 100,000 skilled personnel in next 5 years.
CSIR has already initiated 10 skill programs in the areas of Leather Processing Technology, Industrial
Maintenance Engineering, Mechatronics, Instrumentation, Battery maintenance, Internet of Things,
Advance Manufacturing Technology, etc. with its target to have 75 programmes by the end of 2017.
All these programmes are industry relevant with great entrepreneurial prospects. The target groups
are from 10th standard to bachelor’s level.
19.4 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department in this matter and hopes that
it will yield desired results and will go a long way in respect of social upliftment of down-
trodden persons of the society. However, the Committee feels that merely running new skill
programs in the areas of Leather Processing Technology, Industrial Maintenance Engineering,
Mechatronics, Instrumentation, Battery maintenance, Internet of Things, Advance
Manufacturing Technology, etc. is not enough unless those skilled persons are employed or
integrated in the respective industries. Therefore, the Committee recommends that
Department should have linkages with various industries as well Ministries/ Departments so
that these skilled persons could get suitable employment and sustain their livelihoods.
20. CSIR’S ROYALTY AND EARNINGS OF DEPARTMENT BY TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER
20.1 The Committee enquired from the Department about its earnings during last three years on
account of royalty component and efforts made to augment the same. Responding to this query, the
Department informed the Committee that Department provides support to industry for development
and demonstration of technology. For technology transfer and licensing of knowledgebase, CSIR
Guidelines for Technology Transfer and Utilization of Knowledgebase 2005 are followed. These
‘Guidelines’ are under revision. CSIR has been continuously endeavouring to earn higher premia and
royalty through technology transfer and licensing of knowledgebase, but much depends upon the
paying capacity of industry in a given sector. Further, CSIR has always focused on strengthening the
technology base of industry leading to socio-economic development in the Country. Royalty received
from industries during the last three years by CSIR and DSIR is given below:
Y ear Royalty received by the DSIR from industries upon CSIR
commercialization of technologies ( ` Crore) ( ` in Crore)
2013-14 3.17 8.18
2014-15 3.64 12.22
2015-16 5.97 12.29

32
20.2 The Committee also asked as how much Department has been able to get investment from
industries for its R&D activities for the last 3 years. In response to this query, the Department
informed the Committee that Department through DSIR schemes gets around 50% of the investment
from industries for the R&D and technology development projects sanctioned to them. Over the last
three years, DSIR has been able to mobilize investments of about ` 40.00 cr. from industries. As
regards CSIR, it has received ` 312.29 c rore during last three years as external cash flow from
private agencies, industries etc.
20.3 While deposing before the Committee during its meeting held on 15th February, 2017, the
Secretary informed the committee that Department gives technologies to private companies/industries
and after seeing its commercial viability, the companies/ industries pay the money. However, sometimes
the companies/ industries do not pay immediately, but pay later on. Establishing credibility with
world class companies/ industries is a first step and in the next two to three generations, the Department
focuses on the large amount of money which also paves the way for better work in the future.
20.4 The Committee observes that income of the Department from royalty component is
very low as compared to the huge investment of the Government on account of research/
innovations/ R&D etc. vis-à-vis  profit earned by the private companies/industries by making
commercial use of technologies developed by the Department. In view of this, the Committee
recommends that MoU should be signed with the companies/industries for fixing royalty
component while making technology transfer/inventions for allowing its product for commercial
utilization so that Department could be financially self reliant in every aspect and invest in
R&D.
20.5 The Committee also observes that investment in Research and Development (R&D) is decreasing.
It is only about 0.48% of our GDP whereas in some other countries, it is 2-3%. It is also a matter of
concern that all over the world, as per an estimated data, about 66 per cent of R & D funding comes
from the private sector and about 25-33 per cent comes from the public sector. In India, the ratio is
reverse. In view of this, it is essential that representatives of private sector/ industries get involved
in order to contribute more in R & D in the country.
20.6 The Committee, therefore, recommends that investment in R&D must be increased so
that research work may be taken up at large scale and more and more representatives of
industries/companies should be motivated for making investment in R&D of the Scientific
Ministries/Departments of the country.
20.7 The Committee further is of the opinion that instead of giving the technologies to
private companies/ industries in the first instances, option for exploring transfer of
technologies to Public Sector companies may be explored which could be beneficial for both
i.e.  Department as well as Public Sector companies. In order to achieve this goal, the
Committee recommends that more tie-ups between the Department and Public Sector
companies/ institutions should be done.
21. DUPLICATION IN RESEARCH WORK/ TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT
21.1 During its meeting held on 15th February, 2017, the Committee observes that similar kind of
research in various fields is going on in the Scientific Ministries/Departments of the country especially
in the Departments of Science & Technology, Scientific & Industrial Research, Biotechnology, and

33
Space and Ministry of Earth Sciences etc. For example, same type of devices like electronic machine
for checking blood pressure, blood sugar, water purifier, and milk adulteration is also developed by
the Department of Science and Technology (DST) and other Scientific Departments besides
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR).
21.2 The Committee further observes that research in same area could be done using different
methodology which could be later on compared to find out which one is better method and more
usability and financially viable for use of the masses. On responding to this, the Secretary of the
Department submitted that it looks like duplication because different Departments claim the credit
for it and present the results whereas they in fact collaborate. Moreover, especially, in case of
national labs, a specific project is presented with DST or DBT as well as CSIR, more often than not,
people have actually contributed to this and funding also comes from various Departments.
21.3 However, the Committee feels that this shows some sort of lack of co-ordination and
consultation between the various Scientific Ministries/ Departments of the country. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that a mechanism should be evolved for having a constant
and broad consultation/ co-ordination amongst the various scientific Ministries/ Departments
about the areas/fields of research so that time, energy, money, manpower and other resources
of the country may be utilized optimally.
22. AWARENESS AND OUTREACH PROGRAMME OF THE DEPARTMENT
22.1 The Committee while considering the Demands for Grants (2017-18) had observed that various
stakeholders and general public at large is not much aware of the successes of CSIR, its diverse
inventions of public utilities, medicines, vaccines, varieties of rice, detection of milk adulteration
device, achievements in the field of Agri & Food Technologies, etc. which could be immensely
beneficial for the general public, researchers, academia, students, efforts of CSIR in skill development,
industries and farmers etc.
22.2 The Committee during its meeting held on 15th February, 2017 had also observed that
people of the country including elected representatives are not aware of the excellent work in
the field of Science being done by the Department or much about the Department itself which
may be beneficial for a very big segment of the society like farmers, fishermen, students,
research scholars etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should
prepare a comprehensive awareness programme with a calendar of events using social media
platforms, radio, television etc. meant for researchers, academia, farmers, industries, students
and general public but most importantly for all the elected representatives right from district
level i.e. Members of Zila Panchayats, Legislative Assemblies and Councils and Members of
Parliament. The Committee strongly feels that elected representatives can play an important
role in making their constituents aware of scientific development and ultimately developing
scientific temperament in the public at large.

RECOMMENDATION/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
FINANCIAL ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT
The Committee observes that financial performance of the Department has been
satisfactory in the past few years. However, the Committee notes that the Department has
utilized ````` 3203.45 cr. (upto 31.01.2017) against the allocated amount of ````` 4062.80 cr. only
during 2016-17 which shows that proper and timely planning for utilization of the allocated
fund was not done. In view of this, the Committee recommends that the Department must
have proper and robust monitoring mechanism for utilizing the allocated funds so that optimum
utilization of allocated funds may be ensured. (Para 2.2)
REQUEST & JUSTIFICATION FOR ADDITIONAL BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR
FY 2017-18
In view of the above submissions of the Department, the Committee feels that request
for the enhancement in the budgetary allocation to the tune of ````` 500.00 cr. for the financial
year 2017-18 is fully justified and the matter should be taken up by with the concerned
Ministry/Department vigorously. The Committee also observes that scientific institutions
like CSIR should not suffer due to lack of money especially in the cutting edge national labs
which are involved in various researches in the field of science. (Para 3.5)
SCHEMES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
The Committee notes that there has been gross underutilisation of allocated resources
not only during 2016-17 but in the past too, in all the four Schemes viz. Promoting Innovations
in Individuals, Start-ups and MSMEs (PRISM), Patent Acquisition and Collaborative Research
and Technology Development (PACE), Building Industrial Research & Development (BIRD)
and Access to Knowledge for Creation of Innovative Capacity and Dissemination (A2K) of the
Department. The reasons for underutilization of allocated funds have also not been given by
the Department. Because of underutilizations, allocation at BE stage for 2017-18 in some of
the said schemes have been reduced substantially. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that the Department should strengthen its administrative and monitoring
mechanism for utilizing the allocated resources right from beginning and evaluation be done
in each quarter. (Para 4.11)
NATIONAL RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (NRDC)
The Committee notes that NRDC plays a significant role in transfer of technologies
emanating from R&D laboratories and its operation covers entire spectrum of technologies.
However, the Committee expresses its deep concern over underutilization of allocated amount
during 2016-17. The Committee hopes that proper planning would be done for optimum
utilization of allocated amount during 2017-18. The Committee further recommends that
NRDC should have close co-ordination and constant interactions with CSIR- labs in order to
promote, develop and commercialize the technology emanating from various labs so that it
could reach the masses of the country. (Para 5.6)
34

35
CENTRAL ELECTRONICS LTD. (CEL)
The Committee feels that Department should be more proactive in utilizing the allocated
amount during 2017-18 in order to attain the objectives of CEL by strengthening the monitoring
mechanism. (Para 6.6)
CONSUL TANCY DEVELOPMENT CENTRE (CDC)
The Committee hopes that no cut or reduction in the allocated amount would be done
during 2017-18 at RE stage for smooth and effective functioning of CDC. (Para 7.4)
COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (CSIR)
The Committee notes and appreciates the efforts of CSIR in publishing large number of
research papers in International SCI journals every year. However, the Committee observes
that good work done by the CSIR in the form of research papers do not translate into
sustainable technologies for use of the masses. Hence, the Committee recommends that
Department should make all out efforts so that research and inventions may be translated
into sustainable technologies. The Committee further recommends that the scientific journals/
papers/ publications etc. should come out on time and with high standards. (Para 8.6)
NATIONAL LABORATORIES SCHEME
The Committee observes that the National Laboratories Scheme of the Department is
very significant in improving lives of citizens of the country through scientific advancement.
The Committee notes that during 2016-17 only ````` 2948.50 cr. was utilised under National
Laboratories scheme till 31.01.2017 as against allocation (R.E.) of ````` 3713.06 cr. by the
Department. At the one hand, the Department is pursuing for more allocation but on the other
hand allocated amount could not be spent fully by the Department. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that Department should have a proper monitoring and planning mechanism in
place so that allocated amount must be utilized fully during 2017-18. (Para 9.3)
The C ommittee also feels that creation of national labs under this scheme and other
significant activities may further be extended in those states where its presence is negligible
especially in states like Bihar, Jharkhand, Uttar  Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh
etc. (Para 9.4)
NATIONAL PHYSICAL LABORATORY, NEW DELHI
The Committee commends the role of NPL for its glorious achievements in the past in
the field of scientific research activities and emerging as a leading national institution for
research in a whole gamut of areas in the physical science. The Committee hopes that NPL
would be able to excel in its field and also strive hard for its contribution towards nation
building. (Para 10.8)
CSIR - NATIONAL AEROSPACE LABORATORIES (NAL), BENGALURU
The Committee observes that CSIR-NAL is a premier research institution of the country
and, over the last five decades, NAL has successfully contributed towards the growth of aerospace
activities in the country which has resulted in achieving expertise in many disciplines of the

36
aerospace technology. The Committee appreciates that the Scientific and Technological research
of NAL which has helped the nation in overcoming technological challenges, without
compromising the confidentiality of the strategic data. The Committee recommends that CSIR-
NAL should identify its future challenges, continue its research, scientific and technical work
and its contribution to the civil, strategic and aerospace sector. (Para 11.5)
The Committee is also constrained to note that CSIR-NAL’s proposal for funding of
70-seater Regional Transport Aircraft has been awaiting the Government’s approval since the
last three years. The Committee recommends that DSIR should immediately take the required
action in the matter and ensure that approval for the project is granted at the earliest so that
further action in respect of the project can be taken up by the CSIR-NAL. (Para 11.6)
CSIR-FOURTH PARADIGM INSTITUTE (4PI), BENGALURU
The Committee commends the various activities of CSIR-Fourth Paradigm Institute,
especially the High Performance Computing Facility. The Committee, however, recommends
that DSIR should closely look into the affairs of CSIR-4PI and ensure that the shadow of
factors which slowed down the progress of the Institute does not adversely affect its functioning
for long. The Committee hopes that CSIR-4PI would continue the good R&D in supercomputing
and cyber security research. The Committee recommends that 4PI should strengthen the
present modelling and simulation capability with focus on earth system and hazard by bringing
in new capability in data and computational science. (Para 12.4)
CSIR- CENTRAL GLASS & CERAMIC RESEARCH INSTITUTE (CGCRI), KOLKATA
The Chairperson suggested that all the laboratories involved in manufacturing these
membranes to put it on a single platform and then as the Govt. of India should direct that
municipalities, coming under urban planning, all must access this platform. The Chairperson
also suggested that Govt. could have a forum to put all the developments of these labs in
Doordarshan, after taking steps to protect the intellectual property. (Para 13.9)
The Committee notes the activities and achievements of CGCRI in the field of ceramic
& glass research in order to maximize the economic, environmental and social benefit for
people of the country. The Committee feels that Department should take proactive measures
so that technologies developed by the CSIR Scientific Institutions like CGCRI reaches the
masses faster through industries/ companies. The Committee also recommends that proper
mechanism must be in place for disseminating the activities and achievements of scientific
labs at national level by involing universities and initiating discussion & interactions with
State Governments and also through media. (Para 13.11)
The Committee appreciates the work done by CGCRI by using ceramic membrane
technology for water purification which removes arsenic and iron from the contaminated
water making it potable. The Committee notes that mostly these plants have been installed
in West Bengal besides some other States like Sikkim and North- East States. The Committee
feels that this technology should be extended in other States also including far remote places
like Lakshadweep islands. Further, the Committee recommends that DSIR should co-ordinate
with all scientific laboratories which are involved in manufacturing these membranes to put

37
it on a single platform and then concerned Ministries/ Departments should direct that
municipalities, coming under urban planning, must access this platform in order to provide
clean and safe water to its citizens. (Para 13.12)
CSIR - INDIAN INSTITUTE OF CHEMICAL BIOLOGY (IICB), KOLKATA
The Committee felt that a number of Biotechnology related inventions have come up
but has not gone as people program. NRDC is the right agency that can assimilate and initiate
our up gradations and asked about steps taken in this regard. (Para 14.7)
During the meeting, the Committee was of the view that in both presentations there are
two major disconnects, firstly a disconnect between work done in the labs and industry and
secondly between work done in the labs and universities. The Committee felt that the
pharmaceutical industry is going in one direction which is quite unfortunate. About 10 year
back we developed significant pharmaceutical industries. After the FDI policy, things changed.
Today R&D of pharmaceutical company is generally poor in the country. The Committee
recommends that since, CSIR being the eyes and ears of the Government in R & D, it should
make efforts to remove disconnect between the R&D and industry, particularly for the benefit
of Indians. (Para 14.12)
The Committee appreciates the good work done by IICB in the field of chemical and
biological sciences, and extensive research work done in containing diseases such as cholera,
developing leishmaniasis detection kit and achievements made in translating medicine for
asthma namely Asmon, Prostalyn, compounds from Paan leaf, mentoring National Institute
of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER), Kolkata and futuristic research focused
on Dengue and Alzheimer’s etc. The Committee feels that these research outcomes/findings
should be disseminated all over the country involving various stakeholders and universities
so that general public at large may benefit. (Para 14.17)
The Committee also observes that a number of bio-technology related research and
inventions of IICB have not reached to the masses in the absence of proper agencies or
mechanism with regard to technology transfer. In view of this, the Committee recommends
that National Research Development Corporation (NRDC) of the Department should be engaged
by doing MoU in order to promote, develop and commercialize the technology emanating
from IICB at the earliest. (Para 14.18)
The Committee further observes that both the above said institutions of CSIR i.e.
Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute (CGCRI) and Indian Institute of Chemical
Biology (IICB) have two major disconnects, firstly work done in the labs and industry and
secondly work done in the labs and universities . The Committee, therefore, Recommends
that there should be much more interactions between CSIR labs and the industries as well
as Univ ersities. (Para 14.19)
NATIONAL S&T HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
The Committee welcomes the enhancement in allocations for this Scheme from `````300 cr.
in 2016-17 to `````325 cr. in BE 2017-18. However, the Committee takes serious note that during

38
2016-17, an amount of ````` 225 cr. only (upto 31.01.2017) was spent against the allocated RE of
````` 300 cr. which clearly states that physical targets could not be achieved fully and many of the
deserving students might have been denied the opportunities to get the fellowships/
Scholarships. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in future, the Department should
be more careful in utilizing the allocated amount. (Para 15.8)
The Committee also feels that to catch young students and nurture, groom and develop
them into budding scientists, it is imperative that a concerted and co-ordinated strategy is
made on a long- term basis. Since, CSIR has vast chain of scientific labs and the biggest
institution as employer of scientists; it has to actively play a major role in this direction. Just
by awarding some fellowships/ Scholarships, this mammoth task is not going to be accomplished.
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Department must come out some concrete
proposals to trap, harness and retain human resources in the field of science. (Para 15.9)
FILING AND GRANT OF PATENTS
The Committee appreciates the efforts of CSIR in obtaining patents in India and abroad.
However, the Committee feels that ratio in respect of Patents filed and Patents granted in India
and abroad is not encouraging. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Department should
have constant vigil on this front and also the matter may be taken up vigorously with National
Biodiversity Authority (NBA) for clearance of around 150 patents, in order to file the same with
the Indian Patent Office in the field of Biological Sciences, at the ea rliest. (Para 16.4)
WORLD RANKING OF CSIR
The Committee notes with satisfaction that CSIR has improved its world ranking among
Government institutions as well as its overall global Ranking. However, the Committee
observes that CSIR is still far behind amongst the globally benchmarked scientific organisations
in the world. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to place India in the list
of the top countires in the scientific world , CSIR should aim to become amongst at least first
10 global organisations in its field and it should strive hard to achieve that rank ing.(Para 17.3)
PROJECTS/ SCHEMES IN NORTH – EASTERN STATES
The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the Department in the form of various
projects/ schemes being run in the North-Eastern States of the country which will bring the
qualitative changes in the lives of the people of that area and also generate employment
opportunities. However, the Committee feels that lot more is needed to be done in order to
augment the incomes and improve the quality of lives of millions of people geographically
spread across the North-Eastern States of the country. (Para 18.6)
SKILL DEVELOPMENT
The Commi ttee appreciates the efforts of the Department in this matter and hopes that it
will yield desired results and will go a long way in respect of social upliftment of down-trodden
persons of the society. However, the Committee feels that merely running new skill programs
in the areas of Leather Processing Technology, Industrial Maintenance Engineering,

39
Mechatronics, Instrumentation, Battery maintenance, Internet of Things, Advance
Manufacturing Technology, etc. is not enough unless those skilled persons are employed or
integrated in the respective industries . Therefore, the Committee recommends that Department
should have linkages with various industries as well Ministries/ Departments so that these
skilled persons could get suitable employment and sustain their livel ihoods. (Para 19.4)
CSIR’S ROYALTY AND EARNINGS OF DEPARTMENT BY TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER
The Committee observes that income of the Department from royalty component is
very low as compared to the huge investment of the Government on account of research/
innovations/ R&D etc. vis-à-vis  profit earned by the private companies/industries by making
commercial use of technologies developed by the Department. In view of this, the Committee
recommends that MoU should be signed with the companies/industries for fixing royalty
component while making technology transfer/inventions for allowing its product for commercial
utilization so that Department could be financially self reliant in every aspect and invest in
R&D. (Para 20.4)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that investment in R&D must be increased so
that research work may be taken up at large scale and more and more representatives of
industries/companies should be motivated for making investment in R&D of the Scientific
Ministries/Departments of the country. (Para 20.6)
The Committee further is of the opinion that instead of giving the technologies to private
companies/ industries in the first instances, option for exploring transfer of technologies to
Public Sector companies may be explored which could be beneficial for both i.e.  Department
as well as Public Sector companies. In order to achieve this goal, the Committee recommends
that more tie-ups between the Department and Public Sector companies/ institutions should
be done. (Para 20.7)
DUPLICATION IN RESEARCH WORK/ TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT
However, the Committee feels that this shows some sort of lack of co-ordination and
consultation between the various Scientific Ministries/Departments of the country. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that a mechanism should be evolved for having a constant
and broad consultation/ co-ordination amongst the various scientific Ministries/ Departments
about the areas/fields of research so that time, energy, money, manpower and other resources
of the country may be utilized optimally. (Para 21.3)
AWARENESS AND OUTREACH PROGRAMME OF THE DEPARTMENT
The Committee during its meeting held on 15th February, 2017 had also observed that
people of the country including elected representatives are not aware of the excellent work in
the field of Science being done by the Department or much about the Department itself which
may be beneficial for a very big segment of the society like farmers, fishermen, students,
research scholars etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should
prepare a comprehensive awareness programme with a calendar of events using social media
platforms, radio, television etc. meant for researchers, adacemia, farmers, industries, students

40
and general public but most importantly for all the elected representatives right from district
level i.e. Members of Zila Panchayats, Legislative Assemblies and Councils and Members of
Parliament. The Committee strongly feels that elected representatives can play an important
role in making their constituents aware of scientific development and ultimately developing
scientific temperament in the public at large. (Para 22.2)

MINUTES

43
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 15 th February, 2017 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury   —   Chairperson
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shri C. P. Narayanan
4. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
LOK  SABHA
5. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
6. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
7. Shri Ninong Ering
8. Shri Nana Patole
9. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. The Committee reassembled after lunch at 2.10 
P.M. and the following representatives of
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research appeared before the Committee:
1. Dr. Girish Sahni, Secretary, DSIR and DG , CSIR
2. Ms. Sumita Sarkar, Financial Advisor
3. Shri K. R. Vaideeswaran, Joint Secretary (Admn.)
***Relate to other matters.

44
4. Dr. Sudeep Kumar, Head, PPD, CSIR
5. Dr. Ashwani Gupta, Scientist ‘G’ DSIR
6. Shri S. K. Lalwani, Head of Office, CDC, DSIR
7. Dr. Nalin Singhal, CMD, Central Electronics Ltd. DSIR
8. Shri Subodh Chawla, Executive, NRDC, DSIR
9. Shri B.N. Sarkar, Scientist ‘F’
10. Dr. Rajesh Kumar, Scientist ‘D’, CSIR
11. Dr. Srikanth, Scientist ‘H’, CMC and Head, RPPBDD, CSIR
12. Dr. Rajesh Luthra, Head, HRDG, CSIR
13. Dr. Viswajanani Sattigeri, Sr. Principal Scientist, CSIR
14. Dr. K. Venkatasubramanian, Sr. Principal Scientist, CSIR
15. Dr. R.K. Sinha, Principal Scientist, CSIR
10. The Chairperson welcomed the Secretary, Department of Scientific and Industrial Research and
his team of officers. She stated that various aspects related to Demands for Grants (2017-18) pertaining
to the Department will be discussed in the meeting.
11. Initiating th e discussion, the Chairperson asked the Secretary, Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research to inform the Committee about the budgetary allocations made and physical
targets set for important programmes for the T welfth Five Year Plan and to what extent the Department
managed to achieve the targets, both physical as well as financial. She also desired to know about the
targets set for the next Financial Year i.e. 2017-18 by the Department and the roadmap drawn in that
regard. She further enquired about the major challenges faced by the Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research and the strategic policy measures intended by the Department to address those
challenges.
12. The Secretary, Department of Scientific and Industrial Research informed the Committee about
the significant achievements and performance of the Department during the Twelfth Five Year Plan and
in 2016-17. Thereafter, he made a Power Point presentation on the physical and financial performance
of the Department during the year 2016-17 and the financial allocations made to the Department during
2017-18. The Secretary, DSIR also sought intervention of the Committee for allocating additional
budget of ` 500.00 Cr. for its various activities as allocated amount for 2017-18 did not include the 7
th
Pay Commission impact.
13. The Chairperson and members then raised queries relating to the expenditure and performance
of the Department during 2016-17 in various schemes; trans-generational effect of Vitamin B 12 and
Folate deficiencies; publication of research papers; solar trees; hand held milk testing machines; traditional
knowledge and medicines; whitefly resistant cotton; schemes relating to research and development;
scientific institutions in the North-Eastern region; Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) being developed by
NAL, Bengaluru; Revisiting of CSIR Institutes; etc.
14. The representatives of Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, while presenting their
views, also responded to some of the queries raised by the Chairperson and Members of the Committee.

45
They also promised to furnish written replies to some other queries/points raised by the Chairperson
and the Members of the Committee, which could not be replied during the meeting.
15. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
16. The witnesses, then, withdrew and the Committee then adjourned at 3.29 
P.M.

46
XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 29 th March, 2017 in Committee Room ‘B’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury    —    Chairperson
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shri Parimal Nathwani
4. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
5. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
6. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK  SABHA
7. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
8. Kumari Sushmita Dev
9. Shri Ninong Ering
10. Shri Laxman Giluwa
11. Shri Daddan Mishra
12. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
13. Shri Nana Patole
14. Shri Nagendra Singh
15. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. She informed
the Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 294
th, 295th, 296th, 297th,
298th, 299th and 300th reports on Demands for Grants 2017-18 of the Ministries/Departments of Earth Sciences,
Biotechnology, Science and Technology, Scientific and Industrial Research, Space, Atomic Energy, and
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, respectively.
3. The Committee, after considering the recommendations made in the draft reports, adopted the draft
294th, 295th, 296th, 297 th, 298th, 299th and 300th reports. The Committee also decided to present/lay the reports
to both the Houses of Parliament on 31 st March, 2017.
4. The Committee also decided to nominate the Chairperson and in her absence Ch. Sukhram Singh
Yadav to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Daddan Mishra and in his absence Shri Vikram Usendi
to lay the reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on 31st March, 2017.

47
***Relate to other matters.
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 3.45 
P.M.