PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED NINETY FIFTH REPORT
Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the
Department of Biotechnology
(Demand No. 85)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 31st March, 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 31st March, 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2017/Chaitra, 1939 (Saka)
295
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED NINETY FIFTH REPORT
Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the
Department of Biotechnology
(Demand No. 85)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 31st March, 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 31st March, 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2017/Chaitra, 1939 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)-( V)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-28
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE.................................................. 29-37
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 39-44

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2016-17)
(Constituted on 1st September , 2016)
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury —  Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
5. Shri C.P. Narayanan
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani
7. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
8. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
9. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
10. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
23. Shri Nana Patole

(ii)
24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
30. Shrimati M. Vasanthi
31. Shri Prabhubhai N. Vasava
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report
on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Ninety Fifth Report of the Committee. This Report deals with
the detailed Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the Department of Biotechnology (Demand No. 85).
2. In the meeting of the Committee held on 15th February, 2017, the Secretary and other Officers
of the Department of Biotechnology gave an overview of the various activities of the Department and
the Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the Department to enable
it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications
sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise
the Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 29th March, 2017.
  N EW D ELHI; RENUKA CHOWDHURY
March 29, 2017 Chairperson,
Chaitra 8, 1939 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests,
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
B E : Budget Estimate
BIBCOL : B harat Immunologicals and Biologicals Corporation Limited
BIRAC : Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council
CDFD : Centre for DNA Fingerprinting & Diagnostics
CIAB : Centre of Innovative and Applied Bioprocessing
DBT : Department of Biotechnology
DDRC : District Disability Rehabilitation Centre
DNA : Deoxyribonucleic Acid
FSSAI : Food Safety and Standards Authority of India
IBSD : Institute for Bioresource and Sustainable Development
ICGEB : International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology
ILS : Institute of Life Sciences
NABI : National Agri-Food Biotechnology Institute
NBRC : National Brain Research Centre
NCCS : National Centre for Cell Sciences
NEIGRIHMS : North Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health and
Medical Sciences
NIAB : National Institute of Animal Biotechnology
NIBMG : National Institute of Biomedical Genomics
NII : National Institute of Immunology
NIPGR : National Institute for Plant Genome Research
NISHAD : National Institute of High Security Animal Diseases
NIVEDI : National Institute of Veterinary Epidemiology And Disease
Informatics
RE : Revised Estimate
RGCB : Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology
RMRC : Regenerative Medicine Research Committee
(iv)

RNA : Ribonucleic Acid
SAM : Severe Acute Malnutrition
SME : Small and Medium Enterprise
THSTI : Translational Health Science and Technology Institute
WHO : World Health Organisation
(v)

REPORT
INTRODUCTION
In terms of Rule 270 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Rajya Sabha,
examination of budgetary proposals is one of the primary mandates of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committees. In this context, the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests considered the Demands for Grants of the Ministries/
Departments within its purview during the third week of February, 2017. This Report of the Committee
deals with the examination of the Demands for Grants for the year 2017-18 (Demand No.85) of the
Department of Biotechnology, which was considered by the Committee in its meeting held on 15th
February, 2017.
2. MANDATE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY (DBT)
2.1 The Department of Biotechnology was set up as an Independent Board in 1982, and thereafter
became a full fledged Department under the Ministry of Science & Technology in 1986. The mandate
of the Department is as under:
• To evolve policies and integrated programmes in biotechnology and ensure their implementation
and monitoring;
• To identify specific programmes of Research and Development and manufacturing in biologicals
and biotechnology and oversee the initiation and pursuit of related research and manufacturing
activities;
• To identify, set up and support Centres of Excellence for Research and Development in
biotechnology and ensure proper dovetailing of their activities
• as per national priorities and objectives;
• To act as a screening, advising and approving agent of the Government with regard to import
and transfer of new technologies for the manufacture of biologicals, biotechnological products
and their intermediates;
• Evolve safety guidelines for biotechnology Research and Development and manufacturing in
India;
• To act as the central agency for the import of genetically manipulated materials, culture, cells,
specimens, tissues and biotech products including DNA and RNA of any type or size and for
promoting their production in the country;
• Serve as the inter-ministerial and interagency nodal point for all specific international bilateral
and multilateral Research and Development collaborations and agreements in the area of
biotechnology; act as the nodal point for all technology transfers in the area of biotechnology;
• Manufacture and ensure application of recombinant, cell-based and DNA vaccines, diagnostics
and other biotechnological products;
1

2
• To evolve programmes for Human Resource Development in the area of biotechnology;
• Serve as an administrative and implementing Department of agencies, commissions, boards,
etc. specifically formed by the Government for fulfilling the national objectives in biotechnology
and also to serve as the nodal point for Bio-informatics including training and creation
of infrastructure, collection, dissemination and exchange of information relating to
biotechnology;
• Establishment of National Biotechnology Regulatory Authority;
• The mandate also includes the matters relating to:
- International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB), New Delhi;
- National Institute of Immunology (NII), New Delhi;
- National Centre for Cell Sciences (NCCS), Pune;
- Centre for DNA Fingerprinting & Diagnostics (CDFD), Hyderabad;
- National Institute for Plant Genome Research (NIPGR), New Delhi;
- National Brain Research Centre (NBRC), Manesar, Gurgaon;
- Institute for Bioresource and Sustainable Development (IBSD), Imphal
- Institute of Life Sciences (ILS), Bhubneshwar
- Translational Research in Health Science and Technology Institute, Faridabad
- Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology (RGCB), Trivananthpuram
- UNESCO Regional Centre for Education, Training & Innovation in Biotechnology (RCB),
Faridabad
- National Institute of Biomedical Genomics (NIBMG), Kolkata
- Institute for Stem Cell Science and Regenerative Medicine, Bangalore
- National Agri-Food Biotechnology Institute Mohali (NABI), Punjab
- National Institute of Animal Biotechnology (NIAB), Hyderabad
- Centre of Innovative and Applied Bioprocessing (CIAB), Mohali
- Bharat Immunologicals and Biologicals Corporation Limited (BIBCOL), Bulandshahar,
Uttar Pradesh;
- Indian Vaccine Corporation Limited;
- Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC), New Delhi;
3. FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF THE DEPARTMENT DURING THE 12TH FIVE YEAR PLAN:
3.1 The proposed and approved Plan outlay for the Twelfth Five Year Plan period, BE, RE allocations
and actual expenditure, year-wise, for the year 2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17 of the

3
Department of Biotechnology are as under:
(` in cr .)
Y ear B E RE Actual Expenditure Percentage Utilisation
2012-13 1485.00 1300.00 1271.00 97.76
2013-14 1485.00 1300.00 1289.50 99.19
2014-15 1500.00 1395.00 1344.35 96.36
2015-16 1606.80 1606.80 1537.35 95.67
2016-17 1800.00 1895.20 1620.06* 85.49*
T
OTAL 7876.8 7497.00 7062.26 94.20
*As on 14th February, 2017
3.2 The Committee notes that the Department of Biotechnology had proposed a budgetary
allocation of ````` 18000.00 cr. for the entire 12th Five Year Plan (2012-17) whereas the Department
got approval of only `````7876.8 crore as allocation which is less than 50 per cent. The Committee
is perturbed to note that against the approved budgetary allocation of `````7876.8 crore for the entire
period of 12th Five Year Plan, the Department of Biotechnology has actually received `````7497.00
crore (at RE stage) during the Plan period. The Committee is of the considered view that the
basic concept of a Five Year Plan is to formulate long gestation schemes/projects by drawing long-
term and mid-term projections. However, if the strategic policy interventions envisaged are not
adequately funded, negative impact on the successful execution of schemes/projects is inevitable.
The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Department should sensitise the concerned
Ministry/Department of the Government of India about the higher financial requirements of the
Department more vigorously so as to enable it to smoothly discharge its mandate.
3.3 The Committee further expresses its unhappiness to notes that the utilization capacity of
the Department has continuously gone down from 99.19 percent in 2013-14 to 96.36 percent,
95.67 percent and 85.49 percent in 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17 (as on 14th February, 2017)
respectively. The Department's performance of utilising 99.19 percent of the total allocation in
2013-14 is indicative of the capabilities of optimally utilising the resources made available to it.
However, the Department appears to have failed to rise to its true potential and could spend only
85.49 percent of the allocated resources during 2016-17 till 14.02.2017. The Committee, therefore,
feels that the Department should have been more prudent in optimally utilising the funds made
available to it for the year 2016-17. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Department
to review its financial performance during 2016-17 and identify the shortfalls responsible for
underutilisation so as to avoid its recurrence in future and revisit its scheme of allocation of
funds under the various schemes/programmes/projects to make them more result oriented.
4. BUDGET ALLOCATION FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2017-18
4.1 The following table showcases the budgetary allocation made in favour of the Department of
Biotechnology for the year 2017-18:

4
(` in cr .)
Sl. No. Division of Schemes Amount
Scheme
1. Biotechnology Research & Development 11 10.22
2. Industrial and Entrepreneurship Development 198.00
3. North-Eastern Region 145.36
Non Scheme
4. AI & PSU 738.53
5. Secretariat 30.00
T
OTAL 2222.11
4.2 The Committee notes that the Department has been allocated an amount of `2222.11 cr. in BE
2017-18 which is `304.87 cr. higher than the allocation of `1917.24 cr. at RE stage in 2016-17. The
Department in response to the information sought by the Committee with regard to the Action Plan
prepared by the Department for the year 2017-18 informed about the focus areas which are as under:-
(i) The Department would further strengthen the research and development programmes, review
ongoing and received proposals for financial support and further improve overall management
of projects by the application of ICT.
(ii) In Agriculture Biotechnology Programme, the emphasis will be on managing various biotic and
abiotic stresses and improving yield and quality traits of economically important crops. The
necessary steps will be taken for the set up of Neel: Institute of Ocean Biology. The Department
would continue its support for the R & D programmes for development of affordable new
generation vaccines and diagnostics against various animal diseases. In Translational Research
on Products and Processes from Medicinal and Aromatic Plants program focus will be on
ecotyping, genotyping and chemotyping of selected medicinal and aromatic plants with a view
to identify elite plating material for mass multiplication/commercial cultivation and on end-to-
end demonstration of cultivation of priority aroma crops in different agro-climatic zones of
country including Bundelkhand and North East Region.
(iii) Energy Biosciences program will be strengthened and technology demonstration for photo
bioreactors and for the treatment of municipal solid waste and municipal liquid waste will be
accomplished. This will continue to apply biotechnology for societal development and support
the projects aiming to promote use of biotechnological processes for societal benefits. The
Support for development of technologies for waste management and environmental improvement
will be continued.
(iv) In medical biotechnology program, the Department will encourage scientists from diverse
fields to come together to embark on multidisciplinary projects in the area of placental biology,
cancer biology and other relevant diseases. The Department will support competitive R&D

5
programmes and generate new programmes on detailed biology in kidney diseases, genetic/
epigenetic mechanisms, development of affordable and non-invasive diagnostics/imaging for
early diagnosis and optimal management, Point-of-care interventions for the non-communicable
diseases. Review of ongoing and completed projects in the area of Malaria, Leishmaniasis,
Medical Mycology and Influenza and follow up of leads available will be done. Clinical
institutions will be engaged for long term collaborative research in the basic and translational
research projects.
(v) The Department will continue to support Human Resource Development Program and under
International Collaboration support the ongoing collaboration and forge new joint research
programs with partnering countries in emerging areas of biotechnology.
(vi) There will be a major emphasis on the implementation of the Mission Programs. The department
will ensure periodic monitoring and ensure efficient implementation of the mission programs
and Action Points.
4.3 The Committee hopes that the Department would utilise the budgetary allocation of `````2222.11
cr. in 2017-18 optimally and ensure that the targets envisioned for the year 2017-18 in the Action
Plan would be achieved in a time-frame fixed by the Department. The Committee is of the
considered view that timely completion of the targets/objectives will not only help the Department
to improve its performance both physically as well as financially but also helping cut down the
overhead costs. Thus, the Committee recommends the Department to monitor the time frame
for the envisaged targets and keep a continuous vigil with the help of a robust internal monitoring
mechanism so as to ensure that the fixed timelines are met and the budgetary support provided
for the purpose is utilised judiciously and optimally.
4.4 The Committee, in its meeting held on 15th February, 2017 was informed by the Secretary,
Department of Biotechnology that the Department has initiated several mission programmess based on
the action plans developed on the recommendation of Group of Secretaries to solve natural problems and
benefiting the society by providing solutions through biotechnological interventions. Following are major
mission programs initiated/ being implemented during the period 2017-18:
(i) Energy Conservation and Efficiency: Clean Energy
(ii) Swachh Bharat: Mission on Waste to Energy
(iii) Swachh B harat: Reinventing the Toilets
(iv) Accelerated Growth with Inclusion and Equity: Creating a Startup Innovation Ecosystem
(v) Biotech-KISAN Farmer Centric Mission
(vi) Collaboration with Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI)
(vii) Mitigating Climate Change Impact on Farmers and Agriculture: Regulation, Crops and Livestock
(viii) Second Green Revolution through Establishment of Crop Genetic Enhancement Network for
Improving Crop Yield and Farm Productivity through Genomic Technology

6
(ix) Bridging the Gap in Production and Demand of Pulses: Promotion and Time Bound Deregulation
of Genetically Engineered Insect Resistant (Bt.) Pulses
(x) Livestock Health and Genomics: Animal Resources, Multiple Livelihoods, Diversification: Large
Scale Demonstration of Brucella Disease Free Villages of Livestock in States and Union
Territories
(xi) Utilisation of Genomic Technology for Genetic Up-gradation of Indigenous Dairy Cattle
(BosIndicus) Breeds like Sahiwal, Gir, Tharparkar and others
(xii) Accelerating Discovery Research for Biopharma Product Development
(xiii) Sickle-Cell Management Mission
(xiv) Health Mission: TB Consortium
4.5 Secretary, Department of Biotechnology also informed the Committee that an additional financial
support of `1000.00 cr. would be required to implement the mission programmes and other inter-
ministerial programmes.
4.6 The Committee shares the enthusiasm of the Department with regard to its mission
programmes and is of the considered opinion that the requisite financial support should be
provided by the Government for the purpose. The Committee feels that the request made by the
Department for additional amount of `````1000.00 cr. during 2017-18 is fully justified and urges the
Department to share the sentiments of the Committee with the concerned Ministry/Department
and impress upon them and seek the requisite budgetary allocations at RE stage so that the
mission programmes which are very vital for benefiting the society as they intend to provide
solutions through biotechnological interventions, can successfully be implemented by the
Department.
4.7 The Committee further feels that the concerned Ministry/Department of the Government
while allocating or making financial allocation in favour of the scientific Departments/Ministries
should also consider that our scientific organisations deserve a lot more financial backing of the
Government to not only sustain their growth but also to venture into new scientific assignments
without having the fear of failure. The Committee strongly feels that scientific endeavours of
our scientific Departments should be supported by the Government open heartedly by giving
them adequate financial support so as to enable them to carry out their mandate efficiently and
for optimal utilisation of their capacities in the direction of scientific advancement in the country.
5. CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES/PROJECTS
5.1 The Committee notes that during the 12th Five Year Plan period, the Department had a number of
schemes for promoting research and development, developing skilled human resources, creating
infrastructure and nurturing entrepreneurship in the biotechnology sector. The major schemes were on
Research and Development, Human Resource Development, Bioinformatics, Biotechnology for Societal
Development, Programme for Promotion of Excellence & Innovation, Biotech Facilities, International
Co-operation, Public Private Partnership (PPP), Biotechnology Cluster and support for programme of

7
North East Region. Subsequently, these schemes were merged and currently the major schemes of the
Department are: "Research and Development" and "Industrial and Entrepreneurship Development - Public
Private Partnership".
6. BIOTECHNOLOGY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
6.1 The following table shows the BE, RE allocations and actual expenditure, year-wise, for the year
2014-15, 2015-16, 2016-17 and allocation made for 2017-18 under the scheme Biotechnology Research
and Development:-
(
` in cr.)
Y ear Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Actual Expenditure
2014-15 787.00 789.77 758.89 (96.09 %)
2015-16 893.50 903.33 873.33 (96.67 %)
2016-17 920.00 1016.71 801.78* (78.60 %)
2017-18  1250.58 — —
*(Upto January, 2017)
6.2 The Committee notes that in BE 2016-17 budgetary allocation of `````920.00 Crore was made
under the head Biotechnology Research and Development which was increased to `````1016.71 Crore
in RE 2016-17 and in BE 2017-18, the budgetary allocation has further been increased to
`````1250.58 Crore The Committee, however, is perturbed to note the underutilisation of the budgetary
allocation during the year 2016-17. The Committee notes that the Department has managed to
spend only `````801.78 Crore (upto January, 2017) which is 78.60 percent of the total allocation made
under the Scheme. The Committee feels that the financial performance of the Department is not
very heartening. The under-utilisation of the budgetary allocation does not speak well about the
Department's focus towards Research & Development in the Biotechnology sector especially
when the budget allocation has been increased at RE stage. The Committee strongly feels that
under utilisation of funds is directly related to the performance of a Scheme. The Committee
is of the view that the Department should accord due recognition to Research & Development
in biotechnology sector while utilising the budgetary allocations and make all efforts to utilise
the funds optimally.
7. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
7.1 The Committee was informed that the Department supports nearly 1200 research projects each year
in Basic, Discovery and Translational Research in the areas of Agriculture and allied areas including
Animal Biotechnology and Aquaculture, Healthcare including Vaccine, Drugs, Medical Devices and Implants,
Bio-engineering, Food and Nutrition, Environment and Clean Energy and Industrial Biotechnology. The
Committee notes that during the period (2015-2017), 5724 proposals were received, out of which
only 542 (9.46%) proposals/projects have been funded so far.

8
8. BASIC RESEARCH
8.1 The Secretary of the Department informed the Committee that through Basic Research in Modern
Biology has been funding basic research in a wide variety of biological science field with a goal of
exploiting new knowledge to enhance and where possible transform-future capabilities. Noteworthy
achievements of some of the projects supported are: Functional characterization of sugar- and auxin-
regulated DUF581 domain containing genes encoding expressed proteins of unknown functions in model
plant system has led to the identification of a novel class of plant-specific zinc finger proteins, studies
on chromatin remodeling for activation of systemic acquired resistance in Arabidopsis has revealed an
epigenetic regulator that modulates both flowering and SAR, research work being carried out by scientists
at Delhi University and IIT Delhi on development of potent small molecule inhibitors against dopamine
beta-hydroxylase to combat cardiovascular diseases has led to the discovery of five small molecules as
potent anti-hypertensive etc.
8.2 The Committee is of the view that making potable water available to our citizens is one of
the biggest challenges facing our country. The Committee feels that the Department of
Biotechnology has the potential to devise a technology to convert the filthiest of the water into
potable water. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should include
developing technologies for extracting safe drinking water from available water resources to
lessen the problem of drinking water in the country.
9. AGRICULTURE AND ALLIED AREAS: CROP BIOTECHNOLOGY
9.1 Further the Committee was informed that Agriculture biotechnology programme deals with a wide
range of economically important crops including rice, wheat, cotton, millets, oilseeds and pulses. DBT
supported these projects for managing various biotic and abiotic stresses and improving yield and quality
traits of the existing crops which has been a priority for the country. These research projects are
supported and implemented in networks, centre of excellence as well as individual investigator driven
projects. During the period, a total of 65 research publications and 4 patent applications were generated
and 31 M.Sc. and 37 PhD students completed their degrees involved in R&D projects of agriculture
biotechnology programme. Key focus of the programme is on product oriented basic research, product
development translational research and bio-safety research using technologies like Genetic Engineering,
Marker Assisted Breeding, Genome based breeding, Genome editing etc. Area aims at enhancement of
crop productivity and nutrition, pest and disease protection, and abiotic stresses with focus on drought
and flooding. The major achievements of the programme include:
• New genes potentially involved in root development, abiotic stress response, nutrient acquisition,
phosphate utilization and nodulation have been identified in rice and chickpea and their modes
of action were demonstrated in model plant.
• Proof of concept of transgenic rice lines and advanced generation transgenic chickpea lines
with high root growth have been developed.
• Rust and Late Leaf Spot, resistant backcross lines of groundnut developed which gave ~15%
higher yield than the recurrent parent.

9
• Twenty soybean homozygous lines with Phytophthora and powdery mildew resistance were
developed through molecular markers.
• Molecular characterization of calcium signaling and transport machinery of finger millet
(Eleusinecoracana) was undertaken for calcium biofortification and Finger millet germplasm
with high calcium content (452.8mg/100gm) has been characterized and registered.
• Biotic stress resistant rice varieties have been developed through marker assisted breeding.
9.2 The Committee appreciates the achievement realised by the Department in the field of crop
biotechnology. The Committee is of the view that agriculture, alongwith its allied sectors, is the
largest livelihood activity in our country and it is the need of the hour that we all should work
in tandem to improve our crops productivity with the help of technological advancements and
sustainable technologies by establishing a dissemination network so that the innovations reach
the last point.
9.3 The Committee also feels that out of box thinking is required to tap the potential lying in
our agricultural activities. The Committee recommends the Department to take necessary steps
in the direction of untapped potential with the help of its biotechnological strategic interventions
so as to address the issues of not only the crops productivity but also for mitigation of post
harvest loss and enhancing the nutritional value as well.
10. ANIMAL BIOTECHNOLOGY
10.1 The Committee was informed that livestock production is becoming increasingly important to
economic growth of the country and therefore application of biotechnological tools to enhance the
productivity of livestock sector is continued through R&D interventions supported by the Department.
Major achievements include: the structural and functional characterization of follicle stimulation hormone
(FSH) of marmoset, transcript of buffalo pregnancy associated glycoproteins (PAgs) were identified,
amplified, cloned, sequenced and compared with the existing database to confirm the predominant
transcript in buffalo placentome, the urinary proteins SLAMF9 (Signaling lymphocyte activation molecule
family-9), MARK1 (Microtubule Affinity-Regulating Kinase 1) and PDK1 (Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Kinase,
Isozyme 1) were identified as possible marker having biological significance during pregnancy etc.
11. ANIMAL HEALTH
11.1 The Department shared with the Committee that it is supporting R&D programmes for development
of affordable new generation vaccines and diagnostics against various animal diseases of economic
importance. The emphasis is given to the 'commercialization of the leads, products and processes
developed in the R & D programmes. During the period (2015-17), several new projects have been
supported on epidemiological studies of mastitis, development of therapeutics for brucellosis, development
of diagnostics for theileriosis, and development of vaccines against Hemorrhagic septicaemia, Infectious
Bursal disease, Porcine circovirus, Hepatitis Hydropericardium Syndrome virus, etc. The Network Program
on Brucellosis has successfully completed the first phase. A repository was established for storing and
cataloguing different Brucella species. A novel penside diagnostic, lateral flow assay kit, indirect ELISA
kit against Brucella species and a hand held ELISA reader have been developed. Other major achievements

10
include more that 50 research publications, 10 patent applications filed, 08 technologies developed and
04 commercialized.
11.2 The Committee notes the activities undertaken by the Department in the field of animal
biotechnology and animal health. The Committee, nonetheless, is of the opinion that the rate of
commercialisation of the technologies developed by the Department is not very encouraging and
it reflects that the technologies so developed by the Department either are not as per the
requirements of the industry or there may be flaws in the technologies restricting their
commercialisation. Hence, the Committee desires the Department to take market driven research
activities so that the technologies developed by it are well received by the industry.
11.3 The Committee also feels that the Department needs to augment its research activities in
the direction of disease resistance in our indigenous livestock. The Committee, therefore,
recommends the Department to take necessary action in these directions.
11.4 The Committee is further of the view that the Department should also adopt more focused
approach towards increasing the productivity of the indigenous varieties of cows in the country;
establishment of sperm banks so as to make available hybrid indigenous sperm of high quality
and standards; etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take
necessary action in this regard.
12. AQUACULTURE AND MARINE BIOTECHNOLOGY
12.1 The Committee was informed that aquaculture plays a very important role in Indian agricultural
economy. The programme is being implemented for enhancing aquaculture production and productivity
and development of useful product and processes from marine resources. During the period (2015-2017)
several projects have been supported to benefit the aquatic and marine sectors by addressing broad areas
on fish genomics, proteomics and transcriptomics, antimicrobial and immunostimulant, fish health and
nutrition, development of bioactive molecules and biomaterials, bio-surfactants, biomarker, marine
actinobacteria, DNA bar coding of marine ascidians and development of diagnostics and vaccines through
adoption of molecular tools and techniques. Some of the major achievements of the programme are: (i)
development of an ELISA-based kit for detection of IgM of Indian major carps against Aeromonas
hydrophila infection (ii) a Lateral Flow Immuno Assay has been developed for toxinotyping (iii) a nano
delivery system of DNA based RNAi vaccine against WSSV in tiger shrimp has been developed (iv) RT-
PCR based detection of viable Salmonella and Vibrio cholera from fresh and processed finfish and
shellfish has been developed. (iv) anti-WSSV formulation was made as a prophylactic measure in shrimp
health management (vi) 50 Cell lines have been developed from 24 fish species. 14 patents have been
filed for product/ process development and 07 technologies have been successfully transferred to Industry
for commercialization.
12.2 The Committee notes that India has a coastline of over 8000 kms. and ranks 2nd in global
fish production, inland capture and aquaculture. The Committee, however, feels that sustainable
productivity and management has been a concern area where the Department of Biotechnology
needs to take the required strategic policy interventions. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Department should take necessary biotechnological measures to address the issues of
sustainable productivity and management.

11
12.3 The Committee is also of the opinion that health of the aquatic animal predominantly
depends on the health of the aquaculture ecosystem. Thus, development of healthy brood stock
of all cultivable fin and shell fishes assumes greater importance and the Committee feels that
the Department of Biotechnology can play a crucial role on this count. The Committee, therefore,
recommends the Department to take necessary strategic measures to develop high health brood
stock.
12.4 The Committee is of the opinion that the biological diversity of the marine resources along
the Indian coast in the form of creeks, estuaries, deep seas and continental shelf offer enormous
scope for the discovery of novel products and processes which have application in biomass and
food production, production of polymers, biocatalysts, biomedical products, and organics;
bioremediation and biomining etc. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Department
should work out a roadmap for the purpose and put earnest efforts in this direction. The
Committee is hopeful that with the help of right policy interventions, the Department can write
a new chapter of biotechnological advancements in the field of aquaculture and marine bio-
technology.
13. MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS
13.1 Programme has been remodelled in the last year focusing on taking forward the research leads to
their logical conclusion through multi-disciplinary approach. An end-to-end demonstration project on field
evaluation of Cymbopogon flexuosus (lemongrass), Cymbopogon winterianus (citronella) and Cymbopogon
martinii (palmarosa) covering an area of 53.5 acre in the farmers' fields involving 10 villages of Dhar
block (Kandi area) in Punjab completed. Three farm distillation units were installed and made operational
in adopted village clusters. The marketing of essential oil has been provided through linkage organizations.
The capacity building of farmers was carried out on cultivation, harvesting and processing operations
through 59 on-farm contact programmes, 25 awareness programmes and six exposure visits. A technology
transfer agreement has been signed between ICGEB, New Delhi and Sun Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd.,
Gurugram for clinical development of most bioactive fraction (CiPa) from Cissampelos pareira towards
developing a phytopharmaceutical drug for dengue infection.
13.2 The Committee takes note of the various activities undertaken under Medicinal and Aromatic
Plants. The Committee observes that the Department has been supporting the salient aspects of
the Indian medicine system through its research activities. The Committee, however, feels that
the Department has to keep pace with the increasing attention about the medicinal and aromatic
plants among the urban population and take necessary measures to tap the unlimited potential
of these plants with the help of its biotechnological capabilities.
14. MISSION INNOV ATION - ACCELERATING THE CLEAN ENERGY
Revolution
14.1 The 'Mission Innovation' was launched during PM's visit to Paris in November 2015. Besides India
and US, 23 other countries are members of this initiative led by US to drive forward clean energy
innovation in a global scale. Under the initiative, members have pledged to double their collective investments
in energy R&D funding of over USD 15 Billion annually to over 30 billion by 2021. DBT has been

12
identified as nodal agency to coordinate national efforts in clean energy for Mission Innovation activities
on behalf of Government of India. Department of Science & Technology, Ministry of Power, Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy are other Ministries participating in addressing the challenges. India will
be partnering in all the challenges. India will be leading the Smart Grids innovation challenge and co-lead
the sustainable biofuels innovation challenge and is collaborating in all the challenges identified. 7 innovation
challenges has been launched, these challenges are global calls to action that complement efforts already
underway by Mission Innovation countries.
14.2 The Committee notes the work done so far by the Department in the direction of biofuels.
However, lot more is yet to be achieved on this count. The Committee hopes that the Department,
along with other related agencies of the Government, will continue its concerted efforts and will
work in tandem to realise the targets set for biofuels.
14.3 The Committee is of the view that the Department should also chalk out a policy initiative
and set up Bioenergy based incubation centres across the country so as to provide a platform to
have interface between academia and industry. If required, the Department should seek budgetary
support for the purpose at RE stage. The Committee also recommends that the Department
should focus on nurturing start-ups in this direction.
15. NANOBIOTECHNOLOGY
15.1 The recent focus of the Nanobiotechnology programme has been on implementation and monitoring
of translational research projects to develop products in various areas such as nanomedicine for cancer,
kalazar, smart Nano-carries to deliver drug in brain, imaging and contrast agents, diagnostics for detection
of pathogens and disease biomarkers, Nanosensor to detect metabolic diseases related biomarkers,
development of Nano patch for wound healing, and continue to support such proposals with translational
values. Activities are initiated to set up infrastructure/system to promote translational research and
product development. An ideation system has been created to enhance the innovative potential of the
proposals through setting up dynamic and interactive website/supporting programs for idea generation.
The total number of patents filed during the period 2016-17 is 05 and 57 research publications.
15.2 The Committee is of the view that the application of nanotechnology can play a very
important and crucial role in the areas of agriculture, health, food, environment, etc. The
Committee feels that the Department should continue its activities in this direction and also
explore the possibilities to address the challenges posed to our agriculture, health, food and
environment with the help of advancement in the field of the nanotechnology.
16. MEDICAL BIOTECHNOLOGY AND RELATED AREAS:
INFECTIOUS DISEASES
16.1 The mandate of the program is to establish an integrated R&D approach for the development of
preventive, therapeutic and diagnostic tools for infectious diseases. Research & Development activities
in the important infectious diseases caused by various pathogenic agents including bacteria, viruses,
parasites, fungi etc. viz., HIV/AIDS, Hepatitis, Influenza, Chikungunya, Dengue, Malaria, Leishmaniasis,
etc. have been funded. Major achievements include: (i) the study on the effects of interaction of Hepatitis
C Virus protein NS5A with host translation machinery on HCV pathogenesis has revealed that HCV NS5A

13
sequesters eukaryotic cap binding protein eIF4E to 40S ribosome and forms a complex ENR (ii) over
the years many compounds of medicinal value have been isolated from Indian Medicinal Plants. Recently
a search found potent anti HCV activity to be present in the semi-purified sub-fraction of methanolic
extract prepared from V . wallichii root (iii) the human hepatic endothelial cell SK Hep1 was adapted to
growth in 3D under hydrogel conditions and maximum growth inhibitory effect of DV2 & 3 NS1 was
seen by direct exogenous exposure (iv) a study on assured-chip, an accurate, affordable and rapid
microfluidics-based diagnosis of Hepatitis-C virus has demonstrated a fully integrated isothermal PCR
assay onto a POC (point-of-care) device for rapid and on-site molecular diagnosis of Hepatitis-C virus
(v) studies in Phase I of the project established that curcumin- arteether combination therapy is very
effective in the treatment of parasite (P. berghei) recrudescence and cerebral malaria in mice and the
studies have been extended to nanocurcumin (PLGA-curcumin) to examine whether it is superior to
native curcumin in view of the poor bioavailability of native curcumin.
16.2 DBT-ICMR Collaborative Efforts on HIV/AIDS and Microbicides have been launched. A new multi
country collaborative initiative, co-ordinated by Canadian institute of Health Research and WHO, to
establish a Healthy Life Trajectories initiative (HeLTi) based on developmental origin of health and
diseases.
16.3 The Committee is of the opinion that a diagnostic test kit for TB patients is the need of the
hour so as to enable early detection of TB. The Committee also feels that the Department should
in coordination with Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and ICMR devise innovative
technologies for the purpose.
16.4 The Committee is also of the view that the Department should undertake an awareness
campaign to popularise its technological advancements and sensitise all the State Governments
as well as medical colleges about the diagnosis and clinical symptomatic diagnosis of TB so as to
provide an important breakthrough in the early detection of the disease.
16.5 The Committee expresses concerns on the issue of mosquito breeding which appears to have
gone out of control. The Committee is of the view that the Department of Biotechnology should
play a significant role by devising technology to keep the mosquito population under control and
should examine the genda flower like pyrethrum for the purpose. Similarly, the Department
should take research work on pheromone traps for the female mosquito.
17. BIODESIGN PROGRAMME
17.1 Biodesign program has been implemented as a flagship program of the Department for fostering and
promoting development of indigenous affordable medical technologies and creating an ecosystem for
med-tech innovations and entrepreneurship in the country. The major achievement during the period
(i) development of diagnostic tests for MTb, acute febrile syndrome (ii) development of platform
technologies for improved stability and yield of recombinant protein (iii) design, prototyping and initial
testing of a bed-to-bed patient transfer device (iv) two entrepreneurial ventures are undertaken, two
technologies have been licensed and two technologies commercialized.
17.2 The Committee notes the scientific improvements brought with the support of its research
activities in the field of medical biotechnology and related areas. The Committee hopes that the

14
Department would continue its focus on this sector and further strengthen its activities in the
areas of human genome research, vaccines, infectious, chronic disease biology, stem cells &
regenerative medicine and the biodesign programmes.
18. FOOD AND NUTRITION
18.1 Research and Development endeavors were continued in food biotechnology and nutrition biology,
addressal of micro & macro nutrient deficiencies through development of fortified foods with generation
of clinical evidence and development of novel food products and processes. Projects were funded in two
new areas: (i) Food to Food Fortification and (ii) Addressal of Food Allergy. A programme for "Strengthening
research in the area of Food sciences through an integrated M.Sc - Ph.D programme" in Guwahati
University was initiated in the current year. Other major achievements include: (i) development of the
process technology & machinery for the production of iron fortified rice premix from the broken rice
and an iron fortificant. A pilot scale demonstration facility with a production capacity of 100 kg/day iron
fortified rice premix has been established at IIT Kharagpur. (ii) A state of art whole body potassium
counter to accurately estimate the body cell mass (lean body mass) has been built. (iii) five types of hypo
immunogenic products, namely hypo immunogenic muffins, hypo immunogenic bread, hypo immunogenic
biscuits, hypo immunogenic chapatti and hypo immunogenic spinach pasta were developed.
18.2 The Committee discussed various issues on the subject 'Public Health, Food and Nutrition Biology'
and enquired about the steps taken by the Department to address the issues of Severe Acute Malnutrition
(excessive thinness). Responding to the query, the Secretary, Department of Biotechnology submitted
before the Committee that Severe Acute Malnutrition is listed as a priority condition for reducing
childhood mortality through product based nutrition intervention (Ready to Use Therapeutic Food or
RUTF). It was informed that in collaboration with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and Indian
Council of Medical Research, the Department has led a National Alliance on SAM to generate scientific
evidence to inform public health policy. The Secretary apprised the Committee that 5 indigenous Therapeutic
Food Formulations in Ready-to-Eat form were developed as per WHO/UNICEF standards for "medical
nutrition therapy" for rehabilitation of severe acute malnourished child. A pilot scale demonstration unit
with 100 kg/day capacity, was designed and developed according to GMP and GLP norms by IIT
Kharagpur. The developed Therapeutic Food Formulations in Ready-to-Eat form and their process
technology was formally transferred to an industry for commercialization. The Secretary also apprised
the Committee that BIBCOL (Bharat Immunologicals and Biologicals) through Department of Biotechnology's
programme support has developed a formulation consisting of a mix of seven minerals & thirteen
vitamins in a sachet aimed for treatment of severely malnourished children. It was brought to the
knowledge of the Committee that BIBCOL is seeking approval from FSSAI for this product.
18.3 The Committee takes note of the activities of the Department in the direction of Food and
Nutrition. The Committee, however, is of the view that the Department should further intensify
its activities to address the issue of Severe Acute Malnutrition (SAM) so as to tackle the stunting
in the children of our country which can lead to developmental problems. The Committee would
also like to be apprised of the status of the approval of FSSAI to the formulation consisting of
a mix of seven minerals and thirteen vitamins in a sachet aimed for treatment of severely
malnourished children.

15
18.4 The Committee also recommends that the Department should publicise its demonstration
unit developed by IIT, Kharagpur to the various states of the country and sentise and encourage
them to make use of the technology in their respective states to combat Severe Acute Malnutrition
(SAM).
18.5 The Committee is also of the view that the Department should in co-ordination with the
FSSAI take necessary action in the direction of making oil fortification mandatory so as to retain
its nutritional value.
19. BIOTECHNOLOGY FOR SOCIETAL DEVELOPMENT
19.1 Department has been supporting projects aiming to promote use of biotechnological processes and
tools for the benefit of the disadvantaged section of the society comprising women, rural population and
SC/STs in ecologically compatible manner. The programme aims to create platform for self-employment
generation among the target population by diffusion of proven and field-tested technologies through
demonstration, training and extension activities. The projects are being supported in agriculture and
animal husbandry including fish farming, poultry farming, pig production, goat farming, value added
products, floriculture, hybrid seed production, integrated farming system, entrepreneurship development,
bio-resource utilization, women and child health, hygiene and nutrition. Large number of rural, SC/ST
and women population including youth have been benefited through implementation of these projects. A
programme for the rehabilitation of Flash Flood affected area in Uttarakhand is being continued to extend
the benefit to flood affected people of Uttarakhand. A large number of rural farmers including youth, SC/
STs population and women have been benefited through implementation of biotechnology based projects.
19.2 The Committee is of the considered opinion that with the help of right technological
interventions, we can bring the marginalised sections of our society into the mainstream and
make them more productive for the overall growth of the country. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department should further intensify its activities in the directions of
societal development and take necessary steps for creating platform for self-employment generation
in the industrially backward areas of the country.
19.3 The Committee is of the view that the Department of Biotechnology can play a very important
role to address the issue of clean drinking water with the help of its technological advancements.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should chalk out a roadmap for the
purpose and further strengthen its activities in this direction.
20. INDUSTRIAL AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP DEVELOPMENT
20.1 The Committee notes that under 'Industrial and Entrepreneurship Development Scheme', the activities
of the Department relate to Biotech Park, Industry Innovation Research and Biotech Clusters. In the
Make in India and Start up India Action Plan, the Department has already made a commitment for
continuing the activities related to scaling up of incubators, supporting technology transfer offices and
launching a Biotech Equity fund.
20.2 The Committee was informed that the Department, in partnership with State Governments/State
Government Organisations/Central Government Organisations, has established Biotechnology Parks and

16
incubators in different parts of the country to facilitate biotech product development, entrepreneurship,
research and innovation. Following Biotech parks and Incubation Centres have been supported:
(i) Uttar Pradesh: Biotech Park, Lucknow
(ii) Assam: Guwahati Biotech Park
(iii) Kerala: Biotechnology Incubation Centre, Cochin
20.3 The Committee has been informed that the Department has supported creation of infrastructure and
several Public Private Partnership programs to foster Bio-entrepreneurship through "Biotechnology Industry
Research Assistance Council (BIRAC)", a Public Sector Undertaking of the Department. The Department
supports BIRAC for fostering and nurturing the Biotech Enterprises specially start-ups and SME's for
enhancing their innovation research capacities and promoting affordable product development.
20.4 The Committee notes that the Department of Biotechnology has been foundational partner in the
"Make in India" initiatives as it has specific relevance to the biotechnology sector in India, owing to the
fact that the country's biotechnology industry is in the growth phase where the opportunities are
immense. Considering the importance of Biotechnology sector in the programme, the Department decided
to establish a Make in India Facilitation Cell at BIRAC with the responsibility of creating an enabling
ecosystem in the country to promote manufacturing and research & development capabilities of Indian
biotech sector. During the period, the Cell prepared a high level report on the Make in India initiatives
and identified several areas for support in high value manufacturing, provided strategic inputs to NITI
Aayog for framing the Atal Innovation Mission and Grand Challenges and responded to the queries related
to Make in India, Start up India and others related to Entrepreneurship, Startups and Ease of doing
business.
20.5 In order to foster a fruitful culture of innovation and to make India a hub of innovation, design and
Start-ups, the Startup India Action Plan has been formulated and Biotechnology sector has been given
due importance considering the opportunities & growth momentum of Biotechnology sector. The
Department of Biotechnology and BIRAC have initiated several activities and also implemented some of
the activities mentioned in the Startup India Action Plan. The Department has supported 02 Bio-clusters
at National Capital Region and Bengaluru, respectively, 20 bio-incubators across the country and also
implemented Bengaluru-Boston Biotech Gateways to India Program (B4 program) during the year. A new
Bio cluster is being supported at Kalyani.
20.6 The details of publications, patents and technologies generated through the Department and BIRAC
support across the R&D projects and from the Autonomous organizations are as under:
No of No of Patent Technolo gies Technologies
Publication Patent Granted Developed Commercialized
6827 39 10 31 40

17
20.7 The following table shows the BE, RE allocations and actual expenditure, year-wise, for the years
2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17 and BE allocation for 2017-18 in respect of the scheme 'Industrial and
Entrepreneurship Development':-
(
` in Crore)
Y ear Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Actual Expenditure
2014-15 170.00 128.00 93.06 (72.70%)
2015-16 170.00 90.00 82.61 (91.78%)
2016-17 195.00 192.00 167.22 (87.09%)
(upto January 2017)
2017-18 203.00 — —
20.8 The Committee notes that in BE 2017-18 the budgetary allocation under the head Industrial and
Entrepreneurship Development has been increased to `203.00 crore from `192.00 crore in RE
2016-17. Informing the Committee about the reason for the higher budgetary allocation under the head,
it was submitted that the increased funds would be utilised for activities related to scaling up of
incubators, supporting technology transfer offices and launching a Biotech Equity fund.
20.9 Responding to the query of the Committee regarding the action plan prepared by the Department
for the year 2017-18, the Department informed as under:-
1. The Department will forge new partnerships to create new Biotechnology Parks in the country
to facilitate biotech product development, entrepreneurship, research and innovation in areas
where such facilities are not available and continue to support ongoing Biotech Parks in
accordance with their project duration. Two new clusters will be supported for biotech
industry and start-up.
2. To promote culture of innovation and entrepreneurship and to empower the Indian biotech
innovation ecosystem for Affordable Product Development. The Department will continue to
support innovation research mentorship and capacity programs through BIRAC.
3. The Department will continue to foster innovation by promoting entrepreneurship development
through support to the BIRAC for implementation of programs like-BIRAC BioNEST (BIRAC
- Bioincubation: Nurturing Entrepreneurs for Scaling up Technology), SITARE (Students
Innovations for Advancement of Research Explorations), eYUV A (Encouraging Youth for
Undertaking Innovative Research through Vibrant Acceleration), Social Innovation programme
for Products Affordable & Relevant to Societal Health (SPARSH), BIRAC Seed Fund.
4. The Department will work towards the following action points of Startup India Action point
and Make India Action plan:
(i) Scale up the number of Startups in the sector by nurturing approximately 300-500 new
Startups each year to have around 2,000 Startups by 2020.

18
(ii) Setup 50 Bio-Incubators and 150 technology transfer offices across India. (BIRAC has
already supported 20 Bioincubators till now).
(iii) Launch a Biotech Equity Fund - BIRAC Ace Fund which will provide financial assistance
to young entrepreneurs and start-ups.
(iv) Establish 5 Regional centres of BIRAC in the next 5 years. (2 Regional Centres are
operational).
(v) Set-up infrastructure for biopharma product development including facilities.
20.10 The Committee observes that the Department could not optimally utilise the allocation
made for 'Industrial and Entrepreneurship Development Scheme' during the years 2014-15 and
2015-16. The Committee is of the view that the Department needs to monitor its schemes
periodically and recommends that the Department should devise a monitoring mechanism whereby
all its schemes are periodically monitored and underutilisation of funds is avoided.
20.11 The Committee takes note of the activities contemplated by the Department for the year
2017-18 and hopes that the envisioned objectives of the Department would be realized with the
help of concerted and earnest strategic steps.
20.12 The Committee believes that the Department plays an instrumental and pivotal role in the
areas of transfer of technology, licensing, validation and in creation of infrastructure for
commercialisation of technologies. Also, it is essential for the Department to augment effective
engagements so as to trigger, nurture and sustain bio-entrepreneurship by creating the required
strategic policy interventions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department
should take necessary action in the matter and also chalk out a strategic roadmap for setting
up technology development centres, incubator facilities, etc. across the country for our aspiring
entrepreneurs to prosper by creating sustainable rural industrialisation in the field of biotechnology.
20.13 The Committee strongly feels that the Department should make its presence felt in the
technologically backward States like Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Madhya
Pradesh, etc. and should take necessary action in the direction of establishing Bio-technological
Centres/Centre of Excellence in these States as well.
21. HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
21.1 The Department is implementing an Integrated Human Resource Development (HRD) Programme
in Biotechnology to cater the needs of the R & D, manufacturing, quality control sector in institutional
and industrial environment. The HRD programme is comprising of post graduate teaching programme,
short term training courses for upgradation of skills of mid-career scientists and faculty engaged in
teaching and R&D, industrial training of students, fellowships for doctoral and post-doctoral research
training in frontier areas of life sciences. India can take pride in being one of the first few countries in
the world to start PG courses in biotechnology.
PG Programs: Two new PG programs viz., M. Tech. Pharma Biotechnology at Institute of
Chemical Technology, Mumbai and M. Tech. Computational Biology at Indraprastha Institute of
Information Technology, New Delhi have been supported.

19
PG Teaching Program: Department is working towards for revision and reframing of model
course curriculum of Post-graduate teaching programmes in Biotechnology. A web based dynamic
portal PROMPT (Review of Mechanism & Protocols of Teaching) has been developed for effectively
capturing feedback of postgraduate students admitted under DBT supported teaching programmes
in universities about quality of teaching programme.
Star College: Star College Scheme is a unique scheme initiated by the Department with an aim
to nurture excellence in science education at Under Graduate level. The main objective was to
strengthen the under-graduate science departments by providing academic and physical infrastructure
to the colleges, imparting hands-on training to UG students, promoting faculty improvement
programme, networking with neighboring colleges and institutions, providing better library facilities,
motivating students towards research and even encouraging out-reach activities for students in the
neighboring school & colleges. There are currently 85 ongoing Colleges. The Star college scheme
was chosen to be the first starting place to explore a pilot programme to bring Foldscope to the
scientific community.
DBT-JRF: The DBT-JRF programme is being supported by Department of Biotechnology since
2004 with an objective to provide opportunities for pursuing Ph.D. in biotechnology. The DBT-
JRF Program has provision to select JRFs according to merit in Biotechnology Entrance Test
(BET) under two Categories namely Category I and Category II. During 2016-17, 6825 applications
were received, 5865 students appeared for the online exam. Merit list of 300 students in category
-I and 112 students in Category-II was announced.
DBT-RA: Department initiated DBT Research Associateship programme in 2001 for providing
post-doctoral exposure in frontier areas of research in Biotechnology in premier institutes engaged
in major biotechnological research activities in India. During 2015-2016 & current year a total of
148 students have been selected in this fellowship.
Training Programmes: Department is providing support for organization of short term specialized
training programmes for upgrading skills of mid-career scientists from R & D institutions and
faculty involved in undergraduate and postgraduate teaching in multidisciplinary areas of
biotechnology. A total of 35 proposals have been recommended for financial support during the
period. Department of Biotechnology is supporting Biotech Industrial Training Programme (BITP)
for providing hands-on training for six months to fresh B.E./B.Tech./M.Sc./M.Tech. students in
biotechnology. During the period 1127 students have been placed in trainer companies under this
program. Department has created special provision in the existing HRD schemes namely DBT-RA
programme, BITP programme and Entrepreneurship development progarmme for the students/
candidates from the North Eastern Region of the country. Several students and entrepreneurs have
been benefited under these programs.
Awards/Fellowships: Rapid Grant for Young Investigators (RGYI) program fosters creative research
in various fields of biotechnology (Medical, Agriculture, Animal Biotech, Environment and Industry
etc.) to enhance early career development of young investigators below 40 years of age. The
programme aims to provide first grant to establish the lab and initiate research in the frontier areas
of biotechnology.
21.2 The Ramalingaswami Re-entry Fellowship was conceived in the year 2006-07 with the idea of
encouraging scientists (Indian Nationals) working outside the country, and who would like to return to

20
the home country to pursue their research interests in life sciences, biotechnology and other related areas.
So far 202 candidates have returned to the country to join this program.
21.3 "Energy Biosciences Overseas Fellowship" is a re-entry scheme for scientists of Indian origin who
are working outside the country in the field of Energy Biosciences. Over the past few years since 2009,
ten awardees with diverse expertise have returned to India and are working with the DBT Bioenergy
Centers, IISERs, IITs and other institutes.
21.4 Recently, Bioenergy Awards for Cutting Edge Research 'B-ACER' launched for Ph.D. students and
young scientists from India to interact with American peers and helping build long term R&D linkages.
The purpose of this award is to nurture future innovators and thought leaders in Biofuel and Bioenergy.
More than 50 applications received from young scientists and students working in Bioenergy related area.
21.5 The Department initiated Tata Innovation Fellowship program in 2006 to reward the scientists
engaged in innovation and in the pursuit of path breaking solutions to major challenges, interdisciplinary
work and an emphasis on translational research in life sciences, agriculture, biomedical science and
related areas of biotechnology. During the period (2015-2017) 10 scientists have been awarded Tata
Innovation Fellowship in the areas of Medical Biotechnology, Agricultural Biotechnology and Environmental
Biotechnology.
21.6 The W ellcome Trust/DBT India Alliance (India Alliance) was set up in 2008-09 as a 10-year £160
Million equally co-funded programme between the Wellcome Trust, UK and the Department of
Biotechnology, Government of India. By November 2016, India Alliance has made 254 awards at 79
different institutions across India.
21.7 In an attempt to enhance the participation of Women Scientists in Biotechnology Research, the
Department of Biotechnology launched a Biotechnology Career Advancement and Re-orientation Programme
(Bio-CARe) for women Scientists. The programme is mainly for Career Development of employed/
unemployed women Scientists upto 55 years of age for whom it is the first extramural research grant.
4 calls have been announced so far and 323 (113 Employed and 101 Unemployed) women Scientists have
been supported under the Bio-CARe scheme. The achievement of the schemes includes 90 publications,
04 patent and regular job for 11 women scientists during the Bio-CARE projects.
21.8 The Committee appreciates the effort being made by the Department in strengthening and
creation of infrastructure across the country in biotechnology sector, which provides immense
opportunity for promoting innovative research and training and capacity building. The Committee
is of the view that state-of-art infrastructure provides opportunities for Human Resource
Development and employment but in the absence of the efficient human resources, the very
purpose of putting state-of-art infrastructure gets defeated. The major challenge, therefore, is
the availability of adequate trained personnel to manage this infrastructure and the Committee
observes that Department in partnership with the Skill Development Councils is addressing the
issue. The Committee feels that infrastructure in itself can only provide the conducive atmosphere
to work in. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take all necessary
measures to ensure that additional requirement of adequate trained personnel is made available
and the infrastructure created is utilised optimally.

21
22. ASSISTANCE TO AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS
22.1 The Department provides support to 15 Autonomous Institutions and 1 International Institution and
has 3 Public Sector Units.
Budgetary allocation under the head 'Assistance to Autonomous Institutions' for the year 2016-17
and 2017-18 is as under:-
(` in Crore)
Y ear Budget Estimates Revised Estimates
2016-17 660.00 660.00
2017-18 708.53 —
22.2 The Committee enquired as to how the Department would utilise the increased allocation of
`708.53 crore for the year 2017-18, the Department informed that the increased allocation would be
utilised to sustain the activities at the current level and also to launch the new activities especially for
global collaborations. In addition, the Department has also proposed establishment of new Autonomous
Institute on Marine Biotechnology for which approval is in the final stages. It was also informed that
the projected requirement of the Department for this head for 2017-18 was ` 905.00 crore.
22.3 The Committee hopes that the increased allocation of `````708.53 crore under the head would
help these Autonomous Institutions in meeting their financial requirements and also enable
them to carry out their mandate more ef fectively. The Committee recommends that the Department
should ensure that the proposed activities of these Institutions are completed in scheduled time
frame and there is no delay in the activities proposed to be undertaken.
22.4 Responding to the query of the Committee regarding the financial assistance provided to these
Autonomous Institutions during the last three year, the Department has informed that total amount of
`431.75 crore, `450.43 crore and `561.58 crore has been released in favour of these Institutions for
the year 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16 respectively. The details of the release of funds to these
Autonomous Institutions during the last three years are as under:-
(
` in Crore)
Sl. Name 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16
No. Budget Release Budget Release Budget Release
Allocation Allocation Allocation
1       2 3 4 5 6 7 8
1. National Institute of 47.15 47.15 53.43 53.43 55.00 52.54
Immunology, New Delhi
2. National Centre for Cell 26.00 26.00 30.89 30.00 40.00 40.00
Science, Pune
3. Centre for DNA Finger Printing 34.00 34.00 45.00 41.00 84.50 84.50
and Diagnostics, Hyderabad

22
1       2 3 4 5 6 7 8
4. National Brain Research Centre, 0.50 0.50 20.93 20.93 30.50 30.50
Gurgaon
5. National Institute for Plant 23.00 23.00 14.00 14.00 28.60 28.60
Genome Research,
New Delhi
6. Institute of Bioresources and 25.76 22.00 18.23 18.22 30.68 9.79
Sustainable Development,
Imphal
7. Institute of Life Sciences, 22.10 22.10 35.00 34.04 35.89 35.88
Bhubaneswar
8. Translational Health Science and 37.00 37.00 25.00 22.44 29.00 29.00
Technology Institute, Faridabad
9. Rajiv Gandhi Centre 23.50 23.50 33.00 32.50 38.70 38.70
for Biotechnology,
Thiruvananthapuram
10. National Institute of Biomedical 42.00 42.00 26.00 25.90 20.58 20.58
Genomics, Kalyani
11. Regional Centre for 41.40 41.40 22.00 22.00 29.30 29.30
Biotechnology, Faridabad
12. National Agri-Food Biotechnology 20.10 20.10 36.00 35.90 37.15 35.00
Institute, Mohali
13. Institute for Stem Cell Research 55.00 55.00 47.00 45.32 46.89 45.09
and Regenerative Medicine,
Bengaluru
14. National Institute of Animal 18.00 18.00 20.50 19.50 31.78 30.70
Biotechnology, Hyderabad
15. Centre of Innovative and Applied 7.00 7.00 14.25 14.25 31.75 29.25
Bioprocessing, Mohali
16. International Centre for Genetic 13.00 13.00 21.00 21.00 22.15 22.15
Engineering and Biotechnology,
New Delhi
T
OTAL 435.51 431.75 462.23 450.43 592.47 561.58
No Utilisation certificate is pending from any autonomous Institutions in respect of previous years.

23
22.5 The Committee notes that during the financial years 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16, the
budget allocation for Autonomous Institutions could not be utilised fully and the gap between the
budgetary allocation and release of this allocation to these Institutions has increased on yearly
basis. Except (i) National Brain Research Centre, Gurugram; (ii) National Institute for Plant
Genome Research, New Delhi; (iii) Regional Centre for Biotechnology, Faridabad; and
(iv) International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi, no other
Autonomous Institution could be released 100 per cent funds during the three years.  In
2014-15, out of 16 Institutions, only 5 Institutions were able to fully utilise their allocated
budget. The financial performance of Institute of Bioresources and Sustainable Development,
Imphal has not been upto the mark during the three years and during 2015-16, the Institute
could avail only ````` 9.79 crore out of the budget allocation of ````` 30.68 crore. The unsatisfactory
financial performance of the Autonomous Institution indicates that the physical performance of
the Institutions must have been adversely affected. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Department should monitor the financial performance of the autonomous institutions and
evaluate their physical performance as well and if found sub-optimal, necessary corrective
preventive measures must be taken against them.
23. PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKING
BIOTECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY RESEARCH ASSISTANCE COUNCIL (BIRAC)
23.1 Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC) is a not-for-profit PSU under the
aegis of the Department of Biotechnology. BIRAC, being a unique organisation in the biotechnology
ecosystem, works as an interface agency of the Department of Biotechnology and has the mandate of
fostering and nurturing the Biotech Enterprises specially start-ups and SME's for enhancing their innovation
research capacities and promoting affordable product development. BIRAC supports Industry-Academia
interaction, serve as a single window for the emerging biotech industry, helps establish connectivity with
professional and institutional networks, and provides financial support for quality innovation targeted at
affordable solutions and product development. All DBT's biotechnology industry and entrepreneurship
Schemes including Public Private Partnership Programmes are implemented by BIRAC. Today more than
310 companies -large, small, medium and start-ups; and more than 170 entrepreneurs are a part of
BIRAC's Innovators network. Over 50 products and technologies are commercialized/ready for
commercialization. During 2016-17 approx. 100 new projects was supported, 9 new products developed
and 15 new IP generation.
23.2 Budgetary allocation under the head 'Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council' (BIRAC)
for the year 2016-17 and 2017-18 is as under:-
(
` in Crore)
Y ear Budget Estimates Revised Estimates
2016-17 25.00 25.00
2017-18 30.00 —
23.3 The Committee notes that in comparison to the budgetary allocation of `25.00 crore at RE
2016-17, `30.00 crore has been earmarked for the year 2017-18. The Department has informed the

24
Committee that the enhanced allocation of `5.00 crore would facilitate scaling up the activities of the
Department proposed into the Startup India and Make in India Action Plan and would be implemented
by BIRAC.
23.4 Responding to the query of the Committee about the proposed activities of BIRAC for the year
2017-18, the Department has informed that BIRAC will continue its programs under the (i) Investment
Schemes (ii) Fostering Innovation by Promoting Entrepreneurship Development (iii) Mentorship and
Capacity Building (iv) Supporting Ecosystem. It was apprised that BIRAC will work towards Scale up
the number of Startups in the sector by nurturing approximately 300-500 new Startups each year to have
around 2,000 Startups by 2020, support new Bioincubators to facilitate startups in Biotechnology Sector
and will create regional offices for better handholding of entrepreneurs.
23.5 The Committee notes the work done by BIRAC for the advancement of biotechnology
sector in the country by way of fostering innovation and entrepreneurship, promotion of affordable
innovation, empowering start-ups and small and medium enterprises, helping in commercialisation
of biotechnological advancements. The Committee hopes that BIRAC will continue its endeavour
and the budgetary allocation of ````` 30 cr. for the year 2017-18 will further help it to take on new
areas of biotechnology with greater potential.
24. Promotion of Biotechnology In North Eastern Region (NER) of India
24.1 The North East Region (NER) of India is a treasure house of exceptional natural beauty, floral and
faunal biodiversity and abundant mineral, water and forest resources. In order to give focused attention
for the North Eastern Region, the Department has made 10% of its budget allocation to North Eastern
States of India since 2009 onwards. The North Eastern Region Biotechnology Programme Management
Cell (NER-BPMC) which was established by DBT in the year 2009 is helping to evolve and implement
various new programmes in the areas of biotechnology for the benefit of NER States.
24.2 Budgetary allocation under the head 'North Eastern Areas' for the year 2016-17 and 2017-18 is
as under:-
(
` in Crore)
Y ear Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Actual Expenditure
2016-17 180.00 189.68 120. 00
(as on 6th February,
2017-18 145.36 —
24.3 The Committee learns that in the year 2017-18 the schemes have been merged and support
to the Autonomous Institutes has been indicated under non-scheme. Accordingly the mandatory
allocation of 10% for North East Region is now reflected only against the scheme budget which
is `````145.36 crore. However, the budgetary support which would be provided to the Autonomous
Institutes in the North East has not been reflected. The Department has informed that in actual
value the budgetary support will not be decreased during the current year.
24.4 The Committee sought to know the about the projects/schemes run by the Department for the
benefit of North Eastern Region (NER) and Sikkim. In response, the Department has informed that the

25
Department proactively has taken lot of measures to improve and develop NER through biotech intervention.
The total mandatory 10% budget has been fully utilized for the biotech based development of NER. The
Department has made concerted effort in this direction over the last five years through a dedicated cell,
namely, North Eastern Region Biotechnology Programme Management Cell (NER-BPMC).
24.5 It has been informed by the Department that of various programmes being implemented by it
through NER-BPMC, the Twinning R&D programme has supported more than 450 collaborative projects
between North East institutions and the rest of India Institutions. In Medical Biotechnology, the Department
has provided advanced diagnostic infrastructure in 11 medical colleges/institutions in NER, enhancing the
quality of disease diagnosis and patient care. Enhanced diagnostic facilities created with support from
the Department at Mizoram State Cancer Institute, Aizawl (Mizoram), Naga Hospital Authority- Kohima
(NHAK), Nagaland, and at NEIGRIHMS, Shillong (Meghalaya) are actively engaged in providing state-
of-the art services for patient care in remote areas of NER. Highlight of the programme are as under:-
(i) A network of 126 Biotech Hubs at various institutions, universities and colleges has been
established to promote education, training and research in biological sciences.
(ii) 18 institutions of NER are part of DBT e-Library consortium (DeLCON) which provides
access to more than 900 high impact peer reviewed e-journals. 15 colleges have been
recognized as Star Colleges in NER.
(iii) 170 Scientists from NER have been supported through a special scheme of DBT's Overseas
Associateship and more than 150 scientists have already availed this fellowship. Through
yet another program of similar nature, 11 Scientists were provided National Associateship
for advanced training at leading institutions in India.
(iv) 88 Senior Secondary Schools from NER have been selected for setting up of Biotechnology
Labs under "Biotechnology Labs in Senior Secondary Schools (BLiSS)" Scheme. These
laboratories at NER schools are functional now for training of young students.
(v) During this year, 30 Scientists/Faculty have been selected for bringing advancement in the
Biotechnology and Life Science related activities in various institutions of higher learning in
the NER under "DBT-NER Visiting Research Professorship (VRP) Scheme".
(vi) DBT is supporting M.Sc./M.Tech. programme at 5 universities/ institutions in NER. Also,
80 PG students from NER have been trained at various biotech industries under Biotech
Industrial Programme for NER.
(vii) Advanced Biotech infrastructural facilities have been created at NRC Yak in Arunachal
Pradesh and NRC Mithun in Nagaland.A Centre of Excellence in Agriculture Biotechnology,
named DBT-AAU Centre for Agri Biotechnology, and another on Fisheries and Aquaculture
Biotechnology (FAB) has been supported at Assam Agricultural University, Jorhat and to
College of Fisheries, CAU, Tripura respectively.
(viii) A regional level Animal House facility is being established at RMRC, Dibrugarh (Assam),
which will be accessible to entire biomedical research community of NER for carrying out
critical animal experiments in disease biology, molecular medicine, vaccinology and

26
pharmacology. The requisite statutory approvals for this facility have been obtained by
RMRC-Dibrugarh. Civil work is expected to start very shortly.
(ix) The NER of India, owing to its unique geographical location sharing five international
borders, bears constant threat of exotic trans-boundary diseases of our valuable livestock.
To address this issue a programme on "Advance Animal Disease Diagnostic and Management
Consortium (ADMaC)" has been initiated by involving NIVEDI, Bangalore; NRC on Equines,
Hissar; NIHSAD, Bhopal and institutions from NER. This programme is aimed at strengthening
regional infrastructure and capabilities for developing latest diagnostics and organizing rigorous
surveillance for the highly contagious and ravaging diseases so that forecasting model on
disease outbreaks in the region can be developed for a formidable defense to guard the
territories.
(x) A major collaborative research programme on Chemical Ecology of North Eastern Region
has been initiated involving scientists from reputed national institutions (National Centre for
Biological Sciences (NCBS), Indian Institute of Science (IISc), University of Agricultural
Sciences (UAS), and NER institutions.
(xi) A major network project involving five institutes from NER and DDRC/THSTI-Faridabad
has been launched on harnessing the traditional herbal medicines of NER for developing
novel therapeutic strategies for metabolic syndrome.
(xii) New initiatives launched in this year include network programmes on biodiversity of aromatic
rice strains of NER and improvement in their yield and aromatic content (Joha and Black
Rice); biodiversity of banana and its pathogens in NER and to develop nutritionally fortified
and pathogen-resistant banana strains. In the animal biotechnology area, a collaborative
programmes on Duck improvement of duck productivity has been initiated; brain storming
for detection and control of diseases in both freshwater and marine/brackish water fish, and
molecular characterization and conservation of ornamental fish of NER has been organized
in Tripura.
(xiii) In the h uman healthcare sector, new initiatives in the area of Multi-Drug Resistant Tuberculosis
(MDR-TB) in NER, its molecular characterization and advanced diagnostics, and instituting
its control in association with various NER and other institutions has been intiated. A
component on detection and characterization of various species of lung fluke Paragonimus
prevalent in NER, and its intermediate hosts has also been included with the TB programme
in NER.DBT has an autonomous institutions "Institute of Bioresources and Sustainable
Development (IBSD)" at Imphal and its regional centre in Gangtok, Sikkim.
24.6 The Committee further notes that through the concerted efforts of the Department, during
the last five years, it has been able to initiate unique scheme/programes for NER which resulted
in R&D capacity building of more than 800 NER scientists/ researchers/faculty, creation of best
of the R&D infrastructure at almost all R&D institutions and universities of NER through
infrastructure support, setting up of Centre of Excellence (CoEs) as well as Unit of Excellence
(U-Excel) around meritorious scientists of NER, training of NER scientists/faculty in reputed

27
overseas institutions and specialised training of scientists/researchers/students under various
schemes/programmes. The NER researchers published more than 300 research papers in the peer
reviewed journals. Entrepreneurship Development Programmes in Biotechnology were also initiated
by the Department during the last two years and as of now 2 entrepreneurs have already
established their ventures in NER.
24.6 The Committee further desired to know about the budget allocation and utilization in the last five
years alongwith the fund utilization in response to which the Department has submitted that the fund
utilisation is increasing due to initiation of several NER specific programs as well as skill development
among the researchers and students in NER. The following table gives details of the budgetary allocation
and utilisation thereof for the years 2012-13 onwards:-
(` in Crore)
Year Budget Utilisation
2012-13 148.50 130.39
2013-14 148.50 136.00
2014-15 150.00 140.00
2015-16 160.00 150.00
2016-17 189.67 120.00 (as on 6th
February, 2017)
T
OTAL 796.67 676.39
24.7 The Committee is perturbed to note that since the year 2012-13 the Department could not
fully utilise the budgetary allocation earmarked for the North Eastern Region. The underutilisation
of the financial assistance given for the advancements of the scientific activities of the Department
in the Region is reflective of the poor fund management by the Department. The Committee
takes serious note of the fact that against the total budgetary allocation of ````` 796.67 crore, the
Department managed to spend only ````` 676.39 crore which is only 84.90 per cent of the total
allocation. Taking into account the importance of the North East Region in the overall scientific
growth of the country, the Committee recommends that the Department should make all out
efforts to utilise the budgetary allocation and ensure that the funds earmarked are optimally
utilised for undertaking scientific research activities and creation of skilled human resource in
the North East Region.
24.8 The Committee is of the considered opinion that North Eastern Region of our country has
innumerable potential given the taxonomy of this Region. The Committee feels that the Department
can play a vital role with the help of its technological achievements and hand-holding, various
commercially viable activities can be taken up such as pineapple processing industry in Sikkim,
etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take the concerned
agencies on board and come up with a doable proposal to give technological boost to the local
industries of this Region to give sustainable livelihoods to the people.

28
24.9 The Committee during its meeting held on 15th February, 2017 had observed that people
of the country including elected representatives are not aware of the excellent work in the field
of Biotechnology being done by the Department or much about the Department itself which may
be beneficial for a very big segment of the society like farmers, fishermen, students, research
scholars etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should prepare a
comprehensive awareness programme with a calendar of events using social media platforms,
radio, television etc. meant for students and general public but most importantly for all the
elected representatives right from district level i.e. Members of Zila Panchayats, Legislative
Assemblies and Councils and Members of Parliament. The Committee strongly feels that elected
representatives can play an important role in making their constituents aware of scientific
development and ultimately developing scientific temperament in the public at large.

29
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A  GLANCE
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF THE DEPARTMENT DURING THE 12TH FIVE YEAR PLAN:
The Committee notes that the Department of Biotechnology had proposed a budgetary
allocation of ````` 18000.00 cr. for the entire 12th Five Year Plan (2012-17) whereas the Department
got approval of only ````` 7876.8 crore as allocation which is less than 50 per cent. The Committee
is perturbed to note that against the approved budgetary allocation of ````` 7876.8 crore for the
entire period of 12th Five Year Plan, the Department of Biotechnology has actually received
````` 7497.00 crore (at RE stage) during the Plan period. The Committee is of the considered view
that the basic concept of a Five Year Plan is to formulate long gestation schemes/projects by
drawing long-term and mid-term projections. However, if the strategic policy interventions
envisaged are not adequately funded, negative impact on the successful execution of schemes/
projects is inevitable. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Department should
sensitise the concerned Ministry/Department of the Government of India about the higher
financial requirements of the Department more vigorously so as to enable it to smoothly discharge
its mandate. (Para 3.2)
The Committee further expresses its unhappiness to notes that the utilization capacity of
the Department has continuously gone down from 99.19 percent in 2013-14 to 96.36 percent,
95.67 percent and 85.49 percent in 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17 (as on 14th February, 2017)
respectively. The Department's performance of utilising 99.19 percent of the total allocation in
2013-14 is indicative of the capabilities of optimally utilising the resources made available to it.
However, the Department appears to have failed to rise to its true potential and could spend only
85.49 percent of the allocated resources during 2016-17 till 14.02.2017. The Committee, therefore,
feels that the Department should have been more prudent in optimally utilising the funds made
available to it for the year 2016-17. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Department
to review its financial performance during 2016-17 and identify the shortfalls responsible for
underutilisation so as to avoid its recurrence in future and revisit its scheme of allocation of
funds under the various schemes/programmes/projects to make them more result oriented.
(Para 3.3)
BUDGET ALLOCATION FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2017-18
The Committee hopes that the Department would utilise the budgetary allocation of
````` 2222.11 crore in 2017-18 optimally and ensure that the targets envisioned for the year
2017-18 in the Action Plan would be achieved in a time-frame fixed by the Department. The
Committee is of the considered view that timely completion of the targets/objectives will not only
help the Department to improve its performance both physically as well as financially but also
helping cut down the overhead costs. Thus, the Committee recommends the Department to
monitor the time frame for the envisaged targets and keep a continuous vigil with the help of
a robust internal monitoring mechanism so as to ensure that the fixed timelines are met and
the budgetary support provided for the purpose is utilised judiciously and optimally. (Para 4.3)
29

30
The Committee shares the enthusiasm of the Department with regard to its mission
programmes and is of the considered opinion that the requisite financial support should be
provided by the Government for the purpose. The Committee feels that the request made by the
Department for additional amount of ````` 1000.00 crore during 2017-18 is fully justified and urges
the Department to share the sentiments of the Committee with the concerned Ministry/Department
and impress upon them and seek the requisite budgetary allocations at RE stage so that the
mission programmes which are very vital for benefiting the society as they intend to provide
solutions through biotechnological interventions, can successfully be implemented by the
Department. (Para 4.6)
The Committee further feels that the concerned Ministry/Department of the Government
while allocating or making financial allocation in favour of the scientific Departments/Ministries
should also consider that our scientific organisations deserve a lot more financial backing of the
Government to not only sustain their growth but also to venture into new scientific assignments
without having the fear of failure. The Committee strongly feels that scientific endeavours of
our scientific Departments should be supported by the Government open heartedly by giving
them adequate financial support so as to enable them to carry out their mandate efficiently and
for optimal utilisation of their capacities in the direction of scientific advancement in the country.
(Para 4.7)
BIOTECHNOLOGY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
The Committee notes that in BE 2016-17 budgetary allocation of ````` 920.00 crore was made
under the head Biotechnology Research and Development which was increased to ````` 1016.71 crore
in RE 2016-17 and in BE 2017-18, the budgetary allocation has further been increased to
````` 1250.58 crore The Committee, however, is perturbed to note the underutilisation of the budgetary
allocation during the year 2016-17. The Committee notes that the Department has managed to
spend only `````801.78 crore (upto January, 2017) which is 78.60 per cent of the total allocation made
under the Scheme. The Committee feels that the financial performance of the Department is not
very heartening. The under-utilisation of the budgetary allocation does not speak well about the
Department's focus towards Research and Development in the Biotechnology sector especially
when the budget allocation has been increased at RE stage. The Committee strongly feels that
under utilisation of funds is directly related to the performance of a Scheme. The Committee
is of the view that the Department should accord due recognition to Research and Development
in biotechnology sector while utilising the budgetary allocations and make all efforts to utilise
the funds optimally. (Para 6.2)
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
The Committee notes that during the period (2015-2017), 5724 proposals were received, out
of which only 542 (9.46%) proposals/projects have been funded so far. (Para 7.1)
BASIC RESEARCH
The Committee is of the view that making potable water available to our citizens is one of
the biggest challenges facing our country. The Committee feels that the Department of

31
Biotechnology has the potential to devise a technology to convert the filthiest of the water into
potable water. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should include
developing technologies for extracting safe drinking water from available water resources to
lessen the problem of drinking water in the country. (Para 8.2)
AGRICULTURE AND ALLIED AREAS:
CROP BIOTECHNOLOGY
The Committee appreciates the achievement realised by the Department in the field of crop
biotechnology. The Committee is of the view that agriculture, alongwith its allied sectors, is the
largest livelihood activity in our country and it is the need of the hour that we all should work
in tandem to improve our crops productivity with the help of technological advancements and
sustainable technologies by establishing a dissemination network so that the innovations reach
the last point. (Para 9.2)
The Committee also feels that out of box thinking is required to tap the potential lying in
our agricultural activities. The Committee recommends the Department to take necessary steps
in the direction of untapped potential with the help of its biotechnological strategic interventions
so as to address the issues of not only the crops productivity but also for mitigation of post
harvest loss and enhancing the nutritional value as well. (Para 9.3)
ANIMAL HEALTH
The Committee notes the activities undertaken by the Department in the field of animal
biotechnology and animal health. The Committee, nonetheless, is of the opinion that the rate of
commercialisation of the technologies developed by the Department is not very encouraging and
it reflects that the technologies so developed by the Department either are not as per the
requirements of the industry or there may be flaws in the technologies restricting their
commercialisation. Hence, the Committee desires the Department to take market driven research
activities so that the technologies developed by it are well received by the industry.
(Para 11.2)
The Committee also feels that the Department needs to augment its research activities in
the direction of disease resistance in our indigenous livestock. The Committee, therefore,
recommends the Department to take necessary action in these directions. (Para 11.3)
The Committee is further of the view that the Department should also adopt more focused
approach towards increasing the productivity of the indigenous varieties of cows in the country;
establishment of sperm banks so as to make available hybrid indigenous sperm of high quality
and standards; etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take
necessary action in this regard. (Para 11.4)
AQUACULTURE AND MARINE BIOTECHNOLOGY
The Committee notes that India has a coastline of over 8000 kms. and ranks 2nd in global
fish production, inland capture and aquaculture. The Committee, however , feels that sustainable

32
productivity and management has been a concern area where the Department of Biotechnology
needs to take the required strategic policy interventions. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Department should take necessary biotechnological measures to address the issues of
sustainable productivity and management. (Para 12.2)
The Committee is also of the opinion that health of the aquatic animal predominantly
depends on the health of the aquaculture ecosystem. Thus, development of healthy brood stock
of all cultivable fin and shell fishes assumes greater importance and the Committee feels that
the Department of Biotechnology can play a crucial role on this count. The Committee, therefore,
recommends the Department to take necessary strategic measures to develop high health brood
stock. (Para 12.3)
The Committee is of the opinion that the biological diversity of the marine resources along
the Indian coast in the form of creeks, estuaries, deep seas and continental shelf offer enormous
scope for the discovery of novel products and processes which have application in biomass and
food production, production of polymers, biocatalysts, biomedical products, and organics;
bioremediation and biomining etc. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Department
should work out a roadmap for the purpose and put earnest efforts in this direction. The
Committee is hopeful that with the help of right policy interventions, the Department can write
a new chapter of biotechnological advancements in the field of aquaculture and marine bio-
technology. (Para 12.4)
MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS
The Committee takes note of the various activities undertaken under Medicinal and Aromatic
Plants. The Committee observes that the Department has been supporting the salient aspects of
the Indian medicine system through its research activities. The Committee, however, feels that
the Department has to keep pace with the increasing attention about the medicinal and aromatic
plants among the urban population and take necessary measures to tap the unlimited potential
of these plants with the help of its biotechnological capabilities. (Para 13.2)
MISSION INNOV ATION - ACCELERATING THE CLEAN ENERGY REVOLUTION
The Committee notes the work done so far by the Department in the direction of biofuels.
However, lot more is yet to be achieved on this count. The Committee hopes that the Department,
along with other related agencies of the Government, will continue its concerted efforts and will
work in tandem to realise the targets set for biofuels. (Para 14.2)
The Committee is of the view that the Department should also chalk out a policy initiative
and set up Bioenergy based incubation centres across the country so as to provide a platform to
have interface between academia and industry. If required, the Department should seek budgetary
support for the purpose at RE stage. The Committee also recommends that the Department
should focus on nurturing start-ups in this direction. (Para 14.3)

33
NANOBIOTECHNOLOGY
The Committee is of the view that the application of nanotechnology can play a very
important and crucial role in the areas of agriculture, health, food, environment, etc. The
Committee feels that the Department should continue its activities in this direction and also
explore the possibilities to address the challenges posed to our agriculture, health, food and
environment with the help of advancement in the field of the nanotechnology. (Para 15.2)
MEDICAL BIOTECHNOLOGY AND RELATED AREAS:
INFECTIOUS DISEASES
The Committee is of the opinion that a diagnostic test kit for TB patients is the need of
the hour so as to enable early detection of TB. The Committee also feels that the Department
should in coordination with Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and ICMR devise innovative
technologies for the purpose. (Para 16.3)
The Committee is also of the view that the Department should undertake an awareness
campaign to popularise its technological advancements and sensitise all the State Governments
as well as medical colleges about the diagnosis and clinical symptomatic diagnosis of TB so as to
provide an important breakthrough in the early detection of the disease. (Para 16.4)
The Committee expresses concerns on the issue of mosquito breeding which appears to have
gone out of control. The Committee is of the view that the Department of Biotechnology should
play a significant role by devising technology to keep the mosquito population under control and
should examine the genda flower like pyrethrum for the purpose. Similarly, the Department
should take research work on pheromone traps for the female mosquito. (Para 16.5)
BIODESIGN PROGRAMME
The Committee notes the scientific improvements brought with the support of its research
activities in the field of medical biotechnology and related areas. The Committee hopes that the
Department would continue its focus on this sector and further strengthen its activities in the
areas of human genome research, vaccines, infectious, chronic disease biology, stem cells &
regenerative medicine and the biodesign programmes. (Para 17.2)
FOOD AND NUTRITION
The Committee takes note of the activities of the Department in the direction of Food and
Nutrition. The Committee, however, is of the view that the Department should further intensify
its activities to address the issue of Severe Acute Malnutrition (SAM) so as to tackle the stunting
in the children of our country which can lead to developmental problems. The Committee would
also like to be apprised of the status of the approval of FSSAI to the formulation consisting of
a mix of seven minerals and thirteen vitamins in a sachet aimed for treatment of severely
malnourished children. (Para 18.3)
The Committee also recommends that the Department should publicise its demonstration
unit developed by IIT, Kharagpur to the various states of the country and sentise and encourage

34
them to make use of the technology in their respective states to combat Severe Acute Malnutrition
(SAM). (Para 18.4)
The Committee is also of the view that the Department should in co-ordination with the
FSSAI take necessary action in the direction of making oil fortification mandatory so as to retain
the its nutritional value. (Para 18.5)
BIOTECHNOLOGY FOR SOCIETAL DEVELOPMENT
The Committee is of the considered opinion that with the help of right technological
interventions, we can bring the marginalised sections of our society into the mainstream and
make them more productive for the overall growth of the country. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department should further intensify its activities in the directions of
societal development and take necessary steps for creating platform for self-employment generation
in the industrially backward areas of the country. (Para 19.2)
The Committee is of the view that the Department of Biotechnology can play a very important
role to address the issue of clean drinking water with the help of its technological advancements.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should chalk out a roadmap for the
purpose and further strengthen its activities in this direction. (Para 19.3)
INDUSTRIAL AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP DEVELOPMENT
The Committee observes that the Department could not optimally utilise the allocation
made for 'Industrial and Entrepreneurship Development Scheme' during the years 2014-15 and
2015-16. The Committee is of the view that the Department needs to monitor its schemes
periodically and recommends that the Department should devise a monitoring mechanism whereby
all its schemes are periodically monitored and underutilization of funds is avoided.
(Para 20.10)
The Committee takes note of the activities contemplated by the Department for the year
2017-18 and hopes that the envisioned objectives of the Department would be realized with the
help of concerted and earnest strategic steps. (Para 20.11)
The Committee believes that the Department plays an instrumental and pivotal role in the
areas of transfer of technology, licensing, validation and in creation of infrastructure for
commercialisation of technologies. Also, it is essential for the Department to augment effective
engagements so as to trigger, nurture and sustain bio-entrepreneurship by creating the required
strategic policy interventions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department
should take necessary action in the matter and also chalk out a strategic roadmap for setting
up technology development centres, incubator facilities, etc. across the country for our aspiring
entrepreneurs to prosper by creating sustainable rural industrialisation in the field of biotechnology.
(Para 20.12)

35
The Committee strongly feels that the Department should make its presence felt in the
technologically backward States like Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Madhya
Pradesh, etc. and should take necessary action in the direction of establishing Bio-technological
Centres/Centre of Excellence in these States as well. (Para 20.13)
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
The Committee appreciates the effort being made by the Department in strengthening and
creation of infrastructure across the country in biotechnology sector, which provides immense
opportunity for promoting innovative research and training and capacity building. The Committee
is of the view that state-of-art infrastructure provides opportunities for Human Resource
Development and employment but in the absence of the efficient human resources, the very
purpose of putting state-of-art infrastructure gets defeated. The major challenge, therefore, is
the availability of adequate trained personnel to manage this infrastructure and the Committee
observes that Department in partnership with the Skill Development Councils is addressing the
issue. The Committee feels that infrastructure in itself can only provide the conducive atmosphere
to work in. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take all necessary
measures to ensure that additional requirement of adequate trained personnel is made available
and the infrastructure created is utilised optimally. (Para 21.8)
ASSISTANCE TO AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS
The Committee hopes that the increased allocation of ````` 708.53 crore under the head would
help these Autonomous Institutions in meeting their financial requirements and also enable
them to carry out their mandate more ef fectively. The Committee recommends that the Department
should ensure that the proposed activities of these Institutions are completed in scheduled time
frame and there is no delay in the activities proposed to be undertaken. (Para 22.3)
The Committee notes that during the financial years 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16, the
budget allocation for Autonomous Institutions could not be utilised fully and the gap between the
budgetary allocation and release of this allocation to these Institutions has increased on yearly
basis. Except (i) National Brain Research Centre, Gurugram; (ii) National Institute for Plant
Genome Research, New Delhi; (iii) Regional Centre for Biotechnology, Faridabad; and
(iv) International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi, no other
Autonomous Institution could be released 100 percent funds during the three years. In 2014-15,
out of 16 Institutions, only 5 Institutions were able to fully utilise their allocated budget. The
financial performance of Institute of Bioresources and Sustainable Development, Imphal has not
been upto the mark during the three years and during 2015-16, the Institute could avail only
````` 9.79 crore out of the budget allocation of ````` 30.68 crore The unsatisfactory financial performance
of the Autonomous Institution indicates that the physical performance of the Institutions must
have been adversely affected. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department
should monitor the financial performance of the autonomous institutions and evaluate their
physical performance as well and if found sub-optimal, necessary corrective preventive measures
must be taken against them. (Para 22.5)

36
PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKING
BIOTECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY RESEARCH ASSISTANCE COUNCIL (BIRAC)
The Committee notes the work done by BIRAC for the advancement of biotechnology sector
in the country by way of fostering innovation and entrepreneurship, promotion of affordable
innovation, empowering start-ups and small and medium enterprises, helping in commercialisation
of biotechnological advancements. The Committee hopes that BIRAC will continue its endeavour
and the budgetary allocation of ````` 30 cr. for the year 2017-18 will further help it to take on new
areas of biotechnology with greater potential. (Para 23.5)
PROMOTION OF BIOTECHNOLOGY IN NORTH EASTERN REGION (NER) OF INDIA
The Committee learns that in the year 2017-18 the schemes have been merged and support
to the Autonomous Institutes has been indicated under non-scheme. Accordingly the mandatory
allocation of 10% for North East Region is now reflected only against the scheme budget which
is `````145.36 crore. However, the budgetary support which would be provided to the Autonomous
Institutes in the North East has not been reflected. The Department has informed that in actual
value the budgetary support will not be decreased during the current year. (Para 24.3)
The Committee further notes that through the concerted efforts of the Department, during
the last five years, it has been able to initiate unique scheme/programes for NER which resulted
in R&D capacity building of more than 800 NER scientists/ researchers/faculty, creation of best
of the R&D infrastructure at almost all R&D institutions and universities of NER through
infrastructure support, setting up of Centre of Excellence (CoEs) as well as Unit of Excellence
(U-Excel) around meritorious scientists of NER, training of NER scientists/faculty in reputed
overseas institutions and specialised training of scientists/researchers/ students under various
schemes/ programmes. The NER researchers published more than 300 research papers in the
peer reviewed journals. Entrepreneurship Development Programmes in Biotechnology were also
initiated by the Department during the last two years and as of now 2 entrepreneurs have already
established their ventures in NER. (Para 24.6)
The Committee is perturbed to note that since the year 2012-13 the Department could not
fully utilise the budgetary allocation earmarked for the North Eastern Region. The underutilisation
of the financial assistance given for the advancements of the scientific activities of the Department
in the Region is reflective of the poor fund management by the Department. The Committee
takes serious note of the fact that against the total budgetary allocation of `````796.67 crore, the
Department managed to spend only `````676.39 crore which is only 84.90 per cent of the total
allocation. Taking into account the importance of the North East Region in the overall scientific
growth of the country, the Committee recommends that the Department should make all out
efforts to utilise the budgetary allocation and ensure that the funds earmarked are optimally
utilised for undertaking scientific research activities and creation of skilled human resource in
the North East Region. (Para 24.7)

37
The Committee is of the considered opinion that North Eastern Region of our country has
innumerable potential given the taxonomy of this Region. The Committee feels that the Department
can play a vital role with the help of its technological achievements and hand-holding, various
commercially viable activities can be taken up such as pineapple processing industry in Sikkim,
etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take the concerned
agencies on board and come up with a doable proposal to give technological boost to the local
industries of this Region to give sustainable livelihoods to the people. (Para 24.8)
The Committee during its meeting held on 15th February, 2017 had observed that people
of the country including elected representatives are not aware of the excellent work in the field
of Biotechnology being done by the Department or much about the Department itself which may
be beneficial for a very big segment of the society like farmers, fishermen, students, research
scholars etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should prepare a
comprehensive awareness programme with a calendar of events using social media platforms,
radio, television etc. meant for students and general public but most importantly for all the
elected representatives right from district level i.e. Members of Zila Panchayats, Legislative
Assemblies and Councils and Members of Parliament. The Committee strongly feels that elected
representatives can play an important role in making their constituents aware of scientific
development and ultimately developing scientific temperament in the public at large.
(Para 24.9)

MINUTES

XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 15th February, 2017 in Committee Room
'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Re nuka Chowdhury — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shri C.P. Narayanan
4. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
LOK SABHA
5. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
6. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
7. Shri Ninong Ering
8. Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole
9. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
2. The following representatives of Department of Biotechnology appeared before the Committee:
1. Prof. K. Vijayraghavan, Secretary
2. Shri Chandra Pratap Goyal, Joint Secretary
3. Ms. Gargi Kaul, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
4. Dr. (Ms.) Renu Swamp, Scientist 'H'
5. Dr. S.R. Rao, Scientist 'G'
6. Dr. Suman Govil, Scientist 'G'
7. Dr. T. Madan Mohan, Scientist 'G'
8. Dr. Mohd Aslam, Scientist 'G'
9. Shri Arvind Duggal, Scientist 'G'
41

42
10. Dr. A.S. Ninawe, Scientist 'G'
11. Dr. Suchita Ninawe, Scientist 'G'
12. Ms. Preeti Katiyar, Director
3. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the Secretary,
Department of Biotechnology and his team of officers. The Chairperson informed the members that the
meeting had been convened to have a presentation on the Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the
Department of Biotechnology.
4. Initiating the discussion, the Chairperson asked the Secretary, Department of Biotechnology to
inform the Committee about the budgetary allocations made and physical targets set for important
programmes for the XIIth Five Year Plan and to what extent the Department managed to achieve the
targets, both in terms of physical as well as financial. She also desired to know about the targets set
for the next Financial Year i.e. 2017-18 by the Department and the roadmap drawn in that regard. She
further enquired about the major challenges faced by the Department of Science and Technology and the
strategic policy measures intended by the Department to address those challenges.
5. The Secretary, Department of Biotechnology while thanking the Committee for the opportunity
given to present the annual Demands for Grants of the Department, made a power point presentation
highlighting the performance of Department as well as the budgetary allocations made and the physical
and financial achievements of the Department during 2016-17 and the XIIth Five year Plan and new
initiatives proposed to be taken by the Department in 2017-18.
6. The Chairperson and Members then raised queries relating to Severe Acute Malnutrition Programme
(SAM), schemes relating to research and development, Aquaculture and Marine Biotechnology, medicinal
and aromatic plants, medical biotechnology, food and nutrition, animal biotechnology etc.
7. The Secretary, Department of Biotechnology, while presenting his views also responded to some
of the queries raised by the Chairperson and Members of the Committee. He also promised to furnish
written replies to some other queries/points raised by the Chairperson and the Members of the Committee,
which could not be replied during the meeting.
8. The Committee, then, adjourned for lunch at 1.13 
P.M.
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. * * *
12. * * *
13. * * *
14. * * *
15. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
16. The witnesses, then, withdrew and the Committee then adjourned at 3.29 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.

43
XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 29th March, 2017 in Committee Room 'B',
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shri Parimal Nathwani
4. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
5. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
6. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
8. Kumari Sushmita Dev
9. Shri Ninong Ering
10. Shri Laxman Giluwa
11. Shri Daddan Mishra
12. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
13. Shri Nana Patole
14. Shri Nagendra Singh
15. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. She
informed the Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 294th, 295th,
43

44
296th, 297th, 298th, 299th and 300th reports on Demands for Grants 2017-18 of the Ministries/
Departments of Earth Sciences, Biotechnology, Science and Technology, Scientific and Industrial Research,
Space, Atomic Energy, and Environment, Forest and Climate Change, respectively.
3. The Committee, after considering the recommendations made in the draft reports, adopted the
draft 294th, 295th, 296th, 297th, 298th, 299th and 300th reports. The Committee also decided to
present/lay the reports to both the Houses of Parliament on 31st March, 2017.
4. The Committee also decided to nominate the Chairperson and in her absence Ch. Sukhram Singh
Yadav to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Daddan Mishra and in his absence Shri Vikram
Usendi to lay the reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on 31st March, 2017.
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 3.45 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.