PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS 
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTH REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010-2011) 
OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL 
RESEARCH 
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY) 
(DEMAND NO. 85) 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23RD APRIL, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 23RD APRIL, 2010) 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 2010/VAISAKHA, 1932 (SAKA) 
Web site: http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-Mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
C O N T E N T S 
       PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE               (i) – (ii) 
2.     PREFACE           (iii) 
3.     REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                  1-26                                  
4.      SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS                      
5.  MINUTES  OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 
                                                                                                        
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,  
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2010) 
---------- 
1. Dr.T. Subbarami Reddy  –– Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
 ** 2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
3. Shri Anil H. Lad 
4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
5. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi  
6. Shri Saman Pathak 
7. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
8. Dr. Ejaz Ali 
9. Shri Jabir Husain 
10. Dr. Barun Mukherji 
 LOK SABHA 
11. Dr. Mirza Mehboob Beg 
12. Shri Udayanraje Bhonsale 
13. Shri Ninong Ering  
14. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
15. Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda 
16. Shrimati Kaisar Jahan 
17. Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
18. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
19. Shri C. R. Patil 
20. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle 
21. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
22. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
23. Shri Francisco Sardinha 
 # #24. Vacant 
25. Dr. Rajan Sushant 
26. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
27. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
28. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava 
29. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
 30. Shri Akhilesh Yadav 
          #31. Shri K.C. Singh Baba 
    SECRETARIAT 
 Smt. Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary 
 Shri  Alok Chatterjee, Director 
 Shri  V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director  
Shri  Girija Shankar, Assistant Director 
                                                           
 Nominated w.e.f. 14th October, 2009 
**  Nominated w.e.f. 31st December, 2009 
     #  Nominated w.e.f.  11th January, 2010 
  # #  Shri Yashwant Sinha ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation from the           
Committee w.e.f. 1st February, 2010 
 
 
 

Preface 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science & Technology, Environment & Fore sts, having been authorised by the 
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred eighth Report of 
the Committee. This Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2010-2011) of 
the Department of Scientific and Industr ial Research (Ministry of Science and 
Technology) (Demand No.85). 
 
2.   In the meeting of the Committee held on the 29
th March, 2010 the Secretary and other 
Officers of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research gave an overview of the 
various activities of the Department and th e Members sought clarif ications on various 
aspects of the performance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for 
Grants. 
 
3.   The Committee expresses its thanks to th e Officers of the Department for replying to 
the clarifications sought by the Members and placing before it  the required material to 
enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of 
Scientific & Industrial Research. 
 
4.    The Committee considered and adopte d the Report at its meeting held on the 16
th 
April, 2010. 
  
NEW DELHI;               DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY 
April 16, 2010           Chairman,                               
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on  
  Science & Technology, Environment & Forests. 
         
 
REPORT 
The primary endeavour of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
(DSIR) is to encourage indus try to increase their share in  country’s R&D expenditure, 
support a larger cross section of small and medium industrial units to develop state-of-the 
art globally competitive technologies of high commercial potential, catalyze faster 
commercialization of lab-scale R&D, enhan ce the share of technol ogy intensive exports 
in overall exports, strengthen industrial consultancy & technology management 
capabilities and establish user friendly info rmation network to facilitate scientific & 
industrial research in  the country. The Department also  acts as an administrative link 
between the Government of India and the CSIR society. 
1.2.  The mandate of DSIR includes promoti on of industrial research for indigenous 
technology promotion, development, utilizatio n and transfer. The allocation of business 
of the Department is as under:  
i. All matters concerning the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research;  
ii. All matters relating to National Research Development Corporation;  
iii. All matters relating to Central Electronics Limited; 
iv.  Registration and Recognition of R&D Units; 
v. Matters relating to UNCTAD and WIPO; 
vi.  National Register for Foreign Collaborations; and 
vii. Matters relating to creation of pool  for temporary placement of Indian 
Scientists and Technologists.  

2. ORGANISATIONAL SETUP 
2.1. The DSIR has two autonomous organiza tions viz Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research (CSIR) and Consultanc y Development Centre (CDC) and two public 
sector undertakings viz. National Research Developm ent Corporation (NRDC) and 
Central Electronics Limited (CEL). The De partment also provide s institutional host 
facilities to Asia Pacific Centre for Transfer of Technology (APCTT).  
3. MECHANISM TO MONITOR AND REVIEW THE ONGOING SCHEMES  
3.1 The Committee has been informed th at DSIR has developed monitoring and 
reviewing mechanisms both at external and inter-departmental levels. At the external 
level the department has been reviewing the progress of on-going schemes by involving 
an external agency or outside experts at th e beginning of every five year plan. At the 
beginning of XIth five year plan, DSIR entrusted a study to Indian Institute of  
Management, Bangalore to assess the impact of DSIR programmes in the Xth five year 
plan. Besides this, each scheme in the depa rtment has an inter-departmental Technical 
Advisory Committee which reviews the progr ess of on-going projects and recommends 
for new projects and programmes. The propos als for budgetary support are formulated 
keeping in view the requirement of funds under ongoing as well as new proposals.  
3.2 In the CSIR has refocused and repositio ned its R&D activities (of Eleventh Five 
Year Plan) responding to the Government dire ctions/ policy changes. For the purpose, 
activities of CSIR laboratori es have been regrouped in si x clusters viz. Biological 
Sciences, Chemical Sciences, Engineering Sciences, Physical Sciences, Information 
Sciences, and CSIR-800. The monitoring and review of the ongoing schemes/projects at 
CSIR is being carried out through: Internal Monitoring; and External Monitoring. Internal 
Monitoring is done at (i) Task Force level, ( ii) Cluster level, and (iii) Council of CSIR 
Clusters level. External Monitoring is done through (i ) Research Council of the 
respective CSIR laboratories/institutes, and (ii) Sectoral Monitoring Committee involving 
peers from Academia, Industrial Enterprises and other Technical Agencies. 
4. ELEVENTH  FIVE  YEAR  PLAN OUTLAY AND PROPOSALS 
4.1 The Committee has been informed that  the total budgetary allocation for the 
Department for Eleventh Five Year Plan  is Rs. 9000.00 crores. The various schemes 
undertaken by the Department and its constituents during the Five Year Plan are:  
(a) Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) schemes  
DSIR is implementing programmes towa rds technology promotion, development 
and utilization through Tec hnology Promotion, Developmen t and Utilization (TPDU) 
programmes. The components include Tech nology Development and Demonstration 
Programme (TDDP); Technopreneur Promo tion Programme (TePP); Technological 
Empowerment of Women and Implementation of Flagship Programmes. 
(b) Consultancy Development Centre (CDC)  
Several new programmes and schemes rela ting to development and promotion of 
consultancy profession have been planned. Th ese include creating a large pool of human 
resource for the consulting profession, intr oducing schemes for fellowship and internship 
for young professionals to opt consulting as a career option, launching scheme for 
capacity building of client or ganizations including setting up of Novel Assessment Units 
for Training, Innovation, Capacity Augm entation and Learning (NAUTICALs) in 
research institutions, including CSIR.  
(c) Central Electronics Limited (CEL)  
The capacity enhancement to manufactur e phased control modules (PCM) from 
30,000-40,000 to 70,000 per annum and creating ma nufacturing and test facilities for 
piezo generator will be implemented dur ing the plan period. The proposals for the 
development of dye-sensitized so lar cells and enhancing the e fficiency of the solar cells 

shall be taken up. The CEL also plans to expand PV manufacturing capacity to 100 MW 
in two phases viz. 25 MW by the year 2012 and then up to 100 MW.  
(d) National Research Development Corporation (NRDC)  
 The main objective of  NRDC is to commercialize the R& D results of publicly 
funded R& D institutions as well as to promote the growth of the indigenous technology. 
 (e) Council of Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR )  
CSIR is an autonomous orga nization of the Department and its schemes includes   
the National Laboratories, Na tional S&T Human Resource De velopment, Intellectual 
Property & Technology Mana gement, R&D Management Support, New Millennium 
Indian Technology Leadership Initiative, and Setting up Institute of Translational 
Research . 
4.2 The Committee has been informed that CSIR  during Xth  plan operated six 
schemes of which five, are continuing into XI Plan as well and the Infrastructure 
Refurbishing & Renovation (IRR) scheme has been discontinued in the X
th  Plan. Sixteen 
network projects under National Laboratory sche me were permitted to spillover into the 
XIth Plan. Thirteen projects have been completed while three projects are still continuing. 
The reason for spillover into XIth Plan is late  start of these projec ts as Standing Finance 
Committee (SFC) and Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) approvals took time. 
4.3 The Committee appreciates the achievemen ts made so far by the Department 
during the X th Five  Year Plan and hopes that the Department will strive towards 
continuing and strengthening its progra mme to support the small and medium 
industrial units to develop cutting edge tech nologies of high co mmercial value and  
intensify exports and at the same time de veloping technologies for the use of the 
common man. However, the Committee takes note of the fact that although six 
schemes initially operated by CSIR five are now continuing into XI th plan, while 
Infrastructure Refurbishing & Renovation (I RR) scheme has been discontinued in 
the XI th plan.  The Committee however noticed no significant reasons have been 
provided by DSIR for discontinuance of IRR Scheme.  Moreover sixteen network 
projects under National Laboratory scheme were permitted to spillover into the XIth 
plan.  The reasons quoted for such spillover is the late start of these projects as 
Standing Finance Committee (SFC) and Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) 
approvals took time.     
4.4 The Committee feels that non agreeability between Standing Finance 
Committee and Expenditure Finance Committee might have led to the late approval 
of sixteen network projects  under NLS for which these projects have been spilled 
over to XI
th  plan leading to delay in project implementation.  Committee apprehend 
that  disagreeability between SFC and EFC might have taken place due to the fact 
that there might be some major changes in  the project content in comparison to 
initial proposal.  The Committee therefore fe els that the revised cost estimates in 
respect of every scientific project should be made in such a manner that escalation 
in the cost of projects due to prevailing in flation at the revised estimate stage should 
not be exceeded more than 20 percent of the original cost estimate.  As per the 
opinion of the  Committee this can be achieved if there is no major changes 
proposed in the content of the project at  R.E. level, then only disagreeability 
between SFC and EFC could be avoided a nd project approvability may be granted 
without any delay. 
 

5. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION  
5.1. The Budgetary Estimates of the Department  of Scientific and Industrial Research 
for the year 2010-2011 is Rs. 2988.00 crores  with a Plan component of                    
Rs.1600.00 crores and Non-Plan compone nt of Rs.1388.00 crores as compared to a                          
B.E. allocation of Rs.2691.00 crores and R.E. allocation of Rs.2697.75 crores for the year 
2009-2010. 
5.2 The Committee enquired as to whether the funds allocated were sufficient to carry 
out the activities of the Depa rtment. In reply, the department stated that the projected 
demand of the department for 2010-2011 was Rs. 4150.98 crore with a component of                             
Rs. 2615.00 crore for Plan and Rs. 1535.98 crore for Non-plan allocation. However, the 
department has been allotted Rs . 2988.00 crore only, with Rs.1600.00 crore for Plan and                         
Rs. 1388.00 crore for Non-Plan allo cation. The department stated  that while this will be 
sufficient, in a limited way, to support ongo ing activities under various schemes in the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan, the non-plan compon ent might be constrained due to low level 
of funding against increased requirem ent on account of Sixth Pay Commission 
recommendations. Apart from that there is a continuous increase in pensionary liability 
due to large number of pensioners in CSIR . The maintenance cost of infrastructure 
created during Xth Plan also needs additiona l Non-Plan budgetary support. The reduced 
Plan allocation may affect the  ambitious me ga projects of the C ouncil of Scientific & 
Industrial Research such as ‘Open Source Drug Discovery’ which has just been initiated, 
the ‘Solar Mission’, ‘Energy Efficiency Mi ssion’, ‘Micromachines & Robotics’, and the 
‘CSIR-800’ will also be affected under th e respective R&D domains of ‘Affordable 
Healthcare’, ‘Sustainable Energy’, ‘Chemistry & Environment and Smart & Functional 
Materials’, ‘Engineering Structures and Design & Electronics’, and ‘Societal Mission’.  
5.3 In view of the shortfall th e other schemes/projects that  are likely to be affected 
under the following broad heads include:  
TPDU:Technology Development an d Demonstration Programme, 
Technopreneur Promotion Programme.  
CDC:   Studies on Science & Technology Proposals for XII five year plan.  
NRDC: Funding for promoting devel opment of new generation products, 
Promotion of Export of Technol ogy, Basic Engineering Design 
Packages and Technology Development Program for Priority Projects.  
CEL: Development of Dye-sensitized Solar Cells  
The Department also informed that th e additional funds would be required under 
Technology Development and Demonstration Programme (TPDU), Central Electronics 
Limited(CEL) and National Lab schemes of CSIR for which demand would be made at 
RE stage. For CDC, the Department will re-p rioritize allocation within various heads to 
initiate work and complete the activiti es in the following year. For NRDC, the 
Department will take important activities by increasing its comm ercial operations and 
defer some of the planned activities to next year. For CEL, the Department will request 
for additional funds at R.E. stage and de fer project on developm ent of Dye-sensitized 
Solar Cells to next year.  
5.4 The Department also informed  that at the beginning of XI
th F i v e  Y e a r  P l a n ,  
around 225 projects under National Laboratories scheme were formulated for CSIR. 
However due to reduced allocation, Depart ment has prioritized  its projects for 
implementation. As a first priority 91 projects have been taken up for implementation 
during the plan period. The remaining project s would be taken up for implementation as 
and when sufficient funds are made available to the Department. 
5.5 The Committee notes with serious co ncern that there has been a drastic 
reduction in the Plan allocation for the department, amounting to Rs.1015.00 crores.   

Moreover the allocation for DSIR during 2009-10 was slashed from Rs. 58.50 crore 
at BE stage to Rs. 31.31 crore at RE stage.  Due to this reduction, the Department 
will need to re-prioritize allocation within  various heads to initiate work and will 
even have to defer some of the activities planned for that year to next year due to 
paucity of funds.  
5.6 The Committee also notes with seri ous concern the significant difference 
between the demand projected by the De partment and the amount actually 
allocated. The Committee is of the opinion th at investment in scientific research is a 
step towards ensuring the development of the country. Therefore at least the 
scientific Departments  should not be depriv ed of funds as it would adversely affect 
research and development which is crucial for the development of the nation. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the well thought out projected demand of 
scientific departments should be ho noured and accepted by the Planning 
Commission, specially in view of the fact that scientific research is a capital intensive 
field. 
5.7 The  Committee observes that though the Department has been making an 
outstanding contribution towards the res earch and development in the various 
sectors of science & technol ogy and has played a pivotal ro le in the progress of the 
country, yet the acknowledgement of its acti vities has been  utterly disappointing  
and  its activities are not popular as co mpared to those of the other scientific 
departments. The Committee feels that this  is one of the root causes for the 
reduction of the budgetary allocation by  the Planning Commission. The Committee 
therefore recommends that the Department should have a comprehensive plan and 
a separate budget for populariz ing its technologies and shou ld double its efforts to 
communicate its activities and market it s products to the Government and the 
private sector both through audio-visual an d print media in a more effective way.  
In this direction the initiative of Department to have a CSIR logo on all the products 
using CSIR technology should be vigor ously pursued. The Planning Commission 
should also on its part encourage the sc ientific departments with adequate fund 
allocation in keeping with their proposed allocations so that most of the programme 
may not be spilled over to the future years and could be completed within the 
targeted time frame. 
6. PROGRAMMES OF THE DEPART MENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND 
INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH 
6.1 Technology Promotion, Development and Utilisation (TPDU) Programme 
The Department of Scientific and Indus trial Research operates a plan scheme 
called the ‘Technology Promotion, Developm ent and Utilization(TPDU) Programme’. 
The specific components of the scheme are: 
 Industrial R&D Promotion Programme; 
 Technology Development and Demonstration Programme; 
 Technopreneur Promotion Programme; 
 Technology Management Programme; 
 International Technology Transfer Programme;  
 Consultancy Promotion Programme; 
 Technology Information Facilitation Programme; 
 Technology Development and Utilization Programme for Women; 
 IT& e-Goverance; and 
 Asian and Pacific Centre for Transfer of Technology  

6.2 The details of the specific compon ents of the ‘Technology Promotion, 
Development and Utilization (TPDU) Programme scheme are as under : 
6.2.1 Industrial R&D Promotion Programme 
DSIR is the nodal Department for granti ng recognition to in-house Research and 
Development centres. The programme deals with  all activities relating to recognition of 
in-house R&D units in industry and non-commer cial Scientific and Industrial Research 
Organisations, fiscal incentives and other m echanisms and initiatives towards supporting 
and encouraging R&D efforts of industry. In centives and support measures provided 
under the scheme contribute a great deal in enhancing the R&D expenditure by 
recognized in-house R&D units of industry. 
6.2.2 Technology Development and Demonstration Programme  
 The programme aims at catalyzing and supporting activities relating to technology 
absorption, adaptation and demonstration including capital goods development, involving 
industry and R&D organizations . Under the scheme, projects for absorption and                              
up-gradation of imported technology as well  as development and demonstration of new 
and improved technologies are supported.  While DSIR support has been catalytic and 
partial, bulk of the financia l contribution in such projects have been from the industry. 
These projects cover products and processes in various important industries such as 
metallurgy, electrical, electronics, instrumentation, mechanical engineering, earth moving 
and industrial machinery, chemicals and explosives.  
6.2.3 Technopreneur Promotion Programme  
The programme aims to tap the vast innova tive potential of the citizens of India. 
The activities under TePP include providing fina ncial support to individual innovators 
having original ideas and convert them into working models, prototypes, etc.  
6.2.4 Technology Management Programme 
The programme aims to enhance knowledge and skills in the efficient 
management and transfer of technology. It s activities effectiv ely supplement other 
programmes/activities of the Department in th e attainment of technological excellence. 
Specific programmes have been targeted towards enhancing technology management 
capability in industry, R&D institutions, acad emic institutes and other establishments. 
This is helping the promotion and eff ective utilization of emerging technology 
management methodologies, and in bringing about better indust ry-institute inter-linkages 
through networking of industrial units with different academ ic institutions and State 
bodies in various States.   
6.2.5 International Technology Transfer Programme 
The Programme aims to promote intern ational technology transfer and trade 
including exports of technologies, projects, services and hi-tech products. A variety of 
activities have been undertaken under the programme to cata lyze technology transfer and 
trade, involving Indian industries, R&D es tablishments, institutions and consultancy 
organisations. These have ranged from Reports, Compendiums and Newsletters on 
technology export potential, Workshops a nd Awareness-cum-Training Programmes, 
Technology Exhibitions, etc.  
6.2.6 Consultancy Promotion Programme 
The main objective of Consultancy Prom otion Programme is to promote and 
strengthen consultancy capabilities for domestic use and export requirements. It also aims 
to develop sector specific consultancy capabilities and provide door step consultancy 
services to Small and Medium Enterprises.   
6.2.7 Technology Information Facilitation Programme 
Technology Information Facilitation Pr ogramme has been included under the 
TPDU Programmes to provide a strong back up support of information services.  The 

projects under TIFP aim at developing appropr iate indigenous information capacities to 
support R&D activities, production of local content and capture of indigenous knowledge 
base, promotion of information and knowledge  networking thus f acilitating flow and 
sharing of information resources.   
6.2.8 Technology Development and Utili zation Programme for Women  
The programme is aimed to meet specifi c needs of the women and to enhance 
their contribution towards technology capability building.   
6.2.9 e-Governance in DSIR 
The programme has been designed to accelerate e-Governance through 
Information Technology at all le vels of Government to impr ove efficiency, transparency 
and accountability.  
6.2.10 Asian and Pacific Centre for Transfer of Technology 
The programme promotes in ternational cooper ation in the areas of industrial 
R&D, innovations and technology developm ent and transfer. Activities of APCTT 
include: promotion of nationa l innovation systems and green  grass-roots innovations and 
networking and the sharing of experiences relating to techno logy; developing portals for 
technology transfer and for sharing technology information and delivering business 
support information with a focus on Small & Medium Enterprises (SMEs) and to make a 
network on Asia-Pacific Traditional Medicine and Herbal Technology Network. 
6.3  On being enquired about the allocat ion to Technology Promotion, Development 
and Utilisation (TPDU)Programme, which in  2009-2010 stood at Rs. 37.50 crores at  
B.E. stage and was decreased to Rs 12.50 crores at R.E. stages and has b een increased to                             
Rs. 32.00 crores in B.E. 2010-2011. The department clarified that the TPDU allocation in 
2009-2010 was drastically cut at the RE stage because of meager spending till October, 
2009 but thereafter, activities have picked up and department could have spent higher 
amounts, if the funds were available. Furthe r, during 2010-2011 in vi ew of initiation and 
revision of some TPDU programmes, increased allocation is required.  
6.4 The Department was successful in achievi ng the physical targets of X five year 
plan. However, there were shortfalls in achieving the financial targets under the TPDU 
Programme. While the X Plan outlay for TPDU Programme was Rs. 99.00 crore, the 
actual expenditure was Rs. 67.74 crore. One r eason for this has been dearth of good 
proposals, in spite of publicity through press, media and promotional workshops. Another 
reason has been non-receipt of u tilization certificates from th e beneficiaries in the first 
half of the financial year, in spite of rigorous follow-up, thereby leading to slashing of the 
budget at the RE stage. 
6.5 The Committee notes with serious concern that the TPDU allocation for the             
2009-2010 was drastically reduced to Rs. 12.50 cro res at the R.E. stage, which is less 
than half of the initial allocation of  Rs.37.50 crores at the B.E. stage, as the 
Department was unable to ensure proper ut ilisation of the funds allocated till 
October, 2009.   
6.6 The Committee has also noticed that wh ile the department was successful in 
achieving the physical targets of Xth five year plan, however there were shortfalls in 
achieving the financial targets under th e TPDU Programme for which initially 
under Xth plan Rs. 99.00 crore was allocated out of which only Rs. 67.74 crore was 
spent and Rs. 31.26 crore remain unspent.  The reason quoted by DSIR for such 
shortfall in actual expenditure under TPDU programme was inadequate publicity of 
the programme through printed and tale media, dearth of good proposals received 
for the programme and non-receip t of utilization certificat es from the beneficiaries 
of the  programme in spite of rigorous follow-up.  By going through the entire 
explanation given by the department about TPDU programme, the committee feels 

that the monitoring of the programme is no t at all satisfactory on the part of the 
department and that is why the utilization certificate could not have been obtained 
from the beneficiaries in spite of the  strict follow up of TPDP.  The Committee 
therefore is of the opinion that the monito ring mechanism of the projects adopted 
by the department contains deficiencies at every stage which needs to be strengthen   
and spilling over of projects to future plan  period should be avoided as far as 
possible so that strategic projects could be completed within  a reasonable time 
frame. The Committee feels that it is a serious lacunae on the part of the 
Department as regards the proper manage ment and utilization of funds allocated 
for the TPDU.  
6.7 The Committee feels  that the various  programmes and activities under the 
TPDU are essential for the nation as it promotes industrial research & development, 
commercialization and export of indigenous technologies, acquisition of cutting edge 
technologies from abroad, promotion of co nsultancy capabilities and  also ensures 
participation of both public and private sectors in technology development efforts. 
Therefore the Committee strongly recomm ends that the Department should 
formulate a comprehensive plan and take follow-up measures to overcome 
procedural problems such as non-receipt of utilization cert ificates from the 
beneficiaries, for optimal utilization of  funds for the scheme in future. The 
Department should also ensure proper pub licity of the TPDU schemes through the 
print and audio-visual media to draw more proposals for the schemes. 
GLOBAL KNOWLEDGE PARTNERSHIP  
6.8 The Commitee has been informed th at Under the International Technology 
Transfer Programme, the ‘Global Knowledge  Partnerships’ of the Department for 
promotion of Technology Transfer at an in ternational level is  going on with four 
countries viz. Germany, Japan, France and USA. The programme requires equal 
investments by the partners. Refering to a particular programme called the ‘Green 
Chemistry’ the Committee was informed that the National Chemical Laboratory has tied 
up with the Max Planck Group, Germany to  reduce toxic by-pro ducts of cemical 
industries, while in another partnership with  Japan a combination of cancer drugs in low 
concentration is being experimented upon to reduce the toxicity of the cancer drugs. 
6.9 The  Committee is of the opinion that  such ‘Global Knowledge Partnerships’ 
are the need of the hour, where both the co nstituent partners stand to benefit from 
each others competence. Such programmes besides building up the confidence of 
our researchers would also be economically beneficial for the country as the 
investments costs of the research programme s are shared by both the partnering 
countries. The Committee the refore recommends that such programmes should be 
further intensified with more partnerships  particularly with South East Asian 
Countries  like Japan, Korea, China etc.  apart from other  scientifically advanced 
countries of Europe and strengthened with more funds allocation. 
6.10 The Committee is glad to learn that CSIR had planned two mega projects 
and specific programmes in R&D domain su ch as Chemistry and Environment and 
Smart and Functional Materials and Engineering Structures/Design and 
Electronics.  Within these programmes the green Chemistry mission  as mentioned 
in    para 6.7 above may be  encouraged in view of the global warming and climate 
changes.   The Committee feels that for de veloping green chemistry technology in 
addition to collaboration with Max planck Group, Germany, collaboration with 
America, France and Britain should also be  encouraged  in the field so that the 
global leaders in the technology could co ntribute to their maximum in developing 
the green chemistry in the country in the wake of persistent climate change  

7 AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS 
 The  Autonomous institutions include the Council of Scie ntific & Industrial 
Research(CSIR) and the Consultancy Development Centre(CDC). 
7.1 Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) 
The  CSIR is implementing six schemes, which are as follows: 
i) National Laboratories, 
ii) National S&T Human Resource Development 
iii) Intellectual Property & Technology Management, 
iv) R&D Management Support, 
v) New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative, and  
vi) Setting up of Translational Research Institute 
7.2 National Laboratories 
 The National Laboratories Scheme is operated through 37 National Laboratories 
and 38 field Centres. During the 11th Plan the research programmes/projects/activities  of 
the laboratories have been categorized into  the following major socio-economic sectors 
viz. Aerospace Science & Engineering; Agro, Food Processing & Nutrition Technology; 
Biology& Biotechnology; Chem ical Science & Technology; Earth System Science; 
Ecology & Environment; Sustainable Energy; El ectronics, Photonics & Instrumentation; 
Engineering Materials, Mining/Mineral s& Manufacturing Technology; Affordable 
Healthcare; Housing, Road &Construction; Information Technology; Resources & 
Products; Leather; Meteorology; Rural Development and Water Resources & 
Technology. The CSIR is also striving towards creating a Sc ientists’ Pool with the  
objective of promoting and creating a p ool of qualified, highly specialized 
scientists/engineers and technologists in R&D in all disciplines of S&T in the country. 
7.3     The Department has informed the Committee that for National Laboratories the 
allocation has been increased from Rs.1807.00 crores at B.E. in 2009-2010 to                       
Rs. 1877.30 crores in R.E. 2009-2010 and then again increased to Rs.2120.00 crores in              
B.E. 2010-2011. Explaining the reasons for the increase the department explained that 
under the Plan allocation of the National Laboratories Scheme, out of 94 priority projects 
89 projects were ongoing and two new projects were initiated during 2009-2010. 
Majority of them have a projection of enhanced activitie s in the fourth year of the              
XIth Five year Plan. In  addition, some other priority pr ojects have been planned to be 
initiated during 2010-2011. Under Non Plan, a dditional funds are required for meeting 
the requirement of enhanced salary and pension budget due to implementation of Sixth 
Pay Commission recommendations.  
7.4 The Committee appreciates the fact th at under the XIth Five Year Plan 
allocation of the National Laboratories  Scheme, 89 projects out of 94 sanctioned 
priority projects have been started a nd two new projects were initiated during  
2009-2010. The Committee hopes that the enha nced activities for the priority 
projects which have been projected during th e fourth year of the XIth Five year 
Plan would be completed and the two ne w projects would be initiated as per 
schedule.  
7.5 The Committee also enquired as to wh ether the Department was exploring the 
issue of opening National Laboratories in the st ates where there are no such laboratories, 
specially in the state of Bi har and in Andhra Pradesh. The Department stated that the 
proposal of opening a laboratory has been di scussed in the recently held State Council 
meeting and there are also proposals for the state of Sikkim and Chattisgarh which lack 
such laboratories. Requirement of land is al so being considered for setting up a Marine 
Research Laboratory in Vishakhapatnam. 
 

7.6 The Committee recommends that the ex pansion of National Laboratories 
should be extended to all the states of the country, with at least one laboratory in 
each state so that there is equitable scie ntific progress in each state. The Committee 
also desires that comprehensive plans for setting of the National Laboratory  in 
states which lack such facility may be forwarded to the state governments, for 
preferential allotment of land.    
7.7 The Committee is of the view that th e investment in science can only be 
fruitful in case its benefi ts reaches the common man. Pr esently, the Committee feels 
that though the National Laboratories are doing a lot of ingenious work as regards  
research and development in various scientific spheres  but most of its achievements 
are not reaching the common man. In fact the Committee feels that the Department 
of Scientific and Industrial Research can justify an increase in the Budgetary 
allocation only if substantial benefits reach the common man. The Committee 
therefore recommends that the department  should focus towards transfer of 
technologies from the National Laboratories to the society particularly strategic 
areas to give benefit to the user.   
7.8 ‘CSIR-800’Programme 
The Committee has been informed that a new programme namely,                         
‘CSIR-800’has been started by the department  with the mission of increasing the daily 
per capita income by Rs. 15.00 of 800 million peopl e of India said to be subsisting in the 
bottom half of the pyramid.  The focus areas are ‘affordable health’, ‘sustainable energy’, 
‘waste to wealth’, ‘potable water’, low-co st housing’, and ‘empowering masses’, In this 
new endeavour, CSIR has launched ‘Soleckshaw ’, an optimally designed, pedal-operated 
motor-assisted, zero carbon emission urban transpor t vehicle. It is expected to have four 
major societal effects viz. conservation of  natural petroleum resources, zero pollution , 
increased self-employment of  the poor, enha ncing the dignity of of human labour and 
cutting down the drudgery and exhaustion of pedaling traditional rickshaws. 
7.9 The Committee is of the opinion that since its inception, CSIR has played a 
very crucial role in the development of industrial technologies and research and 
development in various scientific areas. A time has come when it should increase its 
societal role and generate technologies fo r the common and deprived masses. In this 
direction the Department has taken a pro- active step towards facilitating a  
socialistic, yet commercially viable business model linked to the economic prosperity 
of a large and deprived masses throug h its CSIR-800 programme. The Committee 
therefore recommends that such progra mmes should be pursued vigorously and 
adequately funded so that the objectives of the programme are attained. 
7.10 Open Source Drug Discovery (OSDD) Programme 
 The Committee has been  informed that CSIR has conceptualized and launched an 
‘Open Source Drug Discovery (OSDD) progra mme’ during XI Five Year Plan, with a 
vision to provide affordable healthcare to the developing world. Initially focused at 
Tuberculosis, this global initi ative is a CSIR led ‘Team India’ consortium based on the 
principles of ‘Collaborate, Share and Di scover’. Open to global participation, OSDD 
programme represents a viable alternative m odel of drug discovery for neglected tropical 
infectious diseases, as it enables expansion of resources by allowing open access to the 
participants on one hand and incentivises contribution to the cooperative efforts on the 
other hand.  Presently there are more th an 2500 contributors, the best minds can 
collaborate and collectively endeavour to so lve the complex problems associated with 
discovering novel therapies for neglected tropi cal diseases like Malaria, Tuberculosis, 
Leishmaniasis, etc.  

7.11 The Committee is aware that even in this age of medical advancement, there 
are a lot of fatalities in our country due to common tropical diseases like Malaria, 
Tuberculosis etc. due to absence of pr oper medication. The Committee therefore 
feels that the department should inve st substantially in the research and 
development and devise innovative method s for inventing new drugs. In this 
direction, the ‘Open drug Discovery Programme’ is an innovative method wherein  
the researchers can collectively utilize thei r knowledge base for the discovery of a 
drugs. This will also bring down the cost involved in the research and development 
process. The Committee therefore strongly recommends that the Department should 
give adequate budgetary support to this innovative programme.   
8. INITIATIVES BY THE  DEPARTMENT 
8.1  Mega Project on Solar Energy 
The Committee desired to know the contri bution made by the Department in the 
field of Solar energy. The Department has stat ed that it has initiated a ‘Mega Project on 
Solar Energy’ as Solar Energy, both thr ough Photovoltaics (PV) and Solar Thermal 
routes present tremendous opportunity for Indi a.  CSIR had done pioneering work in this 
area during the 1970s but since then the focu s shifted due to absence of appropriate 
policies of the Government. The Department through its P ublic Sector Undertaking, 
namely, Central Electronics Limited, has made  immense contributions in the field of 
Solar Photovoltaics. CSIR is presently initi ating a mega project on Solar Energy  in 
partnership with Network Institute for Sustai nable Energy (NISE) and Research Institute 
of Sustainable Energy (RISE) under Jawahar Lal Nehru Solar Mission.  
8.2 The Committee is of the opinion that I ndia being a tropical country has a lot 
of potential in the field of solar ener gy and appreciates the initiative of the 
Department in starting the Mega Project fo r large scale utilization of solar energy 
The Committee feels that the Department  should explore the possibilities of 
exploiting more and more  solar energy and in the long run it should aim at 
replacing the conventional source of energy with solar energy more so because 
conventional source of energy adds to the environmental pollution and global 
warming.  Since the setting up of a sola r power plant is capital intensive the 
Committee recommends that the Department should be adequately funded to enable  
it to attain its objective.  
8.3 Treatment for Diabetes 
 The Committee raised the specific issue of treatment of  Diabetes and desired to 
know the efforts the Department has taken to treat the disease which is afflicting a large 
section of the population of the country. The Department has st ated that it has identified 
the gene contribution of the Indian popula tion which causes Diabetes genetically. The 
Department also stated that a small diagnostic centre in co llaboration with the a private 
diagnostic company is being floated, where DSIR will provide the technology and also 
train the technicians to do the necessary tests after collecting blood samples. The 
Department will also create a  genomic diagnostic company of the CSIR to address the 
problem The technology used will reduce the cost of detection. The Department also 
informed that the multinational companies are not favouring it as it would reduce their 
profits. 
8.4 The Committee is of the view that the Department should invest substantially 
in establishing  technologies for the treatm ent of Diabetes which is afflicting a large 
portion of the Indian population regardle ss of age and also decreasing their work 
potential. The Committee feels that in case  the multinational companies are not in 
its favour, the Department can approach the Government aided hospitals, train 

their technichians and transfer the technol ogy, so that the poor  masses can avail of 
the cheaper alternative for the diagnosis of this disease. 
8.5 Development of Cheaper Computers 
   The Committee pointed out the fact th at the people are going in for Chinese  
made computers though the indigenous t echnology to produce cheap computers is 
available with the DSIR. The Department ha s stated that the CSIR has developed a 
simple computer for Rs 10,000/- only, but Go vernment departments/ private sector was 
not interested in investing cap ital for the project for larg e scale manufacture. However, 
the Department was ultimately able to sell the technology to Malaysia and is being 
marketed in Brazil and Malayasia. Further, the Chinese product is  popular because their 
Government takes the initia tive to popularize such products  internationally by giving 
subsidies so that the cost is reduced  and a huge market is created, while there is no such 
initiative on the part of our government. 
8.6 The Committee takes serious note of the fa ct that there is a lack of initiative 
on the part of the Government to promot e indigineous products, which is evident 
from the fact that none of the Government Departments or companies in the Private 
Sector were interested in the indigenous computer technology,  though it has been 
acknowledged internationally i.e. by Ma layasia and Brazil.  The Committee feels 
that injustice is being meted out to th e Indian scientists who developed the 
technology and will inevitably lower their morale and dissuade them from making 
such inventions in future. The Committee recommends that the Government should 
take the initiative to popularize such indigenous technologies and remove the 
bureaucratic hurdles which prevents such  innovative inventions from becoming 
realities and internationally competitive.   
9. SCHEMES, SCHOLARSHIPS AND FELLOWSHIPS 
9.1 In the sphere of Human Resource De velopment the CSIR has been rendering 
service in all the the vital areas of science and technology. In the eleventh plan CSIR is 
executing following programmes: 
CSIR Programme on Youth for Leadership  in Science (CPYLS); Technological 
Entrepreneurship Programme for Res earch Scholars; Trans Disciplinary 
FellowshipScheme; Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Fellowship Scheme (SPMF); Faculty 
training and motivation and adoption of sc hools and colleges by CSIR laboratories; 
Research Fellowships in Basic Sciences & Interdisciplinary areas; Conducting Junior 
Research Fellowship(JRF) & National Eligibility Test(NET); GATE qualified Junior 
Research Fellowship(JRF-GATE) Scheme; Adjunct / Visiting Scientist Scheme for CSIR 
Labs; CSIR – National Innovation Fellowship; Innovation Fellowship Scheme; Setting up 
of Centres for Knowledge / Innovation / R&D / Technology Management; Training 
program on Knowledge and R & D Managemen t; Special assistance scheme to promote 
research  in universities; Floating Faculty  Scheme; Project Interns Award Schemes for 
CSIR Labs; Research Schemes in Emerging, Critical & Thrust Areas. 
 
9.2 The Committee has been informed that  the allocation for Research Schemes, 
Scholarships and Fellowships was decreased from Rs. 195.00 cr ores at B.E stage to                 
Rs 173.00 crores at R.E. stage in 2009-2010 and for B.E. 2010-2011 it has been increased 
to Rs. 185.00 crores. Explaining the reasons for the fluctuating trend in allocation the 
department explained that the budget estimates  (BE) for Research Schemes, Scholarships 
and Fellowships during a financial year are made keeping in view the expected number of 
students joining/completing the fellowships a nd numbers of research projects sanctioned, 
renewed and their cost. The allocations were  revised at the RE stage in 2009-2010 based 
on the expenditure incurred till date and the bills likely to be received from the grantee   

institutions during the financial year. Since it is difficult to pr edict how many students 
will actually be availing the fellowships in a year, the budget is normally prepared based 
on the past trends of joining and actual number of fellows completing their tenure. 
Furthermore, joining of JRF-NET qualified fellows at different times of the year may also 
have its bearing on actual e xpenditure incurred. Th e department also stated that a new 
programme namely,CSIR Nehru Science Po stdoctoral Fellowship Scheme has been 
started. 
9.3 The Department has also informed the Committee about the following satistics 
regarding the Research Schemes, fellowships  and Scholarships gran ted during the last 
three years: 
 
S.No  Particulars  2006-07  2007-08  2008-09  
1  Research 
Fellowships 
(JRF/SRF/SPMF)/ 
Research 
Associateships 
(SRF-Ext/RA/SRA)  
 
 
2055  
 
 
3155  
 
 
4652  
2  Research Scheme 
and Emeritus 
Scientists Scheme  
 
 
250  
 
 
326  
 
 
261  
 9.4 The Committee notes that while the Research Fellowships & Research 
Associateships schemes has shown an increasing trend; the Research Scheme and 
Emeritus Scientists Scheme has decreased in  the year 2008-2009 as compared to the 
the year 2007-2008. The Committee fails to understand the reasons for the 
decreasing trend and expects that the decreasing trend would be reversed in future. 
9.5 The Committee notes that there has been  an increase of a meager amount of 
Rs. 12.00 crores only in the  B.E. 2010- 2011 as compared to the R.E. 2009-2010 and 
expresses concern over the negative trend in fund allocation towards  Research 
Schemes, fellowships and Scholarships. The Committee is of the opinion that 
creating a bank of well-trained researchers is of paramount importance for the 
promotion of the diverse disciplines of science & technology in the country and 
would ultimately help in the nation building process and therefore the budgetary 
support too is necessary to create such  a bank. The Committee hopes that the 
sufficient funds would be allotted for this purpose as there is an urgent need to 
encourage scientific research in universities / academic/ scientific/ engineering 
institutions and attract the brightest you ng persons to pursue their career  in 
Science and Technology.  
10. TECHNOLOGICAL  EMPOWERMENT OF WOMEN 
10.1 The Committee took up the issue of  technological empowerment of women, 
which is one of the objectives of the Department and noted th at its performance has been 
quite disappointing and only 18% of the total scientists of the CSIR are women. Further, 
most of the women scientists are from th e elite and urban background implying that only 
these women are able to choose science as a career. The Department clarified that the 
percentage seems to be low but as compared to other scientific institutions such as the 
Indian Institutes of Technology( 4%), the Indian Institute of  Science(5%), CSIR has the 
highest percentage of women. The Department ha s also stated that it is trying to increase 
it upto 50%. As regards the background of wome n scientists, the Depa rtment has  stated 
that the section of women from poor backgr ound is progressively increasing in the CSIR. 

Women are being encouraged to join with sc hemes such as creches in every laboratory, 
flexible timings etc. 
10.2 The Committee is of the view that the country can progress only through 
social upliftment and the same can only be achieved by empowering the women with 
technological knowledge and ensuring their contribution in the field of science and 
also feels that a major limit ation for the girls to pursue science courses in the rural 
areas is the unavailability of these cour ses there. The Committee recommends  that 
the Government should promote science e ducation in rural areas and make special 
efforts to popularize it, specially amon g women. The Committee also recommends 
that an environment favourable to  women should be created in the laboratories to 
encourage them to join. Successful women sc ientists should be encouraged to reach 
out to women, specially from the rural area s to enthuse and enlighten girl students 
about the opportunities available in the scientific areas.  
11. CAREER PROSPECTS OF SCIENTISTS  
 On being enquired by the  Committee regarding the  career and promotional 
prospects of scientists in the CSIR laboratories, the Department has stated that presently a 
scientist is subjected to too many assessment stages for promotion, unlike other scientific 
institutions like IITs where there are compar atively less stages. Further sometimes the 
assessments itself are also delayed, which adds  to the frustration amongst the scientists. 
Steps have been initiated to bring the assessments upto date  which have yielded positive 
results. 
11.1   The Committee feels that if science in  India has to progre ss, the scientists 
have to be respected and provided prop er incentives through faster promotional 
avenues.  The Committee feels that burea ucratic hurdles such as delay in 
performance assessment should be strictly avoided to attract the best possible talent 
to join the organization. The Committee also recommends that the Department 
should take up the issue regarding improve ment in the pay scales of scientists 
vigorously with the government to ensure best possible career prospects for them.  
12. INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY & TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT 
12.1 The Committee has been informed that the CSIR under the XIth Five Year Plan 
will meet the challenges of Intellectual Prope rty Rights (IPR) by selecting Public–Private 
partnerships (PPPs) & Research  & Development Projects. In  addition, continued efforts 
will be made to promote IPR through patent awareness and human resource development, 
patent acquisition portfolio, IP analysis as tool, prom oting techno-prenuership, and 
support to industry for innovation. The programme s proposed for the Eleventh Five Year 
Plan are listed below: 
 Filing, capturing, prosecution and ma intaining of IPR for CSIR R&D 
outputs; 
 Valuation and valorization of patent and IP portfolios; 
 Surveillance for infringement and enforcement of IPR; 
 Human Resource in IP cells of CSIR laboratories; and 
 Modernization of computing, communi cation and related facilities and 
infrastructure. 
12.2 The Department has informed that th e allocation for Intellectual Property & 
Technology Management has been decreased from Rs. 40.00 crores in B.E. and R.E. 
2009-2010 to Rs. 30.00 crores in B.E. 2010-2011. Stating the reasons, the department 
explained that the allocation for Intell ectual Property & Technology Management has 
been revised to Rs. 30.00 crores in view of th e fact that the filing of patent abroad has 
been restricted to commercially and strategica lly important inventions. In case there is 
any further requirement of budget, it will be reviewed during R.E. stage 2010-2011. The 

department also stated that the strategy of CSIR during the year 2009 -10  was to create 
greater awareness among CSIR la boratories in IPR and in the Eleventh Plan the strategy 
is focusing on to planned patenting.  
12.3 The Committee also enquired from the Depa rtment the reasons for the fact that  
despite a large number of patents application pending with DSIR, their 
conversion/development into workable tec hnology has been comparatively less. The 
Department has explained that  Patents are normally filed at the conceptual/ proof of 
concept stage, whereas the technology deve lopment is a complex and time consuming 
effort thereafter involves substantial investment in development activities. In case of drug 
development, for example, patents are filed at  initial stage when activity is established, 
lot of R&D goes thereafter before it reaches to clinical trial stage and the complete 
development of a drug involves an expens e of about one billion dollars. However, 
depending upon the nature of technology a nd field of application, development 
expenditure may vary. Therefore, Patents cannot  be construed as complete technologies. 
Worldwide, only about 3% to 4% patents are commercialized whereas  the CSIR’s patent 
utilization rate was comparatively higher at  8.67%. Further, CSIR has taken number of 
steps for creation of some features for an enabling ecosystem favorable for development 
and utilization of patentable products and pr ocesses. Some of the steps include equity 
partnership with IP devel opers and technology led manuf acturing firms & governmental 
support for such development efforts. 
12.4 The Committee appreciates the CSIR’s  patent utilization rate of 8.67% 
compared to worldwide statistics, but is st ill of the opinion th at due to lack of 
knowledge about Intellectual Property amon gst the researchers and a lack of an 
appropriate mechanism for transfer of the Intellectual Property a lot of research 
outcomes in universities, academic and res earch institutions, which hold potential 
for public good does not reach the i ndustry or the public and instead are 
languishing in the laboratories.  In some cases there has also  been delay in filing of 
patents specially as regards to our traditional knowledge and processes, on the part 
of our scientific institutions and other co untries have taken patents on the products 
and processes which had been traditiona lly used in our country for ages. The 
Committee therefore recomme nds that the Department should increase its focus 
towards the awareness of Intellectual Pr operty issues so that our traditional 
knowledge is well protected and also make  sincere efforts for optimal transfer and 
utilization of Intellectual Property from research institution to industry . 
13.  NEW MILLENNIUM INDIAN TECHNOLOGY LEADERSHIP 
INITIATIVE(NMITLI)  
13.1 The New Millennium Indian Technol ogy Leadership Initi ative (NMITLI) is 
viewed today as a benchmark of Public Pr ivate Partnership Schemes (PPP schemes) 
which is being emulated by various othe r government departments. The partners 
especially from the industry, were of the vi ew that industries which partnered NMITLI 
projects have highly benefited not only in terms of the hard object ives and achievements 
in the project wherein they participated but also in terms of other associated gains such as 
high quality technical inputs etc.   As India is entering in to a new era of R&D, more such 
newer approaches of innovation development need to be evolved and experimented.   
13.2  
 The Committee has been informed that the allocations made for 'New 
Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative (NMITLI), has been decreased from                       
Rs.70.00 crores at B.E. to Rs. 50.00crores at  R.E. stage in 2009-2010 and then again 
increased to Rs. 75.00 crores in B.E. 2010-2011. The Department has explained that the 
development of projects under NMITLI Sche me is initiated in the beginning of a 
particular financial year and it takes about  6 to 8 months for screening, selection, 

brainstorming and development of projects  and another 2 to 3 months for approval 
through High Powered Committee (HPC) and the competent authority of CSIR and 
thereafter new projects are gene rally launched in the last quarter of financial year. The 
Ministry of Finance had reduced the budget allocation at R.E.  stage based on progressive 
expenditure which is low in the first few qua rters. The allocation was increased at B.E. 
stage depending upon the future requirements.  
13.3 Informing the Committee of the successes achieved under the NMITLI Scheme, 
the department stated that it is developi ng three health care products                              
viz. a new Tuberculosis molecule, a bio-therapeutic anti-b acterial molecule and a                 
anti-psoriasis(a skin disease) formulation. Se veral world class softwares in the area of 
Bio-informatics and monsoon prediction have been de veloped and are being marketed.          
A simple office computer and its varian ts costing around Rs.10,000/- have also been 
developed and are being marketed. An amb itious ‘bio-refinery concept’ based on 
sugarcane with the objective of substituti ng petroleum products as a base for many 
industrial chemicals is underway. NMITLI has embarked upon environment friendly 
bioprocesses for eliminating pollution from  tanneries wherein a large amounts of 
pollution causing industrial chemicals are used.  
13.4 The Committee expresses satisfaction  at the achievements of the New 
Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative (NMITLI)   Scheme which 
seeks to encourage innovation centered scie ntific and technological developments 
and propel Indian industry towards a global leadership position, by utilizing the 
best available competencies of public fu nded R&D institutions, academia and 
private industry. The Committee also acknowle dges its appreciation at the fact that 
the NMITLI programme is being operated in diverse areas of technologies to yield 
cutting edge new technologies which are sust ainable and   eco-friendly such as ‘bio-
refinery concept’ or the bioprocesses for tanneries, which will help in reducing 
environmental pollution. The Committee feels that there is a lot of scope in the 
development of computer software arena and therefore recommends that the 
Department should vigorously pursue this field, and try to manufacture products 
such as the low cost Personal Computer which has a huge market. 
14. The Committee is of the view that the Department of Scientific & Industrial 
Research through its various research and development programmes is striving to 
uplift the standard of living in the country.  Keeping in vi ew the excellent work that 
the Department has undertaken, the kind of  competence it has exhibited and the 
kind of core and critical programmes it has envisaged for the future, the Committee 
strongly recommends that the Department  of Scientific & Industrial Research 
should be properly and adequately funded and any kind of reduction in outlay at 
R.E. stage should be strictly avoided.  
MINUTES 
________________________________________________________________________ 
XVI 
SIXTEENTH MEETING  
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Monday, 29 th March, 2010 in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT  
1.  Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi 
3. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 

4. Shri Jabir Husain 
5. Dr. Barun Mukherji 
LOK SABHA  
6.  Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
7.  Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
8.  Shri Jayaram Pangi 
9. Shri C.R. Patil 
10. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
11. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
12. Shri Francisco Sardinha 
SECRETARIAT  
Smt. Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary 
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director 
Shri V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director 
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director 
Representatives of the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research 
 
 
1. Dr. S. K. Brahmachari, Secret ary & Director General, CSIR  
2. Dr. K. Jayakumar, Joint Secretary (Admn.)  
3. Ms. Sheila Sangwan, Financial Adviser 
4. Shri V.K. Gupta, Director, TKDL 
5. Dr. Sudeep Kumar, Head, PPD, DSIR 
6. Shri R. R. Abhyankar, Scientist 'G' 
7. Shri Ashwini Gupta, Scientist 'G' 
8. Shri Somnath Ghosh, Managing Director , National Research   Development 
Corproration  
9. Shri S.K. Kaicker, Chairman cum Ma naging Director, Central Electronics Ltd. 
10. Shri R.K. Gupta, Scientist, Head, IPMD 
11. Dr. Rajesh Luthra, Head, HRDG, CSIR 
12. Dr. Sunil Abrol, D.G., Consultancy Development Centre 
13. Dr. R.C. Budhani, Director, NPL 
14. Dr. Gangan Prathap, Director, NISCAIR 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed th e Secretary, Department of Scientific & 
Industrial Research and his team of offi cials to the meeting of the Committee and 
requested him to make a presentation on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the 
Department.  He also desired to know the budgetary aspects and th e aspects concerning 
major programmes and policies of the Department including programmes where the 
targets could not be achieved by the Departme nt or the performance of the Department 
was not satisfactory. He requested the Secretary to highlight the specific requirements for 
increase under any head of the budget. Th ereafter, the Secret ary made a visual 
presentation regarding the major activit ies formulated for the year 2010-11 and 
achievements of the Department during the year 2009-10.  He also mentioned about the 
budgetary allocations u nder different heads as also the functioning of the Department.  
Thereafter, Members sought clarifications on the points that emerged out of the 
presentation. The Secretary replied to them. 
 The officials then withdrew.  
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
3. The Committee, therea fter, adjourned at 1.00 p.m. and re-assembled at 02.30 p.m. 
to hear the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Forests.  

Representatives of *** 
***  *** *** 
4. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Forests and 
his team of officials and requested him to make a brief presentation on certain aspects 
relating to the Demands for Grants (2010-11) of  the Ministry. He requested the Secretary 
to highlight the policy which is being followed by the Ministry for compensating forest 
land, diverted for establishing coal sector projects by way of afforestation. He also 
desired to know the budgetary aspects and the aspects concerning major programmes and 
policies of the Ministry including programmes where the targets could not be achieved by 
the Ministry or the performance of the Mi nistry was not satisfactory and specific 
requirements for increase under any head of th e budget. Thereafter, the Secretary made a 
visual presentation highlighting the replies to the specific issues raised by the Committee 
relating to the Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry in its earlier meeting held in 
this regard.  The Secretary also mentione d about the Forest Policy adopted by the 
Ministry on diversion of forest land for non- forestry purposes. The Members then sought 
clarifications on the points that emerged out of the presentation. The Secretary replied to 
them. 
 The officials then withdrew.  
 A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on 
Tuesday, the 30
th March, 2010. 
XVIII 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING  
The Committee met at 03.00 p.m. on Friday, 16th April, 2010 in Committee Room 
'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT  
1.  Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi 
4. Shri Saman Pathak 
5. Shri Jabir Husain 
6. Dr. Barun Mukherji 
LOK SABHA  
7. Dr. Mirza Mehboob Beg 
8. Shri Ninong Ering  
9.   Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
10.  Shri C.R. Patil 
11.  Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
12.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
13.  Shri Pradeep Tamta 
14.  Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
SECRETARIAT  
Smt. Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary 
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director 
Shri V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director 
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director 
2. At the outset, the Chairman info rmed the Committee that though seven 
reports (204
th to 210 th Reports) on Demands for Grants  (2010-2011) pertaining to the 
Ministries/Departments under the purview of  the Committee have been circulated, the 

Committee would however consider  the draft ***, ***, ***, ***, 208 th and *** Reports 
on Demands for Grants (2010-2011)  pertaining to the ***; ***;  ***; ***; Scientific and 
Industrial Research and *** respectively a nd draft *** Report pert aining to the *** 
would be considered later on as he could not go through that Report due to his some other 
engagements. The Committee then took-up for consideration its draft ***, ***, ***, ***, 
208th and *** Reports. The Committee discussed the Reports one by one and adopted all 
the six Reports (204th to 209th) without any amendment. 
3. The Committee, thereafter decided to present its *** to *** Reports on 22 nd April 
and 207th to 209th Reports on 23 rd April, 2010 to both the Houses of the Parliament. The 
Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence Shri Jabir Husain to present the 
*** to *** reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Francisco Sardinha and in his absence        
Dr. Mirza Mehboob Beg to lay the copies of the reports on the table of Lok Sabha on 22nd 
April, 2010. The Committee also authorized its  Chairman and in his absence Shri Rama 
Chandra Khuntia to present the 207 th to 209 th reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Pradeep 
Tamta and in his absence Dr. Charan Das Mahant  to lay the copies of  the reports on the 
table of Lok Sabha on 23rd April, 2010.  
3. Thereafter, the Committee decided to unde rtake study visit to Bangalore, Chennai 
and Tirupati in the second week of June, 2010 to acqua int itself   with    the   functioning    
of    certain institutes/bodies/ centers, etc., falling    within   the administrative control of 
the Ministries/Departments under the purview of the Committee. The Committee directed 
the Secretariat to take necessary action accordingly. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 p.m.  
*** Relates to other matters. 
 
 
 