115TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/115threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:25:50]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
ONE HUNDRED–FIFTEENTH REPORT
 
ON
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2003-2004)
OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT
(DEMAND NO. 65)
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 2ND MAY, 2003)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 2ND MAY,  2003)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2003/VAISHAKA, 1925 (SAKA)
E-mail: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in
Website: http://parliamentofindia.nic.in
C O N T E N T S
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                             
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                                             
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                          
4.         SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS                                                                    
5.         ANNEXURE                                                                                                                     
6.         MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                       
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2003)
 
 
Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Shri C. Apok Jamir
Shri M. V. Rajasekharan
Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharma
Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
Shri B.P. Singhal

115TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/115threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:25:50]
Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
Smt. Savita Sharda
Smt. S. G. Indira
Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
Shri Lalit Suri
Shri T. S. Bajwa
   * 13.Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
   * 14.Dr. C. Narayana Reddy
  @15.Vacant
 
LOK  SABHA
 
Smt. Margaret Alva
Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan                   
Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
Chowdhary Talib Hussain
Adv. Suresh Ramrao Jadhav                            
Shri G.J.Javiya
Shri Babubhai K. Katara
Shri C. Kuppusami
Dr. Charan Das Mahant
Shri Kailash Meghwal
Shri Madhusudan Mistry
Shri Rupchand Murmu
Shri S. Murugesan                               
Shri A. Venkatesh Naik                       
Shri B.K. Parthasarathi
Shri Suresh Pasi                                               
Dr. Ashok Patel                                               
Shri Prahlad Singh Patel           
Shri Shriniwas Patil
Prof. R.R. Pramanik
Shri Naresh Puglia       
___________________________________________________________________________
            *          Nominated w.e.f. 23
rd Janaury, 2003.
@        Dr. Vijay Mallya ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 27th February, 2003 consequent upon his  
         nomination to the Committee on Defence.
 
Shri Ganta Sreenivasa Rao       
Prof. I.G. Sanadi
Kunwar Akhilesh Singh
Shri Vishvendra Singh  
Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar
Shri Akhilesh Yadav
Shri Balram Singh Yadav
                #44.Dr. Bikram Sarkar
                  45.Vacant
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri S.N. Sahu, Director
            Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary

115TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/115threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:25:50]
Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
____________________________________________________________________________
#          Nominated w.e.f. 7
th April, 2003.
INTRODUCTION
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
 Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One
 Hundred-Fifteenth Report of the Committee.  This Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2003-2004) of
 the Department of Ocean Development (Demand No.65).
 
2.         In the meeting of the Committee held on the 1
st April, 2003, the Secretary and other Officers of the Department
 of Ocean Development gave an overview of the various activities of the Department and the Members sought
 clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for
 Grants.
 
3.         The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by
 the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants
 of the Department of Ocean Development.
 
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on 29
th  April, 2003.
 
 
NEW DELHI;
April 29, 2003
 
 
 
 
C. RAMACHANDRAIAH,
Chairman,
Parliamentary Standing Committee on
 Science & Technology, Environment & Forests.
       
R E P O R T
           
Oceans have played a critical and decisive role in our history. Numerous invasions of India through land frontiers never
 turned our country into a colony. We fell to that status only when mastery of our seawaters was lost. Oceans,
 particularly the Indian Ocean is assuming importance in shaping the world order. In the 19
th century, Admiral Mahan
 of the United States of America, had predicted:
“Whoever controls the Indian Ocean dominates Asia.  This ocean is the key to the seven seas.  In the twenty first
 century the destiny of the world will be decided on its waters.”
Not only from the strategic point of view but also from the point of view of our very survival and development we will
 increasingly depend on oceans, particularly the Indian Ocean in the centuries ahead.
“Oceans sustain nearly half of all life on earth and provide us with vital resources.  They are a source of food, energy,
 commerce, medicine and recreation…. They shape our weather and link us to other nations.  In the twenty first century,
 we will look increasingly to the oceans to meet our every day needs.”
This declaration formed the cornerstone of the convention on the Law of the Sea and Oceans Conference held in 1998, a
 year that was designated as the U.N. Year of the Ocean.
2.         Recognising the importance of oceans for our all round development on a sustainable basis, the Department of
 Ocean Development was created in July, 1981 within the Cabinet Secretariat directly under the charge of the Prime
 Minister.  In March, 1982 it became a separate Department and has since been functioning as a nodal Department for
 organizing, coordinating and promoting ocean development activities in the country, in line with the Ocean Policy
 Statement of 1982. The national level R&D laboratories, educational institutions and industries assist the Department in

115TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/115threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:25:50]
 carrying out its multi-disciplinary plans and programmes. Marine research and capacity building are key areas of the
 Department to promote basic research in marine science for self-reliance.  The activities of the Department are targeted
 towards scientific research and technology development with orientation towards its applications and harnessing ocean
 resources.  The Department has also the mandate for international programmes arising out of international obligations
 and bilateral and multilateral cooperative ventures to create technological capacity building and human resources
 development for self-reliance.
3.         The Department witnessed a phenomenal growth with manifold expansion of its activities during the 9
th Five
 Year Plan period, involving a plan outlay of Rs.510.62 crores.  A wide range of subjects and activities introduced
 during the 9
th Five Year Plan period included Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC), Assessment of the Marine
 Living Resources, Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management, Ocean Observation and Information Services,
 Delineation of Outer limits of Continental Shelf, etc.  They were directed towards development, dissemination and use
 of Ocean Science and Technology for socio-economic benefit of the country, with the active participation of a large
 number of national research laboratories, academic institutions etc.  In addition, two autonomous institutions, viz.,
 National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR) at Goa and Indian National Centre for Ocean Information
 Services (INCOIS) at Hyderabad were established under the Department for carrying out and implementing
 programmes in the areas of Polar Science; and Ocean Observation and Information Services, respectively.  For
 implementation of the Environment Management Capacity Building project and the related infrastructure, R&D and
 training programmes, the Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management (ICMAM) Project Directorate was
 established in Chennai, jointly funded by the International Development Association and the DOD.  The Sagar
 Sampada Cell of Kochi was renamed as a “Centre for Marine Living Resources and Ecology” for implementing the
 programmes relating to Assessment of Marine Living Resources in the Indian EEZ.  Some of the major achievements
 include the development and successful testing of a seabed mining system at a depth of 410m of Tuticorin in Tamil
 Nadu coast, as a forerunner to the development of deep sea mining system for operation at 6000 m water depth;
 deployment of 12 Met Ocean Data Buoys along the Indian coastline for collection and dissemination of oceanographic
 data on real time basis; establishment of Ocean Science and Technology Cells in 8 different disciplines for human
 resource development and capacity building in Ocean Science and Technology.
4.         The Vision statement highlighting the Perspective Plan 2015 of the Department was formulated and released
 during this year (2002-03).  The following objectives have been set by the Department in the Vision Statement for the
 coming decades :
i)          Promoting ocean science, supporting technology development and strengthening observations, so as to
 continuously improve our understanding of local and remote processes.
ii)         Modelling sustainable uses of the coastal zone and reliably predicting extreme events, for the socio-economic
 benefits of the coastal population.
iii)         Understanding the influence of the ocean on the monsoons and contributing to the capability to forecast it.
iv)        Strengthening programmes in the southern Ocean and Antractica that offer unmatched opportunities to study
 planet earth in its pristine state.
v)         Mapping ocean resources and evolving guidelines for proper stewardship so that they are sustainably utilized
 with minimal environmental impact.
vi)        Developing reliable and safe deep sea technology that permits man to understand, quantify and harness ocean
 resources.
vii)        Partnering Indian Ocean neighbours in mutually beneficial programmes.
viii) Creating awareness in stakeholders about the complex functioning of the ocean and the inherent limits to the
 predictability of ocean processes.
ix)        Creating an Ocean Resource Commission as a national framework so that national efforts on ocean resource
 issues are effectively coordinated.
5.         The following programmes of the Department have been reoriented and revamped during the 10
th Five Year
 Plan:
Polar (Antarctic) Science
Marine Living Resources
Marine Non-Living Resources
Marine and Coastal Area Management
Ocean Observation & Information Services
Marine Research and Capacity Building

115TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/115threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:25:50]
Coastal Community Programmes
Ocean Awareness, and
International Cooperation/Contribution
 
While formulating the research and development programmes, stress is laid on accelerated development of applied
 technology for the benefit of society.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR 2003-04
6.         The total budget demand for the year 2003-04 is Rs.199.33 crores which includes plan allocation of Rs.175.00
 crores and non-plan allocation of Rs.24.33 crores. The Plan outlay for 2003-04 is Rs.25 crores more than the outlay for
 2002-03. The following areas have been identified for focus during the year 2003-04:
(i)         The approved outlay for the Antarctic Research is Rs.24.00 crores which would be given as Grants-in-aid to
 National Centre for Antarctic & ocean Research (NCAOR), Goa for launching the 23
rd Scientific Expedition to
 Antarctica, carrying out scientific experiments, maintenance of the permanent research station "Maitri" at Antarctica
 and infrastructure development, operation & manning of the NCAOR.
(ii)        In the case of Polymetallic Nodules Programme, an outlay of Rs.22 crores has been provided. Under this
 programme, the activities planned include, continuation of survey of nodules in the CIOB area alongwith the selected
 profiles for identifying and va1tdating the trends of higher abundance of nodules; continuation of Environmental
 Impact Assessment of simulated sea bed disturbance; research to upgrade existing mining system in a phased manner
 with a view to ultimately mining the nodules at 6000m depth; development of unmanned submersible, capable of
 operation upto water depth of 6000m; and designing of a remotely Operated Vehicle for underwater examination and
 continuation of extractive metallurgy.
(iii)       For National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) an outlay of Rs.25 crores including for Island Development
 programme, is provided. The activities of OTEC and other programmes on Technology for sea bed mining, coastal
 engineering, marine instrumentation and island related programmes will be continued during the year. For Delineation
 of the Outer Limits of Continental Shelf, an outlay of Rs.8 crores is provided.
(iv)       Under Marine Living Resources Programme, the proposed outlay is Rs.2.5 crores for Assessment of Marine
 Living Resources and Rs.2.5 crores is for the ongoing Drugs from Sea programme. During the year 2003-04, a
 provision of Rs.2.5 crores has been made for the Marine Non-living Resources programme .
(v)        For the Ocean Observation & Information Services, an outlay of Rs.35 crores has been provided. Out of this, the
 provision for the Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS) at Hyderabad is Rs.10 crores and
 expenditure will be incurred on creation of permanent infrastructure and other operational programmes.
(vi)       For the National Data Buoy Programme and the other Ocean Observing System programmes, a sum of Rs.21-.5
 crores has been provided. It is proposed to procure a dedicated vessel for the data buoy programme during 2003-04.
(vii)      An outlay of Rs.2 crores and Rs.5 crores has been made for Coasta1 Ocean Monitoring and Prediction Systems
 (COMAPS) and Coastal Research Vessel (CRV) respectively during the Annual Plan 2003-04.For the Integrated
 Coastal and Marine area Management (ICMAM) programme, an outlay of Rs.5.5 crores has been provided.
During the year 2003-04, activities relating to the Exploration of Gas Hydrates with the aim of identification of areas in
 the seas around India will be carried out with the budget allocation of Rs.18 crores.  A programme of  Comprehensive 
 Swath Bathymetric survey  with an allocation of Rs.12 crores will be carried out to survey the Exclusive Economic
 Zone to support the activities relating to exploration of non-living resources in this area. The geo-physical study of
 Laxmi Basin will be continued with an allocation of Rs.2.5 crores in order to understand the geology specially the
 crystal characteristics of the Laxmi Basin in the Arabian sea. In order to support the changing needs of the technology
 development and related programmes, an activity for designing a new research vessel will be initiated with an initial
 allocation of Rs.2 crores.
7.         The Secretary, Department of Ocean Development informed the Committee that during the year 2002-03, the
 B.E. of the Department i.e. Rs.175 crores has been reduced to Rs.150 crores at the R.E.stage. Due to this, scaling down
 of activities had to be made under most of the programmes. The major variations, therefore, were made in the following
 programmes:
i)          Fishery and Oceanographic Research Vessel (FORV) and Marine Living Resources
BE -     Rs.7.35 crores                          RE -     Rs.6.1 crores
Scaling down of activities had to be resorted to due to selective supporting of project activities; hence the reduction in
 anticipated expenditure.
ii)         Polar Science/ Antarctic Research

115TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/115threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:25:50]
BE -     Rs.26.5 crores                          RE -     Rs.20.9 crores
The major variation is due to reducing the funds provided for charter hire of ship and helicopter used in the 23rd Indian
 Antarctic Expedition.
iii)        BENFAN
BE -     Rs.3 crores                                          RE -     Rs.1 crores
The reduction in expenditure was mainly due to delay in survey.
iv)        Comprehensive Swath Bathymetric Survey of Indian EEZ
BE -     Rs.14 crores                                         RE -     Rs.5.25 crores
The reduction in the requirement is due to more time taken in obtaining the requisite approvals from the appropriate
 authorities.
v)         Gas Hydrate Exploration and Technology Development for Exploitation
BE -     Rs.8.5 crores                            RE -     Rs.4.5 crores
The shortfall in utilisation of the funds to the budgeted levels is due to the delay in getting the necessary Government
 approvals.
vi)        Ocean Observation and Information Services
BE -     Rs.25 crores                 RE -     Rs.24 crores
The saving is due to more time needed for initiating construction activities at INCOIS, Hyderabad.
vii)       Acquisition of new Research Vessels
BE -     Rs.2 crores                   RE -    Rs.0.1 crores
 
The reduction is due to more time taken in obtaining the requisite approvals from the appropriate authorities.
8.         The Committee feels that the Department during 2002-03 had to scale down its activities due to reduction in its
 B.E. from Rs.175 crores to Rs.150 crores.  The Committee is constrained to note that in many cases major
 disproportionate variations is due to delay in getting the necessary Government approvals.  The Committee feels that
 these kind of hassles should be removed and strongly recommends higher allocations for activities of the Department
 which is doing a commendable job.  The Committee also feels that there is an urgent need to review the whole planning
 and budgeting process in the Department so that realistic physical and financial targets are projected in the Budget and
 planned projects are not hampered due to drastic cuts at R.E. stage.  It is equally important to prioritise the projects in
 the light of their potential benefit to the Nation. 
POLAR SCIENCE (ANTARCTIC RESEARCH) PROGRAMME
9.         The objectives of the Antarctic Research Programme are to identify and initiate programmes of scientific and
 economic significance besides establishing infrastructure.  The Antarctic Research Progamme has been designed to
 take advantage of the unique location and environment of the icy continent for understanding the key global processes
 which are manifested and controlled by this polar cap.  Antarctic is a pristine and natural laboratory, which enables the
 scientists to study, detect and monitor global phenomena, such as the atmospheric patterns and ocean circulations. 
 Glaciological and geophysical research provides a clue to the geological history and evolution of the earth.  In addition,
 Antarctica provides a singular platform for conducting studies on solar terrestrial interaction, adaptation of organisms,
 including human beings in the cold land isolated conditions.  The XXII scientific expedition with 48 members was
 launched successfully from Cape Town, South Africa on the 10
th January, 2003.  This expedition will carry out
 research in the fields of atmospheric, geological, biological, environmental, medical and engineering sciences and
 global change.
10.       The Committee was informed that the during the year 2003-04, preparatory exercise is proposed to be initiated
 of identifying the location of a second permanent Indian station in Antarctica, replacing “Maitri”.  With this year’s
 allocation of Rs.24.00 crores, the Department proposed to augment the research facilities at Indian Antarctic Station
 and also to actively undertake research in the Southern Ocean Oceanography area.
11.       The success of the Antarctic Programme and sustained capabilities in Antarctic science and logistics prompted
 the Department to establish the first polar research lab of the country at Goa namely the National Centre for Antarctic
 Ocean Research (NCAOR) in 1998 which is responsible for carrying out all the activities relating to Antarctic
 expeditions. The research on polar science and expeditions to Antarctica was being planned, executed and launched
 annually on behalf of DOD by the Centre.  The Centre has a specific R&D mandate in the realm of polar science and to
 coordinate and launch Indian Antarctic expeditions.  The Centre has a unique laboratory for low-temperature research
 on ice cores retrieved from Antarctica and the Himalayas.  It would also have the facility for the application of remote
 sensing techniques aimed at understanding the sea-ice-atmosphere interaction in the Polar Regions.  It would also have

115TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/115threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:25:50]
 an Antarctic museum and a database repository on polar sciences.
12.       The budgetary allocation for the year 2002-03 for the programme Antarctic Research/ Polar Science was reduced
 since the funds provided for charter hire of ship and helicopter were curtailed.  There  was no curtailment  in research
 activities as  planned during the expedition. The allocation of Rs.24.00 crores at B.E. stage for the year 2003-04 is
 owing to estimated increase in hire charges of ship and helicopter and other incidental charges such as on POL, etc.
13.       During 2003-04, NCAOR is proposed to conduct a multi-institutional and multi-disciplinary cruise in the Indian
 Ocean sector of the Southern Ocean by chartering an ice-class research vessel with facilities for acquisition of
 oceanographic data and sediment cores/deploying ORV Sagar Kanya.  Moreover, efforts would be made to induct sate-
of-the-art experiments in accordance with the long-term science strategy for the Antarctic expeditions.
14.       Commencement of the Antarctic Programme in the eighties and its evolution and growth represent the
 excellence of our scientific and technological capabilities beyond the frontiers of our country. The study and research
 undertaken during Antarctic expeditions have produced a repository of data and information which are of immense
 importance not only for India but for the entire world. Pursuing this mission as part of the mainstream of the
 international endeavour to explore the icy continent has made invaluable contribution to promote international
 understanding. The Committee, therefore, feels that the Antarctic programme should not be allowed to suffer for want
 of funds.  Besides, with a view to strengthening our scientific base in Antarctica, there is a need for expanding the area
 of activities by installing many more research stations in different regions of Antarctica.
15.       The Committee is also of the view that the National Centre for Antarctic Ocean Research (NCAOR) which is the
 nodal Department to execute the Antarctic programmes should also initiate its activities to establish the Country’s ice-
core repository and analytical facilities with focus on high-resolution histories of fact changes in climate, atmospheric
 composition and ice-cover in Antarctica.
16.       The Committee further recommends that the Department may take steps to conduct state-of-the-art experiments
 in Antarctica.
POLYMETALLIC NODULES (PMN) PROGRAMME
17        Robert Heilbroner in his book ‘An Enquiry into the Human Prospects’ pointed towards a bleak future for
 humans in the process of approaching finite resources of the earth.  Later he did modify his assessment.  He wrote “I
 would like to take a more hopeful view of the mineral resources problem.  This is because I did not know when I wrote
 the book of the possibility of mining the seabed for mineral nodules which are estimated to exist in the order of
 hundreds of billions of tons”.
17.       The above paragraph indicates the potentiality of the oceanic world in terms of the sources of energy. 
 Manganese nodules of the deep seabed today have revolutionised the expectations of the industrialized countries.  The
 commercial exploitation, in the near future, of this nodule will not only provide the much needed scarce minerals but
 also change fundamentally the international mining market and its allied fields.  This will help the nations who have got
 technological superiority to explore and exploit the deep seabed.  Therefore, India has taken steps to extract
 Polymetallic nodules from the deep seabed. 
18.       The Polymetallic Nodules Programme (PMN Programme) is a national programme with international
 commitments which envisages eventual exploitation of the nodules from the allotted 1,50,000 sq. km. mine site in the
 Central Indian Ocean Basin. The programme consists of four components-Survey & Exploration of Polymetallic
 Nodules in the Central Indian Ocean Basin (CIOB); Environmental Impact Assessment studies at CIOB; Technology
 Development for mining of nodules;  and  Technology  Development  for  extraction of  metals from  nodules. The
 work related to Survey and Exploration was mainly directed towards assessing relative concentration and quality
 characteristics of nodules as well as seabed topography.  Demarcation of grade of nodules in the Central Indian Ocean
 Basin was one of the main objectives.  Design and development of mining system has been re-oriented so that the
 intermediate applications of the technology could be achieved before developing the ultimate system for a depth of
 6,000 m.  Towards this design, development and testing of mining nodule complex has been undertaken. 
19.       The Committee was informed that a joint collaborative programme between NIOT, Chennai and Experimental
 Design Bureau of Oceanological Engineering (EDBOE), Russia, for design and development of unmanned
 submersibles capable of operation up to 6,000 m was likely to be taken up soon in pursuance of a MoU signed between
 DOD and Russian Academy of Sciences. Besides, a continuous demonstration pilot plant of 500 kg/day capacity for
 extraction of Copper, Nickel and Cobalt from nodules was set up at Hindustan Zinc Limited (HZL), Udaipur.  An
 Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) monitoring cruise is also proposed during 2003-04 as a part of continuing
 studies in the pioneer area for assessing the impact of the simulated mining at deep seabed at the site of nodules
 occurrence.
20.       The Committee was also informed that during the year, it is proposed to undertake the following major activities

115TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/115threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:25:50]
 with the enhanced allocation of Rs.22.00 crores:
(i)         Development of technologies pertaining to mining viz. re-demonstration of underwater mining system for long
 term operation and development of joint technology for unmanned submersible devices capable of operation up to 6000
 m. water depth,
(ii)        Technology development pertaining to extractive metallurgy viz. validation of process routes and continuation
 of campaigns in the pilot demonstration plant for extractive metallurgy at HZL (Udaipur),
(iii)       Survey and exploration in selected blocks of retained area in the Central Indian Ocean Basin;
(iv)       EIA studies viz. Monitoring, Environmental data collection, Assessment mining plume impact and creation of
 data base and modelling of sediment plume dispersion.
21.       It has also been stated that India has entered into contract with International Seabed Authority (Jamaica), a
 regulatory agency under the UNCLOS, for exploration of Polymetallic Nodules for 15 years.  The Department has not
 entered into contract with foreign countries for extraction of nodules. The process package was developed by RRL
 (Bhubaneshwar) and BARC (Trombay) for extraction of metal values indigenously.    M/s EIL was consultant towards
 this endeavour. The validation of process package is under progress at a semi-continuous pilot plant commissioned at
 HZL (U).
22.       The Committee hopes that the periodical review of the Polymetallic Nodules (PMN) Programme would continue
 to be undertaken to adopt new technologies in view of the fast changing technologies.  This project has tremendous
 potential in supplying adequate minerals for the benefit of our economy.
23.       The Committee recommends that efforts to extract polymetallic manganese nodules from the deep seabed be
 assessed from the point of view of its impact on the ocean environment.
 24.      The Committee hopes that data generated from the R&D activities of the Department for extraction of
 manganese nodules could be studied in depth with the ultimate objective of designing a commercial plant.
DRUGS FROM SEA
25.       World wide researchers believe that oceans hold the key to a whole range of new drugs for chronic pain,
 epilepsy and Parkinson’s disease.  The current attempt to reap a chemical harvest from the seas is just a continuation of
 the bio prospecting that the big drug companies have been doing in jungles for the past few decades.  The National
 Project on Drugs from Sea is a multi-institutional project aiming at developing potential drugs and chemicals from the
 marine flora and fauna. This project has led to identification of five marine organisms showing potent activity as anti-
diabetic, anti-viral, anti-fungal, anti-cholesterol and spermicidal agents for developing new drugs. The exploratory
 attempts will be continued in an intensive manner during the 10
th plan period. The Department has fostered the search
 for novel drugs from the sea and will continue to encourage these activities, supporting extensive bioassay guided
 screening programmes.  The emphasis will be on following aspects:
Extension of inventory of organisms with bioactive potential.
In-vitro synthesis molecules recognized for their bioactivity.
Development and application of novel screening programmes for bioactivity.
Explore and understand at levels ranging from genes to organisms, unique properties of the production of novel
 compounds.
Understand interactions between organisms and their habitats.
26.       An amount of Rs.2.50 crores has been allocated for 2003-04 for the programme Drugs from Sea as against
 Rs.2.00 crores allocated both at B.E. and R.E. stages of 2002-03. The enhanced allocation would strengthen the
 facilities for bioactivity screening and regulatory pharmacological and toxicological analysis of the promising
 compounds. Lead compounds for anti-diabetic and anti-cholesterol have been identified. The anti-diabetic lead has
 completed the toxicity test and clinical trials will be continued. For anti-cholesterol compound, toxicity test is proposed
 to be undertaken. In order to continue the exploratory activities for identification of bioactive compounds having the
 properties of anti-fungal, anti-cancer, spermicidal, etc., it is proposed to intensify the survey and screening activities for
 which an additional amount of Rs.50.00 lakhs is needed. The amount will be used to enhance instrumental and other
 analytical facilities in the institutes involved in the programme.
27.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that under the Drugs from Sea Programme the Department has done
 commendable work.  The Committee trusts that the Department would continue the exploratory work relating to
 collection, identification and bio-evaluation of the marine flora and fauna from the Indian Coastal waters for the
 purpose of extracting drugs.
28.       The Committee is of the view that possibly from marine resources some medicines could be extracted which
 otherwise are not available at present to treat some of the diseases affecting mankind.   Therefore, the Committee

115TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/115threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:25:50]
 recommends that marine resources must be used in a sustainable way for the benefit of our people.
COASTAL OCEAN MONITORING AND PREDICTION SYSTEM (COMAPS)
29.       Under the Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System (COMAPS) Programme, the Department of Ocean
 Development had taken up scientific monitoring of pollution at different locations. The programme aimed to assess the
 status and likely trends in coastal marine environment quality and contribute directly to the development of strategies
 for maximising the economic benefits derived from the intelligent and sustainable use of marine environment and
 resources. The programme had been continuing since 1991 for monitoring the level of various marine pollutants and its
 impacts on marine fauna and flora of the country. The data collected under the programme was made available to the
 Pollution Control Boards and periodically discussed with them. Any significant increase in pollutants at a particular
 location was brought to the notice of the Central Pollution Control Board for control as well as remedial actions.  The
 main objective of the Programme was to constantly assess the health of India’s  marine environment and indicate areas
 that needed immediate and long term remedial action.  Data on 25 environmental parameters were being collected at 82
 locations last year with the help of nine R&D institutions.  The Programme along with the modeling component would
 be continued during 2003-04. An allocation of Rs.2.00 crores has been sought for carrying out the activities under the
 programme for the year 2003-04
30.       At present the Department is monitoring pollution levels at 82 locations in our coastal waters and brings data to
 the notice of Central Pollution Control Board as well as concerned State Pollution Control Boards for mitigative
 measures. Enormous efforts are made to collect data through the coastal research vessels, i.e., Sagar Purvi and Sagar
 Paschimi. The data generated under this programme is reviewed periodically in the presence of Member Secretaries of
 Coastal Pollution Control Boards who are permanent members of the Steering Committee of the programme.
 Development of GIS based database is a continuous process as the data is collected on a long-term basis. As far as
 monitoring activities of the Department are concerned, the present projection of Rs.2.00 crores is sufficient for 2003-04
 at the B.E. stage.
31.       The Committee recommends that the Department may augment its ongoing Coastal Ocean Monitoring and
 Prediction System to regularly monitor the condition of the coastal waters and adjoining areas. 
MARINE RESEARCH AND CAPACITY BUILDING
32.       The objectives of the programme are to foster the concept of stewardship through education, training and human
 resource development and increasing awareness at all levels. The activities proposed in the programme include
 promotion of research under the basic categories of marine ecology, marine biology, marine microbiology, marine
 benthos, coastal marine culture systems, marine geology/geophysics and ocean engineering & underwater robotics. 
 Besides the ongoing programme of award of fellowships to students for pursuing higher studies in
 academic/educational institutions in various disciplines of ocean science and technology, organizing exhibitions and
 fairs to create awareness among the public on the oceans would continue.
33.       The Scientific Research and Technology Development programmes for exploration and sustainable use of the
 marine resources are multi-disciplinary and multi-institutional.  Basic research and developments are required in a wide
 spectrum of areas to gain adequate knowledge and expertise.  Required infrastructure and trained personnel are
 essential for successfully implementing different programmes.  There is need for effective interaction between R&D
 institutions, academicians and industries.
34.       The Department has been implementing this programme with a view to encouraging research in the newly
 emerging and frontline areas of Marine Chemistry, Marine Biology and Microbiology, Coastal Zone management,
 Marine Archaeology, Exploration and Exploitation of Marine Resources, etc. to finance infrastructure facilities in
 Universities / Institutions / Organizations etc., and to generate special Manpower in the Ocean Sector.
35.       Asked about the efforts being made by the Department for disseminating information about its research activities
 and achievements to the masses, it informed the Committee that the awareness campaigns aim to spread scientific
 knowledge among school children and masses about our oceans. By organising exhibitions, trade fairs, seminars,
 conferences, workshops etc. the Department aims at promoting awareness about our oceans among our people.  Senior
 officers of the Department also actively contribute to this awakening by giving interviews/ programmes on the national
 media, i.e., television, radio, newspapers and magazines. Furthermore training programmes, quiz shows for children,
 audio-video presentations on the Department and its attached offices/institutions help spread knowledge on the oceans.
 A television series on ocean related activities is being telecast on the national channel. A bimonthly newsletter
 "WISTA: Ocean Wealth" for disseminating information on oceans and activities of DOD and other related aspects is
 being published.
36.       For strengthening ocean research centres in coastal universities, the Department is emphasising on quantum
 jump in our approach towards the ocean.  To achieve that purpose the Committee recommends that the Department

115TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/115threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:25:50]
 should formulate an integrated approach and explore the possibilities of bringing all maritime educational institutions
 under one body such as a Maritime University. Since ocean sciences are multi-disciplinary sciences such an integrated
 approach, the Committee feels, will be of vital significance.  The Committee recommends that the Department should
 establish Oceanariums in different parts of the country.  If planetariums could promote knowledge and awareness about
 space, the Committee feels that Ocenariums could also create awareness about oceans and their resources.
COASTAL RESEARCH VESSELS
37.       Two research ships ORV Sagar Kanya and FORV Sagar Sampada have been carrying out oceanographic surveys
 for the exploration of non-living and living resources in the Exclusive Economic zone (EEZ) and beyond, around
 Indian Ocean region since 1984.  These vessels were being utilised for multi-disciplinary research on the physical,
 chemical, geological and biological aspects of the Indian Ocean.  The vessels were also engaged in campaigns for
 validating satellite oceanographic data, assessment of marine living resources and for various technology demonstration
 activities. The vessels facilitate systematic collection of samples and immediate analysis of the mandatory parameters
 like nitrate, phosphate etc. for the Coastal Ocean Monitoring  & Prediction   System  (COMAPS) programme.   Both   
 the   vessels   are equipped with sophisticated scientific facilities for onboard analysis and navigational equipments
 alongwith communication facilities. In order to strengthen the programme on monitoring of marine pollution along the
 coastal waters of the country and to promote research on near shore phenomena, the two vessels do sampling at desired
 locations of the transects identified for potential hot spots. The National Institute of Ocean Technology, Chennai
 through its Vessel Management Cell is maintaining these vessels. During the year 2003-04 an allocation of Rs.5.00
 crores has been earmarked for the programme.
38.       These vessels are being used for pollution monitoring under the Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction
 System (COMPAS) programme of the Department and also Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management
 programme.  These have completed 56 cruises for 15 institutions along the west and east coast of India.  The ship time
 is being effectively utilized by engaging the vessels for various programmes and preventive and periodical maintenance
 was ensured for trouble free functioning of onboard equipment and machineries.  During the cruises, these vessels
 undertook CTD, ADCP observations, dreadging, water  sampling and plankton net operations.  In addition  the cruises
 participated in the Marine  Archaeological findings at Gulf of Cambay and Multibeam sonar survey at Ennore and
 Haldia ports.  Public sector undertakings and corporate agencies like IGCAR, ONGC utilised the service of these
 vessels.
39.       Both the Coastal Research Vessels have been plying in east and west coast for pollution monitoring since 1996
 and have been conducting experiments in close coordination with the COMAPS participating institutions. The grant
 projected is for regular running, maintenance of vessels, upkeep and upgradation of scientific equipments. Since they
 are of regular nature, the expenditure is expected to be at the same level with slight increase in running and
 maintenance expenditures and decrease in the equipment upgradation and purchase. Hence, the projected level of
 expenditure i.e. Rs.5.00 crores can sustain the activities.
40.       The Committee observes that the Coastal Research Vessels(CRVs), with the participation of scientists of other
 related institutions, should cruise frequently to monitor pollution and do other multidisciplinary work.
INTEGRATED COASTAL AND MARINE AREA MANAGEMENT (ICMAM)
41.       The Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management (ICMAM) programme focuses on development of
 expertise in ICMAM oriented activities and dissemination of knowledge gained by the users like coastal states through
 organized training programmes; developing capabilities in the coastal states and UTs for adoption of ICMAM through
 training; creating a base for human resource development in the fields of ICMAM and ensuring sustainable
 development and management of the ocean resources and enforcement of rules and regulations for regulation of ocean
 related activities in the ocean zone to make Indian oceans clean and productive.
42.       The programme has two components, namely (i) Capacity building and (ii) Development of Infrastructure for
 R&D, Survey and Training for ICMAM.  The capacity building component is being funded by the International
 Development Association containing the activities, namely (i) Development of Geographic Information System (GIS)
 for 11 critical habitats in the coastal and marine Areas in India (II) Determination of Waste Assimilation Capacity at
 selected estuaries along coastal areas of India, (iii) Development of Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment
 and (iv) Preparation of Model Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management Plans.  Under the component on
 infrastructure, training, laboratories and other facilities have been established in the NIOT Campus, Chennai.  The
 determination of Use Classification for Coastal/Waters and no impact zone for selected habitats like coastal lakes and
 mangroves were in progress.
43.       The enhanced allocation of Rs.5.50 crores for ICMAM programme for 2003-04 is 10% over and above the
 previous year’s (2002-03) allocation of Rs.5.00 crores. The additional allocation of Rs.0.50 crores is for creation of

115TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/115threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:25:50]
 facilities for analytical quality control laboratory for ICMAM activities; conducting new activities like acute toxicity
 studies on selected parameters using selected marine organisms; collection and analysis of primary data, identification
 of the mixing   zones,  and   assessing   the  health  of  4  coastal  ecosystems  (Gulf of Munnar / Pulicat, Vedaranyam,
 Chilka Lake and Kochi backwaters), for modelling purposes; and compilation of secondary information and collection
 of primary data related to Shoreline Management studies and preparation of the base maps for 3 sites. Processing of two
 sets of OCM / LISS / PAN / QUICKBIRD satellite data, in situ data collection and validation of satellite derived Sea
 Surface Current (SSC); and development of site-specific SSC algorithms.
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
44.       The objectives of the Department through this programme is:
to contribute and participate effectively in all the international/bilateral organizations, meetings, conferences,
 committees etc. with a view to projecting India’s role in ocean development activities
to exchange information and expertise in different aspects of ocean science & technology between the Department and
 its organizations and other countries, for upgrading knowledge and for fostering technical cooperation.
45.       The Committee was informed that a MoU was signed between the Government of India and the Republic of
 South Africa in 2002 for promoting Antarctic cooperation. In the same year Indian and Russian delegations visited each
 other’s countries to study the subject of Gas Hydrates and related technologies. Another delegation, from America,
 visited India in February, 2003 to discuss a bilateral project proposal on ‘Ocean Observation for the Indian Ocean  and
 Assessment of Data Available’ and ‘Greenhouse Gas Measurements’. Besides, the Department has entered into MoUs
 with countries such as  Chile, Argentina, Peru, South Korea, Portugal, Germany, etc for conducting experiments related
 to basic and advanced research in the field of Oceanography/ Ocean Sciences.
46.       During the year 2003-04, the Department would continue to represent India in various International &
 Intergovernmental organizations/bodies such as Antarctic Treaty System, SCAR, Council of Managers of National
 Antarctic Programmes (COMNAP)/Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistic Operation (SCALOP), CCAMLR, IOC,
 Regional Seas Programme, International Sea Bed Authority and International Tribunal on Law of the sea (ISBA),
 IBPIO/DBCP etc.
47.       The Committee notes that India is a signatory to the Ocean Charter which is not a legal entity, but which
 stipulates that all nations shall act in unison to protect the oceans.  India being a major maritime country in the Indian
 Ocean rim, it has a greater responsibility to take initiatives for bringing together all littoral countries for the
 development, protection and conservation of oceans.  The Committee notes with trepidation the observation of Dr. R.
 Sengupta, renowned oceanographer, “Of the three greatest water bodies, the Atlantic, the Pacific and the Indian Ocean,
 the latter was the cleanest.  But that is history now”.  The Committee therefore recommends that India must take a lead
 to protect its own interests and the interests of developing countries vis-a-vis their oceanic resources.
OCEAN OBSERVATION & INFORMATION SERVICES (OOIS)
48.       Recognizing the need to operationalise the oceanographic services in the new areas of Science & Technology,
 the Department has implemented the Ocean Observation and Information Services (OOIS) programme from the
 beginning of the 9
th Plan.  The objective of the Programme is to provide ocean information services for various
 applications in the ocean section.  OOIS is structured  around four major  themes  namely,  Ocean  Observing 
 Systems,  Ocean  Information
Services, Satellite Coastal and Oceanographic Research (SATCORE) and Indian Ocean Modelling & Ocean
 Dynamic(INDOMOD).
49.       The Ocean Observing Systems envisage collection of sea truth data using moored data buoys, expandable
 bathythermographs (XBT), current meter arrays and tide gauges, and designed particularly for acquisition of real-time
 sea surface, meteorological and upper oceanographic parameters from the coastal and deep waters.  Validation of the
 satellite sensors has also been undertaken using the sea truth data generated under this programme.  The Data Buoy
 Programme was initiated in 1996 with partial financial assistance from Norwegian Agency for Development (NORAD)
 and National Institute of Ocean Technology (NOIT) has been entrusted with the responsibilities for deployment,
 operation and maintenance of the data buoys.
50.       The Ocean information service envisages generation and dissemination  of ocean data/data products on an
 operational basis.  The 14 National Marine Data Centres will be continued under the Ocean Information & Services.A
 dedicated centre “Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS)” started functioning at Hyderabad
 from 1999 for  efficient development and dissemination of data products.   INCOIS is involved to synthesis, generate,
 promote, provide and coordinate various endeavours in the field of ocean sciences, ocean observations, satellite
 oceanography, and ocean information and advisory services.  INCOIS has a vision to emerge as a knowledge and

115TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/115threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:25:50]
 information technology enterprise for the oceanic realm.  Synergy and knowledge networking with centers of
 excellence in ocean, atmospheric sciences, space applications and information technology as well as translating this
 scientific knowledge into useful products and services comprise the cornerstone of INCOIS.
51.       The Satellite Coastal and Oceanographic Research (SATCORE) component envisages development of regional
 algorithms, data assimilation techniques and operational models which would be transferred to the Ocean Information
 and Service Centre for operational use.  The ocean modeling and dynamics project addresses basic issues on the ocean
 dynamic, climate variability, ocean state forecast, sea level variations, ocean flux studies etc.
52.       The Committee recommends that in order to improve Oceanography services, the Department should strengthen
 the observation platforms.  The moored buoy network should also be augmented to improve generation of data useful
 for the Coastal and off shore developmental activities.  The Department should also process the data collected from
 Array for Real-time Geotropic Oceanography (ARGO) Floats for obtaining temperature and salinity profiles from the
 Indian Ocean to study the long-term climate and Monsoon variability.
53.       The Committee desires that the Department should monitor the performance of the Indian National Centre for
 Ocean Information Services (INCOIS) for efficient dissemination of ocean data and data products to user communities
 on a regular basis.
54.       The Committee recommends that the Department should take initiatives in setting up information kiosks in the
 coastal states to facilitate the dissemination of data/data products to user communities.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF OCEAN TECHNOLOGY
55.       The National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) was established in November, 1993 as a registered society
 under the administrative control of the Department of Ocean Development with a view to developing technology in the
 ocean sector. The main aim of NIOT is to develop and  promote  technology  in mission  mode  for  specific  purposes 
 in  ocean  related  areas. The multifarious activities of NIOT are carried out as in-house technology development
 programmes and field demonstration projects. Initially NIOT’s spectrum of activities includes the four core mission
 activities i.e. Ocean Energy, Deep Sea Mining, Coastal and Environmental engineering and Marine Instrumentation.
 Subsequently, NIOT was also entrusted with the operation & maintenance of two CRVs by establishing a  Vessel
 Management Cell in 1996 and National Data Buoy Programme in 1997. In 1998-99, one more project on Island
 Development was added to the activities of NIOT and renamed as Ocean Science & Technology for Islands. NIOT is
 also entrusted to undertake Hi-tech consultancy service in ocean related activities.  During 2003-04, the major
 activities, ongoing as well as new, undertaken by NIOT are testing of 1MW Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion
 (OTEC) Plant, design of mining system for depth upto 6000 m, preparation of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
 guidelines for Coastal Ocean management, development of Under Water Marine Instruments and calibration of the
 same and continuing the project on enhancement of Marine Living Resources. For the project Ocean Science &
 Technology for Islands, NIOT has already made a headway in enhancement of marine living resources in the island
 groups by taking up technology development for breeding, rearing and fattening lobsters to begin with. The facilities
 both at the Island groups and at the mainland have been augmented for this purpose. It is proposed to expand the
 activities under this programme to other marine organisms on selective basis and also to coordinate the implementation
 of all the programmes of the Department in the island groups for the benefit of the island community.
56.       The Committee was informed that the budgetary allocation for the National Institute of Ocean Technology
 (NIOT) has been kept at Rs.25.00 crores as against last year's allocation of Rs.23.40 crores. The increase in allocation
 was caused due to new activities on Marine Archaeology under the Coastal and Environmental Engineering Group and
 inclusion of Ocean Science and Technology for Islands Programme as part of the core Mission Programmes of NIOT.
 Feasibility studies for establishment of 5 MW OTEC plant is being implemented during the year 2003-04 by the
 Department in pursuance of the recommendation made by the Committee in its 101
st Report.
57.       The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation to the Department to build energy plants of higher capacity
 as it feels that this might be cost effective in the long run and lessen the dependence on fossil fuel for power generation.
NEW PROGRAMMES
Comprehensive Swath Bathymetric Survey
58.       This new programme entails scientific mapping of this area to have an inventory of potential resources and to
 identify the causes of hazards.  The study would help to develop innovative concepts in the following areas:
Submarine fans and their role on accumulation of hydrocarbons.
Submarine canyons and their role in transport and distribution of pollutants.
Island-understanding of submarine landslides and stability of coastlines.
Sedimentary processes-effect on fisheries and biogeochemical cycling.

115TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/115threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:25:50]
Sediment failure along slopes and their effects on communication cable links across the seafloor.
Tectonics of margins.
A financial allocation of Rs.12.00 crores has been sought for the year 2003-04.
59.       The Committee hopes that such activities of the Department yield good results.  The Committee strongly feels
 that the allocation for the Department for this area must be substantially enhanced. 
Gas Hydrates
60.       With ever increasing gap between demand and indigenous production of natural gas and the huge import bill
 incurred by India, it is necessary to look for alternative resources.  Gas hydrates have the potential of providing total
 energy security to our nation.  The programme consists of both scientific & technology development for gas hydrates.
61.       The Department, in association with CSIR and other laboratories, would focus on scientific research with special
 emphasis on resource extent evaluation and environmental impacts and development of technology for detection and
 qualification of gas hydrates in sediments.  Thereafter, exploratory drilling will be advised.  The steps in this
 programme will be to
Understanding the generation and accumulation of hydrates in sediments/
Estimate impact of gas dissolution on geological environment and climate.
Develop or adopt environmentally safe technology for production and transportation of gas from hydrates.
Draw up plans to monitor and manage environmental perturbation during hydrate harvesting.
62.       During the year it is proposed to examine the multi-channel seismic (MCS) data collected and carried out under
 special processing and analysis of MCS data acquired under Legal continental shelf programme.  It is also proposed to
 initiate the mapping of Bottom simulating Reflector (BSR) prone zone. A financial allocation of Rs.18.00 crores has
 been sought for the year 2003-04.
Acquisition of New Research Vessel
63.       The new vessel is meant for technology demonstration. A concept design of the vessel has been made and the
 technical specifications of the vessel have been drawn. In principle approval from the Planning Commission for
 acquisition of the vessel has been obtained. An EFC memo for acquisition of the vessel has been circulated to
 concerned Departments for comments.
64.       This vessel will serve as a platform for the programme envisaged in the X Plan and also serve as a utility science
 vessel which will augment the capacity need of the marine living and non-living resources programme of the
 Department.  The NIOT would be the nodal agency to implement this programme and to operate and maintain the
 vessel.  A detailed design and estimates for the vessel have been worked out and a detailed project report has been
 prepared, which is under active consideration of the Department. A financial allocation of Rs.2.00 crores has been
 sought for the year 2003-04.
 65.      The Committee has been recommending for a Research Vessel for the Department and therefore notes with
 satisfaction that the proposal for such a vessel has been approved in principle by the Planning Commission.  The
 Committee recommends that this proposal be implemented as soon as possible to enable the Department to do its
 important work in ocean development.
Geophysical Study of Laxmi Basin
66.       Under this programme the Department is planning to undertake detailed geophysical surveys along the entire
 west coast to establish conclusively the nature of basement in the Laxmi Basin. A financial allocation of Rs.2.50 crores
 has been sought for the year 2003-04.
67.       The Committee strongly recommends that all the new projects proposed by the Department should be taken up
 on a time bound basis.  The Committee also strongly recommends that sufficient allocations be made for the successful
 completion of these projects.
68.       After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development and assessing the progress
 of various important programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the budgetary
 allocation of Rs.199.33 crores, as sought by the Department for the year 2003-2004, under Demand No. 65, may be
 approved.
SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMMENDATIONS
 
1.         The Committee feels that the Department during 2002-03 had to scale down its activities due to reduction in its
 B.E. from Rs.175 crores to Rs.150 crores.  The Committee is constrained to note that in many cases major
 disproportionate variations is due to delay in getting the necessary Government approvals.  The Committee feels that
 these kind of hassles should be removed and strongly recommends higher allocations for activities of the Department

115TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/115threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:25:50]
 which is doing a commendable job.  The Committee also feels that there is an urgent need to review the whole planning
 and budgeting process in the Department so that realistic physical and financial targets are projected in the Budget and
 planned projects are not hampered due to drastic cuts at R.E. stage.  It is equally important to prioritise the projects in
 the light of their potential benefit to the Nation.
(Para 8)
2.         Commencement of the Antarctic Programme in the eighties and its evolution and growth represent the
 excellence of our scientific and technological capabilities beyond the frontiers of our country. The study and research
 undertaken during Antarctic expeditions have produced a repository of data and information which are of immense
 importance not only for India but for the entire world. Pursuing this mission as part of the mainstream of the
 international endeavour to explore the icy continent has made invaluable contribution to promote international
 understanding. The Committee, therefore, feels that the Antarctic programme should not be allowed to suffer for want
 of funds.  Besides, with a view to strengthening our scientific base in Antarctica, there is a need for expanding the area
 of activities by installing many more research stations in different regions of Antarctica.
 (Para 14)
3.         The Committee is also of the view that the National Centre for Antarctic Ocean Research (NCAOR) which is the
 nodal Department to execute the Antarctic programmes should also initiate its activities to establish the Country’s ice-
core repository and analytical facilities with focus on high-resolution histories of fact changes in climate, atmospheric
 composition and ice-cover in Antarctica.
 (Para 15)
4.         The Committee further recommends that the Department may take steps to conduct state-of-the-art experiments
 in Antarctica.
 (Para 16)
5.         The Committee hopes that the periodical review of the Polymetallic Nodules (PMN) Programme would continue
 to be undertaken to adopt new technologies in view of the fast changing technologies.  This project has tremendous
 potential in supplying adequate minerals for the benefit of our economy.
 (Para22)
6.         The Committee recommends that efforts to extract polymetallic manganese nodules from the deep seabed be
 assessed from the point of view of its impact on the ocean environment.
 (Para 23)
 7.        The Committee hopes that data generated from the R&D activities of the Department for extraction of
 manganese nodules could be studied in depth with the ultimate objective of designing a commercial plant.
 (Para 24)
8.         The Committee notes with satisfaction that under the Drugs from Sea Programme the Department has done
 commendable work.  The Committee trusts that the Department would continue the exploratory work relating to
 collection, identification and bio-evaluation of the marine flora and fauna from the Indian Coastal waters for the
 purpose of extracting drugs.
(Para 27)
9.         The Committee is of the view that possibly from marine resources some medicines could be extracted which
 otherwise are not available at present to treat some of the diseases affecting mankind.   Therefore, the Committee
 recommends that marine resources must be used in a sustainable way for the benefit of our people.
 (Para 28)
10.       The Committee recommends that the Department may augment its ongoing Coastal Ocean Monitoring and
 Prediction System to regularly monitor the condition of the coastal waters and adjoining areas. 
(Para 31)
11.       For strengthening ocean research centres in coastal universities, the Department is emphasising on quantum
 jump in our approach towards the ocean.  To achieve that purpose the Committee recommends that the Department
 should formulate an integrated approach and explore the possibilities of bringing all maritime educational institutions
 under one body such as a Maritime University. Since ocean sciences are multi-disciplinary sciences such an integrated
 approach, the Committee feels, will be of vital significance.  The Committee recommends that the Department should
 establish Oceanariums in different parts of the country.  If planetariums could promote knowledge and awareness about
 space, the Committee feels that Ocenariums could also create awareness about oceans and their resources.
(Para 36)
12.       The Committee observes that the Coastal Research Vessels(CRVs), with the participation of scientists of other
 related institutions, should cruise frequently to monitor pollution and do other multidisciplinary work.

115TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/115threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:25:50]
S.No. Name of the Scheme 2003-04
1. Polar Science 24.00
2. Polymetallic Nodules Programme 22.00
3. Ocean Observation and Information Services 35.00
4. Marine Research & Technology Development 21.50
4.1 Oceanographic Research Vessel (ORV & FORV) and MLR          2.50
(Para 40)
13.       The Committee notes that India is a signatory to the Ocean Charter which is not a legal entity, but which
 stipulates that all nations shall act in unison to protect the oceans.  India being a major maritime country in the Indian
 Ocean rim, it has a greater responsibility to take initiatives for bringing together all littoral countries for the
 development, protection and conservation of oceans.  The Committee notes with trepidation the observation of Dr. R.
 Sengupta, renowned oceanographer, “Of the three greatest water bodies, the Atlantic, the Pacific and the Indian Ocean,
 the latter was the cleanest.  But that is history now”.    The Committee  therefore  recommends  that  India  must  take 
 a  lead to protect its own interests and the interests of developing countries vis-a-vis their oceanic resources.
 (Para 47)
14.       The Committee recommends that in order to improve Oceanography services, the Department should strengthen
 the observation platforms.  The moored buoy network should also be augmented to improve generation of data useful
 for the Coastal and off shore developmental activities.  The Department should also process the data collected from
 Array for Real-time Geotropic Oceanography (ARGO) Floats for obtaining temperature and salinity profiles from the
 Indian Ocean to study the long-term climate and Monsoon variability.
 (Para 52)
15.       The Committee observes that the Department should monitor the performance of the Indian National Centre for
 Ocean Information Services (INCOIS) for efficient dissemination of ocean data and data products to user communities
 on a regular basis.
(Para 53)
16.       The Committee recommends that the Department should take initiatives in setting up information kiosks in the
 coastal states to facilitate the dissemination of data/data products to user communities.
 (Para 54)
17.       The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation to the Department to build energy plants of higher capacity
 as it feels that this might be cost effective in the long run and lessen the dependence on fossil fuel for power generation.
(Para 57)
18.       The Committee hopes that such activities of the Department yield good results.  The Committee strongly feels
 that the allocation for the Department for this area must be substantially enhanced. 
(Para 59)
19.       The Committee has been recommending for a Research Vessel for the Department and therefore notes with
 satisfaction that the proposal for such a vessel has been approved in principle by the Planning Commission.  The
 Committee recommends that this proposal be implemented as soon as possible to enable the Department to do its
 important work in ocean development.
(Para 65)
20.       The Committee strongly recommends that all the new projects proposed by the Department should be taken up
 on a time bound basis.  The Committee also strongly recommends that sufficient allocations be made for the successful
 completion of these projects.
(Para 67)
21.       After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development and assessing the progress
 of various important programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the budgetary
 allocation of Rs.199.33 crores, as sought by the Department for the year 2003-2004, under Demand No. 65, may be
 approved.
(Para 68)
ANNEXURE
 
Budgetary allocations for the year 2003-04
             (Rs.in crores)
 

115TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/115threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:25:50]
4.2 Drugs from Sea 2.50
4.3 Assistance for Research Projects 5.0
4.5 Ocean Awareness 1.00
4.6 Manpower Training 0.50
4.7 Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management (ICMAM) 5.50
4.8 Deep Sea Mineral Exploration 0.75
4.9 BENFAN 1.75
5. National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) 25.00
6. Coastal Research Vessel (CRV) 5.00
7. Delineation of Outer Limits of Continental Shelf 8.00
8. Comprehensive Swath Bathymetric Survey of Indian EEZ 12.00
9. Gas-hydrate Exploration & Technology Development for Exploitation 18.00
10. Acquisition of new Research Vessels 2.00
11 Geo-physical Study of Laxmi Basin 2.50
                                          Total 175.00
            BUDGET DEMANDS MADE/APPROVED AND ACTUALLY UTILISED DURING,
2000-01, 2001-02 and 2002-03
 
  2000-01 2001-02 2002-03
S.N. Schemes / Programmes B.E Actuals B.E Actuals BE R.E
A. PLAN SCHEMES       
1. Polar Science/Antarctic Research 20.00 20.70 20.00 19.22 26.50 20.90
2. Polymetallic Nodules Programmes 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
2.1 i  Survey and Exploration 1.00 1.81 0.05 0.05 1.25 1.25
2.2 ii  EIA Study 0.31 0.15 0.25 0.14 1.00 1.00
2.3 iii Mining R&D 5.91 4.73 6.00 6.36 10.00 10.00
2.4 iv Technology Development
 (Metallurgy)
8.00 7.54 6.00 4.53 1.75 1.75
2.5 v. Unmanned Submersibles 4.09 0.00 5.00 0.00 6.00 6.00
3. Ocean Observation and Information
 Services (OOIS)
14.00 11.28 19.70 14.16 25.00 24.00
4. Marine Research & Technology Devp. 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
4.1 Oceanographic Research Vessel (ORV
 & FORV) and MLR
2.96 2.59 2.96 1.05 7.35 6.10
4.2 Drugs from Sea 2.00 2.00 2.20 1.62 2.00 2.00
4.3 Assistance for Research Projects 2.70 2. 89 3.50 2.66 3.50 3.50
4.4 Coastal Ocean Monitoring and
 Prediction System (COMAPS)
2.05 2.25 4.05 2.15 2.00 2.00
4.5 Ocean Awareness 0.70 0.82 0.80 0.86 0.70 0.70
4.6 Manpower Training 0.30 0.30 0.60 0.18 0.30 0.30
4.7 Integrated Coastal and Marine Area
 Management (ICMAM)
6.70 3.59 6.50 4.38 5.00 5.00
4.8 Deep Sea Mineral Exploration 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.50
4.9 BENFAN 0.00 0.05 1.15 1.04 3.00 1.00
5. National Institute of Ocean Technology
 (NIOT)
15.70 17.00 13.30 30.30 23.40 23.40
6. Coastal Research Vessel (CRV) 2.50 2.75 3.94 3.90 5.00 5.00
7. Delineation of Outer Limits of
 Continental Shelf
43.00 0.00 43.00 25.00 18.00 18.00
8. Comprehensive Swath Bathymetric
 Survey of Indian EEZ
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 14.00 5.25
9. Gas-hydrate Exploration & Technology 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 8.50 4.50

115TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/115threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:25:50]
 Development for Exploitation
10. Acquisition of new Research Vessels 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.00 0.10
11 Geo-physical Study of Laxmi Basin 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.00 7.00
12. International Cooperation 0.60 0.46 0.70 0.52 0.00 0.00
13. Island Development Programme 1.00 0.76 0.75 0.71 0.75 0.75
14. Direction and Administration 1.46 1.46 1.50 1.15 0.00 0.00
15. Marine Instrumentation 0.02 0.00 0.05 0.00 0.00 0.00
 Sub-Total (A) 135.00 83.13 142.00 119.98 175.00 150.00
 
 
B. NON-PLAN SCHEMES
 ORV Sagar Kanya 10.30 9.98 13.77 17.17 10.00 10.00
 FORV Sagar Sampada 9.84 7.85 10.31 11.28 11.41 11.41
 Secretariat & Economic Services 1.83 1.31 1.74 1.40 1.89 1.89
 Administrative Support &
 Infrastructure
1.03 0.58 0.98 0.63 0.98 0.98
 Sub-Total (B) 23.00 19.72 26.80 30.48 24.28 24.28
 TOTAL (A+B) 158.00 102.85 168.80 150.46 199.28 174.28
MINUTES
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 1
st April, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
                       
                        PRESENT
 
Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Shri M. V. Rajasekharan
Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
Shri B.P. Singhal
Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
Smt. S. G. Indira
Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
Shri T. S. Bajwa
Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
 
LOK  SABHA
 
Smt. Margaret Alva
Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan                   
Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
Chowdhary Talib Hussain
Shri C. Kuppusami
Dr. Charan Das Mahant
Shri Madhusudan Mistry
Shri Suresh Pasi                                               
Dr. Ashok Patel                                               
Shri Prahlad Patel        

115TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/115threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:25:50]
Shri Shriniwas Patil
Prof. R. R. Pramanik                           
Shri Ganta Sreenivasa Rao
Kunwar Akhilesh Singh
Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar
Shri Balram Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
                       
                        Shri S.N. Sahu, Director
                        Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
                        Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BIO-TECHNOLOGY
            *                                                          *                                                          *
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT 
Dr. Harsh K. Gupta, Secretary
Shri D. P. Singh, AS & Financial Adviser
Shri S. K. Das, Scientist
Dr. B. R. Subramaniam, Scientist
Shri V. Ravindranathan, Scientist
Shri Ajai Saxena, Director
Dr. V. Sampath, Scientist
Prof. M. Ravindran, Director, NIOT
Dr. K. Radhakrishnan, Director, INCOIS, Hyderabad
Shri R. K. Sharma, Scientist
Shri Rakesh Kumar, DS
Dr. M. P. Wakidikar, Scientist
Dr. K. Somasundar, Scientist
Shri P. Madeswaran, Scientist
Shri K. V. Sharma, Scientist
Dr. S. Rajan, Scientist, NCAOR
Dr. S.A.S. Naqvi, Scientist
Shri A. B. Chaudhury, Scientist
Shri K. Narayanan, US
Shri B. L. Kureel, US
 
REPRESENTATIVES FROM OTHER OFFICES/ORGANISATIONS
 
Dr. R. R. Kelkar, DG, Indian Meteorological Department, New Delhi
Shri P. C. Mandal, DG, GSI, Kolkata
Dr. M. D. Zingde, Scientist-in-charge, Regional Centre for NIO, Mumbai
Dr. E. Desa, Director NIO, Gao
Dr. C. M. Gupta, Director, CPCB, Lucknow
Shri R. C. Trivedi, AD, CPCB, New Delhi
Shri P. K. Sen, GM, EIL, New Delhi
 
2.         *                                                          *                                                          *
3.         *                                                          *                                                          *
4.         *                                                          *                                                          *
5.                     The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 02.00 P.M. for lunch and re-assembled at 3.00 P.M. to hear the
 Secretary, Department of Ocean Development.
______________________________________________________________________________
***      Relates to other matters.

115TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/115threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:25:50]
 
6.         The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other officials of the Department of Ocean Development. Chairman
 then requested the Secretary to make a brief presentation regarding the Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
 Department.  Thereafter, the Secretary made a visual presentation regarding the major activities and achievements of
 the Department.  The Secretary also explained briefly the budgetary allocations on different heads as also the
 functioning of the Department.  Thereafter Members sought clarifications on the points that emerged out of the
 presentation of the Secretary.  The Secretary replied to the questions.
            The witnesses then withdrew.
                        A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7.         The Committee then adjourned at 05.30 P.M.
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 03.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 23
rd April, 2003 in Committee Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
                       
                        PRESENT
 
Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Shri M. V. Rajasekharan
Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
Shri B.P. Singhal
Smt. S. G. Indira
Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
Shri Lalit Suri
Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
       
LOK  SABHA
 
Smt. Margaret Alva
Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
Chowdhary Talib Hussain
Shri G.J.Javiya
Shri C. Kuppusami
Shri S. Murugesan
Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
Shri Naresh Puglia
Prof. I. G. Sanadi
Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar
 
SECRETARIAT
                       
                        Shri S.N. Sahu, Director
                        Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
                        Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
 
2.         *                                                          *                                                          *
After some discussion, the Committee directed the Secretariat to incorporate the suggestions made by Shri Singhal in all
 the reports on Demands for Grants.  The Committee also requested three of its Members, Shri Manoj Bhattacharya, Dr.
 (Smt.) Beatrix D’Souza and Smt. Margaret Alva, to go through the reports to suggest further amendments, if any.  The

115TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/115threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:25:50]
 Committee decided to meet for consideration and adoption of the reports after these were received from the above
 Members.
______________________________________________________________________________
***      Relates to other matters.
3.         *                                                          *                                                          *
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 04.00 P.M.
______________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
            The Committee met at 03.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 29
th April, 2003 in Committee Room ‘B’, Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
                       
                        PRESENT
 
Shri Manoj Bhattacharya   –– In the Chair*
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Shri C. Apok Jamir
Shri M. V. Rajasekharan
Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharma
Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
Shri B.P. Singhal
Shri T. S. Bajwa
Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
       
LOK  SABHA
 
Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
Shri G. J. Javiya
Shri Babubhai K. Katara
Dr. Charan Das Mahant
Shri Suresh Pasi
Prof. I. G. Sanadi
Kunwar Akhilesh Singh
Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar
Dr. Bikram Sarkar
 
SECRETARIAT
                       
                        Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri S.N. Sahu, Director
                        Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
                        Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
 
2.         The Committee took up consideration of Draft ***, ***, ***, 115
th, *** and *** Reports of the Committee on
 Demands for Grants (2003-2004) pertaining to ***, ***, ***, Department of Ocean Development, *** and ***
 respectively.  The Committee considered and adopted each of the above reports.
 ____________________________________________________________________________
* In the absence of Chairman Shri Manoj Bhattacharya was voted to the Chair.

115TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/115threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:25:50]
*** Relates to other matters.
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Shri Manoj Bhattacharya and Shri B. P. Singhal to
 present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Dr. Charan Das Mahant and in his absence Shri Suresh Pasi  to lay the
 Reports on the table of the Lok Sabha.
4.         The Committee placed on record its deepest appreciation for the officers and staff attached with the Committee
 for their painstaking effort in drafting quality reports. It further referred to the style of writing of the Reports and noted
 that these blended substantive information on science and environment with literature.
5.                     *                                                          *                                                          *
6.                     The Committee then adjourned at 03.30 P.M.
 
______________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.