6th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/6threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
SIXTH REPORT
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1993-94)
 
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY FOR THE YEAR 1992-93
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 23RD    DECEMBER, 1993)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 1993
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 C O N T E N T S
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                          
2.INTRODUCTION                                                              
3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                   
4.APPENDIX                                                                                      
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FOREST
 
1.         Syed Sibtey Razi -Chairman
 
            RAJYA SABHA
2.         Shri N. Giri Prasad
3.         Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
4.         Prof. M.G.K. Menon
5.         Shri Suresh Pachouri
6.         Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel
@7.     Vacant
*8.       Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
9.         Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
10.       Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
 
LOK SABHA
11.       Shri M.G. Reddy
12.       Shri Oscar Fernandes
13.       Shri K.G. Shivappa
14.       Shri Digvijaya Singh
15.       Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
16.       Shri Praful Manoharbhai Patel
17.       Shri Sharad Dighe

6th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/6threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
18.       Shri Rama Chandra Rath
£19.     Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav
20.       Shri Harchand Singh
21.       Shri Yashwantrao Patil
22.       Shri Vijay Naval Patil
23.       Shri P.C. Chacko
24.       Kumari Farida Topno
25.       Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
26.       Shrimati Mahendra Kumari
27.       Shri Chandresh Patel
28.       Shrimati Vasundhara Raje
29.       Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
30.       Shri Balraj Pasi
31.       Shrimati Bhavana Chikhalia
32.       Shri Ram Prasad Singh
33.       Shrimati Saroj Dubey
34.       Shri Harpal Panwar
35.       Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
36.       Shri Jitendra Nath Das
 37.      Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy
#38.     Vacant
39.       Shri Bhim Singh Patel
40.       Shri E. Ahamed
______________________________________________________________________________________
@ Vacancy caused due to retirement of Dr. R.K. Poddar from the Membership of Rajya Sabha.
*Nominated w.e.f. May 13, 1993 vice Dr. Naunihal Singh resigned.
£Nominated w.e.f. August 26, 1993 vice Shri Bhagey Gobardhan died.
#Vacancy caused due to death of Shri Nani Bhattacharya.
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N. C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri Nand Lal, Under Secretary
Shri N. K. Singh, Assistant Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY
 (DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY)
 
Dr. P. Rama Rao, Secretary
Shri Y. S. Rajan, Advisor
Shri S. B. Krishnan, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
Shri S. Ghose, Joint Secretary
Maj. Thiagarajan, Advisor
Dr. V. Rampal, Advisor
Dr. J. Dhar, Advisor
Dr. A. R. Rajeshwari, Joint Advisor
Dr. N. K. Sehgal, Joint Advisor
Dr. S. K. Misra, Director
Shri V. Rao Aiyagari, Director                       
Shri P. K. B. Menon, Director
Dr. R. K. Midh, Director
Shri A. N. N. Murthy, Director
Dr. H. K. Gupta, Director
Prof. Ramnath Cowsik, Director

6th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/6threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
Dr. Avijit Sen, Director
Dr. D. Chakraborty, Director
Dr. N. Sen Roy. D.G. IMD
Dr. G. S. Mandal, DDG, IMD
Shri V. P. Kamble, DDG, IMD
Shri C. J. Jhony, Principal Scientific Officer
Shri B. Hari Gopal, Principal Scientific Officer
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
R E P O R T
General Background
 
1.         Science and Technology has had a long and rich tradition in India. Even in ancient times, India is known to have
 made pioneering contributions in the areas like mathematics, astronomy and chemistry. Iron-pillar situated near Qutab
 Minar is an eloquent testimony to the great advances made in the field of metallurgy in ancient India. From towards the
 end of the last century and during the first half of the present century, science in India witnessed a period of renaissance
 when India produced renowned scientists like J.C.Bose, S. Ramanujan, C.V. Raman, S.N. Bose, Meghnad Saha, P.C.
 Mahalanobis, Birbal Sahni, H.J. Bhabha, S.Chandrasekhar and others who are known for their path-breaking
 contributions in the areas of basic research.
 
2.         Spectacular achievements made in the field of science and technology during the last century brought about
 unprecedented economic growth and social transformation in the industrialised countries. This led to the creation of a
 favourable climate for science and technology being made a part of the national endeavour in developing countries as
 well. Governments in developing countries started paying increasing attention to science and technology on the
 assumption that an indigenous scientific and technological base would bring faster economic development and social
 transformation.
 
3.         After Independence, India also decided to use science and technology as a key instrument in the process of
 nation-building particularly through the vision and initiative of Jawaharlat Nehru. At the time of Independence, the
 scientific and technological base in India was neither properly organised nor capable enough to take on major national
 challenge. It was, therefore, decided to give special attention to create the necessary infrastructure for the development
 o4 science and technology in India. Various institutions and a network of laboratories for conducting research in
 specialised areas were established. Ministry of Scientific Research and Natural Resources was created by the
 Government of India in 1951 for organising and directing scientific research for national development.
 
4.         A symbol of the Government's forward-looking thinking in promoting science in the country was the adoption of
 the Scientific Policy Resolution in 1958 which aimed at securing for the people of the country all the benefits that can
 accrue from the acquisition and application of scientific knowledge. The Resolution aimed at producing research
 scientists of the highest quality in the country and introducing programmes for training scientific and technical
 personnel on a scale adequate to fulfil the country's need in areas like Health Education, Agriculture, Industry, Defence,
 etc.
 
5.         The Department of Science and Technology (DST) was, therefore, set up in 1971 with a view to providing a
 "nodal department for organising, coordinating and promoting science and technology (S&T) activities in which a
 number of institutions and Departments have interests and capabilities". This, of course, does not cover the specific
 programmes in fields such as atomic energy and space for which Government has specially set up Departments and
 Commissions. Major roles assigned to DST involve promoting new areas of science and technology and formulating
 policy statements and guidelines on S&T. The Department has since undertaken various projects and programmes for
 this purpose, such as providing support to basic and applied research; critical technology programmes; socially oriented
 S&T activities for
rural areas and weaker sections; and entrepreneurship development with a view to creating self-employment
 opportunities.
 

6th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/6threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
6.         In order to assess whether the DST is fulfilling its mandate effectively and efficiently, the Committee decided to
 study the various aspects of the functioning of the Department by analysing its Annual Report for the year 1992-93.
 
7.         The Committee was informed about various programmes and activities undertaken by DST for development of
 S&T and coordination of multi-institutional and inter-disciplinary activities at the national level. The Department also
 undertakes various societal programmes to help people in rural areas and weaker sections of society. It is also rendering
 scientific services such as collection and supply of meteorological .and seismic data to different user agencies and
 departments of the Government. Besides, these, the Department is also looking after various autonomous high quality
 research institutions and professional bodies throughout the country. The Department is promoting scientific research in
 frontline and priority areas of Research and Development (R&D) in various disciplines of science and technology by
 funding those through the mechanism of science and Engineering Research Council (SERC). SERC supports and
 monitors R&D efforts in new and inter-disciplinary areas by providing financial assistance, setting up of core groups
 and establishing national facilities required for promoting a given discipline of S&T. During the year 1992-93, SERC
 approved 155 projects costing Rs.22.96 crores in different areas of S&T. The Committee was informed about the
 'Young Scientists Scheme' meant for providing opportunities for pursuing exciting and innovative ideas 'by young
 scientists.
 
8.         The Committee was also given an idea about the multi-disciplinary activities of the National Centre for Medium
 Range Weather Forecasting and Development of Agro-meteorological Advisory Services which aim at the
 development of the capability of issuing medium range (3-10 days in advance) weather forecasting mainly for
 preparation of the weather based advisories for the farming community and dissemination of the same to the users.
 
9. The Committee was also informed about the support and facilities provided by the Department for science promotion
 through the initiation of several schemes such as the Regional Sophisticated Instrumentation Centres (RSICs),
 Sophisticated Instrumentation Facilities (SI Fs), National Coordination of Testing and Calibration Facilities (NCTC),
 support to State S&T Councils to professional bodies for various S&T activities. One Department also provides
 assistance for international travel to participate in scientific seminars and symposia.
 
10.       In the area of technology development, DST has evolved certain schemes intended to accelerate growth of
 indigenous capability such as Instrument Development programme, Robitics and Automation, Biomedical engineering,
 Cryogenics, Ceramics, etc. "Critical Technology Programme" is a new initiative to support selected activities conducive
 to strengthening technological capabilities of the country. The Technology Information Forecasting & Assessment
 Council (TIFAC) generates Technology Forecast and Technology Assessment documents in various areas. 'A number
 of technology forecasting, technology assessment and techno-market survey studies were conducted by the TIFAC in
 prioritised areas. DST has also set up a Science & Technology Advisory Committee (STAC) with a view to formulating
 long term S&T plans/ programmes relevant to concerned sectors.
 
11.       As regards the programmes involving international cooperation in scientific and technological fields the
 Committee was informed that DST has the nodal responsibility of coordinating international collaborations. Such
 programmes are in operation at bilateral, regional and multilateral levels. Agreement for cooperation in S&T has been
 signed with Hungary, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Poland, Italy, Mangolia and Israel during the year 1992-93. Multilateral
 programmes on S&T including regional cooperation programmes and those involving UN and other international
 agencies are also being looked after by DST.
 
12.       Application of science and technologyfor the benefit of society is one of the important concerns of DST. Several
 experimental projects were undertaken by the Department in the past with a view to demonstrating the changes that
 could be brought about by S&T in improving the living conditions of the rural people and those of the women and other
 weaker sections of society.
 
13.       Activities connected with science communications and popularisation and National Science and Technology
 Entrepreneurship Development were also promoted by the
 Department. The Bharat Jan Gyan Vigyan Jatha (BJGVJ-92) communication event, which could directly address a
 large number of people in various parts of the country touching nearly a fourth of the population . The programme
 informed on some of the basic problems like water, nutrition; health, environment and literacy. The 144 - part radio

6th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/6threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
 serial on "Manav ka Vikas' being broadcast simultaneously in 18 Indian languages, is the largest science serial ever
 produced in the world. A scheme called Mass Employment Generation through Science and Technology (MEGST) has
 been launched for providing avenues for self-employment to unemployed science and engineering graduates, mainly
 through development.
 14.       Besides, DST provides operational services in the field of meteorology and surveys
 through India Meteorological Department (IMD), Survey of India (SOI) and National Atlas
 and Thematic Mapping Organisation (NATMO). These services are being modernised through
 the introduction of sophisticated equipments. With the help of widely distributed INSAT-based
 disaster warning receivers, it has been made possible to forecast and issue tropical cyclone
 advisories. These services are offered to departments dealing with Agriculture, Aviation, etc.
 Survey of India (SOI), the country's principal agency for surveying and mapping has been
 actively engaged in the production of various types of topographical and geographical maps
 for defence mid developmental purposes. It has been carrying out geodetic and geophysical
 surveys, viz., tidal gravity and geomagnetic observations for tunnel alignments and crustal
 movement studies etc. The National Atlas and Thematic Mapping Organisation (NATMO)
 provides valuable services in the preparation of thematic maps. The Department also supports
 a number of autonomous research and academic institutions which are working in areas like
 medical science, plasma physics, palaeobotany, astronomy, astrophysics, geo-magnetism,
 Himalayan geology and climatology, etc.
 
Role of DST
 15.       When asked about the role and overall impact of DST in the promotion of S&T
 activities, the representative of the Department informed the Committee that DST was supposed to promote scientific
 research and development technology-related programmes and that it was also mandated to constitute the S&T inputs
 into society-related programmes. He informed the Committee that there was no single agency in the Government which
 was solely responsible for implementing society-related programmes. There are many departments/ agencies involved
 in it. In this regard Secretary, DST observed:
 
If we have to have the impact of demonstrations what is important is to make DST more effective in
 participating in the programmes of other departments .... there are large number of programmes. If coordination
 can be ensured, if effectiveness can be ensured whether it is the Ministry of Welfare or the Ministry of Rural
 Development, then we can make the impact.
 
In view of the observations made by the Secretary, DST, the Committee feels that the DST should dovetail its
 efforts not only with scientific departments but also with such Ministries/Departments like Railways, Defence,
 Communications, Commerce, Industry, etc. The Department should also coordinate its activities with the other socio-
economic Ministries. Whilst this is being attempted, the real success of S&T for national development will come about
 when this coordination can be made most effective.
 
Allocation of Funds :
 
16.       The Committee noticed that while the Annual Plans allocation for the DST during 1990-92 was Rs.274.20
 crores, actuals for the period were Rs.240.06 crores only. In other words, actuals were Rs.34.14 crores less than the
 allocation for this period. Attention of the Committee was drawn towards the fact that the allocation to the Department
 constituted just 0.2% of the total Central Sector outlay during the Sixth Plan. It went slightly up to 0.36% in the
 Seventh Plan. This share has further come down in the Eighth Plan. The Secretary, DST, also informed the Committee
 that of the total allocation made to the Department, a lion's share is being spent on the India Meteorological Department
 and Survey of India. Besides, DST is also required to support 13 autonomous research institutions like Raman Research
 Institute, Indian Institute of Astrophysics, etc. Thus, the remaining funds are not sufficient to fulfil the mandate
 assigned to it. The Committee, therefore, realises that the DST is working under severe financial constraints, and that
 with present level of allocation, it was difficult for the Department to promote effectively the mandate assigned to it.
 The Committee took particular notice of the financial paucity for carrying out R&D activities and various society-

6th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/6threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
related programmes. The Committee was told that any of the society-related programmes did not have more than Rs.4
 crores. Since these programmes are committed to supporting a large number of core groups, this amount is not
 sufficient. The Committee feels that there is need to spend more in the field of S&T. The Government should,
 therefore, make a realistic assessment of the financial requirements of the DST keeping in view the obligations which it
 has to fulfil and make suitable allocation to the Department.
 
17.       Survey of India and India Meteorological Department are huge organisations employing 17042 and 8307
 persons, respectively. This is needed in their cases as they are all India service organisations with considerable
 technical and field work. DST has a sanctioned strength of 757. The staff strength of DST, since it includes the
 personnel of IMD and SOI naturally conveys the impression that the Department is organised like any other
 administrative department of the Government rather than a scientific department which normally is expected to be very
 compact and highly scientific and officer-oriented. The Committee, however, is of the view that the ministerial strength
 of DST is also large for the role it has to play. The Committee, therefore, recommends that DST should organise itself
 in such a manner as may facilitate it to devote the bulk of its funds on scientific and research activities.
 
Technology Fee :
 
18.       The Committee is also of the view that a part of the fund could be raised from various beneficiaries of the
 technologies developed by DST. When asked about collecting something like development cess as was being done in
 the case of sugar and coal, the Secretary, DST had this to say :
 
"Fortunately for us we have what is known as technology fee which is being levied. Every import of
 technology requires a fee to be paid .... commodity cess is usually used by the corresponding socio-
economic Ministries more for the purpose of expansion of their activities. So, if we use the amount for
 the promotion of technology development and the DST has to perform that role, it will be very good.
 This is one cess to which we would like to have access. This is now being levied as part of the
 technology growth in the country. Industries are importing technology and in the liberalised
 environment, more and more imports will take place and there is a five per cent cess which is being paid
 towards those imports of technology. If we can have access to this, then we really don't have to trouble
 or burden the Planning Commission."
 
In view of the above, Committee feels that the Government may examine the feasibility of implementing the
 suggestion of allowing DST to have access to the technology fee; but there would have to be careful monitoring of the
 use to which funds' are put.
 
Research and Development (R&D) :
 
19.       Research and Development in various disciplines of S&T forms one of the important activities of the DST. Basic
 objectives of the R&D activities cover integrated research programmes in inter-disciplinary fields, frontier areas in
 science and engineering, encouraging brilliant young scientists and promoting general research capabilities in relevant
 areas of S&T. National R&D programmes are supported by DST involving a number of academic and research
 institutions, professional bodies and other socio-economic departments of the Government. Industrial R&D forms an
 important component of overall R&D activities in the country in which both the Public and the Private Sectors are
 involved. As regards the state of Industry-related R&D in India, the Committee was informed that of the total national
 R&D expenditure (Rs.4186.43 crores) during 1990-91, 68.9% came from Central Government, 7.9% from State
 Governments, 10.6% was contributed by public sector industries and 12.6% by the private sector industries. The major
 share of national expenditure on R&D was thus met from government sources (87.4%) and the rest 12,6% came from
 the private industries.
 
The Committee notices that this ratio is just the reverse in the developed economies such as Korea and Japan. In
 Korea, for example, in 1988, government share in the expenditure on R&D was just 18.1°/o and that of the private
 sector was 81.9%. Similarly, in Japan, this ratio was 20% and 80% respectively during the same year. The Committee
 feels that the share of private sector industries in R&D activities in India is far more less, particularly when the various
 incentives have been given to them. There is a need to raise standard of industrial research with a view to meeting the

6th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/6threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
 changing economic situation and to see that the country competes with others. Achieving this would certainly require
 substantial financial input which, as things stand today, is not possible, unless the private sector industries which are
 making use of expertise and technology developed by DST and its various centres, gives part of its cost back to the
 nation. The Committee, therefore, suggests that efforts should be made to motivate private industries to put more
 money into industry-related R&D activities. The Committee feels that by doing so a close linkage between Science-
industry-university can also be established.
 
Technology Information, Forecasting & Assessment Council:
 
20.       Technology Information, Forecasting & Assessment Council (TIFAC) has the primary mandate to generate
 Technology Forecasting (TF) and Technology Assessment (TA) documents in various technology areas and establish
 an on-line nationally accessible technology information system. The Committee noted the fact that according to the
 Department TA/TF studies have been completed in some areas like sugarcane and sugar production technologies,
 biotechnology, electronic technologies, aviation, etc., the tempo in implementing various programmes relating to
 TA/FF on an overall basis has not caught up; and even in the areas where work has been taken up, the depth is not
 adequate. The Committee is of the view that further major initiatives are required to be taken by the TIFAC to create an
 impact in this regard.
 
International Cooperation :
 
21.       On the question of international cooperation in the areas of science and technology, particularly at the bilateral
 level, the Committee was informed that such cooperation could play a prominent role in R&D activities at a relatively
 low cost. A great impetus can, therefore, be provided to S&T activities by seeking cooperation of the advanced
 countries. In this connection the representative of the Department gave the example of India's cooperation with Israel
 under which there would be a 3 million dollar Joint fund contributed equally by both the governments. It has been
 proposed that the projects to be taken up under this scheme should be decided by experts not by government officials.
 Similarly, a research centre has been set up in Hyderabad in cooperation with Bylorussia, where coating of blades of
 aircrafts has been started. This used to be earlier got done in England which involved a considerable amount of foreign
 exchange. In view of the benefits accruing from the international cooperation the Committee emphasises the need for
 building broad based R&D infrastructure even with foreign help and cooperation which would be advantageous to the
 country to make use of its comparatively inexpensive scientific manpower.
 
Brain Drain :
 
22.       Most of our young scientists and engineers who go abroad for higher study do not come back even after
 completing their studies. When Committee enquired about their number and employment profile, etc. it was informed
 that no such data was available with the Government. Department of Science & Technology, however, had sponsored
 some pilot-studies at IIT, Delhi and AIIMS, New Delhi yielding some estimates in this regard. For example, it was
 found that about 30% of the graduates from IIT had migrated abroad where most of them worked as practising research
 engineers and scientists. Similarly, the overall brain drain from AIIMS for the period 1956 to 1980 was 50% with a
 decreasing trend from 1971 onwards. The magnitude varied from 3% in 1980 to 89% in 1967. The field of work of
 those settled abroad had shown that 84% were in clinical practice, 30% in teaching and 19% in research, etc. The
 Committee feels that a poor country like India can ill-afford the drain of trained engineers, scientists and doctors,
 particularly when the country spends scarce money on training them. The Committee desires that the government
 should study the phenomenon of brain drain and evolve effective strategies to convince and motivate our scientists and
 engineers to come back after completing their studies abroad and furthermore, devise measures whereby we can make
 use of our scientists located abroad who desire to help in development of science and technology in our country and
 thereby contribute to the development.
 
Bharat Jan Gyan Vigyan Jatha (BJGVJ) :
 
23.       When asked about BJGVJ and post-Jatha activities, the Committee was informed in a written reply that during
 the Jatha period, over 400 Jathas in 375 districts touching nearly one-fourth of the population of the country were
 organised. Each district had its own Jatha covering 100 villages. Some 2500 volutarty agencies and other government

6th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/6threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
 organisations also participated in it. The postojatha phased covers strengthening S&T communication/popularisation
 activities and identifying local problems and mobilisation of people for the possible solution of the same. Thereafter, a
 Mass Action For National Regeneration would be launched. Programme planned for this might include, inter alia, basic
 surveys of the village/gram panchayat on themes such as literacy and elementary education, traditional methods of
 communication, organisation of competitions among local students/youth on making posters/slogans, village gram
 panchayat/ block level competitions on best farmer, best craftsman, etc. The Committee appreciates the steps taken and
 proposed to be taken by the Department in strengthening S&T communication/ popularisation. The Committee is of the
 opinion that such steps would go a long way in inculcating scientific temper and rational thinking among villagers. The
 BJGVJ programme should also be utilised for the purpose of taking science and technology from laboratories and
 universities to the people,
 
Appropriate Technology:
 
24.       S&T has to be utilised as a key instrument in taking care of problems faced by weaker sections, particularly
 those living in rural areas. Scientific researches and technology development efforts, no doubt, aim at devising
 technologies appropriate to the local needs and conditions but much more needs to be done in this regard. For example,
 particle board which is being manufactured from the rice-husk which can replace natural wood can also be
 manufactured from other materials such as Sugarcane skin or coir waste. In rural areas, poor people live in thatched
 houses made of locally available material which lasts only a year or two. If a chemical treatment could be worked out
 as could prevent or delay the decay of these leaves, etc. which would make them last longer, it would immensely
 benefit poor people. CSIR has already developed many packages for the poor people, particularly those living in rural
 and remote areas. For example, fire-proofing of thatched roofs is a technology which has already been developed by
 CSIR. But unfortunately such technologies have not reached the target-groups. In this regard Committee is aware of the
 limitations of the scientific departments. The scientific departments can promote socially-beneficial technologies but
 they are not always in a position to deliver such technologies to the people because the extension mechanism requires
 not only additional funding but extra efforts for which these departments are not particularly trained. Moreover, the
 emphasis of these departments is on the developing of socially-beneficial technologies. The Committee, therefore,
 recommends that in order to ensue that the socially beneficial technologies reach the target groups, DST should make
 efforts to enlist the support of socio-economic Ministries/Departments of the Central and State Governments which
 should help in promoting extension activities and coordinate its activities with CSIR in this regard.
 
State Councils for S&T:
 
25.       About the nature of activities of S&T Councils in various .States and Union territories and their sources of
 finance, the Committee was informed that State S&T Councils were set up for "promoting and fostering the application
 of science and technology for socio-economic development of States and Union territories . Some of the programmes
 being undertaken by  them are in the area of popularisation of science, entrepreneurship development, remote
 sensing, rural development, R&D support for location specific needbased projects,
 demonstration and field trials, etc. As regards funding of the State S&T Councils, the
 representative of DST told the Committee that while DST provides funding towards the
 secretarial staff in the State S&T Councils, the funds for the activities/programmes are
 provided as a part of the State Annual Plans, based on discussions in the Planning
 Commission in which Department of Science and Technology also participated. When asked
 about the existence of control or monitoring mechanism, if any, the Committee was informed
 that it was very difficult for DST to perform a controlling role because the States are
 autonomous. Generally, they would not accept a controlling role of DST and, therefore, it
 only plays a promotional role. Monitoring of the activities of the State S&T Councils,
 however, is done through an annual all-India review meeting on specific S&T themes with
 heads of S&T Secretariat of Council in which Union Minister of State (S&T) is also present.
 Regional level meetings are also held to review the existing S&T structure at the State level
 and to identify areas of mutual cooperation between the States and Union territories in the
 respective regions. Executive Committees of all the State Councils meet 3 or 4 times a year
 to consider new activities as well as to review on-going programmes. A DST officer
 participates in all these meetings. Besides, DST participates while State S&T Annual Plans

6th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/6threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
 and Five Year Plan are discussed in Planning Commission under its working group on 'S&T Sector'. The Committee
 observes that S&T Councils in some of States are not working satisfactorily and, therefore, they need to be activised
 and for this purpose DST should coordinate~ its efforts with those States where the S&T councils are not functioning
 properly.
 
Natural Vagaries:
 
26.       India Meteorological Department (IMD) which provides meteorological services is the principal institution in all
 matters relating to meteorology, and allied subjects. IMD has developed various techniques by which it can now very
 accurately locate and monitor cyclones as they develop and move over time and space and issue warnings about
 magnitude, point of impact, time of impact, etc. While the Committee appreciates the progress made by IMD in its
 cyclone-forecasting, as a result of which disaster prevention and mitigation in this area has attained world standard, it
 expresses its serious concern over the fact that not enough work has been done in the field of seismology. The
 Committee discussed various aspects of seismology including the possibility of earthquake prediction and warning and
 noted the fact that a separate study on the subject is being conducted by the Rao Committee appointed in the aftermath
 of the earthquake in the Marathwada region.
 
27.       With regard to other natural vagaries, the Committee notices that the entire Himalayan region faces problems
 generated by natural vagaries such as rivers changing their course, landslides, etc. These often result in loss of life and
 property. The Committee, therefore, feels that the Department should address itself to taking care of the problems faced
 by the people inhabiting these areas. Basic problems like these should be studied by our scientists and effective
 measures should be evolved with a view to protecting people from such natural disasters.
 
Format of the Annual Report:
 
28.       The Committee observes that the Annual Report of the DST provides only a narration of the on-going
 programmes and activities but it does not give meaningful information which may help in reviewing the progress of
 various programme. In the absence of such information, it becomes very difficult to take stock of and assess the
 performance of the Department. The Committee, is therefore, of the opinion that DST should provide inter alia, either
 in the Annual Report as Annexure or in some other form, such vital information with regard to various on­going
 programmes as the year when a programme was sanctioned the money which has already been spent on the
 programme, the progress made in the execution of that programme and so on. The Committee feels that the Department
 should clearly evaluate its strength and weaknesses and should in clear terms, inform through its Annual Report as to
 what are its areas of strength and where lies the weakness. Unless strengths are identified the Department cannot
 assume the leadership in the development of S&T in the country. Likewise, identification of weak areas is also essential
 as this would naturally lead the Department to initiate necessary corrective measures to improve its working.
 
29.       The Committee notes that at present there is no adequate audit of various programme/ projects undertaken and
 sponsored by the DST. An audit mechanism which should also go into the social benefits that would be accruing
 through a programme undertaken by the Department should also be instituted. The Committee has particularly found
 that in many areas the monitoring mechanism in the Department needs to be revamped.
 
30.       The Committee noted with satisfaction that DST, besides promoting scientific research and technology
 development, is also promoting society-related programmes which are of immense value. In such a situation, the
 Committee feels that DST has to associate with it persons from different areas of life who would function as a
 'thinktank' of the Department. Such a thinktank would be responsible for identifying areas to be emphasised and for
 chalking out an integrated strategy for achieving the desired results more efficiently.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY    STANDING   
 COMMITTEE    ON    SCIENCE    & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
XIX

6th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/6threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
NINTEENTH MEETING
 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
 Forests met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 23rd September, 1993 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1.         Syed Sibtey Razi -Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri N. Giri Prasad
3.         Shri Suresh Pachouri
4.         Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel
5.         Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
6.         Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
 
LOK SABHA
 
7.         Shri Oscar Fernandes
8.         Shri Sharad Dighe
9.         Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav
10.       Shri Harchand Singh
11.       Shri P.C. Chacko
12.       Shri Chandresh Patel
13.       Shri Ram Prasad Singh
14.       Shri Jitendra Nath Das
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri Nand Lal, Under Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Under Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY
 
Shri Y.S. Ranjan, Advisor
Shri S.B. Krishnan, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
Shri S. Ghose, Joint Secretary (Administration)
Maj. R. Thiagarajan, Advisor
Dr. V.V. Rampal, Advisor
Dr. S.K. Misra, Director
Dr. N.K. Sehgal, Joint Advisor
Shri V. Rao Aiyagari, Director
Shri P.K.B. Menon, Director
Dr. N. Sen Roy, DG, IMD
Maj. Genl. D.P. Gupta, SGI, SOI
Shri B.N. Tiwari, Under Secretary
Shri B. Hari Gopal, Principal Scientific Officer
 
2.         The Committee considered the Annual Report (1992-93) of the Ministry of Science and Technology,

6th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/6threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
 Department of Science and Technology. The representatives of the Ministry replied to the clarifications sought by the
 Members. The discussion on the Report remained in conclusive.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3.         The Committee, while considering its future programme, decided to hold its next meetings on the 4th and 5th
 October, 19930
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 1.10 P.M.
XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 4th October, 1993 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1.         Syed Sibtey Razi- Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
3.         Shri Vithalbhai M, Patel
4.         Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
 
LOK SABHA
 
5.         Shri  Oscar Fernandes
6.         Shri K.G. Shivappa
7.         Shri Sharad Dighe
8.         Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav
9.         Shri Harchand Singh
10.       Shri Vijay Naval Patil
11.       Shri P.C. Chacko
12.       Shrimati Mahendra Kumari
13.       Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
14.       Shri Ram Prasad Singh
15.       Shri Harpal Panwar
16.       Shri Jitendra Nath Das
17.       Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy
18.       Shri E. Ahamed
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri Nand Lal, Under Secretary
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Under Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (DEPARTMENT OF
 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY)
Dr. P. Rama Rao, Secretary
Shri Y.S. Rajan, Advisor
Shri S.B. Krishnan, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
Shri S. Ghose, Joint Secretary

6th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/6threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
Maj. Thiagarajan, Advisor
Dr. V. Rampal, Advisor
Dr. J. Dhar, Advisor
Dr. A.R. Rajeshwari, Joint Advisor
 
Dr. N.K. Sehgal, Joint Advisor
Dr. S.K. Misra, Director
Shri V. Rao Aiyagari, Director
Shri P.K.B. Menon, Director
Dr. R.K. Midh, Director
Shri A.N.N. Murthy, Director
Dr. H.K. Gupta, Director
Prof. Ramnath Cowsik, Director
Dr. Avijit Sen, Director
Dr. D. Chakraborty, Director
Dr. N. Sen Roy, D.G., IMD
Dr. G.S. Mandal, DDG, IMD
Shri V.P. Kamble, DDG, IMD
Shri C.J. Jhony, Principal Scientific Officer
Shri B. Hari Gopal, Principal Scientific Officer
 
2.         The Committee considered further the Annual Report (1992-93) of the Department of Science & Technology.
 The representatives of the Department of Science & Technology gave replies to the points raised by the Members in the
 meeting held on 23rd September, 1993. They also informed the Committee about the working of the State Councils for
 Science and Technology and various research institutions working under the Development. The Committee was also 
 informed about the Science Communication and Science Popularisation programmes, etc. Members sought
 clarifications on application of Science & Technology for rural development, availability of financial support for
 Science and Technology programmes, etc.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3.         The Committee decided to hold its next series of meetings from 18th to 20th October, 1993 to discuss the issue
 of forecast of Earthquakes in India.
4.         The Committee also decided to visit the Electronics Regional Test Laboratory (North), Okhla, New Delhi on the
 5th October, 1993 to make an on-the-spot study of working of the Laboratory.
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 5th October, 1993.
 
XXI
TWENTY-FIRST MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday the 5th October, 1993 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1.         Syed Sibtey Razi Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri N. Giri Prasad
3.         Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
4.         Shri Suresh Paehouri

6th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/6threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
5.         Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel
6.         Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
 
LOK SABHA
 
7.         Shri  Oscar Fernandes
8.         Shri Sharad Dighe
9.         Shri Harchand Singh
10.       Shri Vijay Naval Patil
11.       Shri Ram Prasad Singh
12.       Shri Jitendra Nath Das
13.       Shri M. V. V. S. Murthy
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri Nand Lal, Under Secretary
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Under Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
REPRKSENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY)
 
Dr. P. Rama Rao, Secretary
Shri Y.S. Rajah, Advisor
Shri S.B. Krishnan, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
Shri S. Ghose, Joint Secretary
Maj. Thiagarajan, Advisor
Dr. V. Rampal, Advisor
Dr. J. Dhar, Advisor
Dr. A.R. Rajeshwari, Joint Advisor
Dr. N.K. Sehgal, Joint Advisor
Dr. S.K. Misra, Director
Shri V. Rao Aiyacari, Director
Shri P.K.B. Menon, Director
Dr. R.K. Midh, Director
Shri A.N.N. Murthy, Director
Dr. H.K. Gupta, Director
Prof. Ramnath Cowsik, Director
Dr. Avijit Sen, Director
Dr. D. Chakraborty, Director
Dr. N. Sen Roy, D.G. IMD
Dr. G.S. Mandal, DDG, IMD
Shri V.P. Kamble, DDG, IMD
Shri C.J. Jhony, Principal Scientific Officer
Shri B. Had Gopal, Principal Scientific Officer
 
2.         The Committee took up further consideration of the Annual Report (1992-93) of the Department of Science and
 Technology. The representatives of the Department gave a presentation on the working of the National Centre for
 Medium Range Weather Forecasting and India Meteorological Department and Members sought clarifications thereon.
 An exhibition was also organised for the Members of the Committee depicting various aspects of the functioning of the
 Department of Science and Technology and activities of the various institutions coming under the Department on
 October 4-5, 1993.
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

6th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/6threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
 
3.         The Committee also decided to visit the Headquarters Of India Meteorological Department and Supercomputer
 Centre in New Delhi on the 20th October, 1993 to make on-the-spot study of the functioning of these organisations.
 
4.         The Committee adjourned at 12.15 P.M. and proceeded to the Electronics Regional Test Laboratory (North),
 Standardisation, Testing and Quality Control Directorate (Department of Electronics), Okhla, New Delhi for an on-the-
spot study of the functioning of the Laboratory.
 
XXVI
 
TWENTY-SIXTH MEETING
 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
 met at 9.30 A.M. on Tuesday, the 21st December, 1993 in Committee Room 'A', Parliament House Annexe, New
 Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1.         Syed Sibtey Razi    --    Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri N. Giri Prasad
3.         Prof. M. G. K. Menon
4.         Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
5.         Shri Suresh Pachouri
6.         Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel
 
LOK SABHA
 
7.         Shri Oscar Fernandes
8.         Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
9.         Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav
10.       Kumari Frida Topno
11.       Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
12.       Shri Ram Prasad Singh
13.       Shri Jitendra Nath Das
14.       Shri M. V. V. S. Murthy
15.       Shri E. Ahamed
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri Nand Lal, Under Secretary
Shri N. K. Singh, Assistant Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
2.         The Committee considered and adopted its Sixth Report on the Annual Report of the Department of Science &
 Technology for the year 1992-93, with minor changes.
 
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence, Prof. M. G. K. Menon to present the Report to the
 Rajya Sabha on the 23rd December, 1993.
 

6th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/6threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
4.         The Committee further authorised Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia and in her absence, Shri Ram Prasad Singh to lay
 the Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the 23rd December, 1993.
 
5.         The Committee decided to examine in detail the issue of technology cess and other matters related thereto, at a
 later date.
6.         The Committee while considering its future programme, decided to hold its meetings on 10th, 11th, 27th & 28th
 January, 1994 and to examine the Annual Report of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1992-93,
 thereat.
 
7.         The Committee then adjourned at 10.15 A.M.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 