PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS  
 
TWO HUNDRED FOURTH REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010-2011) 
      OF THE MINISTRY OF EARTH SCIENCES 
 (DEMAND NO. 29) 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 22TH APRIL, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 22ND APRIL, 2010) 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI
 
APRIL, 2010/VAISAKHA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 
Web site: http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-Mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
   
C O N T E N T S 
     
PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                             (i)-(ii)  
2.     PREFACE                                                                                                               (iii) 
3.     REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE   
                              1-23                               
4.     SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS                        
5. MINUTES  OF THE MEETINGS OF THE CO MMITTEE                                                                        
               
 COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2010) 
---------- 
1. Dr.T. Subbarami Reddy  –– Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
 ** 2. 
Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
3. Shri Anil H. Lad 
4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 

5. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi  
6. Shri Saman Pathak 
7. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
8. Dr. Ejaz Ali 
9. Shri Jabir Husain 
10. Dr. Barun Mukherji 
 
 LOK SABHA 
11. Dr. Mirza Mehboob Beg 
12. Shri Udayanraje Bhonsale 
13. Shri Ninong Ering  
14. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
15. Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda 
16. Shrimati Kaisar Jahan 
17. Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
18. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
19. Shri C. R. Patil 
20. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle 
21. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
22. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
23. Shri Francisco Sardinha 
 # #24. Vacant 
25. Dr. Rajan Sushant 
26. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
27. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
28. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava 
29. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
 30. Shri Akhilesh Yadav 
          #31. Shri K.C. Singh Baba 
      SECRETARIAT 
 
Smt. Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary 
 Shri  Alok Chatterjee, Director 
 Shri  V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director  
Shri  Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director 
                                                 
 Nominated w.e.f. 14th October, 2009 
**  Nominated w.e.f. 31st December, 2009 
     #  Nominated w.e.f.  11th January, 2010 
  # #  Shri Yashwant Sinha ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation from the           
Committee w.e.f. 1st February, 2010 
 
 
 

Preface 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & 
Technology, Environment & Forests, having been  authorised by the Committee to present the 
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred fo urth Report of the Committee.  This Report 
deals with the detailed Demands for Grants ( 2010-2011) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences 
(Demand No.29). 
2.   In the meeting of the Committee held on 30 th March, 2010, the Secretary and other Officers 
of the Ministry of Earth Sciences gave an overview of the various activities of the Ministry and 
the Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the Ministry to enable 
it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants. 
3.   The Committee expresses its thanks to th e Officers of the Ministry for replying to the 
clarifications sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the 
Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Earth Sciences. 
4.    The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 16
th April, 2010. 
 
NEW DELHI;                            DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY 
April 16, 2010                                                      Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
         on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests. 
     
REPORT 
The Indian peninsula is surrounded by the Arabian Sea, Bay of Bengal and Indian 
Ocean and has a coastline of about 7500 ki lometers. The vast coastal and offshore 
environment supports a wide va riety of marine ecosystem ri ch in species diversity and 
multifarious economic development activitie s. Recognising the importance of ocean 
atmospheric processes for understanding the va riability of earth, Government of India 
established Ministry of Eart h Sciences in 2006 by bringing  the meteorological agencies 
and Department of Ocean Development under one umbrella. The schemes of the Ministry 
relating to ocean development are directed  towards achieving sustainable development 
and use of science & technology for the exploration and expl oitation of vast marine 
resources for the socio-economic benefit of the society. It has been functioning as a nodal 
Ministry for organising, coor dinating and promoting Earth Sciences activities in the 
country.  
1.2 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & 
Technology, Environment & Forests considered  the detailed Demands for Grants     
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences on 30
th March, 2010.   
2. OBJECTIVES OF THE MINISTRY 
 The Ministry of Earth Sciences has the following objectives and functions:- 
 To improve weather forecast and provide  advisory to agriculture, aviation, 
shipping, sports including the Extended Long Range Seasonal Monsoon forecast. 
 To   provide a wide range of ocean in formation advisories including fishery 
information. 
  To improve the understanding of Polar Science and its implications for climate 
change. 
 To developing technology for harnessing marine resources. 
 To conduct survey for assessing non-living resources. 
 To asses coastal marine productivity and Marine Ecosystems. 

 To improve understanding of Climate Change Science. 
 To provide early warning of natural hazards viz. cyclone, tsunami, sea level rise. 
 To promote basic research including Ca pacity building in the Earth System 
Science. 
3. ORGANISATIONAL SETUP 
3.1 The activities of the Ministry can be broadly classified into three major 
categories viz. (i) ocean science and t echnology; (ii) atmospheric research and 
meteorological services; and (iii) seismic monitoring and earth quake research.  For 
effective implementation of programmes in Ocean Science Technology and Services, 
two attached Offices viz. the Centre fo r Marine Living resources and Ecology 
(CMLRE) at Kochi, and the Project Directo rate for Integrated Coastal and Marine 
Area Management (ICMAM) at Chennai have been set up. Three autonomous 
Institutions viz. the National Centre for Antarctic Resea rch (NCAOR) at Goa, 
National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIO T) at Chennai and the Indian National 
Centre for Ocean Information Services (INC OIS) at Hyderabad, as well as nine 
Ocean Sciences and Technology Cells in universities/institutes and a chain of 
Marine Data Centres at national Institut ions are under the administrative set up of 
the Ministry.  The Ministry also maintains the permanent research station-Maitri in 
Antarctica apart from a fleet of ocean ographic research vessels, which are well-
equipped floating laboratories. 
3.2 The atmospheric sciences and meteorol ogical services are being rendered by 
three dedicated institutes viz., India Meteo rological Department (IMD), National 
Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecast ing (NCMRWF) and Indian Institute 
of Tropical Meteorology (IITM).  The India Meteorological Department is one of 
the oldest of organized meteorological services in the world.  In course of time, when 
it was realised that the nature of meteor ological phenomena was distinctly different 
not only in the tropics and mid-latitudes but also in different geographic regions 
characterized by large ocean basins like th at of Pacific, Atlantic and the Indian 
Ocean the Indian Institute of Tropic al Meteorology came up in 1962 and the 
National Centre for Medium Range Weat her Forecasting in 1989.  Today they 
complement each other's role and add to  the overall scientific capability in the 
country. 
3.3 Towards detection of earthquake and seismic monitoring system, an 
Earthquake Risk Evaluation Centre was established at Delhi for seismic 
microzonation.  The Ministry has developed a close interaction at both research and 
operational level between th e scientific community and ensuring that there is a 
seamless flow of data, information and kn owledge that percolates down to the end 
users, thereby getting integrated with the development process in the country. 
4. MECHANISM DEVELOPED TO MONITOR AND REVIEW THE 
ONGOING SCHEMES 
4.1 The Committee enquired about the mechanism that exists in  the Ministry to 
monitor and review the progress of its ongoing schemes/projects. The Ministry informed 
the Committee that it has adopted a three level monitoring mechanism to oversee 
implementation of the schemes. Each programme has a separate Steering Committee for 
monitoring various schemes periodically.  Besides, the schemes of autonomous bodies 
are also being monitored by the Project Monitoring Committee, Research Advisory 

Committee, Finance Committee and the Governi ng Council of respective Institute.  On a 
half yearly basis, the perf ormance of the Ministry is being monitored by the Member 
Science, Planning Commission in addition to  the annual review conducted by the 
Secretary, Planning Commission.  On monthly basis, the progres s of the project is also 
being reviewed through   submission of Mont hly summary to the Cabinet Secretariat.   
Two separate committees viz., Project Ma nagement Board and Steering Committee for 
periodical review and assessment of the mission mode programmes like Tsunami project 
have been set up.  With regard to R&D projects, an internal mechanism exists for 
periodical review and cons ideration.  The Ministry put  up the recommendations to 
Steering Committee and Management Board for approval and monitoring the projects. 
An Earth Science Council has also been  established by the Ministry, under the 
chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Earth Sciences to review the performance of each 
of programmers both financial and physical as pects on half yearly  basis in April and 
October of each year.   
4.2 Besides, the Ministry's performance is also being monitored from 2009-10 
onwards by Performance Monitoring and Ev aluation System set up by the Cabinet 
Secretariat. This would i nvolve preparation and submi ssion of Result Framework 
document by the Ministry at the beginning of each financial year indicating success 
indicators (key Result Areas – KRA or Key Performance Indicators).  
4.3 The Committee notes with concern th at inspite of having the existing 
mechanism to monitor and review the ongoing schemes, some of the programmes, 
such as Indian Meteorological Departme nt; National Centre for Medium Range 
Weather Forecast; Polymetallic Nodules  Programme; Development of Manned 
Submersible, Gas Hydrates etc. which were undertaken by the Ministry during the 
last three years particularly 2007-08 a nd 2008-09 witness under utilization of funds. 
The Committee recommends the Ministry to further strengthen this mechanism for 
effective implementation of its progr ammes so as to avoid delay in the 
implementation of various projects and also in avoiding underutilization of the 
funds allotted to it.  The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should avoid 
procedural and administrative delays through efficient planning and management.  
5. ELEVENTH FIVE YEAR PLAN - OUTLAYS AND PROPOSALS          
5.1 The Ministry has informed the Committee that during the Eleventh Plan period 34 
programmes are proposed to be carried out which include 19 continuing programmes and 
15 new programmes. However, for effective mo nitoring of the performance recently all 
these programmes have been recast into 11 major Missions viz., (i) Atmospheric Science, 
Information & Services, (ii) Ocean Science In formation & Services (iii) Disaster Support 
(iv) Polar Science & Cryosphere (v) Ocean technology   (vi) Coastal and marine 
ecosystems(vii) Climate Change Science (viii)  Ocean Resources  (ix) Research vessels 
(x) Extramural research and (xi) Outreac h. As per the information furnished by the 
Ministry, the total initial budge tary allocation of Rs. 7004 cror es for the Eleventh Five 
Year Plan has been revised to Rs. 6637 crores at the Mid-Term A ppraisal stage of the 
XI
th  Five Year Plan. 
5.2 The Committee finds that during the year 2007 -08, out of the total plan the  BE of 
the Ministry of Rs. 690 crores, the actua l expenditure incurred was Rs. 359.06 crores. 
Similarly, for the year 2008-09, out of the tota l plan B.E. of Rs. 750 crores the actual 
expenditure incurred was Rs. 489.56 crores and in the year 2009-10 plan B.E. of Rs. 900 

crores was reduced to Rs. 793 crores at the R.E. stage. Keeping in view the actual 
expenditure incurred by the Ministry, it ha s been observed that during the first three 
financial years of XI th Five Year Plan, the Ministry has not been able to fully utilize its 
allocated funds. The reasons submitted for under utilization are mainly administrative and 
procedural delays like non-avai lability of suitable collabora tion partners, relocation of 
priorities, delay in allotment of land, delay in finalization of t echnical specifications, 
delay in approval by CCEA for modernization of India Meteorological Department; delay 
in shipment of equipments for forecasting system, etc.  The Committee is surprised to 
note that for under utilization of fund under Development of Manned Submersible 
scheme similar excuse i.e. lack of consen sus in negotiations on  the finalization of 
financial bid for design development of equipment has been cited for the year 2008-09 
and 2009-10.   
5.3 The Committee takes a very serious view  of the fact that the Ministry has 
grossly under utilized the allo cated budget of the first three financial years of the 
XIth Five Year Plan which shows only sl ackness and laxity on the part of the 
Ministry.  When the Committee enquired abou t the sorry state of affairs in respect 
of utilization of allocated funds, the S ecretary admitted that trend of expenditure 
has not been upto the mark, and one of the re asons for this is that the Ministry was 
setup only in 2006. It is also true that planning was not that good but they have 
improved this year and assure the Committee that their performance will be very 
good next year. The Committee is not at all convinced by the lame excuses given by 
the Ministry as most of them are admini strative and procedural in nature which 
could have been avoided by efficien t planning and better monitoring of 
schemes/projects.  The Committee therefore,  recommends that the Ministry must 
plan its programme in such a manner that it may be able to utilize the allocated 
funds in the financial year itself.  The Committee also recommends that the Ministry 
must show improvement in its utilization tr end this year so that  it could convince 
the Committee as well Planning Commission for additional allocation in future. 
6. BUDGETARY ALLOCAT IONS FOR 2010-11  
6.1 The total outlay for 2010-11 has been fi xed at Rs. 1302 crores (Rs. 1000 crores 
for Plan and Rs. 302 crores for Non Plan expe nditure) as against the projected demand of 
Rs. 1834 crores by the Ministry. In reply to a query as to whether the allocation for 2010-
11 is sufficient to carry out the activities and if not which schemes will be affected due to 
reduction of fund, the Ministry informed that the funds allocated are not adequate to meet 
the commitments of the Ministry for th e year 2010-11 as the Ministry proposed a 
minimum budget requirement of Rs.1310 cror es after consultation with Planning 
Commission.  However an amount of Rs. 1000 crores has been allocat ed for the planned 
activities.  The major schemes likely to be affected are primarily modernization of India 
Meteorological Department, Climate Change Centre, Polar Science and a set of new 
initiatives proposed at Mi d –Term Stage of XI Five Year Plan viz., Ocean 
Biogeochemistry Coupled Atmosphere -O cean Models, Mountai n Meteorology for 
Himalaya, High Altitude Cloud Physics Labora tory, Aerial Platforms for probing of 
cyclones and advanced Training School etc. 
6.2 The Committee has observed that the curr ent allocation is how ever, 92 crores 
more than the outlay for the previous year of Rs. 1210 crores.  The percentage increase in 
B.E. 2010-11 from B.E. 2009-10 is  about 7.6 per cent. For the year 2010-11 the plan 

outlay for Oceanographic Research has b een fixed at Rs. 597.55 crores and Rs. 402.45 
crores for Atmospheric Sciences and Servi ces. Out of the plan allocation of Rs. 321 
crores for Meteorology, Rs. 165 crores has be en earmarked for Modernisation of India 
Meteorological Department (IMD) and Rs. 156 crores for other schemes under IMD.   
6.3 The details of the programme and budgeta ry allocation for the year 2010-2011 are 
given at Annexure. 
6.4 The Committee notes that some major schemes such as modernization of 
India Meteorological Department, Climate Change Centre, Polar Science are likely 
to be affected on account of cut im posed by the Planning Commission while 
allocating funds to the Ministry.  Even ongoing schemes are not accorded priority in 
fund allocation. The Committee is of the vi ew that with reduced budgetary support 
it would not be easy for Ministry to pursue its programme vigourously. The 
Committee therefore, recommends that the Mi nistry should take up the issue of 
additional fund allocation at R.E. stage  for new schemes, with the Planning 
Commission, in right earnest and impress upon them the need for such higher 
allocation, indicating the seriousness of the Ministry to achi eve its targets. The 
Committee, at the same time also recommends  that Ministry should also plan its 
projects/schemes meticulously so as to avoid any drastic cut in their projections 
because of poor performance in utilisation of previous funds. 
7. ACTIVITIES OF THE MINISTRY OCEAN SCIENCE  
7.1 OCEAN O
 BSERVATION & INFORMATION SERVICES  
7.1.1 The Ocean Observation & Information Services Programme is designed to 
acquire time-series data and develop a wide  range of ocean atmospheric models.  The 
data acquired through Argo floats, Drifters, XBTs, Current Meter Arrays from the sea 
around India are being used for various opera tional and research purposes including 
forecasting of cyclones and understanding the climate variabili ty. 15 floats that use 
Iridium communication and 22 floats that use ARGOS communicati on were procured 
during the year 2009. Eighteen argo floats with facility for the measurement of near 
surface temperature were deployed in the Indian Ocean, of which seven were deployed in 
the Bay of Bengal.   
7.1.2 For the Ocean Observation & Information Services, an outlay of Rs. 23 crores has 
been provided which is required for both strengthening the in-situ observational networks 
and ocean-atmospheric modeling and Rs. 25 crores has been provided for Indian National 
Centre for Ocean Information Services (INC OIS) to provide services and conduct in 
house R&D projects. INCOIS objective is to generate and disseminate user oriented 
ocean data/data products on an operation basis. Data products in the form of Sea Surface 
Temperature maps, potential Fishing Zone ma ps, Ocean State Forecast, wind vector 
maps, mixed layer depth maps are being made available on operational basis.  INCOIS is 
also responsible for implemen tation of projects like Earl y Tsunami Warning System.  A 
suite of ocean related data and data produc ts are being made available through its web 
site.  This was earlier included in the Ocean Observation and Information Services.  Over 
55 integrated Coastal Ocean Information kios ks have been established in the various 
locations along the coast for dissemination of Information.  A High Performance 
Computing Facility has been installed to improve the services.  
7.1.3 The Ministry has informed that the  reas on for increase in the allocation  from   
Rs. 15 crores in the year 2009-10 to Rs. 23 crores in the current year is mainly due to 

initiation of a major dedicated programme on Ocean Biogeochemistry of  the Northern 
Indian Ocean proposed during the mid-term stag e of the Eleventh Five Year Plan.  The 
objective of the programme is to conduct mu lti-disciplinary biogeochemistry studies in 
the Indian Ocean with a view to understand fluxes of material of both micro and macro 
nutrients. This could be important to understand the impact of climate change on the 
oceans and to understand the living resources in the Indian Ocean.   
7.1.4 The objective of the project Tsunami a nd Storm Surge Warning System is to 
establish a warning system for the oceanoge nic disasters caused by tsunami and storm 
surges.  The project is being carried out with participation of other concerned 
departments such as Science and Technology (D ST), Scientific and Industrial Research, 
Space over a period of 30 months.  The project is expected to strengthen the 7 seismic 
observation station of DST, establishm ent of 8-10 DART Observation Network, 
Instillation of real time tide gauge monito ring stations, 24 hours monitoring of the 
systems for generation of timely warning, etc.  A full fledged tsunami warning centre had 
been set up at INCOIS, H yderabad with deployment of  18 tide gauges and 6 bottom 
pressure recorders for providing warning of 24X7 basis.  
7.1.5 The Committee enquired about the distin ction between tsunami and storm surge 
generation since like Tsunami, storm surge can  be equally devasta ting. The Committee 
was informed that Tsunami is the wave wh ich is generated becau se of earthquake, 
however, the surge which comes to the coast ha s different characteristics.   Incase of 
Tsunami, the entire water mass right from Indonesia to India moves in a wave form while 
cyclone is a kind of waves gene rated because of wind and it is more on the surface.  It 
does not affect the botto m of the sea but the Tsunami waves affect the bottom of the sea 
as well.  So, this is the major difference.   Though the affect of Tsunami and storm surges 
on the coast could be similar in terms of height of the waves and the damage which it 
does, but the generation process is entirely different.  
 
7.1.6 The Committee also enquired about the predictability of earthquake. It was 
informed that in earthquake predictions, there are certain issues.  The Ministry has been 
trying to predict the Koyna Earthquake specifi cally because that earthquake is governed 
by the reservoir water level a nd they have sufficient knowledge to predict the earthquake 
in Koyna.  During last year earthquake was predicted on 5
th December that earthquake 
was likely to take place in next 15 days of  about 4 magnitude.  The earthquake actually 
took place on 12 th December of about 4.5 magnitude.  So, magnitude-wise their 
prediction was not very correct but the time-wise it was quite satisfactory.  Basically for 
earthquake prediction the proc ess is needed to be unders tood and if the process is 
understood, prediction can come.  The Committee was also informed that the Ministry 
has set up one laboratory in Central Himalayas and put a lot of instruments which define 
certain pre-cursor like pre-cursors relating to  changes in ground water level, helium gas, 
temperature changes and certain minor changes in the gravity and magnetic field.  All 
these instruments have been put  in one place to see whether it can see any precursor for 
the earthquake.  This work is going on and the Ministry is also going to set up such labs 
in the North-East in area around Narmada falls , in Port Blair and around Bhuj since these 
are the areas where earthquake is likely to take place.   
7.1.7 The Committee is of the view that the Mi nistry needs to enhance its scientific 
and technological capabilities in respect of predicting tsunami and earthquakes 

since accurate observations and advance warnings about these natural hazards 
could give enough time to disaster man agement agencies to be better and timely 
geared up to minimise the loss of property and lives.  
7.1.8 The Committee notes that the Ministry  has initiated a dedicated programme 
on Ocean Biogeochemistry of the Northern  Indian Ocean which has been proposed 
during the mid-term stage of the Eleventh  Five Year Plan.  The Committee hopes 
that the Ministry would attain the objective of the programme and would 
successfully conduct multi-disciplinary biogeochemistry studies in the Indian Ocean 
with a view to understand fluxes of materi al of both micro and macro nutrients as 
this could be important to understand the impact of climate change on the oceans 
and to understand the living resources in the Indian Ocean.   
7.1.9 The Committee has observed that Rs. 25 crores has been provided for Indian 
National Centre for Ocean Information Serv ices (INCOIS) to provide services and 
conduct in house R&D projects. The Co mmittee recommends th at services of 
INCOIS may be optimally used to provide ocean information and advisory services 
to society, industry, Government agenc ies and scientific community through 
sustained ocean observations, informatio n management, modelling and constant 
improvements through systematic and focused research.  
7.1.10 While the Committee apprecia
 tes the progress made by the Ministry in 
respect of providing fishery services to the fishermen about the potential fishing 
zone and the state of the ocean which has become highly popular among the 
fishermen.  However, while fishing in the deep sea, it so happens that sometimes 
fishermen inadvertently happens to cross ma ritime boundary and venture into the 
boundaries of other countries.  The Commi ttee in this background enquired from 
the Ministry whether any system has been or is being developed to warn our 
fishermen not to go beyond the particul ar point, which is Indian maritime 
boundary.  To this, the Secreta ry replied that an experiment has been initiated in 
association with Space Applications Centre of ISRO to develop an instrument to 
warn the fishermen  and it is expected that an instrument would be developed 
shortly.  The Committee recommends that effo rts should be made to develop that 
instrument at the earliest, so that fishermen may not be arrested and prisoned for 
crossing international border while fishing in deep sea. 
7.2 NATIONAL 
 INSTITUTE OF OCEAN TECHNOLOGY 
7.2.1 The NIOT was established in November , 1993 with a view to develop technology 
in ocean sector. The major functions are development of technology related to the 
country’s needs in the field of deep sea mining, ocean energy, marine instrumentation, 
materials development, oceanic data collect ing devices and observation systems etc. in 
consonance with ocean policy and national priorities, Research and development of ocean 
related technology projects sponsored by the industry and Development of required 
technologies for the management of coastal zo ne and islands of the country. In addition 
to the four core mission activities of Ocean Energy, deep sea mining, coastal and 
environmental engineering and marine instru mentation, NIOT would also continue to 
undertake consultancy service in ocean relate d activities, Ocean Science & Technology 
and enhancement of marine living resources. 
7.2.2 For National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) an outlay of Rs. 45 crores has 
been provided which will primarily cater to the ongoing projects under Ocean Acoustics, 

Marine sensors, Technical Criteria Atla s, Inter inst itutional R&D, Manpower and 
operational expenses, Renewable Ocean Energy , Offshore Structures and Ocean Science 
and Technology for Islands.  
7.2.3 The Ministry informed that by using Waste Heat from Power Plants, NIOT 
demonstrated the Low Temperature Ther mal Desalination (LTTD) technology by 
commissioning of a plant and produced fresh wa ter at the first trial run at the North 
Chennai Power Plant in February, 2009. The cap acity of the plant is  1 lakh liter per day. 
Besides, 3 more desalination plants of 1 lakh liter capacity one each are being setup at 
Minicoy, Agatti and Androth islands of Laks hadweep islands. Currently, Public-Private 
Partnerships are being explored for further development of the technology for up scaling 
of capacities of the order of 10 million litres per day in offshore plant.   
7.2.4 The Committee has observed that, Nati onal Institute of Ocean Technology  
(NIOT) demonstrated the Low Temperatu re Thermal Desalination technology by 
commissioning of a plant of 1 lakh litre per day  capacity and produced fresh water 
at the first trial run at the North Chenna i Power Plant during last year by using 
waste heat from Power Plants. Besides, three more desalination plants of 1 lakh liter 
capacity one each are being setup at Minicoy, Agatti and Androth islands of 
Lakshadweep islands. The Committee appreciat es the fact that the Ministry has 
done the commendable job in the area of desalination of sea water. The Committee 
is of the view that the Ministry must work hard to make such plants cost effective 
which can contribute significantly to the needs of the population of these islands. 
The Committee recommends that the Mini stry should expand and extend this 
programme so that safe drinking water co uld be provided to the communities living 
around the coastal areas. The Committee a ppreciates that the Ministry is also 
exploring the possibility of Public-Private Partnerships for further development of 
the technology and hopes that it will achieve its goal in this regard in future.   
7.3 
GAS HYDRATES & TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT FOR 
EXPLOITATION 
7.3.1 Gas hydrates with their abundant resour ce potential is emer ging as a potential 
clean fuel resource.  The preliminary assessment of geological condition and limited 
available seismic data suggests high possibili ty of occurrence of large quantity of gas 
hydrates within the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of India.  The scheme is broadly 
divided into science component and technol ogy development component.  NIOT is 
coordinating this project.  The programme co nsists of both scient ific and technology 
development for gas hydrates. The Ministry , in association with CSIR and other 
laboratories, would focus on scie ntific research with special  emphasis on resource extent 
evaluation and environmental impacts and de velopment of technology for detection and 
qualification of gas hydrates in sediments. Development and integration of automatic 
coring system for conducting sea trials woul d be taken up. At Gas Hydrate Site in KG 
basin and in Mahanadi basin, Deep Water testing of Au tonomous Coring System (ACS) 
in Indian waters and ACS & deployment at Gas Hydrate site will be conducted. 
7.3.2 The Committee observed that there was gr oss under utilization of allocated funds 
under this programme during the first two financial years of the Eleventh Five Year Plan.   
The Ministry has informed that the major component of the funds of the Gas Hydrate 
Programme are meant for Multi channel seismic survey (MCS) and Development of 
Autonomous Coring System (ACS).  The selec tion and hiring of suitable research vessel 

with appropriate instruments for the MCS proved to be a difficult task.  As a result, funds 
could not be utilized to its full capacity.  A global tender floated for the same was not 
successful in obtaining suitable proposals.  However, in 2009-10, it was re-tendered and a 
suitable survey vessel has been identified and the survey could be commissioned in 
March/April 2010.  Similarly, there was a delay in identifying a suitable joint partner for 
the development of ACS through open tender as this a highly specialized coring system.  
However, the system now has been developed and is under going field trials.   
7.3.3 Under the programme on gas hydrates, Remotely Operated Vehicle capable of 
operating at a water depth of 2500 m has been jointly developed by National Institute of 
Ocean Technology, Chennai in collaboration with Experimental Design Bureau of 
Oceanological Engineering, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow and is presently 
undergoing trials. Similarly, an Autonomous Coring System capable of retrieving 100 m 
sediment core has been developed in collaboration with Williamson and Associates, USA 
and is presently undergoing testing.  
7.3.4 When the Secretary, Ministry of Eart h Sciences was aske d about the progress 
made with regard to gas hydrates in the c ountry and whether any other country has been 
successful in using this, he informed the Committee that as of now, gas hydrate is not 
being exploited commercially anywhere in the world.  First, there is a need to estimate its 
total quantum and need to develop technology wh ich can work at this depth and can take 
the core of a sample.  Then they would be ab le to take up 50 meter core of this to study 
how gas hydrate behaves and at how much depth it is availabl e.  The second thing is, to 
estimate the spatial extent. For this there is a requirement to map th em.  So, that is why 
the remotely operable vehicles which fit cameras  and other sensors to find out the extant 
are being developed.  It was informed furt her that after finding the gas depth and the 
extant, then, they would know how much quantum is available.  Exploitation is totally a 
different kind of expertise for which techno logy is needed to be developed and the 
Ministry is in touch with ONGC and th e Department of Hydrocarbon about its 
achievements in this regard.   
7.3.5 It was also informed that  the technology for extracting gas from gas hydrate 
accruing below the seabed at 100 – 200 m in  the sediments occurring at 2500 m water 
depth is not available and is required to be  developed. Once, we complete the present 
objective of  exploration of gas hydrates  and development of  technologies for 
exploration, efforts would be concentrated on studies towards the pilot scale production 
of Gas Hydrates. 
7.3.6 Gas hydrates with their abundant resou rce potential is likely to emerg as a 
potential clean fuel resource.  The prelim inary assessment of geological condition 
and limited available seismic data suggests high possibility of occurrence of large 
quantity of gas hydrates within the EEZ of India.  The Committee is of the view that 
it has the potential of providing total energy security to our nation on account of its 
widespread occurrences and potential energy content. To meet the overwhelming 
demand of energy in the country it can be lo oked as an alternate source of energy as 
well as a clean fuel.  The Committee feels that it is necessary to carry out various 
geological, geochemical and geophysica l analyses systematically for the 
identification and quantification of gas-hydrates along the continental margins of 
India for evaluating the resource potential. 

7.3.7 The Committee hopes that the Ministry  would take concerted efforts to 
develop the technology for extracting gas  from gas hydrate accruing below the 
seabed at 100-200m and will achieve succes s in producing gas hydrates in large 
quantities. The Committee feels that adho c and token approach of the Ministry 
reflected in allocations made during the years 2007-08 and 2008-09 under this 
programme would lead us no where.  The Ministry needs to focus and concentrate 
on this programme more vigorously.   The Committee therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry should take gas hydrate as a pilo t project so as to intensify its efforts to 
this project and exploit its potential resou rces in the national interest in a time 
bound manner. 
7.3.8 The Committee notes that non availability of suitable proposals for selecting 
and hiring of research vessel to carry out multi channel seismic survey and delay in 
identifying a suitable joint partner for the development of autonomous coring 
system  led to the underutilization funds during the previous two years of Eleventh 
Five Year Plan, however during last year the Ministry has found a suitable survey 
vessel and research activities could be commissioned in this regard. The Committee 
feels that the Ministry must take corrective measures to avoid such delays in future 
and take every possible step to utilize the budg et in the financial ye ar itself to avoid 
non-utilization of allocated funds.  
7.4 POLYMET
 ALLIC NODULES PROGRAMME 
7.4.1 The Polymetallic Nodules (PMN) Progr amme is a national programme with 
international commitments.  India has b een allotted a site of 1,50,000 sq. km. in the 
Central Indian Ocean Basin (CIOB) by In ternational Sea Bed Authority of United 
Nations for exploiting Polymetallic Nodules  lying on the sea bed at 4000 to 6000 metre 
water depth.  An area of 75000 sq. km. has ho wever been retained for detailed survey. 
The programme consists of four components - Survey & Exploration of Polymetallic 
Nodules in the Central Indian Ocean Basi n (CIOB), Environmental Impact Assessment 
studies at CIOB, Technology Development for mining of nodules and Technology 
Development for extraction of metals from nodules.   
7.4.2 The Committee observes that the allocation for the “Polymettalic Nodules 
Programme” has been increased as compared to last year’s B.E. allocation. During the 
year 2009-10, the allocation was Rs. 13.00 crores and this year the al location is kept at 
Rs. 15.00 crores to provide research and technology development under the programme.  
The Committee was informed that the increase  of allocation during the financial year 
2010-11 is mainly due to the increase of  allocation under Technology Development 
Mining of Polymettalic Nodules  Programme (PMN). The EFC in its meeting held on 
November, 2009 has approved the project on “I ntegrated Deep Sea mining system for 
mining of polymetallic nodules upto 6000 m dept h” for a total cost of Rs. 224 crores. 
This would be the pilot project to cover th e full ocean depth in Indian Ocean to be 
undertaken for the first time by India. The Ministry is continuing its efforts towards 
developing technologies of mining system upto a water depth of 6000 metre in phases. 
Accordingly, higher allocation has been kept for the  year 2010-11.  
7.4.3 The Committee is of the vi ew that the greatest unexploited mineral resources 
on the earth are on the deep sea floor including manganese nodule, cobalt rich 
manganese crusts containing nickel, copper and hydrothermal depo sits that contain 
copper, lead, zinc, gold and silver.  Since India is endowed with a vast Exclusive 

Economic Zone of about 2.02 million sq. km ., the Committee feels that the Ministry 
should approach its projects related to id entification and exploitation of ocean 
resources in a well focused manner to meet the requirements of minerals and make 
concerted efforts towards developing tec hnology for sufficient metal recovery from 
the polymetallic nodules and tapping rich  resources from ocean since the country 
needs large scale mineral resources for its industrial growth.  
7.4.4 The Committee, however, notes with con cern that the Ministry has failed to 
fully utilize the allocated budget during the last three financial years i.e. 2007-08, 
2008-09 and 2009-10.  The Committee, therefo re, recommends that the Ministry 
must not show any slackness in utilizing the enhanced budget allocated for this 
financial year. 
7.5 POLAR SCIENCE  
7.5.1 The Antarctic is a pristine and natural laboratory, which enab les scientists to 
study, detect and monitor global  phenomena, such as the atmo spheric patterns and ocean 
circulations. Glaciological a nd geophysical research provides clue to the geological 
history and evolution of the earth. In addition, Antarctica provides a singular platform for 
conducting studies on solar terre strial interaction, adaptati on of organisms, including 
human beings in the cold land isolated c onditions. The Ministry has informed that 
Antarctic /Polar Research and Antarctic scie ntific expeditions to  Antarctica would be 
continued during the year 2010-11. 
7.5.2 For Polar Science activities , Rs. 145 crores has been earmarked which includes 
expedition to Antarctic, Southern Ocean Ocea nographic  Studies and activities related to 
setting up of 3 rd permanent Antarctic Research station in the Larsemann Ranges and  
maintenance of the permanent research station “Maitri. Rs.15 crores has been provided to 
National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Re search (NCAOR) for the institutional and 
logistic activities related to establishment and infrastructure development, operation and 
manning of the NCAOR and establ ishment of research facilities within the country. The 
29th Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica was launched in four phases in the month 
of November 2009 from Goa.   
7.5.3 During the interaction with the Committ ee, the Secretary, Ministry of Earth 
Sciences informed the Committee that every ye ar, two expeditions go to the Arctic.  The 
Committee enquired whether the Ministry has noticed any indication about the changes in 
glacier position or the climat e change from their studies in the Arctic regions. The 
Committee was informed that about glaciers, there are changes going on in the Arctic 
region and the Ministry has started monitori ng only for the last th ree years or so and 
hence it has not passed sufficient time to ma ke any definite comment because there can 
be some variability.  However, in the Anta rctic, the Ministry has been monitoring for 
quite some time and has the last 10 years' data, which shows that there is a clear cut 
recession glaciation  due to rise in temper ature during the last 100 years.  The data 
reveals that change is about 0.2 degree Celsius in the last 100 years. This data is quite 
valuable to understand the change. 
7.5.4 The proposed targets of activit ies during 2010-11 are as under: 
 Planning, co-ordination and ex ecution of all scientific and logistics tasks related 
to the XXX
th  Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica.    

 Signing the contract for construction work at Larsemann hills after completion of 
all the ground work requir ed for construction of 3 rd station including shipping or 
the requisite prefabricated material.  
 Chartering of ice-class vessel to Southern Ocean. 
 Under Arctic Programme, the existing Indi a's station "Himadri" will be equipped 
with field equipment, and processing units and to continue long term scientific 
projects approved by the expert group.  
7.5.5 The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should undertake every 
possible institutional and logi stic activity in respect of  establishment of third 
permanent Indian Base at Larsemann Hill s and it may also aspire for yielding 
positive results as substantial amount of  fund has been approved towards activities 
associated with Polar Science. The Comm ittee recommends that some target date 
should be fixed for completing the task, as in the absence of any time-frame, the 
project may lose its importance. 
7.5.6 The Committee further recommends that equipping the existing Indian 
station 'Himadri' in Arctic with fiel d equipments and processing units and 
continuing long term approved scientific projects which are the proposed activity 
under Arctic Programme, should be pursued  diligently and in a well-planned and 
strategic manner and the data collected from its scientific expeditions to Arctic must 
be analyzed to understand the changes in glacier position in the north pole.  
ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE  
7.6 The atmosphere plays a vita l role in defining the overall environment in which all 
organisms live. It impacts almost all kinds of human activities in a major way. Society 
has evolved in harmony with the existing variability of weather and climate and needs the 
support of forecasts to manage many of its critical functions.  
7.7 Three meteorological institutions mainly devoted to Weather Modelling, viz India 
Meteorological Department (IMD), Nationa l Centre for Medium Range Weather 
Forecasting (NCMRWF) and Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM) have been 
functioning under the Ministry of Earth Sciences since June, 2006. 
7.8 INDIA ME
 TEOROLOGICAL DEPARTMENT 
7.8.1 India Meteorological Department (IMD) is one of the oldest sc ientific institutions 
of the country. Its primary objectives are to undertake meteorological observations and to 
provide current and forecast meteorological  information for optimum operation of 
weather-sensitive sectors like agriculture, irrigation, shipping, aviation, off-shore oil 
exploration etc. and warn ag ainst severe weather phenomena like tropical cyclones, dust 
storms, heavy rains and snow, cold & heat waves etc.  
7.8.2 Out of the total plan outlay of Rs. 321 crores for India Meteorological Department 
(IMD) during 2010-11, Rs. 165 crores has been fixed for Modernisati on of IMD. It is 
proposed to upgrade/modernize the obser vational network and weather modeling 
capability. Modernization of IMD scheme is broken into various sub projects such as 
procurement of Doppler Weather Radars, High Performance Computing System (HPCS), 
Automatic Rain Gauge Network, Automatic Weather System, Airport Meteorological 
Instruments, Upper Air Observational E quipments, Telecommunication network and 
Forecasting System through MFI, etc. It is expe cted that the first phase of modernization 
will be completed by March 2011.  

7.8.3 In response to a query on  conssistent under utilizatio n of funds under this head 
during the last three years it was informed th at it is basically due to delay in site 
preparation for various observing systems and delay in delivery of long-lead items.  The 
work suffered due to delay by CPWD, close mo nitoring of the work on a regular basis is 
being placed to complete the job. And at the same time Ministry has informed that 
modernization of IMD is going to be affected due to shortage of funds too.  
7.8.4 The Committee takes a very  serious note  of the fact that while the Ministry 
has grossly under utilized the allocated budget of the previous years under 
modernisation of India Meteorological Depa rtment programme and this year it is 
submitting that the programme is going to be affected due to shortage of funds.   
The Committee is constrained to observe th at this shows lack of seriousness and 
apathy towards utilization of allocated f unds.  The Committee is of the view that 
reasons such as delay in site preparation for various observing systems and delay in 
delivery of long-lead items could have been  avoided by efficient planning and better 
monitoring of project components at regul ar interval. The Commi ttee feels that the 
Ministry must plan its programme in su ch a manner that it may utilize maximum 
percentage of allocated funds in the financ ial year itself so that there should be 
minimum carry forward of the unspent balance to the next  financial year. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends that there should be timely infusion of funds 
in various schemes/projects and the Minist ry should evolve a suitable mechanism 
for optimum utilization of funds. 
7.8.5  The Committee asked the Secretary as to how far weather forecast is accurate and 
what efforts are being made to enhance the accuracy level.  The Secretary, Ministry of 
Earth Sciences responded by saying that as re gards fog forecast in Delhi this year it was 
accurate by 94 per cent in December and 86 per cent in January as compared to the last 
corresponding accuracy of 74 per cent in Decemb er and 58 per cent in January last year.  
So, there has been substantial improvement this year.  The Secretary further added that so 
far as monsoon predictions are concerned, ther e are several complex factors involved in 
this because monsoon is not governed by only one single process.  Monsoon is governed 
not only by what happens around India, but al so throughout the globe, like what happens 
in the Pacific Ocean, in the North Atlantic Ocean, in the Indian Ocean, as well as, what 
happens on the land.  He further added that efforts are being made to improve upon the 
accuracy level of weather and monsoon forecast a nd a lot of initiatives have been taken. 
A major programme for augmenting the obser ving systems has been  undertaken.  This 
year the Ministry has installed about 223 au tomatic weather stations, and 248 automatic 
rain gauges, the GPS-on-date to measure the upper air, etc. The complete installation will 
be over by 2012.  The Ministry has also installed a system to take the data from a large 
number of systems to a central unit and then to integrate them.   The satellite-related 
Ocean Sat-II has been launched and they ar e awaiting the data.  INSAT-3D, which is 
very important, will be launched some time in the latter half of the year.   
7.8.6 It was informed further that as regard s the computing system, earlier the Ministry 
was not having sufficient computing systems,  the high power computing systems to run 
the models for carrying out experiments.  Now it has installed all the high power 
computing systems.   The Secretary claime d that this monsoon onwards the Ministry 
would have a much better system for the analysis of the data.  They are also doing a lot of 
experiments on the models and would be able to  take the data from radars and satellite 

and assimilate them directly into the mode ls.  However, they do not have sufficient 
number of personnel to run the models.  So, this  year the Ministry is  proposing to start a 
training school where it w ill take about 20 to 40 young graduate and post-graduate 
students and train them for a year or two and then absorb take them into their system.  
The Committee was also informed that a High Altitude Cloud Physics Laboratory is 
being set up at Mahabaleshwar to study the nature of cloud throughout the year.  Thus, all 
round  efforts right from observation to computing, to have adequate qualified manpower, 
etc. are being made to improve the accuracy of weather forecast.     
7.8.7 The Committee feels that weather for ecast and its accuracy has today 
assumed greater significance, specially, in the context of climat ic changes taking 
place which have resulted in vagaries of mo nsoon and weather.  Since, agriculture 
has traditionally been the cornerstone of  Indian economy, scanty and sporadic 
rainfall during monsoon witnessed during the recent years has started adversely 
affecting agricultural production. 
7.8.8 The Committee of the view that the init iatives being taken by the Ministry to 
improve the accuracy of weather foreca st are welcome steps.  The Committee 
however recommends that all the processes a nd steps as indicated by the Ministry 
must be put in proper place as soon as possible and preferably before the onset of 
the coming monsoon so that predicatio ns could be more and more accurate and 
precautionary measures to deal with flood like situation can be taken in advance .  It 
also recommends that besides making consis tent efforts towards achieving accuracy 
of monsoon forecast, it is also imperative to disseminate the prediction to the remote 
and far flung areas of the country so that it reaches the poor and marginal farmers 
also.    The Committee also recommends th at the Ministry must ensure this year 
that the funds allocated for modernization of India Meteorological Department 
must be fully utilized. 
7.9  DOPPLER WEATHER RADARS 
7.9.1 The Committee enquired from the S ecretary as to why do Ministry import 
Doppler Weather Radars and is not in  a position to develop radar technology 
indigenously?  Secretary, Ministry of Earth Sciences responded by saying that Bharat 
Electronics Ltd. (BEL) have made two radars out of which one is installed in Bhuj and 
the other one is likely to be installed in  Mumbai.  He further added that since the 
requirement for radars was very high, Mini stry have procured  12 Doppler Weather 
Radars from M/s Metstar Ra dar Co. Ltd., Beijing, China through a global tendering 
process.  Equipments for the radars have  been supplied by the company and are under 
installation at various places.  Radars are to be installed at Mumbai, Karaikal, Hyderabad, 
Delhi, Bhopal, Lucknow, Patiala, Mohanbari, Agartala, Paradip, Nagpur and Goa.  First 
radar is likely to be commissioned at New Delhi soon. 
 
7.9.2 The Committee observes that the Minist ry's contention that radars were 
imported because of its requirement being very high does not   hold good on two 
grounds. Firstly, because the imported radars  are yet to be installed and secondly 
because there was delay in shipment of Doppler Weather Radar during 2008-09. As 
such, the Committee finds that the sense of urgency shown in import of radars got 
defeated.  The Committee feel s that instead of deciding  to import radars from 
China, the Ministry should have persuade d BEL to manufacture more radars as it 

has rightly done now.  The Committee th erefore, recommends that the Ministry 
should try its best to make use of indigenous  technology as it gives fillip to Indian 
industry and generate employment opportunities.  
7.10 CENTRE FOR CLIMATE CHANGE 
7.10.1 As informed, Climate Change Centre is one of the major schemes likely to be 
affected by the overall reduction in the proj ected demand of the Ministry.  But the 
Committee finds that allocation under the Prog ramme of Centre for Climate Change has 
been increased to Rs. 45.00 crores as against BE allocation of Rs. 25.00 crores in the year 
2009-10.  In such a situation Committee enquired from the Ministry that on what basis it 
claims that this Centre will be affected by the overall cut in allocation of the Ministry, 
while the fact is that allocation under this h ead has increased.  It was informed that by 
saying that Climate Change Centre will suffer,  it is not meant that the Climate Change 
Centre per se will suffer.  There are a lot of observation systems which have been defined 
under atmospheric science which will also be  needed for studying th e climate change.  
Then,  there are requirements for enhan cement of existing capacity of high power 
computer system.  The high power computer system is being upgrade with peak 
performance of 60.2 teraflop which will be adde d to the existing setup to achieve more 
than 70 teraflop peak performance.  So, if we  could not build this capacity in one year, 
we will be able to run the modeling work pr edictions of Indian monsoon, but we will not 
be able to run it the way it wa s originally envisaged.  In brief, although, it will not affect 
the Climate Change Centre per se but it will affect climate change research.  
7.10.2 The Committee feels that climate change research is quite significant in the 
present context and it must not be allowed to suffer at any cost.  It, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry must cont inue with the ongoing and proposed 
activities related with this scheme and s eek additional provision at the RE stage 
from the Ministry of Fianance. 
7.11 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TROPICAL METEOROLOGY 
7.11.1 The Indian Institute of Tropical Mete orology (IITM), Pune established in 1962 
has been functioning as a na tional centre for basic and ap plied research in monsoon 
meteorology of the tropics in general with special reference to monsoon meteorology in 
India and neighbourhood. Its primary functio ns are to promote, guide and conduct 
research in the field of meteorology in all its aspects. IITM has been playing a leading 
role in the development of empirical models  for long-range predic tion of seasonal mean 
monsoon rainfall and has taken major initiativ e in simulation of seasonal prediction of 
Indian summer monsoon and its variability by using atmospheric and oceanic general 
circulation models (OGCM).  
7.11.2 The Ministry took up a programme to set up a dedicated Centre for Climate 
Change Research (CCCR) at the IITM, Pune to address various  scientific issues relating 
to climate change including impacts on sector s like health, agriculture and water. The  
mandate is (i) to explore and assess targeted science-facets of climate change that are of 
high relevance for the Indian region, along with their global linkages through the creation 
of a research infrastructure to be coordina ted by a exclusive program on climate change 
science, (ii) to integrate existing resear ch groups and develop new groups through the 
development of institutional research network,  (iii) developing collaborative linkages 
with international institutions and research groups to enhance research capabilities, and 

(iv) coordinate systematic observation program fo r climate change related parameters 
including fluxes, over Indian region and ocean in the neighborhood.  
7.11.3 The CCCR has been established in October 2009 and started functioning in an 
incubation centre with recruitment of six sc ientists and redeployment of a few existing 
scientists of the IITM. The new High Powered Computer (HPC) system has also been 
installed, commissioned and put in function in  a new specially constructed building in 
January/February 2010. Modelling work for pr ediction of Indian monsoon, weather and 
climate has also been started recently using the new HPC.  
 
7.11.4 The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Earth Sciences has initiated a new 
programme on global and regional cl imate change and has successfully set up a dedicated Climate Change 
Research Centre with the state of ar t research facilities.  This is indeed  a timely initiative.  The Committee 
recommends that all out effort should be made to  enhance the weather, mons oon and climate prediction 
ability of this Centre for making reliable projection of weather and monsoon and the services of the Centre 
could be utilized to deal climate change issue in a holistic and comprehensive manner.  
7.12     NATIONAL CENTRE FOR MEDIUM RANGE WEATHER 
FORECASTING 
7.12.1 The National Centre for Medium Range  Weather Forecasting (NCMRWF) was 
created as a mission mode project of the G overnment in 1988 and continues to function 
in the same mode. The mandate of the Cent re is to provide medium range location 
specific forecasts to farmers through development of Agro-Advisory Service for the 127 
Agro-climatic zones (ACZ) of the country. In this regard the NCMRWF has established 
links with different Agricultural Universities and Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
(ICAR) research centres spr ead across the country. NCMRWF has been designated as a 
Ministry of Earth Sciences centre of excelle nce for weather & climate modeling in India 
after mandates of its constituent units were redefined by a designated committee and 
accepted by the Earth Commission. This year , budgetary allocation of Rs. 14.90 crores 
has been provided to carry out various activities under this programme. 
7.12.2 The Ministry has taken new initia tives at Mid-term Appraisal of XI
th  Five Year 
Plan and has proposed to take up a set of new proposal to achieve the targets of 11th Five 
Year Plan which are Mountain Meteorology for Himalaya, High Altitude Cloud Physics 
Laboratory at Mahabaleswar, Ocean biogeochemistry of the Indian Ocean,  Impact of 
climate change on coastal zone, Cryosphere Processes and Climate Change, Integrated 
development of Islands, Acquisition of Aerial platforms and coastal research vessel, 
Advanced Training School in Climate and Earth System, Pune. 
7.12.3 The Committee is of the view that thru st of weather forecasting must be on 
its accuracy and there is a need to ensure higher degree of precision in our weather 
forecasting system. The Committee recomme nds that Ministry has to widen its 
objectives and work hard to ensure the constant upgradation of forecast techniques 
and models for prediction with the use of available, reliable and accurate satellite 
data. It appreciates that its products are provided to various agencies in the 
Government and other users in a number of socio-economic sectors.  
8.  The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Earth Sciences which 
aims to look at the planet in a holisti c way to understand the interplay of earth 
dynamics and systems phenomenon is stri ving to emerge as a knowledge and 
information technology enterprise for the Earth System Science. It has been doing 
commendable job of using science and technology for exploration and exploitation 

of vast marine resources for the socio econ omic benefit of the society. Given the 
commendable work, the Ministry of Earth Sciences is doing, the Committee 
strongly recommends that the Ministry of  Earth Sciences should be properly and 
adequately funded and any kind of reduction  in outlay at R.E. stage should be 
strictly avoided as far as possible.  
Annexure 
The budgetary allocation (B.E.) for the year 2010-11  
S.No. Name of the Scheme 
B.E. 2010-11
(Rs. in 
crores) 
1  Polar Science 145.00 
2  Polymetallic Nodules Programme 15.00 
3  Ocean Observations, and Information System  23.00 
4 Marine Research Technology Development  
4.1 Marine Living Resources & berthing facility  17.00 
4.2  Assistance for Research Projects & Training 7.50 
4.3 Coastal Ocean Monitoring & Prediction System 7.00 
4.4 Awareness (Exhibition and Fairs Seminar Symposia) 8.00 
4.5 Marine Non-Living Resources  17.00 
4.6  Integrated Coastal & Marine Area Management 
(ICMAM) 
11.00 
4.7  Drugs from Sea 11.00 
5  National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT)  45.00 
6 Coastal Research Vessels & other research vessels  7.00 
7  Delineation of Outer Limits of Continental Shelf   1.00 
8 Comprehensive Topographic Surveys 6.00 
9 
 Gas Hydrates Exploration & Technology 
Development for Exploitation 12.00 
10 O&M of Sagar Nidhi 20.00 
11  Early Warning Systems of Tsunami & Storm suges 12.00 
12  Data Buoy programme & O& M of Sagar Manjusha  15.00 
13  Information Technology 7.00 
14 
 National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean 
Research(NCAOR) 15.00 

 
15 
 Indian National Centre for Ocean Information 
Services (INCOIS) 25.00 
16  Seafront facility 0.50 
17  Development of manned submersible                             5.00 
18 
 Multichannel Seismic System  (MCS) on board Sagar   
Kanya                                                                                0.50 
19  Desalination Technology  ( 10 MLD) 5.00 
20  Expedition to Arctic 3.00 
21  National Oceanarium  1.00 
22  Demonstration of Shore Protection measures through  5.00 
23 
 Integrated Ocean Drilling Programme & Arabian Sea 
basin studies 6.00 
24  Ice class Research vessel 25.00 
25  Headquarter Building 25.00 
26  India Meteorology Department 306.00 
27 
 National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecast 
(NCMRWF) 25.00 
28   Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM  )         56.45 
29  Multi-hazards Early Warning Support System 5.00 
30  Centre for Climate   Change Research 45.00 
31 
 Dedicated Weather Channel & Commonwealth 
Games 2010 15.00 
32  NIOT ext. centre West Bengal 0.05 
33  Seismicity and Earthquake precursor 30.00 
34  R&D in Earth & Atmospheric Sciences 15.00 
  Grand Total 1000.00
_______________________________________________________________________ 
MINUTES 
________________________________________________________________________ 
  
XVII 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING  
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Tuesday, 30 th March, 2010 in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT  
1.  Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
4. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi 

5. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
6. Shri Jabir Husain 
7. Dr. Barun Mukherji 
LOK SABHA  
8.  Shri Ninong Ering  
9.   Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
10.  Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda 
11. Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
12.  Shri C.R. Patil 
13.  Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
14.  Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
15.  Shri Francisco Sardinha 
16.  Dr. Rajan Sushant 
17.  Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
SECRETARIAT  
Smt. Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary 
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director 
Shri V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director 
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director 
Representatives of the Ministry of Earth Sciences 
 
1. Dr. Shailesh Nayak, Secretary  
2. Shri D.P. Singh, Joint Secretary  
3. Ms. Sheila Sangwan, JS&FA 
4. Shri Taranjeet Singh, Director Finance 
5.   Ms. Suman Mala, Controller of Accounts 
6.   Dr. S.K. Das, Scientist 'G' 
7. Dr. B.R. Subramanian, Scientist 'G' 
8. Dr. S.S.C. Shenoi, Dir ector, INCOIS, Hyderabad 
9. Dr. M.A. Athmanand, Director, NIOT, Chennai 
10. Dr. V. N. Sanjeevan, Director, CMLRE, Kochi 
11. Dr. A.K. Bohra, Scientiish 'G' 
12. Shri A.K. Bhatnagar, Addl. Director General, IMD 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed th e Secretary, Ministry of Earth Sciences 
and his team of officials to the meeting of  the Committee and requested him to make a 
presentation on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry.   He also desired to know 
the budgetary aspects and the aspects concerning major programmes and policies of the 
Department including programmes where th e targets could not be achieved by the 
Ministry or the performance of the Minist ry was not satisfactory. He requested the 
Secretary to highlight the specific require ments for increase under any head of the 
budget. Thereafter, the Secret ary made a visual presen tation regarding the major 
activities formulated for the year 2010-11 a nd achievements of the Ministry during the 
year 2009-10.  He also mentioned about the budgetary allocations under different heads 
and the functioning of the Ministry.  Thereaf ter, Members sought cl arifications on the 
points that emerged out of the presentation. The Secretary replied to them. 
 The officials then withdrew.  
 A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 

3. The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 12.40  p.m. and re-assembled at 02.30 
p.m. to hear the views of the Secretary, Department of Science & Technology.  
Representatives of *** 
 
*** *** *** 
4. *** 
The officials then withdrew.  
 A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.20 p.m.  
XVIII 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING  
The Committee met at 03.00 p.m. on Friday, 16th April, 2010 in Committee Room 
'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT  
1.  Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi 
4. Shri Saman Pathak 
5. Shri Jabir Husain 
6. Dr. Barun Mukherji 
LOK SABHA  
7. Dr. Mirza Mehboob Beg 
8. Shri Ninong Ering  
9.   Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
10.  Shri C.R. Patil 
11.  Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
12.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
13.  Shri Pradeep Tamta 
14.  Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
SECRETARIAT  
Smt. Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary 
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director 
Shri V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director 
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director 
2. At the outset, the Chairman informed  the Committee that though seven reports 
(204
th to 210 th Reports) on Demands for Grants (2010-2011) pertaining to the 
Ministries/Departments under the purview of the Committee have been circulated, the 
Committee would however consider  the draft 204
th, ***, ***, ***, *** and *** Reports 
on Demands for Grants (2010-2011)  pertaining to the Ministry  of Earth Sciences; ***; 
***; ***; *** and *** respectivel y and draft *** Report pertai ning to the *** would be 
considered later on as he could not go through that Report due to his some other 
engagements. The Committee then took- up for consideration its draft 204 th, ***, ***, 
***, *** and *** Reports. The Committee discussed the Reports one by one and adopted 
all the *** Reports (204
th to ***) without any amendment. 

3. The Committee, thereafter decided to present its 204 th to *** Reports on 22 nd 
April and *** to *** Reports on 23 rd April, 2010 to both the Houses of the Parliament. 
The Committee authorized its Chairman and in  his absence Shri Jabir Husain to present 
the 204th to 206th reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Francisco Sardinha and in his absence 
Dr. Mirza Mehboob Beg to lay the copies of the reports on the table of Lok Sabha on 22nd 
April, 2010. The Committee also authorized its  Chairman and in his absence Shri Rama 
Chandra Khuntia to present th e *** to *** reports in Ra jya Sabha and Shri Pradeep 
Tamta and in his absence Dr. Charan Das Mahant  to lay the copies of the reports on the 
table of Lok Sabha on 23rd April, 2010.  
3. Thereafter, the Committee decided to unde rtake study visit to Bangalore, Chennai 
and Tirupati in the second week of June, 2010 to acqua int itself   with    the   functioning    
of certain institutes/bodies/centers, etc., falling within   the administrative control of the 
Ministries/Departments under the purview of the Committee. The Committee directed the 
Secretariat to take necessary action accordingly. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 p.m.  
 *** Relates to other Matters. 