PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE. ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1998-99) 
SIXTY-FIRST REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND 
INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE FIFTY-SIXTH REPORT OF 
THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND 
FORESTS ON THE DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS (1998-99) 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND 
INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH 
(PRESENTED ON DECEMBER 22ND, 1998) 
(LAID O:N DECEMBER 22ND, 1998) 
RAJY A SABHA. SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 1998/ AGRAHA YANA, 1920 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
1. CoMrosiTION or- TilE Co~IMITTEE 
2. lNTIWDIXTION 
3. RErORT or- TilE Col\.I~IITTEE 
4. MINUTEs oF TilE MEETING OF TilE CoMMITTEE. 
PAGES 
(i)-(ii) 
(iii) 
1-5 
7-9 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRON­
MENT AND FORESTS (1998-99) 
1. Shri S.R. Bommai-Chnirmnn 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Rahasbihari Barik 
4. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
*5. Shrimati Saroj Dubey 
* *6. Shri Oscar Fernandes 
@7. Shri Ram Chandra Khuntia 
8. Dr. D. Masthan 
9. Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty 
10. Shri Lachhman Singh 
@@11. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh 
12. Shri W. Angou Singh 
$13. Shri B.P. Singhal 
14. Shri Prakanta Warisa 
$$15. Vacant 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shri Indra Nath Bhagat 
17. Shri Ranjib Biswal 
18. Shri Chengara Surendran 
19. Shrimati Bhavana Chikhaliya 
20. Dr. (Mrs.) Beatrix D'Souza 
21. Shri M.C. Dhamotharan 
22. Shri George Eden 
23. Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya 
24. Shri K. Krishnamoorthy 
25. Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
26. Shri Janardan Prasad Misra 
27. Shri Rupchand Munbu 
• Nominated w.e.f 27th July, 1998 vice Shri Khan Ghufrnn Zahidi ceased to be a Member of the 
Committee w.e.f. 4th July, 1998 on expiry of his term in Rajya Sabha. 
•• Nominated w.e.f. 17th July , 1998. 
@ Nominated w.e.f. 17th July, 1998 vice Shri Pranab Mukherjee ceased to be a Member of the Committee 
w.c.f 29th June, 1998. . 
@@Nominated w.e.fllth August, 1998 vice Shri G. Swaminathan ceased to be a Member of the Committee 
w.e.f. 29th June, 1998 on expiry of his term in Rajya Sabha. 
$ Nominated w.e.f. 15th Scptembr, 1998 vice Shri Ram Ratan Ram who was nominated w.e.f. 12th June, 
1998. and ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 4th July, 1998 on expiry of his term in Rajya 
Sabha. 
$$ Shri N. Abdul Khadcr ceased to be n Member of the Committee w.e.f. 29th June, 1998 on expiry of his 
term in Rajya Sabha. 

28. Captain Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad 
29. Shri Prakash Vishwanath Paranjpe 
30. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik 
31. Shri S. Vijaya Rama Raju 
32. Shri lnderjit Singh Rao 
33. Shrimati Vijaya Raje Scindia 
%34. Shri Maheshwar Singh 
35. Shri Virendra Singh 
36. Prof. Saifuddin Soz 
37. Shri Devji Bhai J. Tandel 
38. Shri Prasad' Baburao Tanpure 
39. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
40. Shr! ,Ravi Prakash Verma 
41. Shri Suresh Warpudkar 
42. Shri Mukul Wasnik 
**43. Vacant 
%*44. Vacant 
%$45. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Director 
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary 
Shri Roshan Lal, Committee Officer 
% Nominated w.e.f. 26th June, 1998. 
•• Shri Madhavrao Scindia ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.t!.f 16th December, 1998. 
% • Shri Ayanur Manjonath ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 11th June, 1998. 
%$ Shri B.M. Menasinakai ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.t!.f lOth June , 1998. 

INTRODUCfiON 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and 
Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the report on its behalf, present 
this Sixty-first Report, on the Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial 
Research on the recommendations contained in the Fifty-sixth Report of the Committee on 
Demand for Grants (1998-99) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research. 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of 
Scientific and Industrial Research on the recommendations contained in the Fifty-sixth 
Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and 
Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research which was presented to the Rajya Sabha 
on lOth July, 1998. 
2. There are ten recommendations contained in the Fifty-sixth Report of the Commit­
tee. Action Taken notes on the recommendations of the Committee, were re(eived from the 
Department on 22nd September, 1998. 
3. In the meeting held on 18th December, 1998 the Committee considered the draft 
Action Taken Report and adopted the same. 
New DELHI; 
December 18, 1998 
S.R. BOMMA1, 
Chairman, 
Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment and Forests. 

REPORT 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of 
Scientific and Industrial Res earch on the recommendtltions contained in the Fifty-sixth 
Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and 
Technology, Environment and Forests on the De munds for Grants (1998-99) of the 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research which was presented to the Rajya Sabha 
on lOth July, 1998. There are ten recommendations contained in the Fifty-sixth Report of 
the Committee. Action Taken notes on the recommendations of the Committee, were 
received from the Department on 22nd September, 1998. 
On scrutiny of the Action Taken Report as received from the Department of Scientific 
and Industrial Research, the Committee finds that all the ten recommendations have been 
fully implemented . 
The Committee's recommendation, action taken thereon and comments of the Commit­
tee on the action taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research are given in 
the succeeding paragraphs:-
RECOMMENDATION 
The Committee observes that it is not a happy situation. Funds which could have been 
utilised for R&D work were used for meeting inescapable commitment towards payme nt of 
salaries, pensions and other related administrative expenditure. Something need urgently be 
done to remedy the situation. The CSIR should pursue the matter with the Ministry of 
Finance for higher allocation at the Revised Estimates stage to enable it to meet its liability 
under the Central Management Head. As regards th~ diversion of Plan funds to uon-Pian 
sector, the Committee would like to reiterate its earlier views as contained in its Thirteenth, 
Twenty-fourth, Thirty-sixth and Fifty-second Reports in which this Committee had recom­
mended in unambiguous terms that sufficient pro\'ision be made in the non-plan outlay of 
DSIR to meet its committed liability. Despite a clear recommendation of the Committee, in 
the budget estimates of 1998-99, thete is still a wide gap between the allocations made and 
expected liability of the Department. The plan funds should be utilised for plan activities only 
as per the accepted budgetary norms. 
(Para 6) 
Action Taken by the Department: 
The CSIR has take.n up with the Ministry of Finance for enhancement of its non-plan 
allocation, so as to be able to meet the committed expenditure without encroaching upon the 
Plan funds. The Ministry of Finance is considering the CSIR request. It is expected that the 
requisite funds would be provided for at the RE stage. 
Comments: 
The Committee notes the action taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial 
Research and observes that this has been going on for quite some time. The Committee 
therefore would like the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) to help DSIR 
come out of the -situation once for all. 

RECOMMENDATION 
The Committee observes that most of the laboratories functioning under the administra­
tive control of DSIR are equipped either with the ageing equipment and facilities or with the 
obsolete equipment· and communication and networking system. Most of the laboratories 
require urgent upgradation and replacement to make them globally competitive. The 
Secretary, DSIR informed that the Government, keeping in view the recommendations of this 
Committee in its Thirty-sixth and Fifty-second reports has committed to provide a 
modernisation grant of Rs. 250 crores to DSJR during the Ninth Plan period. But the 
Committee would like the Department to generate internal resources also for modernising the 
CSIR laboratories. DSIR should also make concerted efforts to bring down the non-Plan 
expenditure of the laboratories coming under the CSIR system. 
(Para 8) 
Action Taken by the Department: 
The allocation of Rs. 250 crore for modernisation during IX Plan is to meet only a part 
of the overall requirement . CSJR is already meeting a major part of the modernisation 
expenditure from its internal and ottier resources. 
CSIR is seized of the matter aud has issued instructions for economy in expenditure 
pertaining to consumables, travel, contingencies etc. 
Comments: 
While the Committee notes th.e instructions issued by DSIR for economy in expenditure 
on travel etc .• nothing has been indicated about the modernisation of the laboratories . The 
Committee reiterates its recomm,endation and would like the Department of Scientific and 
Industrial Research laboratories to come up to the expectations of its users by providing 
better standard of services an<f other requirements . 
RECOMMENDATION 
. The Committee is of the view that the industry-related laboratories of the CSIR should 
abn at havina better interface with the industry so that the technologies developed by them 
are eventually commercialiseft. Th~ would bring self-reliance and confidence within the CSIR 
system providing further impetus of R&D activities of these laboratories. 
(Para 12) 
Action Taken by the Dep~rtment: 
CSIR is seized of the matter and infact its Vision 2001 document has outlined CSIR's 
technology strategy, which inter alia lays emphasis on partnering Indian industry to emerge as 
a significant global player and assist the nation in derivin& enhanced and sustainable value 
from . endogenous resources. This would be relentlessly pursuad . 
Comments: 
The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATiON 
The Committee is of the yiew that in order to attract talent to take up S&T as a career, 
and retain them, housing and other amenities be provided to the scientists. Possibilities may 
also be explored for providing campus-housing facilities to the scientists working in CSIR 
laboratories. 
(Para 15) . 
Action Taken by the Department: 
CSIR within the confines of the budgetary allocations, is endeav.ouring to provide 
campus-housing facilities for its scientists. 

Comments: 
The Committee is of the view that in order to check the brain drain it is necessary to 
have higher budgetary allocations so that exodus of scientists to foreign countries is checked. 
Likewise those willing to return from abroad be provided sufficient amenities particularly 
housing so that they do not miss their comforts and surroundings which they had during 
their stay abroad . 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Committee is of the view that since we have got the highest cattle population in the 
country and, therefore, raw material is available in abundance, if the eco-friendly and cost 
effective technologies and techniques are utilised for leather processing, it would be possible 
for us to compete at the international level and increase our exports. For this there has to be 
a greater interaction between tanneries and the concerned laboratories of the CSIR. 
(Para 19) 
Action Taken by the Department: 
CSIR has infact mounted a mission mode programme that seeks to dovetail the oraanised 
and informal sectors of leather lodustry for sustainable and symbiotic development and to 
achieve a 10% share of the World Leather exports. 
Comments: 
While the Committee notes the reply it would like sustained effort to achieve the 
targets. 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Committee is of the view that plant-based drugs and herbal drup are becoming 
popular all over the world. This can become our area of strength and the traditional 
knowledge about plants and herbs which exist in this country is required to be probed 
sclentifacally for its medicinal use and further validation. The Committee would Uke the CSIR 
to work in this area with appropriate thrust. 
(Para 22) 
Action Taken by the Department: 
Recoanisina the Indian core strengths in traditional system of medicine using .plaats and 
herbs, CSIR has already initiated a high priority co-ordinated programme on develo~nt 
and commercialisation of bio-actlve molecules during the Ninth Plan. 
Comments: 
The Committee notes the reply. However it would like to point out that the traditional 
knowledge about plant based and herbal drugs is fast disappearing ~n the commercialisation 
of new remedies through ads. It is necessary that the knowledge aoout traditional herbal 
drugs and home made remedies appearing in language newspapers and other journals from 
time to time is collected. As a first step in that direction it is necessary to collect information 
about these nearly forgotten remedies through whatever source one can lay hands on and 
document them before drug formulations based on them are prepared and tested . The 
Committee is ~oubtful whether sufficient administrative machinery for the purpose is 
available in DSIR. 
RECOMMENDATION 
Tile Committee is of the c:onsidered opinion that the Food Processin& sector in our 
cowatry offen tnmeadous scope for application of teChniques and technologies for redudJI&. 

post harvest losses and for generating wealth and · employment in the rural sector. The 
Committee would like that cheap and simple processing technologies for value addition, 
minimising post-harvest losses and employment generation be developed which could be easily 
learnt by the people living in rural areas . 
(Pam 24) 
Action Taken by the Department: 
CFTRI, Mysore of CSIR is developing and disseminating knowledge, techniques and 
devices for minimising post-harvest losses and enhancing employment generation amongst the 
rural population. 
Comments: 
The Committee observes that it should have been apprised of the results, if any, of the 
steps taken, in concrete terms. 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Committee recommends that innovative work of generating new technologies for 
rural road should continue and the State and concerned agencies may be informed of the low 
cost road construction technologies available with the CRRI through publicity folders , 
brochures and by producing literature on the subject. 
(Pnrn 26) 
Action Taken by the Department: 
CSIR welcomes the suggestions of the Committee. CRRI would take steps to widely 
disseminate the required information and knowledge. 
Comments: 
The Committee observes that there is vust potential in improving the technology with a 
view to have better roads. If the CRRI possesses the technology it should use it first in the 
roads connecting villages to cities, within the cities and then on St<Jte and National 
Highways. 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Committee is happy over the fact that in 1997 DSIR and NRDC had organised over 
fifteen patents and IPR-related workshops for the schmCific community with expert resource 
persons drawn from India and abroad and these initiatives are being further enlarged. The 
Committee would like the Department to prol•ide wide publicity to its scheme being 
administered by NRDC under which assistance is provided to Indian scientists and inventors 
to secure patents for their products and process<'s through engaging of patent attorneys. 
(Para 29) 
Action Taken by the Department: · 
The suggestions of the Committee is well received and NRDC would endeavour to provide 
wide publicity on IPR related matters. 
Comments: 
The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Committee is of the view that on the front of providing drinking water to all the 
villages in the country not much work has been done. The dream of Rajiv Gandhi, the former 
Prime Minister of India, who launched the National Drinking Water Mission, still remains to 
be fulfilled. Despite the technical inputs provided by CSIR Laboratories to the Mission by way 

of quality testing of water, removal of arsenic from drinking water, etc. what is needed today 
is to develop technologies for water conservation and water harvesting. The water table 
everywhet·e is going down. Traditional sources of water are drying up. Water is the necessity 
of life. The Committee would like the Department to co-ordinate its activities with the 
Ministries of Water Resource , Rural Development and the State Governments for transferring 
technologies in the area of purifying water to make it potable. At the same time the scientists 
working in the area may also think of devising new and cheaper methods of water harvesting 
and water conservation. 
(Para 32) 
Action Taken by the Department: 
CSIR welcomes the suggestions of the Committee. It is further enhancing its earlier 
initiatives in this regard . 
Comments:· 
While the Committee notes the reply , it would like a not e on the s ubject listing the 
steps taken in the direction and the result s, if any, achieved by the time the Committee 
take:; up consideration of Demand for Grants next time. 
NEw DELHI; 
December 18, 1998 
S.R . BOMMAI, 
Chairman , 
Committee on Science and Technolo gy, 
Em/ironment and Forests; 

MINUTES 

XVII 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Friday, the 18th December. 1998 in Room No. 62, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri S.R. Bommai-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Rahasbihari Barik 
4. Shri Oscar Fernandes 
5. Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty 
·6. Shri Lachhman Singh 
7. Shri W. Angou Singh 
LOK SABHA 
·8. Shri Indra Nath Bhagat 
9. Shri M.C. Dhamotharan 
10. Shri Janardan Prasad Misra 
11. Shri Maheshwar Singh 
12. Captain Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad 
13. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik 
14. Prof. Saifuddin Soz 
15. Shri Prasad Baburao Tanpure 
16. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
17. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
18. Shri Mukul Wasnik 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri H. K. Chanana, Director 
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary 
Shri . Roshan Lal, Committee Officer . 
2. The Committee took up consideration of the draft •• • Sixty-first and ••• Reports on 
the Action Taken by the Departments of ***, Scientific and Industrial Research and ••• on 
Committee's •••, Fifty-sixth and *** Reports on Demands for Grants (1998-99) respectively 
and adopted the same with minor amendments. 
3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri Lachhman Singh to 
present the Reports to the Rajya Sabha and Captain Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad and in his 
absence Shri Prasad Baburao Tanpure to Jay the Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha. 
4. • 
5 .• 
6. The Committee 
December, 1998. 
* • 
* * 
then adjourned at 4.50 r.M. to meet again at 4.00 P.M. on 22nd 