PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

64
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED AND FIRST REPORT
“Genetically Modified Crops and its Impact on Environment”
(Presented to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on the 25th August, 2017)
(Forwarded to Hon’ble Speaker , Lok Sabha on the 25th August, 2017)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 15th December, 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 15th December, 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2017/Shravana, 1939 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(iv)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (v)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (vi )
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-27
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE .............................................................. 28-36
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 37-62

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2016-17)
 ( Constituted on 1st September , 2016)
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury   —  Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
5. Shri C.P. Narayanan
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani
7. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
8. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
9. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
10. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
16. Kumari Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
23. Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole
24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
30. Shrimati M.Vasanthi
31. Shri Prabhubhai N. V asava
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri T.N. Pandey, Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2017-18)
 ( Constituted on 1st September , 2017)
1. Shri Anand Sharma    —   Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
5. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
6. Shri C.P. Narayanan
7. Shri Parimal Nathwani
8. Shri Sharad Pawar
9. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
15. Shri P.P . Chauhan
16. Kumari Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shrimati M. Vasanthi
21. Shri Daddan Mishra
22. Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava
23. Shri Chirag Paswan
24. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
25. Shri Nana Patole
26. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
27. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
28. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
29. Shri Nagendra Singh
30. Shri Vikram Usendi
131. Vacant
(iii)
1 Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f. 12th December, 2017

(iv)
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri T.N. Pandey, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on
its behalf, present this Three Hundred and First Report on “Genetically Modified Crops and its Impact on
Environment”.
2. In its meeting held on the 23rd December, 2016, 5th January, 2017, 8th, 27th and 28th February,
2017, 24th April, 2017, 24th and 25th May, 2017 and 5th July, 2017, the Committee heard the views of the
representatives of Ministries of Health and Family Welfare and Environment, Forest and Climate Change and
Departments of Biotechnology; Agricultural Research & Education; Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
and some Members of Civil Society and Experts on the subject. During its study visit to Chennai in May,
2017, the Committee also heard the views of the Members of Civil Society and local representatives on the
subject.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the representatives of the concerned Ministries/Departments,
Members of Civil Society and Experts for placing before the Committee the required material and replying to
the clarifications sought by the Members on the subject.
4. In its meetings held on 9th and 21st August, 2017, the Committee considered the draft report and
adopted the draft report on 21st August, 2017.
(RENUKA CHOWDHURY)
N
EW D ELHI; Chairperson,
21st August,  2017 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Shravana 30, 1939 ( Saka)  Science and Technology, Environment and Forests,
Rajya Sabha.
(v)

ACRONYMS
BRL  : Biosafety Research Level
CBD  : Convention on Biological Diversity
CICR  : Central Institute for Cotton Research
CPB  : Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety
DARE  : Department of Agricultural Research & Education
DLC  : District Level Committee
EP A  : Environment (Protection) Act, 1986
ERA  : Environmental Risk Assessment
FSSAI  : Food Safety & Standard Authority of India
GEAC  : Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee
GMOs  : Genetically Modified Organisms
HGT  : Horizontal Gene Transfer
IBSC  : Institutional Biosafety Committee
ICAR  : Indian Council of Agricultural Research
LMOs  : Living Modified Organisms
NKSPLR  : Nagoya Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol on Liability and Redress
OECD  : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
RCGM  : Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation
RDAC  : Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee
SBCCs  : State Biotechnology Co-ordination Committees
SOPs  : Standard Operating Procedures
USDA  : United State Department of Agriculture
(vi)

1
REPORT
India, the second most populous country in the world, is soon likely to be the world’s most populous
country, considering our rate of increase in the population. The requirement of foodgrains has also been
keeping pace with the increasing population. In order to meet our ever increasing demand for foodgrains
and keeping in mind the limited land and water resources, high input cost, worsening soil health, dependence
on rain, increasing indebtedness, stagnated productivity, and climatic changes, innovative scientific and
technological efforts are the need of the hour to give fillip to our agricultural production so as to ensure food
security of the country on a sustainable basis.
2. On the one hand we have the ever increasing demand for food and on the other hand, we have to be
equally cautious to strike a fine balance between technological and scientific interventions and their impact
on our environment, bio-diversity, bio-safety, human health and health of livestock and animals. To address
these issues, it is claimed that the genetically modified crops have been developed worldwide for a variety of
purposes and reasons such as enhancing agricultural productivity, reducing dependence on the use of pesticides,
improving the agronomic performance of crop plants; enhancing the nutritional value of foods and feeds;
increasing tolerance to biotic (insect pests, fungal, bacterial and viral diseases) and abiotic stresses (drought,
high and low temperature), elevated levels of carbon dioxide (major global warming gas); providing cost
effectiveness and sustainable industrial products, cleaning of soils contaminated with heavy metal pollutants
including bio-energy (biofuels) crops to produce clean energy.
3. There have been major controversial debates in the country since the introduction of genetically
modified crops in India. On the one hand, it has been argued that genetically modified crops can provide a
potential solution to many of our malnutrition problems and food security and also help in preserving and
protecting the environment by way of minimising dependence on chemical herbicides and pesticides, and
increasing crop yield whereas and on the other hand, there have been widespread apprehensions from
various sections of the society on the safety of genetically modified crops especially in the area of human
and animal health and environmental degradation.
4. In this backdrop and in its endeavour to understand the whole gamut of genetically modified crops
and its impact on environment as well as the human and animal health, the Committee selected the subject
“Genetically Modified crops and its impact on environment” for examination.
INTRODUCTION
5. Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs) can be defined as organisms i.e. plants, animals or
microorganisms in which the genetic material i.e. DNA has been altered in a way that does not occur
naturally by mating and/or natural recombination. The technology is often called “modern biotechnology” or
“gene technology”, sometimes also “recombinant DNA technology” or “genetic engineering”.
6. Genetic engineering techniques have enabled development of GM crops that could address several
biotic and abiotic stresses as well for enhancing agricultural productivity. This technique allows individual
genes to be transferred from one organism into another, also between non-related species. Plants produced
from genetic engineering techniques are called GM crops/Transgenic plants.
7. Traditionally, a plant breeder tries to exchange genes between two plants to produce offspring that
have desired traits. This is done by transferring the male (pollen) of one plant to the female organ of another.
This cross breeding, however, is limited to exchanges between the same or very closely related species. It
can also take a long time to achieve desired results.

2
8. GM technology enables plant breeders to bring together in one plant useful genes from a wide range
of living sources, not just from within the crop species or from closely related plants. This powerful tool
allows plant breeders to do faster what they have been doing for years and generate superior plant varieties.
9. The Committee was given to understand that since biotechnology/genetic engineering techniques are
new and novel and their effects/consequences are not known properly, several regulations/guidelines and
manuals have been put in place from time to time at national and international level. As a party to several
International Conventions, India ensures the safe usage of GM crops through the “Precautionary Approach”
from time to time. In line with the same, India ratified International Protocols like Convention on Biological
Diversity (CBD), Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety (CPB) and Nagoya Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol
on Liability and Redress (NKSPLR).
10. The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change that
genetic modification of plants using conventional selection and plant breeding principles have been carried
out for centuries. The modern techniques of rDNA technology can obtain the same results by directly
identifying the genes responsible for the desired character/trait from various source organisms and transferring
these into a variety of crop plants and other organisms with high degree of precision.
11. The Committee was informed that genetic engineering differs from other plant-breeding techniques
by enabling specific and predictable changes in the transgenic plant. The risks, if any, therefore, associated
with the introduction of GM crops should be the same as those with conventionally modified hybrid crops
and organisms except the new trait introduced. However, the main difference between the classical selection
methods and rDNA technology is that the latter goes beyond the species barrier, i.e., a gene(s) can be
transferred across microorganisms, plants and animals.
12. The Department of Biotechnology in its background note on the subject submitted for the consideration
of the Committee informed that the process for the GM crop development is very long in which during
R&D phase several independent transgenic lines are generated in a variety which is amenable to genetic
engineering for obtaining a stable and effective final “Event”. Such events are then mobilised into desired
cultivated variety or hybrid through backcross breeding methods. Once the final event in a defined genetic
background is established, it requires that prior to the environmental release of GM plants, these undergo a
case-by-case risk assessment to evaluate any potential for adverse environmental impacts. Statutory
Committees (IBSC, RCGM and GEAC) examine each case through a step by step process from research to
product development to generate data on food and environmental safety.
13. The Committee was further informed that in the laboratory and contained conditions, the parameters
to be examined include description of the host plant; center of origin of the host plant; geographical distribution
of the host plant in the country; source and sequence of transgene(s); cloning strategy; characteristics of
expression vector(s); characteristics of inserted genes with detailed sequence homology searches;
characteristics of gene regulator elements; site of target gene integration into host plant genome; genetic
analysis including copy number of inserts, genetic stability over the generations, level of expression of
transgene(s) in various tissues, characterization of expressed gene product; mode of action of gene product;
compositional analysis; rationale for the development of GM plants in terms of agronomic, nutritional and
other benefits.
14. The Committee notes that the Government follows a policy of case by case approval of GM crops.
The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change informed the Committee that as per various

3
guidelines and protocols updated from time to time, the applicant is required to complete several health
and environmental safety studies for ensuring the safety of GM products. The environmental safety
assessment studies includes (i) weediness potential wherein seed germination and speed of seed germination;
seedling vigour and seed size; long continuous seed production; and pod shattering are being booked into,
(ii) crossability and gene flow under which extent of cross pollination with related species; extent of
cross pollination with other plant species; alteration in  pollen viability; and alteration in pollen production
are being studied, (iii) effect on soil microflora to study the alteration in abundance (cfu/gm) and alteration
in predominant species in the region, and (iv) effect on pests, diseases and beneficial insects wherein change
in the susceptibility for insects and diseases; change in predator abundance; change in receptibility towards
honeybees and any toxicity to honey bees are to be studied. The health safety assessment studies include
allergenicity and toxicological potential and compositional analysis wherein various related studies such as
bioinformatics analysis of proteins, pepsin digestibility, thermal stability, expression levels of introduced
protein, acute oral toxicity of purified protein, sub-chronic toxicity with edible parts, alteration in nutrient
composition of leaf and seed, and alteration in toxin/anti-nutrient composition in leaf and seed are to be
conducted.
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
15. In India, the manufacture, import, use, research and release of Genetically Modified Organisms as
well as products made thereof by the use of rDNA technology are governed by the Rules 1989 of the
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (EPA) administered by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change, Government of India. These rules and regulations are commonly referred to as ‘Rules 1989’ and
are available at the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change website and cover the areas of
research as well as large-scale applications of GM organisms and products made thereof. The regulatory
agencies responsible for implementation of the Rules 1989 are the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change and Department of Biotechnology through the following six competent authorities:-
(i) Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RDAC)
The RDAC is involved in reviewing the developments in biotechnology both at national as well
as international levels and recommend safety regulations as per the indigenous requirements of
our country in recombinant research, use and applications from time to time. The RDAC
functions are of advisory nature.
(ii) Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBSC)
IBSC is established under the institution engaged in GMO research to oversee such research
and to interface with the RCGM in regulating it. IBSC is the authority for regulating GH or Lab
experiments.
(iii) Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM)
RCGM is established under the Department of Biotechnology and is mandated to monitor the
safety related aspects in respect of on-going research projects and activities and bring out
manuals and guidelines specifying procedure for regulatory process with respect to activities
involving genetically engineered organisms in research, use and applications including industry
with a view to ensure environmental safety. RCGM is the authority for Biosafety Research
Level I (BRL I) trials.

4
(iv) Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee (GEAC)
GEAC is established under the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. It is the
apex body to accord approval of activities involving large scale use of hazardous micro-organisms
and recombinants in research and industrial production from the environmental perspective.
GEAC is also responsible for granting approvals relating to release of genetically engineered
organisms and products into the environment including experimental field trials (Biosafety
Research Level II known as BRL-II). Minimum of three seasons/years BRL trials are required
for approval of event by GEAC.
(v) State Biotechnology Co-ordination Committees (SBCC’s)
SBC plays a major role in monitoring and has the powers to inspect, investigate and take
punitive action in case of violations of statutory provisions.
(vi) District Level Committee (DLCs)
DLC has a major role in monitoring the safety regulations in installations engaged in the use of
genetically modified organisms/hazardous microorganisms and its applications in the
environment.
16. Rules 1989 are also supported by several Acts and Guidelines put in place from time to time for
ensuring the safety of products derived from Living Modified Organisms (LMOs) viz.:-
z The Environment (Protection )Act, 1986;
z Recombinant DNA Safety Guidelines, 1990;
z Recombinant DNA Safety Guidelines and Regulations, 1994;
z Revised Guidelines for research in transgenic plants & Guidelines for toxicity and allergencity
evaluation of transgenic seeds, plants and plant part, 1998;
z Guidelines for generating Pre-clinical and clinical data for rDNA Vaccines, Diagnostics and
other Biologicals, 1999;
z The Biological Diversity Act, 2002;
z Plant Quarantine (Regulation of Import into India) Order, 2003;
z Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006;
z Industries (Development & Regulation) Act, 1951 - New Industrial Policy & Procedures,
1991;
z Seeds Act, 1966; Seeds Rules, 1968; Seeds (Control) Order, 1983; Seeds Policy 1988 &
2002;
z Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Act 2001, PPV & FR Regulations 2006;
z Guidelines & Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for Confined Field Trials of Regulated,
GE Plants, 2008;

5
z Guidelines for the Safety Assessment of Foods Derived from Genetically Engineered Plants,
2008-ICMR; and
z Protocols for Food and Feed Safety Assessment of GE Crops, 2008
17. The role of various Ministries/Departments related to the GM crops is as detailed below:-
Ministry of Environment, Forest z Primarily responsible for conservation and protection of
& Climate Change environment, ensuring environmental and human health
safety before release of LMOs.
Department of Biotechnology z Promotion of biotechnology.
(Ministry of Science & z Provide services in areas of research, infrastructure, and
Technology) generation of human resources.
Ministry of Agriculture z Policies aimed at agriculture growth.
z ICAR responsible for monitoring agronomic benefits of
GM technology.
z Post release performance of GM crops.
Ministry of Health and Family z Policies aimed at protecting and monitoring human
Welfare health.
Ministry of Commerce and
z Enhance trade with other countries through export/import
Industries policies.
Department of Customs  z Enforcement at point of entry.
18. The Committee notes that several international organisations such as Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD); CODEX Alimentaries (FAO-WHO food Code); and Cartagena Protocol
on Biosafety (CPB) under Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and many functional regulatory systems
such as USA Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA); European Union European Food Safety Authority; Brazil; Japan
and Australia-Office of the Gene Technology Regulator have published several global consensus documents,
protocols and data requirements for food/feed and environmental safety assessment of GM crops.
19. The Committee heard the views of Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change on the subject
on 5th January, 2017. During his deposition before the Committee, the Secretary, on the issue of regulatory
mechanism available with the Ministry, submitted the following:-
“India has been one of the early movers in the development of regulatory system to ensure bio-safety
evaluation and its application and use. The role of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change is conservation of environment, protection of environment and ensuring environmental health
and human health safety, before release of LMOs.
In 1989, the bio-safety rules were framed to cover use, import, export, storage of hazardous
microorganisms and genetically engineered organisms. The Environment Ministry takes care of the

6
regulatory mechanism and the Department of Biotechnology is responsible for the scientific support
in implementation of bio-safety regulations. We get collaborative support also from the Ministry of
Agriculture, ICAR, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the Ministry of Commerce and Industry,
the Central Board of Excise and Customs. All of them play a very useful role in the regulatory
mechanism that goes behind regulating the genetically engineered organisms.
There are at least six stages of scrutiny involved in the entire process. And, each stage has several
iterations within it. On an average, a proposal from the lab stage to the point of decision-making on
clearance takes, at least, ten years, if not more”.
20. Contrary to the views of the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change on the issue of
regulatory mechanism available with the Government, the Committee in its meeting held on 5th January,
2017, was informed by one of the non-official witnesses as under:-
“RCGM (Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation) is purely a lab committee, an institutional
committee. So, there are three levels. There is a lab and RCGM takes care of lab procedures being
right, and not escaping into the “grain-drain” and the antibiotic resistance is not escaping into the
environment. The next one is, whether the designs for the lab work appropriate? That is the role of
Department of Biotechnology. The Department of Biotechnology under the rules is the only legal
body. They did try and I sued them for ultra vires. They started to write guidelines. Now, the trials of
the Bt cotton, after the planting of that season of 1998, when we broke the case, they immediately ran
to RCGM which then sent hand approvals to the people carrying out the trials. It is the wrong body.
The statutory approval on environmental safety and bio-safety in terms of a deliberate release into
the environment is only to be given by GEAC. This is now recognized by a Supreme Court Order that
RCGM, the Biotechnology Department is a promoter Department. It promotes bio-technology and in
that technology, it does work out the institutional parameters of a good research. But, anything in the
environment is called a deliberate release, once it is out and even with the small trial one bee can pick
up the pollen and contaminate. I remember the Biotechnology Department put in submissions that
had to be counted by us where they said that they change the language. The language in the rules is
that large scale manufacture with hazardous micro-organisms in the contained environment and open-
field trials. They mixed up the two and said, ‘Large scale open field trials.’   Because even a one-by-
one plot in the open environment will affect the soil; will affect the pollinator and that is why, all
those tests have to be done under contained conditions of green houses. You can find now what is
happening to soil in a green house. You can find out what is happening to the toxicity and health
through lab research. This is never done in the field. So, when they say that they need to do the open
releases for research is very, very false. Not a single health safety test is done in the field. It is done
in the lab by feeding trials and they have done no human feeding trials and they have done no animal
feeding trials”.
21. The Committee takes note of the divergent views on the efficacy of existing regulatory
mechanism. On the one hand, the Government claims that a very stringent regulatory mechanism
has been put in place leaving no scope for any non-adherence whatsoever by the technology developer
whereas on the contrary, the Committee has been given to understand by some representatives of
the civil society that the existing regulatory mechanism is stringent on paper only and the whole
process of regulation depends upon the data made available to the regulators by the technology

7
developers. The Committee is surprised to know that none of the Committees referred to in the
preceding paragraphs conduct the closed field trials on their own but are solely dependent on the
data provided to them by the technology developer. The Committee feels that this leaves a scope for
the technology developers to fudge the data to suit their own requirements. The existing regulatory
system is, therefore, susceptible to manipulations. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Central Government should, in consultation with the State Governments and Administrations
of Union Territories ensure that the whole process of field trials should be done in closed environment
keeping bio-safety and health safety in mind and in collaboration with the agricultural universities
so as to minimise the scope of fudging the primary data.
22. The Committee is further perturbed to note that despite having GEAC which consists of
experts from various relevant fields, the Government failed to put in place the desired protocols as
late as till 2011. The Committee fails to understand as to why the Ministry did not feel the necessity
to frame these protocols from the introduction of GM crops in 2002. The Committee takes a serious
view of the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change as
well as GEAC in this matter. The Committee is of the opinion that the casual approach of Ministry
and GEAC is indicative of the indifference of these agencies towards the environmental safety and
health hazards of human and animals. The Committee feels that the Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change and GEAC should shrug this complacency and be more focused in their
approach in the matter.
23. The constitution of GEAC also came up for discussion during the meeting of the Committee
held on 25th May, 2017 with the representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change and Department of Biotechnology. The Committee was informed that the GEAC was first
constituted on 28.05.1990 and it was last re-constituted on 11.03.2013 for a period of three years.
Subsequently, with the approval of the Competent Authority, the tenure of the committee has been
extended till re-constitution of the new committee. The Committee expressed its concerns about
the ad hocism in the constitution of the Committee and also about the criteria adopted by the
Ministry for selection of the members of GEAC, their credentials, etc. The Committee also noted
that two of the top three positions of GEAC are held by the bureaucrats of the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change. The Committee is also of the view that there is a conflict
of interest in the appointment of some of the members of GEAC. The Committee is also of the
opinion that it would be in fitness of things if GEAC is headed by an expert from the field of
Biotechnology given the understanding of scientific data and analysis of research and its implication
before coming to a conclusion in the matter.
24. The Committee further notes that there is no mention of GEAC in Rules 1989, and later the
term has been used just for administrative convenience. The Committee further notes that Members
of GEAC are mostly from the Government and Government-aided institutions and there is hardly
any representation of civil society on the board. The Committee is equally surprised to note that
there is hardly any representation from the States particularly where Bt Cotton has been introduced.
The Committee is of the view that the functioning and activities of GEAC call for more transparency.
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should
review the functioning of GEAC along with the organisational set up of GEAC and take necessary

8
corrective measures to make the whole process of assessment and approval more transparent so as
to ensure environmental safety, bio-diversity safety, bio-safety, health safety, food and feed safety
of our country. The Committee also feels that Acts & guidelines must reflect their concerns in the
final consideration.
25. The Committee also feels that the presence of District Level Committee (DLC), which is one
of the most important committees to regulate GM crop at the ground level, is hardly felt in any of
the States/Union Territories and the functioning of these Committees also create suspicion in the
minds of the stakeholders further weakening the confidence level of our farmers, civil societies,
environmentalists, etc.
26. Further, Members of Parliament are representatives of the people of that constituency and
the absence of their representation in the DLC is surprising. The Committee, therefore, is of the
view that Members of Parliament should be nominated as members in the District Level Committees
so that the activities of these Committees are also shared with the public.
STATUS OF GM CROPS
27. As per the Background Note submitted by the Department of Biotechnology, the experience of the
first 20 years from 1996 to 2015 of commercialisation of the GM crops, has confirmed that the early
promise of crop biotechnology has been fulfilled. Biotech crops have delivered substantial agronomic,
environmental, economic, health and social benefits to farmers and, increasingly, to society at large. The
rapid adoption of biotech crops, during the initial 20 years of commercialisation, reflects the substantial
multiple benefits realized by both large and small farmers in industrial and developing countries, which have
grown biotech crops commercially. From the initial planting of 1.7 million hectares in 1996 to 179.7 million
hectares in 2015, GM crops achieved a remarkable 100-fold increase. A record 181.5 million hectares of
biotech crops were grown globally in 2014. In 2015, approximately 18 million farmers planted biotech
crops in 28 countries, including 20 developing countries, of which 97.1 million hectares (over 54%) were
planted by small and resource-poor farmers from developing countries. Biotech crops were grown
commercially in all six continents of the world. Of the 28 countries planting biotech crops in 2015, 19
countries planted 50,000 hectares or more of biotech crops. These mega-countries include the USA, Brazil,
Argentina, India, Canada, China, Paraguay, Pakistan, South Africa, Uruguay, Bolivia, Philippines, Australia,
Burkina Faso, Myanmar, Mexico, Spain, Colombia and Sudan. India is occupying the 4th position with 11.6
million hectares of GM crop during 2014 and 2015. The top ten countries with GM Crop cultivation in 2015
are as under:-
Country Crop Area (million ha)
USA Maize, soybean, cotton, canola, sugar beet, alfalfa, papaya and 70.9
squash
Brazil Soybean, maize, cotton 44.2
Argentina Soybean, maize, cotton 24.5
India Cotton 11.6
Canada Canola, maize, soybean and sugar beet 3.70

9
China Cotton, papaya, poplar, tomato, sweet pepper 11.0
Paraguay Soybean 3.60
Pakistan Cotton 2.90
South Africa Maize, soybean, cotton 2.30
Uruguay Soybean and maize 1.40
28. The Committee notes that currently, twenty years after their introduction in 1996, only 6
countries continue to account for over 90% of all GM crop area globally (USA 40%, Brazil 23%,
Argentina 14%, India 6%, Canada 6%, China 2%). The Committee was informed by the members
of civil society during the deliberation on the subject that there was a decline in GM crop area in
2015. The Committee notes with surprise that inspite of the fact that GM technology is being
propagated as the most advanced agricultural technology, 17 of the 20 most developed countries
(HDI) do not grow it which includes most of Europe, Japan, Russia, Israel etc. The Committee
opines that there is increasing evidence about the lack of safety of GM crops and little or no benefits
to justify the risks, most countries in the world do not grow GM crops. The Committee also feels
that the policy makers of these countries, as custodians for both present and future generations,
have seen that GM organisms spread rapidly, that the impacts have been unpredictable, potentially
hazardous, uncontrollable and irreversible, assessed the benefits and risks, taken note of emerging
evidence of harm, and therefore do not permit GM crops. The non acceptance of the most advanced
agricultural technology, GM technology, by the most developed countries raises doubts about the
efficacy of the technology. The Committee, therefore, feels that the Government of India should
conduct a comparative study to examine the reasons for not accepting this technology by these
developed countries viz-a-viz the reasons led to its acceptance.
GM STATUS IN INDIA
29. Bt cotton is the only transgenic crop approved for cultivation in India subsequent to extensive evaluation
and regulatory process. Bt cotton was introduced primarily for bollworm control. Yields of cotton which
was 189 kg lint per ha in 2001 increased to 504 kg lint/ha in 2015. Prior to the introduction of Bt cotton, in
2001 about 13,176 tonnes of insecticides were used for cotton pest control in India in an area of 86 lakh
hectares at 1.53 kg insecticide per hectare. In 2013, the insecticide usage was 0.96 kg/ha at a total usage of
11,598 tonnes used in 127.5 lakh hectares.
30. The Committee was informed by the Department of Agricultural Research & Education, Ministry of
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare that Bt cotton has been under cultivation for more than ten years and there
has been no report of adverse impact on health and environment due to Bt cotton cultivation in India. It was
brought to the notice of the Committee that comprehensive bio-safety studies were carried out by ICAR
institutions with Bt cotton to study its effects on lab animals such as rabbit, rat and guinea pigs; on broiler
chickens for feeding of Bt cotton seed meal (by Central Avian Research Institute, Izatnagar); on fishes (by
CIFE, Mumbai) and large animals like cow and sheep (by Central Sheep & Wool Research Institute (ICAR),
Avikanagar). Safety or Bt Cry protein on various studies such as primary skin irritation test, irritation to
Country Crop Area (million ha)

10
mucous membrane, acute oral toxicity study and skin sensitization study showed that Bt Cotton did not
induce any treatment related observable toxic effects when compared with non-Bt cotton seeds. Studies on
skin sensitization revealed that the repeated application of Bt cotton seed extract did not induce dermal
sensitization (allergies) to the skin of any tested animals.
31. The Committee was informed by Department of Agricultural Research & Education that a study
entitled “Impact evaluation of Bt cotton in Maharashtra” was conducted by ICAR - CICR during 2012-13
funded by Government of Maharashtra for which the data was collected from 2700 cotton farmers belonging
to 18 major cotton growing districts of Maharashtra. The analyzed result for overall 18 sample districts
indicated that most of the cotton producers adopted Bt cotton during 2005-08. It was found that the incidence
of bollworms reduced drastically as a result of introduction of Bt genes. Number of insecticidal sprays
decreased after the adoption of Bt cotton from 7-8 application to 4 applications. Presently, there are more
than 300 Bt cotton hybrids in the market. The farmers were selecting hybrids based on the advice of the
seed dealers or neighbours, however they are not getting expected yield. Only 55% respondents had sown
non Bt seeds on border rows or as intercrop of red gram seeds as refugia. After introduction of Bt cotton,
about 30% of the respondents used weedicides and 21% used growth regulators in Bt cotton cultivation.
Average cotton yield increase from 10 q/ha to 20.8 q/ha after the adoption of Bt cotton. Most of the
respondents felt that crop failures are not responsible for the suicides of the farmers and there were no
incidences of death of animals due to Bt cotton. 95% of respondents opined that there are no health hazards
due to cultivation of Bt cotton. On average Bt cotton farmers got a gross net return of ` 36831.05/ha.
32. The Committee notes the growth and success of Bt cotton since its introduction in India. The
relevant data furnished by the government agencies for the consideration of the Committee speaks
volume about the success of Bt cotton in the country. On the contrary, the members of the civil
society informed the Committee that the production of cotton in the country has increased largely
due to increase in area under cotton, significant increase in irrigation, fertile groundnut areas
shifting to cotton, etc. The Committee, therefore, feels that the Government agencies have made
attempts to portray a rosy picture with regard to the success of Bt Cotton in the country which
actually is not the case.
33. The Committee also notes that the data provided by the government agencies speak only
about the production and not the average yield in area which the Committee believes would be the
true assessment of the potential of GM technology to find out as to what has been the increase in
yield of cotton since the introduction of Bt cotton in the country. The Committee further learns
that India’s cotton yields increased by 69% in the 5 years (2000-2005) when Bt cotton was less than
6% of total cotton area, but by only 10% in the ten years from 2005 to 2015 when Bt cotton grew to
94% of total cotton area. The Committee is of the considered view that this duality of the claims
about the increase in the yield of cotton after its commercialisation in the country needs further
examination and clarification. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change should undertake a comprehensive study to bring out
clarity in the matter.
34. The representatives of some NGOs appearing before the Committee also brought out that the production
output of GM crops was reducing with successive generation of crops i.e. the productivity of third generation
GM crops was much less than the first generation GM crops. As such, the long term benefits of GM crops

11
were under a doubt. In this context, in its meeting held on 25th May, 2017, the Committee drew the attention
of the representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change and Department of Biotechnology
to a news item stating that in Global Rajasthan Agri-Tech meeting platform, one Minister in the State
Government of Rajasthan had categorically stated that Rajasthan already produces 28 to 30 quintals per
hectare from normal seed whereas GM mustard is said to be producing only 16 quintal per hectare. The oil
content in their mustard was 40 to 42 per cent, which was the highest in the Country.
35. In view of the above, the Committee is at a loss to understand as to why the Government is
pushing for GM crops without even having thoroughly assessed its environmental impacts, even
when the desired result of increased productivity could be achieved through our own traditional
methods of farming and the long term benefits of GM crops were under a doubt.
36. The Committee observes that one of the promising facts about the benefits of GM technology
as being promoted by the Government has been that the technology will help in conservation and
protection of environment by way of minimising dependence on chemical herbicides and pesticides
whereas the Committee in its various interactions with the members of civil society in and outside
Delhi was given to understand that the use of insecticides for sucking pests has, on the contrary,
increased steeply both in value and quantity because sucking pests became a menace, replacing the
bollworm, when Bt cotton grew from 12% of total cotton area in 2012 to 95% of total cotton area
2015. The Committee was further informed that the pesticide use on cotton had begun to decline
and was 0.5 kg. per ha. by 2006 when Bt cotton was only 12% of total cotton area and after the
advent of Bt cotton, the insecticide use on bollworm decreased sharply as the bollworm was controlled,
but sucking pests took over the ecological niche vacated by the bollworm and the per ha insecticide
use had almost doubled to 0.97 kg/ha by 2013 even though Bt cotton had increased to 93% of total
cotton. The Committee was also informed that in Maharashtra the annual consumption of pesticides
(insecticides, weedicides and fungicides) has gone up drastically from 2800 lakh tonnes in 2002-03
to 11502 lakh tonnes in 2015-16 registering an increase of 311%. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should before proceeding
further in the matter, obtain the results of scientific study by Ministry of Agriculture and then
come up with a view in this regard. The Ministry should also come up with a comprehensive note
containing the year-wise details of increase in area cultivated under Bt cotton in the country, usages
of pesticides details be compiled State-wise so as to give a clear picture as to whether the usages of
pesticides has gone down or up, etc.
37. The Committee brought to the notice of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
that resistance by the pink bollworm to Bollgard II (BG-II) has been escalated sharply from 2012.
The reduction in insecticides used for bollworm and the increase in insecticide for curbing the
growing menace of secondary pests after the advent of Bt cotton has increased and sought the views
of the Ministry thereon. In response, the Ministry informed the Committee that the matter is
being looked into more scientifically and critically by Ministry of Agriculture.
38. The Committee expresses its serious concerns over the problem of sucking pest which is
turning out to be a big menace. The Committee also observes that consumption of pesticides has
gone down in case of American Bollworm, however, the total usages of pesticide in the areas under
cultivation of Bt cotton has not gone down. The Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change

12
has not been able to respond to the facts brought to the notice of the Ministry by the Committee,
and has merely stated that the matter is being looked into more scientifically and critically by the
Ministry of Agriculture.
39. The Committee takes a serious view on the casual attitude of the Ministry and expresses its
concerns as the issue raised by the Committee deserves diligent and immediate analysis with a view
to arrive at a conclusion best suited for the country. The Committee further feels that farmers who
were using GM seeds had lost sovereignty over the seeds since they had to purchase seeds from the
seed selling companies every time even if they were not getting the fair price for their produce.
ASSESSMENT OF FOOD/FEED AND ENVIRONMENTAL SAFETY (AFES) OF GM PLANTS
40. The Department of Biotechnology in its submission before the Committee stated that Indian law and
the Cartagena Protocol on Bio-safety, to which India is a signatory, require that a risk assessment be
performed prior to the environmental release of a GM plant in India. The purpose of the risk assessment is
to identify risks to the health and safety of people and the environment from the cultivation of the GM plant,
when compared with the cultivation of the non GM version of the plant, and to characterise the risks on the
basis of severity and likelihood.
41. The Committee was given to understand that the Risk Analysis Framework describes the principles
of risk analysis used by the Regulatory Agencies to protect human health and safety, and the environment,
in accordance with the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. This Risk analysis approach followed in India
is also in agreement with recently published report by National Academy of Science, USA (2016) and an
article by Gregory et al. (2016). Risk analysis integrates the assessment, management and communication
of risks posed by GM plants. The risk context defines the parameters within which risk is assessed, managed
and communicated.
42. The Department apprised the Committee that risk assessment process for GM plants described is
based on a comprehensive, transparent, and science based framework by which regulators can identify
potential harms that might be caused by GM plants, collect relevant scientific data pertaining to the likelihood
and severity of any harms, and consistently evaluate the level of risk posed by the use of GM plants. This
framework uses a conventional approach to risk assessment similar to ones used in many other areas of risk
assessment, and it incorporates a case by case approach that takes into account a variety of sources of
information.
43. The Committee was further informed that using Problem Formulation, regulators identify protection
goals, formulate risk hypotheses that explore causal relationships between the cultivation of GM plants and
the identified goals, and then determine which relevant data are needed to test the hypotheses. Using these
data, regulators will assess the severity and likelihood of harms and ultimately evaluate the level of risk that
would result from cultivating the GM plant. This process is performed for each risk hypothesis generated
through Problem Formulation. More recently (2016), the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change has brought out an elaborate and updated Environmental Risk Assessment (ERA) guidance document
after a through process of stake holder’s consultation process. The ERA is consensus document which is in
line with the ERA guidelines followed by all major functional regulatory agencies across the globe.
44. Risk assessments method used for the environmental release of a GM plant are performed using the
below mentioned fundamental principles:

13
z Risk assessments must be carried out in a scientifically sound manner.
z Risk assessments should be comparative. For example, according to the Cartagena Protocol
on Biosafety, “Risks associated with living modified organisms…..should be considered in the
context of the risks posed by the non modified recipients or parental organisms in the likely
potential receiving environment.”
z Risk assessments should be carried out on a case by case basis, taking into account the
specific circumstances or context for each individual application.
45. It was submitted that the Risk Hypothesis is based on a comparison between the GM plant and the
non GM version of the plant, typically, the host variety or a near isogenic parental line, and so the data
collection process must first collect sufficient information to fully characterise the biology of the non GM
version of the plant. This information establishes a background of long standing familiarity with the crop
and with the breeding of novel varieties using traditional methods.
46. The Committee was also informed that relevant data should focus on characteristics that could likely
have environmental implications, such as the plant’s reproductive biology, whether the plant is known to
have weedy or invasive properties, and whether the plant is known to produce toxic or allergenic substances.
The goal is to identify specific ways, including both intentional changes and unintended ones, in which the
GM plant is significantly different from the non GM version and how those differences could impact the
environmental resource in question. Useful data would be taken from a variety of sources: published scientific
literature, applications submitted for confined field trial permits, past environmental risk assessments of GM
plants with the same phenotype, including risk assessments from other countries, and professional experience
of the risk assessors. Following such due diligence through scientific appraisal process and consultations,
the GEAC may determine that organism or product regulated under this Rules 1989 of Environmental
(Protection) Act 1986 as safe for intended purpose or environmental release with post release risk management
conditions, if any. Finally, the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change, Government of India
through approval process provides authorisation for intended use. However, such authorization shall also be
subject to all other laws, rules and regulations made thereof in the Central and State Governments relevant
at that time.
47. The Committee notes the existing mechanism available in the country for the assessment of
Food/Feed and Environmental Safety (AFES) of GM crop. The Committee finds it very surprising
that despite having so many levels of scrutiny in place, none of these levels of scrutiny is directly
involved in the process of Environmental Impact Assessment and the regulators are predominantly
relying upon the data made available by the applicant himself. The Committee is of the view that
inspite of claiming to have the most stringent assessment process, we are lacking on the very basis
of the same. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the whole process of evaluation should
be carried out by an independent agency consisting of the people of impeccable credentials in the
relevant field to ensure that there is no violation of the existing regulations in this regard.
48. During its interaction with the various members of the civil society the Committee learnt that there
are numerous concerns and apprehensions in the minds of the stakeholders about the whole assessment
process which is largely found to be non-transparent and non-participatory. It was also brought to the
notice of the Committee that ICAR - Directorate of Rapeseed - Mustard Research has informed in response

14
to an RTI application that DRMP has not conducted any trial and the data received from the technology
developer was passed to DRMR for onward transmission to GEAC.
49. The Committee further notes that the very purpose of the risk assessment process for GM
plants which is based on a comprehensive, transparent, and science based framework by which
regulators can identify potential harms that might be caused by GM plants, collect relevant scientific
data pertaining to the likelihood and severity of any harms, and consistently evaluate the level of
risk posed by the use of GM plants gets defeated in the absence of any long term scientific study to
further corroborate the claims of the Government in the matter. Throughout its examination of the
subject, the Committee raised the issue with all the concerned government agencies that without
having any long term scientific studies how the government has arrived at this conclusion that GM
crops would not have any adverse impact on human as well as animal health. It is surprising that
the Government has also failed to come up with even a single study assessing the impact of Bt
cotton on our environment, bio-diversity, bio-safety, ecosystem, etc. The Committee takes serious
note of this apathy of the concerned government agencies. The Committee strongly believes that
given the complexity and uncertainty of the GM technology, its evaluation should be done after
taking into account the long term impact on our environmental safety, bio-diversity safety, bio-
safety, health safety, food and feed safety of our country.
50. The Committee further notes that risk analysis integrates the assessment, management and
communication of risks posed by GM plants and the risk context defines the parameters within
which risk is assessed, managed and communicated. In this regard, the Committee is of the
considered view that the whole issue of GM technology and its usage has not been communicated to
the society to the desired level. None of the government agencies involved in the matter seems to
have taken it to the public thus creating a suspicion in the minds of public about the efficacy of this
technology. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all the concerned Ministries/Departments
should take necessary corrective measure in the matter and put every piece of information pertaining
to the subject for the public scrutiny which the Committee feels in turn would make the whole
process more participatory and transparent and also help clearing the doubts that seem to have
been deepened in minds of our public.
GM CROPS - IMPACT ON ENVIRONMENT
51. The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change through its background note submitted that
the safety of GM crops is crucial for their adoption and has been the object of intense research work. The
literature produced over the years of GM crop safety is large. However, GM crop safety literature is still
often ignored in the public debate hence, a publicly accessible database were created with the aim of
improving visibility and regulatory agencies have funded research programs with the intent to gain new
scientific evidence addressing the public concern on the safety of GM crops. Various parameters considered
for assessing potential impacts of the introduction of genetically engineered crops relates to crop diversity,
biodiversity of wild relatives, non-target soil organism, weeds, land use, non-target above-ground organisms,
and area-wise pest suppression.
52. The Ministry informed the Committee that biodiversity preservation is unanimously considered a
priority by the scientific community and society at large. A risk may exist if a GM plant possesses an

15
introduced trait having the potential to adversely impact individual species, ecosystems, or bio-diversity and
these potential risks must be evaluated before the GM plant may be authorised for widespread planting. It
was submitted that risk assessors use scientific data regarding potential hazards and exposure to assess the
likelihood of adverse impacts on populations of organisms as well as on communities of organisms and their
diversity. The Committee was apprised that the potential impact of GM crops on biodiversity can be investigated
at different levels (crop, farm and landscape) and different organisms or microorganisms (target and non-
target) can be considered.
53. The Committee was apprised that if we consider the effect of GM crops on the target species, weeds
or pests, a reduction of biodiversity is obviously expected and necessary for the success of the crop. On the
other hand, higher reductions on biodiversity is generally expected with non-GM crops and herbicide/
insecticide applications, because the chemicals used are often more toxic and persistent in the environment.
In a systematic study of 20 years conducted pre-and post adoption of Bt cotton in China at 36 sites, it was
seen that marked increase in abundance of generalist arthropod predators and a decreased abundance
of aphid pests associated with widespread adoption of Bt cotton and reduced insecticide sprays in the
crop. Evidence showed that the predators might provide additional bio control services spilling over from
Bt cotton fields onto neighboring crops (maize, peanut and soybean), thereby proving that Bt crops can
promote bio-control services in agricultural landscape.
54. In its meeting with the representatives of the Department of Agricultural Research & Education,
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, the Committee desired to know the views of the Department
on the environmental impacts, biosafety and risk management of GM crops. In response, the Department of
Agricultural Research & Education informed the Committee that with the development of transgenics, the
issues of bio-safety, food safety, the environmental impact and their risk assessment have become one of
the great concerns of researchers, consumers and policy makers around the world. Therefore, it is of
crucial importance that transparent and science based approaches are used to adopt to conduct safety
assessments on GM crops before their commercialisation so that the public at large should be informed
about the benefits and risks, if any, of the GM foods. Environmental risk assessment and food/feed safety
need to be carried out as a strict scientific basis including economic analyses of benefits and costs to
determine the socio economic feasibility of implementing specific biotechnology application. Biosafety
legislations and regulatory institutions to implement them have been put in place by many countries including
India both for research and trade of GM crops and food.
55. On the issue of gene flow and potential of the introduced genes to outcross to weedy relatives of crop
plant, the Department of Agricultural Research & Education informed the Committee that this is a major
environmental concern associated with GM crops and has the potential to create new super weeds. It was
brought to the notice of the Committee that a herbicide tolerant gene may escape through pollen into nearby
farms and fields, to another GM or non-GM cultivars or to a wild and weedy relative. It was also informed
that the possibility of these escaped genes seems very unlikely, and is being regulated through extant monitoring
system.
56. On the same issue of gene flow, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and
Department of Biotechnology submitted before the Committee that in an agricultural context, the gene flow
between cultivated and wild species and its impact on biodiversity is an issue that exists independently of

16
GM crops. However, in the absence of any selection pressure this gene flow does not lead to any advantage
to the receiving plant. Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) to soil bacteria is also studied and the results indicate
that soil bacteria can uptake exogenous DNA at very low frequency (10
-4 to 10-8) in laboratory experiments
whereas experiments in the field did not show any evidence of HGT. Apprising the Committee about the
gene flow in Mexico for commercial use of GM corn, it was brought to the notice of the Committee that
particular concerns have been raised about the potential impact of GM crops on diversity of crop landraces
and wild relatives in centers of origin. The Committee was informed that any gene from commercial varieties,
whether from GM varieties or not, may introgress into landraces. However, the potential impact of such
introgression would depend on consequences, that is, whether or not the additional genetic material confers
any fitness advantage or disadvantage.
57. The issue of contamination and cross pollination with non-GM and creation of super weed was
deliberated by the Committee in its meetings with the members of civil society. The Committee was informed
that there are numerous instances of even open air field trials of GM crops leading to contamination of non-
GM crop. It was submitted that such cross pollination with non-GM could also be in the context of related
and wild species (not just intra-specific contamination), which gives rise to the possibility of a selection
advantage being conferred on the new contaminated species. This has a risk of erosion of native diversity
and genetic purity being affected. The Committee was given to understand that contamination has an immediate
regulatory implication for organic farmers, of their organic status being withdrawn. The Committee was
further informed that in USA, farmers have faced a nightmare with a particularly tenacious species of
glyphosate-resistant weed called Palmer amaranth, or pigweed, which can grow about three inches a day
and reach seven feet or more, choking out crops; it is so sturdy that it can damage harvesting equipment and
in an attempt to kill the pest before it becomes that big, farmers in the US began plugging their fields and
mixing herbicides into the soil. It was also submitted that the increase in the number of glyphosate-resistant
weeds worldwide has been steep from the time of large scale adoption of GM crops. It was informed that
more than 50% of farms surveyed for a study were infested with glyphosate resistant weeds in 2013 in the
USA. In southeastern USA, a reported 92% of cotton and soybean fields are infested with superweeds as a
result of Roundup Ready HT crops.
58. The Committee notes the issues highlighted by the representatives of Civil Society regarding
contamination and cross pollination with non-GM and creation of super weed. The Committee feels
that these issues are of vital importance from the perspective of long term impact of GM crops on
our environment since cross pollination and contamination of non-GM crop have the potential of
destroying our traditional crops as well as organic farming. It is noteworthy that the Department of
Agricultural Research & Education, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare has accepted that
an herbicide tolerant gene may escape through pollen into nearby farms and fields, to another GM
or non-GM cultivars or to a wild and weedy relative. The Committee is therefore, of the view that if
GM crops are allowed in the midst of other indigenous farming, there is no way contamination can
be stopped. India, being endowed with various types of naturally available organic form of nutrients
in different parts of the country, has a competitive advantage in the global market due to low
production cost and diverse climates to grow a large number of crops all through the year. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change,
in consultation with the Department of Agricultural Research & Education, Ministry of Agriculture

17
and Farmers Welfare, should study the matter threadbare scientifically and take the desired measures
in the matter.
59. The Committee desired to know from representatives of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change regarding the development of insect resistance to GM crops. In response, the representative
of the Ministry informed the Committee that one of the major concerns of GM crops with insect resistance
is that in long run, the insects develop tolerance and can no more be managed. Such reports to Bt cotton in
terms of laboratory and field studies have been reported. It was submitted that it is important to have a
management strategy so that the genes and their products in GM crop continue to be effective for as long as
possible. As part of a resistance management strategy, refuges of a non-insecticidal crop or non-GM cotton
lines are grown alongside Bt transgenic crops in order to dilute resistance in populations of H. armigera
moths which may survive the Bt toxin. The Committee was informed that in Bt cotton cropping systems,
the refuge is usually composed of Pigeon pea or non-Bt cotton. Poor management of refuges, (in particular
the farmer do not grow non-GM cotton for economic reasons) and insufficient irrigation are the greatest
barriers and to deal with the issue, a new technique called Refugia in Bag with five percent non-Bt cotton is
advised to overcome the situation.
60. The Department of Agricultural Research & Education, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
in its submission on the issue informed the Committee that one of the concerns with Bt crops is that it may
lead to the development of insect resistance to Bt crop. In this context, strategies like pyramiding of insecticidal
genes with divergent mode of action along with additional resistance management practice have been initiated.
It was further informed that commercialisation of transgenic crops may lead to erosion of biodiversity and
contaminate gene pools of endangered plant species and many endangered plant species are threatened by
habitat loss or hybridization with cultivated plants. The potential transfer of a transgene to local flora and its
any possible subsequent impact on specific plant species is thus an issue that needs to keep in view before
commercial release of specific transgene.
61. The Committee was informed by the representatives of civil society that genetically modified seeds
that are engineered to resist pests, such as Bt crops, express the pesticide in every cell of the plant from root
to fruit and involve constant exposure to the pesticide, unlike sprayed pesticides which are applied primarily
during pest attacks. The Committee notes that the amount of Bt toxins produced by GM Bt crops can be
much greater than the reduction in chemicals sprayed. The Committee feels that such heavy and continuous
exposure induces the target pest to develop resistance far more rapidly than would occur with intermittent
exposure to sprayed insecticides. Such rapid development of resistance has been found in India too for Bt
cotton. Bollgard I was released in 2002, and Bollgard II was released in 2006-07, when it was found that the
pink bollworm was showing resistance. However resistance by the pink bollworm to Bollgard II was reported
by 2012 - and has escalated sharply thereafter.
62. In view of the facts brought out above, the Committee is, therefore, of the view that given
the small farm holdings of our farmers it seems to be a bit difficult to create refugia to combat
resistance as suggested by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. The Committee,
therefore, is of the opinion that the matter needs to be examined thoroughly and directs the Ministry
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to take necessary action in this regard.
63. The Committee while sharing the concern expressed about GM genotypes becoming the dominant

18
cultivars, sought the response of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change thereon. The
Ministry, accordingly, informed the Committee that one of the apprehensions about the adoption of GM
technology is the likelihood of one or a few GM genotypes becoming the dominant cultivars thus leading to
reduction of crop diversity in farmers’ fields. However, GM crops may actually increase crop diversity by
enhancing underutilised alternative crops, making them more suitable for widespread domestication. One
example is that the introduction of Bt cotton in India led to more Bt varieties becoming available over time.
Concern over Area-wise pest suppression has also been studied in detail. The results shows that pest
suppression not only reduces losses to adopters of the GM Bt crop technology, but may also benefit non-
adopters and growers of other crops by reducing crops losses and/or the need to use pest control measures
such as insecticides.
64. The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change also informed the Committee that the pest
management traits that are embodied in currently commercialised GM crops have led to changes in the use
of pesticides that may have impacts on biodiversity. It was brought to the notice of the Committee that if the
planting of GM pest-resistant crop varieties eliminates the need for broad-spectrum insecticidal control of
primary pests, naturally occurring control agents are more likely to suppress secondary pest populations,
maintaining a diversity and abundance of prey for birds, rodents and amphibians.
65. The Committee notes the explanation of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change that the pest management traits that are embodied in currently commercialised GM crops
have led to changes in the use of pesticides that may have impacts on bio-diversity.
66. The Committee while noting the changes in pest and disease ecology also observes that insects
are a vital part of agricultural, horticultural and forest ecosystems and vitally ensure food security
as pollinators and natural pest controllers. The Committee learns that heavy and continuous exposure
induces the target pest to develop resistance and there are several studies pointing out as to how
insect resistance Bt crops in particular have led to changes in pest and disease ecology. The Committee
observes that in India, this has been experienced firsthand in the case of Bt cotton where secondary
pests have become major pests. The Committee notes that Bollgard I was released in 2002 and
Bollgard II was released in 2006-07 when it was found that the pink bollworm was showing resistance.
The Committee further notes with concern that the incidence of white fly, mirid bugs and other
such pests in Bt cotton crop has led to increased use of chemical insecticides with the result that at
the end of 15 years of Bt cotton cultivation and expansion (to nearly 95% of the cotton cultivation
area), India’s pesticide use on cotton has only increased and not decreased. The Committee is of the
view that such usage of pesticides will have their own environmental impacts in terms of contamination
of resources and impact on unintended organisms. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Ministry should make a scientific study to examine the impact of pesticides on the environment
in general and ecology in particular of the areas under cultivation of Bt cotton and submit the
findings of the study for the consideration of the Committee. The Committee is also of the view
that the impact of GM crops on insect biology further needs to be studied.
67. On the issue of pest resistance build up, the Committee notes that insect resistant GM crops
are based on faulty pest management science, where a target pest is sought to be killed through the
use of an externally sprayed pesticides, or in-planta toxin production wherein if the target pest eats
the Bt plant, it gets killed. The Committee was informed by some representatives of civil society

19
that in this kind of pest management, through simple natural principles of evolution and mutations,
pests develop resistance as has been seen in the case of pink bollworm in India’s Bt cotton where
the GM crop is unable to control the pest anymore forcing our farmers to resort to higher use of
chemicals since this has been found as an unsustainable pest management strategy/science.
68. The Committee takes note of all the submissions of the Ministries/Departments referred to
in the preceding paragraphs, which make us believe that the environmental impact of GM crops is
not a matter of serious concern at all and all these agencies have no doubt that there would be any
negative impact of these crops on our environment, bio-diversity, ecology, etc. In view of the concerns
raised by the Committee in the earlier paras in the report, the Committee is of the opinion that
either all these agencies have turned a blind eye to the negative impact of GM crops on our
environment or are indifferent to the threat to our environment due to these GM crops. The
Committee also feels that all the government agencies seem to have relied blindly upon the finding
of the studies conducted in different parts of the world to justify their views. The Committee is of
the considered view that given the topography of our country and its diversity, it is imperative that
the government agencies should come up with indigenous studies to substantiate their claim that
there is no threat posed to our environment on account of GM crops.
69. The Committee further feels that at an environmental level, the enormous complexity of
living organisms and their web of inter-relationships has evolved over millennia and sudden, lab-
based, insertion of genes, often across species, results in unpredictability of environmental impacts
at multiple levels. It is noteworthy that currently 99% of GM crops are modified to express only 2
traits ‘Herbicide Tolerance’ and ‘Insect Resistance or Pesticide Producing’ and both these traits
constitute major interventions in living agro-ecosystems, natural ecosystems and human diets. The
Committee also feels that Bt crops continuously express a pesticide which can adversely affect non
target organisms like soil microbes, insects, birds or even mammals and also rapid development of
resistance in the target insect.
70. The Committee further notes the impact of GM technology on the microbes, soil and water.
The Committee was informed that Bt toxin produced in genetically modified Bt Crops is present in
every part of the plant, so when the parts that have not been harvested decompose, a considerable
amount of the toxin may reach the soil. The Committee also observes that the use of herbicides also
impacts soil micro organisms, which are the foundation for both agricultural and wild ecosystems,
and affects water sources for all species including humans. The Committee strongly feels that
before we allow any commercialisation of GM crops in the country, the Ministry owns a responsibility
to inform the nation that GM crops are not going to have any negative impact on the microbes, soil
and water. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should examine the matter
threadbare in the light of the points raised by the Committee.
71. The Committee also understands that GM crops do impact unintended organisms including
beneficial organisms like bees and butterflies along with predators which are also impacted. The
Committee notes that the impact is related to both the genetic engineering process as well as by
accompanying agricultural practices in terms of use of pesticides and herbicides on GM crops and
GM seeds. The Committee feels that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
should study the impact of GM crops on the unintended organisms including beneficial organisms

20
like bees and butterflies. The Committee further desires that a study be made to examine the
impact of GM crops on monarch butterflies, honeybees, earthworms, etc. which were shown to have
been impacted in various studies.
72. One member of the Civil Society, who also happened to be former Secretary, Department of
Biotechnology, Government of India informed the Committee that hardly any research or study on the
impact of GM crops was funded by Department of Biotechnology and majority of the research was supported
by seed and insecticide companies which cannot be relied upon. The Committee is, therefore, of the
considered view that any scientific research/study to assess the impact of GM on environment
should be funded by the Department of Biotechnology for its sheer credibility.
IMPACT OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED CROPS ON HUMAN HEALTH
73. In its endeavour to apprise itself of the views of the Government on the concerns and apprehensions
expressed on account of impact of GM crops on human health, the Committee heard the views of the
Secretary, Department of Health Research in its meeting held on 24th May, 2017. In the Background Note
of the Department of Health Research, submitted as under:-
“The genetically modified products that are currently on the international market have all passed
safety assessments conducted by national authorities. These different assessments in general follow
the same basic principles, including an assessment of environmental and human health risk. So far,
no serious health problem in humans has been shown as a result of the consumption of such foods by
the general population in the countries where they have been approved.
The safety assessment of GM foods generally focuses on: (a) direct health effects (toxicity),
(b) potential to provoke allergic reaction (allergenicity); (c) specific components through to have
nutritional or toxic properties; (d) the stability of the inserted gene; (e) nutritional effects associated
with genetic modification; and (f) any unintended effects which could result from the gene insertion.
According to World Health Organisation the three main possible issues concerning human health are
the potential to provoke allergic reaction (allergenicity), gene transfer and outcrossing.
A study carried out on Genetically modified cotton and farmers health in China indicated that
the adoption of Bt cotton can substantially reduce the risk and the incidence of pesticides poisonings
(Hosain et al, 2004). Another study carried out in Taiwan reported that no differences were observed
on allergenicity between GM broccoli and non-GM broccoli (Liao et al, 2013). A study carried out by
Netherwood et at (2004) in United Kingdom to assess the survival of transgenic plant DNA in the
human gastrointestinal tract reported that gene transfer did not occur during the feeding experiment.
A study carried out by Council of Scientific Industrial Research in India on allergenicity response in
humans reported that GM mustard may be as safe as its native counterpart with reference to allergenic
responses (Misra et at, 2012).
However, few studies published a decade ago reported that an allergen from a food known to
be allergenic can be transferred into another food by genetic engineering (Nordlee et at, 1996).
Another study carried out in United Kingdom to assess degradation of transgenic DNA from genetically
modified soya and maize in human intestinal simulations indicated that some transgenes in GM foods
may survive passage through the small intestine (Martin-Orue, 2002).

21
A review based on 24 studies on laboratory animals published in 2012 in Food & Chemical
Toxicology did not suggest any health hazards and in general there were no statistically significant
differences with parameters observed. The studies reviewed present evidence to show that GM
plants are nutritionally equivalent to their non-GM counterparts and can be safely used in food and
feed (Snell et al, 2012).
Three studies published from India on GM mustered between 2006 and 2014 on allergenicity
in mice demonstrate substantially equivalent allergic responses against GM as well as its native
counterpart. Therefore, the GM mustard may be as safe as its native counterpart with reference to
allergenic responses.
A recent study published in 2017 in Food and Chemical Toxicology carried out on rats in China
to assess safety of genetically modified milk revealed that there was no difference in the nutritional
composition of genetically modified and conventional milk. Furthermore, body weight, food
consumption, blood biochemistry, relative organ weight and histopathology were normal in rats from
both groups. No adverse effects were observed between groups that could be attributed to varying
diets (Chen et al, 2017)
A recent study published in 2016 in British Poultry Sciences on Japanese quail fed diets containing
genetically modified plant ingredients over 10 generations did not indicate the existence of any
pathological changes caused by pathogens, nutritional factors or environmental nature. According to
the obtained results, it was concluded that there was no negative effect of the use of GM soya or
maize with regard to bird health status or to the presence of transgenic DNA in the final consumable
product (Kossakowska et al, 2016).
A critical review published (2014) in Environment International demonstrates an incomplete
picture regarding the toxicity (and safety) of GM products consumed by human and animals (Zdziarski
et al, 2014). Therefore, each GM product should be assessed on merit, with appropriate studies
performed to indicate the level of safety associated with them.
The review of available literature indicates that genetically modified crops available in the
market that are intended for human consumption are generally safe and their consumption is not
associated with serious health problems. However, as different GM organisms include different genes
inserted in different ways, individual GM foods and their safety should be assessed on a case-by-case
basis”.
74. The Committee enquired about the scientific studies undertaken to assess the impact of GM food on
human health. Responding to the query of the Committee, Secretary, Department of Health Research stated
about the scientific studies done to assess the impact on human health submitted the following:-
“In terms of food, it would be very difficult to design a study where you tell one group of people that
you have to take only this GM food and, then, you tell another group of people to not take that GM.
Then, you have to follow them for many years. So, this type of study has not been done anywhere in
the world. It has not been done in India also”.
75. The Committee in its meeting held on 5th July, 2017 with the Secretary, Department of Health further
desired to know the views of the Department in the matter of impact of GM crops on human health. Sharing

22
the views of the Department of Health about the scientific studies done on humans, the Secretary submitted
that no study till date has been carried out on humans. He further submitted that scientists in ICMR feel that
doing this kind of a test on human beings right now does not seem to be practical as it is very difficult to feed
one person GM alone to test its impact. He also submitted the following:-
“We have requested WHO also to give us some backup material on this as to which way we should be
acting, collective evidence from the globe. One of the issues in this is that you did mention that one
should take preparatory measures. The basic issue arises out of the FSSAI Section 22, which talks
about the Genetically Modified food. The essential work on this was being carried out by the Genetic
Engineering Appraisal Committee which falls under the Ministry of Environment and Forests but
that, unfortunately, did not lead anywhere. It got, in a way, aborted in 2016 when no further action
was taken on that. FSSAI, meanwhile, instead of duplicating this effort that has already been made
by GEAC moved away to what you call making the consumers aware through labelling, in fact, trying
to say that this food does have Genetically Modified element so the harm should be well-known to
them. That is a provision in Section 13. A scientific panel for the Genetically Modified organism in
food was formed in the FSSAI. They have come to a conclusion. They have said that they recommended
to FSSAI that the labelling should be mandatory and designated food products have been defined.
Any food product having GE ingredient 5 per cent or more shall be labelled is what they have said.
This has gone to their panel and to the authority which will take a view on this and we hope to get a
decision on the labelling aspect very soon. A lot of work has already been done on it and the scientific
panel has collected all the evidence. Based on that, they have put it across to the authority. Once the
authority does the labelling work then the enforcement will become a little easier and this is going to
happen quite soon. We are moving in that direction. Once the labelling comes into force, some of the
imported items — where we are still not very clear what the elements of the Genetically Modified food
are — is something they are still working on. Standard setting is not something that the FSSAI is
doing right at the moment. They are concentrating on labelling. So, I thought I should bring these
facts before the hon. Committee. Apart from Sections 22 and 13, the evidence, once it comes to us, I
mean, the Department of Health, as you advised, would rather be pro-active than be reactive once a
disease sets in. We are looking for evidence and ICMR has promised that they will give us some lead
on this very soon so that, at least, advisories can go out because no food product has really been
approved so far. There are certain Genetically Modified food which we are told is coming in as a
mixed form in some of the imports that is happening”.
76. The Committee notes with surprise that the Department of Health Research has not taken
any action with regard to examination of impact of GM crops on human health except narrating the
studies done in other countries growing GM crops. Equally surprising to note is that there has been
no in house scientific study carried out till date to study the impact of GM crops on human health.
The Committee fails to understand as to how the Department of Health Research gave its approval
for the commercialisation of GM crops in India even without having the matter studied thoroughly
on its part. The Committee, therefore, finds the approach of the Department of Health Research
very casual and it is disheartening to note that the Department till date did not bother to collaborate
with any of the countries which are growing GM crops for in depth research. The Committee is of
the firm opinion that the Department of Health Research should have taken an initiative instead of
sitting idle on the matter and approving the commercialisation of GM crops without making any

23
scientific study for the purpose. It is all the more painful to note that only acute and sub-chronic
studies have been done and chronic, i.e., long term effects have not been studied on the human
health anywhere in the world. The Committee also feels that the Departments concerned with the
subject have this approach and indifferent attitude toward the issue which if not dealt scientifically
may turn out to be a disaster not only for us but for the generations to come also. The Committee
is also of the strong opinion that if there has been no threat attached to the GM crops either to
human health or environment as being claimed by our government agencies, the whole world would
have by now adopted this technology.
77. The Committee is also at a loss to understand the haste being made for the commercialisation
of GM crops in the country. The Committee is of the considered view that without having been
scientifically proven that GM crops would have no adverse impact on human health and solely
relying on the studies which have not been done here in India and on our own population as well as
in the context of our climate and environment negating any adverse impact on human health, the
Government should reconsider its decision to commercialise GM crops in the country.
78. It was also brought to the notice of the Committee that GM products being sold in the country had no
such indication. The Committee feels that it is every citizen’s right in the country to be aware of the type of
food being bought by him/her and therefore, proper labeling is imperative of all the GM products being sold
in the country. The Committee though appreciates that process to label GM products has been started.
The Committee feels that it is very late in the day for FSSAI to take a decision to label GM foods
imported into the country. However, the Committee strongly recommends that labeling on GM
foods must be done with immediate effect.
IMPACT OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED FOOD ON ANIMALS
79. In its meeting held on 5th July, 2017, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Department of
Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare to examine the impact
of GM food on animal health.
80. Secretary, Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries informed that various trials were
conducted by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) to study the impact of genetically modified
food/feed items on animals in various institutes. The institute-wise information, as shared by the Department
of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries, is as follows:
ICAR-Central Avian Research Institute, Izatnagar, Bareilly (U.P.)  has conducted series of
feeding trials on transgenic crops (Bt cotton, Bt brinjal, transgenic corn and Bt rice) in broiler chickens
(0-42 days of age) during the years 2003-2011. The results in terms of body weight gain, feed intake,
feed conversion efficiency, immune response, carcass attributes and organs yield indicated that
genetically modified crops provided similar response to that of their respective non-Bt counterparts
or commercial check crops in broiler chickens.
ICAR-Central Sheep and Wool Research Institute (CSWRI), Avikanagar (Rajasthan)
conducted 120 days trial in weaner lambs (at a high plane of nutrition) in the year 2007 to study the
bio-safety of Bt cotton seed in lamb feeding. The study was conducted in collaboration with ICAR-
Central Institute for Cotton Research (CICR), Nagpur. Nutrient (organic matter i.e. OM, crude protein

24
i.e. CP and fibre fractions) and mineral (Ca, P, Mn, Co and Zn) contents were identical in Bt cotton
and non-Bt cotton seeds. The study revealed that the growth performance of lambs was similar on
control, non- Bt cotton seed and Bt-cotton seed included diets. The growing lambs consumed 168 g
Bt-cotton seed per day and did not have apparent adverse effect on dry matter intake, nutrient utilisation
and nitrogen balance. Similarly, Bt-cotton seed intake of 0.681% of body weight or 19.5% of dry
matter intake did not produce deleterious effect on performance and dry matter intake, thus, palatability
and growth performance was not a problem for Bt-cotton seed feeding in lambs even under high
plane of nutrition.
81. Similarly, Rumen fermentation characteristics viz., pH, TVFA and NH3-N concentrations were not
influenced by feeding of GNC, non- BT cotton seed or BT-cotton seed in lamb diets. Feeding of Bt-cotton
seed increased RBC and decreased WBC in blood. The serum IgG levels did not change due to Bt and non-
Bt cotton seed feeding indicating that feeding of BT cotton seed did not alter immunity and allergen status.
Internal organs weights as g per kg empty live weight (ELW) indicated precise effect of Bt cotton seed
feeding on internal organ changes. The weights of kidney, spleen, pancreases, heart, lung, penis, kidney fat,
caul fat, GI tract, ingest and empty GI tract were not different among BT cotton seed and non-Bt cotton
seed fed lambs. However, Bt cotton seed feeding increased liver weight, testicle weight and testicles fat g/
kg empty live weight.
ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI), Izatnagar, Bareilly (U.P.) conducted 90
days feeding trials with concentrate mixtures @ 250g/day/animal of which 12.5 % was cottonseed (non Bt
version of JKC 738 or Bt. JKC 738 Bt trait) on 36 Barbari goats of 1 year of age. The study indicated no
significant effect on organ biometry as compared to Indian Cotton and Control groups. On postmortem
examination none of the goats belonging to Bt Cotton or Indian Cotton groups showed lesions of toxicity.
There was no variation in the haematological (haemoglobin, WBC and DLC), biochemical (total serum
protein, glucose, blood urea nitrogen, bilirubin, GOT, GPT, alkaline phosphates, LDH) and serum mineral
status (Calcium, Phosphorus, Magnesium, Potassium, Sodium, Iron, Copper, Zinc and Manganese). It was
concluded that on the basis of results obtained, there was no toxicity of any kind in the goats fed concentrate
mixture having crushed Bt cotton seeds (12.5%) and concentrate mixture @25% of total feed intake for 90
days.
ICAR-National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal (Haryana)  conducted a study for four weeks
on cows. Sixteen crossbred (KS and KF) multiparous cows were adapted to test by feeding Bt cottonseed
based diet. Mainly the Bt Cry protein side effect and absorption in the milk was tested. Milk yield and
voluntary feed intake were recorded daily while milk samples were collected at the start of experimental
feeding and thereafter at weekly intervals during the four week experimental period for the analysis of milk
composition and to test for the presence of Bt protein. At the end, a blood sample from each cow was
collected and plasma was separated to test for the presence of Cry 1Ac protein. Cry 1Ac protein in cottonseed,
milk and blood samples was measured by ELISA method. The amount of Cry 1Ac protein in Bt cottonseed
was 195.04 ng/g on fresh basis. Corresponding value in Bt concentrate mixture was 78 ng/g on fresh basis.
Cows in both the groups improved their body weight during the study period and body weight gain in both
groups was similar. Average milk yield during 28 days of experimental period in Non Bt (13.53 kg/day) and
Bt (13.12 kg/day) groups did not vary significantly. During the experimental period the milk composition in
terms of fat, protein, lactose, SNF and total solids content in Bt and Non-Bt were similar. Cry 1Ac protein

25
was not detected in milk samples, drawn at 0, 7, 14, 21 and 28 day of feeding the experimental diet, as well
as in plasma samples drawn on day 28 from the cows fed the Bt cottonseed based ration. Lactating dairy
cows of both the groups did not show symptoms of any disease, maintained their health and performed in
a similar fashion when fed with Non Bt and Bt cottonseed as a source of energy and protein supplement
during the four week long experimental period. The present study results revealed that the Cry1Ac proteins
were neither detected in the milk nor in blood of cows that were fed with Bt cottonseed during the four
week trial. Further, there was no effect of Bt cottonseed containing Cry protein on milking cows. Hence,
feeding of Bt cottonseed as a source of protein and energy in the ration of crossbred cows was considered
to be safe and as nutritious as Non Bt cottonseed.
ICAR- Central Institute for Cotton Research, Nagpur also carried out a field study involving a
team of scientists led by a scientist of the Krishi Vigyan Kendra, for two years (2007-2009) by tethering six
goats in one hectare of Bt cotton and one hectare of conventional cotton. The goats were fed on the crop
continuously for four months and there were no differences in any biological aspects of the two sets of
animals. The biochemical and health results clearly showed that Bt cotton was safe to goats.
ICAR-Central Institute of Fisheries Education, Mumbai conducted a systematic study with Bt
cotton seed meal as a feed for Fish Common Carp and the side effects if any were tested in the fish food
chain. This study was conducted in a 60-day feeding trial on common carp fry. Bt cotton seed cake was
included in the diet of common carp at 3 – levels (10, 20, 30%) and compared with its non-Bt counterpart
along with control group comprising of no cotton seed cake. Growth rate of Bt cotton seed cake fed group
was comparable (P< 0.05) with that of control group and with non-Bt counterpart as well. No mortality was
found after feeding the Bt cotton cake, suggesting no adverse effect of Bt cotton seed cake. Studies were
also conducted on large animals such as Cow and Sheep to assess the bio-safety of Bt cotton seed.
82. The Committee was given to understand that based on the available literature, the ICAR has drawn
the following conclusions with regard to impact of GM crops on Animal Health:
(i) GM crops are assessed thoroughly and rigorously before their approval as food and feed to
animals. More than two decades of proven history indicates safe use of GM crops as feed to
animals.
(ii) Scientific methods used for the assessment of the safety of GM crops as food and feed are
harmonized globally over the years, Bt-cotton, Bt-brinjal and GM-mustard assessed by Indian
regulators also proved to be safe as feed to animals.
(iii) No deleterious effect of GM plants approved for animal feed has been described.
(iv) Gene constructs used for creating insect resistant and herbicide tolerant plants tested by
appropriate bio-molecular methods are safe for animal feeds.
(v) Methods used for the safety assessment and recommendations of new plants for use as animal
feed are appropriate for detection of any ill effect on the animals health and performance.
(vi) The absence of recombinant DNA, either as whole gene or gene fragment, in animal products,
milk, meat and eggs was confirmed in the results of 12 publications, based on several hundred
samples.

26
83. Sharing views of the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries with the Committee,
the Secretary further informed as under:-
(i) Although ICAR has undertaken feeding trials of Bt Cotton on Broiler chicken, Sheep (Lamb),
Goats, Crossbred multiparous cows karanswiss and Karanfresien (KS & KF) species but
these trials are of short duration. Hence, long term feeding trials in all the species of livestocks
including fish must to be undertaken.
(ii) Once the suggested long term feeding trials about the safety of Bt cotton on Animal Health
prove to be positive then the technology can be recommended to the farmers through package
of practices.
84. The Committee notes that feeding trials of Bt Cotton on some animals have been of very
short duration. The Committee is not at all convinced with the duration and the manner in which
ICAR has conducted its trials to study the impact of GM crops on animal health. It is also surprising
to note that these trials have been conducted on a very limited number of animals whereas the
Committee feels that these trials should have been conducted on a large number of animals and for
atleast 2-3 generations. The Committee is also wary of the methodology opted by the ICAR for
conducting these trials. The Committee, therefore, is of the considered view that the Department
of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries should chalk out guidelines for the purpose and then
conduct these trials under its supervision so that the veracity of these claims can be established in
the light of these studies.
85. The Committee is further a little bewildered to note that even after about 15 years of
introduction of GM crop in India, the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
could not scientifically prove whether GM crops has any adverse impact on the health of an animal.
The Committee, accordingly, is at a loss to understand that when the Department itself feels that
long term feeding trials in all the species of livestocks including fish must be undertaken then how
come it should give a conclusive view that GM crop has no impact on animal health. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should get the desired scientific study done to give its
conclusive recommendations in the matter.
86. The Committee observes that there are several animal studies indicating serious health risks
associated with GM food including infertility, immune problems, accelerated aging, insulin regulation,
and changes in major organs and the gastrointestinal system which should also be examined
thoroughly before arriving this conclusion that there lies no negative impact on animal health on
account of GM crops. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that necessary action in the matter
may be taken by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change in consultation with
ICAR and Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries.
87. The Committee, further, learns that GEAC has given its approval for commercialisation of
GM mustard inspite of the fact that the matter is pending for decision in the Hon’ble Supreme
Court of India. The Committee has been given to understand that GM mustard being a herbicide
tolerant GMO, there is clear evidence on the adverse impacts of such GMOs from elsewhere in the
world. In the case of GM mustard, from what one can gather from different quarters, there are
serious unanswered questions. The Committee has also come to know that many State Governments

27
in the country are opposed to its entry even in the form of field trials, leave alone commercial
cultivation. The Committee strongly believes that unless the bio-safety and socio-economic
desirability, taking into consideration long run effects, is evaluated by a participatory, independent
and transparent process and a retrieval and accountability regime is put in place, no GM crop
should be introduced in the country. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change should examine the impact of GM crops on environment
thoroughly, in consultation with the concerned Government agencies, experts, environmentalists,
civil society, and other stakeholders so that the nation is very clear about all its probable impacts
before taking a call in the matter.

RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
REGULATORY  FRAMEWORK
The Committee takes note of the divergent views on the efficacy of existing regulatory
mechanism. On the one hand, the Government claims that a very stringent regulatory mechanism
has been put in place leaving no scope for any non-adherence whatsoever by the technology developer
whereas on the contrary, the Committee has been given to understand by some representatives of
the civil society that the existing regulatory mechanism is stringent on paper only and the whole
process of regulation depends upon the data made available to the regulators by the technology
developers. The Committee is surprised to know that none of the Committees referred to in the
preceding paragraphs conduct the closed field trials on their own but are solely dependent on the
data provided to them by the technology developer. The Committee feels that this leaves a scope for
the technology developers to fudge the data to suit their own requirements. The existing regulatory
system is, therefore, susceptible to manipulations. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Central Government should, in consultation with the State Governments and Administrations
of Union Territories ensure that the whole process of field trials should be done in closed environment
keeping bio-safety and health safety in mind and in collaboration with the agricultural universities
so as to minimise the scope of fudging the primary data. (Para 21)
The Committee is further perturbed to note that despite having GEAC which consists of experts
from various relevant fields, the Government failed to put in place the desired protocols as late as
till 2011. The Committee fails to understand as to why the Ministry did not feel the necessity to
frame these protocols from the introduction of GM crops in 2002. The Committee takes a serious
view of the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change as
well as GEAC in this matter. The Committee is of the opinion that the casual approach of Ministry
and GEAC is indicative of the indifference of these agencies towards the environmental safety and
health hazards of human and animals. The Committee feels that the Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change and GEAC should shrug this complacency and be more focused in their
approach in the matter. (Para 22)
The constitution of GEAC also came up for discussion during the meeting of the Committee
held on 25th May, 2017 with the representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change and Department of Biotechnology. The Committee was informed that the GEAC was first
constituted on 28.05.1990 and it was last re-constituted on 11.03.2013 for a period of three years.
Subsequently, with the approval of the Competent Authority, the tenure of the committee has been
extended till re-constitution of the new committee. The Committee expressed its concerns about
the ad hocism in the constitution of the Committee and also about the criteria adopted by the
Ministry for selection of the members of GEAC, their credentials, etc. The Committee also noted
that two of the top three positions of GEAC are held by the bureaucrats of the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change. The Committee is also of the view that there is a conflict
of interest in the appointment of some of the members of GEAC. The Committee is also of the
opinion that it would be in fitness of things if GEAC is headed by an expert from the field of
Biotechnology given the understanding of scientific data and analysis of research and its implication
before coming to a conclusion in the matter. (Para 23)
28

29
The Committee further notes that there is no mention of GEAC in Rules 1989, and later the
term has been used just for administrative convenience. The Committee further notes that Members
of GEAC are mostly from the Government and Government-aided institutions and there is hardly
any representation of civil society on the board. The Committee is equally surprised to note that
there is hardly any representation from the States particularly where Bt Cotton has been introduced.
The Committee is of the view that the functioning and activities of GEAC call for more transparency.
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should
review the functioning of GEAC along with the organisational set up of GEAC and take necessary
corrective measures to make the whole process of assessment and approval more transparent so as
to ensure environmental safety, bio-diversity safety, bio-safety, health safety, food and feed safety
of our country. The Committee also feels that Acts & guidelines must reflect their concerns in the
final consideration. (Para 24)
The Committee also feels that the presence of District Level Committee (DLC), which is one
of the most important committees to regulate GM crop at the ground level, is hardly felt in any of
the States/Union Territories and the functioning of these Committees also create suspicion in the
minds of the stakeholders further weakening the confidence level of our farmers, civil societies,
environmentalists, etc. (Para 25)
Further, Members of Parliament are representatives of the people of that constituency and
the absence of their representation in the DLC is surprising. The Committee, therefore, is of the
view that Members of Parliament should be nominated as members in the District Level Committees
so that the activities of these Committees are also shared with the public. (Para 26)
STATUS OF GM CROPS
The Committee notes that the currently, twenty years after their introduction in 1996, only 6
countries continue to account for over 90% of all GM crop area globally (USA 40%, Brazil 23%,
Argentina 14%, India 6%, Canada 6%, China 2%). The Committee was informed by the members
of civil society during the deliberation on the subject that there was a decline in GM crop area in
2015. The Committee notes with surprise that inspite of the fact that GM technology is being
propagated as the most advanced agricultural technology, 17 of the 20 most developed countries
(HDI) do not grow it which includes most of Europe, Japan, Russia, Israel etc. The Committee
opines that there is increasing evidence about the lack of safety of GM crops and little or no benefits
to justify the risks, most countries in the world do not grow GM crops. The Committee also feels
that the policy makers of these countries, as custodians for both present and future generations,
have seen that GM organisms spread rapidly, that the impacts have been unpredictable, potentially
hazardous, uncontrollable and irreversible, assessed the benefits and risks, taken note of emerging
evidence of harm, and therefore do not permit GM crops. The non acceptance of the most advanced
agricultural technology, GM technology, by the most developed countries raises doubts about the
efficacy of the technology. The Committee, therefore, feels that the Government of India should
conduct a comparative study to examine the reasons for not accepting this technology by these
developed countries viz-a-viz the reasons led to its acceptance. (Para 28)
GM STATUS IN INDIA
The Committee notes the growth and success of Bt cotton since its introduction in India. The
relevant data furnished by the government agencies for the consideration of the Committee speaks

30
volume about the success of Bt cotton in the country. On the contrary, the members of the civil
society informed the Committee that the production of cotton in the country has increased largely
due to increase in area under cotton, significant increase in irrigation, fertile groundnut areas
shifting to cotton, etc. The Committee, therefore, feels that the Government agencies have made
attempts to portray a rosy picture with regard to the success of Bt Cotton in the country which
actually is not the case. (Para 32)
The Committee also notes that the data provided by the government agencies speak only
about the production and not the average yield in area which the Committee believes would be the
true assessment of the potential of GM technology to find out as to what has been the increase in
yield of cotton since the introduction of Bt cotton in the country. The Committee further learns
that India’s cotton yields increased by 69% in the 5 years (2000-2005) when Bt cotton was less than
6% of total cotton area, but by only 10% in the ten years from 2005 to 2015 when Bt cotton grew to
94% of total cotton area. The Committee is of the considered view that this duality of the claims
about the increase in the yield of cotton after its commercialisation in the country needs further
examination and clarification. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change should undertake a comprehensive study to bring out
clarity in the matter. (Para 33)
In view of the above, the Committee is at a loss to understand as to why the Government is
pushing for GM crops without even having thoroughly assessed its environmental impacts, even
when the desired result of increased productivity could be achieved through our own traditional
methods of farming and the long term benefits of GM crops were under a doubt. (Para 35)
The Committee observes that one of the promising facts about the benefits of GM technology
as being promoted by the Government has been that the technology will help in conservation and
protection of environment by way of minimising dependence on chemical herbicides and pesticides
whereas the Committee in its various interactions with the members of civil society in and outside
Delhi was given to understand that the use of insecticides for sucking pests has, on the contrary,
increased steeply both in value and quantity because sucking pests became a menace, replacing the
bollworm, when Bt cotton grew from 12% of total cotton area in 2012 to 95% of total cotton area
2015. The Committee was further informed that the pesticide use on cotton had begun to decline
and was 0.5 kg per ha. by 2006 when Bt cotton was only 12% of total cotton area and after the
advent of Bt cotton, the insecticide use on bollworm decreased sharply as the bollworm was controlled,
but sucking pests took over the ecological niche vacated by the bollworm and the per ha insecticide
use had almost doubled to 0.97 kg/ha by 2013 even though Bt cotton had increased to 93% of total
cotton. The Committee was also informed that in Maharashtra the annual consumption of pesticides
(insecticides, weedicides and fungicides) has gone up drastically from 2800 lakh tonnes in 2002-03
to 11502 lakh tonnes in 2015-16 registering an increase of 311%. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should before proceeding
further in the matter, obtain the results of scientific study by Ministry of Agriculture and then
come up with a view in this regard. The Ministry should also come up with a comprehensive note
containing the year-wise details of increase in area cultivated under Bt cotton in the country, usages
of pesticides details be compiled State-wise so as to give a clear picture as to whether the usages of
pesticides has gone down or up, etc. (Para 36)

31
The Committee brought to the notice of Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
that resistance by the pink bollworm to Bollgard II (BG-II) has been escalated sharply from 2012.
The reduction in insecticides used for bollworm and the increase in insecticide for curbing the
growing menace of secondary pests after the advent of Bt cotton has increased and sought the views
of the Ministry thereon. In response, the Ministry informed the Committee that the matter is
being looked into more scientifically and critically by Ministry of Agriculture. (Para 37)
The Committee expresses its serious concerns over the problem of sucking pest which is
turning out to be a big menace. The Committee also observes that consumption of pesticides has
gone down in case of American Bollworm, however, the total usages of pesticide in the areas under
cultivation of Bt cotton has not gone down. The Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
has not been able to respond to the facts brought to the notice of the Ministry by the Committee,
and has merely stated that the matter is being looked into more scientifically and critically by the
Ministry of Agriculture. (Para 38)
The Committee takes a serious view on the casual attitude of the Ministry and expresses its
concerns as the issue raised by the Committee deserves diligent and immediate analysis with a
view to arrive at a conclusion best suited for the country. The Committee further feels that
farmers who were using GM seeds had lost sovereignty over the seeds since they had to purchase
seeds from the seed selling companies every time even if  they were not getting the fair price for
their produce. (Para 39)
ASSESSMENT OF FOOD/FEED AND ENVIRONMENTAL SAFETY (AFES) OF GM PLANTS
The Committee notes the existing mechanism available in the country for the assessment
of Food/Feed and Environmental Safety (AFES) of GM crop. The Committee finds it very surprising
that despite having so many levels of scrutiny in place, none of these levels of scrutiny is directly
involved in the process of Environmental Impact Assessment and the regulators are predominantly
relying upon the data made available by the applicant himself. The Committee is of the view that
inspite of claiming to have the most stringent assessment  process, we are lacking on the very
basis of the same. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the whole process of evaluation
should be carried out by an independent agency consisting of the people of impeccable credentials
in the relevant field to ensure that there is no violation of the existing regulati ons in this
regard. (Para 47)
The Committee further notes that the very purpose of the risk assessment process for GM
plants which is based on a comprehensive, transparent, and science based framework by which
regulators can identify potential harms that might be caused by GM plants, collect relevant scientific
data pertaining to the likelihood and severity of any harms, and consistently evaluate the level of
risk posed by the use of GM plants gets defeated in the absence of any long-term scientific study to
further corroborate the claims of the Government in the matter. Throughout its examination of the
subject, the Committee raised the issue with all the concerned government agencies that without
having any long term scientific studies how the government has arrived at this conclusion that GM
crops would not have any adverse impact on human as well as animal health. It is surprising
that the Government has also failed to come up with even a single study assessing the impact of

32
Bt cotton on our environment, bio-diversity, bio-safety, ecosystem, etc. The Committee takes serious
note of this apathy of the concerned government agencies. The Committee strongly believes that
given the complexity and uncertainty of the GM technology, its evaluation should be done after
taking into account the long term impact on our environmental safety, bio-diversity safety, bio-
safety, health safety, food and feed safety of our country. (Para 49)
The Committee further notes that risk analysis integrates the assessment, management and
communication of risks posed by GM plants and the risk context defines the parameters within
which risk is assessed, managed and communicated. In this regard, the Committee is of the
considered view that the whole issue of GM technology and its usage has not been communicated to
the society to the desired level. None of the government agencies involved in the matter seems to
have taken it to the public thus creating a suspicion in the minds of public about the efficacy of this
technology. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all the concerned Ministries/Departments
should take necessary corrective measure in the matter and put every piece of information pertaining
to the subject for the public scrutiny which the Committee feels in turn would make the whole
process more participatory and transparent and also help clearing the doubts that seem to have
been deepened in minds of our public. (Para 50)
GM CROPS - IMPACT ON ENVIRONMENT
The Committee notes the issues highlighted by the representatives of Civil Society regarding
contamination and cross pollination with non-GM and creation of super weed. The Committee feels
that these issues are of vital importance from the perspective of long term impact of GM crops on
our environment since cross pollination and contamination of non-GM crop have the potential of
destroying our traditional crops as well as organic farming. It is noteworthy that the Department of
Agricultural Research & Education, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare has accepted that
an herbicide tolerant gene may escape through pollen into nearby farms and fields, to another GM
or non-GM cultivars or to a wild and weedy relative. The Committee is therefore, of the view that if
GM crops are allowed in the midst of other indigenous farming, there is no way contamination can
be stopped. India, being endowed with various types of naturally available organic form of nutrients
in different parts of the country, has a competitive advantage in the global market due to low
production cost and diverse climates to grow a large number of crops all through the year. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change,
in consultation with the Department of Agricultural Research & Education, Ministry of Agriculture
and Farmers Welfare, should study the matter threadbare scientifically and take the desired measures
in the matter. (Para 58)
In view of the facts brought out above, the Committee is, therefore, of the view that given the
small farm holdings of our farmers it seems to be a bit difficult to create refugia to combat resistance
as suggested by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. The Committee, therefore,
is of the opinion that the matter needs to be examined thoroughly and directs the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change to take necessary action in this regard. (Para 62)
The Committee notes the explanation of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate

33
Change that the pest management traits that are embodied in currently commercialised GM crops
have led to changes in the use of pesticides that may have impacts on bio-diversity. (Para 65)
The Committee while noting the changes in pest and disease ecology also observes that insects
are a vital part of agricultural, horticultural and forest ecosystems and vitally ensure food security
as pollinators and natural pest controllers. The Committee learns that heavy and continuous exposure
induces the target pest to develop resistance and there are several studies pointing out as to how
insect resistance Bt crops in particular have led to changes in pest and disease ecology. The Committee
observes that in India, this has been experienced firsthand in the case of Bt cotton where secondary
pests have become major pests. The Committee notes that Bollgard I was released in 2002 and
Bollgard II was released in 2006-07 when it was found that the pink bollworm was showing resistance.
The Committee further notes with concern that the incidence of white fly, mirid bugs and other
such pests in Bt cotton crop has led to increased use of chemical insecticides with the result that at
the end of 15 years of Bt cotton cultivation and expansion (to nearly 95% of the cotton cultivation
area), India’s pesticide use on cotton has only increased and not decreased. The Committee is of the
view that such usage of pesticides will have their own environmental impacts in terms of contamination
of resources and impact on unintended organisms. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Ministry should make a scientific study to examine the impact of pesticides on the environment
in general and ecology in particular of the areas under cultivation of Bt cotton and submit the
findings of the study for the consideration of the Committee. The Committee is also of the view
that the impact of GM crops on insect biology further needs to be studied. (Para 66)
On the issue of p est resistance build up, the Committee notes that insect resistant GM crops
are based on faulty pest management science, where a target pest is sought to be killed through
the use of an externally sprayed pesticides, or in-planta toxin production wherein if the target
pest eats the Bt plant, it gets killed. The Committee was informed by some representatives of
civil society that in this kind of pest management, through simple natural principles of evolution
and mutations, pests develop resistance as has been seen in the case of pink bollworm in India’s
Bt cotton where the GM crop is unable to control the pest anymore forcing our farmers to resort
to higher use of chemicals since this has been found as an unsustainable pest management strategy/
science. (Para 67)
The Committee takes note of all the submissions of the Ministries/Departments referred to
in the preceding paragraphs, which make us believe that the environmental impact of GM crops is
not a matter of serious concern at all and all these agencies have no doubt that there would be any
negative impact of these crops on our environment, bio-diversity, ecology, etc. In view of the concerns
raised by the Committee in the earlier paras in the report, the Committee is of the opinion that
either all these agencies have turned a blind eye to the negative impact of GM crops on our
environment or are indifferent to the threat to our environment due to these GM crops. The
Committee also feels that all the government agencies seem to have relied blindly upon the finding
of the studies conducted in different parts of the world to justify their views. The Committee is of
the considered view that given the topography of our country and its diversity, it is imperative that
the government agencies should come up with indigenous studies to substantiate their claim that
there is no threat posed to our environment on account of GM crops. (Para 68)

34
The Committee further feels that at an environmental level, the enormous complexity of
living organisms and their web of inter-relationships has evolved over millennia and sudden, lab-
based, insertion of genes, often across species, results in unpredictability of environmental impacts
at multiple levels. It is noteworthy that currently 99% of GM crops are modified to express only 2
traits ‘Herbicide Tolerance’ and ‘Insect Resistance or Pesticide Producing’ and both these traits
constitute major interventions in living agro-ecosystems, natural ecosystems and human diets. The
Committee also feels that Bt crops continuously express a pesticide which can adversely affect non
target organisms like soil microbes, insects, birds or even mammals and also rapid development of
resistance in the target insect. (Para 69)
The Committee further notes the impact of GM technology on the microbes, soil and water.
The Committee was informed that Bt toxin produced in genetically modified Bt Crops is present in
every part of the plant, so when the parts that have not been harvested decompose, a considerable
amount of the toxin may reach the soil. The Committee also observes that the use of herbicides also
impacts soil micro organisms, which are the foundation for both agricultural and wild ecosystems,
and affects water sources for all species including humans. The Committee strongly feels that
before we allow any commercialisation of GM crops in the country, the Ministry owns a responsibility
to inform the nation that GM crops are not going to have any negative impact on the microbes, soil
and water. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should examine the matter
threadbare in the light of the points raised by the Committee. (Para 70)
The Committee also understands that GM crops do impact unintended organisms including
beneficial organisms like bees and butterflies along with predators which are also impacted. The
Committee notes that the impact is related to both the genetic engineering process as well as by
accompanying agricultural practices in terms of use of pesticides and herbicides on GM crops and
GM seeds. The Committee feels that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
should study the impact of GM crops on the unintended organisms including beneficial organisms
like bees and butterflies. The Committee further desires that a study be made to examine the
impact of GM crops on monarch butterflies, honeybees, earthworms, etc. which were shown to have
been impacted in various studies. (Para 71)
The Committee is, therefore, of the considered view that any scientific research/study to
assess the impact of GM on environment should be funded by the Department of Biotechnology for
its sheer credibility. (Para 72)
IMPACT OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED CROPS ON HUMAN HEALTH
The Committee notes with surprise that the Department of Health Research has not taken
any action with regard to examination of impact of GM crops on human health except narrating the
studies done in other countries growing GM crops. Equally surprising to note is that there has been
no in house scientific study carried out till date to study the impact of GM crops on human health.
The Committee fails to understand as to how the Department of Health Research gave its approval
for the commercialisation of GM crops in India even without having the matter studied thoroughly
on its part. The Committee, therefore, finds the approach of the Department of Health Research
very casual and it is disheartening to note that the Department till date did not bother to collaborate

35
with any of the countries which are growing GM crops for in depth research. The Committee is of
the firm opinion that the Department of Health Research should have taken an initiative instead of
sitting idle on the matter and approving the commercialisation of GM crops without making any
scientific study for the purpose. It is all the more painful to note that only acute and sub-chronic
studies have been done and chronic, i.e., long term effects have not been studied on the human
health anywhere in the world. The Committee also feels that the Departments concerned with the
subject have this approach and indifferent attitude toward the issue which if not dealt scientifically
may turn out to be a disaster not only for us but for the generations to come also. The Committee
is also of the strong opinion that if there has been no threat attached to the GM crops either to
human health or environment as being claimed by our government agencies, the whole world would
have by now adopted this technology. (Para 76)
The Committee is also at a loss to understand the haste being made for the commercialisation
of GM crops in the country. The Committee is of the considered view that without having been
scientifically proven that GM crops would have no adverse impact on human health and solely
relying on the studies which have not been done here in India and on our own population as well as
in the context of our climate and environment negating any adverse impact on human health, the
Government should reconsider its decision to commercialise GM crops in the country. (Para 77)
The Committee though appreciates that process to label GM products has been started. The
Committee feels that it is very late in the day for FSSAI to take a decision to label GM foods
imported into the country. However, the Committee strongly recommends that labeling on GM
foods must be done with immediate effect. (Para 78)
IMPACT OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED FOOD ON ANIMALS
The Committee notes that feeding trials of Bt Cotton on some animals have been of very
short duration. The Committee is not at all convinced with the duration and the manner in which
ICAR has conducted its trials to study the impact of GM crops on animal health. It is also surprising
to note that these trials have been conducted on a very limited number of animals whereas the
Committee feels that these trials should have been conducted on a large number of animals and for
atleast 2-3 generations. The Committee is also wary of the methodology opted by the ICAR for
conducting these trials. The Committee, therefore, is of the considered view that the Department
of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries should chalk out guidelines for the purpose and then
conduct these trials under its supervision so that the veracity of these claims can be established in
the light of these studies. (Para 84)
The Committee is further a little bewildered to note that even after about 15 years of
introduction of GM crop in India, the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
could not scientifically prove whether GM crops has any adverse impact on the health of an animal.
The Committee, accordingly, is at a loss to understand that when the Department itself feels that
long term feeding trials in all the species of livestocks including fish must be undertaken then how
come it should give a conclusive view that GM crop has no impact on animal health. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should get the desired scientific study done to give its
conclusive recommendations in the matter. (Para 85)

36
The Committee observes that there are several animal studies indicating serious health risks
associated with GM food including infertility, immune problems, accelerated aging, insulin regulation,
and changes in major organs and the gastrointestinal system which should also be examined
thoroughly before arriving this conclusion that there lies no negative impact on animal health on
account of GM crops. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that necessary action in the matter
may be taken by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change in consultation with
ICAR and Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries. (Para 86)
The Committee, further, learns that GEAC has given its approval for commercialisation of
GM mustard inspite of the fact that the matter is pending for decision in the Hon’ble Supreme
Court of India. The Committee has been given to understand that GM mustard being a herbicide
tolerant GMO, there is clear evidence on the adverse impacts of such GMOs from elsewhere in the
world. In the case of GM mustard, from what one can gather from different quarters, there are
serious unanswered questions. The Committee has also come to know that many State Governments
in the country are opposed to its entry even in the form of field trials, leave alone commercial
cultivation. The Committee strongly believes that unless the bio-safety and socio-economic
desirability, taking into consideration long-run effects, is evaluated by a participatory, independent
and transparent process and a retrieval and accountability regime is put in place, no GM crop
should be introduced in the country. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change should examine the impact of GM crops on environment
thoroughly, in consultation with the concerned Government agencies, experts, environmentalists,
civil society, and other stakeholders so that the nation is very clear about all its probable impacts
before taking a call in the matter. (Para 87)

MINUTES

39
IX
NINTH  MEETING
The Committee met at 1l.00 A.M. on Friday, the 23 rd December, 2016 in Room No. ‘139’, First
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury   —   Chairperson
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shri C.P. Narayanan
4. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
5. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK  SABHA
6. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
7. Dr. K. Gopal
8. Shri Daddan Mishra
9. Shri Nana Patole
10. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
l1. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
12. Shri Nagendra Singh
13. Shri Vikram Usendi
14. Shri Prabhubhai N. Vasava
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
Witnesses
Representatives of Department of Agricultural Research and Education
l. Dr. Trilochan Mohapatra, Secretary (DARE) & DG , ICAR
2. Dr. J.S. Sandhu, Deputy Director General (Crop Science), ICAR
3. Dr. J.S. Chauhan, Assistant Director General (Seeds), ICAR
4. Dr. A.K. Singh, Head of Genetics Division, IARI
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and Secretary, Department of Agricultural
Research and Education alongwith other officers of the Department and informed them about the agenda of
the meeting. The Chairperson, while raising pertinent issues on the subject ‘Genetically Modified Crops and
its Impact on Environment’, sought to know the views of the Department thereon.

40
3. The Secretary, while making the presentation on the subject, informed the Committee about the
global scenario of the GM crops. He submitted that 18 million farmers in 28 countries planted GM Crops in
2013. It was informed that in 2014, the global market value of biotech crops was 15.7 billion dollar representing
22% of the 72.3 billion dollar global crops protection market in 2013, and 35% of the 45 billion dollar
commercial seed market. The Committee was informed that the accumulated global value of biotech crops
since 1996 is estimated at 133541 billion dollar. The Secretary also briefed the Committee about the statistics
of Bt Cotton in India. He informed that Bt cotton is the only transgenic crop approved for cultivation in India
subsequent to extensive evaluation and regulatory process. Bt cotton was introduced primarily for bollworm
control. Yields of cotton which was 189 kg lint/ha in 2001 increased to 504 kg lint/ha in 2015. Prior to the
introduction of Bt cotton, in 2001, about 13,176 tonnes of insecticides were used for cotton pest control in
India in an area of 86 lakh hectares at l.53 kg insecticide per hectare. In 2013, the insecticide usage was 0.96
kg/ha at a total usage of 11,598 tonnes used in 127.5 lakh hectares.
4. The Committee was further informed that 8 field crops, 6 vegetables and 2 fruits have been identified
as GM Crops in India. It was informed that only those traits for which, conventional sources of improvement
are not available (including those where higher expression is limiting in conventional sources) and only’
those genes either with a history of ‘safe use’ or those whose risk analysis supports environmental release
and biosafety. The Committee was also apprised about the current status of GM mustard which are taken up
for consideration. The Secretary also sensitised the Committee about the environmental concerns of the
genetically modified crops along with the statutory provisions related to GM crops in India.
5. The representatives of Department of Agricultural Research & Education while presenting their views
also responded to some of the queries raised by the Chairperson and Members of the Committee. They also
promised to furnish written replies to some other queries/points raised by the Chairperson and the Members
of the Committee, which could not be replied during the meeting. The representatives of Department of
Agricultural Research & Education then withdrew.
6. Afterwards, Prof. Deepak Pental, Professor of Genetics, University of Delhi appeared before the
Committee. The Chairperson welcomed Prof. Deepak Pental and sought to know his views on the subject.
The Committee was informed that transgenic technologies are now more than 20 years old. It was informed
that earlier transgenics were developed with genes from bacterial genomes (simpler and easier to handle) -
with the advent of genomics era and new breakthroughs in instrumentation, more complex genomes have
also become amenable to analysis and as a consequence meaningful for the development of a new generation
of transgenics. It was submitted that India needs to make concerted and focused efforts on achieving low
input - high output agriculture. Prof. Pental was of the opinion that enhancing productivity while maintaining
ecological balance is a major challenge and cannot be met without proper use of S&T. Only yield increase
through low input - high output agriculture can meet future food needs, allow crop diversification and
release some land for industry and housing. The Committee was informed that in 2016, transgenic crops
were grown in around 185 million hectares of land - major success stories being - Bt cotton, HT (herbicide-
tolerant) soybean and Canola hybrids. It was brought to the notice of the Committee that very extensive
reviews on transgenics crops have shown that transgenics have no harmful effect on biodiversity - gene
flow to wild relatives and non-transgenic varieties/hybrids will occur but to varying degrees depending upon
the breeding system of the crop, chance of gene transfer to bacteria are abysmally low and appropriate
methods are available for checking allergenic and toxic effects of trans gene products in food and feed.

41
Prof. Pental also briefed the Committee about the economic and strategic threats in the use of GE technologies
on crop plants, use of GE technologies to help small and marginal farmers and technologies for crops like
mustard, pigeonpea that are grown extensively only in India, etc.
7. Prof. Pental while presenting his views also responded to the queries raised by the Chairperson and
Members of the Committee.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
9. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 1.35 
P.M.

42
X
TENTH  MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 5th January, 2017 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury    —    Chairperson
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
6. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK  SABHA
7. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
8. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
9. Shri Laxman Giluwa
10. Dr. K. Gopal
11. Shri Daddan Mishra
12. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
13. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
14. Shri Vikram Usendi
15. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
16. Shri Prabhubhai N. Vasava
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
Witnesses
Representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
1. Shri Ajay Narayan Jha, Secretary
2. Dr. Amita Prasad, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Gyanesh Bharti, Joint Secretary
4. Ms. Madhumitha Biswas, Scientist ‘F’
Representatives of Department of Biotechnology
1. Prof. K. Vijayraghavan, Secretary
2. Dr. S.R. Rao, Scientist ‘G’

43
3. Dr. Amit Parikh, Scientist ‘D’
4. Dr. V. Siva Reddy, Chief Scientific Officer
Representatives of Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
1. Shri R.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Mishra, Additional Commissioner (Seeds)
Representatives of Biotech Consortium India Limited
1. Dr. (Ms.) Vibha Ahuja, Sceintist
2. Dr. Murali Krishna Chimata, Scientist
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and informed
them that the meeting had been convened to hear the views of representatives of Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change; Department of Biotechnology; Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare;
and Biotech Consortium India Limited on the subject ‘GM Crops and its impact on environment’. The Chairperson
welcomed all the representatives of the Ministries/Department present in the meeting and requested them to
enlighten the Committee about the subject in detail and share all the pros and cons related to the subject.
3. The representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Department of
Biotechnology made power point presentations presenting a holistic picture of the subject. The Committee
was apprised about the application and status of GE crops; international and national regulatory framework;
concerns and safety studies; GE crops in India; issues and challenges; and impact of GE technology. It was
informed that in India all GMOs including GE plants are regulated as per the Rules for the manufacture, use,
import, export and storage of hazardous micro-organism/genetically engineered organisms or cells (Rule
1989) notified under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. The roles of various Ministries in regulation of
GE crops were explained to the Committee. The Committee was also informed about the concerns and
safety studies with regard to GE crops. Tests performed to address environmental and health concerns such
as compositional analysis, toxicity potential, allergenicity potential, etc. were also shared with the Committee.
While presenting their views, the above witnesses also responded to some of the queries raised by the
Chairperson and Members of the Committee.
4. The witnesses then withdrew and Dr. Vandana Shiva, Director, Navdanya appeared before the
Committee.
5. The Chairperson welcomed Dr. Vandana Shiva and sought to know her views on the subject.
Dr. Vandana Shiva in her deposition before the Committee informed that GMOs have emerged as a major
environmental issue since it impacts biodiversity, soils and pollinators, public health and farmers’ rights.
Dr. Shiva submitted that the discipline and regulatory framework of biosafety includes environmental impact,
health and socio-economic impact and without these the holistic and scientific assessment of GM Mustard
is not possible. On the issue of increase in yield, it was submitted that the comparison on this count has been
done with low performing species of mustards rather than with the best species of mustards available in the
country. It was submitted that the Bharatpur Mustard Research Institute under ICAR has actually produced
hybrid mustards which have much higher yields than the promise of the GMO Mustard. She informed the
Committee that India can do non-GMO hybrids without any of the risks that the GMO carries and increase
the production. The Committee was also given to understand that in the case of the herbicide-tolerant crops,

44
one of the biggest problems is the emergence of resistance in weeds. It was submitted that the cauliflower
mosaic virus is now being found to be responsible for many instabilities in GMOs. The Committee was
apprised that GMO Mustard is based on terminator genes and herbicide resistant traits and is not to increase
yields. She informed that the ICAR has already developed non GM varieties of mustard that outperform the
GMO mustard. Dr. Shiva also informed the Committee about the lacunae on account of biodiversity &
biosafety and assessment process.
6. The witness then withdrew.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 2.33 
P.M.

XI
ELEVENTH  MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 8th February, 2017 in  Committee Room ‘E’,
Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury   —   Chairperson
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri C.P. Narayanan
3. Shri Parimal Nathwani
4. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
5. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
7. Kumari Sushmita Dev
8. Shri Ninong Ering
9. Shri Laxman Giluwa
10. Shri Chirag Paswan
11. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
12. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
13. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
14. Shri Nagendra Singh
15. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. Thereafter the following representatives of Association of Biotechnology Led Enterprises - Agricultural
Focus Group (ABLE-AG) appeared before the Committee:-
(i) Shri Sanjay Deshpande
***Relate to other matters.
45

46
(ii) Shri Ritesh Mishra
(iii) Shri Shivendra Bajaj
(iv) Shri P .J. Suresh
(v) Shri Binod Anand
(vi) Shri Dhiraj Pant
(vii) Shri Rakesh Dubey
(viii) Dr. Sanjiv Kalia
7. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of Association of Biotech Led Enterprises Agriculture
Focus Group (ABLE-AG) and informed that the meeting had been convened to hear their views on ‘Genetically
Modified Crops and its Impact on Environment’.
8. The representatives of Association of Biotechnology Led Enterprises-Agricultural Group (ABLE-AG)
introduced themselves. They emphasized upon the safety aspects of the biotechnology crops. It was stated
that biotechnology can help and complement conventional methods of breeding and fast track the improvement
in terms of development of newer varieties. The Chairperson pointed out that there had been complaints that
third generation of Bt. Cotton had failed so much that the farmers had to change their crop pattern. The
representatives of ABLE also pointed out that biotechnology was like a vaccine which did not change the
inherent characteristics of the local germ plasm but prevented these varieties from getting extinguished
because of disease or pest. The representatives of ABLE also provided the details of CSR activities being
undertaken by the Association.
9. The representatives of Association of Biotechnology Led Enterprises-Agricultural Group (ABLE-AG)
while presenting their views, also responded to some of the queries raised by the Members of the Committee.
They also promised to furnish written replies to some other queries/points raised by the Chairperson and the
members of the Committee, which could not be replied during the meeting.
10. The witnesses then withdrew.
11. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
12. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 5.39 
P.M.

XVI
SIXTEENTH  MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 27th February, 2017 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury   —   Chairperson
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK  SABHA
5. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
6. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
7. Shri Laxman Giluwa
8. Dr. K. Gopal
9. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
10. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
11. Shri Nagendra Singh
12. Shri Vikram Usendi
13. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
14. Shri Prabhubhai N. Vasava
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
Witnesses:
Representatives of Government of Maharashtra
1. Shri Swadheen Kshatriya, Chief Secretary,
2. Shri Bijoy Kumar, Principal Secretary (Agriculture Department)
Representative of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
1. Shri Gyanesh Bharti, Joint Secretary
2. * * * Thereafter, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee, Chief Secretary,
Government of Maharashtra along with his colleagues and representative of Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change to the meeting of the Committee and sought to know the
47
***Relate to other matters.

48
views of the Government of Maharashtra on the subject ‘Genetically Modified Crops and its Impact
on Environment’.
3. * * * Thereafter, Principal Secretary (Agriculture Department), Government of Maharashtra made a
power point presentation on the subject giving a snapshot of the activities viz., evolving role of the States in
respect of GM crops; experience of the Maharashtra Government with Bt cotton released for commercial
use with approval of GEAC; assigning new role to States in the form of No Objection Certificate (NOC) for
confined field trials of GM crops and the present status and the proposed future course of action. The
Committee was informed that the Government of Maharashtra constituted an advisory committee under the
chairmanship of Dr. Anil Kakodkar to recommend proposals for grant of NoC for confined field trials. It
was brought to the notice of the Committee that Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) is being adopted by
the Advisory Committee. Various concerns against the field trials of GM crops along with the response
thereof of the Government of Maharashtra were also brought to the notice of the Committee. The Committee
was informed that the Kakodkar Committee considered written objections and recommended continuing
with field trials. The Committee was also sensitised about the initiative taken by the Government of Maharashtra
for the purpose.
4. The representatives of Government of Maharashtra and Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change while presenting their views, also responded to some of the queries raised by the Members of the
Committee. They also promised to furnish written replies to some other queries/points raised by the
Chairperson and the Members of the Committee, which could not be replied during the meeting.
5. The witnesses then withdrew.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 4.43 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

XVII
SEVENTEENTH  MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 28th February, 2017 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury   —   Chairperson
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
5. Shri C.P. Narayanan
6. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
7. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Ninong Ering
9. Dr. K. Gopal
10. Shri Daddan Mishra
11. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
12. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
13. Shri Nagendra Singh
14. Shri Vikram Usendi
15. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
Witness
Shri Rajinder Chaudhary
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and Shri Rajinder Chaudhary, non official
witness to the meeting of the Committee and informed them about the agenda of the meeting. The Chairperson
sought to know the views of Shri Rajinder Chaudhary on the subject ‘Genetically Modified Crops and its
Impact on Environment’.
3. Shri Rajinder Chaudhary made a power-point presentation before the Committee on the subject.
Shri Chaudhary was of the opinion that given the complexity and uncertainty of the GM technology, its
evaluation should be transparent, independent and participatory. He submitted that long run impact of GM
technology should be taken into account. He apprised the Committee that retrieval and accountability regime
49

50
should be put in place before the environmental release of GM technology. He also submitted that socio-
economic desirability should be established.
4. Dwelling on the issue of Assessment of Food and Environmental Safety (AFES) of GM mustard, he
pointed out that it is the only document put in public domain by the Genetic Engineering Approval Committee
(GEAC) and it indicates that the regulatory regime in place fails to meet all the requirements. Citing an
example of ICAR - Directorate of Rapeseed-Mustard Research (DRMR), Bharatpur, Rajasthan, he submitted
that the Directorate has informed under the RTI Act that DRMR has not conducted any trial and the data
received from the applicant was passed to DRMR for onward transmission to GEAC. The Committee was
further informed that long term effects of GM technology have not been studied and only acute and sub-
chronic studies have been done, i.e. long term effects have not been studied as per the AFES. He also
apprised the Committee that no livestock feeding trials have been done. Apprehensions were also expressed
by Shri Chaudhary about the post release adverse consequences of GM technology in the absence of any
remedial preventive measures and responsibility regime. The Committee was also given to understand that
oil content of GM products has not been compared and yield comparison is meaningless without comparing
the oil content. He also submitted that in spite of GM mustard being herbicide tolerant, effect of use of
herbicide has not been studied at all. He further pointed out that experience of BT cotton is no less intimidating
in light of the fact of decreasing areas under cotton cultivation due to uncontrollable pest attacks over last
few years, launching of BT I, BT II and BT III  in quick succession over a short period; and no reduction in
chemical usage was noticed. He requested the Committee to recommend that unless the bio-safety and
socio-economic desirability, taking into consideration long run effects, is evaluated by a participatory,
independent and transparent process and a retrieval and accountability regime is put in place, no GM crop
should be introduced in the country.
5. The Chairperson and Members then sought clarifications on the points that emerged out of the
presentation of Shri Chaudhary, which were replied to by him.
6. The witness, then, withdrew.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. * * *
9. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 4.35 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.

XIX
NINETEENTH  MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 24th April, 2017 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury   —   Chairperson
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
5. Shri C.P. Narayanan
6. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
7. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
8. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK  SABHA
9. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
10. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
11. Shri Ninong Ering
12. Shri Laxman Giluwa
13. Dr. K. Gopal
14. Shri Daddan Mishra
15. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
16. Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole
17. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
18. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
19. Shri Nagendra Singh
20. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
WITNESSES
(i) Dr. T.L. Dholaria and Shri Narendra Matholia, Saurashtra Seedmen Association
(ii) Ms. Kavitha Kuruganti, Alliance for Sustainable 
& Holistic Agriculture (ASHA)
(iii) Mrs. Dilnavaz V ariava
(iv) Ms. Aruna Rodrigues
51

52
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and informed
them that the meeting had been convened to hear the views of some non-official witness on the subject ‘GM
Crops and its impact on environment’. The Chairperson then welcomed Dr. T.L. Dholaria, Shri Narendra
Matholia, Ms. Kavitha Kuruganti, Smt. Dilnavaz Variava; and Ms. Aruna Rodrigues and requested them to
enlighten the Committee about the subject in detail and share all the pros and cons related to the subject. She
also requested them to make their presentations one by one.
3. Dr. T.L. Dholaria, Ms. Kavitha Kuruganti, Smt. Dilnavaz Variava; and Ms. Aruna Rodrigues then
presented their views on the impact of GM crops on environment. Ms. Kavitha Kuruganti, Smt. Dilnavaz
Variava; and Ms. Aruna Rodrigues also made power point presentations on the subject. While presenting
their views, the above non-official witnesses also responded to some of the queries raised by the Chairperson
and Members of the Committee.
4. The witnesses then withdrew.
5. * * *
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 2.10 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.

XXI
TWENTY  FIRST  MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 24th May, 2017 in Committee Room’ A’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury   —   Chairperson
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shri C.P. Narayanan
4. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK  SABHA
5. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
6. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
7. Kumari Sushmita Dev
8. Shri Ninong Ering
9. Shri Laxman Giluwa
10. Shri Nana Patole
11. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
12. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
Witnesses
Representatives of Department of Agricultural Research 
& Education
1. Dr. Trilochan Mohapatra, Secretary (DARE) & DG , ICAR
2. Dr. Joykrushna Jena, Deputy Director General (FS), ICAR
3. Dr. N.K. Singh, Project Director, NRCPB
4. Dr. A.K. Singh, Head of Genetics Division, IARI
Representatives of Animal Welfare Board of India, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change
1. Shri Siddhanta Das, DG(F) & SS & Chairman, Animal Welfare Board of India
2. Shri Gyanesh Bharti, Joint Secretary
3. Dr. A.K. Tyagi, Head, Animal Nutrition, NDRI, Karnal
4. Shri A.K. Verma, Scientist, IVRI, Bareilly
53

54
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. The Chairperson then welcomed the representatives of the Department of Agricultural Research &
Education (DARE) and Animal Welfare Board of India, Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
present in the meeting and requested them to enlighten the Committee about the subject in detail and share all
the pros and cons related to the subject.
5. The Secretary, DARE while making the presentation on the subject, informed the Committee about
the global scenario of the GM crops. The Secretary also briefed the Committee about the statistics of BT
Cotton in India. He informed that BT cotton was the only transgenic crop approved for cultivation in India
subsequent to extensive evaluation and regulatory process. BT cotton was introduced primarily for bollworm
control. The Committee was further informed about BT Cotton seed meal feed studies on sheep lambs,
result of long term feeding of GM feed to dairy cattle etc. The Committee was also apprised about the list of
approved GM feeds and GM feed additives. The Secretary concluded by assessment and prospects of GM
Crops in the country. The Secretary, DARE, while presenting his views, also responded to some of the
queries raised by the Chairperson and Members of the Committee.
6. The representatives of AWBI, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change also made a
power point presentation and presented their views on the subject. On the query of the Chairperson about
the stand of AWBI on the issue, Chairman, Animal Welfare Board of India stated that they go by the advice
of the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change. While presenting their views, the representatives
of AWBI also responded to some of the queries raised by the Chairperson and Members of the Committee.
7. The representatives of DARE and AWBI also promised to furnish written replies to some other
queries/points raised by the Chairperson and the Members of the Committee, which could not be replied
during the meeting. The representatives of Department of Agricultural Research & Education and AWBI,
then, withdrew.
8. The Committee then heard the following representatives of Department of Health Research, Ministry
of Health & Family Welfare appeared before the Committee to present views of that Department on ‘Impact
of GM Crops on Human Health’:
1. Dr. Soumya Swaminathan, Secretary
2. Dr. Pawan Agrawal, Chief Executive Officer, FSSAI
3. Dr. G.S. Toteja, Head, Nutrition Division
4. Dr. Vijay Kumar, Head, Basic Med. Sciences
5. Dr. B. Dinesh, Scientist ‘G’, National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad
9. The Chairperson welcomed the Secretary, Health Research alongwith her team of officers and desired
to know the views of Department of Health Research on Impact of GM Crops on Human Health. She also
desired to know whether the Department had done any study with regard to impact of GM crops and grains
***Relate to other matters.

55
on human health. The Secretary while making her presentation apprised the Committee about commercial
GM crops developed by country, regulations of GM Crops, Bio safety assessment, food safety and human
health issues and studies & impact of GM Crops on human health.
10. The representatives of Department of Health Research while presenting their views also responded to
some of the queries raised by the Chairperson and Members of the Committee. They also promised to
furnish written replies to some other queries/points raised by the Chairperson and the Members of the
Committee, which could not be replied during the meeting.
11. The representatives of Department of Health Research, then, withdrew.
12. * * *
13. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
14. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 6.15 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.

XXII
TWENTY  SECOND  MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 25th May, 2017 in Room No. G-074, Ground
Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury    —    Chairperson
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK  SABHA
5. Kumari Sushmita Dev
6. Shri Laxman Giluwa
7. Dr. K. Gopal
8. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
9. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
10. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
1. Shri Ajay Narayan Jha, Secretary
2. Dr. Amita Prasad, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Gyanesh Bharti, Joint Secretary
4. Dr. (Ms.) Madhumita Biswas, Director
Representatives of Department of Biotechnology
1. Prof. K. Vijay Raghavan, Secretary
2. Dr. S.R. Rao, Scientist ‘G’
3. Smt. Rajalakshmi Muralidharan, Scientist ‘E’
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee along with the Secretaries,
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Department of Biotechnology and other officers
and informed them about the agenda of the meeting. While raising various important and relevant concerns
on the subject ‘GM Crops and its impact on environment’, the Chairperson also sought to know the views
of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Department of Biotechnology thereon. She
also raised certain queries with regard to the constitution of the Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee
(GEAC) in the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and its recent approval of GM mustard
for commercialisation.
56

57
3. Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change informed the Committee about the
regulatory framework put in place by the Government of India on the issue of Genetically Modified Crops
in the country. He also apprised the Committee about the role of statutory Committees notified under Rules
1998 along with the role of various Ministries as regards review, approval and monitoring of GM crops. The
Secretary brought to the notice of the Committee that as per various guidelines and protocols updated from
time to time, the applicant is required to complete several health and environmental safety studies for safety
of GM products. Various aspects relating to environmental impact of GM crops such as impact on biodiversity,
gene flow, change in tillage practices, change in pesticides use, development of resistance to GM crops, etc.
were also explained by the Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to the Committee.
The advantages of GM crops to the environment were also brought to the notice of the Committee.
4. Secretary, Department of Biotechnology made a power point presentation before the Committee
giving a snapshot on the subject. He also briefed the Committee about the stand of the Department of
Biotechnology on GM crops and the role of the Department with regard to promotion of GM crops in the
country.
5. The representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Department of
Biotechnology, while “presenting their views, also responded to some of the queries raised by the Chairperson
and Members of the Committee. They also promised to furnish written replies to some other queries/points
raised by the Chairperson and the Members of the Committee, which could not be replied during the meeting.
6. * * *
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 1.15 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.

XXIV
TWENTY  FOURTH  MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 5th July, 2017 in Committee Room ‘A ’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury   —   Chairperson
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
LOK  SABHA
6. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
7. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
8. Kumari Sushmita Dev
9. Dr. K. Gopal
10. Shri Daddan Mishra
11. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
12. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
13. Shrimati M. Vasanthi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri T.N. Pandey, Director
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
Witness
Representatives of Department of Health (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
1. Shri C.K. Mishra, Secretary,
2. Dr. R.K. Vats, Additional Secretary 
& DG (CGHS)
3. Shri Sudhir Kumar, Joint Secretary
4. Shri S.K. Yadav, Director, FSSAI
5. Shri Kumar Anil, Advisor (Standards)
6. Shri Baskar N. Advisor (Quality Analysts)
Representatives of Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying 
& Fisheries
1. Shri Devendra Chaudhry, Secretary
2. Dr. Suresh Honnappogal, Animal Husbandry Commissioner
58

59
3. Dr. O.P. Choudhary, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Mihir Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary
5. Shri Aditya Kumar Joshi, Joint Secretary
6. Dr. B.S. Prakash, ADG
7. Shri G.N. Singh, Director
8. Shri S.S. Kandpal, Director
9. Dr. R.G. Bambal, Dy. Commissioner (LH)
10. Shri Vijay Thakre, Fodder Agronomist
11. Shri Paul Pandian, Fisheries Development Commissioner
Representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
1. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gyanesh Bharti, Joint Secretary
2. The Chairperson, at the outset, welcomed the Members of the Committee alongwith the Secretaries,
Departments of Health and Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries and other officers and informed them
about the points of discussion in respect of the subjects namely Impact of GM Crops and Adulteration of
Food on Human and Animal Health. The Chairperson also raised pertinent concerns and sought the comments
of both the Secretaries thereon.
3. The Secretary, Department of Health apprised the Committee about Section 22 of the Food Safety
and Standards Act, 2006 envisages that save as otherwise provided under this Act and regulations made
thereunder, no person shall manufacture, distribute, sell or import, 
inter alia, any genetically modified
articles of food. Section 22 (2) of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, empowers the Food Safety and
Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) to regulate various kinds of foods including the genetically modified
(GM) foods. However, Section 22 was enforced vide Notification dated 18th August, 2010, w.e.f. 18.08.2010,
except in respect of matters relating to the genetically engineered or modified food as explained in clause (2)
of Section 22. It was further brought to the notice of the Committee that the rules for regulating the
manufacture, distribution, sale and import of genetically engineered or modified food as explained in clause
(2) of the Explanation thereof, have not yet been notified. The Committee was further given to understand
that FSSAI has not received any proposal from the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change for
regulation of any genetically modified foods released by them into the environment. The Secretary, Department
of Health also briefed the Committee about the initiatives and action taken to curb the menace of food
adulteration.
4. Furthering the discussion, the Secretary, Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
made a power point presentation on the subject informing the Committee that various trials have been
conducted by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) at its six institutions to study the impact
of genetically modified feed on Broiler chicken, Sheep (Lamb), Goats, Crossbred cows (Karanswiss and
Karanfresien). It was submitted that based on the available literature, the ICAR has drawn the conclusion
that GM crops are assessed thoroughly and rigorously before their approval as food and feed to animals. It
was stated that scientific methods used for the assessment of the safety of GM crops as food and feed are
harmonized globally over the years. Bt-cotton, Bt-brinjal and GM-mustard assessed by Indian regulators
also proved to be safe as feed to animals. The Committee was apprised that no deleterious: effect of GM

60
plants approved for animal feed has been described and gene constructs used for creating insect resistant
and herbicide tolerant plants tested by appropriate bio-molecular methods are safe for animal feeds. It was
submitted that methods used for the safety assessment and recommendations of new plants for use as
animal feed are appropriate for detection of any ill effect on the animals health and performance and the
absence of recombinant DNA, either as whole gene or gene fragment, in animal products, milk, meat and
eggs was confirmed in the results of 12 publications, based on several hundred samples. The Secretary
further submitted that although ICAR has undertaken feeding trials of Bt Cotton on Broiler chicken, Sheep
(Lamb), Goats, Crossbred cows karanswiss and Karanfresien (KS & KF) species but these trials are of
short duration. Hence, long term feeding trials in all the species of livestock including fish needs to be
undertaken by ICAR.
5. The Committee directed the concerned Ministry to develop high yielding variety crops and hybrid
crops to cater the need of growing demand of food grains as it has not been fully proved that GM crops are
not harmful. The Committee also directed the concerned Ministry to find out alternative of carbide to
minimise the effect on health. The Committee also directed the Ministry to arrange for limited supply of
oxotoxin for gynaecological use and its use for dairy purpose is discouraged.
6. The representatives of Departments of Health and Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries while
presenting their views also responded to some of the queries raised by the Chairperson and Members of the
Committee. They also promised to furnish written replies to some other queries/points raised by the
Chairperson and the Members of the Committee, which could not be replied during the meeting.
7. The witness, then, withdrew.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 12.55 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.

XXV
TWENTY  FIFTH  MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 9th August, 2017 in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury   —   Chairperson
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
6. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
7. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK  SABHA
8. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
9. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
10. Shri Ninong Ering
11. Shri Daddan Mishra
12. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
13. Shri Nagendra Singh
14. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri T.N. Pandey, Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
2. The Chairperson, at the outset, welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them about
the agenda of the meeting. Thereafter, the Committee considered the draft 301st Report on ‘Genetically
Modified Crops and its impact on environment’. After a comprehensive discussion, the Committee decided
to take up the said report for adoption on a subsequent date.
3. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 03.45 
P.M.
61

XXVI
TWENTY  SIXTH  MEETING
The Committee met at 12:00 Noon on Monday, the 21 st August, 2017 in Committee Room’ A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury   —   Chairperson
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
5. Shri C.P. Narayanan
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani
7. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
LOK  SABHA
8. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
9. Shri Ninong Ering
10. Dr. K. Gopal
11. Shri Daddan Mishra
12. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
13. Shri Nagendra Singh
14. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri T.N. Pandey, Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them of the
agenda of the meeting. Thereafter, the Committee considered the draft 301st Report on ‘Genetically Modified
Crops and its impact on Environment’ and after some deliberations, adopted the same with slight modifications.
3. The Committee observed that both the Houses of Parliament are not in Session and, therefore, authorised
the Chairperson of the Committee to present the 301st Report on ‘Genetically Modified Crops and its impact
on Environment’ to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha during the current inter-session period so that the report
could be forwarded to the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change for necessary action.
4. The Committee thereafter adjourned at 12.55 
P.M.
62