PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 235
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2012/AGRAHAYANA, 1934 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY FIFTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWO 
HUNDRED TWENTY FIFTH REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FOREST ON 
THE DEMAND FOR GRANTS (2012-13) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SPACE
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 20  DECEMBER, 2012)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 20  DECEMBER, 2012)
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY FIFTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 20th December, 2012)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations Contained in the Two Hundred 
Twenty Fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment 
and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the 
Department of Space
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
235
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY FIFTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations Contained in the Two Hundred
Twenty Fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment
and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the
Department of Space
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  20 th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on  20 th December, 2012)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)
4. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—7
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 9—12

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil H. Lad
3. Shrimati Maya Singh
4. Shri M. Rama Jois
5. Shri Alok Tiwari
6. Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi
7. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
8. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
9. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
12. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
@13. Vacant
#14. V acant
15. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
16. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase
17. Dr. Ajay Kumar
18. Shri O.S. Manian
19. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
20. Shri Basori Singh Masram
21. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
22. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
23. Shri Ramashanker Rajbhar
24. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
25. Shri Yashvir Singh
#26. Vacant
27. Shri Pradeep Tamta
28. Shri Joseph Toppo
29. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
30. Shri Ramakant Yadav
31. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
@ Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 14th December, 2012 on his resignation
from the Membership of the Committee.
# Shri Ninong Ering and Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon their
induction in the Union Council of Ministers w.e.f. 28
th October, 2012.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Committee Officer
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Thirty Fifth Report on the Action Taken by the
Department of Space on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Twenty Fifth Report
of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Space.
2. The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Space on
the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Twenty Fifth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Space which was presented to the Rajya
Sabha on 18
th May, 2012.
3. There were fifteen recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Twenty Fifth Report of
the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from
the Department on 5
th September, 2012.
4. In the meeting held on 17 th December, 2012, the Committee considered the Draft Action
Taken Report and adopted the same.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
17th December , 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.

(iv)
ACRONYMS
FAC – Failure Analysis Committee
GSLV – Geo-synchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle
ICC – INSAT Coordination Committee
IIST – Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology
RFD – Result Framework Document
RISAT – Radar Ima ging Satellite
VPN – Virtual Private Network

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Space on
the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Twenty Fifth Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on
the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Space, which was presented to both the
Houses of Parliament on 18
th May, 2012. There were fifteen recommendations in the Two Hundred
and Twenty Fifth Report of the Committee. Action Taken notes on the recommendations of the
Committee were received from the Department on 5 th September, 2012.
The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee
on the Action Taken by the Department of Space are set out in the succeeding paragraphs.
MONITORING MECHANISM FOR ONGOING SCHEMES
Recommendation (Para 5.3)
The Committee is of the view that an effective monitoring mechanism is vital to ensure that
the various projects are completed as per the schedule and there is no time or cost overruns. In
this context, the Committee appreciates the adoption of the Result Framework Document (RFD)
by the Department, which aims towards an effective appraisal of the actual physical and financial
progress/achievements in implementation of policies/programmes in comparison to the projected
targets for each programme. The Committee, in view of strengthening of monitoring mechanism,
hopes that the Department would, in future, be able to ensure timely completion of projects and
optimum utilization of funds.
Action Taken by Government
The views of the Committee are noted. The Department will continue to put an effort to
ensure timely completion of projects with optimum utilization of funds.
Comments
The Committee hopes that the Department will make a critical review of its
monitoring mechanism and plug the gaps, wherever necessary, so as to preclude any scope
of time and cost overruns.
ELEVENTH PLAN ACHIEVEMENTS AND TWELFTH FIVE YEAR PLAN
Recommendation (Para 6.2)
The Committee appreciates the achievements made by the Department during the Eleventh
Plan, notably the Chandrayaan-1 Mission and progress made in the field of Launch Vehicle
Development, Earth Observation and Satellite Communication Systems. However, it notes with
concern that some of the missions such as Radar Imaging Satellite (RISAT-1), Advanced
Meteorological satellite INSAT-3D, Multi-wavelength X-ray astronomy satellites ASTROSAT,
SARAL, GSAT-9, GSAT-10, GSAT-6/6A, GSAT-11 and IRNSS could not be completed as per
schedule and shall spill over to the Twelfth Plan period due to technological developmental
complexities, difficulties in sourcing the critical supplies and mission contingencies. The Committee
hopes Department would make all possible efforts to tide over these difficulties and projects would
be completed as per the revised schedule.

2
Action Taken by Government
Noted. It is brought to the notice of the Committee that Radar Imaging Satellite (RISAT-1)
has already been launched on 26 th April, 2012. GSAT-10 satellite is scheduled to be launched in
September, 2012. As recommended by the committee, the Department will make all possible efforts
to complete the remaining spill-over missions as per the revised schedule.
Comments
The Committee congratulates the Department on the successful launch of the RISAT-
I and hopes that the Department will make all out efforts to launch its remaining spill-over
missions during the Twelfth Plan period.
Recommendation (Para 6.5 and 6.6)
The Committee notes that in the Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012-17) the major thrust of the
Indian Space programme will be to carry forward and strengthen the already established space based
services aimed at socio-economic development of the country. The Committee hopes that, apart from
the ongoing space programmes and its efforts for developing advanced launch vehicles, the
Department should also strive for mastering critical technologies, so as to reduce the chances of
failure of important missions. The Committee is of the opinion that the next stepping stone of the
Department should be to strive towards sending a Manned Mission to Space, which naturally follows
from its successes obtained in sending launch vehicles which can carry higher payloads to space.
Action Taken by Government
Noted. Department has taken up activities for development of critical technologies required
for the advanced missions such as Re-usable Launch V ehicles, Manned Spaceflight, advanced
communication satellite, sub-meter resolution remote sensing satellites and planetary exploration.
The Department is also actively pursuing the development of the heavy lift launch vehicle, the
GSLV-MkIII.
Recommendation (Para 6.6)
The Committee also recommends that Department should also strive to increase its global
market share in space services by developing more innovative and competitive space services on
commercial lines and the revenue generated from marketing of these services, should be used for
further growth and development of space technology in the country. This will also increasingly
reduce the dependence of our space programme on budgetary resources.
Action Taken by Government
Noted. Department is pursuing the commercial activities through Antrix Corporation Limited.
Space Services in the global market is provided by Antrix in the areas of Remote Sensing Data,
Value Added Services, Communication Transponders, design and development of custom-built
satellite, PSLV Launch Services and Ground Station Services. The Annual Revenue of Antrix has
grown from Rs. 940.26 crores in 2007-08 to Rs. 1179.92 crores (provisional) in 2011-12. Antrix
has plans to further expand its activities to increase its share in space services in the global market
in the coming years.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that Antrix would be
able to secure a respectable share in global market in space services in the near future.

3
MANNED MISSION INITIATIVE
Recommendation (Para 8.3)
The Committee notes with concern that a programme initiated in the year 2006 and having
target date of 2014 as its completion, is yet to get a final approval even for its Phase 1
programme. It shows that the Department is either not serious in timely completion of the project
or has casually fixed a schedule for its completion. It also reflects a lack of proper planning and
effective monitoring, as also absence of adequate research and technological support for timely
execution of the project. The Committee, however hopes that the pre-project activities would be
expeditiously completed and approval for Phase 1 of the programme obtained, so that the project
is completed as per schedule in the year 2014.
Action Taken by Government
Noted. After a careful consideration of the magnitude of efforts, investments and
technological complexities involving development of a host of new technologies in diverse areas,
it was decided to take up the Manned Mission Programme in a phased manner focusing on the
development of critical technologies in the initial phase. Accordingly, the pre-project activities in the
areas of Crew module development, Environmental Control and Life Support System etc. are
progressing satisfactorily.
Comments
The Committee finds that the Department in its reply has  neither advanced any
reason for the delay nor underlined the efforts made by them to complete its pre-project
activities. The Committee,  therefore, reiterates that the pre-project activities for the
mission may be completed within a fixed time-frame.
CHANDRAYAAN-2 AND MARS ORBITER MISSION
Recommendation (Para 9.5)
The Committee after going thoroughly through the aforesaid reply of the Department is of
the opinion that preparation of an optimistic schedule for missions like Chandrayaan-2 and Mars
Orbiter Mission, alone is not sufficient but what is required is the will and dedication to complete
the mission target within the time schedule. If time schedule does not inspire the confidence of
the team and is seen by it as an unrealistic target, it will hardly serve any purpose. The Department
should therefore, fix time schedules in a more realistic way, rather than fixing time schedules
which are not to be adhered. The Committee feels that failure to adhere to programme schedule
sends a wrong message to the public and lowers their confidence in our capability to take our
space programme to new heights. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the
schedule for all missions including complex missions should be prepared only after taking into
account all ground realities, so that a realistic schedule meant to be adhered by all, rather than that
being violated with impunity, is prepared.
Action Taken by Government
Noted. Department prepares schedules for the project taking into account the development
time required for the key/new technologies and the lead time required for fabrication, assembly,
integration and testing activities. The Department has also implemented a Project Management
Structure involving multi-level periodical reviews of the project progress to ensure that the projects

4
are realized within the targeted schedule. Chandrayaan-2 was approved in September, 2008 as an
Indo-Russian joint mission with an objective of carrying out in-situ Lunar surface studies using
Moon Lander and Rover. Russia had the responsibility of developing the ‘Moon Lander and Rover’,
while India had the responsibility of developing the ‘Moon Orbiter’ and launch by Geo-synchronous
Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV).
However, based on the suggestion from Russian side, technical configuration of
Chandrayaan-2 mission was revised in February 2010. As per the revised plan, Russia took the
responsibility to realize the ‘Moon Lander’ and ISRO took up the responsibility to realize the Rover
and module.
Subsequent to the failure of the Russian interplanetary mission Phobos-Grunt, Russian side
has proposed for a shift in approach for Chandrayaan-2 mission in a recent meeting held at
Bangalore on May 12, 2012. As per the communication, Russia wants to increase the reliability of
their planetary missions by incorporating additional redundant systems. As a result, the mass of the
proposed ‘Moon Lander’ is likely to increase and the Lander will be made available only during
2014. These recent inputs from Russia have called for a programmatic realignment for
Chandrayaan-2 mission which is being examined by the Department. However, the Department
would continue to strive hard and spare no efforts in meeting the project time schedules.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF SPACE SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Recommendation (Para 10.3)
The Committee commends the initiative of the Department in setting up of the Indian
Institute of Space Science and Technology (IIST) for developing high quality man power required
for our space programmes and research. The Committee is further happy to note that it is Asia’s
first Space Institute to offer the complete range of courses related to space sciences. The
Committee hopes that the Institute would turn into a centre of excellence imparting high quality
space education and producing highly skilled and proficient space scientists and technologists. The
Committee is happy to note that a large numbers of students are competing for admission to the
IIST, which indicates growing popularity and importance of the institute.
Action Taken by the Government
Noted. From the current academic year, the institute has started four Post Graduation
programmes in the areas of RF and Microwave Engineering, Aerospace Propulsion Engineering,
Optical-Engineering and Digital Signal Processing. Moreover, the Institute is offering doctoral
programme in various areas of research which are relevant to Space and advanced technology areas
which would enable IIST to become a centre of excellence.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
OCEANSAT AND RESOURCESAT PROGRAMMES
Recommendation (Para 11.5)
The Committee observes that for both the Oceansat 2 and 3 and Resourcesat 2 and 3

5
programmes, there has been a trend to seek substantial budgetary allocations at B.E. stage without
making an extensive and critical assessment of the actual requirements. The Committee feels that
budgetary demands should be sought by the Department only after comprehensive analysis of the
actual fund requirement for the programme. Scarce resources should not be blocked by asking for
ambitious allocations and not utilizing them subsequently. These instances are also a reflection on
the capacity of the Department to plan its projects, efficiently, set realistic targets and its
determination to achieve the targets set.
Action Taken by Government
Noted.
Comments
The Committee expresses its displeasure that the Department has not initiated any
action in pursuance of the observations of the Committee and has simply noted it. The
Committee hopes that the Department would, in future, make extensive and critical
assessments of its actual requirements.
TELE-MEDICINE
Recommendation (Para 12.4)
The Committee feels that Telemedicine is a very useful programme pursued by the
Department for providing societal benefits by use of space technology to the common masses. The
Committee is aware that to provide even the basic healthcare facilities in all the villages of the
country, would require a huge capital investment, both in terms of manpower and resources. The
Committee is, therefore, of the opinion that this is a very cost effective method for providing
quality healthcare facilities in the rural and remote areas of the country. The Committee
recommends that the telemedicine network should be expanded in a time-bound manner to cover
the backward, remote, inaccessible or disease-prone areas, left out so far.
Action Taken by Government
Noted. Since 2001, ISRO has been providing Telemedicine nodes in a phased manner. It
covers remote regions of the country including J&K, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep
islands and most of the mainland States.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and presumes that the
Department will spread their telemedicine programme over to other left out places soon.
Recommendation (Para 12.5)
The Committee also notes that due to the failure of the launch vehicle carrying the
GSAT-5P satellite, the expansion of telemedicine network work was adversely affected. The
Committee is happy to note that with the successful launch of GSAT-12, the telemedicine activities
are being restored. The Committee hopes that the migration of telemedicine network to GSAT-12
satellite, which is currently in progress, will be completed soon and the expansion of the facility
will be pursued with vigour.

6
Action Taken by Government
Noted. Two transponders in GSAT-12 satellite are allotted by INSAT Coordination
Committee (ICC) for tele-medicine programme. Out of 382 tele-medicine nodes, 190 tele-
medicine nodes were planned to be migrated to GSAT-12 satellite and rest of the nodes are to
be operated through INSAT-3A, INSAT-3C and INSAT-4A satellites. Against the 190 nodes that
are scheduled for migration, 165 nodes have already been migrated and actions are taken to
migrate the remaining nodes. In order to ensure the effective utilization of all the tele-medicine
nodes, steps are taken up by DOS/ISRO to enter into an appropriate maintenance agreements and
for monitoring activities.
Comments
The Committee applauds the Department for migration of 165 nodes out of 190 and
hopes that the migration of the remaining nodes would be done soon.
DISASTER MANAGEMENT SUPPORT SYSTEM
Recommendation (Para 13.3)
The Committee is of the view that natural disasters such as floods, droughts, cyclones,
earthquakes and landslides are a recurring phenomena and every year widespread economic
devastation and loss of human lives is caused on account of these natural calamities. The
Committee is of the opinion that the services of Virtual Private Network (VPN) which has been
set up for networking the State and district level emergency control centres for natural disasters
management must be optimally utilized for rapid dissemination of information to lessen the human
and economic loss.
Action Taken by Government
Noted. Presently, the satellite based Virtual Private Network set up under the Disaster
Management Support (DMS) Programme offers connectivity to the following:
(i) 20 State Emergency Operation centres (Andhra Pradesh, Andaman and Nicobar
Islands, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Delhi, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala,
Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Orissa, Sikkim, Tamil
Nadu, Tripura, Uttarakhand, and West Bengal)
(ii) 5 observation nodes (Prime Minister Office, Prime Minister residence, National
Disaster Management Authority, Delhi, Cabinet Secretariat, Delhi, and Control Room
North Block)
(iii) 10 primary nodes (National Remote sensing Centre, Hyderabad, National Remote
Sensing Centre, Shadnagar, Indian Meteorological Department, Central Water
Commission, Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services, Geologlcal
Survey of India, New Delhi, Space Application Centre, Ahmedabad; NESAC, Shillong;
Master Control Facility, Hassan and National Institute of Disaster Management, Delhi)
The Virtual Private Network which was earlier functional through INSAT-3E satellite is re-
established to its full capacity by allotting a full transponder in GSAT-12 and all the nodes are now
re-aligned with GSAT-12. To further optimize the usage of the network, periodical meetings of the
nodal officers from the States and the data providing nodes will be organized.

7
Comments
The Committee is happy to hear that Virtual Private Network (VPN) has been re-
established to its full capacity by allotting a full transponder in GSAT-12 and reiterates that
efforts may be made to link State and district level emergency control centres through VPN.
SPACE INDUSTRY PARTNERSHIP
Recommendation (Para 14.3)
The Committee is of the opinion that active involvement and effective participation of more
and more Indian industries in providing quality products and services needed for our Space
programme will lead to self-reliance and would decrease our dependence on foreign industries for
space equipments and technologies. The involvement of Indian industries in production of
aggregates/systems for the Indian Space programme would augment the technical expertise of the
Indian industry and would also lead to employment generation. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department of Space should make concerted efforts in this direction. The
Committee also desires that Department of Space should look forward to transfer more and more
technologies which may be useful for civilian applications to Indian Industries so as to make them
globally competitive.
Action Taken by Government
Noted. Department has been progressively increasing the participation of Indian Industries
in the Space Programme. The focus has been to upgrade the Indian Industries from mere supplier
of parts/components/subsystem to system level integrator. The Indian Industries are also supported
with transfer of ISRO developed technologies to make them globally competitive.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
FAILURE ANALYSIS COMMITTEE (FAC)
Recommendation (Para 15.4)
After going through the replies of the Department of Space and findings of FAC, the
Committee is of the opinion that the Department should make efforts to develop our indigenous
cryogenic engines for GSLV and other advanced launch vehicles, as it would make us self reliant
in this important area. The Committee would however like the Department to ensure that every
possible care is taken while launching our satellite so that chances of failure are reduced to the
minimum. It should bear in mind that any failure of our missions, though failures are bound to
happen in such complex missions, not only results in loss of crores of rupees but also raises a
doubt in the mind of the people about the credibility of our space programme.
Action Taken by Government
Noted. Development of indigenous cryogenic engines for GSLV is a critical milestone for
making India’s launch vehicle programme self-reliant. Hence the development of indigenous
cryogenic is being taken up on priority basis. The recommendations of Failure Analysis Committees
(FAC) have been implemented in the realization of the indigenous cryogenic upper stage for the
next development flight of GSLV , i.e., GSLV-D5.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

MINUTES

10

11
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Monday, the 17 th December, 2012 in Committee Room
‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri M. Rama Jois
3. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
LOK SABHA
4. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
5. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
6. Shri O.S. Manian
7. Shri Basori Singh Masram
8. Shri Ramashanker Rajbhar
9. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
10. Shri Pradeep Tamta
11. Shri Joseph Toppo
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Committee Officer
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and
informed them that the Committee would consider and adopt its draft 232
nd to 238 th Reports on
the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 222 nd to
228th reports on Demands for Grants (2012-13), pertaining to the Ministries/De partments of Atomic
Energy, Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, Space, Earth Sciences, Scientific and
Industrial Research and Biotechnology respectively.
2. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration, one by one, the Draft Action Taken
Reports and adopted the 232
nd to 238 th Reports without any amendment.
11

12
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. The Committee, thereafter, decided to present/lay on the Table of both the Houses of the
Parliament its 232 nd to 238 th Reports on 20 th December, 2012. The Committee authorised its
Chairman and in his absence Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra to present the Report in Rajya Sabha and
Shri Pradeep Tamta and in his absence Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde to lay the copy of the report
on the Table of Lok Sabha.
The Committee, then, adjourned at 10.35 
A.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.