 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
May, 2013/ Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)  
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
TWO HUNDRED FORTY FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-2014) 
OF THE 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY 
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY) 
(DEMAND NO. 87) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th May, 2013) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th May, 2013) 
 
REPORT 
NO. 
245

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS  
 
TWO HUNDRED FORTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
ON  
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-2014) 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY 
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY) 
(DEMAND NO. 87) 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 8TH MAY, 2013) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA 8TH MAY, 2013) 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
MAY, 2013/VAISAKHA, 1935 (SAKA) 
 
C O N T E N T S 
         PAGES 
 1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE       (i) – (ii)   
 2.     PREFACE                            (iii)                             
 3. ACRONYMS 
 4. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                                             
●5. SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS  
●6. MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE           
   
                                                 
● To be appended at printing stage 
 
 


MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY,  
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS (2012-13) 
 
1. Dr.T. Subbarami Reddy  –– Chairman  
 RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Anil H. Lad 
3. Smt. Maya Singh 
4. Shri M. Rama Jois 
5. Shri Alok Tiwari 
6. Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
7. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra 
8. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian 
9. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
10. Vacant 
 LOK SABHA 
11. Shri K.C. Singh "Baba"    
12. Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty 
  13. Shri Vincent H. Pala 
14. Vacant 
15. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde 
16. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
17. Dr. Ajay Kumar 
18. Shri O.S. Manian 
   19. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
20. Shri Basori Singh Masram 
21. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel 
22. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
23. Shri Ramashanakar Rajbhar 
24. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
25. Shri Yshvir Singh 
26. Smt. Supriya Sule 
27. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
28. Shri Joseph Toppo 
29. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava 
30. Shri Ramaknt Yadav 
31. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
   SECRETARIAT 
 Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary 
 Shri  Alok Chatterjee, Director 
 Shri  V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director  
Shri  Girija Shankar, Deputy Director 
Shri Deepak Kalra, Assistant Director 
             Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer 
                                                 
 Prof. M.S. Swaminathan ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 9th April, 2013. 
 Nominated w.e.f 9th January, 2013. 
 Nominated w.e.f. 1st May, 2013 

Preface 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Pa rliamentary Standing Committee on Science & 
Technology, Environment & Forests, having been  authorised by the Committee to present the 
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Fo rty-fifth Report of the Committee. This Report 
deals with the detailed Demands for Grants ( 2013-2014) of the Department of Biotechnology 
(Ministry of Science and Technology) (Demand No. 87). 
 
2.   In the meeting of the Committee held on 3
rd April, 2013 the Secretary and other Officers of 
the Department of Biotechnology gave an overvie w of the various activities of the Department 
and the Members sought clarifications on variou s aspects of the performan ce of the Department 
to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants. 
 
3.   The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the 
clarifications sought by the Members and placing  before it the required material to enable the 
Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology. 
 
4.    The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 7
th May, 2013. 
 
 
N
EW DELHI;    
May, 2013, 
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
                                                         Chairman,
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
         on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests.
 
 
ACRONYMS 
BIBCOL :  Bharat Immunologicals a nd Biologicals Corporation Limited  
BITP  :  Biotech Industry Training Programme  
BIPP  :  Biotechnology Industr y Partnership Programme  
BSL  :  Bio-safety Laboratories 
BMGF  :  Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation  
CAGR  :  Composite Annual Growth Rate  
CDFD  :   Centre for DNA Fingerprinting & Diagnostics 
DNA  :   Deoxyribonucleic acid  
DRDO  :  Defence Research and Development organisation 
EPROMIS :  Web enabled Project Management Information System 
GDP  :  Gross Domestic Product    
GERD  :  Gross Expenditure in Research and Development  
HPC  :  High Powered Committee  
IBSD   :  Institute for Bioresour ce and Sustainable Development  
ICGEB :  International Centre for Genetic Engineering and  
Biotechnology  
ICT   :  Institute of Chemical Technology   
IPR  :   Intellectual property Rights    
ILS   :  Institute of Life Sciences  
IOCL  :  Indian Oil Corporation Limited  
IVCOL :  Indian Vaccines  Corporation Limited   
KVK  :  Krishi Vigyan Kendra 

NCCS  :   National Centre for Cell Sciences  
NBRC   :  National Brain Research Centre  
NER-BPMC :   North Eastern Region-Biotechnology Programme  
Management Cell                    
NII   :  National Institute of Immunology  
NIPGR :  National Institute for Plant Genome Research 
PMC  :   Project Monitoring Committee  
PMD  :   Performance Management Division  
R & D  :   Research & Development   
RFD  :  Results Framework Document  
RNA   :  Ribonucleic acid  
SBIRI  :  Small Business I nnovation Research Initiative 
S&ME  :  Small & Medium Enterprises 
STI  :  Science, Technology & Innovation Policy, 2013 
TSC  :  Technical Steering Committee  
TTO  :  Technology Transfer Organizations  
 
 REPORT 
The long history of Biotechnology had w itnessed productive use of biological 
processes to create useful goods for th e benefit of mankind. Rapid scientific 
developments in the past few decades have produced a knowledge base and set of tools 
and techniques that enable biological pro cesses to be better unders tood and controlled to 
an extent never possible before. During th e first half of the 20th century, knowledge 
from the scientific fields of Chemistry and Genetics, combined to provide a revolution in 
the field of life sciences. Advances in ge netic engineering since 1953 had led to the 
acceptance of the role of DNA, combined with its molecular structure, to bring about the 
development of new tools and techniques in genetic engineering, which in turn brought 
about huge advances in biotechnology. As of today biotechnology is applicable in 
diverse fields like healthcare, food, mining, plastics, agriculture and animal husbandry 
etc.   
1.1 With a view to give a new impetus to the development in the field of modern 
biology and biotechnology, as mentioned abov e, in the country, the Government of 
India, initially set up an  Independent Board in 1982, which became a full-fledged 
Department of Biotechnology under Minist ry of Science & Technology in 1986.  The 
Department of Biotechnology is today a ma jor national research and development 
agency and provides nearly two-third of the Research & Development support in the life 
science sector in the country. The Depa rtment endeavours to wards creating an 
institutional framework and human resour ces for nurturing scie nce and technology for 
advancement in their respective fields. To nur ture ever augmenting growth in the field 
of Biotechnology, the budgetary allocation of the Department has been increased from 
around Rs.23.00 crores in 1986-87 to over Rs . 1500.00 crores in 2013-14. The Indian 
biotech industry had expande d threefold during 2009-11 to record revenues of US $3 
billion and is expected to grow further in the coming years.  
2. MANDATE  OF THE DEPARTMENT 
2.1 The main mandate of the Depart ment of Biotechnology is as under:- 
 To evolve policies and integrated progr ammes in biotechnology and ensure their 
implementation and monitoring;  

 To identify specific programmes of Research and Development and 
manufacturing in biologicals and biot echnology and oversee the initiation and 
pursuit of related research and manufacturing activities;  
 To identify, set up and support Centres of Excellence for Research and 
Development in biotechnology and ensure pr oper dovetailing of their activities as 
per national priorities and objectives;  
 To act as a screening, advising and appr oving agent of the Government with 
regard to import and transfer of ne w technologies for the manufacture of 
biologicals, biotechnological products and their intermediates;  
 Evolve safety guidelines for biotec hnology Research and Development and 
manufacturing in India;  
 To act as the central agency for the impor t of genetically manipulated materials, 
culture, cells, specimens, tissues and biotech produc ts including DNA and RNA 
of any type or size and for promoting their production in the country;  
 Serve as the inter-ministerial and in teragency nodal point for all specific 
international bilateral and multilateral Research and Development collaborations 
and agreements in the area of biotec hnology and act as the nodal point for all 
technology transfers in the area of biotechnology;  
 Manufacture and ensure application of  recombinant, cell-based and DNA 
vaccines, diagnostics and other biotechnological products;  
 To evolve programmes for Human Res ource Development in the area of 
biotechnology;  
 Serve as an administrative and impl ementing Department of agencies, 
commissions, boards, etc. specifically formed by the Government for fulfilling the 
national objectives in biotechnology and also to serve as the nodal point for Bio-
informatics including training and cr eation of infrastr ucture, collection, 
dissemination and exchange of information relating to biotechnology; 
 Establishment of National Biotechnology Regulatory Authority;   
 To deal with matters relating to the following institutions:  
 International Centre for Genetic E ngineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB), 
New Delhi; 
 National Institute of Immunology (NII), New Delhi; 
 National Centre for Cell Sciences (NCCS), Pune; 
 Centre for DNA Fingerprinting & Diagnostics (CDFD), Hyderabad; 
 National Institute for Plant Genome Research (NIPGR), New Delhi; 
 National Brain Research Centre (NBRC), Manesar, Gurgaon; 
 Institute for Bioresource and Sustainable Development (IBSD), Imphal; 
 Institute of Life Sciences (ILS), Bhubneshwar; 
 Translational Research in Health Science and Technology Institute, 
Faridabad;  
 Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, Trivananthpuram; 
 UNESCO Regional Centre for Education, Training & Innovation in Biotechnology, 
Faridabad; 
 National Institute of Biomedical Genomics, Kolkata; 
 Institute for Stem Cell Science and Regenerative Medicine, Bangalore 
 National Agri-Food Biotechnology Institute and Bioprocessing Unit, Mohali, and 
 National Institute of Animal Biotechnology, Hyderabad. 

 Matters relating to: 
 Bharat Immunologicals and Biological s Corporation Limited (BIBCOL), 
Bulandshahar, Uttar Pradesh; and 
 Indian Vaccines Corporation Limited (IVCOL), Manesar, Gurgaon. 
2.2 The Department-related Parliament ary Standing committee on Science & 
Technology, Environment and Forests consider ed the detailed Demand for Grants (2013-
14) of the Department of Biotechnology (DBT) in its meeting held on 3rd April, 2013. 
3. MONITORING MECHANISM OF  THE DEPARTMENT AND THE 
RESULT FRAMEWORK  DOCUMENT (RFD)  
3.1 The Committee was informed that fo r monitoring of the schemes of the 
Department, 20 subject specific task forces c onsisting of about 250 experts have been set 
up, who  monitor  the progress of the projects on half-yearly or annua l basis, which also 
includes site visits. An elaborate monitoring m echanism also exists for all Public Private 
Partnerships schemes, which involves visits at the project implementation sites by Project 
Monitoring Committee (PMC) comprising of two area experts, one officer from the 
Department and a financial expert, every si x months to review the progress of the 
projects. Besides, project review were also being done by the Technical Steering 
Committee (TSC) every year and thus the annual financial re leases were made based on 
the successful completion of specified milestone s/targets. The Department added that to 
strengthen the system further, an online project registration and monitoring system 
namely “EPROMIS” had been started since 2011-2012, where all the documents were 
available for online scrutiny and review at all permitted levels.  
3.2 As regards the implementation of the Results Framework Document (RFD), the 
Department, informed that the targets, timelines and achievements as per the RFD format 
for the year 2011-2012 had been recently re viewed by the High Powered Committee 
(HPC) on Government Performance and based on the data submitted by the Department, 
it had approved a composite score of 89.72 for the year 2011-2012, as against 85.03 score 
worked out by the Department of Biotechnology . It also added that during the financial 
year 2010-2011, it had obtained the third rank amongst all the Ministries, as per the 
evaluation carried out by the Performan ce Management Division (PMD) of Cabinet 
Secretariat in terms of accomplishing agreed objectives of the year. 
3.3 The Committee appreciates the Department for putting in place an 
innovative online system i.e. “EPROMIS” since 2011-12 for the registration and 
monitoring of projects. The Committee is  also appreciative of the good results 
obtained by the Department in the RFD assessment for the years 2010-11 and 2011-
12, which suggests that various mechanisms put in place by the Department have 
worked effectively in these two years. The Committee hopes that the Department 
would aim and achieve even better RFD scores in future. 
4. 12TH  FIVE YEAR PLAN 
4.1 The Department informed the Committee that a total budgetary allocation                          
of Rs. 11,804.00 Crores had been made for the 12
th five year plan (2012-2017), against a 
proposed outlay of 18,000.00 Crores. The allocation for the 12 th Plan was 143.89% more 
than the allocation of Rs . 4,840.00 Crores made for 11 th Plan (2007-2012). The major 
thrust areas of the 12th Plan are as follows: 
(i) Expand available pool of research scholars a nd scientist at all le vels (Ph.D, Post 
Doctoral Fellows, young faculty) in biologi cal and interdisciplinary space by 3-5 
folds;   

(ii) Connecting and augmenting existing co mpetences across institutions and 
universities for bio-economy and social impact;  
(iii) Expanding, diversifying career paths with a linkage to high-end interdisciplinary 
sciences, innovation, translation and entrepreneurship;  
(iv) Strengthening regulatory science and infrastructure;  
(v) Expanding existing autonomous R&D institutions; 
(vi) Expansion and commissioning of bioclust ers at Faridabad, Mohali, Kalyani and 
Hyderabad and setting new clusters; 
(vii) Establish DBT grants-in-aid or partners hip research and translational centres 
through long term support in 5 best universities/institutions;  
(viii) Reorient “Grand Challenge Programme” Sche me of 11th Plan to address national 
priorities in various developmental s ectors through bottom-up approach and also 
encourage discovery led innovative ideas;   
(ix) Rejuvenate and establish new research resources, facilities and services;  
(x) Leverage international collaboration for partnerships in cu tting edge areas 
research, education and technology development, access, acquisition; 
(xi) Continued and Sustained support to publ ic private partnerships with new 
innovative funding schemes; 
(xii) Promoting discovery led innovation and strategic investments in priority sectors; 
(xiii) Promoting new generation biotech industries; 
(xiv) Technology acquisition, transfer and licensing for product development;   
(xv) Communication platform/system for creating awareness and public understanding 
of biotechnology with special reference to agriculture biotechnology;  
(xvi) Expediting legal framework and legislations; 
(xvii) Strengthening and consolidation of major 11th Plan initiatives;  
(xviii) Promote policy research and analysis in biotechnology;  
(xix) Reengineering the economic model for bi otechnology product/industry development; 
and  
(xx) Reforms in funding and project management.  
4.2 The Committee notes that there is a significant incre ase of 143.89% in 
allocation of this Department for the 12 th Plan over the allocation made for the 11 th 
Plan, though it substantially falls short of  the outlay of Rs. 18, 000 crores sought by 
the Department for the 12 th Plan period.  The Committee is happy to note that the 
Department during the Plan period inter-alia proposes promotion of new generation 
biotech industries and sustained support to public private partnership, which are 
amongst the thrust areas of  the Department for the 12 th Five Year Plan.  The 
Committee hopes that the Department through its concerted efforts would be able to 
promote public private partnership in a significant way and help establish  new 
generation biotech industries on a large scale which will not only generate 
employment but would also help country rea p in a big way the benefits  of new 
generation biotech industries.   
5. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR THE YEAR 2013-14 
5.1 As regards the Budgetary Allocation, the Committee was informed that the total 
B.E outlay for the year 2013-14 is Rs. 1502.06 crores (with a Plan component of Rs. 
1485.00 crores). The Committee also notes that in the year 2012-13, the total allocation 
of Rs. 1500.39 crores (with a Plan component remaining the same at Rs.1485.00crores) at 
B.E. stage was reduced to Rs. 1315.72 crores at R.E. stage. Explaining the reasons for the 
underutilisation in the year 2012- 13, the Department stated that the Ministry of Finance 

reduced the allocation at R.E. stage by about Rs. 185.00 crores, even though the 
utilisation of the Department was around 55% of B.E. by the end of 2 nd quarter of 2012-
2013 i.e. 30th September, 2012. The Department as a result of the reduc tion of funds had 
to re-prioritize its programmes for 2013-2014.  
5.2 In  reply  to a  query as   regards the  percentage of utilization of funds as 
compared to he total Plan allocation over th e last three years, th e Department provided 
the following  information :   
Year B.E. (Plan) 
(Rs. in Crore) 
 
R.E.(Plan) 
(Rs. in Crore) 
Actual Utilization 
(Rs. in Crore) 
Percentage 
 
2010-2011 1200.00 1200.00 1120.55 93.37 
2011-2012 1400.00 1350.00 1182.39 87.58 
2012-2013 1485.00 1300.00 1269.94 97.69 
2013-2014 1485.00 ---- ---- ---- 
5.3 The Committee notes with concern the red uction of plan allocation of the 
Department at R.E. stage in the years 2011-12 and 2012-13 despite good utilization 
of allocated funds by the Department.  If this trend is not rev ersed immediately, at 
the end of the 12
th Five Year Plan, the Departme nt would end up having a plan 
outlay which will be much less than the approved plan outlay of the Department 
and this in turn would adversely impa ct achievement of targets set by the 
Department for the 12
th Five Year Plan.  The Committee is of the view of that 
growing international stature of India in th e field of biotechnology should not suffer 
a setback on account of fund crunch and accordingly, recommends that no 
reduction should be made in the approve d plan outlay of the Department and 
reduced plan allocation for the year 2012- 13 should be balanced  by the higher 
allocations at R.E. stage in the year 2013-14.   
6. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME 
6.1     As regards the Budgetary allo cations for the Research & Development 
programme, over the last three years, the Committee was informed of the following: 
          ( i n  R s .  C r o r e s )  
Year B.E.(Plan) R.E.(Plan) Actual 
Expenditure(Plan) 
2011-12 Rs.418.90 Rs. 420.00 Rs. 432.95 
2012-13 Rs. 420.00 Rs. 357.15 Rs.398.89 
2013-14 Rs. 420.50 --- --- 
 
The Department had proposed an ou tlay of Rs.638.06 crores for the R & D 
Programme in the year 2013-14 as against B.E. allocation of Rs. 420.50 crores. 
6.2 Giving the details of the R& D Programme, the Department stated that it receives 
on an average 4000 R&D projects under competitive grant system through online 
submission. After initial scrutiny, peer review  by external experts and evaluation by 14 
different subject specific task forces in the areas of basic research in life sciences and 
biotechnology; applications for agriculture,  healthcare, bioresour ces and environment, 
industry, on an average 400 pr ojects are funded every year . Besides, this open ended 
submission of projects by scientists, department also advertises special calls for proposals 
in priority areas and emergi ng sciences. During the year 2012-13, a bout 777 projects had 
been supported under various schemes following th e priorities set in 12th plan. In terms 

of measurable indicators of performance, it was noted  that about 1500 scientific 
publications in peer review journals were published and one-third of the publications had 
impact factor above 5. About 175 patents were filed, with include 50 international patents 
and 70 patents had been granted including 26 international patents. In terms of 
technology generation there had been about 234 research leads, 216 technologies were in 
pipeline for development, 112 technologies  had been developed, 23 technologies had 
been transferred to industry and 11 of them had been commercialized. 
6.3 The Committee also notes that the new ‘Science, Technology & Innovation’ 
Policy, recently unveiled by the Prime Minister , had set a goal of raising the gross R&D 
expenditure to 2% of the GDP, which is the same as the targeted expenditure set a decade 
back i.e. in 2003 and the current level of investment is only 0.9% of GDP. The 
Department explained that the 12
th Plan document of Science & Technology published by 
Planning Commission, states that “to achieve the target of gr oss R&D expenditure of 2% 
of GDP additional Government efforts as also  much increased private sector effort is 
needed”. The Department has already demons trated through the ongo ing Public Private 
Partnership that a strategic expenditure for promoting R& D in industry sector would 
catalyze increased investments in the privat e sector. For example in the Biotechnology 
Industry Partnership Programme (BIPP) scheme  of the department so far 102 projects 
have been approved and agreement signed w ith 85 companies. Therefore, department 
would pursue such programmes for contributi on towards increasing R&D expenditure in 
S&T to reach to about 2% targeted by the end of 12th Plan.  
6.4 The Committee further notes that as  per new Science, Technology & Innovation 
Policy(STI), 2013, while Global investments in science, technology and innovation are 
estimated at $1.2 trillion as of 2009. India’s R&D investment is less than 2.5% of this 
amount and is currently under 1% of the GDP.  Increasing Gross Expenditure in Research 
and Development (GERD) to 2% of the GDP has been a national goal for some time and 
achieving this in the next five years is real izable if the private sector raises its R&D 
investment to at least match the public sector  R&D investment from the current ratio of 
around 1:3 and this seems attainable as the industrial R&D investment grew by 250% and 
the sales by 200% between 2005 and 2010.  Increa sed private investment is necessary for 
translating R&D outputs into commercial outco mes. While maintaining current rates of 
growth in public R&D investments, a cond ucive environment will be created for 
enhancing private sector investment in R&D. 
6.5 The Committee notes with concern low le vel of private sector investment in 
R&D and is of the view that Department should effectively leverage its Public 
Private Partnership Programme to catalyze increasing private sector investment in 
R&D in Biotechnology.  The Committee no tes with appreciation that through 
Biotechnology Industry Partnership Progra mme of the Department, 85 companies 
are already investing in 102 projects a nd recommends that the Department of 
Biotechnology should pursue such program mes, which would build a conducive 
environment for increased private sector investment in R&D in Biotechnology, so 
that the national goal of increasing expe nditure in Research and Development in 
S&T to 2% of GDP in next five years is realised.  The Committee is of the firm 
opinion that national aspiration of posi tioning India among the top five global 
scientific powers by 2020 can only be realised by significantly augmenting 
investments in R&D in S&T and accordin gly, the Committee recommends that the 
Planning Commission must provide sufficie nt funds to the R&D programme of the 
Department to meet this national objective.   

7. INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FO R GENETIC ENGINEERING AND 
BIOTECHNOLOGY(ICGEB) 
7.1 The Department informed that the IC GEB acts as a centre of excellence for 
research and training in genetic engineering & biotechnology and also meets the needs of 
the developing world to function as a formal international mechanism and forum to 
channelise and coordinate sc ientific and technological reso urces available in developed 
countries in the area of genetic engineeri ng and biotechnology. It was further informed 
that, the ICGEB is an international organisa tion of 65 member c ountries and has been 
established as a two component centre, with a centre at Trieste, Italy and the other at New 
Delhi by United Nations International Develo pment Organization and has been granted 
an independent status from February 1994 afte r its statute came into  force. The main 
thrust of the centre has been to carry out ba sic research in the areas of human diseases 
and agriculture focusing mainly on research relevant to the Indian subcontinent.  
7.2 Informing the Committee of the proposed activities of th e Centre for the year                 
2013-14, the Department informed that programmes like Malaria Vaccine  development, 
research on Hepatitis C virus, Dengue  Vaccine, Translational programme for 
development of transgenic rice, onion, toma to etc, and Lab space expansion, which were 
earlier being handled by the Centre would continue during the year 2013-14.  
7.3 During the examination of Demands  for Grants(2012-13), the Committee 
analysed in detail the status and functi oning of the ICGEB and found that it was 
functioning on the basis of the financial grants  received from the Government of Italy for 
the last 6 years, which had remained more or less static with contribution marginally 
reduced during financial year  2011-12. The Co mmittee further noted that the Centre was 
receiving a Non Plan allocation of Rs 10.00 cror es from the Government of India, which 
was discontinued from the year 2012-13. While examining all these issues, the 
Committee formed a view in its 228
th Report, that the research centres engaged in applied 
science should not be supporte d on Government funds for a long period and the Institute 
must develop its capability to raise resources by  commercially exploiting its product and 
services. The Committee formed such opinion on the basis of the fact that when Italian 
Government had reduced its grant for r unning the centre in 2012-13 and also the 
Government of India discontinued its Non Plan allocation made earlier for the centre. The 
Committee feared that the cumulative effect of these cuts, may lead to financial crisis for 
the centre to run, consequently adversely affecting its functioning and ongoing research 
programmes. The Committee as a measure to come out from such impending crisis, 
recommended in its aforesaid report that inte rim financial assistance  be provided to the 
centre to tide over its immediate problem and al so advocated that the centre should make 
effort to meet its expenses from its own income, in order to avoid its dependence on 
government and foreign funds. 
7.4 In the 238
th Action Taken Report of the Committee, the Department while  
recognising the significance of the aforesaid observation, me ntioned that it had held 
elaborate discussions with ICGEB governi ng body for developing strategy to address 
financial sustainability of the Centre on a long term-basis. The Department further 
informed that during the 12 th Plan, a special budget head  i.e. ‘Autonomous R& D 
Institutions’ had been introduced and a pr ovision of  Rs. 13.00 crores had been made 
under the said head for the centre for the year 2012-13, out of which Rs. 650 lakhs had 
been released to ICGEB. 
7.5 In pursuance of the above decision of  the Government, arising out of the 
recommendations of the Committee, no separa te budgetary allocation had been made for 

ICGEB for B.E. 2013-14 and instead the allocation for ICGEB has been shown under the 
head ‘Autonomous R& D Institutions’ and as already mentioned above and a token 
amount of Rs. 13.00 crores had been allocated to  the said centre.  The Department also 
informed that as part of the future plans, it had already constituted a high-level 
Committee to examine the matters related to  operation of the ICGEB, which would 
recommend the possible restructured model for the sustainability of the institution on a 
long-term basis, in view of the decreased fi nancial support from Italian Government and 
stoppage of non plan allocation by the gove rnment. The first meeting of the said 
Committee was held on 9
th March, 2013 at Bangalore.    
7.6 The Committee is happy to note that in response to its recommendation 
contained in 228th Report, the Department  has as a part of its efforts to address the 
issue of financial sustainability of the cen tre, constituted a high-level Committee to 
examine the matters related to operati on of the ICGEB and the high level 
Committee would inter-alia recommend the possible restructured model for the 
sustainability of the institution on a long-term basis.  The Committee notes that the 
main thrust of the centre is to carry out basic research in the areas of human 
diseases and agriculture focussing mainly on research relevant to the Indian sub-
continent and considering the importance of work entrusted to the centre, the 
Committee is keen that the centre func tions on a self sustained basis and 
accordingly, recommends that the Departme nt should ensure that the restructured 
model of the centre makes it financially viable on self sustainable basis.     
8. DEVELOPMENT OF BIOENERGY AND BIOFUELS 
8.1 The Bioenergy initiative of the Departme nt is to strengthen and expedite the 
bioenergy research and technology development in India. A strategic decision was made 
to set-up Bioenergy Centres at  three locations of India vi z. (i) DBT-ICT Centre for 
Energy Biosciences (Mumbai) was setup in the year 2008 to develop technology for 
second generation biofuel; (ii) DBT-IOC Ce ntre for Advanced Bioenergy Research 
(Faridabad) was setup to develop and de ploy second and third generation biofuel 
technologies with its existing capabilities to scale up; and (iii) DBT-ICGEB Centre for 
Advanced Bioenergy Research (New Delhi) was the third Centre setup in March 2012 to 
perform cutting-edge research using synthetic and system biology approaches towards the 
development of novel technology for biofuel production.  
8.2 The Committee was also informed of  the ‘The Bioenergy Road Map-Vision 
2020’, which had been prepared through a cons ultative process by an expert group of 
scientists involving all researchers from institu tes, universities and industries working in 
this area across the country.  
The Committee was informed of its goals and targets, which are as follows: 
 20% blending of fossil fuel by 2020; 
 Commercially viable lignoce llulosic ethanol produced from 
Agricultural and forestry waste;  
 An economically cost efficient system available for Algal 
production and also a commercial scale technology for production 
of biofuels from Algae eith er through harvesting and oil 
transesterification or direct conversion to Bio-oil; and  
 Next generation biofuels from different biomass feedstock.  
The Committee was also informed that presently, no commercially feasible 
second generation biofuel technologies are available in the country and this national need 
demands a paradigm shift from reactive to proactive technologies.  

8.3  In bioenergy area, major focus was to develop technolo gy for production of 
biofuels from agricultural wastes thr ough DBT sponsored collaborative centres and 
projects. The ICGEB Centre for Advanced  Bioenergy Research was successful in 
identification of three novel ce llulolytic enzymes, which are currently being tested in 
collaboration with Institute of Chemi cal Technology, Mumbai and Indian Oil 
Corporation Ltd.(IOCL), Faridabad. Inform ing the Committee of the new programmes, 
the Department stated that   a virtual Pan -IIT Centre for Bioenergy had been established 
and a joint proposal has been received from 5 IITs which is under review for further 
consideration. 
8.4 The issue of Bioenergy in the form of  ‘Jatropha Bio-diesel Mission Network 
Programme’ of the Department figured in th e discussion, relating to the Department’s 
meeting held on the 3
rd April, 2013, wherein the Committee was informed that at the 
beginning, Jatropha plant, a source of biofuel, was initially cultivated as a wild crop and 
the seeds were not of good quality. However, under the said Mission the Department in 
collaboration with the Ministry of New and Renewable Resources identified good quality 
Jatropha plant across  20 locations in 23 stat es in the country. Apart from this about 
15,000 plant excision were also collected for multi-location trials.  
8.5  As regards the issue of Bio-Etha nol, another bio-fuel, the Committee was 
informed that good quality material is already available at nine nurseries in Uttar Pradesh 
and the Lucknow Biotech Park had been made  the nodal agency for it. Besides, the 
Bharat Petroleum Company Limited, which is a Public Sector Company, had started its 
own plantation/nurseries for supply of good quality planting material. The Committee 
was also informed that the Bio-ethanol t echnology had been solely developed by the 
Department in collaboration with the Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai. 
Presently the technology is being perfect ed through the pilot plant set up at 
Kashipur(U.P.) and it was hoped that the te chnology would be available by the year end 
i.e December, 2013 for use on a commercial scale. Thereafter, the technology would be 
given to various user-agencies such as suga r mills, distillery units etc. for using this 
technology for commercial use. 
8.6 The Committee is aware of the pressing  need for finding non-conventional 
sources of clean energy and is happy to know  that Department in collaboration with 
the Institute of Chemical Technology, Mu mbai had succeeded in developing bio-
ethanol technology and that technology would become available for commercial  
exploitation by the end of this year.  The Committee congratulates  the Department 
on its success and hopes that the Depart ment would be in a position to make 
available the technology for commercial us e by the year end.  The Committee 
further recommends that the Department sh ould earnestly explore and expedite its 
Research & Development in the field of bi o-energy & bio-fuels for developing a cost 
effective, viable commercial alternative fo r conventional fuel at the earliest. The 
Committee also recommends that Government should provide adequate funds to the 
Department so that resource crunch does not come in the way of the Department in 
meeting this goal.  
9. BIOTECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY  RESEARCH ASSISTANCE 
COUNCIL(BIRAC)  
9.1 Biotechnology Industry Re search Assistance Counc il (BIRAC) is operating 
schemes for facilitating and nurturing Biotech Innovation research in the biotech industry 
with focus on startups and Small & Medium  Enterprises(SMEs). BIRAC also provides 
support for innovation research and provides an enabling environment and necessary 

services to facilitate the growth of startups and SMEs. It was set up as a Public sector 
‘Not for profit Section 25 Company’ on the 20 th March, 2012.Till date the BIRAC 
through its various schemes had supported of  15 startups and 60 SMEs. BIRAC has 
initiated partnerships with several national a nd global partners to co llaborate and deliver 
the salient features of its mandate. The Department informed that the allocation under 
Plan for BIRAC, has been included under the head ‘Autonomous R& D Institutions’ and 
in the year 2013-2014 Rs. 20.00 crores had been allocated to it.    
9.2 The key strategies of the BIRAC include: 
 Fostering innovation and entrepreneurship in all places of research; 
 Promoting  affordable innovation in key social sectors; 
 Higher focus on start ups & small and medium enterprises(SMEs);  
 Contributing  through partners for capability enhancement; 
 Encouraging diffusion of innovation through partners; 
 Enabling commercialization of discovery; and 
 Ensuring  global competitiveness of  indian enterprises.  
9.3 The Committee is happy at the declar ation of 2010-20 as the ‘Decade of 
Innovation’, and hopes that it would help create an environment in all the research 
institutions for fostering innovation. The Committee is pleased to  note that BIRAC 
since its formation in  March, 2012 has, th rough its various schemes been able to 
support 15 startups and 60 Small and Med ium Enterprises. The Committee hopes 
that BIRAC would speed up its efforts to support more and more, small and 
medium enterprises to become globally competitive. 
10. HUMAN  RESOURCE  DEVELOPMENT 
10.1 Informing the Committee of the specific areas/projects/programmes to be taken 
up in the year 2013-2014, the Department gave the following scheme-wise details:  
 Ongoing programmes would be  continued in the 12
th Plan and a three year 
M.Sc./MBA dual degree programme in Biotechnology and Bio-enterprise 
Management (including subjects such as Agri business management and Pharma 
business management) and the Biotech E ducation and Skill Development Council 
would be started;   
 Financial assistance would be provided to wards organizing Conference/ Seminar/ 
Symposium/ Workshop; travel support to  the researchers for presenting their 
papers in international c onferences; organizing DBT stalls in Exhibitions and 
printing of bi-monthly newsletter will be continued;  and 
 Support to ongoing 147 Ramalingaswami Fellows will be continued with 
additional selection of about 50 fellowships in the year.  
10.2 The Committee observed that the allocation for ‘Human Resources Development’ 
had been decreased from Rs. 75.00 crores at B. E. to Rs. 67.00 crores at R.E. in the year 
2012-13, while in the year 2013-2 014 it had been increased to  Rs. 85.00 crores at the 
B.E. stage. The Department stated that the decrease at R.E. stage to Rs. 67.00 crores from 
the B.E. allocation of Rs. 75.00 crores du ring 2012-2013 was due to the overall cut 
effected at the R.E. stage by Department of Expenditure, due to resource crunch.   
10.3 Informing the Committee of the Star Colle ge Scheme, the Department stated that 
the scheme was initiated in 2008 to nurture ex cellence at undergraduate level for holistic 
development of colleges. The emphasis of the scheme was on improving knowledge and 
skills of teachers, providing access to specialized infrastructure and consumables to 
improve hands on training and i ndustrial exposure as well as i ndividual research projects 

for undergraduate students. So far 88 colleges had been supported covering 20 states and 
one union territory. The progress made in the supported colleges have indicated positive 
impact of Star college scheme, which was evident from increased number of students 
opting for life science courses, increased passed percentage and enhanced enrolment of 
students for higher studies in sciences course s. Besides, several teaching kits, practical 
manuals, e-lab contents etc. have also been developed by teachers and students under this 
scheme. 
10.4 As regards the development of skilled manpower for Biotech industries in the 
country, the Department stated  that it had been implem enting the Biotech Industry 
Training Programme (BITP) since 11
th Plan, for providing practical industrial training for 
six months to fresh B.E./B.Tech./M.Sc./M.Te ch. students in biotechnology to improve 
their employment prospects.  About 3000 candidates had been  provided training in 
biotech industries and 30% of them had b een absorbed in industry. Considering the 
success of the programme, it would be contin ued by increasing number of intake from 
year to year during 12th Plan.   
10.5 The Committee is of the opinion that the development of skilled and quality 
human resource to cater to the rising needs of the biotech industry, which has 
grown many folds over the last few years, is a major challenge for the country. The 
Committee commends the human resou rce development initiatives of the 
Department, such as the initiation of the three year M.Sc./MBA dual degree 
programme in Biotechnology and Bio-en terprise Management, the Biotech 
Education and Skill Development Council and its ‘Star College Scheme’etc.  The 
Committee is further happy to note that th e Star College Scheme of the Department 
has led to increase in the number of students opting for life science courses, 
increased passed percentage and enhanced en rolment of students for higher studies 
in science courses and all candidates traine d by it in Biotech Industries have been 
absorbed  in the industry.  The Committee recommends that the Department should 
be provided adequate funds by the Government for its Human Resources 
Development Programme.  
11. PUBLICATIONS OF THE DEPARTMENT 
11.1 The Committee notes with happiness th at gross budgetary support for the science 
and technology sector had significantly increased during the last decade and the impact of 
such increase was becoming evident from the fact that India ranks 9
th globally in the 
number of scientific publications and 12th in the number of patents filed.  The Composite 
Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of In dian publications is around 12+ 1% and India’s global 
share has increased from 1.8% in 2001 to 3.5%  in 2011. But the percentage of Indian 
publications in the top 1% impact maki ng journals is only 2.5%.  The Science, 
Technology and Innovation Policy, 2013, also envisages that by 2020, the global share of 
publications must double and the number of papers in the top 1% journals must quadruple 
from the current levels.  The citation impact  of Indian publications must improve and 
match at least the world average.  Initiatives under the new policy should enable these 
macro indicators of research to be achieved by 2020. 
11.2 The Department, during the delibe rations of the Committee held on 3
rd April, 
2013, informed in reply to a query, that  during the year 2012-13, a total of 1467 
publications were brought out by the Departme nt. Out of these 363 publications had an 
impact factor above 5, while 1104 publica tions had an impact factor below 5. The 
Committee was also informed that in case the impact factor is more than five, then the 
publication is considered as a major journal publications. 

11.3 The Committee notes the number of research publications of the Department 
and hopes that in consonance with the Sc ience, Technology and Innovation Policy, 
2013, the Department would gear its efforts towards doubling the global share of its 
publications and quadrupling the existing number of its papers in the top 1% 
journals by 2020.   
12. BIOTECHNOLOGY FOR SOCIETAL DEVELOPMENT 
12.1 The main objectives of the program me were to promote the use of 
biotechnological processes and tools for the benefit of entrepreneurs and to create 
platform for employment generation among the target population and diffusion of proven 
and field-tested technologies  through demonstration, trai ning and extension activities. 
The main areas of focus were biof ertilizer production, vermicomposting, honey 
production, poultry, fish producti on, artificial insemination, mushroom cultivation, goat 
rearing, silk worm rearing, fruit plant nurse ries, ambulatory clinic s, sericulture and 
women health care. Till now, about 45,000 rura l, SC/ST and women population had been 
benefited through implementation of these programmes. Some of the successful examples 
of innovative societal programme include th e running of mobile am bulatory clinics for 
the farmers, low cost poly house construction for rais ing nursery-planting material for 
cultivation of medicinal and aromatic plants etc.  
12.2 As regards the Budgetary allocati on for the ‘Biotechnology for Societal 
Development’, the Committee observed that  an amount of Rs. 13.00 crores and Rs.10.15 
crores was allocated at B.E. & R.E. stages in the year 2012-13 and the allocation had 
been raised to Rs.12.00 crores in B.E. 2013-14 as compared to R.E. 2012-13. Explaining 
the reasons for the increase, the Department stated that the projects under the scheme 
were supported based on competitive grant system and the allocations fluctuate from year 
to year based on trends of expenditure and the number of applica tions received. These 
interventions were mainly on proven and fi eld tested technologies related to agro-
technologies, animal husbandry, etc. The De partment is implementing these projects 
through-out the country for socio-economic upl iftment of the SC/ST, Rural and Women 
population including backward community th rough competitive research grant scheme 
and the support was provided to various Govt . Institutes/ Universities, Krishi Vigyan 
Kendra (KVKs) and also to the Non-Govt. Organizations in various states of the country 
including North-eastern st ates and J&K region. Programmes supported for socio-
economic upliftment of the SC/ST, Rural and Women population including backward 
ones had received appreciation from all quarter s. Besides, an expert committee had been 
formed, consisting of a special group of experts working at the interface between 
technology and society were carefully chosen which annually evaluates these 
programmes and suggests new programmes.   
12.3 The Committee appreciates the programme initiated by the Department to 
promote the use of biotechnological pr ocesses and tools for the benefit of 
entrepreneurs and to create a platform for employment generation among the 
target population and diffusion of proven and field-tested technologies through 
demonstration, training and extension acti vities.  The Committee also notes with 
appreciation that the successful  examples of the programme inter-alia includes the 
running of mobile ambulatory clinics for the farmers, low cost poly house 
construction for raising nursery-planting material for cultivation of medicinal and 
aromatic plants etc. The Committee, however, would like the Department to develop 
a mechanism to actually assess as to what extent the programme has actually helped 
‘benefitted persons’ to get gainfully employed or become entrepreneurs. 

13. INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION 
13.1 The Committee was informed that the br oad areas of collaboration would include 
human resource development,  agriculture & food, medical & healthcare, molecular 
biology, bioinformatics & computational biolog y besides industrial collaborations. The 
Department was presently implementing bila teral/multilateral collaborations with 
developed countries such as Australia, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Netherlands, 
Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United State of America, Europe 
etc. and there are a total of 180 ongoing prog rammes. The advantages of the programme 
include scientific exchanges with advanced countries, more  than 400 joint research 
publications, 27 patents, development of 4 software & 6 technologi es and 5 technology 
transfers to Indian industries.  
13.2 ‘International Cooperation’ had been  allocated a budget of Rs. 39.40 crores at                
R.E. stage in 2012-13, which had been increased to Rs. 50.00 crores at B.E. 2013-14. The 
Department explained that the allocation ha s been increased to meet the commitments 
during the year 2013-2014, which include seve ral new initiatives su ch as the Indo-UK 
collaboration in Animal Biotechnology;  DBT - Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation 
(BMGF) Memorandum of Understanding on hea lth, food and nutritional security needs 
of India & developing countri es and new phase of Indo-Sw iss collaboration in food 
security and climate change related to Indian agriculture.  
13.3 In reply to a clarification sought by the Committee, the Department stated that in 
the field of International Cooperation, the Indo-Swiss programme is an ongoing 
programme since 1998 under the agreement betw een Indian and Swiss Governments for 
implementing joint projects in agriculture a nd environment relevant to Indian conditions. 
The programme was implemented in phases of three years each in a network mode along 
the value chain from basic research to product development a nd technology transfer. 
Products have been developed and transferre d to industry, in three phases from 1998, 
through continued support viz. in sect resistant chickpea; bio-fertilizer for rice and wheat; 
bio-pesticide for legume pests and biosenso r for pesticide residue  detection. These 
products are being pursued fo r regulatory clearances and commercialization through PPP 
mode, it was decided jointly to launch new programme a nd therefore the Indo-Swiss 
programme was relaunched. The call for proposals had been advertised and the new 
phase will be launched based on peer review and relevance to the objectives during 2013-
2014.    
13.4 The Committee is pleased to know that ma ny useful products such as insect 
resistant chickpea; bio-fertilizer for rice and wheat; bio-pesticide for legume pests 
and biosensor for pesticide residue detectio n, have been developed as a result of 
Indo-Swiss programme and these products are being pursued for regulatory 
clearances and commercialisation usin g PPP mode.  The Committee recommends 
that the Department should focus more on  international collaboration that would 
bring direct benefit to the country particular ly those that would lead to technology 
transfer to Indian industries.  
14. PROGRAMME FOR PROMOTION OF EXCELLENCE & INNOVATION 
14.1 The Programme for Promotion for Excelle nce & Innovation consists of two major 
heads viz. Centres of Excellence and set ting up of Translational Research Centres 
andPlatforms. The Committee was informed that  the Department proposes to continue its 
ongoing 15 Centres of Excellence, 49 Pr ogramme Support and 13 individual R&D 
Projects during the 12
th Plan, keeping in view the excel lent output from the programme. 
In the year 2013-14, five new Centres of Ex cellence for translational science and high-

level innovative research in the areas su ch as system biology, synthetic biology, 
genomics, RNA biology, proteomics, metabolomic s, clinical neurosciences etc. were 
proposed to be established. Besides, the Department proposes to setup over 5 Technology 
Transfer Organizations (TTO ) spread across the country with ten professionals per 
institution to support IPR cells and resource pe rsons in various universities and 
institutions. 
14.2 The Committee observed that the allo cation for ‘Programme for promotion of 
Excellence & Innovation’ was decreased margin ally from Rs. 55.00 crores at B.E. stage 
to Rs. 53.00 crores at R.E. stage in the year 2012-13, however, in B.E. 2013-14 allocation 
has been increased substantially to Rs. 65.00 crores. Informing the Committee of the 
reasons for the increase in B.E. 2013-14 a llocation, the Department  stated that the 
programme for promotion of excellence & inno vations includes new initiatives such as 
establishment of atleast 20 inter-institutional centres and partnerships centres proposed 
during the 12
th Plan. While one such programme in pa rtnership with Indi an Institute of 
Science in modern biology had been sanctioned in 2012-2013, three more programmes in 
chemical biology, drug design etc. had been developed and were being implemented in 
2013-2014 and accordingly, increased provision  had been made during 2013-2014 for 
these commitments.   
14.3 The Committee takes note of the proposal of the Department to set up  five 
new Centres of Excellence fo r translational science and high-level innovative 
research in the cutting edge areas of biotechnology as also the proposal to setup over 
five Technology Transfer Organizations  (TTO) spread across the country for 
supporting IPR cells. The Committee is awa re of the urgent need for augmenting 
and strengthening of the basic and transl ational research capacity in areas of 
biotechnology and therefore the initiatives taken by the Department in this direction 
are welcome.  The Committee, however, woul d like to caution th e Department that 
its Centre of Excellence  should be manne d by deserving & capable professionals, 
appointed solely on merit, so that high level innovative research could be carried out 
in these centres and purpose of establishing these centres could be achieved.  
15. SMALL BUSINESS INNOVATION RE SEARCH INITIATIVE (SBIRI) 
AND BIOTECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY PARTNERSHIP PROGRAMME (BIPP)-
PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP 
15.1 The Public Private Partnership Programm e of the Department consists of two 
components viz. Small Business Innovation Research Initiative (SBIRI) and 
Biotechnology Industry Partnership Programme (BIPP) schemes. SBIRI is the pioneering 
programme of the department that supports  R&D, process and product development in 
the biotech industry. The Department had so  far received more than 900 proposals and 
had sanctioned 105 projects under the sche me. Around 540 industr ies throughout the 
country had approached the De partment seeking support under  the scheme and presently 
82 projects were in operation. Under thes e programmes, 20 technologies had been 
developed and 6 of them had been comm ercialized. Similarly, the Biotechnology 
Industry Partnership Programme(BIPP) for high risk innovation research had been funded 
in partnership with the industry since 2010-2011. So far 102 projects have been approved 
and agreements signed with 85 companies with a commitment of Rs.777.00 crores, out of 
which the Department’s contribution under BIPP was Rs. 288.00 crores only, whereas the 
contribution of the private sector companies was Rs. 489.00 crores. Therefore, the private 
sector contribution is nearly 60% as compared to 40% by the Government.  

15.2 The Committee also noted that the alloca tion for ‘Public Privat e Partnership’ had 
shown a decreasing trend. The B.E. allocation of Rs. 139.00 cr ores was reduced to Rs. 
106.75 crores at R.E. stage in the year 2012-13 and at the B.E. stage of 2013-14 it has 
been further reduced to Rs.90.00 crores. Explaining the reasons for the decreasing trend, 
the Department stated that the decrease in allocation was due to th e decreasing trend of 
expenditure and availability of techno-eco nomically viable projects. Further, the 
Department stated that the biotech industry was at a nascent stage at the beginning of 11
th 
Plan and the size of the industry was relativ ely small with about 300 Small and Medium 
Enterprises (SMEs) and 25 major Indian comp anies who were eligible for funding. In 
order to increase the number of industries a nd accelerate the private sector R&D, several 
steps have been taken by the department viz. (i) road shows (ii) launching of ignition 
funds scheme from 2012-2013 for new star t-up companies (iii) establishment of 
incubators for providing common facilitie s to the start-up companies and (iv) 
establishment of Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC).  
15.3 The Committee commends the Departme nt on very encouraging results 
achieved from its SBIRI and BIPP progra mmes.  The Committee is pleased to note 
that SBIRI programmes have led to develo pment of 20 technologies out of which 6 
had already been commercialised. The success and popularity of BIPP programme 
in evident from the fact that 60% of  costs of projects undertaken under the 
programme have been funded by private sector.  The Committe e recommends that 
Department should take large number of projects under these programme so that a 
large base of biotech industries is estab lished in the country and greater private 
sectors investment flows in R&D in Biotechnology, apart from substantially 
increasing India’s share in global trade in biotechnology.  
16. PROJECTS/SCHEMES FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE NORTH–EASTERN 
AREAS & SIKKIM 
16.1 The Department informed that it had been  mandatorily allocating 10% of its total  
Budgetary outlay since the year 2007-2008, for the projects/schemes specifically 
designed for the benefit of the North-East ern region and Sikkim, for Human Resource 
Development, Biotechnology infrastructure and Research & Development in priority 
areas of North East in collaboration and part nership with other public  sector institutions 
& universities and even the private sector. 
16.2 The Committee noted that in the year 2012-13, the Department was allocated a 
Plan allocation of Rs. 148.50 crores in B.E., which was later reduced to Rs. 130.00 crores 
at the  R.E. stage. For the current fiscal 2013-14, the same amount i.e. Rs. 148.5 crores at 
B.E. stage had again been allocated and hence there was no change in the allocation to 
North East areas & Sikkim in 2013-2014 as compared to 2012-2013. In reply to a query 
regarding the adequacy of the funds allo cated, the Department explained that the 
allocations for the projects/schemes of the North Eastern region and Sikkim in HRD, 
bioinformatics, R&D and other schemes are made on the basis of actual assessment of the 
absorption capacity of these schemes. Th e North Eastern Region-Biotechnology 
Programme Management Cell (NER-BPMC) wh ich was established by the Department, 
in the year 2009 for evolving and implemen ting various programmes in the area of 
biotechnology for the benefit of North Ea stern Region, also suggests budgetary 
requirements based on continuous assessment. The Department added that as per the 
demands made by the NER-BPMC, the funds allocated were suffi cient to meet the 
requirements of the various projects/schemes specifically for the benefit of the North-
Eastern region and Sikkim.  

16.3 The Committee also noted that as per the Budget Circular 2013-14, issued by the 
Ministry of Finance(Departme nt of Economic Affairs), ou t of the three constituent 
Departments of the Ministry of Scien ce & Technology, only the Department of 
Biotechnology had been given the responsibil ity of spending 10% of its Annual Budget 
in the North Eastern Region, while the Departme nts of Scientific & Industrial Research 
and Science & Technology had been specifically exempted from spending the said 
amount, by the Ministry of Development of the North Eastern Region. 
16.4 The Committee notes that the Department has been mandatorily allocating 
10% of its total Budgetary outlay since the year 2007-2008, for the projects/schemes 
specifically designed for the benefit of the North-Eastern region and Sikkim, for 
Human Resource Development, Biotechnology infrastructure and Research & 
Development in priority areas of North Ea st in collaboration and partnership with 
other public sector institutions & univers ities and even the private sector.  The 
Committee recommends that the Department should carry out a study to assess to 
what extent its programmes in North-Eastern states  and Sikkim have been able to 
achieve their objectives and goals so that based on the results of this study, if 
needed, programmes could be further d ovetailed to the specific needs and 
requirements of the region and made more useful and effective.    
16.5 The Committee also pointed out in its 228
th Report that keeping in view the good 
performance of the programme in North-Ea st and Sikkim, the Department should not 
only continue its mandatory al location of 10% for this sect or but also to the extent 
possible, the budgetary allocation should be leveraged to  bring in more funds for the 
North-Eastern     states through PPP mode . The Committee further recommended in the 
said report that the Department should e xplore the possibility of earmarking some 
percentage of mandatory allocation to othe r backward regions including the Himalayan 
sector.  
16.6      In 238th Action Take n Report, the Department rep lied in response to aforesaid 
recommendation of the Committee that seve ral steps had been taken to implement 
industry oriented development programmes to promote Public Privat e Partnership in the 
North East. For this purpose, the active i nvolvement of ICAR, CSIR and DST and S&T 
Council had taken place for implementation of the industry-orie nted programme. In 
response to the Committee’s recommendation for earmarking certain percentage of 
mandatory allocation to other backward regions including Himalayan sector, the 
Department mentioned that a Committee had been constituted to work out the strategy for 
earmarking a certain percentage of funds for implementation during 2013-14.  
16.7 The Department further added that th e issue was being examined by subject 
specific Task Force Committees, instead of a single Committee due to the multi-
disciplinary aspect of the biotechnology. Based on the experience of implementing such 
provision and programmes in the North Easter n region on a mandatory basis, it had been 
observed by the Department that to en sure capacity building in Human Resource 
Development and Research & Developmen t, the projects received from the 
biotechnology-deficient universi ties/institutions across the country should be treated as 
“capacity building projects” and reviewed & funded separately from that of high capacity 
universities/institutions so as to ensure in clusiveness in terms of  overall development of 
life science and biotechnology capacity in  the country. Accordingly, in 2012-2013 
several projects have been funded in universities in biotechnology deficient states such as 
Bihar, Chattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh fo r overall developmen t of life sciences 

department in these universities. In 2013-2014, the strategy would be implemented across 
all the schemes under the Department.   
16.8 In the meeting of the Committee held on the 3rd April, 2013, the Department also 
pointed out that the le sson of rapid capacity building in a scientifically backward region, 
learnt through its experience in the North Ea stern region can be utilised in the other 
backward regions as well. The Department al so suggested that inst ead of allocating a 
fixed percentage of the total outlay for the North- Eastern region every year; the 
programme can be made more goal oriente d. In the goal dependent orientation, the 
emphasis would be on achievi ng the targeted goals with in a fixed period and the 
budgetary allocation may vary accordingly every year depending on the requirement.  
16.9 The Committee appreciates the action  taken by the Department on its 
aforesaid recommendation.  The Committee is happy that the Department is making 
sincere efforts to implemen t industry oriented developm ent programmes in Public 
Private Partnership mode in North East a nd hopes this would help in growth of 
Biotech industries in North East and help in development of this region.  The  
Committee is also happy to note that in 2012-2013 several projects have been funded 
in universities in biotechnology deficient states such as Bihar, Chattisgarh and 
Madhya Pradesh for overall development of  life sciences de partment in these 
universities.  The Committee  recommends th at it should also implement industry 
oriented development in Public Privat e Partnership mode in other backward 
regions of the country including Himalaya n region to help growth of Biotech 
industries in these regions as well. The Committee further recommends that in 
order to assess the potency and utility of its training programmes, the Department 
should develop a mechanis m to find out as to what extent these training 
programmes have actually resulted in trained persons becoming gainfully employed 
or becoming entrepreneurs because that alone will demonstrate the usefulness of 
these programmes. 
17. BIO-SECURITY AND BIO-TERRORISM 
17.1 During the deliberations of the Committee, held on the 3
rd April, 2013, the issues 
relating to the Bio-security and Bio-terrorism were also discussed. The Department stated 
that earlier there was no database on the work done in the country on biotechnology 
relating to release of dangerous bio-organism s from laboratories, but the same is being 
created now. The Department further inform ed that in this connection, Bio-safety 
Laboratories (BSL) had been created which we re highly secured. It  was also informed 
that a Memorandum of Understanding had been signed with the Defence Research and 
Development Organisation. The Department al so emphasised the need  for international 
collaboration in this field.  
17.2 The Committee is happy to note that th e Department has become sufficiently 
sensitized of the risk of bio-terrorism  and has initiated steps to deal with it. The 
Committee is also pleased to know of th e setting up of Bio-safety Laboratories, 
which are highly secured. The Committee ho pes that further necessary measures in 
this respect would be taken by the Government at the earliest.    
18. The Committee after examining the var ious aspects of the Demands for 
Grants (2013-14) of the De partment of Bio-Technology, is of the view that the 
Department, through its various schemes and programmes, apart from promoting 
research & development in biotechnology, has demonstrated the ability to use this 
technology for societal benefit. Some of th e initiatives of the Departments discussed 
above are commendable and if properly implemented will bring immense benefits to 

the targeted groups.  The Committee, while ta king note of it, is of the opinion that 
programmes of the Department deserve to be adequately funded by the 
Government.  