PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 193
ND  
(PRESENTED TO HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON THE 22 SEPTEMBER, 2008)
ND  
(FORWARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON THE 22 SEPTEMBER, 2008)
ND  
(PRESENTED TO HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON THE 22 SEPTEMBER, 2008)
ND  
(FORWARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON THE 22 SEPTEMBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON SCIENCE  AND TECHNOLOGY , 
ENVIRONMENT  AND FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY THIRD REPORT
ON
GLOBAL WARMING AND ITS IMPACT ON INDIA
ST  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 21 OCTOBER, 2008)
ST  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 21 OCTOBER, 2008)
ST  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 21 OCTOBER, 2008)
ST  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 21 OCTOBER, 2008)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY THIRD REPORT
ON
GLOBAL WARMING AND ITS IMPACT ON INDIA
(PRESENTED TO HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON THE 22 ND SEPTEMBER, 2008)
(FORW ARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON THE 22 ND SEPTEMBER, 2008)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 21 ST OCTOBER, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 21 ST OCTOBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—10
4C OMMITTEE ’S O BSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................. 1 1—16
5. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 17—20
6. M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ................................................................ 21—36

MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2007-08)
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Prabha Thakur
3. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
4. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
5. Shri Kamal Akhtar
6. Shri Saman Pathak
7. Shri Jabir Husain
8. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
9. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
*10. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
12. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
13. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
14. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
15. Shri Francis Fanthome
16. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
17. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
18. Shri Brahmananda Panda
19. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
20. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
21. Shri Pratik P. Patil
22. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
23. Shri K.C. Singh ‘‘Baba’’
24. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
25. Shri Rakesh Singh
26. Shri Rampal Singh
27. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
28. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
29. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
30. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
31. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
*Nominated w.e.f. 28th August, 2007.
(i)

MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2008-09)
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
4. Shri Kamal Akhtar
5. Shri Saman Pathak
6. Dr. Ejaz Ali
7. Shri Jabir Husain
8. Shri D. Raja
9. Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
12. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
13. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
14. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
15. Shri Akbar Ahmad Dumpy
16. Shri Francis Fanthome
17. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
18. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
19. Shri Brahmananda Panda
20. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
21. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
22. Shri Pratik P. Patil
23. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
24. Shri K.C. Singh ‘‘Baba’’
25. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
26. Dr. Rampal Singh
27. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
28. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
29. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
30. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
31. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorized by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred Ninety-third Report on the Global Warming and its
Impact on India.
2. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests in its meeting held on 20th August, 2007, decided to take up for
examination the aspects relating to Global Warming and its Impact on India and report thereon. In
this regard the Committee heard the views of the Secretaries of Ministries of Environment and
Forests, Earth Sciences and Department of Science and Technology, the representative of The
Energy Research Institute (TERI) and Principal Scientific Advisor to the Government of India. In
addition, the Committee also heard the views of some experts. A list showing the details of the
representatives of various Ministries/Department, experts who appeared before the Committee for
oral evidence is given in Annexure.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests, Earth Sciences and Department of Science and Technology and experts, who appeared
before the Committee, for replying to the clarifications sought by the Members and placing before
it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinize the same.
4. In the meeting held on 29th August, 2008 the Committee considered the draft report and
adopted the same.
DR. V . MAITREYAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
August 29, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.

1
REPORT
1. Introduction
1.1 Climate is often described as the synthesis of weather recorded over a long period of time.
It is defined in terms of long-term averages and other statistics of weather conditions, including
the frequencies of extreme events. Just as weather pattern changes from day to day, the climate
changes too, over a longer period involving years, decades and centuries to millennia, and on the
longer time-scales corresponding to the geological history of the earth. Climate change refers to
long term changes in climate including average temperature, precipitation. Climate change may
result from natural factors, such as changes in the sun’s intensity or slow changes in the earth’s
orbit around the sun, natural processes within the climate system like changes in ocean circulation.
It may also be brought about by human activities that change the atmosphere composition through
burning of fossil fuels, deforestation, urbanization, desertification, etc. The green house gas effect
plays an important role in regulating the climate of the earth.
1.2 Global warming is an average increase in the temperature of the atmosphere near the Earth’s
surface and in the troposphere (the lowest major atmospheric layer, where all of earth’s weather
occurs), which can contribute to changes in global climate patterns. Global warming can occur due
to a variety of causes, both natural and human induced. It often refers to the warming that can
occur as a result of increased emissions of Green House Gases from human activities. The term
global warming is often used interchangeably with the term climate change, but ‘climate change’
is growing in preferred use to ‘global warming’ because it helps convey that there are other
changes in addition to rising temperature.
1.3 The changes taking place in atmosphere are emerging out to be one of the serious threats
the world faces today. Manifestations of adverse climate change due to anthropogenic (manmade)
interference are now visible and might result in irreversible adverse impacts in a few decades.
Human activities have the potential to disturb the balance of natural systems and cause warming
of the planet to an unprecedented extent. Some of the activities that have dramatically increased
green house gas emissions are burning of fossil fuels, industrial practices, growing population, land
use changes due to urbanization, deforestation, etc. These activities have increased emissions to the
extent that it far exceeds the ability of natural systems to assimilate these gases. Of all the gases,
carbon dioxide is the main contributor, being released in great volume since the industrial
revolution. As a result climate change has started endangering biodiversity, human health, food,
fresh water supplies, coastal and low lying system, impacting people worldwide, especially in
developing countries like ours due to low adaptive capacities.
2. Green House Gas Effect
2.1 The ‘green house gas effect’ refers to trapping of the radiation emitted by the earth by its
atmosphere in rough analogy to the trapping of heat by the glass enclosure of a green house used
to keep plants in a warmer environment. This effect which keeps the earth warm is necessary for
life, without which the mean temperature of the earth would be about 18°C instead of its present
14°C. Water vapour is the most important Green House Gas followed by Carbon dioxide (CO
2),
Methane (CH 4) and other trace gases. Green House Gases (GHG) are transparent to visible radiation
(received from the Sun), but absorb some of the outgoing heat (or infrared) radiation. Therefore,
higher concentrations of these gases in the atmosphere cause an increase of the temperature around
earth and lead to warming. Human activities have been increasing the concentration of GHG in the
atmosphere, mostly carbon dioxide (from combustion of coal, oil etc.) and a few other trace gases.

2
2.2 Over the last several hundred thousand years there is convincing evidence that the
fluctuations of the average temperature around the earth have happened closely with the
fluctuations of the concentrations of gases like carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide. When
these concentrations are high, so is the average temperature. It is the Green House Gas Effect of
gases contained in the atmosphere that influenced the gradual increase of average temperature
around the planet. Therefore, it is extremely critical that the concentrations of GHG around the
earth remained constant and the average temperature of earth does not change.
3. Causes of Global Warming : Natural Vs Human-induced
3.1 Changes in the global climate can be either natural or man made. Changes in solar output
or in earth orbital characteristics are the known natural causes of climate change. However, global
warming due to increasing concentrations of GHG mainly constitutes the anthropogenic climate
change.
3.2 There are several geothermal and geological events which could alter the concentrations of
GHG through episodic events such as eruptions of volcanoes and earthquakes. Sea being a large
deposit of carbon dioxide and methane, any discharge of a bolides (which is a deposit of calcium
carbonate derived mass) or gas-hydrate (which is a methane derived deposit) could lead to
discharge and release of high concentrations of GHG into the atmosphere. These could be
attributed to natural causes over which mankind have no control.
4. Possible Global Impacts of Climate Change on account of Global Warming
4.1 V arious consequences of global warming have been analyzed by many groups.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is the main agency which makes quantitative
projections of consequences. It has been assessed that the consequences of Global Warming would
be both negative and positive, although they will be more negative and less positive. Whereas cooler
regions of the world may benefit from global warming, fertile areas of the world would be
seriously affected. Desertification of grain growing areas is forecasted. Sea level rise will seriously
impair living circumstances in nations like Bangladesh, Netherlands and other coastal populations.
4.2 According to the IPCC the enhanced green house effect will result in additional warming
of the Earth’s surface. The Fourth Assessment Report of 2007 of the Working Group III of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change states that global GHG emissions have grown since
pre-industrial times, with an increase of 70 per cent between 1970 and 2004. The largest growth
in global GHG emissions during this period has come from the energy supply sector (an increase
of 145 per cent). The growth in direct emissions from transport had been 120 per cent, industry
65 per cent and land use, land use change, and forestry 40 per cent.
4.3 Global warming may have a devastating impact on the climate of the earth. It is very likely
that climate change can slow down the pace of progress towards sustainable development either
directly through increased exposure to adverse impact or indirectly through erosion of the capacity
to adapt. There would be enlargement and increased number of glacial lakes and increasing ground
instability in permafrost regions and rock avalanches in mountain regions. Effects of temperature
increase have also been documented in some aspects of human health, such as heat-related
mortality in Europe, infectious disease vectors in some areas, and allergenic pollen in Northern
Hemisphere high and mid-latitudes. Settlements in the mountain regions are at enhanced risk to
glacier lake outburst floods caused by the melting glaciers. Sea-level rise and human development
are together contributing to losses of coastal wetlands and mangroves and increasing damage from
coastal flooding in many areas. Increases in the frequency of droughts and floods are projected
to affect local production negatively, especially in subsistence sectors at low latitudes. Coasts are
projected to be exposed to increasing risks, including coastal erosion, due to climate change and

3
sea-level rise and the effect will be exacerbated by increasing human-induced pressures on coastal
areas. The Report projected that climate change-related exposures are likely to affect the health
status of millions of people, particularly those with low adaptive capacity, through:
• Increases in malnutrition and consequent disorders, with implications for child growth
and development; and
• Increased deaths, disease and injury due to heat waves, floods, storms, fires and
droughts.
5. Impact of Climate Change on Asian Region
5.1 Glacier melt in the Himalayas is projected to increase flooding, rock avalanches from
destabilized slopes and to affect water resources within the next two to three decades. This will be
followed by decreased river flows as the glaciers recede. Fresh water availability in Central, South,
East and Southeast Asia, particularly in large river basins, is projected to decrease due to climate
change which, along with population growth and increasing demand arising from higher standards of
living, could adversely affect more than a billion people by the 2050s. Coastal areas, especially
heavily-populated mega-delta regions in South, East and Southeast Asia, will be at a greater risk due
to increased flooding from the sea and, in some mega-deltas flooding from the rivers. Climate change
is projected to impinge on sustainable development of most developing countries of Asia as it
compounds the pressures on natural resources and the envirornment associated with rapid
urbanisation, industrialisation, and economic, development. It is projected that crop yields could
increase up to 20 per cent in East and Southeast Asia while it could decrease up to 30 per cent in
Central and South Asia by the mid-21st Century. Taken together and considering the influence of
rapid population growth and urbanisation, the risk of hunger is projected to remain very high in
several developing countries. The Report predicts an adverse impact of climate change on human
health as endemic morbidity and mortality due to diarrhoeal disease primarily associated with floods
and droughts are expected to rise in East, South and Southeast Asia due to projected changes in
hydrological cycle associated with global warming. Increases in coastal water temperature would
exacerbate the abundance and/or toxicity of cholera in South Asia.
6. Impact on India
6.1 Impact on Coastal Areas
6.1.1 India is also estimated to suffer huge losses due to the impact of global warming and
climate change. Any sharp rise in sea level could have a considerable impact on India. India figures
among the 27 countries identified by the United Nations Envirornnent Programme that are most
vulnerable to a sea level rise. The mega cities of Mumbai and Chennai with large and growing
populations and huge investments in infrastructure are located on the coast. Low-level areas, such
as those in Orissa and West Bengal, could be vulnerable to inundation. Simulations with climate
models as well as observational data have indicated that droughts and spells of excessive rain like
the deluge that struck Mumbai in 2005 are likely to become more frequent in India with the
warming of the world.
6.1.2 In such a scenario major populations are likely to move from these coastal mega cities to
other large urban settlements. This would lead to the already burdened cities such as Delhi,
Bangalore, Ahmedabad, Pune and Hyderabad be prepared to accommodate enormous numbers of
migrants from the coasts.
6.1.3 The Committee was informed by the Secretary, Ministry of Earth Sciences that Ocean plays
an important role both in weather as well as climate and carbon dioxide absorption, which absorbs

4
more than ninety per cent of overall carbon dioxide. A small variable rise in temperature can reduce
the ocean’s absorption capability. In such scenario, it can play much larger havoc than manmade
changes.
6.2 Impact on Water Resources
6.2.1 Glaciers in the Himalayas feed important rivers such as the Ganga, the Indus and the
Brahmaputra that provide water for millions of people as well as for irrigation and industry. The
accelerated melting which these glaciers are experiencing as a result of the earth’s warming will
have a profound effect on future water availability. The Gangotri glacier, one of the largest in the
Himalayas, has been retreating since long and more rapidly in recent decades. As the glaciers
retreat, they become more fragmented and the smaller glaciers are more sensitive to global
warming.
6.3 Impact on Agriculture
6.3.1 The Committee was informed that projected impact of climate change on Indian agriculture
will be very disturbing. Productivity of most of cereals would decrease due to increase in
temperature and decrease in water availability, especially in Indo-Gangetic plains. Increased climate
extremes – droughts and floods are likely to increase production variability. There will be
considerable effect on microbes, pathogens and insects. There would be imbalance in food trade
due to possible positive impacts on Europe and North America and negative impacts on us. It was
further informed that some adaptation programmes are already in existence and they are crop
improvement, development of arid-land crops, pest management, crop insurance schemes,
afforestation programmes to increase forest cover, rain water harvesting and restoration of old
water tanks, etc.
6.4 Impact on Health
6.4.1 Predicted impact on human health due to climate change includes increase in temperature
related illness, vector borne diseases, health impacts related to extreme weather events, and health
effects due to food insecurity. The poor, as well as the elderly, children, and the disabled are likely
to be most vulnerable to these changes, as they already face limited access to health facilities.
Among vector-borne diseases in India, malaria is of considerable concern. Climate change could
also increase the incidence of malaria in areas that are already malaria-prone, and could introduce
malaria in new areas. These changes will require more emphasis to be placed on planning for health
facilities, as well as increased capacity of the medical community to cope with these changes.
7. Observed Changes in Climate and Weather Events in India
(i) Although, the monsoon rainfall at All India level does not show any trend but there are some
regional patterns. Areas of increasing trend in monsoon rainfall are found along the west
coast, north Andhra Pradesh and north-west India, and those of decreasing trend over
east Madhya Pradesh and adjoining areas, north-east India and parts of Gujarat and Kerala
(-6 to -8 % of normal over 100 years).
(ii) Mean annual surface air temperatures show a significant warming of about 0.5 °C /100
years during the last century and recent data indicates a substantial acceleration of this
warming after the 1990s. This is comparable to the global warming trends reported.
(iii) The spatial distribution of temperature changes indicates a significant warming trend along
the west coast, central India, and interior Peninsula and over northeast India. However,
cooling trend has been observed in northwest and some parts in southern India.

5
(iv) The year 2006 was the warmest year on record since 1901. The ten warmest years on
record are 2006(0.595), 2002(0.59), 1998(0.50), 2004 and 2001 (0.47), 2003(0.45),
1958(0.43), 1987 and 1941 (0.41), 2005(0.40), 1999(0.39), 1953 and 2000(0.36) and
1980(0.34). Since 1993, annual mean temperature has been consistently above normal.
(v) Instrumental records over the past 130 years do not show any significant long-term trend
in the frequencies of large-scale droughts or floods in the summer monsoon season.
(vi) The total frequency of cyclonic storms that form over Bay of Bengal has remained almost
constant over the period 1887-1997.
(vii) Analysis of past tide gauge records for the Indian coastline regions gives an estimate of sea
level rise of 1.30 mm/year. Future global projections indicate an average increase of about
4 mm/year.
(viii) There are evidences that glaciers in Himalayas are receding at a rapid pace, however it is
unclear as to how much of this recession is attributable to climate change, as glaciers
retreat is also due to natural-long-term glacial-inter-glacial cycles.
(ix) It is projected that rainfall will increase by the end of 21st Century by 15-40 % and the
mean annual temperature will increase by 3 °C to 6 °C. The warming is more pronounced
over land areas, with the maximum increase over northern India. The warming is also
relatively greater in winter and post-monsoon seasons.
8. Global Efforts to Counter Threat of Climate Change
8.1 Potential and likely impacts of climate change on agriculture outputs, human health and
many other vital aspects of human civilization have become global concerns. The release of GHG
attributable to the man made changes could, in principle, be controlled through human will and
regulated actions. These changes could be linked to the technologies deployed for developmental
processes by various. countries. International protocols on climate change do recognize that
commitments of various member countries to self regulate GHG Emissions must be related to their
respective developmental States. Therefore, the International Conventions and Protocols call for
common and shared but differentiated responsibilities within the respective capacities of member
countries to control and mitigate emissions of GHG. Climate change being related to choices of
technologies employed for meeting their developmental agenda, Nation States are required to align
their developmental agenda and paths with the needs for mitigating climate change and global
warming. Inter Governmental commitments through protocols form an instrument for controlling
GHG emissions. The UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and its Kyoto
Protocol is an example of an international inter-governmental agreement for implementing measures
to regulate the anthropogenic emissions of GHG.
9. The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
9.1 The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) was adopted at
the Rio Earth Summit in May 1992. The objective of the Convention was to achieve stabilization
of GHG concentration in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic
interference with the climate system. Such a level is to be achieved within a time-frame sufficient
to allow eco-systems to adapt naturally to climate change, to ensure that food production is not
threatened and to enable economic development to proceed in a sustainable manner . The UNFCCC
recognizes the legitimate need of developing countries for sustained economic growth and poverty
alleviation. Article 3.1 of the UNFCCC mentions that Parties to the Convention should protect the
climate change system for the benefit of present and future generations of human kind on the basis
of equity and in accordance with their ‘‘common but differentiated responsibiIities’’ and respective

6
capabilities. It is noted in the Preamble of the UNFCCC that the largest share of historical and
current global emissions of GHG has originated in developed countries; that per capita emissions
in developing countries are still relatively low and that the share of global emissions originating in
developing countries will grow to meet their social and development needs. The UNFCCC promotes
and reviews the implementation of the Convention through decisions taken at annually held meetings
of the Conference of Parties (CoP).
9.2 Kyoto Protocol
9.2.1 In 1997, Parties to the UNFCCC adopted the Kyoto Protocol in recognition of necessity for
strengthening developed countries’ commitment in furtherance to the objectives of the Convention.
It is the most significant agreement till date to combat climate change. The Protocol provides for
quantified emission limitation and reduction commitments for the developed countries, mechanisms
to facilitate review of and compliance with these targets.
9.2.2 The Kyoto Protocol also provides for three mechanisms that enable the developed countries
with quantified emission limitation and reduction commitments to acquire greenhouse gas reduction
credits from activities outside their own boundaries at relatively lesser costs. These are Joint
Implementation, Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) and Emission Trading. Developing
Countries can participate only in CDM. Under CDM a developed country would take up GHG
reduction project activities in a developing country where the cost of GHG reduction project
activities is usually much lower. The CDM supports the implementation of sustainable and
environment friendly technologies in developing countries and thereby, facilitating industrialized
countries in meeting their emission reduction obligations in a cost-effective manner.
10. India’s Stand
10.1 India, with 17 per cent of the world’s population, contributes only 4 per cent of the total
global GHG emissions. In terms of per capita GHG emissions it is about 23 per cent of the global
average. It has probably the most comprehensive framework of legal and institutional mechanisms
in the region to respond to the tremendous challenges to the environment it is facing, owing to
population explosion, poverty and illiteracy augmented by urbanization and industrial development.
It is probably the first developing country which has incorporated into its Constitution the specific
provisions for environmental protection. Article 48A of the Constitution of India provides that the
State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and wild
life of the country’. Similarly, Article 51A (g) makes it obligatory for every citizen of India, ‘to
protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life, and to
have compassion for living creatures’.
l0.2 The Secretary, Department of Science and Technology submitted before the Committee that
as far as adaptation and mitigation measures are concerned, we should develop a national agenda,
based on our socio-economic interests and de-link it from international pressure which is pushing
technology on India. This agenda should have sufficient amount of data support and documentation
to relate our technology choices, based on a paying capacity of a large number of people. He was
of the view that most of the carbon and storage technologies that the world is prescribing to our
nation are not vital to our country, India can find other avenues and by using our wisdom of the
culture, which has hundreds of years of understanding of the environment, offer alternative
solutions to the management of adaptation and mitigation measures. Similar thoughts were echoed
by Secretary, Ministry of Earth Sciences and Principal Scientific Adviser to the Government of
India. They asserted that we should not allow other countries to drive our research and technology
agenda as it will cause distortion in our priorities. They emphasized that India’s Climate Change
Action Programme will evolve, based on new scientific and technological knowledge as they

7
emerge and on the evolution of the multilateral climate change regime, as well as of arrangements
for international cooperation.
11. India and the International Forums
11.1 India is a Party to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
and has established the National Clean Development Mechanism Authority on 2nd December, 2003.
India as a developing country does not have any mitigation commitments under UNFCCC, yet a
sustainable development path by a range of policies and programmes to mitigate climate change is
being followed.
11.2 The Ministry of Environment and Forests informed that it has been India’s stand not to
agree to any commitments related to reducing GHG emissions. In order to meet the demands of
rising standards of living and providing access to commercial energy to those lacking it, the total
emission of GHG is bound to increase in India and also in other developing countries. Developed
countries, being responsible for the problem, owing to their historical as well as current emissions,
are required to stabilize and reduce their emissions of GHG. Hence, developed countries should
come forward and take further deeper commitments beyond the year 2012. This would give a clear
direction for Clean Development Mechanism through which developing countries can take part in
mitigation measures and sustainable development. India believes that the appropriate burden sharing
formula (GHG emissions rights) is the ‘equal per capita principle’.
11.3 Climate change is usually discussed from .the perspective of developed countries without
linking it to developmental needs such as poverty, health, energy access and education. India has
been pressing at the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change and other international
conferences for collaborative development of clean technologies and immediate transfer of existing
technologies which are environment friendly. There are fears that uncompensated climate change
mitigation by developing countries would slow down their economic growth. Therefore, efforts
towards climate change mitigation and poverty reduction need be addressed simultaneously.
12. Technology Transfer and Scientific Cooperation
12.1 India has also been trying to impress upon developed countries to transfer environmentally
sound and cleaner energy technologies, which may be vital to our country, into the limited public
domain for use by developing countries for early adoption, diffusion and deployment accompanied
with transfer of financial resources. India had also called for early operationalisation of the
Adaptation Fund and Special Climate Change Fund under the UNFCCC for addressing Climate
Change issues in the developing countries.
13. Proposal to Counter Climate Change
13.1 India, taking a pragmatic view that developing countries have their own priorities of poverty
reduction and economic growth, has suggested following measures to combat climate change:
(i) There is a need to reach an agreement on Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) on technologies
necessary for mitigation efforts in developing countries paralleling the successful agreement
on compulsory licensing of pharmaceuticals for addressing epidemic disease.
(ii) Many needed technologies based on resource endowments of developing countries ( e.g.
biomass) do not yet exist,. or are too expensive. Collaborative R&D between developing and
developed country R&D institutions is necessary to address this gap. This may be done by
a Venture Capital Fund, located in a multilateral financial institution, with the resulting IPRs
being held by the Fund, and worked at concessional cost in developing countries and on
commercial basis in developed countries.

8
(iii) The CDM has largely proved its potential to promote sustainable development in developing
countries, while helping developed countries accomplish their GHG abatement commitments
at lower cost. It has to be clearly borne in mind that the success of the carbon market
is critically dependant on the level of GHG abatement commitments by the developed
countries. Further, the various imperfections in the CDM which contribute to the high
transaction costs involved are now well recognized, and need to be addressed.
(iv) Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) technologies are often referred to as a “magic bullet”
for addressing mitigation concerns. However, CCS technologies are not yet fully developed,
and there are concerns about their safety, and efficacy. i.e. permanence of CO
2 storage.
Moreover, they may involve significant additional costs. India is willing to work on CCS
technologies in countries that are working on these technologies.
14. Need for Improving Alternative Energy Sources
14.1 The representative of The Energy Resources Institute (TERI) informed the Committee that
four energy forms – solar, wind, biomass and nuclear can replace all fossil fuels and India is
fortunate to have all the four in good endowment. There is need to reduce dependency on
hydrocarbons. In the long run, provided the technology is available and appropriate policy structure
is in place, India can certainly meet its energy needs without resorting to fossil fuels. However,
at present they are all too expensive to compete with fossil fuel technologies. The cost effective
sustainable technologies, based on these resources do not exist as yet. Therefore, the need is to
put in place those technologies which become commercially viable. Another solution is a global
venture capital fund for collaborative R&D with institutions between developed and developing
countries and sharing of the resulting Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs). Easing of international
restrictions on expansion of nuclear power in developing countries could also pave way for
developing technologies to use nuclear energy as an energy source.
15. Climate Friendly Measures
15.1 The Ministry of Environment and Forest has informed the Committee that despite the fact
that India’s contribution to greenhouse gas emissions is very small; Government has taken many
measures to improve situation in this regard. The Ministry of Environment and Forests is the nodal
agency for climate change issues in India. Several-climate-friendly measures, particularly in the area
of renewable energy have been initiated. It has one of the most active renewable energy
programmes besides having a dedicated Ministry for non-conventional energy sources in the world.
India had adopted the National Environment Policy 2006, and has also taken many other measures
and policy initiatives.
15.2 Existing Energy Sector Programmes
15.2.1 Specific Energy Sector initiatives include:
• Introduction of CNG for public and private transport in metropolitan areas;
• Improving quality of transportation fuels;
• A major bio-diesel programme. Five per cent blending of ethanol in petrol to increase
in the next phase;
• Cleaner fuels for power generation. Raising thermal efficiency of coal plants;
• National programme on coal washing, in-situ coal gasification, Integrated Gasification
Combined Cycle (IGCC), Coal bed and Mine-mouth methane and,Hydrogen energy;

9
• 50,000 MW hydropower initiatives including over 50 per cent from Run of River
Operation (ROR) projects to be accomplished by 2012.
15.3 Current Actions for Mitigation and Adaptation
15.3.1 Government has also taken a number of steps in recent years that have a direct bearing on
mitigating climate change, some of which are as follows:
(i) Improving energy efficiency and conservation as well by setting up of Bureau of
Energy Efficiency;
(ii) Power sector reforms;
(iii) Promoting hydro and renewable energy;
(iv) Reduction of gas flaring; and
(v) Environmental quality management.
15.3.2 The outcome of all these initiatives is that there has been effective delinking of energy
sector growth from economic growth. Currently, the primary energy sector growth rate is around
3 per cent per year, against GDP growth exceeding 8 per cent. Steel, aluminium, fertilizer, paper,
cement are some of the major energy intensive sectors where India’s energy efficiency has attained
the global standards. Especially in the cement sector, the energy efficiency of Indian plants
is among the world’s highest. The share of renewable energy in total primary energy is at
34 per cent.
15.3.3 Further, India has had, over the last 55 years of economic development, major programmes
addressing climate variability concerns. These include cyclone warning and protection, coastal
protection, floods and drought control and relief, major and minor irrigation projects, control of
malaria, food security measures, research on drought resistant crops, and several others.
16. Monitoring Climate Change
16.1 To monitor climate change the importance and need for enhancing the networks of
systematic observations has been recognised as crucial requirement. To carry out regional
assessments, maintenance of high standards for climate observations and strengthening of networks
for climate monitoring of key elements of physical, biological systems are. some of the imperatives.
With the modernization of the India Meteorological Department (IMD) that is underway, there will
be a quantum jump in the coverage of climate observations over the Indian region which will make
impact assessments feasible and better detection of climate shifts possible in future. Special
provisions for access of data to climate change research community and creation of user friendly
IT enabled data repositories is to be put in-place.
17. Building Research Capacity and Institutional Infrastructure
17.1 To build research strengths and maintain a sustained flow of quality science into our
national climate change agenda and India’s international response, there is need to launch a strong,
well-coordinated program to address Climate Change Science that is of relevance to the Indian
region. The Ministry of Earth Sciences has proposed to create a high-priority Program to address
the Science issues of Global and Regional Climate Change with a well equipped state-of-the-art
Center of excellence at Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM), Pune for inter-disciplinary
research and training in the area of science of climate change. The program will establish networks
of leading National research groups and research centers involved in allied areas by supporting
collaborative research on important issues of national relevance. International research groups shall
be involved to leverage support in gap areas.

10
18. Educational Frame-work
18.1 To address the challenges of climate change effectively there is need to have a carefully
evolved educational frame-work to cultivate understanding among the people about implications of
climate change and its mitigation and adaptation requirements. The formal education system has a
special role to play in helping pupils understand the science of climate change. The curriculum
should be designed to guide the basics of climate science to help middle and high school students
to understand the answers to common questions about climate. And at university level greater
emphasis should be laid on inter-disciplinary, problem-oriented science driven by outcomes on
issues like climate change mitigation. Similarly informal education settings, such as museums and
public libraries may be involved to improve public awareness on climate change through formal and
informal channels.
19. Disaster Management
19.1 Natural calamities such as floods, droughts and tropical cyclones afflict many regions of
the country, but their impact in terms of lives lost and livelihoods disrupted tends to fall most
heavily on the poor. Possible climate change threatens to heighten these impacts in many areas,
both by changing the frequency .and/ or intensity of extreme events and by bringing changes in
mean conditions that may alter the underlying vulnerability of populations to hazards. Holistic
management of disaster risk requires action to reduce impacts of extreme events before, during and
after they occur, including technical preventive measures and aspects of socio-economic
development designed to reduce human vulnerability to hazards. A key challenge and opportunity
therefore lies in building a bridge between current disaster risk management efforts aimed at
reducing vulnerabilities to extreme events and efforts to promote climate change adaptation. There
is a need to understand better the extent to which current disaster management practices reflect
future adaptation needs and assess what changes may be required if such practices are to address
future risks.
The National Disaster Management programme provides grants-in-aid to victims of disaster,
and manages disaster relief operations. It also supports proactive disaster prevention programmes,
including dissemination of information and training of disaster-management staff. However, it needs
to be strengthened enough to handle probable disaster on account of possible climate change.

11
COMMITTEE’S OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
1. The Committee observes that climate change is not about India alone. Rather it is
related to economic change brought in about the entire world. No country in the world has
found a low carbon trajectory as yet and no country can grow without the emissions of
green house gases. Since there is an evident link between economic growth and increased
Green House Gases (GHG) emission, the need of the hour is for developed countries to
reduce their emission so that developing countries like ours can sustain their pace of
economic growth. Climate change is also about equity and cooperation. Even today, with all
of India’s growth, it is nowhere close to the emission levels of developed or rich countries
in the world. The Committee recommends that there is an eminent need to make our
position very clear that we are victims of climate change rather than perpetrators and
demand a reduction in emissions from the rich world. It recommends further that there is
also a need for an intra-national per capita entitlement as it is the poor of India who are
living within the quota.
2. The Committee feels that the most immediate, useful and least economically
disruptive response to climate change and climate variability is to develop strategies for
adapting to and moderating those impacts of climate change and variability that affect us
most. As climate change is a global phenomenon and it takes decades and even centuries
for some GHG to disappear from the atmosphere, we should seek ways to deal with the local
impacts of climate change and variability in addition to trying to reduce it at the global
level. Attempts to mitigate climate change could involve efforts that will take years and
require concerted international cooperation.
3. The Committee is of the view that the implications of climate changes, if they were
to occur, would be serious and devastating. However, it is within the reach of human, society
to meet these threats. We have to adapt to climate change. Projected impacts related to
drought, glacier retreat, temperature rise and cyclone intensity will require adaptive
measures such as investments in storm protection and water supply infrastructure and
community health services. Adaptation is also required to address the impacts resulting
from the warming which is already visible due to past emissions. However, in the long run
adaptation alone will not be able to cope with all the projected impacts as there might be
increase in the magnitude of these impacts. There is substantial potential for mitigation
measures as well to counteract this crisis.
4. The Committee recommends that India must adopt carefully selected technology
paradigms for our developmental needs. A strong and signaling research effort on climate
change and development and choice of environmentally sustainable technologies for national
economic growth would be essential. India should play the leadership role for many
developing countries.
5. Along with adaptation, the country needs to undertake some mitigation measures as
well. The Committee is of the view that mitigation requires long-term perspective. Energy
infrastructure takes time to build up and new energy technology development will need
extensive research and development. Similarly, policy shift often take many years to have
an effect. Hence policy and investment decisions need to be taken simultaneously. The
Committee recommends for inclusion of several measures such as identification of key
11

12
areas of energy technologies like renewable energy, energy efficiency, setting up technology
missions to focus on development of cutting edge renewable technologies, attracting
investment into creating manufacturing base in key technologies, etc.
6. There is international recognition of the fact that, if remedial action is not taken,
the developing countries will be the worst hit. The Committee desires that we adapt
ourselves at all levels, have better healthcare organisations and better preventive care
medicines in place. Our agriculture has to become more drought-resistant otherwise our
food security will be affected. It is our national responsibility that we go in for sustainable
development right away.
7. It has been observed that even though the science of climate change is well
understood, yet in the actual assessments of climate change, there are uncertainties. One
major uncertainty relates to the projections of how the global economy and technology
options will evolve over a period of time. So we have to be very careful when we look at
possible climate change impacts. The Committee recommends that while formulating
policies and framework to address the projected impacts, well researched and well evolved
mechanisms must be adopted.
8. The Committee has observed that addressing climate change mitigation and
adaptation involves extensive study and research and requires high level technical expertise.
There is a need to initiate a National Research Agenda on Climate Change to specifically
address the issue of Climate Change and its impact. There could be a separate institute
namely National Institute on Climate Change under the purview of the Ministry of Earth
Sciences or Ministry of Science and Technology, which may exclusively cater to the concerns
pertaining to the Climate Change mitigation and adaptation measures.
9. The Committee is of the view that tools of modern science such as information
technology, biotechnology and nanotechnology would be required to foresee and manage our
vulnerabilities to global changes in climate and monsoon. Scientific and technological
solutions should be found for ensuring security of food, nutrition, water and energy.
Renewable energy options should be actively pursued. Reliable sources of non-carbon based
energy source must be found for the future.
10. The Committee feels that whether individuals know it or not, they constantly take
decisions that both contribute to climate change and that will be influenced by climate
change. Successfully adapting to future climate change will require an understanding of its
causes and likely impacts and, through this, of the ways to protect one’s self and one’s
family through specific actions. As individuals, one can have an impact on policymakers’
decisions that relate to climate change by becoming informed and engaged in the issue. The
Committee recommends that due importance should be given to spread awareness among
masses about climate change. Mass media can play a major role in this context and can
influence the masses to adapt to energy saving life style changes. For example switching
from older, less efficient appliances to newer, energy-efficient appliances and technologies
is another mitigation strategy that lowers energy costs for households as well as leads to
conservation of energy. It is not easy to make people to adapt to better but expensive
technologies. The best alternative could be to allure them with cost-effective technologies.
11. Carbon sequestration is the provision of long-term storage of carbon in the
terrestrial biosphere, underground, or the oceans so that the buildup of carbon dioxide (the
principal greenhouse gas) concentration in the atmosphere will reduce or slow down. In
some cases, this is accomplished by maintaining or enhancing natural processes; in other
cases, novel techniques are developed to dispose of carbon. Forests have a very important

13
role in climate change as growing or budding forests absorb the carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere and sequester it in the biomass or below the ground. The Committee believes
that there is much scope for carbon sequestration through improving the quality of forests
and afforestation programmes. It may also be beneficial to arrest soil degradation, to
improve soil fertility, to provide renewable fuel timber and non-timber forest products as
well as to provide livelihood to millions of poor people.
12. The Committee feels that transportation is one of the major causes for increase in
green house gas emissions in the entire world. Rapid increase in number of motor vehicles
is leading to greater emissions. Unlike West, in our country larger number of people
commute not by car but by bus or bicycle. However, the major cities have witnessed an
increased usage of personal motor vehicles in the form of cars and two wheelers in the
recent past. The Committee recommends that the Government evolve a long term holistic
policy to address this problem. Short term redressal mechanism will not serve any purpose.
A case in example can be seen in the capital city where the buses and auto-rickshaws were
made to shift from using diesel fuel to CNG as fuel. However, the unchecked upsurge in
the number of private taxis using diesel as fuel would have negated the desired result in
lowering the emission level. Consumers must be offered more fuel efficient vehicles. There
is also need to sensitize people towards better driving techniques, like accelerating slowly
and smoothly. Carpools and public transport must be promoted at the same time to deal
with this issue more efficiently. The Committee also recommends that Mass Rapid Transit
system should be introduced in all major cities which ensures full integration of public
transport services comprising bus, metro, rail networks. The large capacities of such
systems make them potentially more efficient, in terms of cost and environmental effects,
than auto mobile transportation.
13. The Committee is of the view that no efforts at GHG mitigation will succeed if
patterns of production and consumption in developed countries remain grossly
unsustainable. It believes that sustainable patterns of production and consumption are fully
consistent with high living standards and human well being. There are excellent examples
of such practices throughout the world, including many in developed countries which have
little to do with poverty. They range from re-cycling and re-use of materials, to healthier
diets, to efficient mass transport, to reduced and more biodegradable packaging, to
automobile fuel efficiency, to sustainable construction materials and home design; the list
is endless. These need to be catalogued and mainstreamed in all societies.
14. The Committee has taken note of the fact that the country is currently on an
accelerated development path. Many developed countries had earlier made choices of
technologies which led to significant per-capita  emissions of GHG, which could be related to
global warming. The Committee feels that the country is required to make judicious choices
of technologies such that the per-capita emission levels of green house gas are managed
well within the global averages while making economic progress at an accelerated pace. If
India has to reduce its carbon emissions, it would mean a major reorientation of her energy
strategy. The Committee recommends that while considering these mitigation methods, it
should be kept in mind that it should not have adverse impact on economic growth and
underprivileged section of the society.
15. The Committee has observed that India urgently needs to put a strategy in place to
use its human knowledge capital to take a leadership role in designing low carbon
technologies that are going to form the economy of the future. Instead of going down a
carbon intensive path of growth, India must choose a development path that is sustainable
and more economically viable as well, keeping the long term perspective in mind.

14
16. The Committee is of the opinion that mitigation of climate change, due to man made
changes, has emerged a major area of priority at the global level. Planned enhancement of
Indian capability for research on climate change is therefore, in the self interest of India.
Himalayan Glaciers provide a perennial source of water for Northern India. Research on
climate change with a special focus on Himalayan Glaciers is of high significance to India.
There are concerns that climate change, could adversely affect the Himalayan Glaciers and
they could recede. Some estimates have been made that some of our Glaciers have receded
by 21% during the last 40 years. Although there have been several fragmented efforts from
many national institutions and universities during the last fifty years, Indian glaciers are
among the least investigated in the world. The Committee desires that research effort on
Himalayan glaciers must be strengthened.
17. The Committee has been given to understand that in respect of Asian regions, which
directly concerns us, fresh water availability in Central, South, East and South-East Asia,
particularly in large river basins, is projected to decrease by 2050. This is something of
direct concern to India. Asian coastal areas, especially heavily populated mega-delta regions
in South, East and South-East Asia will be at the greatest risk due to increased flooding
from the sea and ip some mega-deltas flooding from the rivers. This goes to our mega-delta
regions, the Sunderban region in particular. The Climate change is projected to compound
the pressures on, the natural resources and the environment, associated with the rapid
urbanization, industrialization and economic development. Endemic mortality and morbidity
due to diarrhoeal disease primarily associated with floods and droughts are expected to rise
in East, South and South-East Asia due to projected changes in the hydrological cycle. The
Committee feels that it is imperative that in view of the acute vulnerability of our country
to the consequences of climate change, we need to recognize that poverty reduction efforts
have to be addressed simultaneously with mitigation and adaptation processes.
18. The Committee observes that the impacts of climate change in a region are
determined not only by the degree of temperature rise but also by the vulnerability of the
region and its population. A combination of geographical and social factors make the poor,
a majority of whom are forced to settle in marginal or highly vulnerable areas, the most
susceptible to climate change. With little access to a functional health system, poor people
are also more vulnerable to vector born diseases like malaria or dengue. The aftermath of
natural disasters and its impact on human health (stagnant standing water after heavy
rainfall and floods leading to the outbreak of diseases) also affects the poor the worst
because of their lack of infrastructure and access to emergency health services. The
Committee is of the view that to prepare itself for such eventualities, emphasis must be
given to enhance the capabilities of health care infrastructure and improved public health
care for vulnerable populations of rural areas.
19. The Committee is of the view that programmes may be initiated to minimize the
adverse effects of drought on production of crops and livestock, and on productivity of land,
water and human resources so as to lead to drought proofing of the affected areas. It may
also lead to overall economic development and improve the socio-economic conditions of the
poor and disadvantaged sections.
20. In Committee’s view there is an important issue about life style habits in the context
of climate change. These life style choices derive a great deal of difference between
developed and developing countries. In India carbon dioxide emission from the production,
packaging, transportation and processing of food up to the table, per million kilo calories
of food energy is minimal as compared to the developed nations. Similarly recycling of
household waste is quite prevalent in Indian households. It is the highest in percentage in

15
respect of India. Culture, tradition, eating and culinary habits influence these factors a lot.
It is unfair to compare lifestyle emissions of developed nations to the survival emissions of
developing countries.
21. The Committee feels that the inter-governmental protocols and conventions recognize
the primacy of development and poverty alleviation and the fact that the developed
countries have an obligation to undertake action within their countries and support action
in developing countries through technology and financing flows. There is currently an
upwelling on the global platform as to who should do what and how much. With India
growing at an accelerated pace of economic development at our current use of energy levels,
fears continue to be expressed in some quarters in the global community. Roles are being
cut out for India by others. The Committee is of the view that global community must be
made to recognize that our per-capita emission levels of GHG are much lower than the
global average and that of the developed countries. The Committee feels that there is an
imminent need to impress upon the world community at large to adhere to the Kyoto
Protocol. India, therefore, should raise its voice on behalf of the developing nations that all
developed nations also adhere.
22. It has been observed that States in India are diverse in their energy endowments and
they should therefore have different energy structure. The Committee feels that the States
which have large hydro resources like states with hilly region, North Eastern States may
focus on hydel power resources. States with wind power resources can develop their energy
requirements from wind energy. Similarly biomass resources can be promoted in a big way.
Since resources differ from region to region, all these have to be accounted in a proper
approach to provide energy security while addressing climate change concerns. Further
there is a need to look at the most sustainable technologies available not only at the State
level but even at local level.
23. The Committee has observed that consumption of energy by Compact Fluorescent
Lamp (CFL) and Light Emitting Diode (LED) is very much less than incandescent lights.
But their unit cost is many times higher than that of the incandescent lights and this is
a major deterrent for switching from incandescent lights to these energy saving options. The
Committee is of the view that this problem can be overcome by The Bureau of Energy
Efficiency’s programme called Bachat Lamp Yojna. This is in collaboration with CFL
manufacturers where CFLs would be provided at the price of incandescent bulbs to domestic
households. The price difference is to be met through the sales of carbon credits that accrue
due to the lower energy consumption and carbon emissions by CFLs. This project could
reduce millions of tones of carbon dioxide every year and could lead to a reduction in
electricity demand. The Committee is also of the view that a national programme on
lightening up India should be initiated to replace kerosene lamps with LEDs in rural areas.
However, disposal of the CFL lamps is to be taken care of at the same time, it should not
be done in a crude manner as it contains mercury which is a health hazard. Monetary
incentive may be attached to it and it may be recycled in a manner similar to recycling of
newspapers and household wastes.
24. The Committee also feels that in residential and commercial construction,
sustainable building practices can lead to healthier indoor environments, lower energy use,
and a reduction in pollution and greenhouse gas emissions. The concept of kitchen herbal
gardens should be incorporated in buildings wherever it is possible.
25. It is felt that the need to address climate change issues has become greater as large
scale industrialisation, ever increasing population and rising number of motor vehicles have
compelled it to be addressed at larger perspective. The Committee is of the opinion that

16
creating awareness in this context at formal education system may also be considered with
the objective of acquiring an appropriate level of knowledge and understanding of the key
concepts involved in this global phenomenon.
26. The Committee feels that the world has come to realize that development models of
the past had used natural resources of fossil fuels and non-renewable energy sources in
unsustainable manners on the one hand and caused double jeopardy on the other through
harmful changes in global environment. It is clear that India should innovate and charter
more sustainable growth paths for her growth requirements. India needs innovations for
growth, which are commercially viable and yet environmentally benign and sustainable.
Investments should be prioritized to mitigate and adapt to climate change and at the same
time attempts must be made to close the gap between the prosperous and deprived classes
and improve their individual adaptation potential.
27. The Committee is of the view that India’s participation in different global
environmental negotiations and several domestic initiatives to counter global warming and
climate change underlines its commitment and seriousness towards the problem. It
recommends that the vulnerability of climate change and global warming can best be
reduced through the process of sustainable development. There are several means to check
the threat which includes exchange of information by all nations, international cooperation
in developing environmentally friendly innovative technologies, technology transfer from
developed to developing countries and access to environmentally sound services.

17
ANNEXURE

19
ANNEXURE
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE V ARIOUS MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENT AND
EXPERTS WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE FOR ORAL EVIDENCE
Sl. No. Date of Meeting W itness
12 3
1. 04.01.2008 Department of Science and Technology
1. Dr. T. Ramasami, Secretary
2. Shri K.P. Pandian, J.S. & F.A.
3. Shri R.C. Srivastava, Scientist ‘G’
4. Prof. Anand Patwardhan, Executive Director
5. Dr. D. Mohanty, Scientist ‘D’
Ministry of Environment and Forests
2. 22.01.2008 1. Ms. Meena Gupta, Secretary
2. Shri J.M. Mauskar, Additional Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Sethi, Director
4. Shri Satish Agarwal, Director
5. Ms. Rajasree Ray, Deputy Secretary
Ministry of Earth Sciences
3. 30.01.2008 1. Dr. P. S. Goel, Secretary
2. Shri Bharat Bhushan, JS & FA
3. Shri Prakash Kumar, Joint Secretary
4. Shri R.C. Bhatia, Director-General, IMD
5. Shri S.K. Das, Sceintist ‘G’
6. Dr. G. Srinivasan, Director, IMD
7. Shri P. Narayanan, Director
8. Dr. K. Krishnakumar, Director
The Energy, Research Institute (TERI)
4. 14.02.2008 Dr. Prodipto Ghosh, Distinguished Fellow

20
12 3
Centre for Science and Environment, Delhi
5. 09.04.2008 1. Ms. Sunita Narain, Director
Green Peace, New Delhi
6. 15.05.2008 1. Shri Srinivas Krishnaswamy, Policy Advisor
2. Ms. Divya Raghunandan, Campaigns Director
3. Ms. Vinuta Gopal, Climate and Energy Campaigner
4. Shri Suman Dasgupta, Advisor
Principal Scientific Advisor to Government of India and
Chairman, Expert Committee
7. 23.05.2008 1. Dr. R. Chidambaram, Principal Scientific Advisor to
Government of India and Chairman, Expert Committee
2. Dr. S.K. Sikka, Scientific Secretary
3. Shri Neeraj Sinha, Scientist ‘E’

21
MINUTES

22

23
I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday the 20th August, 2007 in Room No. ‘63’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Prabha Thakur
3. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
4. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
5. Shri Saman Pathak
6. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
7. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
9. Shri Francis Fanthome
10. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
11. Shri Brahmananda Panda
12. Shri Pratik P. Patil
13. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
14. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Vanjula G. Rajan, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
2. * * *
3. ***. He invited suggestion from Members on the future programmes/subjects, which the
Committee could take up for its consideration.
4. The Members suggested various issues which included *** and effects of global warming,
frequent meetings of the Committee, etc. ***.
5. The Chairman thanked all the Members for their valuable suggestions and assured to
convene meetings of the Committee more frequently.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 3.50 
P.M.
23
*** Relates to other matters.

24
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Friday, the 4th January, 2008 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Prabha Thakur
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
4. Shri Kamal Akhtar
5. Shri Saman Pathak
6. Shri Jabir Husain
7. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
8. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
9. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
10. Shri Pankaj Choudhary
11. Shri Francis Fanthome
12. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
13. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
14. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
15. Shri Pratik P. Patil
16. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat
17. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’
18. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
1. Dr. T. Ramasami, Secretary, Department of Science and Technology
2. Shri K.P. Pandian, J.S. & F.A.
3. Shri R.C. Srivastava, Scientist ‘G’
4. Prof. Anand Patwardhan, Executive Director
5. Dr. D. Mohanty, Scientist ‘D’
24

25
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed and wished all the Members of the Committee and
officials present there a very happy and prosperous new year. He, then requested Dr. T. Ramasami;
Secretary, Department of Science and Technology to hi ghlight the various factors contributing to
and consequences of Global Warming and its impact on the World, in general, and India in
particular. He also desired to know the measures adopted to identify the vulnerable regions and
sections of population likely to be affected due to global warming in the form of Tsunami, rising
sea level ecological imbalances and loss of bio-diversity, etc. The Secretary, Department of Science
and Technology, then made a visual presentation on the subject. Members, thereafter, sought
clarifications on the points arising out of the presentation to which the witness replied.
The witness then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3. The Committee decided to meet on the 22nd and 30th of January, 2008, to hear the views
of the Secretaries of the Ministries of Environment and Forests and Earth Sciences, respectively.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 
P.M.

26
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 22nd January, 2008 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kamal Akhtar
3. Shri Saman Pathak
4. Shri Jabir Husain
5. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
7. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
8. Shri Pankaj Choudhary
9. Shri Francis Fanthome
10. Shri Brahmananda Panda
11. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
12. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
13. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
14. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat
15. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’
SECRETARIAT
Dr. V . K. Agnihotri, Secretary-General
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
WITNESSES
1. Miss Meena Gupta, Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests
2. Shri J.M. Mauskar, Additional Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Sethi, Director
4. Shri Satish Agarwal, Director
5. Ms. Rajasree Ray, Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Secretary and officials of the Ministry of
Environment to the meeting of the Committee and requested them to highlight the various factors
contributing to and consequences of Global Warming and its impact on the World, in general, and
India in particular. He also desired to know the measures adopted to identify the vulnerable regions
26

27
and sections of population likely to be affected due to global warming in the form of Tsunami,
rising sea level, ecological imbalances and loss of bio-diversity, etc. The Secretary, Ministry of
Environment and forests, then made a visual presentation on the subject. Members, thereafter,
sought clarifications on the points arising out of the presentation to which the witnesses replied.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3. The Committee decided to meet on the 30th January, 2008 at 11.00 
A.M. (instead of 2.30
P.M.) to hear the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Earth Sciences on the subject of Global
warming. The Committee also decided to hear the views of Dr. Prodipto Ghosh, Distinguished
Fellow, The Energy Resources Institute (TERI) on the 14th February, 2008, on the aforesaid
subject.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.20 
P.M.

28
X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 30th January, 2008 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Kamal Akhtar
4. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
5. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
7. Shri Francis Fanthome
8. Shri Brahmananda Panda
9. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
10. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
11. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat
12. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
13. Shrimati Jayben B. Thakkar
14. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
1. Dr. P.S. Goel, Secretary, Ministry of Earth Sciences
2. Shri Bharat Bhushan, Joint Secretary & FA
3. Shri Prakash Kumar, Joint Secretary
4. Shri R.C. Bhatia, Director-General, IMD
5. Dr. S.K. Das, Scientist–‘G’
6. Dr. G. Srinivasan, Director, IMD
7. Shri P. Narayanan, Director, MoES
8. Dr. K. Krishnakumar, Director, MoES
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Secretary and officials of the Ministry of Earth
Sciences to the meeting of the Committee and requested them to highlight the various factors
28

29
contributing to and consequences of Global Warming and its impact on the World, in general, and
India in particular. He also desired to know the measures adopted to identify the vulnerable regions
and sections of population likely to be affected due to global warming in the form of rising sea
level, ecological imbalances and loss of bio-diversity, etc. The Secretary, Ministry of Earth
Sciences, then made a visual presentation on the subject. Members, thereafter, sought clarifications
on the points arising out of the presentation to which the witnesses replied.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3. The Committee then adjourned at 1.20 
P.M.

30
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 14th February, 2008 in Committee Room
‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Jabir Husain
4. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
5. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
6. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
8. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
9. Shri Francis Fanthome
10. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
11. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
12. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
13. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
WITNESS
Dr. Prodipto Ghosh, Distinguished Fellow, The Energy Research Institute (TERI)
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed Dr. Ghosh and requested him to highlight the various
factors contributing to and consequences of Global Warming and its impact on the World, in
general, and India in particular. He also desired to know the measures adopted to identify the
vulnerable regions and sections of population likely to be affected due to global warming in the
form of rising sea level, ecological imbalances and loss of bio-diversity, etc. Dr. Ghosh then made
an oral presentation on the subject. Members, thereafter, sought clarifications on the points arising
out of the presentation to which the witness replied.
The witness then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3. The Committee then adjourned at 4.20 
P.M.
30

31
XIX
NINETEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 9th April, 2008 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Prabha Thakur
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
4. Shri Saman Pathak
5. Shri Jabir Husain
6. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
7. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
9. Smt. Neeta Pateriya
10. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
11. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
12. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
WITNESS
Ms. Sunita Narain, Director, Centre for Science and Environment, Delhi.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Ms. Narain and requested her to highlight the various
factors contributing to and consequences of Global Warming and its impact on the World, in
general, and India in particular. He also desired to know the measures adopted to identify the
vulnerable regions and sections of population likely to be affected due to global warming in the
form of rising sea level, ecological imbalances and loss of bio-diversity, etc. Ms. Narain then made
a visual presentation on the subject. Members, thereafter, sought clarifications on the points arising
out of the presentation to which the witness replied.
The witness then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3. The Committee then adjourned at 12.55 
P.M.
31

32
XXI
TWENTY FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 15th May, 2008 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Kamal Akhtar
4. Shri Saman Pathak
5. Shri Jabir Husain
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
7. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
8. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
9. Shri Francis Fanthome
10. Shri Brahmananda Panda
11. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
12. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
13. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
14. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
15. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
16. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives from Green Peace, New Delhi
1. Shri Srinivas Krishnaswamy, Policy Advisor
2. Ms. Divya Raghunandan, Campaigns Director
3. Ms. Vinuta Gopal, Climate and Energy Campaigner
4. Shri Suman Dasgupta, Advisor
32

33
2. * * *
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed Shri Srinivas and his colleagues and requested him to
highlight the various factors contributing to and consequences of Global Warming and its impact
on the World, in general and India in particular. He also desired to know the measures adopted to
identify the vulnerable regions and sections of population likely to be affected due to global
warming in the form of rising sea level, ecological imbalances and loss of bio-diversity, etc.
Shri Srinivas then made a visual presentation on the subject. Members, thereafter, sought
clarifications on the points arising out of the presentation to which the witnesses replied.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4. * * *
5. The Committee then adjourned at 12.55 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 23rd May, 2008.
*** Relates to other matters.

34
XXII
TWENTY SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 23rd May, 2008 in Room No. ‘139’, First-
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Saman Pathak
3. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
5. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
6. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
7. Shri Francis Fanthome
8. Shri Brahmanand Panda
9. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
10. Shri K.C. Singh ‘‘Baba’’
11. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
12. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
13. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
1. Dr. R. Chidambaram, Principal Scientific Advisor to Government of India and
Chairman, Expert Committee.
2. Dr. S.K. Sikka, Scientific Secretary
3. Shri Neeraj Sinha, Scientist ‘E’
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Dr. Chidambaram and his colleagues and requested
him to highlight the various factors contributing to and consequences of Global Warming and its
impact on the World, in general, and India in particular. He also desired to know the measures
adopted to identify the vulnerable regions and sections of population likely to be affected due to
global warming in the form of rising sea level, ecological imbalances and loss of bio-diversity, etc.
34

35
Dr. Chidambaram then made a visual presentation on the subject. Members, thereafter, sought
clarifications on the points arising out of the presentation to which the witness replied.
The witness then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept
3. The Committee then adjourned at 1.25 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 30th May, 2008.

III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 29th August, 2008 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Saman Pathak
4. Shri Jabir Husain
5. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
7. Shri Pankaj Choudhary
8. Shri Francis Fanthome
9. Shri Brahmananda Panda
10. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
11. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
12. Shri Pratik P. Patil
13. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
14. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’
15. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
16. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
17. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
2. The Committee took-up for consideration its draft One Hundred Ninety-third Report on
‘Global Warming and its Impact on India’. After discussions the Committee adopted the report with
certain additions/modifications.
3. * * *
4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.25 
P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on 5th September, 2008
36
*** Relates to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.