PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY EIGHTH REPORT
Demands  for  Grants  (2015-16) of the
Department of Science and Technology
(Ministry of Science and Technology)
(Demand No. 86 )
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th May, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th May, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
May, 2015/Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka)
258
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha. nic. in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic. in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY EIGHTH REPORT
Demands  for  Grants  (2015-16) of the
Department of Science and Technology
(Ministry of Science and Technology)
(Demand No. 86 )
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th May, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th May, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
May, 2015/Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)-(v)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................. 1-22
5. R ECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE.................................................... 23-27
6. M INUTES  ............................................................................................................. 29-35

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2014-15)
(Constituted on 1st September, 2014)
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
6. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
8. Shri Bhupinder Singh
9. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Beig
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
15. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
22. Shri Nana Patole
23. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
(i)

(ii)
24. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
25. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
26. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
27. Shri Nagendra Singh
28. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
30. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
*31. Shri Chirag Paswan
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
* Nominated w.e.f. 25th March, 2015.

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on
its behalf, present this Two Hundred Fifty-eighth report of the Committee. This Report deals with the
detailed Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Department of Science and Technology (Ministry of Science
and Technology) (Demand No. 86).
2. In the meeting of the Committee held on the 9th April, 2015, the Secretary and other Officers of
the Department of Science & Technology gave an overview of the various activities of the Department
and the Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the Department to
enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications
sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise
the Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 6th May, 2015.
   N EW D ELHI; ASHWANI  KUMAR
 6 May, 2015 Chairman,
Vaisakha 16, 1937 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests,
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
ARIES : Aryabhatta Research Institute of Observational Sciences
C-DAC : Cen ter for Development of Advance Computing
CERI : Clean Energy Research Initiative
CURIE : Consolidation of University Research, Innovation and Excellence
DAE : Department of Atomic Energy
DRDO : Defence and Research Development Organisation
DST : Department of Science & Technology
FAIR : Facility for Antiproton and Ion Research
FIST : Fund for Infrastructure Strengthening of S&T
ICIMOD : International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development
IIA : Indian Institute of Astrophysics
INO : India-based Neutrino Observatory
INSPIRE : Innovation in Science Pursuit for Inspired Research
IUCAA : Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics
KIRAN : Knowledge Involvement in Research Advancement through
Nurturing
LHC : Large Hadron Collider
LIGO : Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory
NAPCC : National Action Plan on Climate Change
NA TMO : National Atlas and Thematic Mapping Organization
NEB : National Entrepreneurship Board
NLST : National Large Solar Telescope
NMSHE : National Mission for Sustaining the Himalayan Ecosystem
NRDMS : National Resources Data Management System
NSCTC : National Council for Science & Technology Communication
NSTMIS : National Science and Technology Management Information
System
PPP : Public Private Partnership
(iv)

(v)
PURSE : Promotion of University Research and Scientific Excellence
RFD : Result Framework Document
RO : Reverse Osmosis
SAIF : Sophisticated Analytical Instrument Facility
SA T AH : Solar Aluminum Tubular Air Heater
SERC : Science & Engineering Research Council
SKA : Square Kilometre Array
SoI : Survey of India
TMT : Thirty Meter Telescope

REPORT
INTRODUCTION
Department of Science and Technology (DST) strives to establish and foster India's leadership and
excellence in the field of science and technology. The DST serves as a robust facilitator and aligns its
initiatives with India's developmental aspirations mainly to help optimise human, infrastructure and
financial resources through appropriate inter and intra institutional mechanisms.
2. DST plays several roles which have evolved over time. DST develops S&T policies, strengthens
human resources and institutional capacities, enables development and deployment of technologies, create
opportunities for societal interventions through S&T establishes and engages in mechanisms of cooperation,
partnerships and alliances. These approaches that reflect its mission ensure a holistic systemic influence,
immediate, medium and long term relevance/gains.
3. The following constitute the mandate of DST:-
• Formulation of policy statements and guidelines on Science and Technology (S&T);
• Promotion of new areas of scientific research;
• Co-ordination of inter-Departmental S&T efforts;
• Support basic and applied research in universities and other institutions;
• International S&T Co-operation;
• Support high quality research in autonomous bodies where specialization ranges from advanced
medical research materials to astronomy;
• Catalysing S&T interaction in societal programmes, and entrepreneurship development;
• Science popularisation, communication and S&T Management Information System;
• Promotion of Commercialisation of indigenous technology;
• Support to technology development programmes, technology information and assessment; and
• Providing services in the areas of:
(i) Surveying and Mapping;
(ii) T echnology Development and Application
4. OBJECTIVES
Main objectives of the Department of Science and Technology are:
(a) Formulation of Policies relating to Science and Technology;
(b) Strengthening basic research and Expanding R&D base-Human capacity;

2
(c) Strengthening Basic research and Expanding R&D base-Institutional Capacity;
(d) Implementing Technology Development Programmes;
(e) Societal interventions of Science and Technology; and
(f) International Science and Technology Cooperation
5. ORGANISATIONAL SETUP
5.1 The Department of Science and Technology is the nodal Department of the Ministry of Science and
Technology. Broadly, the organisational set up of the Department has been divided into Autonomous
Institutes, Scientific Groups, Technology Development Board and Scientific Services besides the
Administration and Integrated Finance divisions. There are 19 Autonomous Institutes and 5 Science/
Engineering Professional bodies which are working in diverse areas for the promotion of Science and
Technology. In addition, one new autonomous body viz. National Centre for Molecular Material Research,
Thiruvanathapuram has been recently set up and National Innovation Foundation, Ahmedabad which was
earlier a 'Corpus Funded' Financial Institute has been taken over by the Department as fully funded
autonomous Research Institute. The Scientific Groups inter-alia consists of the Science and Engineering
Research Council (SERC), National Council for Science and Technology Communication (NSCTC),
National Resources Data Management System (NRDMS), International Division, National Entrepreneurship
Board (NEB), National Science and Technology Management Information System (NSTMIS). The Scientific
Services have two subordinate offices, namely, National Atlas and Thematic Mapping Organisation
(NATMO) and Survey of India (SoI) under their administrative control.
5.2 The detailed budget allocation of the DST for the year 2015-2016 was considered by the Department-
related Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the 9th April 2015.
6. TWELFTH FIVE YEAR PLAN OUTLAY AND ITS UTILISATION
6.1 The approved Plan outlay for the Twelfth Five Year Plan alongwith Plan B.E. and R.E. utilisation
for the year 2014-15 and Plan allocation in 2015-16 is given as under-
Overall Financial Summary of the Department of Science and Technology (Plan)
(
` in Crore)
Sl. Scheme XII Plan B E RE Ex penditure B E
No. 2014-15 2014-15 2015-16
12 3 4 5 6 7
1. Research & Development Support 1200 300 260.0 259.56 330.0
2. Technology Development Programme 1500 140 131.27 130.59 154.0
3. S&T Programme for-Socio-Economic
Development 800 140 101.00 100.57 154.0
4. International Cooperation 500 90 79.00 78.70 99.0
5. State Science and Technology 350 35 33.0 32.32 35.0
Programme

3
12 3 4 5 6 7
6. Modernization of mapping Organisations 400 30 19.05 17.84 30.0
7. Autonomous Institutions & Professional 3700 785 701.0 701.00 863.50
Bodies
8. Synergy projects 100 6 3 .25 3.23 6.0
9. Information Technology 10 2 0.5 0.36 5.0
10. Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Research 400 25 19.0 18.97 25.0
11. National Mission on Nano-Science & 650 85 65.0 64.73 85
Nano-Technology
12. Mega Facilities for Basic Research 750 90 61.93 61.93 99.0
13. Science and Engineering Research  Board 3796 600 535.0 535.0 660.0
14. Policy Research Cell 50 17 8.0 7.94 17.0
15. Disha Programme for Women in Science 390 53 44 .0 43.85 53.0
16. Alliance and R&D Mission 3200 495 418.0 417.46 544.50
17. Supercomputing Facility and Capacity 2000 17 0 0.0 84.0
Building
18. National Geographical Information 1800 40 0 0.0 0
System
19. Fund for Inclusive Innovations for - 30 0 0.0 0
Common Man
20. Technical Research Centres - 125 1.0 1.0 137.50
TOTAL 21596.00 3125.00 2500.0 2495.05 3401.50
7. TREND OF UTILISATION IN THE LAST THREE YEARS
7.1 A comparison of the B.E. and R.E allocation and actual expenditure incurred by the Department for
the years 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15 is given below:
Fund Utilisation against the approved outlay of DST
(` in Crore)
Details 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15
BE RE Actual BE RE Actual BE RE Actual
Expenditure Expenditure Expenditure@
Plan 2477.00 2175.00 2138.31 2777.00 2225.0 0 2221.22 3125.00 2500.00 2422.03
Non-Plan 405.86 384.83 385.91 418.39 391.12 379.62 419.00 398.00 386.83
TOTAL 2882.86 2559.83 2524.22 3195.39 2616.12 2600.84 3544.00 2898.00 2808.86
@ Expenditure till 28th February 2015

4
7.2 After examination of B.E. and R.E. allocations vis-a-vis Actuals for the financial year 2013-14 and
2014-15 (up to 28th February 2015) of the Department of Science and Technology, it is found that the
Department had almost fully utilised (> 99%) the allocated funds in the year 2013-14 and 2014-15.
7.3 In the financial year 2012-13, the total B.E. allocation including Plan and Non-Plan was ` 2,882.86
crore and R.E. was ` 2,559.83 crore. In comparison to this, for the year 2014-15, the total BE outlay
of ` 3,544.00 crore for the Department was reduced to ` 2898.00 crore at RE stage.
7.4 In response to the query about the schemes for which budgetary allocation remained underutilized
it was informed that budgetary allocations for the plan schemes like Fund for Inclusive Innovations for
Common Man, National Geographical Information System, Supercomputing Facility and Technical Research
Centres could not be utilised during 2014-15 as necessary approvals for spending the allocations for these
schemes could not be obtained during 2014-15.
7.5 Reduction in these schemes amounted to `212.00 crore during 2014-15. Another `434.00 crore was
reduced at RE stage from other plan schemes of the Department due to financial resource crunch. The
reduction at RE stage was not due to underutilisation of allocations. The Department has informed that
it had utilised more than 50 percent of the allocated amount by September 2014. However, there was
no major impact on the ongoing schemes of the Department due to reduction of the plan allocation at
RE Stage except that some of the projects approved during the current financial year would be provided
with the funds during the financial year 2015-16.
7.6 The Committee finds that though utilisation of allocated resources by the Department
improved considerably in the last three years, the allocation to some of the schemes was reduced
due to delay in seeking administrative approval. The Committee is of the view that grounds cited
by the Department are of routine administrative nature which could have been avoided by the
Department as delay in completion of infrastructure projects leads to time and cost overrun and
affects research and development work. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the loopholes
which led to underutilisation of funds should be plugged and delay in seeking administrative
approval should be avoided, and also responsibility for delay should be fixed.
8. MECHANISM TO MONITOR AND REVIEW THE ONGOING SCHEMES
8.1 The Department informed the Committee that the physical and financial performance of various
schemes is being monitored by various expert groups and committees constituted by the Department.
Feedback mechanisms including stakeholder consultations, wherever necessary, have been put in place
during the implementation of some of the schemes to fine tune the programs. Separate reviews have also
been done during the year for several schemes of the Department. Some of the key activities of the
Department have been included for performance monitoring through Results Framework Document
mechanism. Monitoring of targets and financial progress is also undertaken in the Department at Secretary
level. In the opinion of the Department, these mechanisms have served their purpose well.
8.2 However, the Committee finds that the score of the Department on Result Framework Document
Index for the year 2012-13 is 85.27 out of 100. The Department has submitted Performance Statement
against the targets given in the Result Framework Document for 2013-14 to the Performance Management
Division of the Cabinet Secretariat for final approval. The Department has further informed the High
Power Committee is yet to examine and approve the Performance Statement for 2013-14.

5
8.3 The Committee is of the opinion that a robust monitoring mechanism is essential for
ensuring timely completion of various projects to avoid time and cost overrun and to ensure full
utilisation of the allocated funds. The Committee notes the performance of the Department of
Science & Technology evaluated by third party under Result Framework Document and finds
that there is a considerable scope for improvement in the performance and the Department
needs to further strengthen its monitoring mechanism to make it more robust for timely
completion of projects and optimum utilisation of funds in the year 2015-16.
9. BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2015-16
9.1 The Department has been allocated `3,835.70 crore in the fiscal year 2015-16, an increase of
`291.70 crore compared to the BE allocation in 2014-15. The BE Plan allocation of ` 3,125.00 crore
in 2014-15 has been enhanced to `3,401.50 crore in 2015-16.
9.2 The Department has been allocated B.E. Plan outlay of ` 3,401.50 crore against the projected
demand of ` 4,065.00 crore for the year 2015-16.There is reduction of about 15 percent of the projected
demand. There has been a reduction against the proposed demands in allocation under some of the
programmes/schemes, viz. Research and Development Support, State Science and Technology Programme,
support to Autonomous Institutions and Professional Bodies, Science and Engineering Research Board,
and Alliance and R&D Mission.
9.3 On being asked whether the Department has made demands for additional funds from the Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance in 2013-14 and 2014-15 and if so, with what results, it was informed
that the Department had raised its concern for additional funds with the Planning Commission in
2013-14 and 2014-15. However, no enhancement in allocations was made.
9.4 When BE Plan Allocation for the Department of Science and Technology which is `3,401.50 crore
is compared with BE Plan allocation for 2014-15 which was ` 3,125 crore, it is observed that it is
11.30 percent higher than the previous year.
9.5 The Non-Plan allocation has been increased from `4,19.00 crore in RE 2014-15 to `434.20 crore
in B.E. 2015-16; thus, showing an increase of `15.20 crore. Explaining the reasons for the increased
allocation for 2015-16 the Department submitted that enhancement was for Salaries which accounts for
80.52 percent of the total Non-Plan allocation.
9.6 The Committee takes strong exception to the fact that despite Department's request for
allocation of more funds, the Ministry of Finance has not paid any heed to the matter in the past
two years. Such constraints only circumscribe the functioning of important projects undertaken
by the Department. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in future the Ministry of
Finance should give a favourable response to the request of the Department.
10. PERFORMANCE OF THE DEPARTMENT
Several New Initiatives have been taken by the Department during last two years, some of the
important ones are as follows:
(i) Innovation in Science Pursuit for Inspired Research (INSPIRE) is national programme to
attract students to the study of science and pursue a career in research. INSPIRE has reached
out to more than 1.5 million students so far.

6
(ii) A new scheme namely Knowledge Involvement in Research Advancement through Nurturing
(KIRAN) has been launched that consolidates all women-centric programmes into a holistic
scheme that (i) promotes gender equality, (ii) empowers women with S&T inputs to develop
and adapt appropriate technology, (iii) enables transfer of proven technologies and demonstration
of live technology models, and (v) supports /encourages women scientists constrained with
a break in their career to return to main stream science.
(iii) India's participation in Thirty Metre Telescope (TMT) Project at Mauna Kea, Hawaii, has been
approved. TMT will be one of the largest optical telescopes in the world based on segmented
mirror technology. The project is jointly funded by DST and DAE and DST is the Lead Agency
for this project. This will be a major international scientific collaboration for Indian institutions.
(iv) A prototype application service has been developed and implemented using the Web Map
Services and Web Feature Services from Surveykshan Geo-portal of Survey of India, Bhuvan
Geo-portal of National Remote Sensing Centre, and the Indian Railways data services from the
India Geo-portal. The application -'Spot your train' - for the running trains of the Northern
Railway has been hosted on the web (from Karnataka Geo-portal) and is useful in providing
the passengers with actual departure and arrival information of the running trains of the
Northern Railway.
(v) A road map has been prepared for setting up of five Technical Research Centres (TRCs) in
the existing autonomous research institutions of DST.
(vi) Under Clean Energy Research Initiative (CERI) Development and Demonstration of Modular
Light Weight Solar Aluminum Tubular Air Heater (SATAH ), Solar Cooling and production of
potable water with two stage silica gel-water adsorption system, and Energy Efficient Community
scale PV powered Reverse Osmosis (RO) Desalination Unit at CSMCRI, Bhavnagar has taken
place.
(vii) Convergent solution for augmentation of water resources in Koraput region of Odisha; Chirawa
block in Rajasthan; and Sabarkantha district in Gujarat were successfully provided. Convergent
solutions in three clusters namely Mamsapuram, Thirupattur and Buja Buja for drinking water
purification and waste water treatment were successfully demonstrated incorporating a unique
self sustainability model and were handed over to the local authorities in Tamil Nadu and
Andhra Pradesh.
(viii) International S&T Cooperation Programme has launched new program on Industrial R&D
with selected partner countries which are high on the innovation index like Canada, Finland,
Germany, Israel, South Korea, Spain, UK and USA. The joint R&D projects implemented
through industry-academia partnerships are applied in nature with the potential towards
commercialisation. In order to engage with neighbouring countries, the India Science Research
Fellowship has been launched for scientists from these countries to undertake R&D work in
India. Similarly, the C.V . Raman Fellowship provides an opportunity to researchers from
African countries to undertake scientific research in Indian institutions. So far, more than 200
Africans from 42 countries have been awarded this Fellowship. While new programs of S&T

7
cooperation have been initiated with Poland, Peru, New Zealand and Sri Lanka, partnerships
have been strengthened with Australia, Canada, Finland, France, Russia, Sweden, UK and
USA.
(ix) Concerted efforts were made by the Department to take forward the activities related to S&T
interventions for societal benefits. In this endeavour, several initiatives having people centered
approach to provide technological solutions at the grassroots level with special schemes for
Rural Areas, Women, Scheduled Caste and Tribals Science Express-Biodiversity Special (SEBS)
was flagged-off from Delhi on 28th July 2014. In the current phase, 28th July 2014 to 06
February 2015, the Science Express has travelled to 57 locations across India. More than 1.30
crore people have visited science express so far including 23 lakh during the ongoing run.
(x) The Nano Mission continued to forge linkages with other Government agencies and industry
organisations in promoting Nano science and technology in the country and also orchestrate
national dialogues on issues which are manifestly multi-agency issues. Efforts for Development
of Standards for Nanotechnology continued in association with National Physical Laboratory,
New Delhi.
11. MEGA FACILITIES FOR BASIC RESEARCH
11.1 The basic research in the country is dependent on mega and capital intensive facilities created by
other countries and this practice has led to asymmetries in credit sharing. Further, Indian expertise to
build advanced scientific instruments and devices does not get fostered outside the strategic areas of
research where technology denial forces prevent the building of capacities. The Department along with
Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) has identified several areas where an effective partnership of the
two departments can bring about an effective capacity building in the academic sector for building mega
facilities for basic research. For the same purpose, a Memorandum of Understanding has been signed
between the Department and the DAE.
11.2 The Mega Facilities for the Basic Research Programme has twin objectives:
(i) to enable Indian scientists to participate in building very large international facilities which are
manifestly multinational efforts and gain access to the same for scientific studies, and
(ii) to create some facilities of international standards in the country. India's participation in the
Large Hadron Collider (LHC), FAIR, the Thirty Metre Telescope (TMT), etc. falls in the first
category.
11.3 Mega Science facilities and Mega Science projects of the DST improve access to state-of-the-art
facilities to Indian scientists and researchers. Thirty Metre Telescope (TMT) Project at Mauna Kea,
Hawaii will be one of the largest optical telescopes in the world based on segmented mirror technology.
During the year, the Cabinet approved TMT project at a total cost of `1, 299.80 crore from the year
2014-15 to 2022-23. The project is jointly funded by DST and DAE and DST is the Lead Agency for
this project.
Financial performance
11.4 In reply to a query with respect to reduction in allocation to 'Mega facilities for Basic Research'

8
from `90.00 crore in B.E. 2014-15 to `61.93 crore in R.E. 2014-15, the Department replied that the
reduction was due to the overall resource constraints of the Government. However, in B.E. 2015-16 the
allocation has been increased to `99.00 crore.
11.5 When asked about the manner in which the Department proposed to ensure the gainful utilisation
of enhanced allocation at B.E. 2015-16 under Mega Facilities for Basic Research, it was informed that
a number of important projects/activities like Thirty Meter Telescope (TMT), Facility for Antiproton and
Ion Research (FAIR), Projects for experiments at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, Geneva,
India-based Neutrino Observatory (INO) project, Indian Participation in Neutrino Experiments at Fermilab,
Square Kilometre Array (SKA) Project, Associate Membership of CERN, National Large Solar Telescope
(NLST) will be supported in 2015-16.
11.6 As per sanctioned/projected costs, the requirement of funds for implementation of the above-
mentioned projects/activities is about `240 crore in 2015-16. Though funds will be released based on the
pattern of expenditure, DST is confident that `99 crore will definitely be utilised for implementation of
these projects/activities during 2015-16. Any additional requirement will be projected at the R.E. stage.
11.7 Providing details of areas identified by the Department in collaboration with DAE for building
effective partnership in creating Mega Facilities, it was informed that areas such as high energy physics,
nuclear physics and astronomy are of equal scientific interest to both DST and DAE. The two agencies
have, therefore, entered into a long-standing Memorandum of Understanding to jointly support and
implement mega projects in these areas.
Physical performance
11.8 The Department informed that during 2014-2015, the following activities were undertaken under
this Scheme:
1. India's participation in TMT project at Mauna Kea, Hawaii (USA) sanctioned at a total cost
of `1,299.8 crore from 2014-2023.
2. India-based Neutrino Observatory (INO) project near Madurai (Tamil Nadu) sanctioned at a
total cost of `1,583.05 crore from 2015-2019 for civil works on site and detector R&D and
prototyping work progressing.
3. Continued participation of Indian scientists in the CMS, ALICE experiments at the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC), CERN, Geneva.
4. Continued participation of India in the FAIR (Facility for Antiproton and Ion Research) project
at GSI, Darmstadt, Germany. Design and development of in-kind items such as power
converters, beam stoppers, superconducting magnets, detector components, etc. in progress.
11.9 It is noted that the Department has adopted and implemented the principle of reciprocity
and parity with regard to the use of mega-facilities in the basic research undertaken by our
scientists. This much-appreciated initiative of the Department is likely to work as an enabler in
injecting greater confidence in our scientists and would also lead to the acknowledgement of our
scientific expertise at an international level. The Committee values the partnership between the
DST and the Department of Atomic Energy and feels that such efforts would develop the much-

9
needed capacity building in the university and academic sector for building mega facilities for
basic research. It will enable the Department to explore possibilities of collaboration with other
reputed scientific departments such as the Departments of Biotechnology, Scientific Research,
Space and Ministry of Earth Sciences. The Committee feels that such initiatives need systematic
attention and financial nurturing so that the perennial neglect of basic research in the country
is duly addressed and the systemic pitfalls are avoided.
12. INDIA-BASED NEUTRINO OBSERV ATORY PROJECT (INO)
12.1 The India-based Neutrino Observatory (INO) Project is a multi-institutional effort aimed at building
a world-class underground laboratory with a rock cover of approximately1200 metres for non-accelerator
based high energy and nuclear physics research in India.
12.2 The project includes construction of an underground laboratory and associated surface facilities at
Pottipuram in Bodi West hills of Theni District of Tamil Nadu; construction of an Iron Calorimeter
(ICAL) detector for studying neutrinos and setting up of National Centre for High Energy Physics at
Madurai for the operation and maintenance of the underground laboratory, human resource development
and detector R&D along with its applications. The underground laboratory, consisting of a large cavern
of size 132m X 26m X 20m and several smaller caverns, will be accessed by a 2100 m long and 7.5
m wide tunnel.
12.3 The initial goal of INO is to study neutrinos. The ICAL detector is designed to address some of
these key open problems in a unique way. Over the years, this underground facility is expected to develop
into a full-fledged underground science laboratory for other studies in physics, biology, geology and
hydrology. Development of detector technology and its varied applications are two of the most important
aspects of the project.
12.4 In response to the query relating to the likely benefits of INO, it was informed by the Department
that the primary goal of the INO is to study the properties of the fundamental particle called" neutrino"
which is the most exciting area of research in particle physics after the discovery of Higgs Boson. In
the light of Neutrino research having attracted serious attention of the scientific community world over,
the project will have an international standing and will have a good potential in bringing out scientific
findings of very high impact. The project will also lead to Human Resource Development in basic science
research and strong industrial base in detector technology. Science students across the country will have
the opportunity to develop sophisticated detectors and electronics using their own hands.
12.5 The Committee takes note of the joint initiative taken by the Departments of Science and
Technology and Atomic Energy in setting up the India-based Neutrino observatory for cutting-
edge research in Neutrino studies. The Committee wishes all the success to "Asia's first state-
of-the-art facility" to provide research facility in particle physics. Furthermore, the Committee
recommends that necessary budgetary provisions should be made available for the observatory.
12.6 The Committee hopes that in the years to come, the observatory will transform into an
Observatory Par Excellence setting international standards and provide high quality research
facility to science students across the country, and help them develop sophisticated detectors and
electronics using their own hands and producing new insights in Neutrino studies.

10
13. THIRTY METER TELESCOPE
13.1 The Thirty Meter Telescope (TMT) is world's largest night time Astronomy Telescope to be set up
in USA by several international partners. TMT will be the world's most advanced and capable ground-
based optical, near-infrared, and mid-infrared observatory. It will integrate the latest innovations in
precisions control, segmented mirror design and adaptive optics.
13.2 Thirty Meter T elescope Project is located at Mauna Kea, Hawaii, the USA. India has become a full
'Member' of the project on 2nd December, 2014.
13.3 The TMT will be constructed at a cost of US$ 1.47 billion (in 2012 Base Year Dollars) by an
international consortium consisting of institutions from the USA, Canada, Japan, India and China. From
the Indian side, this will be a joint project of the Department of Science and Technology (DST) and the
Department of Atomic Energy (DAE). With its contributions, India will be a 10 percent partner in the
project and 70 percent of its contributions will be "in kind". This will translate into 25 to 30 observing
nights on the telescope for Indian scientists per year. Total budgetary allocation to the project will be
` 1299.80 crores from 2014-2023.
13.4 This will enable Indian scientists to access a state-of-the-art telescope to answer some of the most
fundamental questions in modern science. Indian institutions and industry will acquire gaining access to
sophisticated technologies of relevance to the country. India will also become a founding member of an
important international scientific project. This partnership will also enhance India's technological capabilities
in high-technology areas such as primary mirror segment figuring and polishing, mirror support system
and edge sensor assembly and testing, software for observatory controls, data analysis pipelines, and
adaptive optics techniques.
13.5 As regards Indian contribution, the Indian Institute of Astrophysics (IIA) is leading the Indian effort
in the TMT project. Crucial part of the mirror segment contribution of TMT will be made by the IIA.
13.6 This will be a national project anchored in Bangalore and led by IIA, Aryabhatta Research Institute
of Observational Sciences (ARIES), Nainital and Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics
(IUCAA), Pune. It will leverage the best of science and technology from wherever available in the
country from R&D institutions, higher educational institutions and industry. All interested scientists from
the country will get time on the TMT for their scientific studies on competitive basis.
13.7 The Committee believes that the proposed Thirty Meter Telescope has tremendous potential
to unravel the myriad mysteries of the universe. It is likely to become a tool for the Indian
astronomy in keeping up the level of excellence in research in astronomy and astrophysics of
the country. The Committee hopes that the TMT project would help the country to embark on
world class, international science collaborations and also help develop the required human resources
in the field.
14. NATIONAL SUPERCOMPUTING MISSION
14.1 National Supercomputing Mission is driven by the aim to consolidate and build synergy in various
ongoing efforts in supercomputing across the country.

11
14.2 Some of the mission oriented departments such as Defense and Research Development Organisation
(DRDO), DAE and other few leading academic institutions were involved in the use of supercomputers.
However, in the recent times, many more departments and research laboratories in government, financial
sector, telecom industry, e-governance, UIDAI, education, and intelligence agencies have also come into
the fold of users of supercomputers. Private sectors such as pharmaceutical industry, automotive industry,
online gaming industry, entertainment industry, online services with Indian language contents.
14.3 Supercomputing has potential applications in the fields of climate modeling, weather prediction,
engineering including CFD, CSM, CEM, Agriculture Research and Education, Computational Biology,
Materials & Chemicals., Molecular Dynamics, Atomic energy simulations, Security and defence applications,
financial and Big Data Analytics. Additionally it can also be used in the disaster simulations and management,
discoveries beyond Earth (Astrophysics) and Information Repositories & Government Information Systems.
14.4 The major objectives of the Mission are:-
(i) Make India a world leader in HPC and to enhance the national capability in solving grand
challenge problems of national and global relevance
(ii) Empower scientists & researchers with state-of-the-art compute facilities for their cutting-
edge research in respective Domains
(iii) Reduce redundancies and avoiding duplication of efforts and investments and
(iv) Attain global competitiveness and self-reliance in HPC
14.5 The Mission is partnered by the DST, the Department of Electronics and Information Technology
in consultation with the Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru and Centre for Development of Advance
Computing (C-DAC), Pune. These organisations are preparing the strategies for implementing the
Programme. In view of the inter-ministerial nature of the proposed mission, National Supercomputing
Mission follows six principles namely ONE Mission, ONE Goal, Mission First, Centralised Planning,
Decentralised Implementation, Clear Division of Roles, Responsibilities and Costs, Harmonisation,
Coordination and Sharing; and Federated Governance Structure.
Financial aspects
14.6 Total budget allocated for the Supercomputing Mission is ` 4, 500 crore out of which DST will
be contributing ` 2,740 crore; whereas ` 1,760 Crore will be contributed by DeitY. The project is to
be completed within seven years. Some of the key deliverables of the project are 70+ HPC installations,
HPC Grid, Million-core cloud, development of HPC applications, 20000 HPC-aware manpower, R&D for
next-generation Exa-Scale HPC. The total cost of this seven years mission is ` 4500 crore with following
breakup: In the present situation, the requirement of DST is ` 599.25 crore during the remaining two
years of the XII Plan and the balance of ` 2,140.75 crore to be allocated in the XIII Plan. Similar
requirements for DeitY are ` 387.25 crore during the remaining two years of the XII Plan and the balance
of ` 1,372.75 crore to be allocated in the XIII Plan.
Physical Performance
14.7 The Department submitted that the capability building during the XII and XIII Plan would be
towards solving computational problems that would move the nation up the value chain with higher levels

12
of intellectual and scientific talents. The changing ecosystem in the country as well as in the world
renders this initiative, to build indigenous supercomputers, as an essential area for the country. In spite
of the exponential growth in the computing power, both in terms of available technology and the need
of the nation, the cost of the computing and the network has not grown exponentially. In fact, they have
come down significantly to make supercomputing more affordable today than ever before. During the
X Plan, the peak computing powers were in Teraflop/s range and they have grown to Petaflop/s now
and are likely to reach Exascale by the end of XIII Five Year Plan. Further the advent of accelerators
has enabled large computing power enhancements, for specific applications at very low cost and power.
With advancements in cluster computing and the birth of cloud computing, it has become possible to
build home brew supercomputers by interconnecting off-the-shelf components to yield multi-
Teraflop/s, multi-Terabyte storage and easy to maintain computers. The storage revolution is witnessing
rapid growth than the computing revolution, providing the paradigm shift from computer-centric to data-
centric supercomputing. It is now called as the Fourth Paradigm. With these technological changes,
newer areas of applications of supercomputing such as biology, materials science, finance and data
repositories are coming up in large scale.
14.8 The Department submitted that Government S&T Departments/Agencies such as Council of Scientific
and Industrial Research (CSIR), Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES), and many other institutions under
the Ministries of Science & Technology (MST/DST), Communications & Information Technology
(MCIT) and Human Resource Development (MHRD) have recognised greater need for Supercomputing
facilities.
14.9 The Department further added that the national challenges and global issues such as energy, climate
change, water and terrorism/Homeland Security call for global solutions and facilities that are comparable
to that available elsewhere in the world. Thus, all problems from the research in fundamental sciences
to solutions for an inclusive society need supercomputing.
14.10 The Committee finds that India was a leader in Supercomputing till 2005 but it has now
slipped down in the global ranking to 14th place. The Committee is of the view that boosting
indigenous efforts in Supercomputing capability is in strategic interests of India, more so when
Information Technology capabilities of the country are recognised worldwide. The Committee
hopes that the mission will help India attain leadership and self-reliance in the field of
Supercomputing. The Committee recommends that considering the significance of Supercomputing,
the Department should make every possible effort including establishment of requisite ecosystem
for the success of the Mission to successfully implement the project in a time-bound manner. The
Committee further recommends that the Department must ensure that the allocated outlays for
the scheme are fully utilised.
15. THE NATIONAL MISSION ON NANO SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
15.1 The National Mission on Nano Science & Technology is an umbrella programme to promote R&D
in this emerging area. The Nano Mission continued to forge linkages with other government agencies and
industry organisations in promoting Nano science and technology in the country and also orchestrate
national dialogues on issues which are manifestly multi-agency issues. Efforts for Development of
Standards for Nanotechnology continued in association with National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi.

13
Financial Performance
15.2 Funds utilisation trend over the years is given below in the following table.
(` in Crore)
Sl. No.  Financial Year Funds Allocated Funds Utilised
(` in crore)
1. 2007-08 120.00 120.00
2. 2008-09 130.00 130.00
3. 2009-10 70.00 70.00
4. 2010-11 99.00 97.81
5. 2011-12 89.55 88.44
6. 2012-13 85.00 84.78
7. 2013-14 65.00 64.99
8. 2014-15 (as on 25.03.2015) 65.00 63.01
15.3 The Committee finds that fund utilisation under the Mission has been satisfactory in the
last eight years. However, the Committee recommends that the Department should inject the
qualitative parameters in terms of utilization of resources of the National Mission on Nano
Science & Technology.
Physical Performance
15.4 As a result of the promotional initiatives taken by Nano Mission and earlier by NSTI, the following
outputs have emerged: India today is placed 3rd in the world in terms of scientific publications. It was
placed at 6th in 2011, 4th in 2012 and 3rd positions in 2013. A community of over 2000 researchers
in the field of Nano Science & Technology has been established. The initiatives have resulted in 5000
research papers in refereed journals, 186 Patents, 600 PhDs and 154 Post-Doctoral Fellows, 900
M.Tech./M.Sc. Students and training of 3500 other technical manpower. 'Guidelines and Best Practices
for Safe Handling of Nano materials in Research Laboratories and Industries' has been evolved. Model
syllabus for M.Tech in Nano Science and Technology has been prepared.
15.5 The Committee asked about the status of the RUSNANO collaboration and reasons behind the delay
in the completion of Nano Mission programme. In response thereto, it was informed by the Department
that in the first phase of the Nano Mission fundamental science and the human resource aspects
progressed well but the technology component, which is the hardest part, could not take off with the
kind of speed and strength that was expected. Highlighting the problems, the Department informed that
the main problem was that the Cabinet approval for disbursal of loans and other things and the mechanisms
for it took a considerable time to get straightened out.
15.6 The Department admitted that the technology component of Nano mission was a weak part of the
Mission. But even in the second phase of the Mission, the Department will be focusing on technological
aspect and the RUSNANO will also take off faster for which the timeframe is 2017. In terms of scientific

14
publications at the international level, India is third in the world and India has been able to establish an
eco system for doing good science and pushing technology.
15.7 The Committee desired to know some of the technologies that have been developed and commercialised
from Nano Mission funded projects. In response thereto, the Department submitted that some of funded
projects are:
(i) Discovery of voltage developing across a single walled carbon nanotube when a liquid flows
over it at IISc., Bangalore.
(ii) W ater purification systems for arsenic & iron removal and contaminants and pesticide removal
using nanotechnology developed at IIT-Madras. Technology for Fluoride removal is also being
developed.
(iii) Antimicrobial Nano finish based on nanosilver, which does not give undesirable colour to white
and pale dyed fabric developed by IIT-Delhi.
(iv) Nano TiO 2 based self-cleaning Nano finish for textiles developed at IIT-Delhi.
(v) Electrospun nanofibre web based automotive filter developed at IIT-Delhi.
(vi) Funding of water purification technology at IIT, Madras, in ten years for the removal of the
pesticides which forms part of all filters of Eureka Forbes today in the market.
(vii) IIT, Madras developed non-electricity based arsenic and iron removal.
15.8 Highlighting the achievements under Nano Mission funded projects; the Committee was apprised
that Nano Mission has been able to satisfactorily achieve its goals of basic research promotion, human
resource development, establishment of research infrastructure and access to international research
facilities.
15.9 However, Nano Mission has not been able to pursue the technology development and commercialisation
agenda in a big way so far because of the operational inadequacy of loan disbursal mechanisms envisaged
at the time of launch of the Mission.
15.10 The Committee notes with satisfaction that India holds the third rank in terms of publications
of papers on Nano science & technology. The Committee also takes cognisance of the performance
of the Department in the first phase of Nano Mission especially in fundamental sciences and
human resources. The Committee believes that the Department would take necessary steps to
achieve the technological aspects within a timeframe of two years in the second phase of the
National Mission on Nano Science & Technology.
16. IMPROVING THE QUALITIY OF RESEARCH IN THE UNIVERSITIES
16.1 Being concerned about the decline in research in the university because of neglect of university
Research and preference to premiere specialised research institutions, the Committee asked the Department
about the steps taken to improve the quality of university Research.
16.2 Replying to a query of the Committee, the Department informed that it had taken some significant
initiatives to improve the quality of Research in the Eleventh five year Plan which are continuing in the

15
current Plan as well. Some significant schemes to increase institutional capacity for Research are:
(i) "Fund for improvement of S&T infrastructures in universities and higher educational institutions
(FIST)" since 2001, (ii) "Promotion of University Research and Scientific Excellence (PURSE)"
since 2008 and iii) Consolidation of Research and Innovation and Excellence in Women Universities
(CURIE)" since 2009. (iii) DST also provides service of many sophisticated analytical instruments
to researchers mainly from less-endowed institutions and colleges through another program titled
as "Sophisticated Analytical Instrument Facility (SAIF)".
16.3 The FIST, a reactive Programme provides support for creating basic infrastructure, enabling facilities
and creating conducive environment for promoting R&D in new and emerging areas including ready
access to information system, networking, databases & scientific journals and also for computational
facilities. During the last 14 years, nearly 2150 departments including more than 330 PG-Colleges
spread over around 610 academic institutions have been covered at a total investment of more than
` 1900 crore.
16.4 "Promotion of University Research and Scientific Excellence (PURSE)":- In appreciation of the
research at the performing Universities, the Department of Science and Technology (DST) pro-actively
initiated a Program titled "Promotion of University Research and Scientific Excellence (PURSE)" to
create, nurture and strengthen the research eco-system in performing universities exclusively across the
country. This Program intends to incentivize the research in niche areas in leading and performing
universities with adequate financial support and associated flexibility. Presently, 44 Universities have been
identified in two sets (14 in 1st Set and 30 in the 2nd Set) based on their scientific and academic
performance measured through h-index as well as research publications over 10 years period and are
receiving financial support. A total investment of Rs 890 crore is currently estimated for this purpose.
16.5 Consolidation of Research and Innovation and Excellence in Women Universities (CURIE):- CURIE
is another pro-actively initiated program of the DST. Under CURIE, till date, the Department has
supported Six (6) Women only Universities with an investment of ` 23.11 Crore in order to develop
State-of-art infrastructure and research facilities to carry out cutting-edge research in their respective
fields.
16.6 Sophisticated Analytical Instrument Facilities (SAIF), is infrastructure support related program of
the DST which provides services of various sophisticated analytical instruments to many researchers in
general and specially from the institutions which do not have such instruments to enable them to pursue
R&D activities requiring such high-end facilities and keep pace with developments taking place globally.
Presently 11 SAIFs are functioning in different parts of the country under the programme and 7 new
SAIFs are in the process of being set up. The details of the programme and Institute/University-wise
details of support during the last five years are given in the following table.
(
` in Crore)
Programs/Scheme Financial Year
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 T otal
1 234 5
FIST Program 122.1 88.8 136.8 97.3 142.2 587.2
PURSE Program 36.1 89.5 88.1 53.1 68.6 335.4

16
1 234 5
CURIE 23.1
SAIF PROGRAM 11.0 4.4 11.5 16.3 15.8 59.0
T
OTAL 1004.7
16.7 The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken by the Department to increase institutional
capacity for Research in FIST, PURSE, CURIE and SAIF Programmes and the support extended
to a number of universities and colleges for carrying out cutting edge research in their respective
field which has resulted in improvement of performance of the universities. It has been observed
that Indian universities in general, and regional centers based in the hinterland in particular, are
deprived of requisite basic infrastructure and necessary wherewithal to undertake quality research.
International collaboration may be encouraged in such cases, both in terms of developing
infrastructure and capacity building of the personnel.
16.8 The Committee notes the improvement in the performance of some major universities/
colleges. However, the Committee is of the view that qualitative improvement is needed to make
Indian universities and research institutes at par with the international standards. International
Best Practices need to be inculcated in the tertiary education and higher research in India. It
is, therefore, recommended that the Ministry should take steps to meet these objectives. Financial
support, technical and technological know-how and R&D support should not be confined to a few
major cities, and the requisite expertise and knowledge must be disseminated to the remote
areas of the country as it would help capture the untapped knowledge resources in the country.
The Ministry needs to bring about uniformity in the quality of research conducted in institutions
and universities spread across the country preferably by the end of XII Five Year Plan.
16.9 The Committee finds that many of the top universities have research Centres in collaboration
with other institutes in interdisciplinary fields. The Committee is of the view that many of the
new technologies coming out of these research centres would help in tackling the problems
plaguing the country. In setting up the Centres of Excellence, the Department should reach out
to international institutions and seek more project-based and targeted collaboration with foreign
universities and research institutes.
17. KNOWLEDGE INVOLVEMENT IN RESEARCH ADV ANCEMENT THROUGH NURTURING
(KIRAN):
17.1 DISHA programme was renamed as Knowledge Involvement in Research Advancement through
Nurturing (KIRAN) in 2014-15. The Department informed that KIRAN consolidates all women-centric
programmes into a holistic scheme that promotes gender equality, empowers women with S&T inputs
to develop and adapt appropriate technology, enables transfer of proven technologies and demonstration
of live technology models and supports/encourages women scientists constrained with a break in their
career to return to mainstream science.
17.2 The Department claimed that KIRAN will address various issues related with women scientists (e.g.
unemployment, relocation etc.), provide opportunities in research, entrepreneurship, science communication,

17
technology development/demonstration and self employment etc. & Support research infrastructure
development through its schemes namely CURIE and WTP.
Financial Performance
17.3 Plan B.E. outlay of ` 53.00 crore for erstwhile DISHA Programme for Women in Science and new
KIRAN in 2014-15 was reduced to ` 44.00 crore at R.E. Stage. When the Committee desired to know
the reasons behind reduction in allocation it was informed that allocation was reduced to ` 44 crore by
Finance/Budget Section of DST due to paucity of funds. At B.E. 2015-16, Plan budgetary allocation has
again been kept at ` 53.00 crore against the projected outlay of ` 98.00 crore.
Physical Progress
17.4. 280 projects were approved for financial support to provide opportunities to women scientist and
technologists for pursuing research in basic or applied sciences in frontier areas of science and engineering.
Also, 65 new projects were sanctioned to women scientists working in the domain of lab-to-land
technology transfer, its adaptation and scaling of location-specific interventions. One year training and
internship in the area of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) and their management was provided to 85
women scientists.
17.5 The Mobility Scheme under KIRAN intends to provide a harmonious environment during early
phases of women scientist where they would like to stay active in research in addition to attending to
their other responsibilities in the domestic front.
17.6 The Committee notes that there is a very small share of the women in the scientific R&D
in the country. The Committee feels that the Department and various institutes under it should
also be forthcoming in recruiting more female researchers and scientists into their organisation.
While taking note of steady increase in number of women scientists being supported under
different schemes, the Committee feels that the number is negligible. The Committee feels that
the KIRAN being launched by the Department in place of DISHA, should not only iron out the
problems and difficulties but also empower women scientists to develop and appropriate new
technologies.
Enhancing Outreach of Programme:
17.7 Department has already organized more than 25 Sensitization workshops at different locations in
order to popularize this unique programme throughout the country and more are in the pipeline. These
workshops have significantly enhanced the outreach of this programme even to remote/difficult areas like
J&K, North-East region, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, and so on which has resulted into manifolds
increase in number of women scientists availing this scheme. In the year 2014, Department has also
launched a dedicated web portal for online proposal submission.
17.8 The framework laid down in Expenditure Finance Committee document of KIRAN programme
encompasses an inclusive approach. The programme is aimed to address women specific issues and
some new components like Mobility have already been conceptualized and would be launched soon.
Further, there is always a scope of improvement in the programme and to meet this, Department regularly
organizes brainstorming sessions and meetings with experts to solicit suggestions and modifications for

18
better functioning and more fruitful outcome. Also, there is a specific relaxation in age (5 years) for
differently-abled women scientists, under KIRAN.
17.9 The Committee hopes that scheme for empowerment of women in its new form will not only
iron out the difficulties of women scientists but also address the crucial issues like mobility of
women and encourage them to pursue a career in scientific research as also for augmenting the
women scientists pool in the country. The Committee further notes that there has been a
substantial increase in the amount of fellowship for the women scientists under the KIRAN
programme from 30,000 to 50,000 rupees. The Committee observes that the fellowship under the
new KIRAN scheme should be tax-free and should not impose unnecessary pre-conditions in
purchasing equipment and other products required for the research.
18. SCHOLARSHIPS FOR RETAINING RESEARCH TALENT AND PROMOTION OF SCIENCE
IN THE COUNTRY
18.1 The Committee desired to know the details of efforts being made by the Department for retaining
research talent in the Country and initiatives announced in the new Science, Technology and Innovation
Policy, 2013 to check brain-drain. Replying to the query the Department informed that it has taken
several steps for retaining research talent in the country. These steps include creation of centres of
excellence and facilities in emerging and frontline areas in academic and national institutes, induction of
new and attractive fellowships, strengthening infrastructure for R&D, encouraging public-private R&D
partnerships etc. Launching of programmes like Nano Mission, Mega Facilities, Solar Energy Research
Initiative, Nano Mission (Phase-II), setting up of Peta scale supercomputing facilities etc. and creation
of a new structure for basic research by establishing a Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB)
in the country demonstrates the commitment of the Department to retain the scientists to carry out
quality research in the country.
18.2 Department also informed that Ministry of Science and Technology is implementing several initiatives
including the fellowship scheme to attract and retain Indian scientists who have settled in various parts
of the world for pursuing research in India in their respective field of expertise as well as in home
country research programs. These initiatives include:-
(i) "Ramanujan Fellowships" seeks to attract brilliant scientists and engineers from all over the
world to take up scientific research in India. The Ramanujan Fellows can work in any of the
scientific institutions and universities in the country and they are eligible for receiving regular
research grants through the extramural funding schemes of various S&T agencies of the
Government of India. Since its inception, 184 Indian origin scientists working abroad have
been offered this "Fellowship". In the last 5 years, total number of 781 scientists applied for
Ramanujan Fellowship 275 selected, 161 accepted and finally 116 scientists were absorbed.
(ii) Ramalingaswami re-entry Fellowship of Department of Biotechnology (DBT) is a targeted
schemes aimed to attract highly skilled researchers (Indian nationals) working overseas by
providing them attractive avenue to pursue their R&D interests in Indian institutions. In the
last 5 years, total numbers of 791 scientists applied for the fellowship, 222 were selected, 119
accepted and finally 61 scientists were absorbed.

19
(iii) Under the Innovation in Science Pursuit for Inspired Research (INSPIRE) Faculty Scheme of
DST, young Indian citizens and people of Indian origin including NRI/PIO status with PhD
(in science, mathematics, engineering, pharmacy, medicine, and agriculture related subjects)
from any recognized university in the world are offered contractual research positions in
Indian Institutions / Universities to carry out independent research and emerge as a leader in
future science & technology. In the last 5 years, total number of 589 scientists applied for
INSPIRE Faculty Award out of them 170 were selected, 116 accepted the proposal and finally
55 scientists were absorbed.
(iv) Four scientists have been supported under National Jawaharlal Nehru Science Fellowship
Programme.
(v) Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) has a scheme to attract Scientists/
Technologists of Indian Origin (STIO) under which they are appointed at an identified CSIR
laboratory so as to nurture a research field in their area of expertise. Total of 667 scientists
have been offered the award letter in the last 5 years, and 396 have accepted the offer. They
are working in cutting edge research areas in various national laboratories and academic
institutions in the country. 232 of these scientists have been absorbed as a faculty or as a
Scientist in our institutions.
18.3 The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken by the Ministry of Science & Technology
that have resulted in the inflow of accomplished researchers back to India. Measures taken by
the three Departments have led to the increasing reversal of flow of researchers. The Committee
recommends that further measures should be taken to retain bright Indian scientists coming
back to India and attract the young talents so that they find it more appealing to stay in India.
For that purpose, the Department should increase the scholarships and stipends provided to
researchers. The Committee also recommends that the research funding and grants should be
linked to the potential and performance of the research undertaken. The research undertaken
should be incentivised, based on its utility and performance.
18.4 The Committee notes with serious concern the decline in the number of research publications
in journals and publications of national and international repute in various areas of scientific
research. The Committee also believes that there is no incentive or concrete action plan to
promote such publications by our scientists and researchers. The Committee is not satisfied with
the policies pursued by the Department to encourage the commercialisation of patents registered
by the innovators. Necessary incentives to researchers/innovators and scientists for the purpose
should be put in place and purposively implemented.
19. INCREASING PRIV ATE SECTOR INVESTMENT IN R & D
19.1 As stated in the 'Research and Development Statistics 2011-12', brought out by DST, the National
expenditure on R&D has been registering a consistent rise in the past few years. India's expenditure on
R&D as percentage of GDP has increased from 0.81 percent in 2004-05 to 0.8 percent in 2009-10. In
absolute terms, the total national R&D expenditure increased by more than 50 percent from ` 24,117.24
crore in 2004-05 to ` 53,014.3 crore in 2009-10, representing a significant increase considering the
overall resources of the country. The Government intends to raise the national R&D expenditure, as

20
percentage of GDP, to 2 percent by the end of XII plan period through various measures including but
not confined to increase in plan allocations for scientific departments, setting up of new institutions for
science education and research, creation of Centres of Excellence and facilities in emerging and frontline
areas in academic and national institutes, induction of new and attractive fellowships, strengthening
infrastructure for Research and Development (R&D), and encouraging public-private R&D partnerships.
Further, setting up of new S&T institutions on the lines of All India Institute of Medical Sciences and
Indian Institute of Technology's have been envisaged in the recent budget for the year 2015-16.
19.2 According to the Department steps are being taken to achieve 2% percent target by the end of the
XII Plan. It was also stated that the Department of Science and Technology (DST) has been consistently
pressing on the need for increasing the allocations for Research and Development with the erstwhile
Planning Commission.
19.3 The percentage share of Private sector in national R&D expenditure has increased from 19.3
percent in 2001-02 to 25.9 percent 2005-06 and further to 28.9 percent in 2009-10. Providing the details
of efforts made by the Department to motivate private sector to increase their share of investment into
the R&D voluntarily in XII Five Year Plan, the Department apprised that it has taken several steps to
encourage research and development with enhanced participation of the private sector in the country.
Steps being taken include: Policy advocacy, increase in investment in R&D including by industry and
strategic sectors, expansion of basic science infrastructure including sophisticated analytical instruments
and lab facilities for the usage of both public and private research, evolving new models of public-private
partnership in scientific research in the fields of drug research, instrumentation, clean energy, etc.
Further, a White Paper on stimulation of investment of private sector into R&D envisages building of
large pool of quality professionals suited for industrial R&D, well designed incentive mechanisms to
trigger commercialization of R&D outputs, simplification and rationalization of entire value chain of
industrial R&D and technology commercialization processes.
19.4 The Department also informed that it offers several incentives to the private sector for R&D,
e.g. Cent percent write-off of revenue and capital expenditures in R&D, weighted tax reduction on in-
house R&D, income tax exemption to donation made to approved non-commercial scientific and industrial
organizations, custom duty exemption to R&D institutions, etc. The Department is also encouraging
private sector to engage in some of the R&D programmes of the Department. It is expected that, over
the years, private sector investment would increase in a gradual manner.
19.5 The Committee notes that the Department is striving to synchronise the efforts made by
the public sector with the private sector in the scientific research domain. However, such syncing
process must take into account the security of the 'common goods' and environmental concerns.
Rather than focussing on exemptions at the input levels, outputs should be incentivised. The
partnership should be result oriented and the benefits should be linked with the performance.
20. NATIONAL MISSION FOR SUSTAINING THE HIMALAYAN ECOSYSTEM
20.1 The National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) has enunciated the launch of a National
Mission for Sustaining the Himalayan Ecosystem (NMSHE). The Mission needs to deliver better
understanding of the coupling between the Himalayan ecosystem and the climate factors and provide
inputs for Himalayan Sustainable development while addressing also the protection of a fragile ecosystem.
This will require the joint effort of climatologists, glaciologists and other experts.

21
20.2 Recogn izing the importance of scientific and technological inputs required for sustaining the fragile
Himalayan Ecosystem, the Ministry of Science and Technology has been charged with the nodal responsibility
of coordinating this mission. However, the mission requires valuable cooperation of Indian Himalayan
States, the planning commission and the Ministry of Environment and Forests to achieve its goals.
20.3 The primary objective of the Mission is to develop in a time bound manner a sustainable national
capacity to continuously assess the health status of the Himalayan Ecosystem and enable policy bodies
in their policy-formulation functions as also to assist States in the Indian Himalayan Region with
implementation of actions selected for sustainable development.
20.4 The mission attempts to address some important issues concerning
(a) Himalayan Glaciers and the associated hydrological consequences,
(b) Biodiversity conservation and protection,
(c) Wild life conservation and protection,
(d) Traditional knowledge societies and their livelihood and
(e) Planning for sustaining of the Himalayan Ecosystem.
20.5 Under the National Mission for Sustaining the Himalayan Ecosystem [NMSHE] as part of the
National Action Plan for Climate Change (NAPCC), six major research programmes have been initiated
/ supported. It includes vulnerability assessment, sustainability and to enhance strategic knowledge in
Climate Change. A number of detailed Technical reports about the R&D work were brought out on
Climate Change.
20.6 The Mission has been allocated an outlay of ` 550.00 crore during the XII Five Year Plan period.
Informing about the progress made in National Mission the Department informed that a major initiative
of establishing 6 Thematic Task Forces anchored around key knowledge institutions in the Himalayan
region as outlined in the Mission document was taken up. The same has been finalised. Following are
six task forces:-
(1) Natural and Geographical wealth by Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, Dehradun;
(2) Forest Resources and Plant biodiversity by GB Pant Institute on Himalayan Environment and
Development, Almora;
(3) Micro flora and fauna and wild life and animal population by Wild Life Institute of India,
Dehradun ;
(4) Traditional Knowledge systems by Jawaharlal Lal Nehru University;
(5) Water, Ice, snow and glaciers by National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee and
(6) Himalayan Agriculture by Indian Council for Agriculture Research.
20.7 The Department further informed that an Inter-University Consortium on "the Himalayan Cryosphere:
Science, and Society" was also launched wherein four universities viz., JNU, Kashmir University, Jammu
University and Sikkim University participated. A major programme for building human capacity in glaciology

22
and related areas under Indo-Swiss S&T cooperation was also launched. Under this programme, it was
proposed to impart training to 30 students annually through a three level training programme jointly by
Indian and Swiss faculty. It was also informed that DST also initiated discussion with International
Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD), Kathmandu for developing a Regional Cooperation
framework for multi-lateral cooperation in the areas of Himalayan Ecosystem.
20.8 The Committee hopes that National Mission for Sustaining Himalayan Ecosystem, a part of
National Action Plan for Climate Change, will follow the Mission Document and its task forces
will accomplish the targets of the Mission. The Committee recommends that considering the
enormous challenges of Climate Change and fragile Himalayan ecology, this Mission should be
adequately funded.
20.9 The focus of the Ministry of Science and Technology should be on endeavouring to acquire
a global leadership position in the frontier areas of sciences including material sciences, synthetic
biology, genetics and astrophysics, etc. International partnerships in these areas should be
established with countries and companies with known expertise and leadership in these and other
areas of big ticket sciences.
20.10 The Department should consider sharing their research and innovations with the state governments
and their instrumentalities so as to ensure a useful dissemination of knowledge throughout the country.
The Committee also recommends that special efforts should be made to disseminate information and
knowledge of the schemes of the Department in far-flung districts and particularly in the states of North
East.

23
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
TREND OF UTILISATION IN THE LAST THREE YEARS
The Committee finds that though utilisation of allocated resources by the Department
improved considerably in the last three years, the allocation to some of the schemes was reduced
due to delay in seeking administrative approval. The Committee is of the view that grounds cited
by the Department are of routine administrative nature which could have been avoided by the
Department as delay in completion of infrastructure projects leads to time and cost overrun and
affects research & development work. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the loopholes
which led to underutilisation of funds should be plugged and delay in seeking administrative
approval should be avoided, and also responsibility for delay should be fixed. (Para 7.6)
MECHANISM TO MONITOR AND REVIEW THE ONGOING SCHEMES
The Committee is of the opinion that a robust monitoring mechanism is essential for
ensuring timely completion of various projects to avoid time and cost overrun and to ensure full
utilisation of the allocated funds. The Committee notes the performance of the Department of
Science & Technology evaluated by third party under Result Framework Document and finds
that there is a considerable scope for improvement in the performance and the Department
needs to further strengthen its monitoring mechanism to make it more robust for timely
completion of projects and optimum utilisation of funds in the year 2015-16. (Para 8.3)
BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2015-16
The Committee takes strong exception to the fact that despite Department's request for
allocation of more funds, the Ministry of Finance has not paid any heed to the matter in the past
two years. Such constraints only circumscribe the functioning of important projects undertaken
by the Department. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in future the Ministry of
Finance should give a favourable response to the request of the Department. (Para 9.6)
MEGA FACILITIES FOR BASIC RESEARCH
It is noted that the Department has adopted and implemented the principle of reciprocity
and parity with regard to the use of mega-facilities in the basic research undertaken by our
scientists. This much-appreciated initiative of the Department is likely to work as an enabler in
injecting greater confidence in our scientists and would also lead to the acknowledgement of our
scientific expertise at an international level. The Committee values the partnership between the
DST and the Department of Atomic Energy and feels that such efforts would develop the much-
needed capacity building in the university and academic sector for building mega facilities for
basic research. It will enable the Department to explore possibilities of collaboration with other
reputed scientific departments such as the Departments of Biotechnology, Scientific Research,
Space and Ministry of Earth Sciences. The Committee feels that such initiatives need systematic
attention and financial nurturing so that the perennial neglect of basic research in the country
is duly addressed and the systemic pitfalls are avoided. (Para 11.9)
23

24
INDIA-BASED NEUTRINO OBSERV ATORY PROJECT (INO)
The Committee takes note of the joint initiative taken by the Departments of Science &
Technology and Atomic Energy in setting up the India-based Neutrino observatory for cutting-
edge research in Neutrino studies. The Committee wishes all the success to "Asia's first state-
of-the-art facility" to provide research facility in particle physics. Furthermore, the Committee
recommends that necessary budgetary provisions should be made available for the observatory.
(Para 12.5)
The Committee hopes that in the years to come, the observatory will transform into an
Observatory Par Excellence setting international standards and provide high quality research
facility to science students across the country, and help them develop sophisticated detectors and
electronics using their own hands and producing new insights in Neutrino studies. (Para 12.6)
THIRTY METER TELESCOPE
The Committee believes that the proposed Thirty Meter Telescope has tremendous potential
to unravel the myriad mysteries of the universe. It is likely to become a tool for the Indian
astronomy in keeping up the level of excellence in research in astronomy and astrophysics of
the country. The Committee hopes that the TMT project would help the country to embark on
world class, international science collaborations and also help develop the required human resources
in the field. (Para 13.7)
NATIONAL SUPERCOMPUTING MISSION
The Committee finds that India was a leader in Supercomputing till 2005 but it has now
slipped down in the global ranking to 14th place. The Committee is of the view that boosting
indigenous efforts in Supercomputing capability is in strategic interests of India, more so when
Information Technology capabilities of the country are recognised worldwide. The Committee
hopes that the mission will help India attain leadership and self-reliance in the field of
Supercomputing. The Committee recommends that considering the significance of Supercomputing,
the Department should make every possible effort including establishment of requisite ecosystem
for the success of the Mission to successfully imp)emcnt the project in a time-bound manner. The
Committee further recommends that the Department must ensure that the allocated outlays for
the scheme are fully utilised. (Para 14.10)
THE NATIONAL MISSION ON NANO SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
The Committee finds that fund utilisation under the Mission has been satisfactory in the
last eight years. However, the Committee recommends that the Department should inject the
qualitative parameters in terms of utilization of resources of the National Mission on Nano
Science & Technology. (Para 15.3)
The Committee notes with satisfaction that India holds the third rank in terms of publications
of papers on Nano science & technology. The Committee also takes cognisance of the performance
of the Department in the first phase of Nano Mission especially in fundamental sciences and
human resources. The Committee believes that the Department would take necessary steps to

25
achieve the technological aspects within a timeframe of two years in the second phase of the
National Mission on Nano Science & Technology. (Para 15.10)
IMPROVING THE QUALITIY OF RESEARCH IN THE UNIVERSITIES
The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken by the Department to increase institutional
capacity for Research in FIST, PURSE, CURIE and SAIF Programmes and the support extended
to a number of universities and colleges for carrying out cutting edge research in their respective
field which has resulted in improvement of performance of the universities. It has been observed
that Indian universities in general, and regional centers based in the hinterland in particular, are
deprived of requisite basic infrastructure and necessary wherewithal to undertake quality research.
International collaboration may be encouraged in such cases, both in terms of developing
infrastructure and capacity building of the personnel. (Para 16.7)
The Committee notes the improvement in the performance of some major universities/
colleges. However, the Committee is of the view that qualitative improvement is needed to make
Indian universities and research institutes at par with the international standards. International
Best Practices need to be inculcated in the tertiary education and higher research in India. It
is, therefore, recommended that the Ministry should take steps to meet these objectives. Financial
support, technical and technological know-how and R&D support should not be confined to a few
major cities, and the requisite expertise and knowledge must be disseminated to the remote
areas of the country as it would help capture the untapped knowledge resources in the country.
The Ministry needs to bring about uniformity in the quality of research conducted in institutions
and universities spread across the country preferably by the end of XII Five Year Plan.
(Para 16.8)
The Committee finds that many of the top universities have research Centres in collaboration
with other institutes in interdisciplinary fields. The Committee is of the view that many of the
new technologies coming out of these research centres would help in tackling the problems
plaguing the country. In setting up the Centres of Excellence, the Department should reach out
to international institutions and seek more project-based and targeted collaboration with foreign
universities and research institutes. (Para 16.9)
KNOWLEDGE INVOLVEMENT IN RESEARCH ADVANCEMENT THROUGH NURTURING (KIRAN):
The Committee notes that there is a very small share of the women in the scientific R&D
in the country. The Committee feels that the Department and various institutes under it should
also be forthcoming in recruiting more female researchers and scientists into their organisation.
While taking note of steady increase in number of women scientists being supported under
different schemes, the Committee feels that the number is negligible. The Committee feels that
the KIRAN being launched by the Department in place of DISHA, should not only iron out the
problems and difficulties but also empower women scientists to develop and appropriate new
technologies. (Para 17.6)
The Committee hopes that scheme for empowerment of women in its new form will not only
iron out the difficulties of women scientists but also address the crucial issues like mobility of

26
women and encourage them to pursue a career in scientific research as also for augmenting the
women scientists pool in the country. The Committee further notes that there has been a
substantial increase in the amount of fellowship for the women scientists under the KIRAN
programme from 30,000 to 50,000 rupees. The Committee observes that the fellowship under the
new KIRAN scheme should be tax-free and should not impose unnecessary pre-conditions in
purchasing equipment and other products required for the research. (Para 17.9)
SCHOLARSHIPS FOR RETAINING RESEARCH TALENT AND PROMOTION OF SCIENCE IN
THE COUNTRY
The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken by the Ministry of Science & Technology
that have resulted in the inflow of accomplished researchers back to India. Measures taken by
the three Departments have led to the increasing reversal of flow of researchers. The Committee
recommends that further measures should be taken to retain bright Indian scientists coming
back to India and attract the young talents so that they find it more appealing to stay in India.
For that purpose, the Department should increase the scholarships and stipends provided to
researchers. The Committee also recommends that the research funding and grants should be
linked to the potential and performance of the research undertaken. The research undertaken
should be incentivised, based on its utility and performance. (Para 18.3)
The Committee notes with serious concern the decline in the number of research publications
in journals and publications of national and international repute in various areas of scientific
research. The Committee also believes that there is no incentive or concrete action plan to
promote such publications by our scientists and researchers. The Committee is not satisfied with
the policies pursued by the Department to encourage the commercialisation of patents registered
by the innovators. Necessary incentives to researchers/innovators and scientists for the purpose
should be put in place and purposively implemented. (Para 18.4)
INCREASING PRIV ATE SECTOR INVESTMENT IN R & D
The Committee notes that the Department is striving to synchronise the efforts made by
the public sector with the private sector in the scientific research domain. However, such syncing
process must take into account the security of the 'common goods' and environmental concerns.
Rather than focussing on exemptions at the input levels, outputs should be incentivised. The
partnership should be result oriented and the benefits should be linked with the performance.
(Para 19.5)
NATIONAL MISSION FOR SUSTAINING THE HIMALAYAN ECOSYSTEM
The Committee hopes that National Mission for Sustaining Himalayan Ecosystem, a part of
National Action Plan for Climate Change, will follow the Mission Document and its task forces
will accomplish the targets of the Mission. The Committee recommends that considering the
enormous challenges of Climate Change and fragile Himalayan ecology, this Mission should be
adequately funded. (Para 20.8)
The focus of the Ministry of Science and Technology should be on endeavouring to acquire
a global leadership position in the frontier areas of sciences including material sciences, synthetic

27
biology, genetics and astrophysics, etc. International partnerships in these areas should be
established with countries and companies with known expertise and leadership in these and other
areas of big ticket sciences. (Para 20.9)
The Department should consider sharing their research and innovations with the state
governments and their instrumentalities so as to ensure a useful dissemination of knowledge
throughout the country. The Committee also r ecommends that special efforts should be made to
disseminate information and knowledge of the schemes of the Department in far-flung districts
and particularly in the states of North East. (Para 20.10)

MINUTES

X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Thursday, the 9th April, 2015 in Room No.139, First Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
6. Shri Bhupinder Singh
7. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
8. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
10. Shri Ninong Ering
11. Dr. K. Gopal
12. Shri Daddan Mishra
13. Shri Nana Patole
14. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
15. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
16. Shri Vikram Usendi
17. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
31

32
** *
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. * * *
12. * * *
13. * * *
14. * * *
15. * * *
16. * * *
17. The Committee reassembled after lunch at 2.30 
P.M. and the following representatives of Department
of Science and Technology appeared before the Committee:-
1. Prof. Ashutosh Sharma, Secretary
2. Dr. Inder Jit Singh, Joint Secretary (Admn. & Paril.)
3. Shri J.B. Mohapatra, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
4. Smt. L. Indumathy, Joint Secretary
5. Prof. S.V. Raghavan, Scientific Secretary
6. Dr. H.K. Mittal, Scientist 'G' & Head (NEB)
7. Dr. R. Brakaspathy, Scientist 'G' & Head (SERC)
8. Shri B.K. Shukla, Scientist 'G' & Head (PCPM)
9. Shri Chander Mohan, Scientist 'G' & Head (SEED) & GLP
10. Dr. Neeraj Sharma, Scientist 'G' & Head (TDT) & Policy Research
11. Dr. Praveer Asthana, Scientist 'G' & Head (AI) & Mission Director (Nano Mission)
***Relate to other Matters.

33
12. Mrs. Sadhana Relia, Scientist 'G' & Head (IMRC)
13. Dr. Arabinda Mitra, Scientist 'G' & Head (IBC)
14. Dr. A. Mukhopadhyay, Scientist 'G' & Head (FIST & INSPIRE Programme)
15. Dr. Praveen Arora, Scientist 'G' & Head (CHORD)
16. Dr. K. R. Murali Mohan, Scientist 'G & Head (Big Data Initiatives)
17. Dr. P.S. Acharya, Scientist 'G & Head (Technology Watch & Foresight)
18. Shri Jeetendra Kumar Jha, Controller of Accounts
19. Dr. B.P . Singh, Scientist 'G & Head (NCSA TC)
20. Dr. Bhoop Singh, Scientist 'G & Head (NRDMS)
21. Maj. Gen. Anil Kumar, Addl. Surveyor General (Tech.), Survey of India
18. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Department of Science and Technology and his team of
officers and asked the Secretary to apprise the Committee of the scientific achievements of the Department
during 2014-15, the societal benefits brought by the various programmes/schemes launched by the
Department and the details of the National Supercomputing Mission. He also desired to know about the
initiatives taken to acquire a leadership position in the frontier areas of science such as genomics,
Astrophysics, synthetic biology, neuro-sciences, material sciences etc. and steps contemplated to increase
the number of publications by the Indian Scientific community in international scientific journals and
increasing patented inventions.
19. Thereafter, the Secretary made a power-point presentation on various aspects of the Demands for
Grants 2015-16, the achievements of the Department during 2014-15 and key thrust areas of the
Department during 2015-16. The Chairman observed that during 2014-15, the Department had utilized
almost 99 percent of the RE allocation. In response to a query, the Committee was informed that out
of the 17 autonomous institutes in the Department, only two institutes generated some internal revenue.
NATMO, SOI and NABL also had very little revenue generation.
20. The Chairman then desired to know the country with highest number of publications. It was
informed that at present U.S. has the highest publications and Japan was closest to India in terms of
publications. The Secretary also informed that China has more number of publications than India is
because it has more number of scientists than India and more extramural funding.
21. The Chairman then desired to know as to which was the fastest supercomputer in the world in
terms of petaflops. It was informed that the fastest supercomputer in was in the US. It was also brought
out that the highest supercomputing facility in the US was 17 petaflops whereas in India it was 1.2
petaflops. The Chairman desired to know the reasons for the delay of Nano Mission and the exact time
frame for the Mission. It was informed that the technology component of the Nano Mission could not
really take off with the kind of speed and strength that the Department was expecting since the Cabinet
approval for disbursal of loans etc. took a long time for be finalized. The Department then furnished the
details of some technologies that had been commercialized from Nano Mission.

34
22. The Committee then desired to know about the future plans of the Department and coordination
with other Departments. The Secretary replied that the Department needed the coordination of other
Ministries/Departments, especially in Research & Development.
23. The Chairman then asked the Department to send written replies to all the queries which could not
be replied during the meeting to the Secretariat at the earliest.
24. The witness then withdrew.
25. * * *
26. * * *
27. * * *
28. * * *
29. * * *
30. * * *
31. * * *
32. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
33. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 5.00 
P.M.
***Relate to other Matters.

35
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 6th May, 2015 in Committee Room 'A',
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri C.P. Narayanan
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
4. Shri Bhupinder Singh
5. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
7. Shri Ninong Ering
8. Dr. K. Gopal
9. Shri Daddan Mishra
10. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
11. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed that the
meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 258th, 259 and 260th reports on Demands
for Grants (2015-16) pertaining to the Departments of Science & Technology and Biotechnology and
Ministry of Earth Sciences respectively.
3. The Committee, thereafter considered the draft 258th, 259th and 260th Reports and adopted the
same with slight modifications.
4. The Committee also decided to present/lay the 258th, 259th and 260th Reports to both the Houses
of Parliament on the 7th May, 2015. The Committee authorised the Chairman and, in his absence, Shri
Bhupinder Singh and Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Daddan
Mishra and, in his absence, Shrimati Vasanthi M. to lay the reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
5. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 10.30 
A.M.
35