 
 
 
  
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
       August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka)
REPORT NO. 
399 
THREE HUNDRED NINETY NINTH REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Three Hundred Ninety Second Report of the Department - 
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment, Forests  and Climate Change on the Demands For Grants 
(2025-26) of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
 

 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
 CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED NINETY NINTH REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Three Hundred Ninety Second Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment, Forests  and Climate Change on the Demands For Grants  
(2025-26) of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
   
  PAGES 
   
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………… (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………… (ii) 
  3. ACRONYMS ……………………………………………………………… (iii) 
4. REPORT …………………………………………………………………... 1-19 
 Chapter I.       Recommendations/Observations which  have been  
                       accepted by the Government 
 
2-10 
 Chapter II.  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee     
does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies 
 
11-15 
 Chapter III.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted  by the     
Committee 
 
16 
 Chapter IV.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
                      Replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
17 
5. MINUTES 18-20  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
(Constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2024) 
 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita -    Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Narayanasa K. Bhandage  
3. Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda 
4. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
5. Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
7. Shri Sharad Pawar 
8. Shri Jairam Ramesh   
9. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
10. Vacant  
LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Sajda Ahmed 
12. Shri Alfred Kanngam S. Arthur 
13. Shri Pradyut Bordoloi  
14. Shri Phani Bhusan Choudhury 
15. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb 
16. Shri Vamsi Krishna Gaddam 
17. Shri Tapir Gao 
18. Adv K. Francis George  
19. Shri Eswarasamy K. 
20. Shri Mahesh Kashyap 
21. Dr. Anand Kumar 
22. Shri Mohibbullah 
23. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
24. Shri Jashubhai Bhilubhai Rathva  
25. Shri Trivendra Singh Rawat 
26. Shrimati Himadri Singh 
27. Shri Tejasvi Surya  
28. Shri Durai Vaiko  
29. Shri Yaduveer Wadiyar 
30. Shri Balwant Baswant Wankhade  
31. Shri Akhilesh Yadav  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Joint Secretary  
Shri Arun Kumar, Director  
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Deputy Secretary 
Ms. I. V. Rajya Laxmi, Committee Officer  
Shri Vaibhav Jain, Committee Officer  
 
     
(i) 
 
 
                                                 
 Nominated w.e.f. 23rd January, 2025. 

 
      
INTRODUCTION 
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Three 
Hundred Ninety Ninth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the  
recommendations/observations contained in the Three Hundred Ninety Second Report  of 
the Committee on  Demands for Grants (2025-2026) of the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change, which was presented to/ laid on the Table of both the Houses 
of Parliament on the 25th March, 2025.  
2.   There were 12 recommendations/observations in the Three Hundred Ninety 
Second Report of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/ 
observations of the Committee were received from the Ministry on 3rd July, 2025.   
3.   In the meeting held on 6th August, 2025, the Committee considered the draft 
Report and adopted the same. 
 
 
 
 
 (BHUBANESWAR KALITA) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman,  
08 August, 2025   Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Sravana 17,  1947 (Saka)  Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and  Climate Change, 
 Rajya Sabha . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
ACRONYMS 
  
CAAQMS Continuous Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Stations 
DWH Development of Wildlife Habitats 
EEAT Environment Education, Awareness and Training 
EEP Environmental Education Programme 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
MoEF&CC Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
NANMN National Ambient Noise Monitoring Network 
NAMP National Air Quality Monitoring Programme 
NAPCC National Action Plan on Climate Change 
NCAP National Clean Air Programme 
NCM National Coastal Mission 
NDCs Nationally Determined Contributions 
NEHP National Environmental Health Profile 
NGC National Green Corps 
NGT National Green Tribunal 
PCCs Pollution Control Committees 
SAPCC State Action Plan for Climate Change 
SMRs Small Modular Reactors 
SPCBs State Pollution Control Boards 
UAs Urban Agglomerations  
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
UTs Union Territories 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
1 
 
REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations of the Committee 
contained in its ‘Three Hundred Ninety Second Report’ on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26) of 
the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change’. The Report was presented to/laid on 
the Table of both the Houses of the Parliament on the 25th March, 2025.  
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change in respect of all the 12 recommendations/observations contained in 
the ‘Three Hundred Ninety Second Report’. The replies of the Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change have been categorized as follows:-  
Chapter I: Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: Para Nos. 2.5, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 6.2, 6.5, 6.13, 7.5, 7.6 
 Total recommendations – 09  
Chapter II:    Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Para Nos. 2.3, 4.4, 5.4 
 Total recommendations – 03  
Chapter III: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: Nil 
Chapter IV:   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: Nil 
  
3. The details of the ATNs have been analyzed in the succeeding Chapters. 
 

 
2 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
OVERALL BUDGETARY DETAILS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2024-25 (BE, RE & 
ACTUAL EXPENDITURE) AND ALLOCATION FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2025-
26 
Bare minimum requirements in budgetary allocations for sustaining key programmes 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.1 The Committee takes note of the challenges projected by the Ministry in Budget 
allocation in Key programmes and the bare minimum budgetary requirements projected by it 
for sustaining certain key programmes.  Though the Committee is in agreement with the 
requirements projected by the Ministry, the utilization of funds by the Ministry in 2024-25 are 
not encouraging enough for the Committee to make any positive recommendations in this 
regard.  The Committee would, however, like to recommend that in 2025-26, the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change should make proactive efforts to ensure that the 
physical targets of the Ministry in respect of the above schemes/programmes are on schedule 
and the allocation made at BE is utilised to the maximum so that it is on a firm ground to seek 
additional funds at the Supplementary and RE stage in respect of the schemes/programmes 
stated above.                                                                                    (Para 2.5 of the 392nd Report)  
 
Action Taken 
1.2 The suggestions of the Committee have been noted for compliance. The Ministry will 
make best efforts to ensure that the physical targets of the Ministry in respect of the concerned 
schemes/programmes are on schedule and the allocation made at BE is utilised to the 
maximum, so that the demand of additional funds at the RE/Supplementary Stage could be 
justified. 
 
Major thrust areas  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.3 The Committee is of the opinion that the launching of the campaign to plant trees on the 
occasion of World Environment Day is indeed laudable.  The Committee feels that the 
campaign to plant a tree in honour of a mother would certainly create a lasting legacy that 
nurtures both the environment and a greener, prosperous future.  The Committee notes that 118 
crore had already been planted as on 19th February 2025 and hopes that the Ministry would be 
able to achieve its target of planting 140 crore trees by 31st March 2025.             (Para 3.4 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 

 
3 
 
1.4 (i)  As informed by National Afforestation & Eco- Development Board division, the 
target of planting 140 crores seedlings under “EkPedMaaKeNaam” campaign 
was successfully achieved by 31st March, 2025. 
(ii)  Intensive efforts had been made in collaboration with States/UTs, local bodies, 
educational institutions, civil society organisations, and community groups to 
ensure the momentum continues and the campaign concludes successfully. 
 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.5 The Committee would, however, like to point out that although a number of plantation 
activities are undertaken on various occasions, the mortality rate of such plants is very high.  
There is a need not only to plant the trees but also to ensure that once planted, they are looked 
after well and continue to survive and grow.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry should not only undertake plantation activities but should also ensure that the survival 
rate of these plants remains high so that they continue to contribute to the environment and the 
society. This also needs to be emphasized to the youth/children etc. when organizing workshops, 
exhibitions, campaigns, competitions etc. by the concerned Central/State/UT authorities.  There 
is also a need for audit of the plantation activities, so that the allocations made in this regard 
are utilized optimally                                                                                              (Para 3. 5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.6 (i)  Environmental Information, Awareness, Capacity building and livelihood 
Programme (EIACP) Centres, as part of awareness drives, conduct various 
competitions, webinars, Mission Life events etc. as well as conduct plantation drives 
for various stakeholders on various environmental days like Van Mohotasav, 
Biodiversity weeks, World Environmental Day etc. The trees are normally planted in 
the campus of the institutes hosting EIACP Centres/schools/colleges etc. and taken 
care of by the Host Institution/EIACP staff/school/college administration. As per 
suggestion of the Committee, EIACP Cell would also communicate to all EIACP 
Centres to make children/youth aware not only about sowing of plants but also 
ensuring that the plant survives and grows well. 
 (ii)  Under Environment Education Programme (EEP), the target beneficiaries are 
children and youth of Eco-clubs who have enthusiastically participated under 
“EkPedMaaKeNaam” campaign by planting saplings in school campus, home, 
gardens, etc. To ensure survival of these saplings, good care was taken of these under 
the guidance of teachers and gardening experts. Also vermi compost prepared by 
students in the school are used for growing healthy plants. Development of kitchen 
gardens is one of the regular activities conducted by Eco-clubs, which engages 
students in plantation and their nurturing. Vegetables grown out of these efforts are 
used for mid-day meals. Many States also celebrates “HarithaRakshabandhan” to 
highlight the bond with trees and to pledge for their protection. 
 (iii) Under National Afforestation & Eco- Development Board, the States/UTs and their 
Forest Departments have their maintenance protocols under which the maintenance of 
Plantations are carried out for successful establishment and ensuring healthy survival 
of planted seedlings. The Standard Operating Protocol on plantation and tree 

 
4 
 
plantation care and maintenance is being promoted for citizens through MeriLiFE 
Portal. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.7 The Committee is also of the view that Centrally-funded schemes are crucial because 
they provide funds to other States for improving their systems. Facilitating research and 
development and investing for the same are extremely important for the development of any 
nation and for a developing country like India, the critical importance of environmental 
education, awareness, Research and Development cannot be overemphasized, as education and 
awareness only can help finding practical solutions to problems of environmental protection 
and management and for developing policies, strategies, action plans and in better management 
and conservation of natural resources. The Committee feels that the allocation of Rs. 101.96 
crore allocated for ‘Environment Education, Awareness, Research and Skill Development’ is 
not adequate and the Ministry should consider allocating additional funds to this head. 
(Para 3.6 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
1.8 The recommendation of the Committee have been noted for compliance. Demand for 
additional funds in respect of Umbrella Central Sector Scheme “Environment Education, 
Awareness, Research and Skill Development” will be submitted at RE stage as per their pace of 
expenditure and committed liabilities for the current FY 2025-26. 
 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.9 The Committee notes that the financial performance of the Ministry under this scheme 
had been satisfactory during the last three years.  The Ministry was able to spend 81% and 
99.99% of the allocated funds during 2022-23 and 2023-24.  During 2024-25, the Ministry has 
been able to spend nearly 75% of the funds upto 31st January 2025.  The Committee hopes that 
the Ministry would be able to fully utilize the allocations under this head by the end of the 
financial year.                                                                                                          (Para 6.2 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
1.10 The Umbrella Scheme “Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats”has two sub-
Schemes, namely “Project Tiger & Elephant” and “Development of Wildlife Habitats”. The 
comments given by these Sub-Schemes may be seen as under:- 
(i) Project Tiger & Elephant: For the FY 2024-25, efforts of the division resulted in 
restoration of the BE amount of Rs. 290.00crores which was reduced to Rs. 245.00 crores 
at the RE stage. It is further informed that the entire FE (Final Estimate) amount of Rs. 
290.00 crores was utilized i.e. 100% utilization. 
(ii) Development of Wildlife Habitats: The details of Utilization of funds by the Wildlife 
Division has been almost 100% of R.E. allocation for CSS-DWH Scheme in previous three 
FYs (i.e. FYs 2022-23; 2023-24 and 2024-25). The details may be seen as under: 

 
5 
 
BE, RE and Expenditure under DWH during 2022-23 to 2024-25 
 (₹ in Crore) 
Financial 
Year 
Budget 
Estimate  
(B.E.) 
Revised 
Estimate 
(R.E.) 
Actual 
Expenditure  
% utilization 
against R.E. 
2022-23 175.00 80.00 79.8231 99.78% 
2023-24 160.00 110.40 110.35 99.96% 
2024-25 160.00 155.00 154.80 99.87% 
 
 
Project Tiger & Elephant 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.11 The Committee observes that state governments receive funds under centrally sponsored 
schemes such as Project Tiger and Elephant and the scheme for Development of Wildlife 
Habitats for the maintenance of protected areas notified under the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 
1972.  The Committee is of the view that such protected areas are integral to conservation 
activities and recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change must 
impress upon that all the state governments to take immediate action to notify Eco-Sensitive 
Zones (ESZs) around all protected areas under the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 to ensure 
that habitats are protected in a holistic manner.                                                   (Para 6.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.12 (i) The Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change vide its Guideline F. No. 1-
9/2007 WL1(pt) dated 09.02.2011 defined eco-sensitive zones as ‘shock absorber’ 
transition zone from areas of high protection to areas involving lesser protection 
emphasizing that activities in the eco-sensitive zones would be of a regulatory nature 
rather than prohibitive nature. 
 (ii)  Total Number of National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries are 680 (106 NP and 574 
WLS). Out of these National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries, 652 ESZ proposals has 
been received in the Ministry. So far, 495 Final notified and 92 Draft Notifications 
have been issued by this Ministry.  
 (iii) The Ministry has taken State/UT and protected area wise review of the pendency of 
ESZ proposals. The States/UTs have been requested to expedite the submission of 
pending ESZ proposals. Further, the Ministry regularly sends reminders to the 
States/UTs regularly.  
 (iv) Notification of ESZs is an on-going process wherein due diligence is exercised as per 
advisories of the National Tiger Conservation Authority on the subject. 
 
Human-Animal conflict 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.13 The Committee observes that the cases of attacks on humans by wild animals and 
consequential severe injuries/ death of human beings are increasing too. The Committee is of 
the view that no amount of compensation can compensate the loss of a human life.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the focus of the Ministry should be on minimizing and 

 
6 
 
mitigating the human-animal conflict rather than merely providing adequate compensation to 
the victims of the conflict. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should impress 
upon all the State Governments to take necessary action in this regard so that the loss of human 
lives / injuries due to the attack by wild animals is reduced to the minimum.  There is also a 
need to clarify/reiterate the role of the State Forest Officials in such cases so that the required 
necessary action is taken immediately by the concerned authorities.                 (Para 6.13 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.14 Incidences of human-wildlife conflict have been reported from various parts of the 
country. The important steps taken by Government for protection of wildlife and to address 
human-wildlife conflict include the following: 
(i)  The Central Government provides financial assistance to State/Union Territory 
Governments under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes, ‘Development of Wildlife 
Habitats’ and ‘Project Tiger and Elephant’ for management of wildlife and its habitat 
including management of human-wildlife conflict in the country. The activities supported 
under the schemes include construction/erection of physical barriers such as solar 
powered electric fence, bio-fencing, boundary walls etc. to prevent the entry of wild 
animals into crop fields. 
(ii)  An advisory on dealing with human-wildlife conflict has been issued by the Ministry in 
February 2021. The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has also issued 
guidelines to States/UTs on 3rd June, 2022 on managing human-wildlife conflicts 
including damage to crops. The Advisory recommends coordinated interdepartmental 
action, identification of conflict hot spots, adherence to Standard Operating Procedures, 
establishment of rapid response teams, formation of State and District level committees 
to review the quantum of ex-gratia relief, and issuing guidance/instructions for expedited 
payments etc. 
(iii)  The Ministry has also issued species-specific guidelines to deal with human-wildlife 
conflict situations on 21.03.2023. 
(iv)  The Section 11 (1) (a) of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, empowers the State Chief 
Wild Life Wardens to grant permits for hunting animals listed in Schedule I of the Act, 
which become  dangerous to human life. Further, the Section 11 (1) (b) of the Act 
empowers State Chief Wild Life Warden or any authorized officer to grant permits for 
hunting of wild animals falling under Schedule-II of the Act, if such animals have 
become dangerous to human life or property. 
(v)  A network of protected areas namely, National Parks, Sanctuaries, Conservation 
Reserves and Community Reserves covering important wildlife habitat have been created 
all over the country under the provisions of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 to 
conserve wild animals and their habitats. 
(vi)  In accordance with provisions contained under Section 33 of the Wild Life (Protection) 
Act, 1972, the Ministry has issued guidelines for the process of management planning for 
protected areas and other landscape elements. 
(vii)  Periodic awareness campaigns to sensitize guide and advise the general public on human-
wildlife conflict, including dissemination of information through various forms of media 
is carried out by the respective State Governments/Union Territory Administrations. 
 

 
7 
 
Climate Change 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.15 The Committee is of the view that Climate change is a global concern and India, being 
amongst the most populous countries, needs to be concerned about that. Our National Action 
Plan for Climate Change (NAPCC) has missions in areas like solar energy, energy efficiency, 
water, human health, sustainable agriculture, Himalayan ecosystem, sustainable habitat, and 
strategic knowledge of climate change. We must cooperate with other countries globally, as 
climate summits, after the Paris Agreement, have shown slow progress.  While taking 
progressive steps, India must correlate her efforts with other countries. The Committee notes 
that the new U.S. administration's withdrawal from climate funding is a matter of concern, as 
they had committed to contributing $100 billion to the climate fund under the Paris Agreement.  
Not only have they backed out, but even the international organizations, like, the WHO has 
shown its reservations. Under these circumstances, India, being a large country and being a 
major player in climate change mitigation, must take responsibility and work towards achieving 
its goals.                                                                                                                   (Para 7.5 ibid)  
 
Action Taken 
1.16 (i)  The Government stands committed in combating climate change and have already 
put in place various ambitious programs, schemes and initiatives to deal with 
challenge of climate change, and the environmental problems.   
 (ii)  India submitted its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) under the Paris 
Agreement and communicated to the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 2015 and subsequently updated it in August, 2022. 
India's updated NDC seeks to enhance India’s contributions towards achievement of 
the strengthening of global response to the threat of climate change, as agreed under 
the Paris Agreement.  Such action will help India usher in low emissions growth 
pathways.  It would protect the interests of the country and safeguard its future 
development needs based on the principles and provisions of the UNFCCC.   
 (iii) India now stands committed to reduce Emissions Intensity of its GDP by 45 percent 
by 2030, from 2005 level and achieve about 50 percent cumulative electric power 
installed capacity from non-fossil fuel-based energy resources by 2030. The decision 
on enhanced NDCs demonstrates India’s commitment at the highest level for 
decoupling of economic growth from greenhouse gas emissions. India’s NDC is 
currently being implemented over the period 2021-2030 through programs and 
schemes of relevant Ministries /Departments and with due support from States and 
Union Territories.  
  
 (iv)  India submitted India’s Long-Term Low-Carbon Development Strategy to UNFCCC 
in November 2022. The document lays out India's approach to low-carbon 
development pathway, taking note of the development challenges in the context of 
climate change and cognizant of its historical traditions and culture that seeks 
harmony and balance between human society and nature. 
  
 (v)  The Government is implementing the National Action Plan on Climate Change 
(NAPCC). It is the overarching policy framework and comprises of nine national 
missions in specific areas of solar energy, enhanced energy efficiency, water, 
agriculture, Himalayan eco-system, sustainable habitat, health, green India and 

 
8 
 
strategic knowledge on climate change.  All the nine Missions under National 
Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) has been updated and revised to align 
with India’s NDC and emerging scientific knowledge. Each National Mission is 
being anchored by respective Ministries/Departments. Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC) is anchoring the National Mission for a 
Green India (GIM).   
 (vi)  To support the objectives of NAPCC, as on date, 34 States and Union Territories 
have already prepared their State Action Plan on Climate Change (SAPCC) to 
address State specific actions. States/UTs have been asked to revise the SAPCC. 
Under the Climate Change Action Plan, a grant of 20 lakhs per State/UT is 
sanctioned for revision of SAPCC.  
 (vii) India submitted its Initial Adaptation Communication to the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 2023, 
highlighting the adaptation priorities, strategies, policies and programmes of the 
country along with implementation support needs for adaptation action.  India has 
been diligently working towards adaptation in mission mode. Several policies and 
measures have been put in place across key economic sectors, keeping in mind the 
wide scope of adaptation activities. India has been spending significant amount of 
resources on adaptation relevant actions, despite the competing demands for limited 
resources in a developing economy.  
 (viii) India, despite its pressing development imperatives, has accorded a prominent focus 
to the sustainability aspects in its accelerated economic growth. India recognizes 
adaptation is inevitable and imperative for its development process and has been 
undertaking several efforts to increasingly mainstream adaptation efforts while 
furthering developmental requirements through a range of schemes/ projects/ 
programmes of several Ministries/ Departments to improve adaptive capacities and 
reduce socioeconomic vulnerabilities of the people.  
 (ix)  Some examples of India's efforts to transition to a more sustainable and self-reliant 
energy sector are:- 
  (a) The National Green Hydrogen Mission which focuses on domestically producing 
and utilizing green hydrogen, a clean fuel derived from renewable sources, to 
decarbonize industries and reduce fossil fuel dependence. 
  (b) Green sovereign bonds are debt instruments used by the government to finance 
green infrastructure projects, including those related to renewable energy and energy 
efficiency. 
  (c) Nuclear Energy Mission- India has a significant nuclear power program. The 
mission aims to increase nuclear energy generation to meet the growing energy 
demand and reduce reliance on fossil fuels. This could involve the development of 
advanced reactor technologies and the expansion of existing nuclear power plants. 
  (d) India has committed to achieving 500 GW of non-fossil energy capacity by 
2030 and sourcing 50% of its energy from renewable sources by the same year.  
  (e) India aims to reduce projected carbon emissions by one billion tonnes by 2030 
and lower the carbon intensity of its economy by 45% compared to 2005 levels, 
also by 2030. 

 
9 
 
  (f) India has pledged to reach net-zero emissions by 2070.  
  (g) India has also launched initiatives like "Lifestyle for the Environment" and 
implemented policies for protecting regional glaciers, greening the railway system, 
and reducing single-use plastic. 
  (h) The Government of India has taken several steps to promote electric vehicles 
(EVs) and address climate change, including financial incentives, infrastructure 
development, and policy changes. These efforts aim to reduce emissions from the 
transportation sector and transition towards a sustainable mobility ecosystem.  
 (x) In nutshell the Government of India stands committed to protect, vulnerable 
populace from impacts of climate change, and the environment. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.17 During the meeting, the Committee also drew attention of the Ministry to the reports 
that in view of the recent climatic trends, the coming months of the year 2025-26 are likely to 
see temperatures soaring to 1-3°C higher than the average temperatures recorded in the past 
across various cities and terrains of the country, especially Delhi where the temperature may 
be abnormally high during the summer season of 2026.  The Committee is extremely concerned 
over such alarming reports. The Committee is of the view that, if this happens, it will have 
devastating consequences for human habitats, birds, animals, and the environment.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change 
should immediately formulate and implement a national-level Heat Action Plan (HAP) to 
mitigate the heatwave conditions that the citizens of India are likely to face in the coming 
months.                                                                                                                     (Para 7.6 ibid) 
        
Action Taken 
1.18 (i) In the context of Heat Waves, it is submitted that heat waves are one of the 
severe weather phenomena for which Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) issues colour 
coded impact-based heat wave warning for public benefit through mass media.   
 (ii) IMD in collaboration with National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) and 
local health departments have started Heat Action Plans (HAPs) in many parts of the country to 
forewarn about the heat waves and also advising action to be taken during such occasions.  
 (iii) At present the HAPs have been implemented in 23 States that are prone to high 
temperatures leading to heat-wave conditions.  
  
 (iv) The heat wave bulletin is issued to provide heat wave forecast and warnings with 5-
day forecasts. Impact of heat wave expected over a region is being mentioned in colour codes 
(Green, Yellow, Orange and Red) and also the specific impact is described in the text as per the 
NDMA guidelines. Bulletins are issued by Meteorological Centres/Regional Meteorological 
Centres at district levels.  Meetings are conducted by concerned departments of central and 
State Governments to review preparedness for the ensuing heat wave season.  
 (v) NDMA has taken all measures including holding Annual Workshop with Ministry of 
Earth Sciences, 23 Heat wave prone States/ UTs, selected districts, and key sectors like Health, 

 
10 
 
Water, Agriculture, Railways, and the civil society. They are also following the best practices of 
Army.  
 (vi) NDMA runs Awareness Generation campaign using Radio (Helpline FM Rainbow), 
TV (special episode of Aapdaka Samna, regional DD channels), eVidya DTH TV channels, and 
social media.  Short-term preparedness to long-term mitigation taken by NDMA are as follows: 
  (a) Comprehensive Mitigation Framework 
  (b) NDMA Manual on Cool Roof: technologies to reduce indoor temperature. 
  (c) Advanced Meteorological Services and operational forecasts for temperature, 
       wind, humidity, and heat index to inform mitigation strategies. 
  (d) Ecosystem and Water Management: green cover, water bodies 
  (e) Making Heat Action Plans more dynamic and adaptive. 
  (f) Integrating Heat wave Mitigation in Urban Planning: cool roofs, greenery, 
       and water conservation as key facets, changes in building codes and bye laws. 
  (g) Technological solutions: Construction technology, monitoring system. 
 (vii)  M/o Health and family welfare - issued Advisories to State Health Department on 
Heat Wave season 2024. Ministry of Jal Shakti monitors the storage position of 150 important 
reservoirs of the country. 
  
The arrangements to deal with situation of heat waves are in place.  
   
 

 
11 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Overall budgetary details for the financial year 2024-25 (BE, RE & actual expenditure) 
and allocation for the financial year 2025-26 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.1    The Committee observes that the Ministry had been able to utilize more than 96% of the 
allocated funds during the year 2022-23 and 2023-24.In 2024-25, against the BE allocation of 
Rs.3330.00 crore, a reduced RE allocation of Rs.3125.96 was made to the Ministry.  However, 
the Committee is constrained to note that the actual expenditure of the Ministry upto 31.1.2025 
was only Rs.1712.48 crore which is merely 54.78% of the RE allocation.  During the 
presentation made before the Committee on 19.2.2025, the Secretary of the Ministry further 
informed the Committee that the Ministry has utilized 69% of the funds as on that date.  
However, the Committee is of the view that the utilization of funds by the Ministry during 2024-
25 is not satisfactory.  With hardly 40 days left in the completion of the financial year, the 
Ministry is yet to make use of more than 30% of the funds allocated to it.  This is in sharp 
contrast to the utilization of funds by the Ministry during the past two financial years when the 
Ministry was able to utilize more than 96% of the budgetary allocations.  The Committee is of 
the view that the Ministry must make proactive efforts to optimally utilize the funds made 
available to it during the financial year 2024-25.                        (Para 2.3 of the 392nd Report) 
 
Action Taken 
2.2 (i) The Ministry acknowledges the Committee's observations regarding the fund 
utilization during the financial year 2024–25 and recognition of our consistent performance in 
the preceding years. The Ministry has utilised Rs. 2252.04 crore, which is 72.04% of the 
Revised Estimates (RE) i.e. Rs. 3125.96 crore for the financial year 2024–25. 
(ii) The utilization of funds in FY 2024-25 declined mainly due to allocation of funds 
for the ‘Control of Pollution’ scheme in March, 2025, by clubbing together of funds for FY 
2024-25 & 2025-26. Cabinet approved an amount of Rs. 1949.80 crore for FY 2024-25 and FY 
2025-26 in March, 2025 along with the direction that unutilised funds of FY 2024-25 will be 
carried over/ re-allocated to FY 2025-26. Accordingly, while Rs. 835.50crore has been 
sanctioned, an amount of Rs.209.64 crore has been released till date. The Ministry will take all 
possible measures like advance planning, preparation and execution of proposals pertaining to 
‘Control of Pollution’ scheme in a time bound manner to utilize the budgetary allocation under 
the scheme. 
 
National Coastal Mission 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.3 The Committee is not convinced with the reply furnished by the Ministry with regard to 
the allocations made to the National Coastal Mission during the last few years.  The allocation 
was reduced from Rs.196.00 crore (BE) to Rs.4.00 crore (RE) in 2022-23.  In 2023-24, the 
allocation was increased from Rs.12.50 crore (BE) to Rs.43.30 crore (RE).  In 2024-25, the 
allocation was again reduced from Rs.50.00 crore (BE) to Rs.8.00 crore (RE), out of which the 

 
12 
 
Ministry has been able to spend only 13.8% i.e. Rs.1.10 crore upto 31.1.2025.  These figures 
amply bring out that the funds under this scheme are being allocated and utilized in an adhoc and 
unplanned manner.  The Committee is of the view that, keeping in view the importance of the 
Mission, the Ministry should holistically plan the execution of the scheme and ensure that the 
funds are suitably allocated and optimally utilized.                                                  (Para 4.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.4 (i) National Coastal Mission has the budgetary outlay of Rs. 87.00 crore for a period of 
five years starting from F.Y. 2021-22 to 2025-26. 
(ii) Under the National Coastal Mission the year-wise allocation and expenditure is 
given below: 
 
Rs. In crore 
Year Budget Allocation Actual expenditure 
 B.E. R.E.  
2021-22 200 100.9 27.79 
2022-23 195 4.0 16.38 
2023-24 12.50 43.30 32.44 
2024-25 50.00 8.00 7.91 
2025-26 2.0 - - 
  
(iii) The ongoing National Coastal Mission scheme will be subsumed in the recently 
recommended upscaling for National Coastal Mission by the Expenditure Finance Committee 
(EFC) with a budgetary provision of Rs. 767 crore for a period of six years (F.Y. 2025-26 to 
2030-31).  EFC after due consideration of the Scheme recommended the aforesaid upscaling for 
National Coastal Mission and the Ministry, after obtaining approval of Competent Authority,  
will take all possible measures to ensure the funds are suitably allocated and optimally utilized 
as per the provisions of EFC. 
 
Control of pollution 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.5 The Committee is of the view that pollution, whether it be air, water or noise, has gone 
beyond permissible limits during the last few years and has serious consequences for the health 
and well being of the citizens of the country. Air pollution has assumed gigantic proportions 
and has become a national issue.  Although Delhi has been in the news because of it ever-
deteriorating air quality, other cities in the country are also not left behind and are 
experiencing high AQI levels.  In such a scenario, the Committee is shocked to note that amount 
to the tune of Rs.858.00 crore allocated for ‘Control of Pollution’, which is 27.44% of the 
annual RE allocation of the Ministry, remains unutilized since the approval for continuation of 
Control of Pollution Scheme till 2025-26, is awaited, even at the fag end of the financial year.  
The rising environmental pollution in the country not only results into a number of pollution 
related human diseases and health conditions but negatively impact our ecology too.  The 

 
13 
 
scenario of air pollution in the country is indeed very grim and has been affecting one and all.  
At a time when the Ministry is required to address the grave and critical challenge of 
deteriorating air quality, the Ministry has not been able to decide the continuation of the 
concerned scheme, as a result of which not even 1% of the funds allocated for the scheme have 
been utilized so far.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry needs to 
introspect and take a serious note of the reasons for this gross underutilization.                                                                 
                   (Para 5.4 ibid) 
                                                                       
Action Taken 
2.6 (i)  A comprehensive revision of the criteria, works to be undertaken, monitoring 
mechanism, present achievements have been undertaken along with framing of revised and 
revamped guidelines under National Clean Air Programme (NCAP). Several field visits, 
interaction with cities and inspection of work on ground were undertaken to revitalize the 
scheme and new set of guidelines/ procedure has been prepared for implementation. The 
revamped scheme has been approved up to FY 2025-26. 
(ii)  The scheme involves providing gap funding support through disbursement of funds to 
82 cities across the country based on a number of factors while allowing convergence with 
existing schemes and programmes following “Whole of Government” approach. NCAP cities 
were continuously implementing their city action plans through funds provided under NCAP as 
well as through convergence of funds from Central and State Govt. schemes and projects 
included in their respective city action plans. There was no discontinuity in implementation of 
the scheme at ground level.  
(iii)  Further, the provision has been included in the approved scheme to ensure that all the 
unspent/unutilized amount in the FY 2024-25 gets carried forward / reallocated in the financial 
year 2025-26, hence there is no actual loss/ surrender of any amount in the scheme.  
(iv)  All the amount allocated in FY 2024-25 and 2025-26 will be spent in the FY 2025-26 as 
per the revamped methods/ procedures thereby ensuring enhanced efficiency, effectiveness and 
continuity in the implementation at field level. 
(v)  In the FY 2025-26, Ministry has already sanctioned an amount of Rs.835.5 crore out of 
which an amount of Rs.209.64 crore has been released to States/UTs and 82 targeted Cities for 
implementing City action plans as well as pollution control measures by North Eastern State 
Pollution Control Boards. 
(vi)  Action taken during 2024-25 under CP Scheme: 
a. 82 non-attainment cities have been provided Rs. 1615.47 crore under NCAP through the 
Control of Pollution Scheme of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
(MoEFCC) till 2024-25.  
b. Annual air pollution reduction targets in terms of PM10 levels have been assigned to cities 
for FY 2024-25. 
c. Annual action plans for FY 2024–25 have been prepared by all cities to implement air 
quality improvement measures. 
d. Air Quality Performance Assessment of 82 targeted cities has been carried out as per 
NCAP guidelines. 

 
14 
 
e. Allocation of Rs. 801 crore to cities based on air quality performance has been made for FY 
2024-25. 
f. At National level, 01 Apex Committee, 02 Steering Committee, 02 Monitoring Committee, 
and 02 Implementation Committee meetings were held to provide guidance and monitor the 
implementation of the programme. 
g. 24 State Steering Committee, 25 Air Quality Management Committee (AQMC) and State 
Level Monitoring Implementation Committee (SLMIC), and 356 District Level Monitoring 
Implementation Committee (DLMIC) at the State and City levels were held to review and 
monitor the implementation of city action plans. 
h. State and City-specific review meetings were held with States of Andhra Pradesh, 
Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Punjab, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and 
Chandigarh in respective States/UTs to assess progress, address challenges, and facilitate 
implementation of action plans. 
i. Field visits in all cities were undertaken by Nodal Officers appointed by CPCB to provide 
ground feedback on field level implementation. 
j. SwachhVayuSurvekshan was carried out for all cities during FY 2024-25. The assessment 
provides ranking of these cities based on measures taken by cities on road dust, Solid 
Waste Management, vehicular emissions, industrial pollution, C&D waste management, 
other emissions (DG sets and commercial establishments) and IEC activities. 
k. 09 better-performing cities under SwachhVayuSurvekshan were conferred awards on 
SwachhVayuDiwas organized on 7th September 2024 in Jaipur, Rajasthan. 
l. SwachhVayuDiwas has been organised at National, State and City level to sensitise public 
on importance of clean air and awareness on initiatives to control air pollution on 7th 
September, 2024 in Jaipur.  
m. Capacity-building and training programmes were undertaken to strengthen the capacities 
of stakeholders for effective implementation. Municipal Commissioner, Nodal Officers of 
State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) and Pollution Control Committees (PCCs), City 
Nodal Officers and PMUs at Cities/SPCBs were provided training on various aspects of 
the programme implementation, air pollution control measures, and use of PRANA portal 
for continuous reporting. 
n. During the FY 2024-25, cities have made expenditure of Rs. 419.35 crore in 
implementing City Action Plans. Major activities undertaken during FY2024-25 in 82 
cities under NCAP include: 
 End-to-end pavement of roads covering length of 60 kms 
 Dust control measures along the roads covering 700 kms 
 Mechanical sweeping of roads covering 550 km/day 
 Development of 26 acres of green spaces  
 Waste collection systems with capacity of 12 tonnes/day. 
o. Out of 82 cities, 62 cities have shown improvement in air quality in terms of reduction in 
annual PM10 concentrations in FY 2024-25 with respect to the levels of FY 2017-18. Out 

 
15 
 
of 82 cities, 19 cities have met National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) for 
PM10 (60 μg/m3) in FY 2024-25. 
(vii) Revamped methodology of NCAP:  
a. A comprehensive revision of the criteria, works to be undertaken, monitoring mechanism, 
and present achievements has been undertaken along with the framing of revised 
guidelines.  
b. This revision includes cities to fulfil three steps to access funds: 
i. Pre-qualification criteria including submission of Annual Action Plan, utilisation of 
minimum 75% funds, 100% data updation on PRANA portal, regular meetings of 
District/ City level and participation in SwachhVayuSurvekshan 
ii. Reform based Challenge on obtaining benchmark score for undertaking various reforms 
by Cities/State Govt. and  
iii. Performance based Challenge in respect of prescribed air pollution reduction targets in 
terms of PM10 levels  
c.  Reform based measures include air pollution control measures in sectors of Waste 
Management, road dust Control, Vehicular Pollution, Saturation based Action Plans and Jan 
Bhagidari (Public Participation) for strengthening the implementation of the programme. 
d.  Based on the revamped Scheme, MoEFCC issued the following OMs/guidelines to 
States/UTs and Cities for effective implementation of NCAP.  
i. Guidelines for implementation of Air Quality Challenge Method and reform measures by 
NCAP cities 
ii. Implementation of Saturation Plans under NCAP through convergence of schemes of Central 
and State Govt., and resources of local bodies and development authorities 
iii. Action Plan indicating the total number of saplings to be planted, and the number of 
Miyawaki sites proposed to be developed 
iv. Engaging of Youth for mass awareness under NCAP through MY Bharat platform 
v. Guidance document for designing, constructing and maintaining urban roads and greening of 
traffic corridors for dust control. 
 

 
16 
 
  
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
-NIL- 

 
17 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
19 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND CLIMATE CHANGE (2024-25) 
 
XII 
TWELFTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 10:00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 6th August, 2025 in Committee 
Room No. B, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita – Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
3. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
 
LOK SABHA 
4. Shri Mahesh Kashyap 
5. Dr. Anand Kumar 
6. Shri Mohibbullah 
7. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
8. Shri Jashubhai Bhilubhai Rathva  
9. Shri Balwant Baswant Wankhade  
10. Shri Yaduveer Wadiyar 
11. Shri Vamsi Krishna Gaddam 
12. Shri Eswarasamy K 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Rakesh Naithani, Joint Secretary  
3. Shri Rajiv Saxena, Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. I.V. Rajya Laxmi, Committee Officer 
5. Shri Vaibhav Jain, Committee Officer  
                                     
 

 
20 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. 
The Committee then took up consideration of the draft 394th,  395th, 396th, 397th, 398th, 399th and 
400th Reports of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Reports  on  Demands for Grants (2025-2026) 
of the Ministries/Departments of Atomic Energy; Biotechnology; Scientific and Industrial 
Research; Science & Technology; Space; Environment, Forest and Climate Change; and Earth 
Sciences, respectively and adopted the same after some deliberations.  
3. The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned Reports in both the Houses 
of Parliament on the 8th August, 2025.  
4. *  *  *  *  * 
5. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 10:46 a.m. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                RAJIV SAXENA 
  06.08.2025                           DEPUTY SECRETARY 
 
 
 
 
 