TWO HUNDRED TWENTY NINTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 30th August, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 30th August, 2012)
The Regional Centre For Biotechnology Bill, 2011
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2012/Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
229
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY NINTH REPORT
The Regional Centre for Biotechnology Bill, 2011
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 30th August, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 30th August, 2012)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2012/Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—10
4. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 11 —54
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 55—64

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY , ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2011-12)
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
**2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Anil H. Lad
4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
5. Dr. Chandan Mitra
@6. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
7. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
@8. Shri A.V. Swamy
9. Dr. Barun Mukherji
10. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan
LOK SABHA
11. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
12. Shri Ninong Ering
#13. Vacant
14. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
15. Shri Abdul Rahman
16. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
17. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
18. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana
19. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
20. Shri Cosme Francisco Caitano Sardinha
21. Shri Shibu Soren
22. Dr. Rajan Sushant
23. Shri Pradeep Tamta
24. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava
***25. V acant
26. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
*27. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
28. Vacant
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
** Shri Janardan Dwivedi re-nominated w.e.f. 2 nd February, 2012.
@ Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra and Shri A.V. Swamy nominated w.e.f. 15th May, 2012.
# Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 3 rd January, 2012 on his resignation
from the Membership of the Committee.
***Shri Akhilesh Yadav ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  2 nd May, 2012 on his resignation from the
Membership of the Lok Sabha.
* Nominated w.e.f.  25 th November, 2011.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri  Deepak Kalra, Committee Officer
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorized by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred and Twenty Ninth Report on “The Regional Centre
for Biotechnology Bill, 2011”.
2. In its meeting held on 5
th March and 20 th July, 2012, the Committee heard the views of the
Secretary, Department of Biotechnology and various experts on “The Regional Centre for
Biotechnology Bill, 2011”.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department and experts for
rendering their valuable views/clarifications sought by the Committee.
4. In the meeting held on 30
th August, 2012, the Committee considered the draft report and
adopted the same.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
August 30, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests

1
REPORT
Biotechnology, simply narrated, is technology based on biological and chemical sciences
which is used, especially in agriculture, food science, industry, medicine and environment. It can
be defined as application of scientific principles to processing of materials by biological agents for
providing goods and services. Although, the application of biotechnology in its rudimentary form
started in the ancient days with the use of micro organisms in making food items such as
beverages, cheese and bread, the term Biotechnology was coined by Karl Ereky, a Hungarian
engineer in 1919 to mean the process by which raw materials could be biologically upgraded into
socially useful products with the aid of living organisms. The history of Biotechnology actually
begins with zymotechnology which commenced as a search for a better understanding of industrial
fermentation. Although now, most often associated with development of drugs, historically,
biotechnology has been mainly associated with food, addressing such issues as malnutrition.
2. Biotechnology, which at the start of the 20
th Century brought industry and agriculture
together, its focus shifted to pharmaceuticals by World War II with the manufacture of Penicillin
and by 1980, biotechnology established itself as promising industry especially in the field of drug
discovery. Currently, Biotechnology has made its foray in a number of areas including agriculture,
food processing, bioremediation, bioprospecting, drug discovery, DNA fingerprinting, energy
production, etc. Genetic engineering continues to be a hotly debated topic today with the advent
of gene therapy, stem cell research, cloning and genetically modified food, etc. It is also being used
to produce plants that are resistant to insects, weeds and pests. Growth and discovery of
recombinant DNA of biotechnology which culminated in the origin of genetic engineering, however,
was mired in controversies, scepticism and suspicion as regard consequences, it could have on the
environment and human health. But growing acceptance of its economic value and hopes for
therapeutic proteins, drugs, seeds, pesticides, modified human cells for treating genetic diseases,
etc. has finally prevailed and Biotechnology, the world over has now been accepted as a rapidly
emerging field of science with immense potential to develop healthcare solutions for man and
animal and bring revolution in the field of agriculture, environment, etc. It is in the backdrop of
recognition of this very fact that the need for establishment of a Regional Centre for Biotechnology
under the auspices of UNESCO was felt to nurture high quality human resource in the SAARC
region and particularly in India through education, training and research in interdisciplinary areas
of science, engineering, medicine, agriculture, veterinary sciences and environment, etc.
3. Initiative to establish such a Centre dates back to the year 2003 when the Government of
India made a commitment at the UNESCO Board. Three years later, Cabinet gave in principle
approval for the setting up of the Centre at Faridabad, Haryana on 22
nd September, 2005. UNESCO,
at its 33 rd General Conference held in Paris, passed a resolution to that effect in October, 2005.
Then an agreement for the establishment and operation of the Regional Centre defining the terms
and conditions governing the support that the Centre would get, was signed between the
Department of Biotechnology, Government of India and the UNESCO on 14
th July, 2006.
Subsequently, after over two years, approval for establishment of the Regional Centre as a
category-II Centre of UNESCO was accorded on 20th November, 2008 by the Cabinet, pending
legislation. In pursuance of the approval of the Cabinet, an order of the Government of India
(Ministry of Science and Technology, Deptt. of Biotechnology number BT/MED-II/UNESCO/01/2008)
establishing the Regional Centre for Biotechnology Training and Education under the auspices of
UNESCO at Faridabad was issued on 20
th April, 2009 and the existing Regional Centre has been
functioning since then. Thereafter, after a gap of over two and a half years, a Bill called
‘The Regional Centre for Biotechnology Bill, 2011’ (Annexure-I) was introduced in Lok Sabha on

2
20th December, 2011 which was referred * to the Committee for examination and report on
13th January, 2012.
4. The Committee held its first meeting with the Secretary and other senior officials of the
Department of Biotechnology on the 5 th March, 2012 for a preliminary discussion on the Bill. The
Committee at its meeting held on the 20 th July, 2012 heard the views of various experts on the
various provisions of the Bill +. Togather more broad-based views on the proposed legislation, the
Committee also invited the comments of Prof. (Dr.) Satyahari De of the Indian Institute of
Technology, Kharagpur, and Dr. Arnab Kapat, Director, Reliance Institute of Life Sciences.
5. Considering the significance of the Bill, the Committee also issued a Press Release in
national dailies and other regional newspapers on the 11
th February, 2012, inviting memoranda
containing suggestions/views/comments of experts/institutions/organisations interested in the subject
matter of the Bill. In response to the Press Release, the Committee received six memoranda on the
Bill, which were duly examined.
6. The Committee at its meeting held on 30th August, 2012, considered and adopted the draft
report.
7. SALIENT FEATURES OF THE BILL
(i) The Regional Centre for Biotechnology is being established as a category II
institution under the auspices of UNESCO meaning thereby that it would not legally
be a part of UNESCO but associated with it through formal arrangements approved
by UNESCO general conference. It would help to implement UNESCO’s programme
through capacity building, exchange of information in a particular discipline,
theoretical and experimental research and advance training and also to contribute to
technical cooperation among developing countries.
(ii) The Regional Centre for Biotechnology shall be an institution of national importance.
(iii) The jurisdiction of the Regional Centre shall extend to the whole of India and to
Centres established within or outside India.
(iv) It shall disseminate and advance knowledge by providing instructional and research
facilities in various branches of Biotechnology and related fields.
(v) It shall provide capacity building through education, training, Research and
Development in Biotechnology through regional and international cooperation.
(vi) It shall facilitate transfer of Biotechnology related knowledge and technology in the
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) Region and more
generally in the Asian region.
(vii) It shall promote and strengthen international cooperation to improve the social and
economic conditions and welfare of the people.
(viii) It shall grant Masters and Doctoral Degrees in Biotechnology and related subjects at
the interface of a varied disciplines including physical; chemical, biological, medical,
agricultural and engineering and such other relevant sciences.
(ix) It shall produce human resource suited to drive innovation in Biotechnology in areas
of new opportunities and fill up talent gap in deficient areas. It would collect and
* Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II, dated 16 th January, 2012.
+ The list of experts is at Annexure.

3
disseminate through networking the relevant local knowledge in the field of
Biotechnology.
(x) The Regional Centre shall be administered by a Board of Governors, comprising of
Secretary, Deptt. of Biotechnology as its Ex-officio Chairperson; a representative of
Government of India nominated by the Secretary, Department. of Biotechnology; a
representative of Director General, UNESCO; and a representative each of the other
Member State of UNESCO.
(xi) It shall also have a Programme Advisory Committee; an Executive Committee and a
Finance Committee.
(xii) The Central Government would provide grant or loans to the Centre. The one time
capital investment for setting up the Centre is estimated to be Rs. 53.11 Crores and
the recurring expenditure in the range of Rs. 15.00 Crores per annum.
8. Uniqueness of the proposed Centre
8.1 The proposed Centre would be a unique institution in the sense that it would be the first
every inter-disciplinary institute in life sciences and Biotechnology in the country with an
international connection through UNESCO. The Centre proposes to offer a peculiar amalgamation
of education, training and research. The Centre would offer novel courses on issues pertaining to
regulation, toxicology, technology transfer, biological engineering, molecular breeding, drug
discovery, imaging techniques, nano-medicine, IP management in life sciences, etc. which are very
much needed in our country through education in inter-disciplinary Ph.D Programme. The Centre
aims at producing a highly specialized cadre of competent and capable scientists who could
translate lab research to clinical practice with vast knowledge of medicine and practice of scientific
investigation. Through training, young scientists would be nurtured to play the leadership role in
biotech science. This Centre will also offer opportunities for industry to hone and enhance their
skills in specific areas and an important focus of expertise building would be regulation, product
development, manufacturing science and bio-entrepreneurship. The Centre would carry out and
promote multi-disciplinary innovative research in biotech sciences by integrating science,
engineering, medicine, etc. Broad range of areas in synergy with biotech science which are
proposed to be pursued, include inter-alia , biomedical science, biochemical and biophysical
sciences, climate science, agricultural and environment, Biotechnology Regulatory Affairs,
Intellectual Property Right and policy.
8.2 The Centre would be a part of Biotech Science Cluster – a hub of Biotechnology innovation
and commerce in Faridabad, Haryana and would be co-located with Translational Health Science
and Technology Institute (THSTI), National Institute of Plant Genome Research (NIPGR) and
National Institute of Immunology (NII). Thus it will have synergies and close relationship with all
these institutes and will be able to share the common facilities like Bio-incubator, Biotech Park,
Technology platforms, clinical Development Services Agency, etc.
8.3 The benefits that are expected to accrue to the country from the Centre, as informed by
the Department, are as follows:–
• Allows freedom to ensure that over 90% scientists in the Centre are Indian.
• Indian students will have world class education and training at their doorstep.
• IPR generated through research in this Centre will belong to India, no matter who
produces it.

4
• The centre would produce highly skilled and trained human resource to be able to
deliver low-cost yet effective healthcare, agricultural and veterinary technologies in the
country.
• The centre would serve as a window for showcasing Indian competence in global
market for economic gains.
9. Observations/recommendations
9.1 Given the purport, intent and object of the Regional Centre for Biotechnology Bill,
2011, the Committee tends to broadly agree with the Bill as it undoubtedly carries with it
immense potential of development, advancement and growth of high quality education,
training and research in Biotechnology with resultant advantages for the country. The
Committee appreciates that conceptually it is a well conceived and a brilliant proposition
and hopes that it would deliver up to the hilt. But having said that the Committee also has
some serious reservations, particularly, on the manner in which the entire issue of the
establishment of the Centre has been handled. The observations/recommendations/
reservations of the Committee on the Bill are given below:–
9.2 The first and serious concern that the Committee expresses in the context of the Bill is that
of a unduly long- long time taken in the process of setting up of the proposed Centre,
notwithstanding the fact that it was so important, so opportune and so significant for the country.
When the Committee enquired about the factors that caused the delay, it was informed that because
it was a green field project; this was the first Institute of its kind to be established in India; much
knowledge and experience was not there and consultations had to be held at different levels
together with the requirement of regular consultations with UNESCO on the issue of the Executive
Board, the Council and Board of Governors to be constituted, etc. so much time was lost in
holding these consultations/deliberations. Further, to work out the details of the operationalisation
of the Centre such as the terms and conditions for governing, modalities of financing, deciding the
status and the locations of the Centre, etc. also took a lot of time. A National Expert Group was
appointed to go into these details which gave its recommendations in May, 2007. Subsequently, a
Cabinet note in consultation with various Ministries like the Ministry of Finance, Human Resource
Development, External Affairs, Health and Family Welfare and Planning Commission was moved for
obtaining approval for establishment of the Centre. Various provisions of the draft Bill prepared by
a Committee appointed for the purpose were deliberated upon by a Committee of Experts which
suggested many changes. The draft Bill as such had to be thoroughly revised. Again draft Bill was
placed before the Committee which deliberated on its provisions and finalised the document. All
these activities took about a period of two years and finally a draft note for Cabinet was prepared
and circulated for enactment of the legislation in consultation with the Ministry of Law and Justice
and finally the Bill was introduced in December, 2011. On being confronted with a categorical
query as to why it took three long years from November, 2008, when the Union Cabinet gave its
approval for establishment of the Centre to bring forward this legislation in 2011, the Secretary
replied that this delay was because of the process of consultations with regional countries and also
because it was very difficult to engage with Bangladesh, Nepal, Pakistan, Bhutan, Malaysia etc. at
various levels. Then, it was not clear whether these countries would agree to the principles of
participation/contribution. So, it was a very complex process as UNESCO also had to be part of
the discussion.
9.3 The Committee understands that it was altogether a new venture involving several countries
and multifarious agencies/authorities, mostly outside the country and hence a time taking activity.
However, it fails to digest the fact that though the concept of Regional Centre was conceived way
back in 2003, even after passage of nine long years it is still to take a final and concrete shape.

5
It is of the view that all the requisite spade/ground work of consultations/deliberations, etc. could
have been done at the very initial stage, at least before signing an agreement with UNESCO in
2006. The Committee is constrained to observe that such delay typically epitomizes
bureaucratic attitude and business as usual approach adopted in this matter which
ultimately resulted in  time and cost overrun of this project. The Committee takes note of the
fact that while in the Cabinet note of September, 2005 the indicative budget projected for the
Centre was Rs. 30.95 lakhs, the order of Deptt. of Biotechnology notified in 2006 estimated that
the Regional Centre for Biotechnology shall be established at a total cost of Rs. 99.55 crores. The
financial Memoranda attached with the Bill mentions an estimated one time capital investment for
the Centre to be Rs. 53.11 crores as one time capital investment added by the recurring expenditure
in the range of Rs. 15.00 crores per annum to be borne by the Central Government The Committee
is sure that this may not be the final figure as it is bound to increase in view of inflationary
measures and other factors as very rightly admitted by Secretary, DBT that a revised Expenditure
Finance Committee (EFC) had been sent to the Ministry of Finance. The Committee also takes note
of the fact that the agreement signed between India and UNESCO on 14
th July, 2006, which was
to remain in force for a period of six years expired on 13 th July, 2012, due to the progress of the
project at a snail’s pace. The Committee fears that the slow pace of progress coupled with typical
bureaucratic approach does not put India in good stead and may have its reflection on its image
at the international level.
9.4 The Committee notes the efforts and hard work put in by the Secretary, DBT
towards establishment of the Centre but it strongly feels that this mission could have been
accomplished early had the responsibility of its establishment been shared, devolved and
decentralized and the Secretary, DBT had not bothered to carry the entire burden on his
own shoulders. The Committee is also of the opinion that the delay caused in the
establishment of the Centre, for whatever reasons, has deprived the country of the benefits
that it could have reaped with the timely completion and operationalisation of the Centre.
9.5 The second and more disturbing and distressing issue about the Regional Centre for
Biotechnology Bill is its establishment vide Executive Order of Government of India, Department
of Biotechnology No. BT/MED-II/UNESCO/01/2008 dated the 20
th April, 2009, almost 2½ years
before, this Bill was introduced in the Parliament. The Committee taking a serious note of this point
asked Secretary, DBT to explain the circumstances and reasons why he could not get this
legislation passed by Parliament before starting work on it. The Secretary was further asked to
explain whether this was a deliberate attempt on the part of the Department to bypass the
Parliament and the Standing Committee. The Secretary replied that he had all respect for the
Parliament and that he had not started any educational programme of this Institute. All that had
been done was to hire a Director, so that, the building could be constructed. The Faridabad cluster
was a very big cluster involving a large investment for Biotechnology with 3-4 separate institutions.
Their only concern was that when landscaping was done, the original building of this institution
should also come up through the same architect to have shared technical facility and to minimize
the cost. He further added that not a single student had been enrolled and nothing in terms of what
was to be done under this Centre had been started so far.
9.6 On being further enquired about the source from where fund was being received, who was
giving it and on what account, whether it had the sanction of the Parliament, what would happen
to the Executive Order and to the money which was already spent on it if Parliament decided not
to have an institution of this kind at all, the Secretary submitted that the Government had given
approval for creating infrastructure. What was required through this legislation was the degree
granting right. He further added that as a research institution, this Centre could function with an
Executive Order, but it could not grant degrees. He further clarified that here the question was
whether Parliament could allow this Centre to have the authority to grant degrees or not and that

6
was why no educational activity was started in this Institute. On the issue of funding, the Secretary
replied that it was actually a part of the Budget. When further enquired, as to whether under the
General Financial Rules, the Department could spend money against an item which had not been
sanctioned by the Parliament and how could the Budget Expenditure for an institution which did
not have the approval of the Parliament could be valid, the Secretary reiterated his stand by saying
that all that was intended here was to go to the Parliament to get the right to grant degrees,
otherwise, it would run like a research institute and for research institutes the Parliamentary
approval is for the Budget. So, it was degree granting right, which was a content of this Bill.
9.7 The Committee, however, does not appreciate the arguments advanced by the
Secretary, DBT and takes a strong exception over the manner in which the Centre has been
established through an Executive Order pending passing of legislation by the Parliament.
The Committee expresses its serious concern over the fact it has almost become a practice
of Government Departments, particularly, the scientific Departments to get an institution
established through an executive order  and afterwards bring the Bill before the Parliament.
The Committee had come across a similar situation when it was examining the Academy of
Scientific and Innovative Research Bill, 2010 and had observed that it would have been appropriate
if the Academy had been set up only after the Parliament had passed the Bill. But it appears that
either the observation of the Committee had not been taken seriously by the scientific departments
or they are deliberately creating a fait accompli situation for the Parliament to accord ex-post facto
approval to the piece of legislation which had already been made operational through an executive
order. The Committee feels that such an attempt on the part of the Ministries/Departments
of Government of India tantamount to taking Parliament for a ride and to make the
Parliament succumb to support or accept whatever had been done by them. The Committee
finds no genuine, convincing reasons or urgency which warranted establishment of the
Regional Centre for Biotechnology through an executive order. This is also borne out by the
fact that no substantial/significant headway has been made in the process of the setting up
of the Centre, even after over three years have elapsed. The Committee is, therefore, of
the considered view that such situation could have been avoided. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommends that henceforth it must be ensured by Government that no such
incidence recurs in future.
9.8 The Committee forcefully and strongly differs with the argument of the Secretary, DBT that
it is only the degree granting right in the Bill for which the Department has come before the
Parliament. All the necessary provisions right from the establishment of the Centre, modalities of
its functioning, funding, objects, etc. find place in the Bill, which have to be approved by the
Parliament and, therefore, the contention of the Secretary of seeking only degree granting right
through this Bill appears to be totally misplaced and implausible.
9.9 Another contention of the Secretary, DBT that parliamentary approval for the funding of the
Centre was not required too does not hold good, particularly, if seen in the context of Clause 28
of the Bill which provides that the Central Government may after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law make to the Regional Centre grants and loans for being utilized for the purposes
of this Act. The Committee, therefore, feels that funding made so far to the Centre pending
its approval by the Parliament does not seem to be in order and in future such type of
practices need to be discouraged.
9.10 Clause 3(3) of the Bill provides that the Head Office of the Regional Centre shall be in the
NCR Region as referred to in the National Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985 which includes
the States of Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. The Committee feels that since the location
of the Head Office of the Centre has not been specifically mentioned, it is probable that the head
Office of the Centre may be apart and away from the location of the Regional Centre which is

7
proposed to be in Faridabad. The Committee is of the opinion that administratively and functionally,
it would be convenient and conducive to have the Head Office of the Centre at the same place
preferably at the same campus where the Centre is proposed to be located. This should also
facilitate keeping a close eye on the day-to-day functioning of the Centre. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that Government should pay due consideration to this
recommendation of the Committee.
9.11 Clause 4 of the Bill provides that since the objects of the Regional Centre for Biotechnology
are such as to make it an institution of National importance, it should be known as the Institute
of national importance. In India an institute of national importance is defined as one which serves
as a pivotal player in developing highly skilled personnel within the specified region of the country.
Only a few institutes make to this coveted list which are Centres of excellence in research,
academics and other such elite schools of education. All the IITs, NITs, AIIMS, National Institute
of Pharmaceutical Research and Education, ISI and some other Institutes are institutes of national
importance. Admission to these Institutes is through highly competitive examinations like the IIT-
JEE/GMAT/AIEEE, etc.
9.12 The Committee is of the opinion that ideally an institute ought not be classified and declared
as an institution of national importance, even before its inception, but it should earn such a tag
based on its actual, outstanding, consistent performance and achievements. In the instance case,
as the Centre is being declared as an Institute of national importance by an Act of the Parliament,
the Committee hopes that the Centre would strive to become an outstanding and unique Institute
worthy of its status as an institute of National importance granted to it.
9.13 One of the functions of the Regional Centre as provided in Clause 8(g) is to collect and
disseminate relevant local knowledge in the field of Biotechnology through networking.
Dissemination of local knowledge in today’s competitive world, when there is a cut throat
competition for patenting Intellectual Property Rights, the Committee feels is not a wise and sound
proposition, particularly when the country has already had the bitter experience of patenting of
Neem, Turmeric, Basmati Rice, etc. by other countries. The Committee is apprehensive about the
safety of the local knowledge after dissemination as regards Intellectual Property Rights. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that Regional Centre while discharging this particular
function must exercise utmost restrain and caution and take all necessary measures
including obtaining patent where feasible, to protect our local knowledge from being stolen/
misused/patented outside. The regulations under the National Biodiversity Act (2002) should
be strictly observed.
9.14 Clause 10(1) (a) mentions that the Regional Centre shall have the power to provide for
Masters and Doctoral degrees in Biotechnology and related subjects. It would run post graduate and
research programmes. The Committee apprehends that unless the Centre gets high quality students
and students of sound scientific understanding and talent, it would not be able to produce high
quality scholars to live up to the expectations of the Centre. The Committee feels that it should
also run some programmes in order to attract the best talent, at a relatively young age. The
Committee is, therefore, of the view that Centre may also develop and run a five year
integrated programme leading to Masters degree in Biotechnology for students passing out
of senior secondary schools so that they do not stray away to other disciplines in absence
of viable options in the field of Biotechnology. This way Government would be able to tap,
develop and nurture high quality under graduate students so as to polish and hone them
into bright and brilliant scholars.
9.15 Further through Clause 10(1) (w), an attempt has been made to give sweeping and
unfettered powers to the Centre to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary,
incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or any of its objectives. The Committee finds that

8
some 22 powers of the Regional Centre have been enumerated in Clause 10(1) which are quite
exhaustive and all encompassing. Granting such an unlimited/broad mandate is fraught with the risk
of being misused. The Committee, therefore, recommends that this sub-clause should be
deleted.
9.16 Clause 13 of the Bill provides for the authority of the Regional Centre. The Committee finds
that there are 4 specific authorities, name ly, the Board of Governor, the Programme Advisory
Committee, the Executive Committee and the Finance Committee mentioned in the Bill and one
general provision, i.e., such other authorities as may be declared by the statutes to be the authority
of the Regional Centre. As regards the Board of Governors, it would be composed of two
Members/representatives of Government of India including the Secretary, DBT as Ex-officio
Chairperson. The rest of the Members include a representative of the Director-General of UNESCO
and a representative each of the other Member States of UNESCO in such manner as specified by
the statutes. Article 4(1)(a)(ii) of the agreement between the Government of India and the UNESCO
concerning the establishment of the Regional Centre for Biotechnology, training and education in
India mentions that the Board of Governors shall consist of a representative of each of the other
Member States that (1) has sent the requisite notification to Director-General of UNESCO, or
that (2) makes a substantial contribution to the operating budget or running of the Regional Centre,
and is thus accorded a seat by decision of the Board of Governors.
9.17 The Committee finds that in all probability, the number of representation from the
Government of India on the Board of Governors would be less than that of the representatives
from the outside. Since all the powers for the running and administration of the Regional Centre
would be vested in the Board of Governors, the Committee fears that there would not be Indian
command and control over the Centre and hence Indian interest may be in jeopardy. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that this aspect must be seriously looked into by the
Government and it should be ensured that Indian representation on the Board of Governors
is suitably enhanced so as to tilt the balance in favour of India, the host country for this
Regional Project.
9.18 Clause (14)(1)(i) provides that the Secretary, DBT would be the Ex-officio Chairperson of
the Board of Governors. By virtue of Secretary of a Department, the person concerned would be
overly busy in running the affairs of the Department and may find it difficult to spare time from
his busy schedule to discharge the powers and functions of the Chairperson of the Board of
Governors, who is mandated to exercise and discharge such powers and functions of the Board
of Governors, as may be delegated by the Board and such other powers and functions as may be
specified by the statutes [Clause 15(1)]. The Committee, therefore, feels that Government
should think in terms of having a Chairperson of the Board of Governors someone other
than the Secretary, DBT and to have it manned by a person of caliber, competence,
dedication and devotion who can devote sufficient time to make the dream of Regional
Centre, as an institute of national importance come true.
9.19 The Committee finds that there is no clear cut provision for representation of women
on the Board of Governors of the Regional Centre. It is of the view that women scientists
must find representation on the Board of Governors of the Centre and therefore
recommends that suitable provisions for this purpose may be made in the Bill.
9.20 So far as, the Executive Committee as provided in the Clause 13(c) is concerned, it is
proposed to be the advisory body for issues concerning the management of the Regional Centre
and advise from time to time to the Board of Governors [Clause 17(1)]. The Committee is
surprised to note that while it has been designated as an Executive Committee, its functions as laid
down in the bill, is purely advisory and hence feels that calling it an Executive Committee appears
to be rather a misnomer. The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that it should

9
appropriately be called an Advisory  Committee and not an Executive Committee. The
Committee also notes that while the Executive Committee in the Bill has been mandated to act as
an advisory body, in the agreement signed with UNESCO [Article (4)(2)(a)] it is to be constituted
for the day-to-day management of the Centre. The Committee, therefore, recommends that this
dichotomy and contradiction in the function of the Executive Committee as given in the
Agreement and in the Bill should be resolved.
9.21 Further, although, a Finance Committee has been proposed to be established vide Clause
13(d), its constitution, powers and functions have been left to be specified by the statutes vide
Clause 18 of the Bill. This some how suggests that the concept or the purpose for which it is
proposed to be constituted is not clear. When the Committee enquired from the Secretary about
the reasons of having a Finance Committee without narrating its functions, the Secretary replied
that because a large part of money for the Centre was coming from the Government of India, it
was felt that this should be audited by CAG. The need was, therefore, felt to have a Finance
Committee to ensure compliance with the General Financial Rules. The Committee fails to
understand that if as stated by the Secretary this was the rationale for having a Finance
Committee, why at least its broad functions have not been made out in the Bill.
9.22 Clause 33(1) of the Bill lays down that there shall be a review of the functioning of the
Regional Centre once in every 4 years by the persons of eminence to be appointed by the Central
Government. The Committee feels that the Regional Centre has an innovative and novel
mandate which would keep on evolving from time and hence its review may be carried out
at regular intervals preferably once in two years instead of once in four years. It is also
of the view that in the interest of openness and transparency, the report of such review
should not be treated as confidential and be put in the public domain through the website
of the Centre. Later on, action taken on the report may also be shared with the public. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that suitable provision to this effect should be made in
the Bill.
9.23 In the Regional Centre for Biotechnology, apart from education and training, Research and
Development in Biotechnology is also proposed to be carried out. However, the Committee finds
that the Bill is silent on the issue of proprietary rights on the intellectual property generated in the
Institute through research work. Clarity on this issue, assumes importance because it is a Centre
which would have research scholars from countries in SAARC and South Asian Region and
intellectual property could be generated by researchers from any of the countries. In reply to a
question, as to how the patent issue of scientific innovation and research would be settled, the
Department in its replies to the questionnaire clarified that patenting issue will be settled as per the
Ministry of Science and Technology guidelines. In case, it was an outcome of the projects funded
by other contributing Member-States, it would be settled as per the terms of participation which
would be decided at the time a Member-State joined the Centre. However, in its Background Note
on the Bill submitted to the Committee, the Department had stated that the IPR generated through
research in this Centre would belong to India, no matter who produces the same.
9.24 The Committee finds that on this particular issue, the Department has taken conflicting and
contradictory stand which needs to be addressed in right earnest. The Committee, is of the view
that since the Centre is primarily funded and supported by the Government of India, the
IPR generated in the Centre should belong to India to the extent possible and while
finalising terms of participation of Member-States, this point must be categorically and
unequivocally be provided for. In any case, the Centre should develop an IPR policy
acceptable to all its stakeholders.
9.25 The Committee further recommends that emphasis on research, particularly, in drugs
should be focused mainly on diseases specific and peculiar to India and South Asian Region.

10
9.26 Since, the Regional Centre is proposed to be an institute of national importance and
a unique centre for education, training and research, the Committee feels that students
from the weaker and backward sections of the society.  should also get opportunity to
participate in the activities of the Centre. The Committee enquired from the Secretary, DBT
if there was any provision for reservation in admission for such students in the Regional Centre,
it was replied that under Section 2(d) of the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in
Admission) Act, 2006, reservation in admission would be provided inter-alia in an institution of
national importance set up by an Act of Parliament and since the Regional Centre for Biotechnology
is going to be an institution of national importance, provisions for reservation as provided in the
Act automatically applied to this Centre as well. The Committee is satisfied with the explanation
given by the Department.
9.27 The Committee hopes that Government would give due consideration to the
observations and recommendations of the Committee and now that considerable time has
already been taken to establish the Regional centre it would at least now ensure that this
Centre is made fully it operational at the earliest possible.

11
ANNEXURES

13
ANNEXURE-I
20 DEC., 2011
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 129 of 201 1
THE REGIONAL CENTRE FOR BIOTECHNOLOGY BILL, 2011
ARRANGEMENTS OF CLAUSES
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Establishment of Regional Centre for Biotechnology.
4. Declaration of Regional Centre for Biotechnology as an institution of national importance.
5. Jurisdiction.
6. Objects of Regional Centre.
7. Transfer of assets, liabilities, etc., of existing Regional Centre to Regional Centre
established under this Act and other provisions, etc.
8. Functions of Regional Centre.
9. Regional Centre to work in collaboration with other centres of UNESCO.
10. Powers of Regional Centre.
11. Regional Centre open to all castes, creed, race or class.
12. Privileges and immunities of academic staff, etc.
13. Authorities of Regional Centre.
14. Board of Governors.
15. Powers and functions of Chairperson.
16. Programme Advisory Committee.
17. Executive Committee.
18. Finance Committee.
19. Board of Studies.
20. Other authorities of Regional Centre.
21. Officers of Regional Centre.
22. Executive Director.
23. Deans and Associate Deans.

14
24. Associate Director (Administration).
25. Registrar.
26. Finance Officer.
27. Other officers.
28. Payment to Regional Centre.
29. Fund of Regional Centre.
30. Annual report.
31. Annual accounts.
C
LAUSES
32. Returns and information.
33. Review of functioning of Regional Centre.
34. Appointment of staff of Regional Centre.
35. Conditions of service.
36. Arbitration.
37. Meetings.
38. Filling of casual vacancies.
39. Proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.
40. Protection of action taken in good faith.
41. Statutes.
42. Matters to be provided by Statutes.
43. Ordinances.
44. Regulations.
45. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to
be laid before Parliament.
46. Power to remove difficulties.

15
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 129 of 201 1
THE REGIONAL CENTRE FOR BIOTECHNOLOGY BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an institution of national
importance to be known as the Regional Centre for
Biotechnology for training and education as a category II
institution under the auspice of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation, to
undertake research in the field of biotechnology and to
provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS  the General Conference of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation, at its thirty-third
session held in Paris, France during the 3rd to 21st October, 2005,
decided that a Regional Centre for Biotechnology Training and
Education shall be established in India under its auspices;
A
ND  W HEREAS  an Agreement for the establishment and
operation of the Regional Centre for Biotechnology Training and
Education in India was entered between the Government of India
and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation on the 14th day of July, 2006 to give effect to the
aforesaid decision;
A
ND W HEREAS it is expedient to make provisions for giving
effect to the said Agreement for establishment of an institution to be
known as the Regional Centre for Biotechnology Training and
Education in India and declare it to be an institution of national
importance.
15

16
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Regional Centre for
Biotechnology Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “academic staff” means Professors, Assistant
Professors, Associate Professors, Deans, Sub-Deans, Executive
Director and such other persons as may be appointed or
engaged for imparting education, training or conducting
research in the Regional Centre for Biotechnology or in
any institution recognised by the Regional Centre for
Biotechnology;
(b) “Board of Governors” means the Board of
Governors constituted under sub-section ( 1) of section 14;
(c) “Board of Studies” means the Board of Studies of
the Regional Centre referred to in section 19;
(d) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Board
of Governors;
(e) “employee” means any person appointed by the
Regional Centre and includes academic and other staff of the
Regional Centre for Biotechnology;
(f) “Executive Committee” means the Executive
Committee of the Regional Centre constituted under section 17;
(g) "Executive Director" means the Executive Director
of the Regional Centre appointed under sub-section ( 1) of
section 22;
(h) “existing Regional Centre” means the UNESCO
Regional Centre for Biotchnology Training and Education at
Faridabad established vide Order of the Government of India
in the Ministry of Science and Technology, Department of
Biotechnology, number BT/MED-II/UNESCO/01/2008, dated
the 20th April, 2009;
(i) “Hall” means a unit of residence for the students of
the Regional Centre;
(j) “institution” means autonomous organisations
conducting research, training or education, supported by the
Government or industry, Universities and other similar
organisations and recognised by the Regional Centre for the
purposes of this Act;
(k) “Programme Advisory Committee” means the
Programme Advisory Committee of the Regional Centre
constituted under section 16;
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.

17
(l) “Region” means the countries in the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation region, and more
generally in the Asia region;
(m) “Regional Centre” means the Regional Centre for
Biotechnology established under sub-section ( 1) of section 3;
(n) “Regulations: means Regulations made by any
authority of the Regional Centre under section 44, for the
time being in force;
(o) “Statutes” means the Statutes of the Regional
Centre for the time being in force framed by the Board of
Governors under section 41;
(p) “Ordinances” means the Ordinances of the Regional
Centre for the time being in force framed by the Programme
Advisory Committee under section 43;
(q) “UNESCO” means the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organisation.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in
the Official Gazette, establish, for the purposes of this Act, an
institution to be known as the Regional Centre for
Biotechnology in India.
(2) The Regional Centre for Biotechnology shall be a body
corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a
common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to
contract and shall, by the said name, sue and be sued.
(3) The head office of the Regional Centre shall be in the
National Capital Region referred to in clause ( f
 ) of section 2 of the
National Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985.
4. Whereas the objects of the institution known as the
Regional Centre for Biotechnology are such as to make the
institution one of national importance, it is hereby declared that the
institution known as the Regional Centre for Biotechnology is an
institution of national importance.
5. The jurisdiction of the Regional Centre shall extend to
whole of India and to centres established within or outside India.
6. The objects of the Regional Centre, shall be—
(a) to disseminate and advance knowledge by providing
instructional and research facilities in such branches of
biotechnology and related fields as it may deem fit including
technology policy development;
(b) to provide capacity-building through education,
training, research and development in biotechnology and
related academic fields for sustainable development objectives
through regional and international cooperation;
Establishment
of Regional
Centre for
Biotechnology.
Declaration
of Regional
Centre for
Biotechnology
as an
institution of
national
importance.
Jurisdiction.
Objects of
Regional
Centre.
2 of 1985.

18
(c) to facilitate transfer of knowledge and technology
relating to biotechnology at the regional level;
(d ) to create a hub of biotechnology expertise in the
countries in South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
region, and more generally in the Asia region, and to address
human resources needs in the region;
(e) to promote and strengthen international cooperation
to improve the social and economic conditions and welfare of
the people;
(f
 ) to promote and facilitate a network of satellite
centres in the region as well as within India.
7. ( 1) On and from the date of establishment of the Regional
Centre,—
(a) any reference to the existing Regional Centre in any
law other than this Act or in any contract or other instruction
shall be deemed as a reference to the Regional Centre;
(b) all properties and assets, movable and immovable,
of, or belonging to, the existing Regional Centre, shall vest in
the Regional Centre;
(c) all rights and liabilities of the existing Regional
Centre shall be transferred to, and be the rights and liabilities
of, the Regional Centre;
(d) without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( c), all
debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered
into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with
or for, the existing Regional Centre immediately before the
said date, for or in connection with the purpose of the said
existing Regional Centre shall be deemed to have incurred,
entered into or engaged to be done by, with or for, the
Regional Centre;
(e) all sums of money due to the existing Regional
Centre immediately before that date shall be deemed to be due
to the Regional Centre;
(f) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or
which could have been instituted by or against the existing
Regional Centre immediately before that date may be
continued or may be instituted by or against the Regional
Centre;
(g) every employee (including those appointed for
imparting instruction or giving training or conducting research
in the existing Regional Centre) holding any office under the
existing Regional Centre or teaching therein immediately
before that date shall hold his office in the Regional Centre or
continue teaching therein by the same tenure and upon the
Transfer of
assets,
liabilities, etc.,
of existing
Regional
Centre to
Regional
Centre
established
under this Act
and other
provisions,
etc.

19
same terms and conditions of service as respects
remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement and other
terminal benefits as he would have held such office if the
Regional Centre had not been established and shall continue to
do so as an employee of the Regional Centre or until the
expiry of the period of six months from that date if such
employee opts not to be the employee of the Regional Centre
within such period.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in the Industrial Dispute
Act, 1947 or in any other law for the time being in force,
absorption of any employee by the Regional Centre in its regular
service under this section shall not entitle such employee to any
compensation under that Act or any other law and no such claim
shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.
8. The functions of the Regional Centre, shall be—
(a) to establish infrastructure and technology platforms
which are directly relevant to biotechnology education,
training and research;
(b) to execute educational and training activities
including grant of degrees in research in biotechnology and
related fields;
(c) to produce human resource tailored to drive
innovation in biotechnology, particularly in areas of new
opportunities and to fill talent gap in deficient areas;
(d) to undertake research and development and
scientific investigations in collaboration with relevant research
centres in the region;
(e) to hold scientific symposia and conferences within
India or in the region or outside the region and to conduct
short-term and long-term training courses and workshops in
all areas of biotechnology;
(f
 ) to collect universally available information with a
view to setting up a data bank for bio-information;
(g) to collect and disseminate, through networking, the
relevant local knowledge in the field of biotehcnology;
(h) to disseminate the outcome of research activities in
different countries through the publication of books and
articles;
(i) to promote collaborative research and development
networking programme in specific areas of biotechnology
with national, regional and international networks and promote
exchange of scientists, at the regional level having regard to
issues pertaining to intellectual property rights of collaborating
institutions promoting equitable sharing of benefits with
collaborating institutions;
14 of 1947.
Functions of
Regional
Centre.

20
(j) to frame Statutes and Ordinances and to alter,
modify or rescind the same.
9. The Regional Centre shall pursue its objects and discharge
its functions in close collaboration with other national, regional and
international centres (including those located in the member States
of the UNESCO).
10. (1) The Regional Centre shall have the following powers,
namely:—
(a) to provide for masters and doctoral degree in
biotechnology and related subjects at the interface of varied
disciplines including physical, chemical, biological, medical,
agricultural and engineering and other relevant sciences as the
Regional Centre may, from time to time, determine;
(b) to provide for short-term and long-term training
courses in biotechnology on specific issues related to the
development, extension, implementation and regulation of
biotechnology and related areas, as the Statutes may, from
time to time, provide;
(c) to organise and undertake extramural studies,
training and extension services in biotechnology;
(d
 ) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in
the manner specified by the Statutes;
(e) to institute Professorships, Associate Professorships,
Assistant Professorships and other academic positions,
required by the Regional Centre and to appoint or engage
persons to such Professorships, Associate Professorships,
Assistant Professorships or other academic positions;
(f
 ) to recognise an institution of higher learning within
India for the purposes of this Act and to withdraw such
recognition in accordance with the norms laid down in the
Statutes;
(g) to appoint persons working in any other institution,
including those located outside the country, as academic staff
of the Regional Centre for a specified period as may be
specified by the Statutes;
(h) to create administrative, technical and other posts
and to make appointments thereto as may be specified by the
Statutes;
(i) to co-operate or collaborate or associate with any
institution, including those located outside the country, in such
manner and for such purposes as the Regional Centre may
determine in accordance with the guidelines specified by the
Statutes;
Regional
Centre to
work in
collaboration
with other
centres of
UNESCO.
Powers of
Regional
Centre.

21
(j) to establish such centres and specialised laboratories
or other units for research, development and instruction as
are, in the opinion of the Regional Centre, necessary for the
furtherance of its objects;
(k) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships,
studentships, medals and prizes as may be specified by the
Statutes;
(l) to make provision for research and advisory
services and for that purpose to enter into such arrangements
with other institutions, industrial or other organisations,
including those located outside the country, as the Regional
Centre may deem necessary as may be specified by the
Statutes;
(m) to organise and conduct refresher courses,
workshops, seminars and other programmes for teachers,
evaluators and other stakeholders;
(n) to appoint on contract basis or otherwise Visiting
Professors, Honorary Professors, Adjunct Professors,
Emeritus Professors, Consultants and such other persons who
may contribute to the advancement of the objects of the
Regional Centre;
(o) to determine standards of admission to the Regional
Centre, which may include examination, evaluation or any
other method of testing;
(p) to demand and receive payment of fees and other
charges;
(q) to supervise the residences of the students of the
Regional Centre and to make arrangements for promoting their
health and general welfare;
(r) to lay down conditions of service of all categories
of employees, including their code of conduct;
(s) to regulate and enforce discipline among the
students and the employees, and to take such disciplinary
measures in this regard as may be considered necessary by
the Regional Centre;
(t) to make arrangements for promoting the health and
general welfare of the employees;
(u) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to
acquire, hold and manage, and to dispose of, with the prior
approval of the Central Government, any property, movable or
immovable, including trust and endowment properties, for the
purposes of the Regional Centre;
(v) to borrow, with the prior approval of the Central
Government, on the security of its property of the Regional
Centre, money for the purposes of the Regional Centre; and

22
(w) to do all such other acts and things as may be
necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or
any of its objects.
(2) In exercising its powers under sub-section ( 1), it shall be
the endeavour of the Regional Centre to maintain high standards of
education, training and research, and the Regional Centre shall,
among other measures which may be necessary for the said
purpose, take, in particular, the following measures, namely:—
(i) admission of students from India and outside India
in such manner as may be specified by the Statutes;
(ii) conduct innovative courses and programmes of
studies with a provision for periodic review and restructuring;
and
(iii ) promote e-governance with an effective
management information system.
11. The Regional Centre or any institution recognised by it
shall be open to persons of either sex and whatever caste, creed,
race, ethnicity, nationality or class, and it shall not be lawful for the
Regional Centre or such institution to adopt or impose on any
person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order
to entitle him to be appointed as a member of the academic staff of
the Regional Centre or such institution or to hold any other office
therein or to be admitted as a student in the Regional Centre or such
institution or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof.
12. The members of the academic staff and, where
applicable, their dependents or members of the family, shall enjoy
such privileges and immunities as the Central Government may, after
entering into an agreement with the Regional Centre, notify under
section 3 of the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities)
Act, 1947.
13. The following shall be the authorities of the Regional
Centre, namely:-—
(a) the Board of Governors;
(b) the Programme Advisory Committee;
(c) the Executive Committee;
(d) the Finance Committee; and
(e) such other authorities as may be declared by the
Statutes to be the authorities of the Regional Centre.
14. (1) The Board of Governors shall consist of the following
members, namely:—
(i) Secretary to the Government of India in the
Department of Biotechnology, ex officio Chairperson;
Regional
Centre open
to all castes,
creed, race or
class.
Privileges and
immunities of
academic
staff, etc.
Authorities of
Regional
Centre.
Board of
Governors.
46 of 1947.

23
(ii) a representative of the Government of India, to be
nominated by the Secretary to the Government of India in the
Department of Biotechnology who would be an eminent
scientist in the relevant field and in the grade not less than
that of a Head of an antonomous institution supported by
Government of India;
(iii ) a representative of the Director-General of
UNESCO;
(iv) a representative of each of the other Member
States of UNESCO in such manner as may be specified by
the Statutes.
(2) The Chairperson of the Programme Advisory Committee
shall be a permanent invitee of the Board of Governors.
(3) The Executive Director of the Regional Centre shall be the
Convenor of the meetings of the Board of Governors.
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board of
Governors shall have the following powers and functions, namely:—
(a) to approve the annual plan and budget of the
Regional Centre;
(b) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and
programmes of the Regional Centre, and to suggest measures
for the improvement and development of the Regional Centre;
(c) to consider the annual report and the annual
accounts of the Regional Centre and the audit report on such
accounts;
(d
 ) to study and approve the internal procedures,
including financial procedure and staff regulations of the
Regional Centre;
(e) to approve the organisational structure and number
of academic staff and other employees at the Regional Centre;
(f
 ) to convene special consultative sessions to which it
shall invite, in addition to its own members, the Executive
Director of the Regional Centre, and may also invite
representatives of other interested countries and international
organisations in order to obtain proposals for strengthening
the scope of services of the Regional Centre and for carrying
out the projects and activities relevant to the Regional Centre,
and to expand the fund-raising strategy and capabilities;
(g) to prescribe fees and other charges;
(h) to frame Statutes.
(5) The Chairperson shall ordinarily preside over the meetings
of the Board of Governors.

24
(6) The Board of Governors shall meet at least once in every
year or such other time as the Chairperson may decide in such
manner as may be specified by the Statutes.
(7) The Board of Governors may evolve its own rules of
procedure for the purpose of conducting its meetings and
transacting business therein.
15. (1) The Chairperson shall exercise and discharge such
powers and functions of the Board of Governors as may be
delegated by the Board and such other powers and functions as may
be specified by the Statutes.
(2) If the Chairperson is not present at a meeting of the Board
of Governors, another member of the Board authorised by the
Chairperson may preside over the meeting.
16. (1) The Programme Advisory Committee shall be the
principal academic body of the Regional Centre and shall, subject to
the provisions of this Act, advise planning, execution, review and
monitoring of the scientific and academic programmes of the
Regional Centre.
(2) The Programme Advisory Committee shall consist of the
following persons who shall be eminent experts of international
repute in biotechnology relevant to the core activities of the Regional
Centre, namely:—
(a) a chairperson to be nominated by the Board of
Governors;
(b) two members to be nominated by the UNESCO;
(c) three members from amongst the member States of
UNESCO which provide maximum financial assistance during
a period of three years to be nominated by the member
States;
(d) two members having expertise and experience in
biotechnology policy and legal matters to be nominated by the
Central Government;
(e) six members from amongst the persons being
renowned scientist or academician, to be nominated by the
Board of Governors;
(f
 ) the Executive Director, Member-Secretary
ex-officio .
(3) The Programme Advisory Committee shall be responsible
to—
(a) make recommendations on the matters of planning
and coordinating of the education, training and research
activities;
Powers and
functions of
Chairperson.
Programme
Advisory
Committee.

25
(b) recommend modifications or revision of education,
training and research programmes of the Regional Centre and
on the reports thereon;
(c) review annually the programmes of the Regional
Centre, evaluate its progress and submit the report thereon;
(d) consider and report on any matter concerning
scientific and technical issues referred to it by the Board of
Governors or by the Executive Director;
(e) perform all such duties and to do all such acts as
may be necessary in the furtherance of education, training and
research under this Act;
(f) frame Ordinances;
(g) perform such other functions as may be specified
by the Statutes.
(4) The fees and allowances payable to members of
the Programme Advisory Committee and their term of
office shall be such as may be specified by the Statutes.
17. (1) The Executive Committee shall be the advisory body
for issues concerning the management of the Regional Centre and
advise from time to time to the Board of Governors.
(2) The constitution of the Executive Committee, the term of
office of its members and its powers and functions shall be such
as may be specified by the Statutes.
18. The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance
Committee shall be such as may be specified by the Statutes and the
Finance Committee shall report to the Board of Governors.
19. The constitution, powers and functions of the Board of
Studies shall be such as may be specified by the Statutes.
20. The constitution, powers and functions of other
authorities, as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities
of the Regional Centre, shall be such as may be specified by the
Statutes.
21. The following shall be the officers of the Regional Centre,
namely:—
(a) the Executive Director;
(b) the Deans;
(c) the Associate Deans;
(d) the Associate Director (Administration);
(e) the Registrar;
(f) the Finance Officer; and
Executive
Committee.
Finance
Committee.
Board of
Studies.
Other
authorities of
Regional
Centre.
Officers of
Regional
Centre.

26
(g) such other officers as may be declared by the
Statutes to be the officers of the Regional Centre.
22. (1) The Executive Director shall be appointed on the
recommendation of the Board of Governors in such manner as may
be specified by the Statutes.
(2) The Executive Director shall—
(a) be the principal executive and academic officer of
the Regional Centre;
(b) direct the work of the Regional Centre in
conformity with the programmes and directives established by
the Board of Governors;
(c) propose the draft work plan and budget to be
submitted to the Board of Governors for approval;
(d) prepare the agenda for the sessions of the Board of
Governors;
(e) prepare reports on the Regional Centre’s activities
for submission to the Board of Governors; and
(f) exercise such other powers and perform such other
functions as may be specified by the Statutes.
(3) The financial powers delegated to the Executive Director
shall be such as may be specified by the Statutes.
(4) The Executive Director may, if he is of the opinion that
immediate action is necessary on any matter, exercise any power
conferred on any authority of the Regional Centre by or under this
Act and shall report to such authority at its next meeting the action
taken by him on such matter.
23. The Deans and Associate Deans shall be appointed in such
manner and on such terms and conditions of service, and shall
exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be specified
by the Statutes.
24. (1) The Associate Director (Administration) shall be
appointed in such manner, and on such terms and conditions of
service, as may be specified by the Statutes.
(2) The Associate Director (Administration) shall have the
power to enter into agreements, sign documents and authenticate
records on behalf of the Regional Centre, and shall exercise such
powers and perform such duties, as may be specified by the
Statutes.
25. The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner and shall
exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be specified
by the Statutes.
Executive
Director.
Deans and
Associate
Deans.
Associate
Director
(Administration).
Registrar.

27
26. The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner,
and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be
specified by the Statutes.
27. The manner of appointment and powers and duties of
other officers of the Regional Centre shall be such as may be
specified by the Statutes.
28. The Central Government may, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law, in this behalf, make to the
Regional Centre grants and loans of such sums of money and
in such manner as that Government may consider necessary
for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
29. (1) The Regional Centre shall maintain a Fund to
which there shall be credited—
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government;
(b) all fees and other charges received by the
Regional Centre;
(c) all moneys received by the Regional Centre by
way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests or
transfers; and
(d) all moneys received by the Regional Centre in
any other manner or from any other source.
(2) All moneys credited to the Fund shall be deposited in
such banks or invested in such manner as the Regional Centre
may, with the approval of the Central Government,  decide.
(3) The fund shall be applied for meeting—
(a) the salary, allowances and other remuneration
of chairperson, members of the Board or committees, or
academic staff, officers and other employees, of the
Regional Centre or members of other committees set up
by it;
(b) the expenses of the Regional Centre in
discharge of its function under this Act;
(c) the expenses on objects and for purposes
authorised by this Act.
30. (1) The annual report of the Regional Centre shall be
prepared under the direction of the Executive Director, which shall
include, among other matters, the steps taken by the Regional
Centre towards the fulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted
to the Board of Governors on or before such date as may be
specified by the Statutes and the Board of Governors shall consider
the report in its annual meeting.
(2) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub-
section ( 1), shall be submitted to the Central Government, which
Finance
Officer.
Other
officers.
Payment to
Regional
Centre.
Annual report.
Fund of
Regional
Centre.

28
shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both
Houses of Parliament.
31. (1) The annual accounts and the balance sheet of the
Regional Centre shall be prepared under the directions of the Board
of Governors and shall, once at least every year, and at intervals of
not more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India.
(2) A copy of the accounts together with the audit report shall
be submitted to the Central Government along with the observations,
if any, of the Board of Governors.
(3) A copy of the annual report and annual accounts together
with the audit report, as submitted to the Central Government shall,
as soon as may be, cause to be laid before both Houses of
Parliament.
(4) The audited annual accounts, after having been laid before
both Houses of Parliament, shall be published in the Gazette of
India.
(5) A copy of the audited annual accounts shall also be
submitted to the Member States.
32. The Regional Centre shall furnish to the Central
Government such returns or other information with respect to its
property or activities as the Central Government may, from time to
time, require, within such period as may be specified by the Central
Government.
33. (1) There shall be a review of the functioning of the
Regional Centre once in every four years by persons of eminence
to be appointed by the Central Government.
(2) The Regional Centre shall meet the expenses for
conducting the review under sub-section ( 1) and upon receipt of the
report of such review, the Board of Governors may take appropriate
action.
(3) In addition to the review under sub-section ( 1), the Board
of Governors may conduct review of functioning of administrative
and academic wings of the Regional Centre, in such manner and at
such intervals, as may be specified in the Statutes.
34. All appointments of the staff of the Regional Centre,
(except appointment of the Executive Director) shall be made in
accordance with the procedure laid down in the Statutes, by—
(a) the Board of Governors for the academic staff;
(b) the Executive Director, in any other case.
35. (1) Every employee of the Regional Centre shall be
appointed on contractual basis under a written contract, which shall
be lodged with the Regional Centre and a copy of which shall be
furnished to the employee concerned.
Review of
functioning of
Regional
Centre.
Returns and
information.
Annual
accounts.
Appointment
of staff of
Regional
Centre.
Conditions of
service.

29
(2) The Regional Centre shall have a flexible compensation
system which recognises performance, as laid down in the Statutes,
to bring the best talent in the Regional Centre.
36. (1) Any dispute arising out of a contract between the
Regional Centre and any of its employees shall, at the first instance,
be resolved through such grievance redressal mechanism as may be
specified by Statutes.
(2) If the dispute referred to in sub-section ( 1) is not resolved
through the grievance redressal mechanism, the same shall, at the
request of the employee concerned or at the instance of the
Regional Centre, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting
of one member appointed by the Executive Director, one member
nominated by the employee, and such two arbitrators shall appoint
the third arbitrator who shall act as the Presiding arbitrator.
(3) The arbitration under sub-section ( 1) shall be governed by
the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
37. The meetings of the Board of Governors, Programme
Advisory Committee, Executive Committee or other committees
constituted by the Regional Centre may be held using contemporary
tools of information and communication technologies (including
video conferencing) without the members necessarily having to be
physically present.
38. All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex-
officio members) of any authority or other body of the Regional
Centre shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the person or body
who appoints, elects or co-opts the member whose place has
become vacant and the person appointed, elected or co-opted to a
casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or body for the
residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would
have been a member.
39. No act or proceedings of any authority or other body of
the Regional Centre shall be invalid merely by reason of the
existence of a vacancy or vacancies among its members.
40. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against any
officer or other employee of the Regional Centre for anything which
is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of any
of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes, Ordinances and
Regulations made thereunder.
41. (1) The Statutes of the Regional Centre shall be enacted
by the Board of Governors.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-
section ( 1), the Executive Committee may make recommendations
for enactment of Statutes to the Board.
Arbitration.
26 of 1996.
Meetings.
Filling of
casual
vacancies.
Proceedings
of authorities
or bodies not
invalidated by
vacancies.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Statutes.

30
(3) The Board of Governors may, from time to time, make
new Statutes or may amend or repeal the Statutes with effect from
such date, not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act,
as it may direct.
42. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of
authorities, term of office of its member and other bodies of
the Regional Centre, as may be constituted from time to time;
(b) the manner of nomination of representative of the
Member States of UNESCO in the Board of Governors;
(c) other powers and functions of the Chairperson of
the Board of Governors; the other functions of the
Programme Advisory Committee, and term of office of its
members; the constitution, powers and functions of the
Finance Committee, the Board of Studies and constitution,
powers and functions of other authorities;
(d) the manner of appointment of Executive Director,
his other powers and other duties, financial powers to be
delegated to the Executive Director and the manner of
appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the
Regional Centre and their emoluments;
(e) the time and date for submission of annual report of
the Regional Centre; manner of conducting review of
functioning of administrative and academic wings of the
Regional Centre;
(f) the appointment of regular academic staff and other
employees of the Regional Centre, their emoluments and
conditions of service, flexible compensation system, their
benefits and privileges, including principles governing the
seniority of service, age of superannuation, provisions for
pension, insurance, provident fund, the manner of termination
of service and disciplinary action consistent with such staff
engaged in higher education and research at Central
Universities;
(g) the manner of co-operation and collaboration with
other Universities, institutions and other agencies including
learned bodies or associations;
(h) creation, composition and functions of any other
body which is considered necessary for improving the
academic life of the Regional Centre;
(i) conferment of honorary degrees and distinctions;
(j) delegation of powers vested in the authorities or
officers of the Regional Centre;
Matters to be
provided by
Statutes.

31
(k) the terms and conditions of service for engagement
of experts as adjunct and visiting faculty;
(l) the terms and conditions of service for hiring
appropriate human resource, Indian or foreign, especially at
higher levels in specific areas, with fixed tenure, not
exceeding three years at a time and with higher compensation,
with the approval of the Board of Governors;
(m) grievance redressal mechanism for resolution of
disputes arising out of a contract between the Regional Centre
and any of its employees;
(n) the manner of making Regulations by any of the
authorities of the Regional Centre;
(o) the manner of recognition of institutions to be
affiliated with the Regional Centre and grounds for withdrawal
of recognition thereof;
(p) any other matter which may be required or
necessary for the purposes of this Act.
43. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes,
the Ordinances of the Regional Centre may provide for all or any of
the following matters, namely:—
(a) admission of students from within India and from
the Region to the Regional Centre and their enrolment as
such;
(b) the course of study;
(c) the conditions under which students shall be
admitted and shall be eligible for degrees, diplomas and
certificates and to the examinations of the Regional Centre,
and shall be eligible for the degrees, diplomas and certificates;
(d) the conditions of award of the fellowships,
scholarships, medals and prizes;
(e) the conditions and mode of appointment and duties
of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;
(f) the conduct of examinations, including the term of
office and manner of appointment and the duties of examining
bodies, examiners and moderators;
(g) the conditions of residence of the students of the
Regional Centre;
(h) the maintenance of discipline among the employees
and students;
(i) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees,
diplomas and certificates of the Regional Centre including the
medium of instruction and examination;
Ordinances.

32
(j) the award of degrees and other academic
distinctions, the qualifications for the same and the means to
be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the same;
the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other
academic distinctions;
(k) fees to be charged for courses of study in the
Regional Centre and for admission to examinations, degrees
and diplomas of the Regional Centre;
(l) institution of and conditions for award of
fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;
(m) the special arrangements, if any, which may be
made for the residence and teaching of women students and
the prescribing of special courses of studies for them;
(n) establishment, management and abolition of Centres
of Studies, Schools, Departments, Specialised Laboratories,
Halls and Institutions;
(o) any other matter which by this Act or the Statute,
is to be, or, may be, provided for by the Ordinances.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordinances
shall be made by the Programme Advisory Committee.
(3) All Ordinances made by the Programme Advisory
Committee shall have the effect from such date as it may direct.
(4) The Programme Advisory Committee shall have the power
by resolution to modify or cancel any of its Ordinances and such
Ordinances shall, from the date of such resolution stand modified
accordingly or cancelled, as the case may be.
44. The authorities of the Regional Centre may make
Regulations, consistent with the provisions of this Act, the Statutes
and the Ordinances, for the conduct of their own business and that
of the Committees, if any, appointed by them and not provided for
by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances, in the manner specified
by the Statutes.
45. (1) Every Statute or Ordinance or Regulation made under
this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette.
(2) Every Statute or Ordinance or Regulation made under this
Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the
Statute or Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the
Statute or Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Statute
or Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such
Regulations.
Statutes,
Ordinances
and
Regulations to
be published in
the Official
Gazette and to
be laid before
Parliament.

33
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that Statute or
Ordinance or Regulation.
(3) The power to make Statutes or Ordinances or Regulations
shall include the power to give retrospective effect, from a date not
earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statutes
or Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective
effect shall be given to any Statutes or Ordinances or Regulations
so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom
such Statutes or Ordinances or Regulations may be applicable.
46. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section
after the expiry of two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

34
34
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Modern biotechnology has been recognised globally as a
rapidly advancing science wherein molecular techniques and
processes are employed to develop health care solutions for human
and animal sector, for agriculture and environment technologies.
This would require creation of high quality human resource in
disciplinary and interdisciplinary areas by engaging students in
research by integrating science, engineering and medicine. Similarly,
interface amongst agriculture or veterinary sciences and engineers
and environmental biologists, ecologists and engineers for
agricultural and environmental technologies respectively would also
be necessary for molecular breeding, bio-energy and green
technologies. For this purpose, it is necessary to create physical
infrastructure in critical platform technologies to support
interdisciplinary education training and research in biotechnology.
2. The General Conference of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO), at its
thirty-third session held in Paris, France during the 3rd to 21st
October, 2005, decided that a Regional Centre for Biotechnology
Training and Education shall be established in India under its
auspices. An Agreement for the establishment and operation of the
Regional Centre for Biotechnology Training and Education in India
was entered between the Government of India and the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation on the
14th day of July, 2006 to give effect to the aforesaid decision.
The Regional Centre for Biotechnology shall be an autonomous
institution and pursue its objects and discharge its functions in
close collaboration with other national, regional and international
centres (including those located in the member States of the
UNESCO). The UNESCO shall provide technical assistance as and
when required and as appropriate for the establishment and
operation of the Regional Centre including assistance in the
formulation of the short-term, medium-term and long-term
programmes of the Regional Centre.
3. In view of the aforesaid, it is expedient to enact a law for
giving effect to the said Agreement for establishment of an
institution of national importance to be known as the Regional
Centre for Biotechnology for training and education as a Category II
Centre under the auspice of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organisation, to undertake research in the
field of biotechnology and to provide for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto. The Regional Centre for
Biotechnology Bill, 2011, inter alia , provides for the following,
namely:—

35
(a) establishment of the Regional Centre for
Biotechnology and to declare it as an institution of the national
importance;
(b) to make provision for objects of the Regional
Centre for Biotechnology, inter alia ,—
(i) to provide for masters and doctoral degree in
biotechnology and related subjects at the interface of
varied disciplines including the physical, chemical,
biological, medical, agricultural and engineering and
other relevant sciences as the Regional Centre may,
from time to time, determine;
(ii) to provide for short-term and long-term
training courses in biotechnology on specific issues
related to the development, extension, implementation
and regulation of biotechnology and related areas, as the
Statutes may, from time to time, require;
(iii) to organise and undertake extramural studies,
training and extension services in biotechnology;
(iv) to institute Professorships, Associate
Professorships, Assistant Professorships and other
academic positions, required by the Regional Centre and
to appoint or engage persons to such Professorships,
Associate Professorships, Assistant Professorships or
other academic positions;
(v) to recognise an institution of higher learning
within India for the purposes of this Act and to
withdraw such recognition in accordance with the
norms laid down in the Statutes;
(vi) to appoint persons working in any other
institution, including those located outside the country,
as academic staff of the Regional Centre for a specified
period as may be specified by the Statutes;
(vii) to create administrative, technical and other
posts and to make appointments thereto as may be
specified by the Statutes;
(viii) to co-operate or collaborate or associate
with any institution, including those located outside the
country, in such manner and for such purposes as the
Regional Centre may determine in accordance with the
guidelines specified by the Statutes;
(ix) to establish such centres and specialised
laboratories or other units for research, development
and instruction as are, in the opinion of the Regional
Centre, necessary for the furtherance of its objects;

36
(c) constitution of the Board of Governors, the
Programme Advisory Committee, the Executive Committee,
the Finance Committee, the Board of Studies and other
authorities for the purpose of the proposed legislation;
(d) to provide for the members of the academic staff
and, where applicable, their dependents or members of the
family, such privileges and immunities as the Central
Government may, after entering into an agreement with the
Regional Centre, notify under section 3 of the United Nations
(Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947;
(e) make provisions for appointment of officers and
staff of the Regional Centre and defining their powers, duties
and conditions of service;
(f) confer power upon the Central Government to
review the functioning of the Regional Centre for
Biotechnology once in every four years by persons of
eminence to be appointed by it;
(g) make provision for arbitration of disputes arising
out of a contract between the Regional Centre and any of its
employees, at the first instance, to be resolved through such
grievance redressal mechanism as may be specified by
Statutes;
(h) confer power upon the Board of Governors to enact
Statutes of the Regional Centre and Ordinances to be made by
the Programme Advisory Committee and Regulations by the
authorities of the Regional Centre;
4. The notes on clauses explain in detail various provisions in
the Bill.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI;
The 13th December, 2012 VILASRAO DESHMUKH.
————
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
————
[Copy of the letter No. BT/Med/RCB/AP/2010 dated 15.12.2011
from Shri Vilasrao Deshmukh, Minister of Science and Technology
and Earth Sciences to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of
the Regional Centre for Biotechnology Bill 2011 recommends the
introduction and consideration of the Bill under article 117(1)
and (3) of the Constitution.

37
37
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 1.— This clause provides for short title and
commencement. It provides that the proposed legislation shall come
into force on such date as the Central Government may appoint by
notification in the official Gazette.
Clause 2 .— This clause seeks to define certain expressions
used in the proposed legislation. These definitions, inter alia ,
include “academic staff”, “Board of Governors”, “Board of Studies”,
“Chairperson”, “employee”, “Hall” and “Region”, etc.
Clause 3.— This clause provides for the establishment of an
institution to be known as the Regional Centre for Biotechnology
which shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a
common seal with power to contract. The head office of the
Regional Centre to be in the National Capital Region.
Clause 4.— This clause provides for the declaration of the
Regional Centre for Biotechnology as an institution of national
importance.
Clause 5.— This clause provides for the jurisdiction of the
Regional Centre which shall extend to whole of India and to centres
established within or outside India.
Clause 6.— This clause specifies the objects of the Regional
Centre. It, inter alia , provides that the Regional Centre shall
disseminate and advance knowledge by providing instructional and
research facilities in such branches of biotechnology and related
fields as it may deem fit including technology policy development;
provide capacity-building through education, training, research and
development in biotechnology and related academic fields for
sustainable development objectives through regional and international
cooperation; facilitate transfer of knowledge and technology relating
to biotechnology at the regional level and create a hub of
biotechnology expertise in the countries in South Asian Association
for Regional Cooperation region, and more generally in the Asia
region, and to address human resources needs in the region; and
promote and strengthen international cooperation to improve the
social and economic conditions and welfare of the people and
promote and facilitate a network of satellite centres in the region as
well as within India.
Clause 7.— This clause provides for the transfer of assets,
liabilities, etc., of the existing Regional Centre to the Regional Centre
for Biotechnology established under the proposed legislation.
It provides that any reference to the existing Regional Centre
in any law other than this Act or in any contract or other instruction

38
shall be deemed as a reference to the Regional Centre; all properties
and assets, movable and immovable, of, or belonging to, the existing
Regional Centre, shall vest in the Regional Centre; all rights and
liabilities of the existing Regional Centre shall be transferred to, and
be the rights and liabilities of, the Regional Centre.
It further provides that all debts, obligations and liabilities
incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and things
engaged to be done by, with or for, the existing Regional Centre or
in connection with the purpose of the existing Regional Centre shall
be deemed to have incurred, entered into or engaged to be done by,
with or for, the Regional Centre established under the proposed
legislation.
It also provides that all sums of money due to the existing
Regional Centre shall be deemed to be due to the Regional Centre
established under the proposed legislation and all suits and other
legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by
or against the existing Regional Centre may be continued or may be
instituted by or against the Regional Centre established under the
proposed legislation.
It also provides that every employee (including those
appointed for imparting instruction or giving training or conducting
research in the existing Regional Centre) holding any office under
the existing Regional Centre or teaching therein immediately before
that date shall hold his office in the Regional Centre established
under the proposed legislation or continue teaching therein by the
same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions of service as
respects remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement and other
terminal benefits as he would have held such office if the Regional
Centre had not been established under the proposed legislation and
shall continue to do so as an employee of the Regional Centre or
until the expiry of the period of six months from that date if such
employee opts not to be the employee of the Regional Centre
established under the proposed legislation.
It also provides that absorption of any employee by the
Regional Centre established under the proposed legislation in its
regular service shall not entitle such employee to any compensation
under any Act or law and no such claim shall be entertained by any
court, tribunal or other authority.
Clause 8.— This clause provides for the functions of the
Regional Centre. It, inter alia , provides that the Regional Centre
shall establish infrastructure and technology platforms which are
directly relevant to biotechnology education, training and research;
execute educational and training activities including grant of degrees
in research in biotechnology and related fields; produce human
resource tailored to drive innovation in biotechnology, particularly in
areas of new opportunities and to fill talent gap in deficient areas;
undertake research and development and scientific investigations in
collaboration with relevant research centres in the region; hold

39
scientific symposia and conferences within India or in the region or
outside the region and conduct short-term and long-term training
courses and workshops in all areas of biotechnology; collect
universally available information with a view to setting up a data
bank for bio-information; collect and disseminate, through
networking, the relevant local knowledge in the field of
biotechnology; disseminate the outcome of research activities in
different countries through the publication of books and articles;
promote collaborative research and development networking
programme in specific areas of biotechnology with national, regional
and international networks and promote exchange of scientists, at
the regional level having regard to issues pertaining to intellectual
property rights of collaborating institutions promoting equitable
sharing of benefits with collaborating institutions; frame Statutes and
Ordinances and alter, modify or rescind the same.
Clause 9.— This clause provides that the Regional Centre
shall pursue its objects and discharge its functions in close
collaboration with other national, regional and international centres
(including those located in the member States of the UNESCO).
Clause 10.— This clause lays down the powers of the
Regional Centre. It, inter alia , provides that the Regional Centre
shall have power to conduct courses leading to masters and doctoral
degree in biotechnology and related subjects at the interface of
varied disciplines including physical, chemical, biological, medical,
agricultural and engineering and other relevant sciences; to provide
for short-term and long-term training courses in biotechnology on
specific issues related to the development, extension, implementation
and regulation of biotechnology and related areas; organise and
undertake extramural studies, training and extension services in
biotechnology; confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the
manner specified by the Statutes; institute Professorships, Associate
Professorships, Assistant Professorships and other academic
positions, required by the Regional Centre and to appoint or engage
persons to such Professorships, Associate Professorships, Assistant
Professorships or other academic positions; recognise an institution
of higher learning within India for the purposes of this Act and
withdraw such recognition in accordance with the norms laid down
in the Statutes; appoint persons working in any other institution,
including those located outside the country, as academic staff of the
Regional Centre for a specified period as may be specified by the
Statutes; create administrative, technical and other posts and to
make appointments thereto as may be specified by the Statutes;
cooperate or collaborate or associate with any institution, including
those located outside the country, in such manner and for such
purposes as the Regional Centre may determine in accordance with
the guidelines specified by the Statutes; establish such centres and
specialised laboratories or other units for research, development and
instruction as are, in the opinion of the Regional Centre, necessary
for the furtherance of its objects; institute and awards fellowships,
scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes as may be specified by

40
the Statutes; to make provision for research and advisory services
and for that purpose to enter into such arrangements with other
institutions, industrial or other organisations, including those located
outside the country, as the Regional Centre may deem necessary as
may be specified by the Statutes; to organise and conduct refresher
courses, workshops, seminars and other programmes for teachers,
evaluators and other stakeholders; to appoint on contract basis or
otherwise Visiting Professors, Honorary Professors, Adjunct
Professors, Emeritus Professors, Consultants and such other
persons who may contribute to the advancement of the objects of
the Regional Centre; to determine standards of admission to the
Regional Centre, which may include examination, evaluation or any
other method of testing; to demand and receive payment of fees and
other charges; to supervise the residences of the students of the
Regional Centre and to make arrangements for promoting their
health and general welfare; to lay down conditions of service of all
categories of employees, including their code of conduct; to regulate
and enforce discipline among the students and the employees, and
to take such disciplinary measures in this regard as may be
considered necessary by the Regional Centre; to make arrangements
for promoting the health and general welfare of the employees; to
receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold and
manage, and to dispose of, with the prior approval of the Central
Government, any property, movable or immovable, including trust
and endowment properties, for the purposes of the Regional Centre;
to borrow, with the prior approval of the Central Government, on
the security of its property of the Regional Centre, money for the
purposes of the Regional Centre; and to do all such other acts and
things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the
attainment of all or any of its objects.
It further provides that the Regional Centre shall maintain high
standards of education, training and research, and take measures for
admission of students from India and outside India in such manner
as may be specified by the Statutes; conduct innovative courses and
programmes of studies with a provision for periodic review and
restructuring; and promote e-governance with an effective
management information system.
Clause 11.— This clause lays down that the Regional Centre
or any institution recognised by it shall be open to all castes, creed,
race or class.
Clause 12.— This clause provides for the privileges and
immunities of academic staff, etc. It provides that the members of
the academic staff and, where applicable, their dependents or
members of the family, shall enjoy such privileges and immunities as
the Central Government may, after entering into an agreement with
the Regional Centre, notify under section 3 of the United Nations
(Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947.
Clause 13.— This clause provides for the Authorities of the
Regional Centre. It provides that the Board of Governors; the

41
Programme Advisory Committee; the Executive Committee; the
Finance Committee; and such other authorities as may be declared
by the Statutes to be the authorities shall be the authorities of the
Regional Centre.
Clause 14.— This clause provides for the Board of
Governors. It provides that the Board of Governors shall consist of
the Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of
Biotechnology, as ex officio Chairperson; and a representative of the
Government of India, to be nominated by the Secretary to the
Government of India in the Department of Biotechnology who
would be an eminent scientist in the relevant field and in the grade
not less than that of a Head of an autonomous institution supported
by Government of India; a representative of the Director-General of
UNESCO; a representative of each of the other Member States of
UNESCO in such manner as may be specified by the Statutes.
It further provides that the Chairperson of the Programme
Advisory Committee shall be a permanent invitee of the Board of
Governors and the Executive Director of the Regional Centre be the
Convenor of the meetings of the Board of Governors.
It also provides that the Board of Governors shall approve the
annual plan and budget of the Regional Centre; review, from time to
time, the broad policies and programmes of the Regional Centre, and
suggest measures for the improvement and development of the
Regional Centre; consider the annual report and the annual accounts
of the Regional Centre and the audit report on such accounts; study
and approve the internal procedures, including financial procedure
and staff regulations of the Regional Centre; approve the
organisational structure and number of academic staff and other
employees at the Regional Centre; convene special consultative
sessions to which it shall invite, in addition to its own members, the
Executive Director of the Regional Centre, and may also invite
representatives of other interested countries and international
organisations in order to obtain proposals for strengthening the
scope of services of the Regional Centre and for carrying out the
projects and activities relevant to the Regional Centre, and expand
the fund-raising strategy and capabilities; prescribe fees and other
charges, and frame Statutes.
It also provides that the Chairperson shall ordinarily preside
over the meetings of the Board of Governors and that the Board of
Governors shall meet at least once in every year or such other time
as the Chairperson may decide in such manner as may be specified
by the Statutes. It also lays down that the Board of Governors may
evolve its own rules of procedure for the purpose of conducting its
meetings and transacting business therein.
Clause 15.— This clause provides for the powers and
functions of the Chairperson. It provides that the Chairperson shall
exercise and discharge such powers and functions of the Board of
Governors as may be delegated by the Board and such other powers

42
and functions as may be specified by the Statutes. It further
provides that if the Chairperson is not present at a meeting of the
Board of Governors, another member of the Board authorised by the
Chairperson may preside over the meeting.
Clause 16.— This clause provides that the Programme
Advisory Committee shall be the principal academic body of the
Regional Centre to advise planning, execution, review and
monitoring of the scientific and academic programmes of the
Regional Centre.
It further provides for the constitution of the Programme
Advisory Committee with a Chairperson to be nominated by the
Board of Governors; two members to be nominated by the
UNESCO; three members from amongst the member States of
UNESCO which provide maximum financial assistance during a
period of three years to be nominated by the member States; two
members having expertise and experience in biotechnology policy
and legal matters to be nominated by the Central Government; six
members from amongst the persons being renowned scientist or
academician, to be nominated by the Board of Governors; and the
Executive Director, Member—Secretary ex officio.
It also provides for the responsibilities of the Programme
Advisory Committee which include making recommendations on the
matters of planning and coordinating of the education, training and
research activities; recommending modifications or revision of
education, training and research programmes of the Regional Centre
and on the reports thereon; reviewing annually the programmes of the
Regional Centre, evaluating its progress and submitting the report
thereon; considering and reporting on any matter concerning scientific
and technical issues referred to it by the Board of Governors or by
the Executive Director; performing all such duties and to do all such
acts as may be necessary in the furtherance of education, training and
research under this Act; framing Ordinances; and performing such
other functions as may be specified by the Statutes.
It also provides that the fees and allowances payable to
members of the Programme Advisory Committee and their term of
office shall be such as may be specified by the Statutes.
Clause 17.— This clause provides that the Executive
Committee shall be the advisory body for issues concerning the
management of the Regional Centre and advise from time to time to
the Board of Governors.
It further provides that the constitution of the Executive
Committee, the term of office of its members and its powers and
functions shall be such as may be specified by the Statutes.
Clause 18.— This clause provides that the constitution,
powers and functions of the Finance Committee shall be such as
may be specified by the Statutes and the Finance Committee shall
report to the Board of Governors.

43
Clause 19.— This clause provides that the constitution,
powers and functions of the Board of Studies shall be such as may
be specified by the Statutes.
Clause 20.— This clause provides that the constitution,
powers and functions of other authorities, as may be declared by
the Statutes to be the authorities of the Regional Centre, shall be
such as may be specified by the Statutes.
Clause 21.— This clause provides for the officers of the
Regional Centre. It provides that the Executive Director; the Deans;
the Associate Deans; the Associate Director (Administration); the
Registrar; the Finance Officer; and such other officers as may be
declared by the Statutes to be the officers of the Regional Centre.
Clause 22.— This clause provides that the Executive Director
shall be appointed on the recommendation of the Board of
Governors in such manner as may be specified by the Statutes.
It further provides that the Executive Director shall be the
principal executive and academic officer of the Regional Centre and
direct the work of the Regional Centre in conformity with the
programmes and directives established by the Board of Governors.
It further lays down that he shall propose the draft work plan and
budget to be submitted to the Board of Governors for approval and
prepare the agenda for the sessions of the Board of Governors. It
also lays down that the Executive Director shall prepare reports on
the Regional Centre’s activities for submission to the Board of
Governors and exercise such other powers and perform such other
functions as may be specified by the Statutes.
It also provides that the financial powers delegated to the
Executive Director shall be such as may be specified by the Statutes
and that the Executive Director may, if he is of the opinion that
immediate action is necessary on any matter, exercise any power
conferred on any authority of the Regional Centre by or under the
proposed legislation and shall report to such authority at its next
meeting the action taken by him on such matter.
Clause 23.— This clause provides for Dean and Associate
Deans. It provides that the Deans and Associate Deans shall be
appointed in such manner and on such terms and conditions of
service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as
may be specified by the Statutes.
Clause 24.— This clause provides Associate Director
(Administration). It provides that the Associate Director
(Administration) shall be appointed in such manner, and on such
terms and conditions of service, as may be specified by the Statutes
and that the Associate Director (Administration) shall have the
power to enter into agreements, sign documents and authenticate
records on behalf of the Regional Centre, and shall exercise such
powers and perform such duties, as may be specified by the
Statutes.

44
Clause 25.— This clause provides that the Registrar shall be
appointed in such manner and shall exercise such powers and
perform such duties, as may be specified by the Statutes.
Clause 26.— This clause provides that the Finance Officer
shall be appointed in such manner, and shall exercise such powers
and perform such duties, as may be specified by the Statutes.
Clause 27.— This clause provides that the manner of
appointment and powers and duties of other officers of the Regional
Centre shall be such as may be specified by the Statutes.
Clause 28.— This clause makes provision for payment to the
Regional Centre. It provides that the Central Government may, after
due appropriation made by Parliament by law, in this behalf, make
to the Regional Centre grants and loans of such sums of money and
in such manner as that Government may consider necessary for
being utilised for the purposes of the proposed legislation.
Clause 29.— This clause makes provision for Fund of the
Regional Centre. It provides that the Regional Centre shall maintain
a Fund to which there shall be credited all moneys provided by the
Central Government; all fees and other charges received by the
Regional Centre; all moneys received by the Regional Centre by way
of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests or transfers; and
all moneys received by the Regional Centre in any other manner or
from any other source.
It further provides that all moneys credited to the Fund shall
be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as the
Regional Centre may, with the approval of the Central Government,
decide.
It also provides that the fund shall be applied for meeting the
salary, allowances and other remuneration of Chairperson, members,
of the Board or committees, or academic staff, officers and other
employees, of the Regional Centre or members of other committees
set up by it; the expenses of the Regional Centre in discharge of its
function under the proposed legislation; and the expenses on objects
and for purposes authorised by the proposed legislation.
Clause 30.— This clause provides for annual reports of the
Regional Centre. It provides that the annual report of the Regional
Centre shall be prepared under the direction of the Executive
Director, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken
by the Regional Centre towards the fulfilment of its objects and
shall be submitted to the Board of Governors on or before such date
as may be specified by the Statutes and the Board of Governors
shall consider the report in its annual meeting.
It further provides that a copy of the annual report shall be
submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may
be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.

45
Clause 31.— This clause provides for annual accounts. It
provides that the annual accounts and the balance sheet of the
Regional Centre shall be prepared under the directions of the Board
of Governors and shall, once at least every year, and at intervals of
not more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India.
It further provides that a copy of the accounts together with
the audit report shall be submitted to the Central Government along
with the observations, if any, of the Board of Governors.
It also provides that a copy of the annual report and annual
accounts together with the audit report, as submitted to the Central
Government shall, as soon as may be, cause to be laid before both
Houses of Parliament.
It also provides that the audited annual accounts, after having
been laid before both Houses of Parliament, shall be published in the
Gazette of India and a copy of the audited annual accounts shall
also be submitted to the Member States.
Clause 32.— This clause provides for returns and information.
It provides that the Regional Centre shall furnish to the Central
Government such returns or other information with respect to its
property or activities as the Central Government may, from time to
time, require, within such period as may be specified by the Central
Government.
Clause 33.— This clause provides for review of the
functioning of the Regional Centre. It provides that the functioning
of the Regional Centre shall be reviewed once in every four years
by persons of eminence to be appointed by the Central Government.
It further provides that the Regional Centre shall meet the
expenses for conducting the review and upon receipt of the report
of such review, the Board of Governors may take appropriate
action.
It also provides that in addition to the aforesaid, the Board of
Governors may conduct review of functioning of administrative and
academic wings of the Regional Centre, in such manner and at such
intervals, as may be specified by the Statutes.
Clause 34.— This clause provides for the appointment of staff
of Regional Centre. It provides that the appointments shall be made
in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Statutes, by the
Board of Governors for the academic staff; and the Executive
Director, in any other case.
Clause 35.— This clause lays down the conditions of service
of the employees. It provides that every employee shall be appointed
on contractual basis under a written contract, which shall be lodged
with the Regional Centre and a copy of which shall be furnished to
the employee concerned.

46
It further provides that the Regional Centre shall have a
flexible compensation system which recognises performance, as laid
down in the Statutes, to bring the best talent in the Regional Centre.
Clause 36.— This clause makes provision for arbitration. It
provides that any dispute arising out of a contract between the
Regional Centre and any of its employees shall, at the first instance,
be resolved through such grievance redressal mechanism as may be
specified by the Statutes.
It further provides that if the dispute is not resolved through
the grievance redressal mechanism, the same shall, at the request of
the employee concerned or at the instance of the Regional Centre,
be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member
appointed by the Executive Director, one member nominated by the
employee, and such two arbitrators shall appoint the third arbitrator
who shall act as the Presiding arbitrator.
It also provides that the arbitration shall be governed by the
provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
Clause 37.— This clause provides that the meetings of the
Board of Governors, Programme Advisory Committee, Executive
Committee or other committees constituted by the Regional Centre
may be held using contemporary tools of information and
communication technologies (including video conferencing) without
the members necessarily having to be physically present.
Clause 38.— This clause provides that all casual vacancies
among the members (other than ex officio members) of any
authority or other body of the Regional Centre shall be filled, as
soon as may be, by the person or body who appoints, elects or co-
opts the member whose place has become vacant and the person
appointed, elected or co-opted to a casual vacancy shall be a
member of such authority or body for the residue of the term for
which the person whose place he fills would have been a member.
Clause 39.— This clause provides that that no act or
proceedings of any authority or other body of the Regional Centre
shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of a vacancy or
vacancies among its members.
Clause 40.— This clause provides that no suit or other legal
proceedings shall lie against any officer or other employee of the
Regional Centre for anything which is in good faith done or intended
to be done in pursuance of any of the provisions of the proposed
legislation, the Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations made
thereunder.
Clause 41.— This clause provides for Statutes. It provides
that the Statutes of the Regional Centre shall be enacted by the
Board of Governors.
It further provides that the Executive Committee may make
recommendations for enactment of Statutes to the Board.

47
It also provides that the Board of Governors may, from time
to time, make new Statutes or may amend or repeal the Statutes
with effect from such date, not earlier than the date of
commencement of the proposed legislation, as it may direct.
Clause 42.— This clause specifies the matters to be provided
by Statutes.
Clause 43.— This clause provides for Ordinances. It specifies the
matters which may be provided in the Ordinances. It further
provides that the Ordinances made by the Programme Advisory
Committee and that the Ordinances shall have the effect from such
date as it may direct.
It also provides that the Programme Advisory Committee shall
have the power by resolution to modify or cancel any of its Ordinances
and such Ordinances shall, from the date of such resolution stand
modified accordingly or cancelled, as the case may be.
Clause 44.— This clause provides for Regulations. It provides
that the authorities of the Regional Centre may make Regulations,
consistent with the provisions of the proposed legislation, the
Statutes and the Ordinances, for the conduct of their own business
and that of the Committees, if any, appointed by them and not
provided for by the proposed legislation, the Statutes or the
Ordinances, in the manner specified by the Statutes.
Clause 45.— This clause provides that every Statute or
Ordinance or Regulation made under the proposed legislation shall be
published in the Official Gazette and shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
It further provides that the power to make Statutes or
Ordinances or Regulations shall include the power to give
retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than the date of
commencement of the proposed legislation, to the Statutes or
Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective
effect shall be given to any Statutes or Ordinances or Regulations
so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom
such Statutes or Ordinances or Regulations may be applicable.
Clause 46.— This clause provides for power to remove
difficulties. It provides that if any difficulty arises in giving effect
to the provisions of the proposed legislation, the Central Government
may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed
legislation, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing
the difficulty.
It further provides that no such order shall be made under
this clause after the expiry of two years from the commencement
of the proposed legislation.
It also provides that every order made under this clause shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament.

48
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (1) of clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central
Government shall establish an institution to be known as the
Regional Centre for Biotechnology. Sub-clause (4) of clause 16
provides that the fees and allowances payable to members of the
Programme Advisory Committee and their term of office shall be
such as may be specified by the Statutes.
2. Clause 28 of the Bill provides that the Central Government
may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law, in this
behalf, make to the Regional Centre for Biotechnology grants and
loans of such sums of money and in such manner as that
Government may consider necessary for being utilised for the
purposes of the proposed legislation. Clause 29 of the Bill provides
for the maintenance of a Fund to which,—( a) all moneys provided
by the Central Government; ( b) all fees and other charges received
by the Regional Centre; ( c) all moneys received by the Regional
Centre by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests or
transfers; and ( d) all moneys received by the Regional Centre in any
other manner or from any other source, shall be credited. Sub-
clause ( 3) of clause 29 of the Bill provides that the Fund shall be
applied for meeting the salary, allowances and other remuneration of
Chairperson, Members of the Board or Committees or academic
staff, officers and other employees of the Regional Centre or
Members of other Committees set up by it and for meeting the
expenses of the Regional Centre in discharge of its functions as
specified under the proposed legislation.
3. The one-time capital investment for setting up the Regional
Centre for Biotechnology is estimated to be 53.11 crore rupees. The
recurring expenditure on manpower requirements, consumables,
office expenses, fellowship, meetings, travel, etc., is estimated to be
in the range of 15 crore rupees per year. The expenditure is to be
borne by the Central Government.
4. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure of
recurring or non-recurring nature from the Consolidated Fund of
India.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 41 and item (h) of sub-clause (4) of
clause 14 empowers the Board of Governors of the Regional Centre
for Biotechnology to enact statutes. Clause 42 specifies the matters
in respect of which such Statutes may be made. These matters,
inter alia, include (a) the constitution, powers and functions of
authorities, term of office of its member and other bodies of the
Regional Centre; (b) the manner of nomination of representative of
the Member States of UNESCO in the Board of Governors;
(c) other powers and functions of the Chairperson of the Board of
Governors; the other functions of the Programme Advisory
Committee, and term of office of its members; the constitution,
powers and functions of the Finance Committee, the Board of
Studies and constitution, powers and functions of other authorities;
(d) the manner of appointment of Executive Director, his other
powers and other duties, financial powers to be delegated to the
Executive Director and the manner of appointment, powers and
duties of the officers of the Regional Centre and their emoluments;
(e) the time and date for submission of annual report of the
Regional Centre; if manner of conducting review of functioning of
administrative and academic wings of the Regional appointment of
regular academic staff and other employees of the Regional Centre,
their emoluments and conditions of service, flexible compensation
system, their benefits and privileges, including principles governing
the seniority of service, age of superannuation, provisions for
pension, insurance, provident fund, the manner of termination of
service and disciplinary action consistent with such staff engaged in
higher education and research at Central Universities; (g) the manner
of co-operation and collaboration with other Universities, institutions
and other agencies including learned bodies or associations;
(h) creation, composition and functions of any other body which is
considered necessary for improving the academic life of the
Regional Centre; (i) conferment of honorary degrees and
distinctions; (j) delegation of powers vested in the authorities or
officers of the Regional Centre; (k) the terms and conditions of
service for engagement of experts as adjunct and visiting faculty;
(l) the terms and conditions of service for hiring appropriate human
resource, Indian or foreign, especially at higher levels in specific
areas, with fixed tenure, not exceeding three years at a time and
with higher compensation, with the approval of the Board of
Governors; (m) grievance redressal mechanism for resolution of
disputes arising out of a contract between the Regional Centre and
any of its employees; (n) the manner of making Regulations by any
of the authorities of the Regional Centre; and (o) the manner of
recognition of institutions to be affiliated with the Regional Centre
and grounds for withdrawal of recognition thereof.
49

50
2. Item (f) of sub-clause (3) of clause 16 empowers the
Programme Advisory Committee of the Regional Centre for
Biotechnology to frame Ordinances. Sub-clause (1) of clause 43
specifies the matters in respect of which such Ordinances may be
made. These matters, inter alia , include: (a) admission of students
from within India and from the Region to the Regional Centre and
their enrolment as such; (b) the course of study; (c) the conditions
under which students shall be admitted and shall be eligible for
degrees, diplomas and certificates and to the examinations of the
Regional Centre, and shall be eligible for the degrees, diplomas and
certificate; (d) the conditions of award of the fellowships,
scholarships, medals and prizes; (e) the conditions and mode of
appointment and duties of examining bodies, examiners and
moderators; (f) the conduct of examinations, including the term of
office and manner of appointment and the duties of examining
bodies, examiners and moderators; (g) the conditions of residence
of the students of the Regional Centre; (h) the maintenance of
discipline among the employees and students; (i) the courses of
study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of
the Regional Centre including the medium of instruction and
examination; (j) the award of degrees and other academic
distinctions, the qualifications for the same and the means to be
taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the same; the
withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic
distinctions; (k) fees to be charged for courses of study in the
Regional Centre and for admission to examinations, degrees and
diplomas of the Regional Centre; (l) institution of and conditions for
award of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;
(m) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the
residence and teaching of women students and the prescribing of
special courses of studies for them; and (n) establishment,
management and abolition of Centres of Studies, Schools,
Departments, Specialised Laboratories, Halls and Institutions.
3. Clause 44 empowers the authorities of the Regional Centre
for Biotechnology to make Regulations for the conduct of their own
business and that of the Committees, if any, appointed by them and
not provided for by the proposed legislation, the Statutes or the
Ordinances, in the manner specified by the Statutes.
4. Sub-clause (1) of clause 45 specifies that the Statutes,
Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 45 provides that every Statute or
Ordinance or Regulation made under the proposed legislation shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament.
5. The matters in respect of which Statutes, Ordinances and
Regulations may be made are matters of procedures or
administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in
the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.

51
51
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an institution of national
importance to be known as the Regional Centre for
Biotechnology for training and education as a category II
institution under the auspice of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation, to undertake
research in the field of biotechnology and to provide for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri Vilasrao Deshmukh, Minister of Science and Technology and Earth Sciences)

52
52
20 DEC., 2011
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 129 of 201 1
THE REGIONAL CENTRE FOR BIOTECHNOLOGY BILL, 2011
ARRANGEMENTS OF CLAUSES
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Establishment of Regional Centre for Biotechnology.
4. Declaration of Regional Centre for Biotechnology as an institution of national importance.
5. Jurisdiction.
6. Objects of Regional Centre.
7. Transfer of assets, liabilities, etc., of existing Regional Centre to Regional Centre
established under this Act and other provisions, etc.
8. Functions of Regional Centre.
9. Regional Centre to work in collaboration with other centres of UNESCO.
10. Powers of Regional Centre.
11. Regional Centre open to all castes, creed, race or class.
12. Privileges and immunities of academic staff, etc.
13. Authorities of Regional Centre.
14. Board of Governors.
15. Powers and functions of Chairperson.
16. Programme Advisory Committee.
17. Executive Committee.
18. Finance Committee.
19. Board of Studies.
20. Other authorities of Regional Centre.
21. Officers of Regional Centre.
22. Executive Director.
23. Deans and Associate Deans.

53
24. Associate Director (Administration).
25. Registrar.
26. Finance Officer.
27. Other officers.
28. Payment to Regional Centre.
29. Fund of Regional Centre.
30. Annual report.
31. Annual accounts.
C
LAUSES
32. Returns and information.
33. Review of functioning of Regional Centre.
34. Appointment of staff of Regional Centre.
35. Conditions of service.
36. Arbitration.
37. Meetings.
38. Filling of casual vacancies.
39. Proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.
40. Protection of action taken in good faith.
41. Statutes.
42. Matters to be provided by Statutes.
43. Ordinances.
44. Regulations.
45. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to
be laid before Parliament.
46. Power to remove difficulties.

54
ANNEXURE-II
List of Experts
1. Prof. Akhilesh Kumar Tyagi, Director, National Institute of Plant Genome Research (NIPGR);
2. Prof. T.P. Singh, Distinguished Biotechnology Research Professor (DBT) Department of
Biophysics, All Indian Institute of Medical Sciences;
3. Dr. Satyajit Rath, Senior Scientist, National Institute of Immunology;
4. Mr. Amit Khare, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Human Resources Development; and
5. Dr. Shahid Jameel, Group Leader-Virology, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology (ICGEB).

MINUTES

56

57
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Mondy, the 5 th March, 2012 in Room No. ‘63’, First
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
4. Dr. Chandan Mitra
5. Shri Saman Pathak
6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
7. Shri Jabir Husain
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
9. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
10. Shri Pradeep Tamta
11. Shri Francisco Sardinha
12. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav
13. Shri Kristapa Nimmala
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
Representatives of the Department of Biotechnology
Dr. M.K. Bhan, Secretary
Dr. S. Sinha, Advisor
Dr. Dinakar Salunke, Director
57

58
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Department of Biotechnology and his
team of officials to the meeting of the Committee. He further informed the Members that the
Committee would hear Secretary on the Regional Centre for Biotechnology Bill, 2011. He desired
to know from the Secretary, the reasons for inordinate delay of six years in bringing legislation
for giving effect to the agreement inked between the Government and the UNESCO way back in
July, 2006.
5. At this stage, one of the Members drew the attention of the Committee to the fact that the
proposed institution was already in existence and had been working for almost 3 and a 1/2 years.
He took a very serious view of the fact that while the agreement between UNESCO and the
Government was signed in 2006, the matter was brought before the Cabinet in 2008-09 and the
institution was set up in 2009 through an executive order by the Government operationalising the
Centre. He, further, emphasised that it had almost become a habit of the Government Departments/
various Ministries to set up institutions by an executive order, bringing the Bill before the Parliament
after many years and thereby virtually forcing the Parliament, the standing Committee to adopt the
Bill as such. This indicated that Parliament was being deliberately taken for a ride by various
Ministries. He, further, desired to know as to what would happen to the Executive Order or to the
money that had already been spent in case Parliament decided not to have an institution of this
kind.
6. He drew the attention of the Committee to the fact that earlier also the Committee in its
report on ‘The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Bill, 20 10’ had taken a serious view
of this practice and the Secretary, Legislative Department (Ministry of Law and Justice) had
concurred with the Committee that this was an unconstitutional situation. He, thereafter, quoted
para 11, from the said report “The Committee takes note of the arguments advanced by Secretaries
of DSIR and the Legislative Department but is of the opinion that it would have been appropriate
if the Academy had been set up only after the Parliament had passed the Bill. This is a very, very
bad practice and the Ministries concerned should take note of this and this should never recur”.
7. The Secretary, highlighting the need for the Bill stated that proposed Regional Centre for
Biotechnology (RCB) had been established by an executive order in 2009 but it did not have a
statutory status. Citing the reasons behind the delay in bringing up the’ Bill before Parliament, the
Secretary explained that delay was due to a series of consultations with countries of South and
South-east Asian Region, obtaining Cabinet concurrence to communicate to the UNESCO for
discussion in the Board, a series of consultations with various Ministries such as the Finance,
Human Resource Development, External Affairs, Health & Family Welfare and Planning
Commission, etc. Moreover, land arrangement for the Centre near the Faridabad Cluster in Close
proximity to the Airport also took a considerable time.
8. He added that the Centre was set up to produce a leadership Institute in Biotechnology and
no education programme had been started in this institute till date and only a’ Director had been
appointed for construction of building and some construction undertaken. He, further, explained that
the authority to grant degrees was the reason for coming before the Parliament because as a
Research Institution, the Centre could function by an executive order, but it could not grant
degrees without Parliament passing the Bill.
9. The Committee also desired to know whether the Secretary had held prior consultations
with all the concerned regional countries and whether the Parliament and Cabinet were informed
*** Relates to other matter.

59
of it. The Secretary submitted that they had held meetings with the international experts and
Ministries to design and structure the Centre.
10. One of the Members desired to know the total annual budget of the DBT for the last three
years, funds allotted to private and public sector institutions along with research activities
undertaken with the assistance of DBT and the details of the policy  decisions on grant of IPR
research projects. The Secretary assured to provide the reply by the next day.
11. However, the Committee was not satisfied with the way the Department was functioning,
for instance taking the approval of the Parliament for granted and establishing Centres even before
being approved by the Parliament. The Committee desired to know whether the expenditure made
against the Regional Centre was sanctioned by the Indian Parliament. The Committee wondered
how the Budget included the expenditure for an institution which had actually not come into
existence.
12. One of the Members asked about the measures taken to expedite the process of establishing
the Centre. The Secretary submitted that the Department worked hard for acquiring 200 acres land
in Faridabad and a translational helpline institute, first of its kind, was being set up over there. At
this juncture, a Power Point Presentation was made by the Director, Regional Centre for
Biotechnology (RCB).
13. The Committee desired to know whether the Department was expecting any contribution
from the UNESCO in setting up of RCB. The Secretary, DBT replied that the UNESCO’s
contribution was to fund for scientific meetings and provide visiting faculty. The Chairman asked
about the mechanism adopted to remove public apprehensions on environmental and bio-safety
aspects of biotechnology in the Bill. The Secretary emphasised upon the need to provide more
training to people and specialized education in bio-safety policy.
14. The Chairman desired to know whether under Clause 14(4), overwhelming powers were
given to the Board of Governors. The Secretary replied that it was strictly as per the norms of
Level 2 UNESCO Centre and if the Committee desired modification the Department would negotiate
with them.
15. One of the Members asked about allotment of projects to different states of India. The
Secretary replied that Ministry had spent 140 crore rupees in North Eastern States and many
colleges and universities were provided with financial support. Chairman, thereafter, sought advice
of the Secretary on inviting witnesses/experts before the Committee on the Bill.
16. The Committee decided to place on record its disapproval of the tendency on the part of
the Department to take Parliament for granted by issuing executive orders on the matter pending
consideration of the Parliament and making expenditure without the approval of Parliament for
setting up of the institution.
17. The Committee also took a serious note of a tendency on the part of the Department to
ignore the queries raised by the Members. The Committee put on record that in future red tapism
needed to be avoided.
18. The officials, then, withdrew.
19. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
20. The Committee, then, adjourned at 12.40 
P.M.

60
XIX
NINETEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Friday, the 20 th July, 2012 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
3. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
4. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
5. Shri A.V . Swamy
6. Dr. Barun Mukherji
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Ninong Ering
8. Shri Kamla Devi Patle
9. Shri Abdul Rahman
10. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
11. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
12. Dr. Rajan Sushant
13. Shri Pradeep Tamta
14. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Committee Officer
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
Representatives of the Department of Biotechnology
1. Dr. M.K. Bhan, Secretary
2. Dr. S. Sinha, Scientist ‘G’
3. Dr. Dinakar M. Salunke, Executive Director, Regional Centre for Biotechnology
WITNESSES
1. Prof. T.P. Singh, Research Professor, AIIMS, New Delhi
60

61
2. Dr. Satyajit Rath, Sr. Scientist, National Institute of Immunology (NII)
3. Prof. Akhilesh Kumar Tyagi, Director, National Institute of Plant Genome Research
(NIPGR), New Delhi
4. Shri Amit Khare, Joint Secretary, M/o Human Resource Development
5. Dr. Shahid Jameel, Group Leader, Virology, International Centre for Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee, Secretary, Department
of Biotechnology, experts and senior Officers present in the meeting. Apprising the Members about
the progress made so far on the Bill, the Chairman informed that the Committee had heard the
views of the Secretary, Department of Biotechnology on the Bill and a press communiqué inviting
memoranda from the stakeholders, experts, etc had been issued and the Committee had invited on
that day the experts in the field of biotechnology to depose before the Committee on the various
provisions of the bill. The Chairman thereafter, requested the experts that apart from commenting
on the various provisions of the Bill, they might also comment on the considerable time taken by
the Department of Biotechnology in bringing forward that Bill. They were also requested to
comment on the fact that recently some of the scientific Ministries/Departments had adopted a
policy of starting institutions/centres through executive orders while legislation on the subject was
pending before the Parliament.
3. All the experts were unanimously of the view that the Regional Centre for Biotechnology
(RCB) would prove to be a unique combination of research and education, different from
Universities and Research Institutions in India which would impart inter disciplinary education in
the field of biotechnology. This Centre would introduce new courses in the field of Climate Change,
Agriculture, bio-energy, Drug development, Health, Research and Training and Translational and
Clinical sciences. They further added that the word ‘Regional’ associated with the Bill implied
largely South Asia Region. Hence, the exchange that would take place between the countries in the
region would provide India leadership position in the field of Biotechnology and strengthen its
position in the Region. The Experts, further, informed that China had five such institutions and
India should also have more and more of such centres. They were of the opinion that this
autonomous Centre mandated by the Parliament would be established in the NCR of Faridabad and
would act as a useful instrument in connecting science and society particularly in the area of
biotechnology. They further pointed out that this centre would be a bio-science cluster with an
interaction of four five institutions which would come up in the cluster. Thus, it would be a novel
combination of research, education and industry. They also emphasised that international linkage in
these times was very much essential.
4. One of the experts was of the view that although India had been a member of UNESCO
since its inception but did not have any category I or II Institute, whereas many smaller countries
had such centres.
5. One of the experts added that in the Bill, research orientation had been clubbed with the
educational programmes, leading to the Masters and PhD degrees. It was further apprised that as
per the UGC Act, any institutions established under an Act of Parliament or State Legislature or
declared as a Deemed University, had the powers to grant Degrees. On the issue of delay in
bringing forward this legislation, it was apprised that since this was the first institute of its kind
to be established in the country, regular consultations were required to be held at different levels
and also with UNESCO on the constitution of Executive Board, the Council and Board of
Governors, which took some time.

62
6. Drawing the attention of the Secretary, Department of Biotechnology to Clause 9 of the Bill,
the Chairman desired to know about other National, Regional and International Centres with whom
the Regional center would have collaboration and the names of the Member States of UNESCO
where such regional centres were located. The Secretary informed that through UNESCO, this
Centre would connect to the European Network, Cambridge, Oxford, etc. Further, they would also
provide visiting professors, course material, lectures, etc. to the centre. The Executive Director,
Regional Centre for Biotechnology CRCB) further informed that UNESCO was in the process of
establishing Regional Centres of Biotechnology in other countries of the world like the one in
Nigeria and the other in Israel. Similarly, UNESCO had established a programme of regional nature
in Institute of Fisheries, Mangalore. In this way, there would be a sharing of expertise, both at
the International and National levels.
7. Referring to Clause 13 (d) of the Bill, the Chairman desired to know the reasons for having
a Finance Committee, whose function had not been narrated in the Bill. The Secretary informed
the Committee that since large part of money was coming from Government of India which was
to be audited by CAG, it was felt necessary to have a finance Committee to ensure compliance with
the procedure.
8. One of the Members of the Committee enquired about the status of education and research
in the field of biotechnology. The Secretary apprised that the Department had been supporting the
MSc course in biotechnology in 74 Universities for the last 15 years and had made every effort
to bring all the disciplines like engineering, medicine, biology, chemistry under one roof but despite
their best efforts they failed because it was very difficult to intervene in the university system
where multiple disciplines and departments were separate entities. Hence, it had been felt that in
order to bring various disciplines under one roof, empowerment in the form of sanctity of the
Parliament would be required so as to enable this Centre to redesign its courses.
9. In reply to a query about no post being earmarked for women scientists in the Board of
Governors, the Secretary informed that the Department would follow the advice/recommendation
given by the Committee in this regard. When asked whether there would be any reservation in the
admission process for Indian and foreign students, the Secretary replied that for Indian students,
the Department would go by the advice given by the Committee. For foreign students, all countries
would be given the option to put their students in the centre but they would have to contribute
for the seats of their students. He further added that for five to six close countries, five or six
seats would be earmarked every year for each country. On the issue of reservation for SC/ST  and
OBC students in the admission to the centre, it was clarified that since it was proposed to be an
institution of National Importance to be set up through an Act of Parliament, the provision of
reservation would be applicable and as such reservation would be provided.
The Officials, then withdrew.
A Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee, then, adjourned at 3.15 
P.M. and re-assembled at 3.50 P.M. to hear the
views of Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy.
** *
10. * * *
11. * * *
*** Relates to other matter.

63
12. * * *
13. * * *
14. * * *
15. * * *
16. * * *
The meeting was adjourned at 5.00 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

XXI
TWENTY FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 30 th August, 2012 in Committee Room,
‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Chandan Mitra
3. Shri A.V . Swamy
4. Dr. Barun Mukherji
5. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Ninong Ering
7. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
8. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
9. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
10. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
11. Shri Francisco Sardinha
12. Shri Pradeep Tamta
13. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
14. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Committee Officer
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and informed them that
the meeting was convened to consider and adopt the draft 229
th report on ‘Regional Centre for
Biotechnology Bill, 2011 ***     ***     ***     ***. Thereafter, Chairman invited the views/
suggestions from the Members on the *** draft report.
3. After some discussions, the Committee adopted *** the draft report with minor changes/
modifications.
4. The Committee, thereafter, decided to present/lay the *** Report on the table of both the
Houses of Parliament on the very same day i.e. 30
th August, 2012. The Committee authorised
Dr. T. Subbrami Reddy and in his absence Dr. Barun Mukherji to present the report in Rajya Sabha
and Shri Francisco Sardina and in his absence Shri Ninong Ering to lay the report on the Table
of the Lok Sabha.
5. The Committee, then, adjourned at 10.30 
A.M.
64
*** Relates to other matter.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.