 
 
  
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
       August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka)
REPORT NO. 
396 
THREE HUNDRED NINETY SIXTH REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Three Hundred Eighty Ninth Report of the Department - 
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment, Forests  and Climate Change on the Demands For Grants 
(2025-26) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research  
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
 

 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
 CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED NINETY SIXTH REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Three Hundred Eighty Ninth Report of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment, 
Forests  and Climate Change on the Demands For Grants  
(2025-26) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
   
  PAGES 
   
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………… (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………… (ii) 
  3. ACRONYMS ……………………………………………………………… (iii) 
4. REPORT …………………………………………………………………... 1-17 
 Chapter I.       Recommendations/Observations which  have been  
                       accepted by the Government 
 
2-8 
 Chapter II.  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee     
does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies 
 
9-12 
 Chapter III.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted  by the     
Committee 
 
13 
 Chapter IV.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
                      Replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
14 
5. MINUTES 15-17  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
(Constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2024) 
 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita -    Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Narayanasa K. Bhandage  
3. Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda 
4. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
5. Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
7. Shri Sharad Pawar 
8. Shri Jairam Ramesh   
9. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
10. Vacant  
LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Sajda Ahmed 
12. Shri Alfred Kanngam S. Arthur 
13. Shri Pradyut Bordoloi  
14. Shri Phani Bhusan Choudhury 
15. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb 
16. Shri Vamsi Krishna Gaddam 
17. Shri Tapir Gao 
18. Adv K. Francis George  
19. Shri Eswarasamy K. 
20. Shri Mahesh Kashyap 
21. Dr. Anand Kumar 
22. Shri Mohibbullah 
23. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
24. Shri Jashubhai Bhilubhai Rathva  
25. Shri Trivendra Singh Rawat 
26. Shrimati Himadri Singh 
27. Shri Tejasvi Surya  
28. Shri Durai Vaiko  
29. Shri Yaduveer Wadiyar 
30. Shri Balwant Baswant Wankhade  
31. Shri Akhilesh Yadav  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Joint Secretary  
Shri Arun Kumar, Director  
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Deputy Secretary 
Ms. I. V. Rajya Laxmi, Committee Officer  
Shri Vaibhav Jain, Committee Officer  
 
     
(i) 
 
                                                 
 Nominated w.e.f. 23rd January, 2025. 

 
 
      
INTRODUCTION 
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Three 
Hundred Ninety Sixth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the  
recommendations/observations contained in the Three Hundred Eighty Ninth Report  of 
the Committee on  Demands for Grants (2025-2026) of the Department of Scientific and 
Industrial Research, which was presented to/ laid on the Table of both the Houses of 
Parliament on the 25th March, 2025.  
2.   There were 15 recommendations/observations in the Three Hundred Eighty 
Ninth Report of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/ 
observations of the Committee were received from the Department on 18th July, 2025.   
3.   In the meeting held on 6th August, 2025, the Committee considered the draft 
Report and adopted the same. 
 
 
 
 
 (BHUBANESWAR KALITA) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman,  
08 August, 2025   Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Sravana 17,  1947 (Saka)  Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and  Climate Change, 
 Rajya Sabha . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
ACRONYMS 
 
AI Artificial Intelligence 
APCTT Asian & Pacific Centre for Transfer of Technology 
AESA Active Electronically Scanned Array 
APIs Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients  
A2K+ Access to Knowledge for Technology Development and Dissemination  
BIRD-CF Building Industrial R&D and Common Research Facilities 
CEL Central Electronics Limited 
CLAIM CSIR League for AI based Industrial Manifestation 
CRTDH Common Research and Technology Development Hubs 
CSIR Council of Scientific & Industrial Research  
DMRC Delhi Metro Rail Corporation 
DSIR Department of Scientific and Industrial Research  
EPC Engineering, Procurement, and Construction 
FIRST Fundamental & Innovative Research in Science of Tomorrow 
GSSF Generic Startup Support Facility 
HAL Hindustan Aeronautics Limited. 
IRD Industrial Research & Development 
KSMs Key Starting Materials 
MSDAC Multi-Section Digital Axle Counters 
MSME Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
NRDC National Research Development Corporation 
PACE Patent Acquisition and Collaborative Research and Technology Development  
PDTC Programme for Development of Technologies for Commercialisation  
PIII Programme for Inspiring Inventors & Innovators 
PRISM Promoting Innovations in Individuals, Start-ups and MSMEs 
SPV Solar Photovoltaics  
SAF Sustainable Aviation Fuel 
TDF Technology Development Facility 
TSI Technology Scale-up Initiative 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
1 
 
 
REPORT 
The Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations of the Committee contained 
in its ‘Three Hundred Eighty Ninth Report’ on “Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Department 
of Scientific and Industrial Research.  The Report was presented to/ laid on the Table of both the 
Houses of Parliament on the 25th March, 2025. 
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Department of Scientific and 
Industrial Research in respect of all the 15 recommendations/observations contained in the ‘Three 
Hundred Eighty Ninth Report’. The replies of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
have been categorized as follows:- 
Chapter I: Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: Para Nos.:- 2.3, 2.9, 3.4, 3.5, 3.22, 4.11, 4.15, 4.16, 4.17 and 5.4  
Total recommendations – 10 
Chapter II: Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
  Para Nos.:- 3.12, 3.13, 3.21, 4.4 and 4.5 
  Total recommendations – 05 
Chapter III:  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: NIL 
Chapter IV:  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: NIL 
3. The details of the ATNs have been analyzed in the succeeding Chapters.  

 
2 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
BUDGET ANALYSIS  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.1         The Committee notes with concern the sub-optimal utilization of funds under the Central 
Sector Scheme - 'Industrial Research & Development', as over half of the allocated funds remain 
unutilized as the current financial year enters its final quarter. In light of this, the Committee 
emphasizes the critical need for the Department to expedite expenditure and ensure the optimal 
deployment of resources within the remaining timeframe of the financial year. To preempt such 
inefficiencies in subsequent years, the Committee strongly advocates for the institutionalization of 
robust quarterly monitoring mechanisms.                                               (Para 2.3 of 389th Report) 
  
Action Taken: 
 
1.2 Department duly acknowledges and agrees with the Committee's observations regarding 
expenditure. It is humbly submitted that 99% of the Revised Estimates (RE) for FY 2024-25 have 
been utilized for department CRTDH, PACE & A2K+ schemes. Furthermore, the Program 
Division has planned for 100% utilization of the allocated funds for FY 2025-26 and intends to 
seek additional funds at the RE stage through supplementary provisions. It is submitted that under 
PRISM scheme, more than 99% of the budget is utilised in past five years except for FY 2023-24 
wherein nearly 80% of the budget was utilised in view of the challenges faced due to 
implementation of CNA mechanism.  Also, for FY 2023-24 Rs. 2.32 Crores was utilised against 
RE of Rs 3.0 Crores and Rs.  67.71 lakhs was booked/utilised against unspent balance available 
with CNA account of IRD scheme of DSIR from previous year. The Department also agrees with 
the Committee's recommendation for robust quarterly monitoring mechanisms. In this regard, a 
comprehensive plan has been formulated to effectively implement and oversee the same. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.3         The Committee finds merit in the Department’s request for an additional budgetary 
allocation to the tune of ₹ 363.92 crore, over and above the provision made in B.E. 2025-26. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department may seek the requisite additional 
allocation from the Ministry of Finance at the R.E. stage.                                         (Para 2.9 ibid) 
 
  
Action Taken: 
 
1.4 Department thankfully acknowledges the Committee’s recognition towards need for an 
additional allocation to the tune of Rs. 363.92 crore over and above the provision made in B.E. 
2025-26. As per recommendations of the Committee, Department will seek additional funds from 
the Ministry of Finance at the R.E. stage to sustain its key programmes/ initiatives. 
 

 
3 
 
CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.5         The Committee expresses concern over the substantial gap between budgetary estimates 
and actual expenditures. The Committee observes that in several instances, the actual expenditure 
remains significantly lower than the budget estimates and even the revised estimates, indicating 
underutilization of allocated funds. Such underutilization may hinder the intended impact of these 
schemes and delay the realization of their objectives. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Department take proactive measures to ensure effective fund utilization by addressing 
administrative bottlenecks, streamlining project approvals, and enhancing monitoring 
mechanisms. 
(Para 3.4 ibid) 
  
Action Taken: 
 
1.6 DSIR, duly and humbly acknowledges the Committee’s observations and concerns 
regarding the gap between budgetary allocations and actual expenditures. The concern over 
underutilization of funds and its potential impact on the effective implementation of schemes is 
well taken. Department has initiated several corrective measures aimed at improving fund 
utilization. These include streamlining internal processes, fast-tracking project approvals, and 
instituting stricter timelines for implementation. Additionally, robust monitoring mechanisms have 
also been put in place, including monthly and quarterly progress/ expenditure reviews at various 
levels to track progress and address bottlenecks in real-time. Department remains committed to 
ensuring optimal use of allocated resources and will continue to take proactive steps to enhance 
efficiency, accountability, and the timely realization of its programmes/projects objectives. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
1.7        The Committee appreciates the achievements made under these schemes. However, the 
Committee believes that a more robust approach is necessary to scale up these achievements and 
expand the reach of these schemes. The Department should consider increasing outreach efforts to 
encourage wider participation from start-ups, MSMEs, and research institutions, ensuring that 
more innovators benefit from these programs. 
(Para 3.5 ibid) 
  
Action Taken: 
 
1.8 The Department sincerely acknowledges the Committee’s appreciation of the progress 
made under the CRTDH, PACE, PRISM and A2K+ schemes. The suggestion to adopt a more 
robust approach to scale up the impact of these initiatives and broaden their reach is duly 
acknowledged. DSIR is undertaking focused efforts to strengthen outreach and engagement 
activities under these schemes. This includes organizing chintan shivirs, awareness drives, and 
targeted communication strategies aimed at increasing participation from start-ups, MSMEs, 
academic institutions, and research organizations. Additionally, measures are being put in place to 
simplify access, offer capacity-building support, and enhance visibility of the schemes at the 
grassroots level. 
 
1.9 The department also remains committed to expanding the reach of these schemes and 
fostering a more inclusive innovation ecosystem. Increase in budget is required for scaling up the 

 
4 
 
achievements of PRISM scheme and enhancing the outreach of PRISM scheme. Presently, there 
are only 10 outreach centers under PRISM scheme which should be increased to minimum 20 so 
that innovators from maximum number of districts & states get benefitted under PRISM scheme. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
1.10  In view of CEL's strategic significance, the Committee strongly recommends that the 
Department provide consistent policy and financial support to enable CEL to overcome its current 
challenges and capitalize on growth opportunities. The Department should ensure that CEL 
receives adequate institutional backing to secure its position as a leading player in defence 
electronics, railway electronics, IT-enabled smart infrastructure, and renewable energy. The 
Committee further advises the Department to submit a detailed roadmap outlining the steps 
required to enhance CEL's operational efficiency, financial viability, and technological 
competitiveness. Strengthening CEL's capabilities will not only contribute to national self-reliance 
in critical technology sectors but also reinforce India's public sector enterprises as key drivers of 
innovation and industrial growth.  
(Para 3.22 ibid) 
  
Action Taken: 
 
1.11 CEL has a proven strategic importance of its products and services are being catered to the 
need of Defence, Railways and other institutions. Many new defence products are under 
development and approval. The Department is providing desired support by way of allowing 
amendment in the objects clause of the Memorandum of the company to include more business 
verticals for accelerated growth. Setting up of a new Data Centre and production of solar modules 
under public-private partnership are recent new initiative of CEL for sustained profits in years to 
follow. The Data Center business is highly capital intensive business, however, CEL will be 
incurring only Rs. 18 crore towards building costs and the rest will be borne by the Data Center 
Service Provider. CEL is continuously endeavouring for new innovations with support of national 
labs and other institutions, to become a significant contributor to defence needs with lower cost 
and effective results.    
 
COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (CSIR) 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
1.12  The Committee commends the selection of key projects under Viksit Bharat, the 
establishment of pilot plants supporting start-ups and MSMEs and the initiatives taken for creation 
of next-generation benchmark facilities. The Committee strongly recommends that the Department 
proactively seek additional financial resources to complete these projects without interruption. 
(Para 4.11 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.13 The Department along with CSIR sincerely acknowledges the Committee’s appreciation 
and recognition. It is humbly reiterated that CSIR remains committed to continuously evolving its 
strategy to stay aligned with India’s scientific and economic goals, while reinforcing its active role 
in addressing national challenges. 
 

 
5 
 
1.14 Two recent progressive initiatives of CSIR along these lines for the kind information of the 
committee are as below: 
 
1. Proposal for pilot plant installation is submitted at Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB)/ 
MoEFCC for treatment of municipal solid waste (MSW) at CSIR-CRRI campus, Mathura 
Road, Delhi. The proposed plant would be the technology demonstration model for sustainable 
solid waste management practices for bulk waste generators. The said proposal is motivated by 
the fact that bulk generators contribute to nearly 30-40% of the daily waste stream in the city, 
New Delhi. Using scientific methods to process MSW is crucial to turning it into value-added 
products. There are several technologies developed by CSIR that could be incorporated into a 
solution for MSW disposal. This would involve following CSIR Technologies: 
  
I. Sorting of MSW using CSIR-CMERI’s sorter technology 
II. Plastic Waste Sorting System for recycling of Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET) Materials 
III. Plastic Waste Sorting System for five types of plastics 
IV. Conversion of waste plastics to diesel unit using CSIR-IIP’s plant 
V. High rate bio methanation technology called “Anaerobic Gas Lift Reactor (AGR)” for the 
generation of biogas and bio-manure from organic solid waste 
VI. Waste plastics to tiles unit 
VII. Waste Plastic with Red Mud Composite for prefabricated Plastic Panel for Road Construction 
VIII. A process of using Thermocol (expanded polystyrene) waste in hot bituminous mixes for road 
construction 
IX. Room temperature process for biodiesel production from used cooking oils 
 
1.15 Above mentioned technologies could provide integrated solution for waste management in 
urban and semi-urban areas. For phase-1, initially, it was considered to install pilot plants (with the 
help of Start-ups) for segregation of MSW using CMERI’s technology and AGR technology of 
CSIR-IICT for production of biogas and bio manure. The proposal has already been submitted to 
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) and MoECC approval is under process.  
 
2. CSIR has established a facility named as “CSIR Innovation Complex” at Mumbai to support 
start-ups, MSMEs, Industries and other stakeholders in form of providing incubation lab and 
service support. The facility with infrastructure and scientific expertise is addressing critical 
gaps in translating the discoveries/innovations/technologies from research labs to the respective 
regulatory agencies, and subsequently to the industry and market. The facility would function 
as an innovation / incubation hub to support / collaborate / partner with the stakeholders 
including start-ups, entrepreneurs and industry, Govt. departments, research institutions, 
universities, in the sectors like healthcare, chemicals, materials, energy and other relevant areas. 
 
As per recommendations of the Committee, Department will seek additional financial resources as 
and when required to sustain its projects related to Viksit Bharat and supporting start-ups and 
MSMEs.  
 

 
6 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
1.16  The Committee acknowledges the significant advancements made by the NAL, Bengaluru 
in the field of aerospace technology. Recognizing the strategic importance of NAL's contributions, 
the Committee concurs with the Department on the need to strengthen and adequately equip the 
laboratory to further its research and development efforts. The Committee also notes the critical 
necessity of establishing a National Wind Tunnel Facility to replace the existing 63-year-old wind 
tunnel, which has played a pivotal role in satellite testing, including for Chandrayaan-3. The 
continued reliance on foreign facilities for satellite testing not only incurs financial costs but also 
exposes sensitive technological information. The Committee, therefore, supports the Department's 
proposal to develop a closed-circuit trisonic wind tunnel within the country at an estimated cost of 
Rs 3,100 crore. Given the regular use of this facility by ISRO and DRDO, the Committee 
recognizes the national importance of this project and agrees with the proposal to allocate the full 
financial outlay to a single organization, such as CSIR, to expedite its implementation. 
(Para 4.15 ibid) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
 
1.17 The Department thankfully acknowledges the Committee’s observations,   recognition and 
support towards its proposal to develop a closed-circuit trisonicwind tunnel within the country at 
an estimated cost of Rs 3,100 crore.  
 
1.18 It is humbly submitted that DSIR/ CSIR concept note of Scheme APNI (Aerospace Projects 
of National Importance) which consists of establishment of this national wind tunnel facility 
(largest Closed Circuit wind tunnel and largest Blowdown wind tunnel in the country to meet long 
standing aerospace needs) has been duly prepared and submitted to the Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for their comments. Currently two rounds of consultations have 
been held, and final inputs/ reply is under preparation at DSIR/CSIR end.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
1.19 The Committee acknowledges the Department's request for funds to develop SarasMk2, e-
Hansa, urban air mobility solutions, and indigenous civil and military aviation systems, including 
Regional Transport Aircraft. Recognizing the growing need for regional connectivity, 
electrification in aerospace, and defense preparedness, the Committee emphasizes the importance 
of expediting these projects with adequate financial support. 
(Para 4.16 ibid) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.20 The Department on behalf of CSIR would like to express its sincere gratitude to the 
Committee for its recognition and acknowledgment and assures that every effort will be made to 
ensure the success of these projects. The department will follow the directions of the Committee in 
this regard. It is also humbly submitted that: 
 

 
7 
 
I. Letters of support have been received from a majority of the end users and these are being 
compiled. Where possible design partners and industry partners have been identified to 
minimize duplication of work and achieve rapid commercialization.  
II. CSIR is working closely with Indian industry Eco system right from 
specification/requirement formulation stage for Industry ready Output and Outcome from 
these proposed projects of National Importance.  
 
1.21 Given the total financial requirement of approximately Rs 5,800 crore for these critical 
projects, the Committee strongly recommends that the Department seeks the necessary funds to 
ensure their seamless execution. Additionally, the Committee recommends that the Department 
closely monitor the progress of these projects, ensure effective coordination among stakeholders, 
and provide periodic updates on their implementation. Prioritizing these projects will not only 
enhance India's self-reliance in aerospace technology but also contribute significantly to the 
nation's scientific and industrial advancement. 
 
(Para 4.17 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.22 Department thankfully acknowledges the Committee’s recommendation and it will follow 
the directions of the Committee in this regard. It is assured that every effort will be made to ensure 
the success of these critical projects.  
 
1.23  Further, it is submitted that the largest component of this Scheme APNI (Aerospace 
Projects of National Importance) which consists of these critical projects is the closed-circuit Wind 
Tunnel, which is being finalized after which the Detailed Project Report will be submitted to the 
Department of Expenditure (DoE). 
 
HUMAN RESOURCE CHALLENGES 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
1.24 The Committee is shocked to witness such a staggering number of vacancies in the 
Department, particularly in Group-I category of CSIR. It is concerning to contemplate how CSIR 
continues its research with such a skeletal workforce. Expecting optimal results from an 
understaffed organization is unrealistic. Human resources are the most important asset of any 
scientific organization and CSIR is critically lacking precisely in that. The Committee strongly 
recommends that the Department urgently fills up all vacant positions, particularly the Group-I 
vacancies in CSIR, in mission mode. 
 
(Para 5.4 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.25 The department humbly acknowledges the Committee’s observations and concerns 
regarding staggering number of vacancies in CSIR particularly in Group-A. It is submitted that as 
per the directions of the committee, CSIR is working in a mission mode approach to fill up all 
vacant Group-A positions. It is submitted for the kind information of the committee that from 

 
8 
 
April 2024 to June 2025; 102 new scientists have been selected in CSIR whereas for 21 posts, 
interview have been conducted and for 13 posts, interview will be conducted shortly.  
 
1.26 It is also pertinent to submit that for 401 scientists posts, advertisement has already been 
given in public whereas advertisement for 149 scientist posts will be given shortly. The department 
assures that every effort will be made for meticulous adherence of the committee’s directions.

 
9 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.1        The Committee acknowledges the vital role played by NRDC in facilitating the 
commercialization of technologies developed by CSIR, public-funded research institutions, 
universities, and autonomous research bodies. However, the Committee notes with concern the 
disparity between budgetary allocations, revised estimates, and actual expenditures across 
multiple financial years, particularly in the PIll scheme, where the actual expenditure has 
remained consistently lower than the allocated amount. The Committee recommends that the 
Department take necessary measures to ensure the optimal utilization of funds by enhancing 
project execution efficiency, streamlining approval processes, and addressing any institutional 
challenges that may be causing delays. 
 (Para 3.12 of the 389th Report) 
  
Action Taken: 
 
2.2 The majority of the funds allocated under PIII in National Research Development 
Corporations were directed towards a key component of the scheme — Technology Development, 
Validation, and Commercialisation (TDVC). These funds are utilized in two phases: Phase-I, 
focused on technology development, and Phase-II, on commercialization. As per the scheme 
guidelines, funds are released only upon the achievement of specific milestones and only 
successful projects from Phase-I progress to receive funding in Phase-II. Since this activity 
commenced during the current Finance Commission period and Phase-I spans approximately 18 
months, a portion of the allocated funds remained unutilized in the initial years. However, as the 
scheme has now stabilized—with more projects being initiated and completed annually—NRDC 
has fully utilized the funds allocated for the year 2024–25.Looking ahead, it is anticipated that the 
funding requirement for 2025–26 will exceed the current year's allocation due to the growing 
number of maturing projects. Therefore, the Committee is assured that the total funds allocated for 
2025–26 will be fully utilized. 
 Recommendation/ Observation 
 
  
2.3       The Committee welcomes the NRDC's proposal to launch the Start-up Driven Technology 
Scale-up Initiative (TSI) with its two major components, namely, the Technology Development 
Facility (TDF) and the Generic Startup Support Facility (GSSF). Given the critical role of start-ups 
in driving technological innovation and economic growth, the Committee emphasizes the 
importance of fostering stronger linkages between research institutions and start-ups to accelerate 
the commercialization of innovative technologies. The Committee recommends that the 

 
10 
 
Department provide adequate financial and infrastructural support to ensure the successful 
implementation of this initiative, particularly in addressing the unique challenges faced by start-
ups and women-led enterprises. 
(Para 3.13 ibid) 
  
Action Taken: 
 
2.4 The Department on behalf of NRDC would like to express its sincere gratitude to the 
Committee for its appreciation and assures that every effort will be made to ensure the success of 
the project. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
2.5 The Committee commends the Department for the successful revival of CEL, which was 
once a struggling PSU on the brink of disinvestment. The remarkable transformation of CEL 
stands as a testament to the potential of strategic interventions in revitalizing public sector 
enterprises. The Committee expresses its optimism that CEL will continue on this trajectory of 
growth and excellence, eventually attaining Maha Ratna status. CEL'S resurgence serves as an 
exemplary model of how a well-executed turnaround strategy can reinvigorate a PSU, reinforcing 
its role in advancing national technological and industrial capabilities. 
 
(Para 3.21 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
 
2.6 Department thankfully acknowledges the Committee’s recognition. It is humbly submitted 
that CEL is achieving rapid growth with more diversification and appropriate business strategies. 
With expected net worth of over 250 Cr by end of 31st March 2025, CEL stands strong on its own 
with regular dividend payout  in recent years. The growth in years to come may be phenomenal 
with utilization of available resources. Involving DSIR supports, CEL plans to become a listed 
company in due course after necessary approvals. The CEL Board has approved in principal to 
initiate the approvals with concerned administrative ministry as well as DIPAM. The company is 
expected to achieve the highest ever net profit of around Rs. 75 crore and corresponding dividend 
payout of around Rs. 22 crore to the Government. 
 
COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (CSIR) 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
2.7 The Committee recognizes the pivotal role played by CSIR in driving research, innovation, 
and technological advancements across diverse domains. As one of the premier research 
organizations in the country, CSIR has contributed significantly to scientific breakthroughs, 
industrial applications, and the development of indigenous technologies that have strengthened 
national self-reliance. Its extensive research network, spanning multiple disciplines, has facilitated 
advancements in healthcare, engineering sciences, environmental sustainability, agriculture, and 
emerging technologies, thereby supporting India's economic and strategic objectives. 
(Para 4.4 ibid) 
 
Action Taken: 
 

 
11 
 
2.8 The Department along with CSIR sincerely acknowledges the Committee’s appreciation 
and recognition. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
2.9 However, the Committee notes with concern that CSIR has substantial overlaps in research 
activities with other scientific institutions, including the Ministry of Earth Sciences, the 
Department of Biotechnology, the Department of Science and Technology, the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology, the Indian Agricultural Research Institute, etc. This 
duplication of research efforts leads to fragmentation of resources, inefficiencies in execution, and 
a lack of cohesive direction in national scientific pursuits. The Committee strongly recommends 
that CSIR undertake a comprehensive restructuring to optimize its research priorities, ensuring a 
sharper focus on projects that are highly critical, have a substantial impact, and align with the 
country's strategic interests. The Committee urges CSIR to realign its research portfolio by 
concentrating on areas of national importance where it can deliver unparalleled expertise and 
breakthrough innovations. Rather than engaging in research that overlaps with other institutions, 
CSIR should collaborate with relevant Ministries and research organizations to ensure synergy 
rather than redundancy. By leveraging its strengths in cutting-edge technologies, translational 
research and industrial applications, CSIR can maximize its contribution to India's scientific and 
economic development. The Committee also recommends that CSIR establish a clear roadmap to 
prioritize high-impact research, streamline its organizational structure, and enhance its role as a 
leader in addressing national challenges. A well-defined and strategic approach will not only 
enhance CSIR's efficiency but also position it as a key driver of India's scientific and technological 
advancement in critical sectors. 
(Para 4.5 ibid) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.10 CSIR acknowledges the Committee’s concerns regarding perceived overlaps in research 
activities with other scientific institutions. However, it is important to clarify that what may appear 
as duplication is, in many instances, a reflection of necessary convergence in addressing complex, 
multidisciplinary national challenges. Scientific research today, by its very nature, involves 
intersecting domains where coordinated efforts are essential to generate comprehensive and 
impactful outcomes. 
CSIR’s research programs are designed with a focus on translational and industrial applications, 
aiming to deliver end-to-end solutions, develop indigenous technologies, and enhance national 
self-reliance. Thus, CSIR’s mandate centers on converting knowledge into deployable 
technologies, prototypes, and processes that serve India's industry, strategic sectors, and societal 
needs. This translational emphasis distinguishes CSIR’s contributions from those of other 
organizations working in similar areas. A part of CSIR’s activities that seemingly overlap with 
other agencies (such as genome sequencing initiatives with DBT, etc.) are specifically meant to 
generate redundancy, aiming towards improving the quality and robustness of data. 
CSIR actively collaborates with other scientific ministries and agencies, including MoES, DBT, 
DST, MeitY, and ICAR, through joint initiatives, co-funded programs, and shared platforms. 
These partnerships ensure synergy and resource optimization as well as effective exchange of 
scientific knowledge among sister ministries/departments. Few of the examples about inter 
departmental/ ministerial collaboration are as below: 
 

 
12 
 
1. CSIR has been undertaking a nationally important project entitled “Indian Breast Cancer 
Genome Atlas’ in collaboration with Dept. of Biotechnology Institute -National Institute of 
Biomedical Genomics (NIBMG) Kolkata. 
  
2.  CSIR is also partnering with All India Institute of Medical Science (AIIMS), New Delhi, 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to work jointly for identified healthcare related research 
projects. 
  
3. CSIR has initiated a new Scheme titled Aerospace Projects of National Importance to undertake 
much needed R&D in National aerodynamic testing facilities, Civil and Military aircraft including 
electric aircraft. 
  
4. CSIR is also partnering with the Ministry of Civil Aviation to develop a National Drone 
Mission. 
  
5. CSIR is in collaboration with the Department of Space, Department of Defence (MoD) for 
various High Technology research and development for national programs. 
  
6. CSIR has entered into Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Ministry of Micro, Small 
and Medium Enterprises (MoMSME) on June 27, 2025. Both the organizations will work jointly to 
meet the needs and demands of MSMEs under the diversified areas of Science & Technology.  
  
7. CSIR is implementing mission mode projects CSIR Aroma mission and CSIR Floriculture 
Mission. The activities being undertaken under these projects are implemented in collaboration 
with Indian Council of Agricultural Research (Krishi Vigyan Kendra), Directorate of Floriculture, 
Pune and Department of Horticulture, ICAR-IARI, New Delhi across the country.  
  
8.  Under CSIR Floriculture Missions, apiculture has been integrated in collaboration with KVIC, 
wherein the Bee boxes and colonies are provided by KVIC to the clusters established by CSIR 
under these missions. Besides, CSIR is also partnering with agencies like APEDA, TRIFED, State 
Horticulture Departments, FFDC (MSME), Central and State Agriculture Universities etc. 
  
9. Under another mission mode project, which aimed at the development of genetically modified 
cotton resistant to insect pests especially Pink bollworm, CSIR collaborated with ICAR institutes 
and Punjab Agricultural University for validation of the technology in containment. 
  
10. In line with direction of the NITI Aayog, CSIR is pursuing a project under mission mode 
aimed at identification of potential sites for commercial cultivation of seaweeds across the coastal 
states and union territories of the country and their valorisation through downstream processing to 
several value added products. Earlier CSIR had worked with the Department of Fisheries, GoI and 
several state Fisheries departments for this purpose under PMMSY and other schemes. 
 
2.11 Further, in line with the Committee’s recommendations, CSIR has already been conducting 
internal reviews to sharpen its research focus through theme-based projects and a duplication 
check. Projects are chosen and evaluated through a cross-disciplinary committee of experts drawn 
from peer institutions. CSIR remains committed to continuously evolving its strategy to stay 
aligned with India’s scientific and economic goals, while reinforcing its active role in addressing 
national challenges. 
 

 
13 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 

 
14 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 

 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
16 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, 
FORESTS AND CLIMATE CHANGE (2024-25) 
 
XII 
TWELFTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 10:00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 6th August, 2025 in Committee 
Room No. B, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita – Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
3. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
LOK SABHA 
4. Shri Mahesh Kashyap 
5. Dr. Anand Kumar 
6. Shri Mohibbullah 
7. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
8. Shri Jashubhai Bhilubhai Rathva  
9. Shri Balwant Baswant Wankhade  
10. Shri Yaduveer Wadiyar 
11. Shri Vamsi Krishna Gaddam 
12. Shri Eswarasamy K 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Rakesh Naithani, Joint Secretary  
3. Shri Rajiv Saxena, Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. I.V. Rajya Laxmi, Committee Officer 
5. Shri Vaibhav Jain, Committee Officer  
                                     
 
 
 

 
17 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. The 
Committee then took up consideration of the draft 394th,  395th, 396th, 397th, 398th, 399th and 400th 
Reports of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Reports  on  Demands for Grants (2025-2026) of 
the Ministries/Departments of Atomic Energy; Biotechnology; Scientific and Industrial Research; 
Science & Technology; Space; Environment, Forest and Climate Change; and Earth Sciences, 
respectively and adopted the same after some deliberations.  
3. The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned Reports in both the Houses of 
Parliament on the 8th August, 2025.  
4. *  *  *  *  * 
5. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 10:46 a.m. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                RAJIV SAXENA 
  06.08.2025                           DEPUTY SECRETARY 
 
 
 
 
 