 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Three Hundred Forty Sixth Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment,   Forests and Climate Change on the Demands for Grants 
(2021-21) of the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1stDecember, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2021) 
 
REPORT NO. 
356 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 

 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
     Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Three Hundred Forty Sixth Report of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment,    
Forests and Climate Change on the Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the 
Ministry of  Environment, Forests and Climate Change 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2021) 
 
 
 

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
   
     
  PAGES 
   
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………… (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………… (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS ……………………………………………………………… (iii) 
  4. REPORT …………………………………………………………………... 1-10 
 Chapter I.       Recommendations/Observations which  have been  
                       accepted by the Government………………………………... 
 
2-5 
 Chapter II.  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee     
does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s  
replies……………………………………………………….. 
 
6-8 
 Chapter III.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted  by the     
Committee…………………………………………………… 
 
9 
 Chapter IV.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
                      Replies of the Government are still awaited………………… 
 
10 
5. MINUTES …………………………………………………………………. 11-12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
                              
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2021-22) 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2021)  
 
1. Shri Jairam Ramesh – Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2.    Shri Anil Baluni 
3.    Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
4.    Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
5.   Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
6.    Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
7.    Shri Parimal Nathwani 
8.    Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
9.    Shri Nabam Rebia   
10. # Vacant 
 
   LOK SABHA 
 
11.    Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
12.    Shri Pradan Baruah 
13.    Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
14.    Shri Jashvantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor  
15.    Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
16.    Shri Anantkumar Hegde 
17.    Shri S. Jagathrakshakan 
18.    Shri Mohammed Azam Khan 
19.    Shrimati Jyotsna Charandas Mahant  
20.    Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
21.    Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
22.    Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
23. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
24. Shrimati Satabdi Roy (Banerjee) 
25. Shri Francisco Sardinha  
26. Shri Anurag Sharma 
27. Shri Mahesh Sahoo 
28. Dr. M.P. Abdussamad Samadani  
29. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
30. Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi  
31. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
 
        SECRETARIAT 
 
        Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
        Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
        Shri Rakesh Anand, Additional Director 
        Smt. Monica Baa, Additional Director 
        Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
        Shri Harish Kumar, Committee Officer 
    _________________________________________________________________________                      
#Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha ceased to be the member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation 
from the Committee w.e.f. 11th October, 2021    
(i) 

             INTRODUCTION  
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Chang e, having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Three 
Hundred Fifty Sixth  Report on Action Taken by the Government on the  
recommendations/observations contained in the Three Hundred Forty Sixth Report  of the 
Committee on  Demands for Grants (2021 -2022) of the Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change, which was presented/laid in both the Houses of Parliament on          
8th  March, 2021.  
2.   There were 11 recommendations/observations in the Three Hund red Forty Sixth 
Report of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations of 
the Committee were received from the Ministry on 21st May, 2021.   
3.   In the meeting held on 30th November, 2021, the Committee considered the draft 
Report and adopted the same. 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 (JAIRAM RAMESH) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman, 
30th November, 2021 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Agrahayana 09, 1943(Saka)                                         Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and  Climate Change, 
 Rajya Sabha. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

ACRONYMS 
 
APOs Annual Plan of Operation 
ATN  Action Taken Note 
ATR Action Taken Report 
BE Budget Estimates 
CA Compensatory Afforestation 
CAF Compensatory Afforestation Fund 
CAMPA Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority 
CPCB Central Pollution Control Board 
DWH Development of Wildlife Habitat 
ETF Eco Task Force 
FDAs Forest  Development  Agency 
GIM Green India Mission 
IFD Integrated Finance Division 
JFMCs Joint Forest Management Committees 
MoEF&CC Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
NAP National Afforestation Programme 
NCAP National Clean Air Programme 
PCC Pollution Control Committee 
R&D Research and Development 
RE Revised Estimates 
SFDAs State Forest Development Agency 
SPCB State Pollution Control Board 
UT’S Union Territory 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

1  
                 REPORT 
The Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in 346th Report of the Committee on 
'Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change'. The Report 
was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 8th March, 2021. 
2. Action Taken Note s (ATN) ha ve been received from the Ministry of Environment, Forest & 
Climate Change in respect of all the eleven recommendations/observations contained in the Three 
Hundred Forty-Sixth Report of the Committee. This has been categorized as follows:- 
Chapter I:  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: Para Nos. 2.3, 2.6, 3.2, 4.5, 5.3, 6.3, 7.3 and 7.6   
 Total recommendation– 08 accepted. 
 The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted its 
recommendations/observations as mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report.  
Chapter II: Recommendations/Observations which the Comm ittee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: Para Nos. 4.6 and 7.5  
Total recommendation – 02. Not to be pursued further. 
The Committee is convinced with the explanation furnished by the Ministry and, 
therefore, does not want to pursue above-mentioned recommendations further. 
Chapter III:  Recommendations/Observations in respect of w hich replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: Para Nos. 4.4  
Total recommendation – 01. Not convincing reply. 
The Committee expresses its concern over the non -implementation of its recommendation 
contained in Chapter -III and desires that the Ministry should furnish convincing action 
taken steps in respect of those recommendations.   
Chapter IV:  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: Nil. 
3. The details of the ATR have been analyzed in the succeeding Chapters. 

2  
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
BUDGETARY DETAILS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 20 20-21 AND ALLOCATION FOR 
the year 2021-22 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.1 The Committee notes the adverse effect of COVID -19 pandemic on the budgetary allocation of 
the Ministry whereby the BE allocation of the Ministry for  the year 2020-21was drastically reduced by 
35% at RE stage, thus resu lting in non -release of funds for all proposed activities mentioned in the 
Annual Plan of Operations (APOs) of various schemes. The Ministry has been able to spend 83% of 
the RE allocation upto 31 st January 2021. The Committee urges the Ministry to optimally utilise the 
funds available with it during remaining part of the year.                        (Para 2.3 of the 346th Report)                                                                                                                                                            
Action Taken 
1.2 All possible efforts were taken to optimally utilise the funds available under the Ministry during 
the FY 2020 -21. The Ministry was able to incur expenditure of Rs.1973.38 crore against the RE 
provisions of Rs.2015.00 crore i.e. 97.93% w.r.t. RE. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 1.3  The Committee notes that the reduction of funds of the Mi nistry at RE - 2020-21 was due to an 
unprecedented situation caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. However, the BE 2021 -22 of the Ministry 
is still less than BE 2020 -21 (Rs.3100 crore) and even BE 2019 -20 (Rs.2954.72). The Ministry has 
indicated that it requires an additional amount of Rs.900 crores during 2021 -22 for its k ey 
schemes/programmes. The Committee recommends that in 2021 -22, the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change should make proactive efforts to ensure that the physical targets of the 
Ministry in respect of its various schemes/programmes are on sc hedule and the allocation made at BE 
is utilised to the maximum, so that it is on a firm footing to seek additional funds at the Supplementary 
and RE stage to achieve its objectives during the year.                                                     (Para 2.6 ibid)                                                                 
 Action Taken 
1.4 The recommendation of the committee has been noted and necessary augmentation in budgetary 
allocation shall be sought at RE stage as per requirement of the scheme. 
 
BUDGETARY SUPPORT & ACTUALLY UTILISED DURING THE LAST THREE YEARS 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.5 The Committee notes the pattern of utilisation of allocated amount by the Ministry during the 
last three financial years and finds the same satisfactory. The Committee also notes that although the 
BE allocation of the Ministry was reduced by nearly Rs.300 crores at RE stage during 2019 - 20, 
indicating a slow start to the schemes in the initial phase, thereby leading to the reduction in 
allocation at the RE stage, the Ministry was able to utilise the allocation fully during that year. The 
Committee also notes that the Ministry has been able to spend 83% of the RE 2020 -21 allocation upto 
31st January 2021, which is satisfactory.                                                                            (Para 3.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.6 The observation of the committee regarding slow start to the scheme in the initial phase, thereby 
leading to the reduction in allocation at the RE stage has been noted and the Pro gramme Divisions of 

3  
the Ministry have been asked to make proactive efforts to ensure that the allocation made at BE may be 
utilised to the maximum during first half of the year. 
CONTROL OF POLLUTION 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.7 Further, the Committee strongly recommends the need for transparency in information relating 
to expenditure of ‘Control of Pollution’ scheme, progress of NCAP, and functioning of the Pollution 
Control Boards.                                                                                                             (Para 4.5 ibid)                                                            
Action Taken 
1.8 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. All the funds under „Control of 
Pollution‟ scheme are being disbursed/monitored under PFMS. Ministry in collaboration with CPCB is 
also developing a web based air quality database management system with dashboard with provision 
for monitoring of NCAP activities.  CP Division of the Ministry follows scrupul ously, in each case the 
observation made by finance wing of the Ministry (IFD) such as production of utilization certificate 
etc. NCAP is a part of umbrella scheme Control of Pollution.  CPCB is a statutory Body of the Ministry 
and SPCBs/PCCs are the body under States/UTs Governments. 
R&D SCHEME FOR CONSERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT  
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.9 The Committee is dismayed to note that during the last three years, the actual expenditure under 
‘R&D Scheme for Conservation and Development’ has been only 16.3%, 35.8% and 23.5%, 
respectively, of the allocated amount. Under utilisation of the funds raises doubts about the 
achievements of the physical targets set under various progr ammes under the scheme too. Facilitating 
research and development and investing for the same are extremely critical. The Committee had dwelt 
upon this issue in its 331 st Report on Demands for Grants 2020 -21 of the Ministry too. However, the 
situation still remains the same. The Committee would like to reiterate its earlier recommendation and 
urge the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to introspect on the poor usage of funds 
allocated to Research and Development, and take appropriate measures to correct this immediately. 
                                                                                                                                             (Para 5.3 ibid)                                                                                                                            
Action Taken  
1.10 The Ministry has taken serious note of the concern of the Committee regarding low utilization of 
fund under „R&D Scheme for Conservation and Development‟. Low utilization of funds was due to the 
administrative activities for new projects (as decided a online portal for processing the applications for 
R&D Scheme became active in August , 2018 only) and the expenditure in the scheme is being done in 
a systematic manner to use it opti mally. Further, the „R&D Scheme for Conservation and 
Development‟ provides selective support in the form of grant to institutions in the country with 
expertise in identified thematic areas to undertake specific projects on specific areas of concern and 
priority and/or urgency of the Ministry for meeting Ministry‟s objectives of environmental protection 
and conservation of natural resources. Other Central Sector Scheme and Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
of the Ministry have also provided/earmarked fund for Research and Development in concerned fields. 
MAN-ANIMAL CONFLICT 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.11 The Committee is of the view that the cases of man-animal conflict are rising and it still  remains 
an area of concern. There is an urgent need to minimise the instances of man -animal conflict resulting 
in both loss of human and animal life.                                                                             (Para 6.3 ibid) 
 

4  
Action Taken  
1.12 The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has taken following steps to minimize 
the instances of man-animal conflict resulting in both loss of human and animal life 
i. The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has issued advisories dated 24th 
December, 2014 and 1st June, 2015, in context of human wildlife conflicts to all the States /UT‟s, 
wherein they have been requested to take proactive steps including exercise of powers under the Wild 
Life (Protection) Act, 1972, for mitigation of human wildlife conflict. 
ii. The Ministry has issued an advisory on payment of ex -gratia in context of human-wildlife conflict 
case of the Chief Wildlife Wardens of all the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations 
dated 10th July, 2020. 
iii. The Ministry has implemented a pilot project on the immuno-contraception as a long term measure 
to control the population of wild animals responsible for damage and destruction of crops, namely wild 
boar, elephant, monkey and nilgai. 
iv. Under Development of Wildlife Habitat (DWH) Scheme there is a provision o f "Management of 
human animal conflict in and around forest areas by  providing ex-gratia compensation to victim, 
support to states in construction of mitigation structure and relocation of villages." 
v. The Ministry has issued advisory on human wildlife conflict on 06.02.2021 after obtaining 
recommendation of the National Board for Wildlife. 
MONITORING OF PLANTATION ACTIVITIES  
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.13 The Committee observes that a year has gone by and  the Committee is still apprehensive on  the 
matter of misappropriation in plantation drives. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change should allay the concerns on this front in a transparent 
manner through audits that can be accessed easily by both public representatives and civil society.  
                                                                                                                                             (Para 7.3 ibid)                                                                                                                                
Action Taken                      
1.14 The Ministry implements two major afforestation schemes which include National Afforestation 
Programme (NAP) and Green India Mission (GIM). The guidelines of these schemes have inherent 
provisions for monitoring and evaluation of the project. 
The National Afforestation Programme (NAP) is implemented through a three tier system involving 
Joint Forest Management Committees (JFMCs) at Village level, Forest Development Agency (FDAs) 
at Division level and State Forest Development Agency (SFDAs) at State level. The guidelines of the 
scheme provides for concurrent monitoring of the project under the schem e and each project under the 
scheme is monitored by SFDA, FDA and State/UT Forest Department officials through field 
inspections and reports. Besides that SFDAs also carry out independent evaluation of each project. The 
evaluation focuses on people‟s participation, status of regeneration and improvement of vegetation, etc. 
The Green India Mission (GIM) monitors the progress of work through comprehensive monitoring 
framework i.e. on -ground self -monitoring by implementing agencies, field review by an external  
agency; KML file, Photographs, Audit report and Annual progress reports , etc. The Mission has also 
constituted Monitoring Committees for every State to monitor and evaluate Green India Mission 
activities. 
Besides, Eco-development Scheme is implemented in 4 States only, for eco -restoration of difficult or 
inaccessible terrains by Eco Task Force battalions cons tituted by employing ex -servicemen. The 
plantation done by ETF battalions have high survival percentage as t hey are monitored by ex -

5  
servicemen and other officials of the battalions. Besides these , plantations are also monitored by State 
Government officials and also by submission of progress reports, photos, etc. 
 Besides, the inherent provisions in the guidelines of the afforestation schemes, monitoring is also done 
through scrutiny of the proposals submitted by State Forest Development Agency. Each proposal from 
SFDA is required to include photos of the plantation area, geo-coordinates, progress report and 
evaluation reports which are scrutinized in the Ministry. 
In addition, 3rd party independent evaluation of plantation activities is also carried out by the Ministry, 
which includes sample check of plantations taken up by States under different schemes, evaluation of 
plantation activities under schemes  of the Ministry. Besides, the Forest Survey of India also carries out 
biennial survey of forests in the country and gives their assessment about change in forest cover and tree 
cover reflecting the afforestation efforts made to increase green cover in the  country. Government of 
India through Forest Survey of India, Dehradun also maintains the e -Greenwatch portal at which details 
of afforestation of degraded forest land through Compensatory afforestation are provided. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.15 The Committee also expresses its anguish on the issue of non - cooperative and unresponsive 
behaviour of the officials dealing with environmental matters towards the public representatives. Such 
attitude not only puts hurdles in the discharge of their constitut ional obligations but also in their 
accountability to the people. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Fores st 
and Climate Change, being the nodal central Ministry dealing with these matters, must impress upon 
the State Governments as well as their own officers to sensitise all the concerned authorities to accord 
due courtesy to the public representatives, attend to their grievances, respond to their communications 
and make available the information sought by them.                                                                (Para 7.6)                         
  Action Taken  
1.16 The recommendations of the Committee are duly noted by the Ministry for implementation of 
the suggestion of the Committee. The Ministry places due importance  on resolution of public 
grievances received by it, and endeavors to resolve them in a time -bound manner. It also, provides the 
requisite information to various stakeholders. 

6  
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
CONTROL OF POLLUTION 
Recommendation/ Observation 
2.1 The Committee understands that the  Ministry of Environment, Fores  and Climate Change 
utilises the allocation made for ‘Control of Pollution’ under its various schemes and programmes. The 
Committee is of the view that apart from implementing its various schemes and programmes, the 
Ministry needs to innovate and invest in  creating infrastructure for pollution abatement measures 
having sustainable and long -term impact such as installing superchargers for electric vehicles and 
establishing Effective Micro -organism bio -digesters units. Installing super -chargers for electric 
vehicles in cities affected by vehicular pollution will accelerate transition of people from petrol/diesel 
to electric vehicles, thereby reducing vehicular pollution. Similarly, establishing Effective Micro -
organism bio-digesters units after studying learni ngs from pilot projects, will not only help increase 
the efficiency of waste treatment and biogas production in urban areas, but also reduce the problem of 
stubble burning in rural North India, since these bio -digester units can provide effective micro -
organism solution, which, if made available to the farmers at a low cost, can provide them incentives 
to decompose stubble instead of burning it. This will also go a long way in controlling the problem of 
air pollution that severely affects the Indo-Gangetic plains every year.  (Para 4.6 of the 346th Report)                                                                                                                                           
 Action Taken 
2.2 Electric Vehicles and bio-decomposers are the policy issues being handled by the Ministry of 
Power and Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare respectively. Charging infrastructure for 
Electric Vehicles guidelines and standard was issued by the Ministry of Power vide their circular dated 
01.10.2019. However, this Ministry being mandated for healthy and safe  Environment of the country, 
always monitors, guides and makes air pollution mitigation strategy with all other stakeholders. 
Further, MoEF&CC is the nodal agency for monitorin g of progress made by 42 million plus cities 
receiving grant under Million Plus Challenge Fund (MCF), as per recommendation of Fifteenth 
Finance Commission for improvement of air quality. MoEF&CC has included development of such 
charging infrastructure as an essential component of performance assessment parameter for utilization 
of grant under MCF. Other Non -attainment cities are also being encouraged to incorporate this aspect 
in their city action plan for combating air pollution. 
MONITORING OF PLANTATION ACTIVITIES  
Recommendation/ Observation 
2.3 The Committee expresses its deep concern and dismay that the Supplementary ATR on the above 
issue of CAMPA fund has not been submitted by the Ministry to the Committee much beyond the 
promised timeline. The Committee expects the Ministry to furnish the Supplementary ATR within the 
next two weeks.                                                                                                                   (Para 7.5 ibid) 
Action Taken  
2.4 National Authority under the Ministry has examined the further recommendation of the 
Committee made in their Report No. 339 regarding issue under CAMPA of enhancing synergy 
amongst its different schemes and programmes related to improvement/expansion of  forest and tree 
cover including restoration of degraded forests which is one of the major objectives of the Green India 
Mission and in this regard conveyed the following factual positions:  
(i) The Compensatory Afforestation Fund (CAF) or CAMPA fund is utiliz ed solely for the purpose 
of mitigating the impact of loss of tree cover, forest land, wildlife habitat and ecological services 

7  
rendered by the forests. Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India has decided that this fund is not a part of 
general revenue of the Union, of the States or of the Consolidated Fund of India. This is echoed in the 
CAF Act, 2016, which provides for establishment of two special funds under the Public Account of 
States and under the Public Account of India, namely State Compensatory Afforestati on Funds (State 
Funds) and National Compensatory Aff orestation Fund (National Fund)  respectively, for crediting the 
CAF in the 90:10 ratios. 
(ii) The funding mechanism for implementing the centrally sponsored schemes of the Ministry on 
afforestation (Green India Mission and National Afforestation Programme) provides for sharing cost of 
these projects between the Centre and State/UT in 60:40 or 90:10 ratios (as per GOI norms). As of 
now, the cost is borne by the Centre as well as by the States/UTs from their resp ective consolidated 
funds. On the other hand, the activities undertaken from the State Fund or National Fund of CAF are 
fully funded by the respective Public Accounts . Rule 230 (1) of General Financial Rules, 2017 on 
„Principles and Procedure for award of Grants-in-aid‟ provides that “The Institution or Organization 
seeking Grants -in-aid should also certify that it has not obtained or applied for grants for the same 
purpose or activity from any other Ministry or Department of the Government of India or Stat e 
Government”. Further, under no circumstances, mixing of the monies received towards Net Present 
Value ( NPV) or interest accrued on the monies in the State Fund is allowed with any other State 
budget either for capital or spill over works and the works un dertaken under this rule shall be on 
standalone basis and there shall not be any duplication of permitted works under different components. 
In addition, monies collected towards any site -specific schemes including Compensatory Afforestation 
(CA) etc., are to be used as per site specific schemes approved at the time of approval of diversion of 
forest land under Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. Because of the above provisions and two different 
funding mechanisms, funding under the CSS cannot be augmented with  State Fund or National Fund 
established under the Public Accounts. 
(iii) As per the mechanism provided in the CAF Act, 2016 and CAF Rules, 2018, the Executive 
Committee of the State Authority of the respective States/UTs formulates and submits annual plan of 
operations to be Steering Committee of the State Authority for its concurrence. The Steering 
Committee of the State Authority scrutinizes and approves the annual plan of operations at the State 
level and thereafter sends the same to the Executive Committee o f the National Authority for final 
approval. It is to be noted here that the Executive Committee of the State Authority also includes one 
representative from the Departments of Environment, Finance, Planning, Rural Development, 
Revenue, Agriculture, Tribal  Development, Panchayati Raj, Science and Technology each as its 
members. Besides, two eminent non -government organizations, two representatives of district level 
Panchayati Raj Institutions, an expert on tribal matters or a representative of tribal commun ity, Nodal 
Officer, State Forest Development Agency (SFDA) are also included. Similarly, the Steering 
Committee of the State Authority constituted under the chairmanship of the Chief Secretary also 
includes Principle Secretaries of the Departments dealing with Forests, Environment, Finance, 
Planning, Rural Development, Revenue, Agriculture, Tribal Development, Panchayati Raj, Science 
and Technology, Nodal Officer, SFDA and an expert on tribal matters or a representative of tribal 
community as its members. T hese arrangements at State/UT ensure that synergy amongst different 
schemes and programmes related to improvement/expansion of forest and tree cover at State/UT level 
is achieved. 
(iv) The National Fund consists of only 10% of the CAF an d is to be used judiciously and 
strategically to improve the efficacy of the State Fund, which is a much larger fund. Section 5(b) of the 
CAF Act, 2016 provides for specific purposes for which the monies under National Fund can be 
utilized. This fund is ut ilized for meeting: (a) The non -recurring and recurring expenditure for 
management of the National Authority, including salaries and allowances payable to its officers and 
employees, (b) the expenditure incurred on monitoring and evaluation of works execut ed by the 
National and each State Authority, (c) The expenditure incurred on specific schemes approved by the 

8  
Governing Body of the National Authority. Such scheme would include any institute, society, centre of 
excellence in the field of forest and wildlife, pilot schemes, standardization of codes and guidelines and 
such other related activities for the forestry and wildlife sector. Consequently, more than fourteen 
proposals submitted by different divisions of the Ministry and State/UTs at an outlay of Rs. 965.31 
crore (approximately) have been carefully selected and are being funded as per Section 5(b) (iii) of 
CAF Act, 2016 for meeting the expenditure incurred on these specific schemes after the approval of 
the National Authority. These include Implementin g “ the Central Asian Flyway National Action Plan 
with Special Focus on Preparation of Site -Specific Activity Plan, Capacity Building and Developing 
Bird Sensitivity app for Setting up of Wind Energy and Species Action Plan”, “Proposal of Estimation 
of Economic Losses in Real Term Per Hectare Basis Due to Forest Fire in Uttarakhand and Madhya 
Pradesh”, “Execution of Readiness Activities for implementation of REDD+ in India”, “Strengthening 
of Forestry Research for Ecological Sustainability Productivity Enha ncement”, “National Programme 
for Conservation and Development of Forest Genetic Resources : Pilot project on „Creation of Centre 
of Excellence on Forest Genetic Resources‟, “Monitoring Protocol for Plantations and Assets created 
by State Forest Department s from Compensatory Afforestation Fund”, “Preparation of DPR with 
LiDAR Survey for one pilot watershed in forest area of each State/UT”, “Endangered Species 
Recovery Programme for Dugong, Dolpin, Great Indian Bustard & Sangai”, “Management of 
PARIVESH Portal”, to name a few. Thus, at the national level, these specific schemes under National 
Fund of CAF complement the other schemes and programme for improvement/expansion of forest and 
tree funding during 2020-21. 

9  
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
CONTROL OF POLLUTION 
Recommendation/ Observation 
3.1 The Committee notes that the ‘Control of Pollution’ scheme is to be implemented through various 
Central and State Government agencies. The Committee is of the view that although there may be 
different fund contributors to various implementation agencies under the scheme, there should be a 
central mechanism for coordination of various Central and State agencies and ensuring accountability 
through monitoring of the progress of the works undertaken. Further, capacity building should be 
undertaken at the municipal level to ensure implementation of The National Clean Air Programme 
(NCAP). These mea sures are critical for the successful execution of the scheme. The Committee 
recommends that the grant made available by recommendation of 15 th Finance Commission for 
installation of systems to monitor air quality must be prioritised by the Ministry in the  smaller cities 
and towns that are often neglected, and suffer from a lack of quality data on air pollution. 
                                                                                                                     (Para 4.4 of the346th Report)  
Action Taken 
3.2 The grant has been released to Million Plus cities for air quality improvement as per 
recommendation of 15 th Finance Commission and the funds have been released to the cities as 
mentioned in Ministry of Finance‟s letter dated 02.11.2020. (Copy of Ministry of Finance‟s letter dated 
02.11.2020 is enclosed at Annexure-I). 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
3.3 The Committee notes that the Ministry has not responded to the Committee’s 
recommendations/observations contained in the above para. The Ministry has merely stated that 
grant has been released to Million plus cities for air quality improvement as per 
recommendations of 15 th Finance Commission. The Ministry has evaded replies to the 
recommendations/observations contained in the above para. The Committee expects and 
recommends the Ministry to furnish concrete and categorical replies to its recommendations. 

 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
 
MINUTES 
_________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11  

 
 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 10:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 30 th November, 2021 in Room No. 63, First 
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
              MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Jairam Ramesh -- Chairman 
              RAJYA SABHA 
2.  Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
3.  Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
4.  Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
5.  Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
6.  Shri Nabam Rebia 
             LOK SABHA 
7.  Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
8.  Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
9.  Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
10.  Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
11.  Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
12.  Shrimati Satabdi Roy (Banerjee) 
13.  Shri Anurag Sharma 
14.  Shri Ram Shiromani 
             SECRETARIAT 
             Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
             Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
             Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
             Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
             Shri Harish Kumar, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee.  The 
Committee decided to take up the consideration and adoption of the draft 348 th, 349 th, 350 th, 
351st, 352nd, 353rd, 354th, 355th, 356th and 357th  reports of the Committee on the Action Taken 
by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 316th Report on 'Air 
Pollution in Delhi and National Capital Region'; the 324 th  Report on „Status of Forests in 
India; the 325th  Report on „An Expanded Role for the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) in 
Cancer Treatment in India through An Enlarged Network of the Tata Memorial Centre 
(TMC)‟; and 351 st to 357 th Reports on the Demands for Gran ts (2021 -22) of the 
Ministries/Departments of Atomic Energy; Biotechnology; Scientific and Industrial Research; 
Science & Technology; Space; Environment, Forest and Climate Change; and Earth Sciences, 
respectively. The Committee, then, considered the draft  348th to 357th reports and adopted the 
same. 
3. The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned reports in both the Houses of 
Parliament on the 1st December, 2021.  The Committee also authorised the Chairman to decide 
the names of the Members for  presentation/laying of the reports in both the Houses of 
Parliament.  
4. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 10.25 a.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
12 