 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
___________, 2013/ Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) 
Web site: http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-Mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
   
  
TWO HUNDRED FORTY FOURTH REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-2014) 
OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH 
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY) 
(DEMAND NO. 86) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th May, 2013) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th May, 2013) 
REPORT 
NO. 
244

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS  
 
 
TWO HUNDRED FORTY FOURTH REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-2014) 
OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH 
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY) 
(DEMAND NO. 86) 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 8TH MAY, 2013) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 8TH MAY, 2013) 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MAY, 2013/VAISAKHA, 1935 (SAKA) 
C O N T E N T S 
 
         PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE       (i) – (ii)   
2.     PREFACE                   (iii) 
3. ACRONYMS 
4. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                                             
  5. SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS  
  6. MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE         
    
                             
                                                 
  To be appended at printing stage 
 


MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY,  
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS (2012-13) 
---------- 
1. Dr.T. Subbarami Reddy  –– Chairman  
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Anil H. Lad 
3. Smt. Maya Singh 
4. Shri M. Rama Jois 
5. Shri Alok Tiwari 
6. Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
7. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra 
8. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian 
9. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
10. Vacant 
 LOK SABHA 
11. Shri K.C. Singh "Baba"    
12. Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty 
13. Shri Vincent H. Pala 
14. Vacant 
15. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde 
16. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
17. Dr. Ajay Kumar 
18. Shri O.S. Manian 
   19. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
20. Shri Basori Singh Masram 
21. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel 
22. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
23. Shri Ramashanakar Rajbhar 
24. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
25. Shri Yshvir Singh 
26. Smt. Supriya Sule 
27. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
28. Shri Joseph Toppo 
29. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava 
30. Shri Ramaknt Yadav 
31. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
     
                                                 
 Prof. M.S. Swaminathan ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 9th April, 2013. 
 Nominated w.e.f 9th January, 2013. 
 Nominated w.e.f. 1st May, 2013 

SECRETARIAT 
 Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary 
 Shri  Alok Chatterjee, Director 
 Shri  V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director  
Shri  Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director 
Shri Deepak Kalra, Assistant Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer 
 
 
Preface 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Pa rliamentary Standing Committee on Science & 
Technology, Environment & Forests, having been  authorised by the Committee to present the 
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Forty-fourth Report of the Committee. This 
Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants  (2013-2014) of the Department of Scientific 
and Industrial Research (Ministry of Science and Technology) (Demand No.86). 
2.   In the meeting of the Committee held on the 3 rd April, 2013 the Secretary and other Officers 
of the Department of Scientific and Industrial R esearch gave an overview of the various activities 
of the Department and the Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance 
of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants. 
3.   The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the 
clarifications sought by the Members and placing  before it the required material to enable the 
Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of  the Department of Scientific & Industrial 
Research. 
4.    The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 7
th May, 2013. 
 
NEW DELHI;    
May, 2013 
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
 Chairman,
 Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on 
Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
 
ACRONYMNS 
 
AcSIR  : Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research 
APCTT : Asia & Pacific Centre for Transfer of Technology  
A2K  : Access to Knowledge for Creation of Innovative Capacity  
and Dissemination 
BIRD  : Building Industrial Research & Development 
CEL  : Central Electronics Limited  
CDC   : Consultancy Development Centre  
CRTDC : Common Research & Te chnology Development Centres 
CTPL  : CSIR ‐Tech  
CSIR   : Council of Scientif ic and Industrial Research  
DSIR   : Department of Scien tific and Industrial Research  
eHC  : eHealth  
EOI  : Expression of Interest 
GRM  : Grievance Redressal mechanism  
IRDP  : Industrial Research & Development Programme 
ITeG  : Information Technology e-Governance 

JRF  : Junior Research Fellowships  
JV  : Joint Venture 
NCAD  : National Civil Aircra ft Development Programme 
NMITLI  : New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative 
NRDC  : National Research Development Corporation  
OCP-II  : Opencast Project-II  
OSDD  : Open Source Drug Discovery 
PACS   : Poorest Areas Civil Society 
PACE  : Patent Acquisition a nd Collaborative Research and  
Technology Development 
PPP  : Public Private Partnership 
PRISM : Promoting Innovations in Individuals, Start-ups and  
MSMEs 
RA  : Research Associates 
RFD  : Result Framework Document 
RGF   : Rajiv Gandhi Foundation  
RG-III  : Ramagundam Area-III 
SCCL  : M/s Singareni Collieries Company Ltd 
SECL  : M/s South-Eastern Coalfields Ltd 
SFC  : Standing Finance Committee  
SPMF  : Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Fellows 
SPV  : Solar Photo Voltaic 
SRA  : Senior Research Associates 
SRF  : Senior Research Fellows 
TECHVIL : CSIR Technology-enabled Village 
TePP  : Technopreneur Promotion Programme 
TDDP  : Technology Development and Demonstration Programme  
TKDL  : Traditional K nowledge Digital Library 
TSL  : M/s Tata Steel Ltd 
TOR  : Term of Reference  
UNDAF  : UN Development Assistance Framework 
 
REPORT 
INTRODUCTION 
At the time, India gained independence in 1947, one of the most challenging tasks 
before the newly independent nation was to  bring out of abject poverty a very large 
proportion of its people and to achieve a reasonable  standard of living for them.  Our 
visionary leaders of that era clearly visu alized the role of Science & Technology in 
meeting this formidable challenge and accordingly from the beginning made sincere 
efforts to develop necessary infrastructure  and environment for growth of science & 
technology in the country.  Promotion of scie nce & technology was r ecognized as one of 
the national priorities with the aim to make  full use of science & technology in achieving 
faster growth and development of the count ry. Scientific Policy Resolution of 1958 and 
the Technology Policy statement of 1983 have  guided the growth & development of 
Science & Technology in the country.  

2. The Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) and its constituent 
laboratories were established as country’s R&D centres in public sector, primarily for 
converting research to technologies having co mmercial potential.  Today, its 37 national 
laboratories, 39 outreach centre, 6 units and 3 innovation complexes are carrying out 
industrial research in divers e scientific areas. Some of these areas are affordable 
healthcare, water purification, dr ug discoveries and their clini cal trials, bio jet fuels, bio-
ethanol, protection of Indian  traditional medicinal knowledge, solar energy, improving 
the yield of crops, etc. 
3. Council of Scientific and Industrial Research estab lished in 1942, subsequently 
became one of the two autonomous organizati ons under Department of Scientific and 
Industrial Research which itself became one of  the three Departments of the Ministry of 
Science and Technology, established in 1985. 
4. The Department-related Parliament ary Standing Committee on Science & 
Technology, Environment and Forests consider ed the detailed Demand for Grants 2013-
14 of the Department of Scient ific and Industrial Research (D SIR) in its meeting held on 
3
rd April, 2013. 
5. DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (DSIR)  
5.1 Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR), one of the Departments 
of the Ministry of Science and Technol ogy was established th rough a Presidential 
Notification dated January 4, 1985. Its mandate inter-alia includes promotion of 
industrial research for indigenous technology development, promotion, utilization and 
transfer. The subjects allocated to the Department are:  
i)  All matters concerning the Council of  Scientific and Industrial Research.  
ii)  All matters relating to National Research Development Corporation.  
iii)  All matters relating to Central Electronics Limited.  
iv)  Registration and Recognition of R&D Units.  
v)  Matters relating to UNCTAD and WIPO.  
vi)  National Register for Foreign Collaborations.  
vii) Matters relating to creation of pool for tempor ary placement of Indian 
Scientists and Technologists.  
5.2 The primary endeavour of Department of Scientific And Industrial Research 
(DSIR) is to encourage indus try to increase their share in  country’s R&D expenditure, 
support a larger cross section of small and medium industrial units to develop state-of-the 
art, globally competitive technologies of hi gh commercial potential, catalyze faster 
commercialization of lab-scale R&D, enhan ce the share of technol ogy intensive exports 
in overall exports, strengthen industria l consultancy and technology management 
capabilities and establish user friendly inform ation network to facilitate scientific and 
industrial research in  the country. Two autonomous orga nizations namely, Council for 
Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) and Consultancy Development Centre (CDC) 
and two public sector undertak ings namely National Research Development Corporation 
(NRDC) and Central Electronics Limited (C EL) are under its admi nistrative control. 
DSIR also provides institutional host facilities and assistance to Asian & Pacific Centre 
for Transfer of Technology (APCTT) as a focal point in the country. 
6. MECHANISM TO MONITOR AND RE VIEW THE ONGOING SCHEMES  
6.1. The Committee was informed that th e progress of all projects under the 
Department was monitored at various le vels. Ongoing programme s/projects were 
reviewed and monitored with the help of Technical Advisory Committees, Steering 
Committees and Project Review Committees. At the end of five year plans, the 

Department also conducts third party reviews.   At present, the Department was carrying 
out third party review for its Technopr eneur Promotion Programme (TePP) and 
Technology Development and Demonstrati on Programme (TDDP) being operated since 
11th plan period. The Department has further informed that Result Framework Document 
exercise had further helped in strengthe ning the monitoring mechanism of ongoing 
schemes.  
6.2 It was also informed that in CSIR, th e Cluster concept of participative planning 
and monitoring was evolved duri ng mid-term appraisal of 11
th Five year pl an and would 
be continued in 12 th Five Year Plan as well with grea ter rigor and focus. A detailed four 
tier monitoring mechanisms have been evolved by the Department regarding CSIR 
projects. The Department has mentioned that at Laboratory level, the respective research 
council monitor’s projects and then task force does it at the project level. At Cluster level, 
the Cluster Director monitors programmes,  and at Headquarters level, External 
Monitoring Committees review pr ogress. Finally DG, CSIR reviews the overall projects 
after it was cleared at the Headquarter’s le vel. The dynamic mode of project operation 
also ensures that programmes can be reposi tioned and reoriented to meet the desired 
objectives. Apart from this, compilation of  comprehensive knowledge base information 
on Clusters and project wise white papers for appropriate benchmarking were additional 
features for the 12
th Five Year Plan monitoring of projects.   
7. RESULT FRAMEWORK DOCUMENT (RFD) 
7.1 From the year 2009-10, Result Framework Document (RFD) has been introduced 
by the Cabinet Secretariat’s Performance Management Division wherein the project 
performance of all scientific  departments of the Government was evaluated by a third 
party, appointed by the Performance Management  Division of the Ca binet Secretariat. 
One of the most important features of RF D was that under it schemes, programmes and 
activities were defined in quantitative terms and the achievements of the projects were 
reviewed by the Adhoc Task Force consisting of former Secretaries of Government of 
India. In this context, the Committee was informed by the Department that under RFD, 
the Department has achieved high compos ite value scores of 95.84% in 2009-10 and 
again 95.97% in 2010-11.  
7.2 When it was enquired from the Department about their performance during the 
last financial year in term of RFD, the De partment informed that its score in RFD for 
2012-13 was expected to be around the same level as in 2011-12 which was 93.90%. It 
was stated that decline in RFD performance below 95% during 2011-12 was because of 
unsatisfactory performance of the Depa rtment in the mandatory indicator on 
“Independent Audit of implementation of Grievance Redressal mechanism (GRM)” fixed 
by Cabinet Secretariat, where the department  lost 2 marks. Further, achievements under 
certain targets were lower since they were not  fully within the control of the Department 
and required co-operation from external agencies.  
7.3 The Department assured that in order to  maintain RFD score above 95%, that it 
would evolve stricter mechanisms of monito ring the work progress in the department as 
well as solicit prompt co-operation of external agencies by maintaining contact with them 
on monthly basis or even at shorter intervals.    
7.4 The Committee notes decline in projec t performance of the Department on 
RFD score in two successive years viz 2011-12 and 2012-13.  The Committee, 
however, takes note of the fact that lower performance of CSIR partly resulted from 
non approval of the 12
th Five Year Plan schemes of DSIR.  The Committee hopes 
that the Department would make all out ef fort to improve its RFD score in 2013-14 

by more stricter monitoring of its programmes and by taking pro-active measures to 
get required cooperation from the concerned external agencies.  
8. ACHIEVEMENTS OF COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL 
RESEARCH (CSIR) 
8.1 As per the information furnished by DSIR, some of its most significant 
achievements during 2012-13 are given below:  
8.2. CSIR’s World Ranking  
8.2.1 CSIR has been placed at 82
nd Rank as per SCIMAGO Institutions Ranking World 
Report 2012 and is the only Indian organi zation among the top 100 global institutions. 
CSIR holds the 17th Rank in Asia and is placed at the first position in the country.  
8.3. Publications & Awards  
8.3.1 CSIR published 4716 research papers duri ng 2011 with an average impact factor 
per paper as 2.568 in SCI journals of nationa l and international re pute contributing to 
9.43% of Indian R&D literature. Several rese arch papers were published in high impact 
factor journals like ‘Lancet’ (IF 38.278), ‘N ature’ (IF 36.28), ‘Science’ (IF 31.20), 
‘Chemical Society Reviews’ (IF 28.76) etc.   
8.4. CSIR Scientists in Frontiers of Science  
8.4.1 Some significant awards/ recognitions to  CSIR Scientists during 2012-13, are as 
follows:  
Fellowship/Award Number 
Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Awardees  2 
Fellows of Indian National Science Academy  9 
Fellows of Indian Academy of Engineers  3 
Fellows of Indian Academy of Sciences, Bengaluru  4 
Fellows of National Academy of Sciences, Allahabad  8 
Infosys Foundation Award  2 
INSA Medal for Young Scientist  5 
CSIR Young Scientists Award  10 
8.5 CSIR further informed that their scie ntists get recognitions  through awards by 
having membership of editorial boards of pr estigious international journals, etc.  The 
details are as under: 
Award/ Recognition Number 
International award/recognitions 27 
8.6 Value Generation through Intellectual Property 
 
8.6.1 CSIR has filed 258 patents abroad and 163 patents in India. It is maintaining a 
portfolio of 3250 patents abroad and 2350 pa tents in India.   The Committee was 
informed that the rate of commercialization of CSIR patents is above 9%, which is much 
higher than global average of 3-4% and the Committee is appreciative of it. 
8.6.2 While the Committee would not like to indu lge in outrightly contesting the claims 
of the most significant achievements narrated above by the Department, it would not tend 
to agree with/accept them at their face valu e either.  The Committee has its own reasons 
and reservations to differ. The Committee is of the view that the 82 nd global ranking of 
CSIR is not at all in consonance with the newly acquired economic and political clout of 
the country in the international community or its international stature in the fields of 
Space, Nuclear Technology, Information Techno logy, Biotechnologies etc. The fact that 
CSIR is the only organization in top 100 global organizations  should not be a matter of 
solace for it as it is the on ly organization in the country which has been working for over 
last 70 years with a mandate to develop stat e of the art globally competitive technologies 

of high commercial potential.  The global rank ing of CSIR is refl ective of its standing 
vis-à-vis other global organizations in the field and is an indicator of its overall 
performance.  Modern India with its 127 crore people, cannot pride itself with 82nd global 
ranking of its premier organization like CSIR.  Even worse is the Asian ranking where it 
stand at 17 th position.  It further goes altogether athwart th e national aspiration of 
emerging as a global superpower, as also the aspiration of positioning India among the 
top five global scientific powers by 2020 enunciated in the Sc ience, Technology & 
Innovation Policy, 2013. The Committee is of the view that in order to fulfill 
aspirations of modern India, CSIR should aim to become amongs t at least first 10 
global organization in its field and it sh ould strive hard to achieve that ranking 
within next 5 years, for that alone would gi ve it position of pride in the hearts of 
millions of our young men & women.  
8.6.3 As regards the credit for research papers having been published in high impact 
factor journals like Lancet, Nature, Scien ce, etc; the Committee has came across some 
conflicting and contradictory f acts which do not corroborate  the tall claims of the 
Department.  The Committee has been informed  that a sample chec k of top 14 research 
papers of the CSIR has revealed that these research papers are not related to any scientific 
research or technological development done at  CSIR laboratories.  Further, Science, 
Technology & Innovation Policy 20 13 envisages that by 2020 th e global share of Indian 
publications must double, and the number of papers in top 1% j ournals must quadruple 
from the current level and the citation impact  of Indian publication must improve and 
match atleast the world average.  The Committee, therefore,  also feels that the 
research papers of the Department also need s to be proportionately increased so as 
to achieve the above envisaged vision by the year 2020. 
8.6.4 The Committee also notes that the Fe llowships/Awards won by CSIR scientists 
are national.  The Committee had in its 227 th report emphasized on the need to make 
efforts to win international apart from national awards as well.  The Committee, as such 
is not very much amused by the aforesaid ach ievements of CSIR, more so, because it   
has the largest pool of scientists in the count ry and it is bu t natural that the number of 
scientists getting award/fellowships would be higher.    
8.6.5 The last but not the least is the perfo rmance of the Department on the index of 
patents.  The Committee finds that the total nu mber of patents filed in India and abroad, 
vis-à-vis patents granted has been on the decline in successive years if 2008-09 is taken 
as a base year. A chart showing year-wise num ber of patents filed in India and abroad 
and the number of patents granted is given below:- 
Year No. of 
patents 
filed in 
India 
No. of 
patents 
filed 
abroad 
Total 
number of 
patents 
filed 
Patents 
granted in 
India 
Patents 
granted 
abroad 
Total 
number of 
patents 
granted 
2008-09 183 404 587 703 833 1536 
2009-10 161 179 340 145 319 464 
2010-11 174 220 394 260 361 621 
2011-12 197 290 487 99 282 381 
2012-13 163 258 421 95 176 271 
8.6.6 The above chart reveals that while in  2008-09, CSIR had f iled a total of 587 
patents-183 in India and 404 abroad, the num ber of patents granted was 1536-  703 in 
India and 833 abroad. In the year 2009-10, the total number of patens filed nosedived to 
340 and the number of patents granted to 464.  Ever since then, CSIR never reached the 

figure of 2008-09 in terms of the number of total patents filed and the total number of 
patents granted.  In the year 2011-12 only, the number of patents filed in India went up to 
197 as against 183 in 2008-09, but th e number of patents grante d in India was       
abysmal 99.  However, the Committee understands  that CSIR is now trying to bring in 
more focus on creating technological niches  and filing those patents which are of 
strategic nature. 
8.6.7 Reasons / justifications for sharp fall ap art, one thing is obvious that the reverse 
trend has set in and it’s a matter of serious concern.  The Committee feels that this 
trend needs  not only be contained but also reversed and the Department should 
undertake all necessary measures in this  regard including strengthening of the 
intellectual Property & Technology Management initiative. 
8.6.8 Having said that the Committee leaves it to  the DSIR itself to critically appraise 
its strength and weaknesses, devise both shor t & long term strategies to live upto the 
aspirations and tread on the right path with te nacity of purpose instead of basking in the 
glory of self aggrandizement. DSIR itself has to judge to what and how much extra 
efforts it requires to put to take itself to the fifth position among top five global powers 
within a short span of some seven years, wh ich, if not a mission impossible, is definitely 
as gargantuan/Himalayan task. 
9. Creating and Nurturing S&T Human Resource  
9.1 CSIR has informed that it has been sy stematically creating and nurturing highly 
qualified S&T manpower in the country. It  is presently supporting 8876 Research 
fellows, 172 Emeritus Scientists, 173 Senior  Research Associat es and 1092 research 
schemes in various universities.  The Committ ee appreciates CSIR's efforts for creating a 
pool of talent in trans-disciplinary areas.  
10. CSIR Technologies for Nati onal Capacity Building  
10.1 CSIR stated that it has developed cer tain path breaking technologies i.e. 
development of Granito tiles which replaced  the expensive imported Ukraine clay with 
indigenous clay. production of 15 liters of high quality Bio-jet fuels from Jatropha curcus 
oil; first test-run of vehicle with marine microalgal biodiesel produced from a marine 
microalgal strain cultivated in a solar pond; construction of Bio-fuel Pilot Plant based on 
bio-ethanol; preparation of Flow Sheets for beneficiation of  low-grade iron ores etc.  In 
order to bring affordable healthcare servi ces to the doorstep of people, CSIR has 
launched eHealth (eHC) Centre.  eHC is housed in a standard shipping container which 
can be quickly transported to remote areas of the country that have no immediate access 
to primary healthcare.   
10.2 The Committee appreciates development of Granito tiles and e-health centre 
initiative, which the Committee hopes will help in bringing affordable health 
services to the doorsteps of people. The Committee also notes breakthrough 
achieved in production of high quality Bio-jet fuel from Jatropha curcus oil and test 
run of vehicle on the marine microalgae biodiesel product from a marine microalgae 
strain cultivated in a solar pond  and ho pes that these breakt hroughs would turn 
out commercially viable and would contri bute towards achieving energy security by 
the country.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Department should 
strive towards making these breakthroughs commercially viable.  
11. TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE DIGITAL LIBRARY (TKDL) 
11.1 The Department informed that TKDL wa s created to prevent misappropriation of 
traditional medicinal knowledge of India at In ternational Patent Offices. India has signed 
TKDL Access Agreements with countries li ke USA, Canada, UK, Australia, Japan and 

Germany. Negotiations are under way to conclude the Access Agreement with 
Intellectual Property Office of New Zealand. Under the agreem ent, examiners of patent 
office can utilize TKDL for search and exam ination purposes only and cannot reveal the 
contents of TKDL to any third party unless it  is necessary for the purposes of citation. 
TKDL Access Agreement is unique in nature and has in built safeguards on non-
disclosure to protect India’s interest against any possible misuse.  
11.2 Beginning  in July 2009, CSIR has id entified 5000 patent applications at 
International Patent Office’s which concer n Indian Systems of Medicine and TKDL 
evidences have been filed at pre-grant stag e under relevant provisions at these Patent 
Offices in more than 1073 cases till June  2012. Success has been achieved in 137 cases 
where the patent applications have either  been withdrawn/cancel led/declared dead/ 
terminated or have the claims amended by a pplicants or rejected by the Examiner(s) on 
the basis of TKDL submissions. Similar outco mes are expected in the remaining cases 
also.  
11.3 When the Committee desired to know the future plans of the Department, the 
Department mentioned that additional 1.0 La kh formulations from Ayurveda, Unani and 
Siddha are proposed to be included in TKDL. Providing access of CSIR-TKDL to 
publically funded R&D institutions  for promoting research in  the field is also under 
consideration. 
11.4 In order to prevent misappropriation of traditional medicinal knowledge of 
India at International Patent Offices, the TKDL initiative of the Department is a 
welcome step. The Committee notes that CS IR through TKDL has been able to 
prevent grant of patents in  137 cases of misappropriatio n of India’s traditional 
medicinal knowledge at International Pate nt Offices like-USPTO, EPO, CIPO etc 
and that though they have identified 5000  patent applications at International 
Patent Office’s which concern Indian Sy stems of Medicine and TKDL, evidences 
have been filed at pre-grant stage under rel evant provisions at these Patent Offices 
in more than 1073 cases till June 2012. The Committee, however, expresses its 
concern that out of 5000 identified cases,  the Department has, till June 2012, filed 
evidences only in 1073 cases.  The Committee feels that undue delay is not desirable 
in such sensitive cases and Department shou ld ensure that evidences etc are filed in 
all the cases expeditiously.  The Department must take pro-active  steps not only in 
zealously preserving and protecting our p recious traditional medicinal knowledge 
but also make best use of it in providing affordable health care to our people.  
12. OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
12.1 Other achievements of the Department includes expansion of drug discovery 
activities pertaining to Malaria and Kala -Azar under the Open Source Drug Discovery 
(OSDD) scheme, establishment of Innovation  Complexes, setting up of Academy of 
Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR ), a world class institution of national 
importance by focusing on research and impar ting training in such areas that are not 
ordinarily provided by the existing universities in India.  
13. SOME USEFUL TECHNOLOGIES 
13.1 CSIR has developed some useful technologi es which if adopted/ bring into use for 
practical purposes could address major mining problems, purification of water, removal 
of saline from water etc. These are discussed below: 
13.2 HIGHWALL MINING IN INDIA 
13.3 This is a new technology developed by the CSIR under ‘Physical and Engineering 
Sciences Cluster’. Under this technology, th e life of opencast mines can be extended 

without disturbing the surface dwellings, and maintaining economy and productivity. It is 
a remotely operated coal mining technol ogy closely related to underground mining 
methodology. The method comprises extraction of coal from a series of parallel entries 
driven in the coal seam from the face of  the Highwall. These entries are unmanned, 
unsupported and unventilated. Highwall Mining can  be successful only if a feasible 
design of extraction is made taking into consideration of complex geology and existence 
of multiple coal seams in Indian Coalfields, which is unique in many respects.  
13.4 According to CSIR the following mining sites had been considered for Highwall 
Mining operations i.e.  
(a) Ramagundem Opencast Project-II, M/s Singareni Collieries Company Ltd, 
(SCCL); 
(b) Medapalli OCP of M/s Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. (SCCL); 
(c) Quarry SEB and AB, West Bokaro of M/s Tata Steel Ltd. (TSL); and 
(d) Shardah Opencast Project of M/s South-Eastern Coalfields Ltd. (SECL).  
13.5 CSIR had designed the extraction methodology by Highwall Mining for above-
mentioned mines except for Shardah Opencast. The first Highwall Mining System started 
on 10th December 2010 at Opencast Project- II (OCP-II), Ramagundam Area-III (RG-III) 
of Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. (SCCL). At present, an approximate amount of 
10.5 lakhs tonnes of locked-up coal has been  extracted by Highwall Mining in India out 
of which M/s SCCL contributed about 4.5 Lakhs  and M/s SECL has produced nearly 6.0 
lakh tonne of coal.  
13.6 TERAFIL WATER FILTERS & NEERI-ZAR 
13.7 CSIR was successful in developing a nd disseminating low cost and effective 
systems for water purification for the benefit of society at large as detailed below:  
13.8. TERAFIL:  CSIR conducted 21 training/demons tration programs all over the 
country for field testing and popularization of  the TERAFIL filters appropriate for both 
domestic and community water supply. In th e recent past, about 4000 domestic Terafil 
water filters were sent to benefit flood a ffected victims of Bihar, West Bengal and 
Odisha. The technology had become very popular which was evident from 93 technology 
transfers for Terafil filtration media disc  and 80 technology transfers for community 
water filtration system design. It was estimated that about six lakhs of filters have already 
been produced by licensees.  
13.9 NEERI-ZAR:  This technology has been made availa ble free of cost for societal 
benefit. Its technical design de tails were being provided to th e interested agencies as and 
when sought.  CSIR installed 100 units in the flood affected remote areas of Baitu block 
in Barmer District in October 2006 and 250 units  were installed in Aila Cyclone affected 
area of Godkhali Ghat, South 24 Parganas, Basanti Block, Sonakhali of Sundarban 
district (West Bengal) in 2009 to treat pond wa ter contaminated with saline water. CSIR 
installed 20 units in tribal areas of Melghat in Amravati District of Maharashtra.  
13.10 The Committee feels that potential of  the above mentioned technologies 
developed by CSIR need to be fully expl oited to derive maximum benefits fron 
them.  The CSIR must convince Ministries of Coal & Mines etc on the utility of the 
Highwall Mining and for its adoption on  a large scale. Si milarly, it should 
collaborate with the Minist ries of Rural Development, Urban Development and the 
other related Ministries & State Governme nts for large scale adoption of water 
purification filters & technologies.  CSIR has informed that its water purification 
technologies have been successfully tested in flood affected areas. A number of states 
in the East and North East region part icularly Bihar and Assam and Southern 

States like Karnataka and Tamil Nadu are hit almost every year  by floods causing 
tremendous scarcity of drinking water and the technology developed by CSIR could 
be gainfully utilized in providing drinking  water in such flood hit states.  The 
Committee recommends that CSIR should de monstrate utility of its technology to 
such flood prone states so that country  could reap full benefi t of technologies 
developed by CSIR.  The Committee, furt her, recommends that CSIR must also 
find solutions to problems faced by people like drying of ponds and their revival in 
the state of Jharkhand so that benefit of research of CSIR is also available in solving 
the problems faced by people. 
14. THRUST AREAS OF XII FIVE YEAR PLAN 
14.1 During 12 th Five Year Plan, the Department has informed the Committee that it 
would focus on the following:  
(a) Supporting start-up companies and MSMEs for innovative projects;  
(b) Acquisition of technologies and licensing the same to start-ups and SMEs on a 
non-exclusive basis for development and demonstration; 
(c) Exploring mechanisms for establishing R&D facilities for micro and small 
enterprises; and 
(d) Enabling in-house R&D units of i ndustries and Scientific and Industrial 
Research Organizations (SIROs) to acce ss scientific e-journals with high 
impact factor.  
14.2 Apart from the above, during the 12 th Five Year Plan, the CSIR would envisage to 
focus on inclusive strategy philosophy and as a part of this the CSIR would focus its 
approach to science in the following key areas namely National, Organizational and 
Leadership focus. An outline of each of the focus area is given below: 
(1) NATIONAL FOCUS 
 Affordable healthcare; 
 Agri food technologies; 
 Sustainable energy; 
 Smart and functional materials 
 Engineering Structures/Design and Electronics 
 Civil Aviation; 
 Climate change and Earth System Sciences; 
 Scientific Entrepreneurship; and 
 CSIR 800. 
(2) Organizational Focus 
 Institutional capacity building 
 Promoting industrial leadership 
(3) Focus on achieving leadership in the following fields 
 Science; 
 Technology; 
 Human resources; and  
 Inclusive Development. 
15. PLAN OUTLAY DURING 11 TH FIVE YEAR PLAN VIS-À-VIS PLAN 
OUTLAY IN 12TH FIVE YEAR PLAN  
15.1 A chart showing  Plan outlay, allocati on made and actual expenditure incurred 
during XI Five Year Plan is given below:- 

 
Rs. in Crores
Outlay Allocation Expenditure 
9000.00 6959.00 6940.51 
(99.73%) 
Rs. in Crores
Year  Budget Estimate Revised 
Estimate 
Expenditure Percentage 
Utilization 
2007-08 1070.00 1060.00 1054.98  99.53 
2008-09 1200.00 1190.00 1180.40 99.19 
2009-10 1350.00 1279.00 1278.87 99.99 
2010-11 1600.00 1600.00 1596.26 99.77 
2011-12 1930.00 1830.00 1830.00 100.00 
Total  7150.00 6959.00 6940.51 99.73 
15.2 From the above chart it is clear th at an amount of Rs. 9000.00 crores was 
earmarked for the Department for the 11 th Five Year Plan. But the BE allocation in the 
annual plans made to the Department was restricted to Rs. 7150.00 crores, thus showing a 
reduction of Rs. 1850.00 crores.  The total budgetary allocation of plan period viz. 
allocation made for the five years from  2007-08 to 2011-12 was further reduced to Rs. 
6959.00 crores at the RE stage.   The Comm ittee notes that the Gross Plan budgetary 
allocation during the 11 th Five Year Plan has been reduced by Rs. 2041.00 crores. The 
Committee finds that trend of utilization of allocated resources has been satisfactory. 
While during the year 2007-2008 as against the BE of Rs. 1070.00 crores, the actual 
expenditure incurred by the Department amounted to Rs. 1054.98 crores. The Committee 
also does not find any significant variation between the BE and RE allocation of the 
Department during that year as the RE a llocation came to Rs. 1060.00 crores as against 
the BE allocation of Rs. 1070.00 crores.  Simila r is the case in almost all other annual 
financial years.  In 2008- 2009, while the BE allocation wa s Rs. 1200.00 crores the RE 
allocation was Rs. 1190.00 crores. While in th e year 2011-12, the BE and RE allocation 
remained the same i.e Rs. 1600.00 crores. If we take a look at the percentage utilization 
of RE allocation it exceeds 99% in all the financial years of 11 th Five Year Plan. And in 
the year 2011-12, it registered as high as 100%. The Committee feels that the reduction in 
approved outlay of the Department which has b een consistently performing so well as far 
as fund utilization is concerned, was not justified. 
16. 12 TH FIVE YEAR PLAN ALLOCATION 
16.1 During the 12 th Five Year Plan, outlay projec ted by the Department was Rs. 
47003.00 crores i.e. which consisted of Rs. 8803.00 crores for DSIR schemes and Rs. 
38200.00 crores for CSIR schemes. However the outlay approved amounts to Rs. 
17896.00 crores- Rs. 496.00 crores for DSIR schemes and Rs. 17400.00 crores for CSIR 
scheme.  Although prima facie it appears that  there has been drastic cut in the projected 
demand of the Department amounting almost  to Rs. 29107.00 crores, the Committee 
finds that the Department has got an approved outlay for the 12
th Five Year Plan which is 
almost double  the a llocation of the 11 th Five Year Plan, thus  showing almost 100% 
increase which cannot be considered less by any standards. 

17. PROJECTED/ APPROVED OUTLA Y AND UTILIZATION DURING  
2012-13 
17.1 During 2012-13 (first year of the 12 th Plan), the Department  had projected a plan 
outlay of Rs. 4868.06 crores but an outlay of  Rs. 2013.00 crores was allocated to the 
Department at BE stage which shows a reduc tion to the tune of Rs. 2855.06 crores. The 
Committee notes that the BE allocation was no t fully utilized by the Department and the 
RE allocation came down to Rs. 1555.00 crores with the utilization percentage of 77.2%. 
When the Committee enquired about the reasons for non utilization of funds, the 
Department replied that inabi lity of NRDC to take up the pl anned activities, inability of 
vendor for (ITeG) project as well by APCTT to raise demand for release of funds.  
Moreover, for the year 2012-13, the funds rema ined unutilized because the schemes were 
subjected to approval of the Planning Co mmission and Standing Finance Committee as 
well as for third party appraisals.   
17.2 The Committee finds that the Departme nt monitors and reviews its ongoing 
programmes with the help of technical advisory committees, technical committees and 
project review committees. In a ddition, CSIR monitors progress of its projects at various 
levels- at Laboratory level by  respective research councils; by the task force at project 
level; by cluster directors at the cluster le vel; external monitoring committees review 
progress at Headquarters level and DG, CSIR re views the overall progress of the projects 
further from Headquarters.   However, the Committee notes that despite various 
monitoring mechanism put in place by the De partment, it has failed to make full 
utilization of allocated resources in the year 2012-13. 
18. Financial allocation for 2013-14 
18.1 A chart showing the demands made a nd outlay approved for 2013-14 is given 
below:             
(Rs. Crores) 
 Plan Non-Plan Total 
 Demands 
Made 
 
Approved Demands
Made 
Approved Demands 
Made 
Approved
A. DSIR 94.02 
 
85.00 12.09 10.50 106.11 95.50 
B.CSIR 2950.00 
 
1898.00 1760.00 1547.50 4710.00 3445.50 
C. CDC 4.00 
 
4.00 0.00 0.00 4.00 4.00 
D. PSE 48.00 
 
 
26.00 0.00 0.00 48.00 26.00 
Total 3096.02 2013.00 1772.09 1558.00 4868.11 3571.00 
 
18.2 The charts reveals that the Department  has once again projected an unrealistic 
demand under the Plan head of Rs. 3096.02 cror es against which the outlay approved is 
Rs. 2013.00 crores, the same as BE plan allocation in 2012-13. However, if both plan and 
non-plan allocation is taken into account, the total approved outla y is Rs. 3571.00 crores 
consisting of non-plan allocation of Rs. 1558.00 crores.  This year total allocation is, 
however, higher by Rs 87.00 crore as compared to the last year allocation of Rs. 3484.00 

crores. As mentioned above, while the plan al location has kept at the same level as the 
last year, the non-plan allocation has been  increased from Rs. 1471.00 to Rs. 1558.00 
crores. The Committee feels that though the utilization of funds of the Department is 
impressive, the Committee recommends that the Department should make 
endeavour to improve it further. 
 18.3 Programmes/schemes of the Department  can be broadly classified into two 
categories  
A.  Programmes of Department of Scient ific and Industrial Research (DSIR) 
B.  Programmes of Council of Scientif ic and Industrial Research (CSIR)  
19. A DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIF IC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH  
(DSIR) 
19.1     (i) Promoting Innovations in Individuals, Start-ups and MSMEs  
(PRISM) 
19.1.1 Main features of this scheme are as follows: 
(a) To Support individuals for converting innovative ideas into demonstrable working 
models; 
(b) To support proposals from the incubatee companies in public funded technology; 
(c) To support proposal from start-up companies including MSME; 
(d) To support revamping the existing TePP outreach centres into TePP outreach 
innovation centres; 
(e) To strengthen linkage of TOCICs with knowledge partners 
(f) To support and complete TePP projects started in 11th five year plan and spilled 
over to the 12
th Plan period. 
19.1.2 The Department has informed that during the year 2013-14, this programme 
envisages giving opportunities to all the innovators across the country including 
incubatee for generating innovative soluti ons. It is anticipated that around 140 new 
projects of incubatee and MSMEs and 50 new/on-gong TePP Outreach cum Cluster 
Innovation centres would be supported unde r proposed new scheme during the year 
2013-14.  It is, further proposed to make th e TePP / PRISM portal operational and the 
target was to complete around 40 TePP projects during 2013-14. 
19.1.3 For the financial year 2013-14, an amount  of Rs. 22 crores was projected by the 
Department under the PRISM scheme but only an allocation of Rs. 18 crores has been 
approved by the Planning Commission.  
19.2 (ii) Patent Acquisition and Collaborative Research and Technology  
Development” (PACE) Scheme 
19.2.1 Main features of this scheme are as follows: 
(a) To support Indian industries to acqui re patented technol ogy at an early 
stage from within the country or overseas; 
(b) To encourage and accelerate deve lopment and demonstration of 
indigenous product /process technologies for commercialization; 
(c) To create enabling environment for collaborative research between Indian 
Industry and R&D organizations; and 
(d) To develop a dynamic database on exis ting expertise and IPs available in 
the R&D organizations. 
19.2.2 For the financial year 2013-14, the Depart ment has informed that under the PACE 
programme they will organize seminars / workshops/ technology acquisitions etc for 
identification of patents to be acquired, de velopment of Experts & IP Database through 
outsourced agency, support 3 pr ojects of industries without involving Universities/Public 

Funded Research Institutions and support 2 proj ects of industries in  collaboration with 
Universities/Public Funded Research Institutions, etc. For the current fiscal, an amount of 
Rs. 22.50 crores was projected by the Department under the PACE scheme. Out of which 
an allocation of Rs. 17.50 crores only has been approved by the Planning Commission.  
19.3 (iii) Building Industrial Research & Development (BIRD) Scheme 
BIRD scheme has been broadly divided into four categories, namely: 
 (a) Industrial Research & Development Programme (IRDP); 
 (b) Asian Pacific Centre for Transfer of Technology (APCTT); 
 (c) Information Technology e-Governance (ITeG); and  
 (d)  Common Research & Technology Development Centres (CRTDC).  
19.3.1 Main features of this scheme are as under: 
(a) Under IRDP: application oriented research and development is strengthened; 
(b) Under APCTT, promotion of internat ional cooperation in the areas of 
industrial R& D, innovations and technology development and transfer takes 
place; 
(c) Under ITeG, IT enabled work environmen t is created with the primary aim to 
convert the existing procedures and processes through implementation of e-
governance in Government Departments;  and 
(d) Under CRTDC, the main aim is to esta blish few facilities for industrial R&D 
with partial Government support. 
19.3.2 For the financial year 2013-14, under the IRDP programme the Department will 
grant 240 applications to new in-house R&D units and renew 775 applications of existing 
in-house R&D units.  Under APCTT, technol ogy transfer network for SMEs, technology 
transfer capacity building activities, promotion of National Innovation System-phase II in 
Asia and Pacific region and renewable energy co-operation network for Asia and Pacific 
programmes would be organized. In ITeG, progr ammes like enterprise integration, office 
automation solution, workflow management, r ecord management and data warehousing 
and system integration would be organized. Under CRTDC, the Department will make an 
effort to set up atleast two Common Research and Technology Development Centres. 
19.3.3 For the financial year 2013-14, an am ount of Rs. 14.62 crores was projected by 
the Department under the BIRD scheme. Out of which an allocation of Rs. 14.50 crores 
has been approved by the Planning Commission.  
19.4  (iv) Access to Knowledge for Creation of Innovative Capacity and   
                        Dissemination (A2K)  
19.4.1 Main features of this scheme are as under: 
(a) To subscribe to science, technology and innovative journals.  
(b) To sponsor industries related studies; 
(c) To organize and participate in international conference for sharing knowledge; 
(d) To promote technological up-gradation of tiny, small and medium enterprises 
run by women. 
(e) To support Technology Development and Demonstration Programme (TDDP) 
of 11
th five year plan and spilled over to the 12th Five Year Plan; and 
(f) To support creation of a building space and infrastructure facilities for DSIR. 
19.4.2. During the financial year 2013-14, the Department proposes to support 50 new 
projects and 19 on-going projects under T echnology Development, Utilization Program 
for Women and 66 on-going projects unde r Technology Development Demonstration 
Program. 

19.4.3 For the financial year 2013-14, an am ount of Rs. 34.90 crores was projected by 
the Department under the A2K scheme but an  allocation of Rs. 35 crores has been 
approved by the Planning Commission.  
19.4.4. The Committee notes the Planning Commission has allocated Rs. 85 crores as 
against the projected demand of Rs. 94.02 crores  for the aforesaid four schemes and 
hopes that Department would prudently utilize the resources to meet various targets 
under the schemes  
20. AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS/ PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES 
20.1 The following are the Autonomous Inst itutions/ Public Sector Enterprises 
functioning under the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR): 
(a) Consultancy Development Centre (CDC); 
(b) Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR); 
(c) National Research Development Corporation (NRDC); and 
(d) Central Electronics Limited (CEL). 
20.1.1 A brief description of the activities/ functions of each of the Autonomous 
Institutions under the Department is given below: 
20.2      Consultancy Development Centre (CDC) 
20.2.1 The Consultancy Development Centre (C DC) was set up in January 1986 in the 
form of a registered society supported by th e Department of Scientific and Industrial 
Research (DSIR) as its administrative mini stry, to promote, develop and strengthen 
consultancy capabilities in the country. CDC was approved as an autonomous institution 
of DSIR by the Government of India in 2004.  
20.2.2 CDC has developed computerized Database  of consultants and consultancy firms. 
These Databases (in form of Portals) are in the public domain and any client organization 
may use them.  
20.2.3 The Committee enquired a bout the source of fundi ng to the centre.  CDC 
informed that they were getting support from  DSIR for implementing schemes, projects 
and activities aimed largely at competency  enhancement and capacity building in the 
field of consultancy capabilities in the country.  
20.2.4 CDC informed that they had forged collaboration with BITS, Pilani. The 
Committee enquired about the benefits th at have accrued to  CDC after such 
collaboration.  The Department informed the Committee that the first and foremost 
benefit accrued to CDC was s ubstantial increase in credib ility and visibility of the 
institution. 
20.2.5 The Committee enquired a bout the potential of ‘consultancy services’ as a 
profession in the years to come. The Department informed the Committee that CDC was 
working closely with vari ous ministries, Government  organizations, client’s 
organizations, etc for the promotion and develo pment of consultancy capabilities within 
the country and abroad.  
20.2.6 According to the Annual Report 2012-13 of  the Department from the financial 
year 2011-12, CDC has started both developmental and revenue generating activities. 
20.2.7 The Committee is of the view that ‘con sultancy services’ has a huge potential 
for growth and in the future it could be one of the leading professions and 
recognises the critical role of CDC in exploitation of this potential.  Development of 
computerized Database of consultants and consultancy firms and collaboration with 
Institutes like BITS are welcome steps but more needs to be done to build capacity 
in the field of consultancy capabilities in the country. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends that the CDC must formulate a potent action plan to develop and 

promote consultancy capabilities in the co untry so that consultancy emerges as a 
viable career option in the country.   
20.3. Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) 
20.3.1 Council of Scientific & Indus trial Research (CSIR) is the largest and most diverse 
S&T institution in the country with a key mission “To provid e scientific and industrial 
R&D that maximizes the economic, environmenta l and societal benefits for the people of 
India”. CSIR through its network of 37 National laboratories and 39 extension centres has 
all India presence.  In the country, CSIR  had laid foundation for indigenous R&D in 
general and for industrial R&D in particular.  
20.3.2 CSIR informed the Committee that duri ng the Twelfth Five Year Plan period, 
CSIR is implementing ten Schemes.  While, the first six schemes are the continuing 
schemes with programmes/projects/tasks & ac tivities, rest four are new schemes as 
shown below: 
 Continuing schemes 
 
New Programmes/Projects/tasks 
(i) National Laboratories CSIR-800 
(ii) National S&T Human Resource 
Development 
CSIR Scheme for Open Innovation 
(iii) Intellectual Property & Technology 
Management 
CSIR Initiative for inclusive, Participative and 
Collaborative Research & Development 
(iv) R&D Management Support Nationa l Programme: National Civil Aircraft 
Development Programme 
(v) New Millennium Indian Technology 
Leadership Initiative 
 
(vi) Innovation Complexes  
20.3.3.  National Laboratories  
 The National Laboratory scheme is to support R&D in CSIR’s constituent 
Laboratories. Under the Nationa l Laboratories scheme during the Twelfth Plan, five new 
institutions are proposed to be set up. These include CSIR Institute of Synthetic and 
Systems Biology, CSIR-Fourth Paradigm In stitute, CSIR-Institute of Biomimetic 
Materials, CSIR-Network Institute of Sola r Energy and the CSIR-Network Institute of 
Manufacturing Technology. Further, CSIR Special Centres would be set up for the North 
Eastern States, Lakshadweep and Andama n & Nicobar Islands for providing S&T 
intervention to address unique challenges of these regions.  
20.3.4 Further, CSIR is pursuing R&D activ ities across the biological, chemical, 
engineering, information, and physical sciences clusters. Each of the clusters has evolved 
a mission for itself to be pursued in the 12
th Five Year Plan. 
20.3.5 The Department has informed that for the financial year 2013-14, the Department 
has projected Rs. 3000 crores for National Laboratories, out of which Rs. 2247 crores 
only has been approved. The Department has stated that allocation for the scheme has 
been reduced as per the financial resources available at the disposal of the Government.   
20.3.6. The Committee enquired from the Department about the progress made on setting 
up of National Laboratories in each of the States (recommended by the Committee in the 
208
th and 227th Reports), technologies transferred from the laboratories to the society and 
modernization of labs etc.   
20.3.7 The Department in their reply has stat ed that CSIR envisages to establish 
Innovation Complexes which would have world class facilities for undertaking 

translational research in the identified domains. They would support network of business, 
R&D institutions and universities and nurture MSMEs in the designated fields. Each of 
such complexes would help in creating nich e for the country in innovation space by 
catalyzing innovation ecosystem of the regi on. The work regard ing building Innovation 
Complexes, at Chennai, Kolkata and Mumbai is in progress.  The Committee appreciates 
this innovative concept, which if executed properly, would boost innovation eco-system 
in the country. 
20.3.8 On technologies of societal value transf erred, the Department  has stated that 
technologies like High Strength Plaster from  Fluro gypsum, plant derived rapid fracture 
healing oral drug, zero waste water discharg e technology for tanneri es, solar assisted 
electrolytic defluroridation et c have been transferred. On m odernization of laboratories, 
the Department has replied that augmen tation of R&D infrastructure in CSIR 
Laboratories is a continuing process. It will  be followed during the plan period also. In 
addition, it is also proposed to develop en ergy efficient green campuses. Recognizing the 
imperative need of CSIR, the government  had approved a new scheme on the 
modernization and upgradation of the equipm ents and R&D facilities in the national 
laboratories during the Ninth Plan. 
20.3.9 The Committee welcomes setting up of  Innovation Complexes which will 
have world class facilities and help catalyze innovation ecosystem of the region.  The 
Committee notes that, for the present, such  complexes are being built in Chennai, 
Kolkata and Mumbai and hopes these comp lexes would be equitably built in all 
parts of the country so that the benefit of  these complexes reach all region of the 
country.  The Committee also hopes that with the setting up of CSIR Special centres 
in North Eastern States, Lakshadweep a nd Andaman & Nicobar Islands, scientific 
solutions would be successfully found to be  peculiar problems of  these regions and 
this would catalyze faster growth and development of these regions.  
20.4. CSIR Tech Private Limited (CTPL) 
20.4.1 CSIR and its labs are known for cutting e dge scientific capabilities, talent, know-
how and intellectual property. In order to enhance the innovation capacity of CSIR for 
newer models, product and services to the market, an independent company, namely, 
CSIR‐Tech Private Limited (CTPL) has been  established in P une on May 2, 2011. The 
main purpose of CSIR Tech was to hold equ ity and give feedback loop of technology 
creation and transfer.  
20.4.2 The Committee desired to know the e fforts made by CTPL to commercialize 
CSIR technologies.  In response thereto, the Department has apprised that the relationship 
between CTPL and CSIR has not been finalize d yet. The effort for the same is on. Thus 
CTPL has not commercialized any technology so  far. CSIR-Tech faci litates technology 
transfer arrangements between commercial enterprises and research labs; enables 
scientists and labs to spin-off ventures a nd leverage private inve stments; and creates 
technology ventures for the Nation and empowers MSMEs for technology interventions 
20.4.3. The Committee is surprised to know that though CTPL was established on 
May 2, 2011, the relationship between CTPL  and CSIR has not yet been finalized 
and CTPL has not commercialized any technologies so far.  The Committee is of the 
view that the purpose for which the CTPL was created gets defeated if it fails to 
nurture and support its mentor.  The Co mmittee, therefore, recommends that 
relationship between CSIR and CTPL may be worked out without any further loss 
of time so that innovative capacity of CS IR for newer models, products and services 
is enhanced i.e. purpose for setting CTPL starts materializing.  

20.5. National S&T Human Resource Development  
20.5.1 The main objective of the programme has been designed on the following lines: 
(a) to invest in basic and interdisciplinary research which is the harbinger of high-
technology of tomorrow through cl ose collaboration with academic 
institutions; and 
(b)  to promote scientific temper by s upporting academic/R&D organizations by 
holding symposium, seminars and conferences, etc.  
20.5.2 The Committee was informed that Na tional S&T Human Resource Development 
has designed programmes to develop and nurtu re S&T manpower at the national level by 
awarding/selecting: 
 Junior Research Fellowships (JRF) through NET;  
 Senior Research Fellows (SRF),  
 Research Associates (RA),  
 Senior Research Associates (SRA),  
 Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Fellows (SPMF), and  
 CSIR-Nehru Postdoctoral Research Fellowships.  
20.5.3 It also promotes R&D through research gr ants to scientists/professors working in 
universities / R&D institutes; and also interacting with sc ientists and students through 
Travel/Conference/Symposium grants etc.  
20.5.4. During the current fiscal, under the JRF (NET) scheme of CSIR, 3000 fellowships 
will be awarded to the students for pursuing higher studies leading to the award of PhD 
degrees in the area of basic sciences. In search of the young budding scientific talent and 
to nourish the objectives of pursuit of scien tific research, 70 Shyama Prasad Mukherjee 
Fellowships (SPMF) will be awarded. Further, in order to promote interest, excitement 
and excellence in science education, all CSIR Laboratories will be encouraged to adopt 1 
school and 1 colleges under the scheme ‘Facu lty training and motivation and adoption of 
schools and colleges’. Besides, 250 hand holding  scholarship will be awarded to dyslexic 
(Attention Deficit Disorder) students to pursue higher education in science. 
20.5.5. The Committee in its 227
th Report had recommended the following: 
 “The Committee notes that the CSIR has introduced 250 CSIR hand holding 
scholarship for dyslexic (Attention Deficit Di sorder) students to pursue higher education 
in science.  The Committee feels that this is a very praiseworthy initiative that needs to be 
further extended and expanded.  The Committee th erefore, recommends that this scheme 
should not cover only dyslexic students but th ose suffering from ot her serious physical 
disabilities as well. 
20.5.6 The Department in their Action Take n Replies had stated the following:  
 “The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. The students suffering 
from other serious physical disabilities will al so be covered under this scheme subject to 
getting requisite budgetary allocation”. 
20.5.7 Now, the Department has informed th at “CSIR hand holding scholarship for 
dyslexic students to pursue higher education in  science” is envisaged to be started from 
financial year 2013-14 subject to getting re quisite additional budge tary allocation as 
compared to 2012-13. The number of scholarships under this scheme will initially be 250 
and this will include the num ber of students suffering fr om other serious physical 
disabilities also. 
20.5.8 The Committee is pleased to note that  the Department has agreed to widen 
the ambit of 250 handholding scholarships to  include not only dyslexic students but 

also students suffering from other serious physical disabilities as recommended by 
the Committee in its 227 th report.  The Committee, feels, consistent with the 
enlargement of the ambit of the handho lding scholarship to include students 
suffering from serious physical disabilities , the scheme of scholarships should be 
renamed as “CSIR hand holding Scholarship for differently abled students”.   
20.5.9 The Committee hopes Planning Commissio n would, while allocating funds at 
RE 2013-14 stage, would make adequate a llocation of funds for the programme 
which will go a long way in exploiting the talent in science students with different 
abilities as also helping them to pursue higher studies in science with dignity.  
20.6 INTERACTION BETWEEN  INDUSTRY AND CSIR 
20.6.1 As per the report published in ‘Battelle  R&D Magazine in December, 2012 issue’ 
for the year 2012, India’s R&D funding is as  low as 0.85% of country’s GDP in 
comparison to developed countries. In Ja pan, it is 3.48%, in USA 2.68% and in China 
1.60%. Combining all 34 countries of Europe , it is 1.88% of the combined GDP of 
Europe. In case of Asia, a gamut of 20 c ountries is having R&D funding of 1.77% of the 
combined GDP of those countries.  
20.6.2 The Committee desired to know the compar ative contribution made by the private 
sector vis-à-vis contribution made by the public sector for R &D programmes in India 
and the world.  In their reply, the Department  has stated that based on ‘Research and 
Development Expenditure: A concept Pape r published in Deloitte, July 2011, the 
contribution made by the privat e sector vis-à-vis public se ctor for R&D programmes for 
different countries is as under:  
Country  Private R&D Expenses 
(%) 
Government R&D 
Expenses 
China  70 30 
USA  65 35 
Korea & Japan  75 25 
India  20-25 75-80 
 
20.6.3 Even the Planning Commission’s 12
th Five Year Plan Approach Paper states that 
as the Indian economy and society grow and modernize, the Indian Science and 
Technology landscape also has to change to meet the magnitude of new demands being 
made.  The paper also stresses the need fo r creating a strong R &D system within the 
scientific sector.  According to it, at pres ent, R& D expenditure in the country is only 
0.9% of GDP, of which about 3/4 th is in the public sector and only 1/4 th in the private 
sector.  This R &D expenditure at 0.9% of  GDP is, however, not at all adequate to 
develop strong R & D base needed as principle driving force for economic growth.  
20.6.4 The Committee notes with concern that  India is lagging far behind other 
countries of the world in respect of R & D contribution made by the Private sector.  
In comparison to developed countries of the world, India’s R&D funding from non-
government sector is abysmally low.  Ev en in comparison to our neighboring 
country China, we lag far behind. The percentage contribution of private sector and 
public sector to R&D contribut ion in India & China is nearly in reverse order.  In 
China private sector contribution is near ly 70% of R&D expenditure while in India 
it is Government which makes 75 to 80% co ntribution.  The Committee feels that in 
order to enhance funding in R&D, the private R&D contribution needs to be 
augmented substantially.  The Committee in its 227 th report had recommended that 
private sector contribution to   R&D needs to be enhanced to 50% from 25% during 

the 12 th Plan period by offering incentive s, forming partnership etc.  The 
Department in their Action Taken Rep lies had assured the Committee that every 
effort would be made to bring industries on board. Even the Government has in 
their 12th Five Year Plan Approach Paper admitt ed that private sector contribution 
is not adequate to develop strong R &D .  The Committee feels that somewhere we 
have failed in our efforts to woo private sector and nothing commendable has been 
achieved in this direction even in th e second year of the plan period.  The 
Committee, therefore, feels that mere assura nce given by the Department to make 
every effort to bring Industries on board,  will not help unless it draws a concrete 
time bound action plan to ensure that pr ivate sector contribution to R&D gets 
enhanced to 50% from existing 25% by the end of 12
th Five Year Plan.  
20.7 New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative (NMITLI) 
20.7.1 The Department has informed that  New Millennium Indian Technology 
Leadership Initiative (NMITLI) is a landmar k Public Private Partnership R&D scheme 
aimed at delivering cutting edge technologies  to provide India a global leadership 
position in select niche areas. During XI Five Year Plan, NMITLI has provided a unique 
platform for performing R&D in public-private partnership (PPP) mode.  
20.7.2 So far, NMITLI has evolve d 75 largely networked proj ects in diverse areas viz. 
Agriculture & Plant Biotechnology, General Biotechnology, Bioinformatics, Drugs & 
Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, Materials, Information and Communication Technology and 
Energy. These projects involve  100 industry partners & 300 R&D groups from different 
institutions.  
20.7.3 During the XII Plan period, NMITLI pr ogramme will continue with its main 
objective and develop innovation based technologies. The programme looks beyond 
today’s technology and thus seeks to build, cap ture and retain for India a leadership 
position by synergizing the best competen cies of publicly funded R&D institutions, 
academia and private industry. The strategy adop ted for NMITLI is to obtain an inverse 
risk investment profile, i.e., low investme nt in high-risk technology areas (with global 
leadership potential) with investments increasing as developments take place and the 
projects move up on the innovation curve with reduction in risks.  
20.7.4 The NMITLI programme was allocated Rs. 60 crores at B.E. 2012-13 which was 
reduced to Rs. 40.00 crores at R.E. 2012-13 an d Rs. 45.00 crores has b een kept at B.E. 
2013-14 for this programme.   
20.7.5 The Committee in its 227
th report had recommended the following: 
 “The Committee feels that in view of budgetary constraints, there is a need for the 
Department to devise innovative ways for funding these schemes.  Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) model, levy of appropriate user charges, funding from other 
beneficiaries, sharing of profits arising fr om commercial exploitation of patents funded 
under schemes, etc. are some of the known ways in which requisite funds for 
implementation of schemes can be generate d.  The Committee hopes that the Department 
would be able to devise innov ative ways of funding schemes & achieve the targets set for 
2012-13 under these schemes.  The Committee, however, feels that Government should, 
to the extent necessary, provide adequate funds for these schemes at RE stage, so that 
targets set for 2012-13 under these schemes get realised in toto”.  
20.7.6 The Department in their reply had stated the following: 
 “The Department is in the process of obtaining the necessary approvals for the 
schemes and shall be able to mobilise the necessary funding for the same”. 

20.7.7 The Department informed the Committee that CSIR was monitoring projects 
under NMITLI Scheme very rigorously through Steering Committee after every 3 months 
and through Monitoring Committee after ever y 6 months. These committees review and 
ensure that projects are implemented as per plan. Financial progress is monitored through 
Utilization Certificates obtained twice a year. Funds are rel eased based on the Utilization 
Certificates. CSIR will continue these step s in the year 2013-14 also. CSIR is also 
sensitizing about risk coverage in PPP mode of R&D. 
20.7.8 The Committee appreciates that New Millennium I ndian Technology 
Leadership Initiative (NMITLI) star ted by the Department in the 11
th Plan and 
recommends that programme should be pursued with great vigour in the 12 th Plan 
so that a large number of research projects are undertaken under PPP mode and 
private investment in R&D which, at present is around 20 to 25%, increase 
substantially. 
20.8 CSIR 800  
20.8.1 During the 12 th Five Year Plan Period, CSIR has initiated a new full-fledged 
scheme ‘CSIR-800’ with the broad objective to  augment the incomes and the quality of 
the lives of one million rural citizens geogr aphically spread across the country, in 
accordance with stated Government of India targets and relevant UN-Millennium 
Development Goals. The strategic implementation of the scheme focuses on building and 
operating ‘CSIR Technology-enabled Villages’ (TECHVIL) at twenty -five to thirty 
locations, where the proportion of families living in poverty is high. Each TECHVIL 
would cater to about 40,000 people and act as  a source of relevant technological 
interventions and skill development for them.  
20.8.2. The Committee enquired about the crite ria for choosing a TECHVIL. In their 
reply, the Department has informed that CSIR-800 scheme has identified the districts that 
were declared backward by the Planning Commission in 2001 and 2010 and also figure in 
the list identified for joint action w ith the UN under UNDAF (UN Development 
Assistance Framework); RGF (Rajiv Gandhi  Foundation); and/or PACS (Poorest Areas 
Civil Society). CSIR labs are under proces s of finalizing the locations for several 
TECHVILs in consultation with concerned st ate agencies, local communities and other 
stakeholders. Further, CSIR along with AcSI R has identified domain expert scientists, 
students and academics for implementation of the CSIR-800 scheme. 
20.8.3 The Committee lauds the objective with which CSIR 800 scheme has been 
launched.  The fact that more budgetary allocation has been made for the scheme 
than those demanded by the Department shows the importance that Government 
attaches to this scheme.  The Committee hopes that the Department shall endeavour 
to achieve the objective of the scheme of augmenting the income and quality of lives 
of one million rural citizens across the country during the 12
th Five Year Plan.  The 
Committee also recommends that the Depa rtment should formulate more such 
schemes to augment the income of poor and quality of their lives. 
20.9 CSIR Scheme for Open Innovation  
20.9.1 The Committee desired to know the detail s of CSIR Scheme for Open Innovation, 
Initiative for Inclusive, Participative and Collaborative Research & Development. The 
Department informed that in order to ma ke healthcare affordable to the common man, 
Open Source Drug Discovery programme (O SDD) was initiated by the Department 
during the 11th Five Year Plan. It was, furt her believed that the current Intellectual 
Property based models of pharmaceutical innov ation do not address the diseases of the 
poor such as Tuberculosis. The OSDD progra mme has now emerged as a new platform 

for innovation in the domain of healthcare particularly for treating diseases like 
Tuberculosis, Malaria, etc.  
20.9.2 CSIR is consolidating and taking forw ard the gains of OSDD to the 12th Five 
Year Plan. OSDD started with TB as the target disease but during the 12
th Five Year Plan 
it proposes to expand its drug discovery activities  to Malaria and Leishmaniasis       
(Kala-Azar) and launch clinical trials of a TB drug. The affordable healthcare principle 
underlies all activities of OSDD and would c over (a) Open Source Drug Discovery; (b) 
Open Source Drug Development; (c) Open Source Drug Delivery; and (d) Open Source 
Disease Diagnostics. CSIR further informed the Committee that for the financial year 
2013-14, the Department has projected Rs. 109 cr ores out of which only Rs. 70 crore has 
been approved. 
20.9.3 The Committee desired to know the time fr ame within which it would target to 
complete its clinical trials for diseases like TB, Malaria, Kala-Azar etc.  The Department 
informed that they were in the process of f iling an application for permission to initiate 
clinical trials before the Directorate of Controller Ge neral of India (DCGI). Upon 
approval, the trial would be initiated in co llaboration with LRS Hospital for Respiratory 
and Infectious Diseases, New Delhi, a hospita l under Ministry of Health. This provides a 
novel model where publicly funded institutes are contributing together to bring drugs for 
treatment of diseases of poor like TB.  
20.9.4 Further the Department has also stated that Drug discovery and development is a 
long and risky endeavour plagued with uncertainti es. It will not be appropriate to provide 
a completion date to clinical trials. CSIR may initiate a clinical trial for Malaria, if an 
appropriate drug candidate is available, during the plan period. 
20.9.5 The Committee appreciates the novel objective of its Open Source Drug 
Discovery Plan i.e. to make healthcare affordable to the common man.  The 
Committee notes that the programme was initiated in 11
th Five Year Plan with TB 
as target disease and is being extended to 12 th Five Year Plan to cover Malaria and 
Leishmaniasis (Kala-Azar) and hopes that  programme would lead to affordable 
treatment of these diseases for common man.  The Committee recommends that the 
Department should provide high priority to such socially useful programmes so that 
objectives of these programmes are achieved as early as possible.  
20.10 National Civil Aircraft De velopment Programme (NCAD)  
20.10.1    The Department of Scientific and Indu strial Research is known for its research 
and innovative ideas. In its que st for expanding its research  activities in  the aviation 
sector on one hand and break th e shackles of dependence on import of civil aircrafts on 
the other, CSIR muster courage and initia ted an over ambitious venture termed as 
National Civil Aircraft Programme (NCAD).  NCAD will be a 90 seater civil aircraft to 
be built with state of the art techniques de veloped with CSIR-NAL collaboration. It is 
included in the 12
th Five Year Plan of CSIR as a New Scheme.  
20.10.2    For the current financial year (2013- 14), an allocation of Rs. 10 crore has been 
made, as against the projected demand of Rs. 178 crores. 
20.10.3   The Committee in its 227
th Report had recommended the following: 
“The Committee hopes that formal Government approval for the programme 
would be available soon and the programme woul d start in right earnes t at the earliest.  
The Committee is also of the view that this  programme is of great national importance 
and sufficient funds be made av ailable to this programme so that our own indigenous 90 
seater aircraft becomes a reality in a short time from now”.  

20.10.4   The Committee enquired about the pr ogress made under this programme since 
last year. While informing the Committee about  the progress made so far, CSIR stated 
about the constitution of two Committees i.e.  Committee for creating Joint Venture (JV) 
for NCAD and a Technical Committee. The Te rm of Reference (TOR) of JV Committee 
was to: (i) identify industry partner (s) through a transparent exercise and work out the 
modalities for the JV formulation, (ii) suggest  equity structure of the identified industry 
partner(s), and (iii) give necessary inputs to CSIR for developing a cabinet note for 
obtaining in-principle approval for the implementation of the programme as 
recommended by the Planning Commission. The JV Committee interacted with a number 
of Indian business houses to develop an Expr ession of Interest (EO I) and a draft Cabinet 
note. The JV interim report has been fina lized. The Technical Committee would guide 
the programme, identify work modules and wo uld also provide inputs for developing a 
Cabinet Note for obtaining ‘in-principle’ a pproval. Based on the recommendations of the 
two Committees, the National Civil Aircraft  Development Programme  would be finally 
formulated.  
20.10.5       Further, CSIR-NAL has made an assessment of the programme by carrying 
out a Feasibility Study for the development of a 70-90 seat er National Civil Aircraft. The 
Feasibility Study Report included Market  Assessment, Configuration Definition, 
Development Strategy, Cost Estimates and th e Business Model. As per the Feasibility 
study, the total estimated cost of the project  is Rs 7555 crore out of which Rs 4355 crore 
is for design & development phase and Rs 3200 crore for series production phase of the 
aircraft. Both the phases would involve Joint Venture with private sector. 
20.10.6    The Committee is perturbed to obs erve that very little progress has been 
made with regard to this important programme. In order to develop capabilities for 
development of aircrafts with large passenger capacities, the Committee is of the 
view that the Department should complete this programme at the earliest so that 
new programme of development of more so phisticated aircrafts of even higher 
passenger capacities could be taken and India acquires capabilities to compete with 
established countries like USA and France in  this field.  The Committee accordingly 
recommends that the Department should se riously work for successful completion 
of the programme at the earliest.  
20.11   Programme for North-Eastern States and Women centric initiatives 
20.11.1   Like any Department of the Government  of India, DSIR also enunciates various 
programmes/schemes for the North-Eastern States and Women centric programmes like 
Technology Development and Utiliza tion program for Women and Women 
Entrepreneurship Development programme.  In order to improve productivity, 
employment, livelihood especially for the backward women, unemployed youths and for 
facilitating new avenues of employment genera tion and income generating activities, for 
which the Department has earmarked the task to one of its public sector enterprises i.e 
NRDC.  According to the Annual Report of the Department, NRDC organized various 
programme for the people of North Eastern States like skill development training 
programme on handloom weaving for unempl oyed youth, development of high land 
water harvesting for drinking and piscicul ture-cum-irrigation reservoir, skilled 
development programme on computer traini ng, food/fruit processing for unemployed 
youths and women’s empowerment programme on kauna crafts.   
20.11.2   Further, Women Entrepreneurship Development Programme (WEDP) aimed at 
promoting, inspiring and encouraging women st udents at different le vels from various 
universities/colleges to take up entrepreneurship to empower themselves. Besides, NRDC 

also conducted skill development progr ams for women like program in bakery 
production, fruits and vegetable processing etc.  
20.11.3   The Committee notes skill development training programme organized by 
NRDC for the people of North Eastern St ates & for women’s empowerment and is 
particularly happy on setting up of post harvest technology centres.  The Committee 
recommends that in order to assess the potency and utility of these training 
programmes, the Department should develo p a mechanism to find out as to what 
extent these training progr ammes have actua lly resulted in trained persons 
becoming gainfully employed or becoming entrepreneurs because that alone will 
demonstrate the usefulness of these programmes. 
20.12   PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES  
20.12.1   National Research Development Corporation (NRDC)   
20.12.2    National Research Development Co rporation (NRDC) was incorporated on 
31st December, 1953 as a Section 25 comp any under the Companies Act with an 
objective to promote, develop and commercia lize indigenous technologies. As per the 
objectives set out in its Me morandum and Articles of Asso ciation, NRDC was mandated 
to commercialize the technologies devel oped by all the resear ch laboratories and 
institutes of CSIR and other public funded re search institutes, un iversities including 
autonomous research institutions.  
20.12.3 The Committee enquired from the Depart ment about the efforts made by the 
NRDC to promote, develop and commercia lize indigenous technologies as per its 
mandate and the profit earned through that promotions/developments/commercialization 
of indigenous technologies.  The Department in their repl y has informed that National 
Research Development Corporation (NRDC) is engaged in obtaining assignment of 
technologies from various research institut ions and universities in the country for 
commercialization. During the last three years,  a total of 141 technologies and technical 
know-hows were assigned to the Corporati on by various R&D institutions across the 
country for commercialization. NRDC assists the technology developers i.e. research 
institutions / universities in  patenting their inventions, technologies and technical know-
hows, if they so desire. Out of the 141 t echnologies and technical know-hows assigned to 
NRDC during the last three years, 22 have been filed for patent protection by the research 
institutions / universities themselves. NR DC provided assistance for filing patent 
applications for 37 technologies and the rema ining were without patent protection. The 
total revenue generated by NRDC  in terms of lump-sum premium and royalty by way of 
licensing, marketing and commercialization of th e said technologies during the last three 
years is Rs.1968 lakhs.  
20.12.4   However, according to the Annual Report, for the year 2011-12, the 
Corporation incurred loss to the tune of Rs. 84.54 Lakhs (befor e tax) as compared to loss 
of Rs. 158.23 Lakhs in the previous year. The Committee notes with concern the poor 
performance of NRDC. The Committee feel s that the purpose for which an 
organization is created gets defeated if it fails to deliver.  The mandate of NRDC is 
to commercialize the technologies developed by the research laboratories and 
institutes of CSIR and other public funded research institutes, universities including 
autonomous research institutions. The p oor record of NRDC in obtaining patents 
for technologies & technical knowhow assigned to it, coupled with losses incurred by 
it, speaks volumes of its malfunctioning & lack of professionalism.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Department should introspect the causes of failure 

of NRDC and its poor performance and work  out a strategy to ensure that NRDC is 
in a position to fulfill the purpose for which it was established.  
20.13  Central Electronics Limited (CEL)  
20.13.1  CEL’s operations can be broadly grouped into three areas, viz. solar 
photovoltaics (SPV), strategic electronics and railway electronics. CEL is the pioneer and 
a leading manufacturer of SPV cells, modules  and systems and Railway Safety Signaling 
Equipment. In the field of st rategic electronics, CEL is th e only indigenous manufacturer 
of phase control modules, which is a key element of phased array radars.  
20.13 .2   The Committee in its 227th Report had recommended the following: 
“Planning Commission must ensure that crucial programmes like up gradations 
of photovoltaic module are not starved of funds and adequate allocations be made to 
these programmes at the RE stage”.   
20.13.3  CEL has been allocated Rs 8 crore dur ing 2013-14, whereas it has estimated an 
outlay of Rs 15 crores for the project on en hancing the capacity of solar PV module 
production facility from 10 MW to 25 MW. CEL has informed that they would like to 
seek additional funds for the project at the RE  stage 2013-14 or else it will continue and 
complete the project during 2014-15.  
20.13.4  CEL has informed that for enhancing the capacity of sola r photovoltaic (PV) 
module production from 10 MW to 80 MW fund re quirement has been worked out to Rs 
80 Crore. However, due to budget constrai nts, the project has been modified as 
“Development & Up-gradation of PV Modul e Manufacturing Facility” by reducing the 
anticipated up-graded capaci ty of PV module production to 25 MW. CEL has estimated 
that it would require 10 months for the installation and commissioning of all the 
equipments to upgrade the capacity of solar photovoltaic module production facility from 
10 MW to 25 MW, provided it is made available the requisite funds.  
20.13.5  The Committee enquired from the Department about the allocation of funds/ 
profit earned by CEL for upgrading photovolta ic modules and the performance of CEL 
over the years. In response thereto, the De partment has stated that CEL has incurred 
persistent losses. The performance of CEL during the last three years is given below: 
 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
(+) Net Profit/ (-) Net Loss after tax 
and extra ordinary items 
(+) 0.12 (-) 17.25 (-) 15.91 
 
20.13.6   The Committee notes with concern losses being incurred by CEL in the 
years 2010-11 & 2011-12 and recommends that Department should take necessary 
measures to restore its financial viabil ity.  The Committee fu rther express its 
anguish that due to financial crunch the crucial programme of upgradation of the 
capacity of solar photo volta ic module from 10 MW to 80 MW is held up and funds 
made available are not even sufficient to upg rade the production facility to 25 MW 
in this financial year and unless sufficient funds are made available even 
upgradation of the production facility to 25 MW would be possible only in 2014-15.  
The Committee recommends that fund crunch should not hold up upgradation of 
facilities for production of photo voltaic module and sufficient funds be allocated at 
RE stage for the purpose.  