 
 
  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
  
  Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
   March, 2025/ Phalguna, 1946 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED EIGHTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY 
 (DEMAND NO. 90) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25th March, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 25th March, 2025) 
REPORT NO. 
388 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://www.sansad.in/rs 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 

 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED EIGHTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26) OF THE  
DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY 
 (DEMAND NO. 90) 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25th March, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 25th March, 2025) 
 
 
 
  
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2025/ Phalguna, 1946 (Saka) 

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
   
                
  PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)-(ii)  
2. INTRODUCTION  (iii)  
  3. ACRONYMS  
 
(iv) 
4. REPORT 1-19  
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE 20-23 
6. MINUTES          24-29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
(Constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2024) 
 
 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita -    Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Narayanasa K. Bhandage  
3. Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda 
4. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
5. Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
7. Shri Sharad Pawar 
8. Shri Jairam Ramesh   
9. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
10. Vacant  
LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Sajda Ahmed 
12. Shri Alfred Kanngam S. Arthur 
13. Shri Pradyut Bordoloi  
14. Shri Phani Bhusan Choudhury 
15. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb 
16. Shri Vamsi Krishna Gaddam 
17. Shri Tapir Gao 
18. Adv K. Francis George  
19. Shri Eswarasamy K. 
20. Shri Mahesh Kashyap 
21. Dr. Anand Kumar 
22. Shri Mohibbullah 
23. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
24. Shri Jashubhai Bhilubhai Rathva  
25. Shri Trivendra Singh Rawat 
26. Shrimati Himadri Singh 
27. Shri Tejasvi Surya  
28. Shri Durai Vaiko  
29. Shri Yaduveer Wadiyar 
30. Shri Balwant Baswant Wankhade  
31. Shri Akhilesh Yadav  
(i) 
                                                 
 Nominated w.e.f. 23rd January, 2025. 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary 
Smt. Kusum Sudhir, Joint Secretary  
Shri Arun Kumar, Director  
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
Shri Vaibhav Jain, Committee Officer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, having been 
authorised by the Committee, present this ‘Three Hundred Eighty Eighth Report’ on 
Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Department of Biotechnology. 
 
2.   The Committee considered the Demands for Grants (2025-26) pertaining to the 
Department of Biotechnology in its meeting held on the 20th February, 2025. It held 
detailed discussion with the Secretary and other officers of the Department of 
Biotechnology.   
  
3.   The Committee expresses its thanks to the officers of the Department of 
Biotechnology for providing the material and information, to enable it to examine the 
Demands for Grants of the Department for the year 2025-26. 
 
4.    The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 19th 
March, 2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (BHUBANESWAR  KALITA) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman,  
19th March, 2025   Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science 
Phalguna 28, 1946  (Saka)                                  and Technology, Environment, Forests and  Climate Change, 
 Rajya Sabha . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
ACRONYMS 
 
 
AI Artificial Intelligence 
AMR Antimicrobial Resistance 
BIBCOL Bharat Immunologicals and Biologicals Corporation Limited 
BRIC Biotechnology Research and Innovation Council 
BIRAC Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council 
Bio-RIDE Biotechnology Research Innovation and Entrepreneurship Development 
CABP Community-Acquired Bacterial Pneumonia 
CAUTI Catheter Associated Urinary Tract Infection 
CDFD Center for DNA fingerprinting & Diagnostics 
DBT Department of Biotechnology 
DCGI Drugs Controller General of India 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
ICGEB International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology 
IIL Indian Immunologicals Limited 
IPV Injectable Polio Vaccines 
IVCOL Indian Vaccines Corporation Limited 
NBM National Biopharma Mission 
NBRC National Brain Research Centre 
NIH National Institute of Health 
OPV Oral Polio Vaccine 
PCT Pre Clinical Toxicology 
PPP Public-Private Partnerships 
PMSV Pasteur Meraux Serum & Vaccines 
QA/QC Quality Assurance/Quality Control 
RCB Regional Centre for Biotechnology 
TRC Translational Research Consortiums 
UIP Universal Immunization Program 
UMMID Unique Methods of Management of Inherited Disorders 
WHO World Health Organisation 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1.1 The Department of Biotechnology (DBT) was established in 1982 as an independent board 
and later became a full-fledged department under the Ministry of Science & Technology in 1986. It 
is responsible for formulating policies, promoting research, and overseeing biotechnology-related 
manufacturing in India. DBT develops integrated biotechnology programs, ensuring their effective 
implementation and alignment with national priorities. It identifies and supports R&D initiatives, 
particularly in biologicals and biotechnological manufacturing, and establishes Centers of 
Excellence to advance research in critical areas. The department also functions as a regulatory and 
advisory body for the import, transfer, and approval of new biotech technologies and products. It 
develops safety guidelines for biotechnology research and production and serves as the central 
agency for importing genetically modified materials while promoting their domestic production. 
1.2 DBT plays a pivotal role in facilitating inter-ministerial and international collaborations, 
overseeing technology transfers, and supporting the development of recombinant DNA products, 
cell-based vaccines, and biotechnological diagnostics. A key mandate of DBT is human resource 
development in biotechnology, achieved through the administration of agencies, commissions, and 
research boards formed by the Government of India. Additionally, it serves as the primary body for 
bioinformatics, supporting training, infrastructure development, data collection, and knowledge 
exchange in biotechnology research. 
1.3 The Department oversees several autonomous institutions engaged in advanced research 
areas such as genomics, immunology, neuroscience, regenerative medicine, and bioresource 
management. It also manages the International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology 
(ICGEB) in New Delhi. Furthermore, DBT supervises public sector undertakings that contribute to 
biotechnology innovation, vaccine production, and industry research assistance. These entities play 
a significant role in advancing India’s biotechnology sector. 
1.4 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment, Forests and Climate Change considered the Demands for Grants (2025-26), Demand 
No. 90 of the Department of Biotechnology in its meeting held on 20th February, 2025. 
 
2. COMPARATIVE BUDGET ANALYSIS 
2.1 The following table shows the overall budgetary details of the Department of Biotechnology 
for the year 2024-25 (BE, RE & actual expenditure) and allocation made for the year 2025-26:-   
            
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
PARTICULARS 2024-25   
B.E R.E. Actual till 31st 
December 
2024 
% 
utilization 
of R.E. 
B.E. allocated 
for 2025-26 
1. Secretariat 71.04 75.89 32.63 43.00 55.48 
2. Biotechnology Research 
and Development 1100.00 662.90 592.67  
44.39* 
2300* 3. Industrial and 
Entrepreneurship 
Development 
74.00 0.00* 0.00 

2 
 
* Biotechnology Research and Development and Industrial and Entrepreneurship Development were merged into a single 
scheme i.e. Biotechnology Research Innovation and Entrepreneurship Development (Bio-RIDE) in September 2024 
  
2.2  It can be seen from the above table that in 2024-25, budgetary allocation of the Department 
was increased from ₹ 2275.70 at B.E. stage to ₹ 2460.13 at R.E. stage (an increase of almost 8.1%). 
However, the Department could spend only ₹ 1548.30 crore till 31st December, 2024 which is 
around 63% of its R.E. allocation. 
 
2.3 The following table shows the budgetary details of the Department for the years 2023-24, 
2024-25 (BE, RE & actual expenditure) and the details of B.E. allocation proposed and B.E. 
allocation made for the year 2025-26:-             
                                                               (₹  in crore) 
Financial 
Year B.E. R.E. Actual 
Expenditure 
2023-24 2683.86 1607.32 1537.81 
2024-25 2275.70 2460.13 1548.30 
2025-26 
Proposed B.E. Allocated B.E. 
4573.47 3446.64 
2.4 The Committee notes from the above data that in FY 2023-24, the Department was allocated 
₹  2683.86 crores at B.E. stage which was significantly reduced to ₹ 1607.32 crore at R.E. stage. 
The Committee also notes that the Department could not even utilize this reduced allocation 
completely.  
2.5 The Committee desired to know about the budgetary allocation demanded by the Department 
vis-à-vis the amount actually allocated to it for the year 2025-26. The Department informed that it 
has been allocated ₹3446.64 crore, against a proposed budgetary allocation of ₹4573.47 crore for 
the year 2025-26. Thus, there is an overall shortfall of ₹1126.83 crore in the actual allocation to the 
Department, about 25% lesser than its budgetary demand.  
2.6 The following chart shows a comparison of B.E., R.E. and Actual expenditure for the years 
2023-24 and 2024-25 along with the proposed allocation demanded and actually allocated for the 
year 2025-26:- 
4. Biotechnology Research 
Innovation and 
Entrepreneurship 
Development (Bio-RIDE) 
0.00 672.10 0.00  
5. Assistance to 
Autonomous Institutions 940.66 959.24 848.65 88.47 994.16 
6. Biotechnology Industry 
Research Assistance 
Council (BIRAC) 
40.00 40.00 30.01 75.03 42 
7. International Centre for 
Genetic Engineering and 
Biotechnology (ICGEB) 
50.00 50.00 44.34 88.68 55 
Grand Total 2275.70 2460.13 1548.30 62.94 3446.64 

3 
 
          
B.E.B.E.B.E. ProposedR.E.R.E.B.E. AllocatedActualsActuals*05001000150020002500300035004000450050002023-24 2024-25 2025-26Rupees (in crore)
  
                        * upto 31st December 2024 
2.7 The Committee questioned the Department about the potential impact on its key programs, 
schemes, and projects due to the significant difference between the budgetary allocation requested 
and the amount actually allocated for 2025-26. In response, the Department stated that it would 
prioritize essential activities to ensure efficient utilization of the allocated funds. To support the 
implementation of new programs, the Department plans to seek additional funding from the 
Department of Expenditure during the Revised Estimate stage. 
2.8 The Committee sought details of the absolute bare minimum increase needed in the 
budgetary allocations for the year 2025-26 to sustain key programmes with the desired outcomes 
and efficiency. The Department replied that to sustain key programs and achieve the desired 
outcomes with optimal efficiency, it will prioritize their implementation. However, to effectively 
execute ongoing activities and new initiatives an additional allocation of ₹ 300 crore may be 
required. This is illustrated in the below chart:- 
         
4573.473446.643000500100015002000250030003500400045005000B.E. Proposed B.E. AllocatedB.E. proposed, B.E. allocated and additional bare minimum requiredAllocatedAdditional₹ 300 croreadditional required
 

4 
 
 
2.9 The financial performance of the Department under major budgetary heads during the year 
2024-25 is shown in the below chart:-   
 
44.3988.4775.03Utilization as % of R.E. across different heads in FY 2024-25Bio-RIDEAssistance to Autonomous InstitutionsBiotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC)
 
 
2.10 The Committee observes that, although the overall actual utilization of the funds given to the 
Department during 2024-25 is about 63 per cent, the performance in respect of the major scheme is 
unsatisfactory. Under ‘Bio-RIDE’, the Department has been able to spend about 44 per cent of the 
R.E. allocation in 2024-25.  
 
2.11 The Committee expresses deep concern over the sub-optimal utilization of funds by the 
Department, particularly in the context of the Central Sector Scheme, Bio-RIDE. This 
underutilization not only hampers the effective implementation of critical programs but also 
undermines the potential impact of the Department’s initiatives. The Committee strongly 
recommends that the Department take immediate and appropriate measures to address this 
issue and ensure the optimal utilization of funds allocated to it in the Budget Estimates (B.E.) 
for 2025-26. The Department should conduct regular reviews and take corrective actions to 
prevent delays and inefficiencies, thereby maximizing the impact of its programs and 
achieving the desired outcomes in a timely and effective manner. 

5 
 
      
67%29%1%3%Major budgetary alloactions in FY 2025-26Biotechnology Research Innovation and Entrepreneurship Development (Bio-RIDE)Assistance to Autonomous Institutions
 
 
2.12 The Committee notes, from the Chart above, that half of the budgetary allocation for the 
year 2025-26 is earmarked for the only Central Sector Scheme Biotechnology Research Innovation 
and Entrepreneurship Development (Bio-RIDE), while about 29 per cent of the provision has been 
kept for Assistance to Autonomous Institutions, indicating the thrust areas for the Department. 
Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC) received just 1 per cent of the total 
outlay, while the allocations under the Head ‘Secretariat’ and International Centre for Genetic 
Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB) together constitute the remaining 3 per cent of the total 
budgetary allocation of the Department.  
2.13 The Committee also made a cursory look at the general trends in total B.E allocation of the 
Department, as well as under its key schemes since 2023-24. The following graphs depict these 
trends: 
 
2683.862275.73446.642023-24 2024-25 2025-26Trend in BE
 
 

6 
 
1645117423002023-24 2024-25 2025-26Trend in Bio-RIDE
 
 
902.47940.66994.162023-24 2024-25 2025-26Trend in Assistance to Autonomous Institutions
 
 
 
2.14 The Committee notes that, the overall B.E allocation of the Department marginally declined 
from 2023-24 to 2024-25, then substantially increased in 2025-26. Similar trend can be seen in 
allocation of the only Central Sector Scheme, Bio-RIDE. On the other hand allocation in respect of 
Autonomous Institutions shows a continuous uptrend.  
2.15  Given the substantial allocation to Bio-RIDE, the Committee recommends that the 
Department must ensure optimal utilization of funds. Regular monitoring, timely 
implementation, and transparent reporting mechanisms should be established to avoid sub-
optimal utilization and maximize outcomes. 
3. BIO-RIDE: A UNIFIED FRAMEWORK FOR ADVANCING BIOTECHNOLOGY 
RESEARCH, ENTREPRENEURSHIP, AND BIOMANUFACTURING IN INDIA 
3.1 The Department of Biotechnology (DBT) was promoting research, development, and 
innovation across all sectors of biotechnology in India through the implementation of policies and 
programs under two umbrella Central Sector Schemes: (a) Biotechnology Research and 
Development, and (b) Industrial & Entrepreneurship Development. In a significant move, the Union 
Cabinet approved the merger of these schemes into a single, unified scheme titled “Biotechnology 
Research Innovation and Entrepreneurship Development (Bio-RIDE)”. This merger was based on 
the recommendations of the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC). The EFC proposed the 

7 
 
integration of the two existing schemes with an additional new component, “Biomanufacturing and 
Biofoundry”, to be implemented during the 15th Finance Commission Cycle (2021-22 to 2025-26) 
with a total budget allocation of ₹9,197 crore. 
3.2 The Union Cabinet, in its meeting on 18th September 2024, formally approved the 
continuation of the DBT schemes under the consolidated Bio-RIDE scheme. This unified scheme 
now comprises three key components: 
1. Biotechnology Research and Development; 
2. Industrial and Entrepreneurship Development; and 
3. Biomanufacturing and Biofoundry (a newly introduced component). 
The total budget of ₹9,197 crore includes a dedicated allocation of ₹1,500 crore for the new 
Biomanufacturing and Biofoundry component. 
3.3 The Committee sought clarification on the rationale behind this merger of schemes. In 
response, the Department explained that the integration of earlier schemes under Bio-RIDE 
enhances flexibility and efficiency in resource allocation, enabling the Department to dynamically 
reallocate funds between the "Biotechnology Research & Development" and "Industrial & 
Entrepreneurship Development" components based on evolving program needs and priorities. This 
strategic approach will ensure optimal utilization of resources, promote innovation, research 
excellence, and entrepreneurship in biotechnology. 
3.4 The first component, Biotechnology Research & Development, aims to build a robust 
education, research, and translation ecosystem to position India as a global leader in emerging 
technologies. This component supports major programs such as capacity building, which includes 
human resource development and infrastructure enhancement, competitive research grants and 
mission programs, international cooperation, and biotechnology-based programs for societal 
development.  
3.5 The second component, Industrial & Entrepreneurship Development, focuses on enhancing 
the research and innovation capabilities of Indian biotech industries, particularly SMEs and 
startups, to drive affordable solutions for societal challenges. This component supports initiatives 
such as public-private partnerships (PPP), the Make in India Initiative, and the establishment of 
Biotech Parks. These efforts aim to stimulate innovation, foster entrepreneurship, and enhance the 
global competitiveness of Indian biotech industries, ensuring that they can address the needs of the 
largest sections of society through affordable and accessible products and services. 
3.6 The third and newest component, Biomanufacturing and Biofoundry, aims to enable a 
Circular-Bioeconomy by ‘Fostering High Performance Biomanufacturing’ in the country, with a 
strategic focus on: bio-based chemicals, Biopolymers and enzymes, functional food, smart proteins, 
precision biotherapeutics, climate resilient agriculture, carbon capture, futuristic marine and space 
research. The sectoral focus will be complemented by cross-cutting Enablers (मूलांक ु र Bio-Enablers) 
including Biofoundries, Biomanufacturing Hubs and Bio-Artificial Intelligence (AI) Hubs, 
powerful national platforms to accelerate biomanufacturing by enabling access to scale-up 
infrastructure, scientific data, technology platforms and biomaterial libraries. Major programs under 
this component include discovery and integrated network research, bridging the gap for scale-up, 
and setting up Bio-enablers to drive innovation and commercialization. 
3.7 On the basis of the information provided by the Department, some of the major 
programmes/initiatives, achievements and action plan for the future, under the newly launched 
component ‘Biomanufacturing and Biofoundry’ are:- 
 The Union Cabinet, approved India’s first Biotechnology Policy, the BioE3 (Biotechnology 
for Economy, Environment, and Employment) Policy for ‘Fostering High-Performance 

8 
 
Biomanufacturing’, marking a significant milestone in the country’s efforts to foster high-
performance biomanufacturing. This policy aims to position India at the forefront of a 
sustainable future by leveraging biomanufacturing processes to accelerate the development 
and production of bio-based high-value products. 
 Six thematic sectors were identified for the Biomanufacturing Initiative. These include bio-
based chemicals and enzymes, smart proteins and functional foods, precision 
biotherapeutics, climate-resilient agriculture, carbon capture and utilization, and futuristic 
marine and space research. A Strategic Roadmap has been formulated to implement these 
thematic verticals under the Biomanufacturing initiative.  
 As part of the BioE3 Policy, the Department is also setting up BioEnablers, including Bio-
Artificial Intelligence Hubs, Biofoundries, and Biomanufacturing Hubs, to accelerate 
innovation and scale-up efforts across thematic verticals. The first DBT-BIRAC joint call 
for proposals was given. Recommended projects are currently under implementation. In a 
landmark collaboration, a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed between DBT 
and ISRO for joint efforts in Space Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing. 
 The Department is working to expand biomanufacturing efforts nationwide through Centre-
State partnerships. The Centre-State Partnership Conclave, held in New Delhi, brought 
together State representatives to strategize on the implementation of biomanufacturing 
initiatives across all States. As part of this collaboration, BioE3 Cells are proposed to be 
established across the country to align biomanufacturing initiatives with regional priorities 
while supporting national objectives. 
 The Department has also launched a new initiative, the DBT-BIRAC Amrit Team Grant, to 
support collaborative and innovative research programs. Simultaneously, Department 
remains committed to ongoing programs under the key components of Biotechnology 
Research & Development and Industrial & Entrepreneurship Development fostering 
advancements in medical, agricultural, and environmental biotechnology through basic and 
applied research, development, and innovation. 
3.8 The Committee appreciates the Department for integration of research, industrial 
development, and biomanufacturing under a unified framework. This will significantly 
enhance India's biotechnology capabilities and position the country as a global hub for 
innovation, sustainability, and bio-based industrialization.  
3.9 The Committee places its confidence in the Department’s ability to effectively 
implement the Bio-RIDE scheme and achieve its ambitious targets. The various initiatives 
under this scheme have the potential to drive transformative changes in healthcare, 
agriculture, environment, and industry. Most importantly, the Committee hopes that the 
advancements in biotechnology under this scheme will ultimately benefit the common man by 
providing affordable and accessible healthcare solutions, enhancing agricultural productivity, 
promoting environmental sustainability through carbon capture technologies and bio-based 
solutions and creating employment opportunities through bio-industrialization and 
entrepreneurship development. 
4. AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS 
 
4.1 The Department has 13 Autonomous Institutions, 1 Institute of National Importance 
established by an Act of Parliament, 1 Inter-Governmental Agency and 3 Public Sector 
Undertakings (PSUs) under its administrative domain. 
4.2 The Department informed the Committee that it has established an Autonomous Body, the 
Biotechnology Research and Innovation Council (BRIC), which consolidates the governance of 13 

9 
 
elite autonomous research institutions while preserving their distinct research identities. These 
institutions are now collectively referred to as 'iBRIC'. Additionally, the inclusion of two more 
institutions i.e. the Regional Centre for Biotechnology (RCB), Faridabad, an institution of national 
importance established by an Act of Parliament and the International Centre for Genetic 
Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB), expands the network to 15 institutions, now designated 
as 'iBRIC+'. 
4.3 The Department submitted that BRIC aims to enhance biotechnology research, education, 
and entrepreneurship by uniting the independent efforts of its institutions into a collaborative 
framework. It seeks to identify common goals, streamline asset monetization, and leverage 
collective strengths to drive innovation. This strategic consolidation will accelerate India's biotech 
revolution, positioning the nation as a global leader. The formation of BRIC is expected to catalyze 
groundbreaking advancements through multidisciplinary research, tackling complex scientific 
challenges and delivering affordable, impactful solutions. By expanding research scope and 
ambition, BRIC will strengthen institutional governance and propel India towards biotech 
excellence on the world stage. 
4.4 The list of iBRIC+ institutions is as follows:  
Biotechnology Research and Innovation Council (BRIC) Institutes 
1. BRIC-Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics (CDFD), Hyderabad, Telangana 
2. BRIC-Institute of Bioresources and Sustainable Development (IBSD), Imphal, Manipur 
3. BRIC-Institute of Life Sciences (ILS), Bhubaneshwar, Odisha 
4. BRIC-Institute for Stem Cell Science and Regenerative Medicine (inStem), Bengaluru, 
Karnataka 
5. BRIC- National Agri-Food and Biomanufacturing Institute (NABI), Mohali, Punjab 
6. BRIC-National Brain Research Centre (NBRC), Manesar, Haryana 
7. BRIC-National Centre for Cell Science (NCCS), Pune, Maharashtra 
8. BRIC-National Institute of Animal Biotechnology (NIAB), Hyderabad, Telangana 
9. BRIC-National Institute of Biomedical Genomics (NIBMG), Kalyani, West Bengal 
10. BRIC-National Institute of Immunology (NII), New Delhi 
11. BRIC-National Institute of Plant Genome Research (NIPGR), New Delhi 
12. BRIC-Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology (RGCB), Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala 
13. BRIC-Translational Health Science and Technology Institute (THSTI), Faridabad, Haryana 
Institute of National Importance established by an Act of Parliament 
14. Regional Centre for Biotechnology (RCB), Faridabad 
Inter-Governmental Agency 
15. International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB), New Delhi 

10 
 
 
4.5 The BRIC has launched several strategic initiatives to maximize the potential of its research 
institutions. Key activities and accomplishments of iBRIC+ institutions include: 
 Interdisciplinary Network Research Programs: Profiles of 320 scientists were created, 
leading to 24 network programs involving 90+ researchers. 
 i3c BRIC-RCB PhD Programme: A multidisciplinary PhD program in Biosciences was 
introduced, enrolling 58 students, with hands-on training and immersion programs. 
 BRIC-NABI Biomanufacturing Institute: India’s first Biomanufacturing Institute was 
inaugurated in October 2024 to enhance the agri-food sector. 
 Governance and Operational Improvements: Establishment of the BRIC Secretariat, e-
Office rollout, revised scientist promotion schemes, and adoption of BRIC Bye-laws. 
 BRIC-ILS: Developed a potential whole-cell vaccine (CNA25) against systemic 
candidiasis. 
 BRIC-inStem: Created Kisan Kavach®, an anti-pesticide fabric to protect farmers. 
 BRIC-NABI: Developed a synbiotic blend to combat obesity and metabolic disorders. 
 BRIC-NBRC: Leads a Dementia Science Programme to collect critical data on 
neurodegenerative diseases. 
 BRIC-NIAB: Developed a rapid Salmonella detection method using advanced LFA-SPE 
technology. 
 BRIC-NIBMG: Whole-genome sequencing of 750+ MTB clinical strains for tuberculosis 
drug resistance studies. 
 BRIC-NII: Developed Clomipramine, a potential treatment for Alzheimer’s, with a US 
patent granted. 
 BRIC-NIPGR: Developed SAATVIK (NC9), a high-yield drought-tolerant chickpea 
variety approved for national cultivation. 
 BRIC-THSTI & BRIC-RGCB: Developed monoclonal antibodies for Nipah virus, 
advancing towards commercialization. 
 RCB: Recognized 20 Higher Education Institutes, with 800+ students enrolled for degree 
programs. 
 ICGEB: Conducted a groundbreaking dengue study, suggesting vaccine strategies should 
focus on primary infections to reduce fatalities. 
4.6 The Committee feels that the establishment of BRIC and its integration of research 
institutions under the iBRIC+ framework has significantly enhanced the governance, 
collaboration, and impact of biotechnology research in India. The data provided reflects 
commendable progress in interdisciplinary research, education, biomanufacturing, and 
industrial partnerships. However, to amplify the outcomes, BRIC should scale 
interdisciplinary research into a nationwide innovation network with industry-aligned 
translational centres, broaden the i3c BRIC-RCB PhD Programme via global academic-
industry partnerships and merit-based fellowships, and develop regional Biomanufacturing 
Hubs for sector-specific bio-solutions. Prioritizing commercialization through streamlined 
regulatory approvals, incentives for startups, and centralized data-sharing platforms will 
expedite market readiness for innovations in diagnostics, biotherapeutics, and disease 
management. Strengthening mentorship programs, industry internships, and entrepreneurial 
fellowships will cultivate skilled talent, while leveraging breakthroughs. By scaling research 
initiatives, refining governance mechanisms, and deepening academia-industry synergies, 

11 
 
BRIC can position India as a global leader in biotechnology and biomanufacturing, fostering 
equitable and sustainable advancements in healthcare, agriculture, and environmental 
resilience. 
4.7 The Department has following Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs): 
1.  The Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC) serves as a key 
industry-academia interface promoting public-private partnerships in biotech. It fosters 
innovation among startups and SMEs, supporting over 4,000 beneficiaries with ₹ 4,000 crore in 
direct funding and ₹ 2,600 crore through co-funding partnerships. With a growing national and 
international network, BIRAC has established 90+ biotech incubators spanning 9 lakh sq. ft., 
offering advanced infrastructure, mentorship, and business support. This has led to 1,300+ IP 
filings and the launch of 800+ biotech products. Today, BIRAC's ecosystem includes 9,000+ 
startups, 800+ biotech firms, and a vast network of entrepreneurs and experts driving 
innovation. 
2. Bharat Immunologicals and Biologicals Corporation Limited (BIBCOL) was incorporated in 
March 1989 as a public sector company in Bulandshahr, Uttar Pradesh to manufacture Oral 
Polio Vaccine (OPV) and other Immunologicals. In addition, BIBCOL has manufacturing 
facility of dispersible Zinc Tablet in pharmaceutical segment. BIBCOL is currently under 
financial crises, which leads to cessation of the production activities. The main reason for 
financial crisis in the company is single product i.e. Polio Vaccine for production and market 
competition with private companies. The proposal of revival package of BIBCOL is under 
consideration with the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE). The resumption of vaccine 
production is subject to the outcome of final decision of the said proposal. 
3. Indian Vaccines Corporation Limited (IVCOL) was incorporated in 1989 as a Joint Venture 
Company promoted by the Government of India (Department of Biotechnology), Pasteur 
Meraux Serum & Vaccines (PMSV) France and Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Ltd. (IPCL, 
now part of Reliance Industries Limited since 2007). With a paid-up capital of ₹ 18.78 crores, 
IVCOL aimed to manufacture (i) vaccines using Vero Cell technology and (ii) Injectable Polio 
Vaccines (IPV). However IPV did not get approvals from the World Health Organisation 
(WHO). As a result the Project of the IVCOL was put on hold in 1992. Following this setback, 
PMSV France exited the joint venture in 1998 by selling its shares to DBT. Subsequently, in 
1999, 46.20 acres of IVCOL’s land was leased for 30 years to the National Brain Research 
Centre (NBRC), an autonomous institution under DBT, at a nominal annual rent of ₹ 11.91 
lakhs. Presently, IVCOL has no commercial operations and is maintained by DBT from its 
CGO Complex office, ensuring site upkeep and compliance with statutory obligations under the 
Companies Act, 2013 
 
4.8 The Committee expresses deep concern over the current state of BIBCOL and IVCOL 
and urges the Department to take immediate and decisive action for their revival. 
Recognizing their immense potential, the Committee strongly believes that both PSUs can 
play a pivotal role in strengthening and transforming India’s vaccine manufacturing 
ecosystem. The Committee recommends that the Department proactively engage with the 
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) and persuade them to secure a revival package for 
both BIBCOL and IVCOL. The Department could explore the possibility of merger of both 
the units to achieve efficiency. If the Department succeeds in securing the revival package 
from DPE, the Committee recommends that the Department should expand BIBCOL’s 
current product portfolio by initiating the production of critical vaccines. Additionally, the 
Department should actively seek technical collaborations with reputed international 
organizations to enhance manufacturing capabilities and technological expertise. The 
Committee acknowledges the Department’s ongoing efforts in developing vaccines for 
Dengue, Malaria, and Chikungunya and suggests that, upon receiving necessary regulatory 
approvals, these vaccines may be manufactured at BIBCOL and IVCOL. Reviving these 

12 
 
PSUs would not only contribute to ensuring affordable vaccine availability for citizens but 
also position them as key players in the global vaccine market. Once operational, these PSUs 
can leverage their infrastructure to support vaccine exports, further strengthening India’s 
presence in the international biopharmaceutical industry. 
5.  KEY INITIAVES AND ACHIEVEMENTS IN HEALTHCARE AND 
BIOTECHNOLOGY 
5.1 The Department of Biotechnology actively drives biomedical research and innovation to 
address human diseases, including emerging infections, antimicrobial resistance, non-
communicable diseases, genetic disorders, maternal and child health, and nutrition. Its efforts focus 
on early detection, prevention, vaccine development, novel therapies, healthcare systems, and 
biomedical devices. DBT has supported diverse R&D projects spanning bioengineering, cancer 
research, chronic diseases, drug development, human genetics, infectious diseases, public health & 
nutrition, stem cells & regenerative medicine, development of vaccines, women & child health, and 
genome editing & nanotechnology applications in healthcare. Its initiatives encompass mission-
driven programs and strategic interventions. 
5.2 The Department addresses key challenges through targeted initiatives, such as the UMMID 
Initiative, which focuses on inherited disorders. These efforts collectively enhance India's 
biomedical landscape, fostering cutting-edge research and healthcare solutions. Some of the 
significant achievements of the research and development supported during the period are: 
Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) 
5.3 Considering Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) as global threat, the Department initiated a 
“Mission program on Antimicrobial Resistance” with the vision to develop indigenous and cost-
effective therapies against AMR, categorization of AMR-specific pathogen priority list of India, 
establishment of Bio-repository for AMR-specific pathogens and development of rapid and cost-
effective diagnostic kits to identify AMR-specific pathogens. 
5.4 The Department announced a joint call with BIRAC in 2018 on AMR. This program aimed 
at tackling AMR under two specific categories: development of new antibiotics and development of 
alternatives to antibiotics which includes therapeutic antibodies, phage therapy, and anti-biofilm 
products. One successful example of this initiative is the development of antibiotic Nafithromycin. 
It is the country's first indigenously developed antibiotic aimed at tackling AMR. This innovation is 
designed to treat Community-Acquired Bacterial Pneumonia (CABP), a severe illness caused by 
Multi-Drug Resistant pathogens, which disproportionately affects vulnerable populations, including 
children and the elderly as well as immune compromised hosts like patients with diabetes, cancer 
etc. 
5.5 The Committee applauds the Department for its strategic foresight and decisive action 
in confronting AMR. Initiatives such as pioneering homegrown therapies, cataloguing 
priority pathogens, establishing AMR bio-repositories, and advancing rapid diagnostics 
underscore India’s resolve to mitigate this global health crisis. The Committee recognizes the 
breakthroughs like Nafithromycin — India’s inaugural indigenous antibiotic targeting drug-
resistant Community-Acquired Bacterial Pneumonia. This innovation exemplifies scientific 
excellence and addresses critical vulnerabilities among high-risk groups. The Committee 
emphasizes the need to expedite the deployment of such solutions through streamlined 
regulatory processes, scalable production, and inclusive partnerships. Strengthening AMR 
monitoring frameworks, broadening investigations into pathogen prioritization and 
integrating diagnostics into primary healthcare are vital next steps. 
 

13 
 
Development of Vaccines 
5.6 The National Biopharma Mission (NBM) being implemented by BIRAC, has supported the 
pre-clinical and clinical development of vaccines for Dengue & Chikungunya and also 
Translational Research Consortiums for vector borne diseases like Chikungunya, Dengue and 
Malaria. The details are as under: 
a) Indian Immunologicals Limited (IIL) has developed a freeze-dried, live-attenuated 
tetravalent dengue vaccine using four attenuated dengue virus strains (serotypes 1, 2, 3, and 4) 
provided by the National Institutes of Health (NIH), USA, under a 2016 agreement. Stability 
studies of the drug substance and product have shown stability under real-time conditions over a 
36-month period. NBM has supported the Pre Clinical Toxicology (PCT) studies and Phase I 
clinical trial for this vaccine. IIL has successfully completed the Phase I trial, which 
demonstrated the vaccine's safety for human use.  
b) The inactivated Chikungunya vaccine candidate BBV87, developed by Bharat Biotech, has 
demonstrated safety, tolerability, and immunogenicity. NBM has supported Phase II clinical 
trials for BBV87 in India. NBM is also funding Phase III trials, which have already received 
clinical protocol approval from the Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI). BBV87 has 
shown consistent safety and immunogenicity in India and internationally, with Phase II trials 
successfully conducted in Thailand and several Latin American countries, including Panama, 
Colombia, Guatemala, and Costa Rica, through collaboration with the International Vaccine 
Institute.  
c) Translational Research Consortiums (TRC) on Vector Borne Diseases has supported 
development of high throughput assays, animal models, biorepositories for clinical isolates & 
development of monoclonal antibodies. Malaria TRC project aims to develop multi-stage P. 
falciparum recombinant chimeric malaria antigens (rCMAs) consisting of leading pre-
erythrocytic and transmission blocking vaccine candidates, as novel malaria vaccines for 
preventing infection in man & minimizing community transmission.  
d) As part of the Ind-CEPI (India-Centric Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations) 
project, support has been provided for development of inactivated viral vaccine for 
Chikungunya (BBV87), whereby, GMP manufacturing of the vaccine in India and subsequent 
manufacture of clinical trial material for conducting Phase I/II clinical trial has been supported. 
The vaccine is presently in Phase II/III clinical trials. 
e) A low-cost Rotavirus vaccine (Rotavac) was indigenously developed and incorporated into 
the Universal Immunization Program (UIP), and India's first indigenously developed qHPV 
vaccine against cervical cancer (Cervavac) was granted market authorization. 
5.7 The Committee commends the Department for its laudable efforts under the National 
Biopharma Mission (NBM) in advancing indigenous vaccine development against critical 
diseases such as Dengue, Chikungunya, Malaria, and cervical cancer. The noteworthy 
progress in pre-clinical studies, clinical trials, and translational research, alongside strategic 
international collaborations, underscores India’s growing capacity to address global health 
challenges through innovation. 
5.8 The Committee urges the Department to expedite regulatory clearances, ensure robust 
post-trial protocols, and prioritize cost-effective manufacturing to facilitate the swift market 
entry of these vaccines. Emphasis must be placed on equitable access and affordability for all 
citizens, particularly vulnerable populations. The Committee expresses confidence that the 
timely deployment of these vaccines will significantly reduce disease burden, align with 
national health objectives, and reinforce India’s leadership in global vaccine equity. 

14 
 
Unique Methods of Management of Inherited Disorders (UMMID) Initiative 
 
5.9 The Unique Methods of Management of Inherited Disorders (UMMID) Initiative was 
launched by the Department to tackle the challenges posed by genetic disorders in the country. It 
has three components: (i) NIDAN Kendras (setting up genetic diagnosis centres in Government 
hospitals); (ii) enhancing the skills of Government doctors; and (iii) outreach to aspirational districts 
for ante-natal and newborn screening and education about genetic pathways for rare disorders. The 
programme's focus is on improving maternal and neo-natal indicators in aspirational districts. The 
programme primarily focuses on promoting research and development and laying the groundwork 
for the anticipated ‘National Screening Programme’. The screening program primarily assesses 
pregnant women for hemoglobinopathies such as thalassemia, sickle cell disease, etc. and newborns 
for five key genetic disorders that require early intervention.  
5.10 In the first pilot phase, 5 NIDAN Kendras, 7 outreach centers, and 6 training centres were 
established. Over the past year, these active NIDAN Kendras and the outreach centers have offered 
screening to over 85,000 pregnant women and 25,000 newborn babies across five centers and nine 
aspirational districts. A total of more than 2,73,000 screenings of pregnant women and newborns 
were carried out in 1st phase wherein nearly 37000 positive cases were reported.  This has led to 
prevention of more than 34 hemoglobinopathy affected births, identification of more than 150 
carrier couples and more than 350 newborns received timely diagnosis of congenital metabolic 
disorders. During the last year, more than 20 faculty members from across the country have 
received training. NIDAN Kendras routinely conducts mass awareness programs about the 
prevention, screening, and management of inherited disorders at various levels, including 
workshops, lectures, and distribution of pamphlets in high schools, nursing colleges, and primary 
health centers, as well as the display of public hoardings.  
 
5.11 UMMID is presently undergoing nationwide expansion, aiming to encompass 
approximately 22 States/UTs by establishing around 70 UMMID components. Currently, 30 
aspirational districts have been covered and 30 NIDAN Kendras and 9 training centers have been 
established all over the country. The genetic disorders being covered in the NIDAN Kendra 
Component includes Beta thalassemia, sickle cell disease, and other hemoglobinopathies, Down 
syndrome and other aneuploidies, congenital malformations such as neural tube defects and other 
genetic disorders prevalent at a relatively higher rate in the region where the proposed NIDAN 
Kendra would be situated. Newborn screening for relatively common treatable genetic metabolic 
disorders including congenital hypothyroidism, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, galactosemia, 
biotinidase deficiency, G6PD deficiency, other treatable genetic metabolic disorders prevalent at a 
relatively higher rate in the region.  In phase-II expansion of the UMMID initiative some of the 
private hospitals like Sri Venkateswara Institute of Medical Sciences (SVIMS) Tirupati, Mahatma 
Gandhi Institute of Medical Science, Sevagram have been granted the NIDAN Kendras and training 
center has been established at Center for Human Genetics, Bengaluru.  
 
5.12 The Committee enquired whether the Department has initiated any research to determine the 
vulnerability of the population to genetic disorders and create a vulnerability index. The 
Department informed the Committee that UMMID is a pilot study for development of trained 
manpower, resources and to establish network in Government setup. However, the vulnerability of 
the population to genetic disorders and creation of vulnerability index can be taken up only when 
pan India study is carried out during the next level implementation in terms of setting up of a 
‘National Screening Programme’ for genetic disorders. 
5.13 The Committee extends its profound appreciation to the Department for the visionary 
launch and strategic implementation of the UMMID Initiative, a critical intervention to 
address the burden of genetic disorders in India. The initiative’s three-pronged approach —

15 
 
establishing NIDAN Kendras for genetic diagnosis, enhancing the capacity of healthcare 
professionals, and expanding outreach in aspirational districts — has demonstrated 
remarkable success in its pilot phase. The screening of over 2,73,000 pregnant women and 
newborns, identification of 37,000 positive cases, prevention of 34 hemoglobinopathy-affected 
births, and timely diagnosis of 350 newborns with congenital metabolic disorders underscore 
the programme’s transformative impact on maternal and neonatal health. Furthermore, the 
integration of mass awareness campaigns, skill-building workshops, and collaborations with 
educational institutions reflects a holistic model for tackling inherited disorders through 
prevention, early diagnosis, and community engagement. 
5.14 The Committee acknowledges the Department’s progress in scaling the UMMID 
Initiative, including its expansion to 30 aspirational districts, establishment of 30 NIDAN 
Kendras and 9 training centres, and the inclusion of private healthcare institutions such 
as SVIMS Tirupati and Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences, Sevagram, in Phase-
II. These efforts signify a commendable stride toward decentralizing access to advanced 
genetic screening and care. However, given the persistent challenges posed by genetic 
disorders—particularly in rural and underserved regions — the Committee urges the 
Department to expedite the pan-India expansion of the UMMID Initiative with a renewed 
focus on universal, time-bound screening coverage. This must include 100% screening of all 
pregnant women and newborns, irrespective of their access to private or Government 
healthcare facilities. The Committee also recommends that following the 100% screening, the 
Department should work upon creating a vulnerability index which would be helpful in 
assessing the susceptibility of specific demographic groups to various genetic disorders. 
Development of Biomedical equipments 
5.15 The Department promotes multi-disciplinary research involving application of science and 
engineering for development of innovative technologies and products leading to affordable 
healthcare. Major focus areas can be categorized as follows: a) Diagnostics - Bio sensors, in-vitro 
diagnostics, medical imaging, home care, wearables, etc. b) Therapeutics - Drug delivery vehicles, 
implants, tissue engineering, surgical robotics. c) Assistive technologies - Mobility aids, prosthesis, 
patient rehabilitation systems. Around 80% of the needs for medical devices are met through 
imports. Thus, the division is focused to support indigenization of biomedical devices and 
resources. The Department has established a Centre of Excellence for Minimally Invasive 
Cardiovascular Devices at Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences & Technology, 
Thiruvananthapuram. Some of the novels products developed / licensed under the Biodesign 
program are: 
a) InoHeal - Advanced Wound Healing Technology to facilitate accelerated healing of 
medically complex wounds like diabetic foot ulcers, pressure sores and infectious wounds 
etc. It overcomes the challenges of halted wound healing by removing exudate, reducing 
inflammation and oedema, enhancing cell proliferation and tissue perfusion and controlling 
microbial growth. 
b) Hip Pro - It is an elderly guardian smartbelt. It provides instant protection by automatic 
inflation of slim cushions with a simple press of a button. This ensures that the hips are 
cushioned before impact, reducing the risk of injury from falls. 
c) Urovib - A Catheter Associated Urinary Tract Infection (CAUTI) prevention device. It 
consists of two components: a reusable clip-on and a disposable coupler and works on dual 
synergistic mechanism. 
d) Preztic - Precision Needle Navigation System for the Ultrasound Machines. It is a small 
device that clips onto an existing ultrasound probe, keeping the needle constrained in the 
ultrasound plane and physically restricting it in the desired trajectory during insertion. 
Additionally, a camera in the device tracks the needle during the procedure. A computer 
vision algorithm computes the needle's position by tracking markers on the device. A 

16 
 
display tablet shows the real-time position of the needle tip and trajectory overlaid on the 
live ultrasound feed received from the ultrasound machine. 
5.16 The Committee commends the Department for its exemplary commitment to 
advancing multi-disciplinary research and innovation in the domain of biomedical science 
and engineering. The development of pioneering technologies such as InoHeal, Hip 
Pro, Urovib, and Preztic reflects a laudable effort to address pressing healthcare challenges 
through indigenous solutions. However, the Committee notes with concern that a major 
chunk of India’s medical device requirements continue to be met through imports, exposing 
vulnerabilities in healthcare security and economic sustainability. To address this critical gap, 
the Committee strongly urges the Department to intensify its focus on cutting-edge research 
and development in high-priority domains where import dependency remains acute. Priority 
areas could include the indigenous design and manufacturing of advanced imaging systems, 
such as CT scan machines and MRI systems, which are indispensable for modern diagnostics 
yet predominantly sourced from foreign markets. Similarly, the development of ophthalmic 
devices, including intraocular lenses for cataract surgery and retinal imaging equipment, 
must be prioritized to address the growing burden of vision-related ailments and reduce 
reliance on external suppliers. 
5.17 Furthermore, the Committee emphasizes the need for innovation in critical care 
equipment, such as ventilators, dialysis machines, and radiation therapy systems, which are 
vital for tertiary healthcare but remain largely imported despite rising domestic demand. 
Integrating emerging technologies like artificial intelligence and machine learning with 
medical diagnostics could further enhance precision, efficiency, and scalability, positioning 
India as a global leader in next-generation healthcare solutions. 
Mission Program on Pediatric Rare Genetic Disorders 
 
5.18 The Department has implemented a Mission Program on Pediatric Rare Genetic Disorders 
(PRaGeD) in 2022 for research and development in areas of Human Genetics. It aims to develop 
methods for diagnosis of difficult-to-diagnose pediatric rare genetic diseases, discover and 
characterize new gene/variants, provide counseling and to develop new therapies for pediatric rare 
genetic diseases in India. The Center for DNA fingerprinting & Diagnostics (CDFD) at Hyderabad, 
in collaboration with 15 centres across the country, aims to recruit patients and their families with 
rare genetic disorders for the study. The outcome of this study will not only provide a unique 
opportunity for the identification of novel genes for various known as well as unexplained inherited 
phenotypes but also help the patient and family with the management of disease and prenatal 
diagnosis. In addition, functional characterization of novel genes/variants using different metazoan 
model systems is likely to establish causality between the novel mutation and the phenotype. A 
database of sequence variants corresponding to phenotypes in Indian pediatric patients will serve as 
an invaluable resource for genetic diagnostics labs, clinicians and researchers across the globe. 
5.19 The Committee appreciates the mission program launched by the Department. It is a 
remarkable effort to address rare genetic disorders in children, combining research, 
diagnosis, and care. The program’s focus on identifying novel genes, improving diagnosis, 
enabling prenatal counselling, and developing targeted therapies reflects a transformative 
approach to addressing unmet medical needs. The creation of a pan-Indian database of 
genetic variants promises to empower clinicians and researchers globally while advancing 
precision medicine tailored to India’s diverse population. The Committee expresses 
confidence that PRaGeD will catalyze breakthroughs in understanding and managing rare 
diseases, reducing suffering through early intervention and innovative therapies. Sustained 
funding, capacity-building, and integration of research into clinical practice are critical to its 
success. The Department is urged to strengthen global partnerships, ensure ethical data-
sharing frameworks, and prioritize accessibility of outcomes for vulnerable families. 

17 
 
Research on Neurological Disorders: 
 
5.20 To enhance our understanding and improve outcomes for the neurological disorders, 
Dementia and Stroke, the Department is supporting cohort-based studies. The program also 
supports research and development initiatives that investigate the intricate structure, function, 
behavior, cognition, and development of the nervous system. 
5.21 The Department is supporting research on different neurological diseases including 
Parkinson’s, Alzheimer’s and Ataxia. Most of the ongoing research efforts are investigator driven 
research projects that have been supported under the Competitive Grant system. These include: 
a) Investigations into the impact of sleep deprivation on memory deficits through analysis of 
protein synthesis, and its implications in case of Alzheimer’s disease. 
b) Investigations into the effect of specific genetic variations on brain cells and their 
interactions in order to understand their implications for Parkinson’s disease. 
c) Investigations to get mechanistic insights into the biology of Spinocerebellar Ataxia. 
d) Investigations for finding a potential biomarker for detecting Parkinson`s disease using 
“Protein Misfolding Cyclic Amplification” technique. 
e) Design and development of cost-effective label-free detection of Alzheimer’s biomarkers 
using liquid crystals. 
5.22 The Committee appreciates the commendable efforts made by the Department in 
advancing research on neurological disorders, particularly through cohort-based studies and 
investigator driven projects. These initiatives are crucial in deepening our understanding of 
disease mechanisms and developing innovative diagnostic and therapeutic solutions.  
5.23 Keeping in view the rising prevalence of neurological disorders, particularly among 
the aging population, the Committee recommends that the Department should launch a 
dedicated mission to comprehensively research the most prevalent neurological diseases. This 
mission should be supported by substantial funding, targeted research programs, and 
strategic collaborations with leading healthcare institutions, academic centres, and industry 
partners to ensure a holistic approach to prevention, early diagnosis, and treatment. 
6.  HUMAN RESOURCE CHALLENGES 
6.1 The  Committee enquired the category-wise details of sanctioned strength, in-position 
strength and vacancies in the Department along with Autonomous Bodies under the Department, 
the impact of manpower shortage, if any, on the functioning of the Department and how the 
Department is planning to overcome this issue. The Department furnished the following data: 
DBT 
Group Total Sanctioned 
Strength 
Filled 
 
Vacancies % of vacancies 
vis-a-vis total 
sanctioned posts 
Group-A 
(Gazetted Posts) 
93 74 19 20.43 
Group-B 
(Gazetted Posts) 
39 33 06 15.38 
Group-B 
(Non-Gazetted Posts) 
39 31 08 20.51 
Group-C 
(Non-Gazetted Posts) 
33 18 15 45.45 

18 
 
Group-C (MTS) 33 25 08 24.24 
Total 237 181 56 23.63 
Autonomous Institutions 
S. No. Name SanctionedIn-
position 
Vacant % of vacancies 
vis-a-vis total 
sanctioned posts 
1 Institute of Bioresources and 
Sustainable Development (IBSD), 
Imphal 
35 29 6 17.14 
2 Center for DNA Fingerprinting and 
Diagnostics (CDFD), Hyderabad 120 111 9 7.50 
3 Institute of Life Sciences (ILS), 
Bhubaneswar 56 47 9 16.07 
4 Rajiv Gandhi Centre for 
Biotechnology (RGCB), Kerala 143 137 6 4.20 
5 National Institute of Animal 
Biotechnology (NIAB), Hyderabad 52 47 5 9.62 
6 Institute for Stem Cell Science and 
Regenerative Medicine (inStem), 
Bengaluru 
87 57 30 34.48 
7 Translational Health Science and 
Technology Institute (THSTI), 
Faridabad 
63 54 09 14.29 
8 National Institute of Biomedical 
Genomics (NIBMG), Kalyani 55 33 22 40.00 
9 National Centre For Cell Science 
(NCCS), Pune 184 131 53 28.80 
10 National Brain Research Centre 
(NBRC), Manesar 83 58 25 30.12 
11 National Institute of Immunology 
(NII), New Delhi 260 161 99 38.08 
12 Regional Centre for Biotechnology 
(RCB), Faridabad 76 56 20 26.32 
13 National Institute of Plant Genome 
Research (NIPGR), New Delhi 93 78 15 16.13 
14 National Agri-Food and 
Biomanufacturing Institute 
(NABI), Mohali 
196 59 137 69.90 
Total 1503 1058 445 29.61 
 

19 
 
6.2 It can be seen from the above tables that almost 24% and 30% of the posts are lying vacant 
in the Department and autonomous bodies under it respectively. 
6.3 The Committee sought details of the last recruitment exercise by the Department and it was 
informed that in 2019, 21 posts of Scientist ‘C’ were filled up through Direct Recruitment and in 
2020, 02 posts of Scientist ‘H’ were filled up through Direct Recruitment. 
6.4 The Department informed the Committee that manpower shortage has increased work 
pressure on existing employees and causes unnecessary delays. To overcome this, Department has 
been hiring workforce on contractual basis, requesting cadre controlling authorities (DST and 
DoPT) for filling up the vacant posts, and removing the bottlenecks in hiring/recruitment process 
for the posts for which DBT is the cadre controlling authority. 
6.5 The Committee also sought details of the staff hired on contractual basis. The Department 
apprised the Committee that the Department currently employs nine Young Professionals and five 
Consultants on a contractual basis. This strategic hiring approach addresses workforce shortages 
and supports the efficient execution of departmental responsibilities. To bridge the staffing gap, 
retired Government employees are engaged as Consultants, leveraging their expertise for key 
advisory roles. Meanwhile, Young Professionals have been recruited to contribute to the Global 
Innovation and other Scientific Directorates in DBT, ensuring high-quality execution of scientific 
initiatives. In addition to these, the Department has also hired 31 Data Entry Operators, 6 Office 
Assistants, 18 Office Helpers, and 9 IT Specialists. The engagement of contractual office staff is 
essential to maintain operational efficiency in the absence of regular positions. IT specialists are 
recruited for their technical expertise, supporting the implementation and maintenance of 
application software and web portals, which are critical for the Department’s digital infrastructure. 
6.6 The Department informed the Committee that that a critical shortage of personnel across its 
network of autonomous institutions has severely hampered their ability to conduct routine 
operations and sustain scientific research initiatives. Persistent vacancies in key roles—spanning 
administrative, technical, and specialized scientific positions—have led to operational delays, 
diminished productivity, and a decline in the quality and output of research projects.  
6.7 The Committee expresses its deep concern over the acute staffing gaps plaguing the 
Department and autonomous institutions under it, condemning the systemic over-reliance on 
temporary contractual hiring to mask chronic manpower deficits. It underscores that such 
short-term stopgap measures erode institutional capacity, stressing that a robust, permanent 
workforce with specialized expertise is indispensable for driving scientific advancement and 
maintaining global competitiveness. To rectify this, the Committee urgently calls for the 
Department to prioritize filling all critical positions — scientific, technical, and administrative 
— through a mission-driven recruitment strategy.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
 
COMPARATIVE BUDGET ANALYSIS 
 
 The Committee expresses deep concern over the sub-optimal utilization of funds by the 
Department, particularly in the context of the Central Sector Scheme, Bio-RIDE. This 
underutilization not only hampers the effective implementation of critical programs but also 
undermines the potential impact of the Department’s initiatives. The Committee strongly 
recommends that the Department take immediate and appropriate measures to address this 
issue and ensure the optimal utilization of funds allocated to it in the Budget Estimates (B.E.) 
for 2025-26. The Department should conduct regular reviews and take corrective actions to 
prevent delays and inefficiencies, thereby maximizing the impact of its programs and 
achieving the desired outcomes in a timely and effective manner.                              (Para 2.11)  
 
 Given the substantial allocation to Bio-RIDE, the Committee recommends that the 
Department must ensure optimal utilization of funds. Regular monitoring, timely 
implementation, and transparent reporting mechanisms should be established to avoid sub-
optimal utilization and maximize outcomes.                                                               (Para 2.15)  
  
BIO-RIDE: A UNIFIED FRAMEWORK FOR ADVANCING BIOTECHNOLOGY 
RESEARCH, ENTREPRENEURSHIP, AND BIOMANUFACTURING IN INDIA 
 The Committee appreciates the Department for integration of research, industrial 
development, and biomanufacturing under a unified framework. This will significantly 
enhance India's biotechnology capabilities and position the country as a global hub for 
innovation, sustainability, and bio-based industrialization.                                           (Para 3.8) 
 
The Committee places its confidence in the Department’s ability to effectively 
implement the Bio-RIDE scheme and achieve its ambitious targets. The various initiatives 
under this scheme have the potential to drive transformative changes in healthcare, 
agriculture, environment, and industry. Most importantly, the Committee hopes that the 
advancements in biotechnology under this scheme will ultimately benefit the common man by 
providing affordable and accessible healthcare solutions, enhancing agricultural productivity, 
promoting environmental sustainability through carbon capture technologies and bio-based 
solutions and creating employment opportunities through bio-industrialization and 
entrepreneurship development.                                                                                       (Para 3.9)             
 
AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS 
 The Committee feels that the establishment of BRIC and its integration of research 
institutions under the iBRIC+ framework has significantly enhanced the governance, 
collaboration, and impact of biotechnology research in India. The data provided reflects 
commendable progress in interdisciplinary research, education, biomanufacturing, and 
industrial partnerships. However, to amplify the outcomes, BRIC should scale 
interdisciplinary research into a nationwide innovation network with industry-aligned 
translational centres, broaden the i3c BRIC-RCB PhD Programme via global academic-
industry partnerships and merit-based fellowships, and develop regional Biomanufacturing 
Hubs for sector-specific bio-solutions. Prioritizing commercialization through streamlined 
regulatory approvals, incentives for startups, and centralized data-sharing platforms will 
expedite market readiness for innovations in diagnostics, biotherapeutics, and disease 
management. Strengthening mentorship programs, industry internships, and entrepreneurial 

21 
 
fellowships will cultivate skilled talent, while leveraging breakthroughs. By scaling research 
initiatives, refining governance mechanisms, and deepening academia-industry synergies, 
BRIC can position India as a global leader in biotechnology and biomanufacturing, fostering 
equitable and sustainable advancements in healthcare, agriculture, and environmental 
resilience.                                                                                                                         (Para 4.6) 
The Committee expresses deep concern over the current state of BIBCOL and IVCOL 
and urges the Department to take immediate and decisive action for their revival. 
Recognizing their immense potential, the Committee strongly believes that both PSUs can 
play a pivotal role in strengthening and transforming India’s vaccine manufacturing 
ecosystem. The Committee recommends that the Department proactively engage with the 
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) and persuade them to secure a revival package for 
both BIBCOL and IVCOL. The Department could explore the possibility of merger of both 
the units to achieve efficiency. If the Department succeeds in securing the revival package 
from DPE, the Committee recommends that the Department should expand BIBCOL’s 
current product portfolio by initiating the production of critical vaccines. Additionally, the 
Department should actively seek technical collaborations with reputed international 
organizations to enhance manufacturing capabilities and technological expertise. The 
Committee acknowledges the Department’s ongoing efforts in developing vaccines for 
Dengue, Malaria, and Chikungunya and suggests that, upon receiving necessary regulatory 
approvals, these vaccines may be manufactured at BIBCOL and IVCOL. Reviving these 
PSUs would not only contribute to ensuring affordable vaccine availability for citizens but 
also position them as key players in the global vaccine market. Once operational, these PSUs 
can leverage their infrastructure to support vaccine exports, further strengthening India’s 
presence in the international biopharmaceutical industry.                                           (Para 4.8) 
 
KEY INITIAVES AND ACHIEVEMENTS IN HEALTHCARE AND BIOTECHNOLOGY
  
The Committee applauds the Department for its strategic foresight and decisive action 
in confronting AMR. Initiatives such as pioneering homegrown therapies, cataloguing 
priority pathogens, establishing AMR bio-repositories, and advancing rapid diagnostics 
underscore India’s resolve to mitigate this global health crisis. The Committee recognizes the 
breakthroughs like Nafithromycin — India’s inaugural indigenous antibiotic targeting drug-
resistant Community-Acquired Bacterial Pneumonia. This innovation exemplifies scientific 
excellence and addresses critical vulnerabilities among high-risk groups. The Committee 
emphasizes the need to expedite the deployment of such solutions through streamlined 
regulatory processes, scalable production, and inclusive partnerships. Strengthening AMR 
monitoring frameworks, broadening investigations into pathogen prioritization and 
integrating diagnostics into primary healthcare are vital next steps.                           (Para 5.5)   
 The Committee commends the Department for its laudable efforts under the National 
Biopharma Mission (NBM) in advancing indigenous vaccine development against critical 
diseases such as Dengue, Chikungunya, Malaria, and cervical cancer. The noteworthy 
progress in pre-clinical studies, clinical trials, and translational research, alongside strategic 
international collaborations, underscores India’s growing capacity to address global health 
challenges through innovation.                                                                                      (Para 5.7)   
 The Committee urges the Department to expedite regulatory clearances, ensure robust 
post-trial protocols, and prioritize cost-effective manufacturing to facilitate the swift market 
entry of these vaccines. Emphasis must be placed on equitable access and affordability for all 
citizens, particularly vulnerable populations. The Committee expresses confidence that the 

22 
 
timely deployment of these vaccines will significantly reduce disease burden, align with 
national health objectives, and reinforce India’s leadership in global vaccine equity. (Para 5.8)   
 The Committee extends its profound appreciation to the Department for the visionary 
launch and strategic implementation of the UMMID Initiative, a critical intervention to 
address the burden of genetic disorders in India. The initiative’s three-pronged approach —
establishing NIDAN Kendras for genetic diagnosis, enhancing the capacity of healthcare 
professionals, and expanding outreach in aspirational districts — has demonstrated 
remarkable success in its pilot phase. The screening of over 2,73,000 pregnant women and 
newborns, identification of 37,000 positive cases, prevention of 34 hemoglobinopathy-affected 
births, and timely diagnosis of 350 newborns with congenital metabolic disorders underscore 
the programme’s transformative impact on maternal and neonatal health. Furthermore, the 
integration of mass awareness campaigns, skill-building workshops, and collaborations with 
educational institutions reflects a holistic model for tackling inherited disorders through 
prevention, early diagnosis, and community engagement.                                            (Para 5.13)   
 The Committee acknowledges the Department’s progress in scaling the UMMID 
Initiative, including its expansion to 30 aspirational districts, establishment of 30 NIDAN 
Kendras and 9 training centres, and the inclusion of private healthcare institutions such 
as SVIMS Tirupati and Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences, Sevagram, in Phase-
II. These efforts signify a commendable stride toward decentralizing access to advanced 
genetic screening and care. However, given the persistent challenges posed by genetic 
disorders—particularly in rural and underserved regions — the Committee urges the 
Department to expedite the pan-India expansion of the UMMID Initiative with a renewed 
focus on universal, time-bound screening coverage. This must include 100% screening of all 
pregnant women and newborns, irrespective of their access to private or Government 
healthcare facilities. The Committee also recommends that following the 100% screening, the 
Department should work upon creating a vulnerability index which would be helpful in 
assessing the susceptibility of specific demographic groups to various genetic disorders. 
   (Para 5.14)   
 The Committee commends the Department for its exemplary commitment to 
advancing multi-disciplinary research and innovation in the domain of biomedical science 
and engineering. The development of pioneering technologies such as InoHeal, Hip 
Pro, Urovib, and Preztic reflects a laudable effort to address pressing healthcare challenges 
through indigenous solutions. However, the Committee notes with concern that a major 
chunk of India’s medical device requirements continue to be met through imports, exposing 
vulnerabilities in healthcare security and economic sustainability. To address this critical gap, 
the Committee strongly urges the Department to intensify its focus on cutting-edge research 
and development in high-priority domains where import dependency remains acute. Priority 
areas could include the indigenous design and manufacturing of advanced imaging systems, 
such as CT scan machines and MRI systems, which are indispensable for modern diagnostics 
yet predominantly sourced from foreign markets. Similarly, the development of ophthalmic 
devices, including intraocular lenses for cataract surgery and retinal imaging equipment, 
must be prioritized to address the growing burden of vision-related ailments and reduce 
reliance on external suppliers.                                                                                        (Para 5.16)   
 Furthermore, the Committee emphasizes the need for innovation in critical care 
equipment, such as ventilators, dialysis machines, and radiation therapy systems, which are 
vital for tertiary healthcare but remain largely imported despite rising domestic demand. 
Integrating emerging technologies like artificial intelligence and machine learning with 
medical diagnostics could further enhance precision, efficiency, and scalability, positioning 
India as a global leader in next-generation healthcare solutions.                                (Para 5.17)   

23 
 
The Committee appreciates the mission program launched by the Department. It is a 
remarkable effort to address rare genetic disorders in children, combining research, 
diagnosis, and care. The program’s focus on identifying novel genes, improving diagnosis, 
enabling prenatal counselling, and developing targeted therapies reflects a transformative 
approach to addressing unmet medical needs. The creation of a pan-Indian database of 
genetic variants promises to empower clinicians and researchers globally while advancing 
precision medicine tailored to India’s diverse population. The Committee expresses 
confidence that PRaGeD will catalyze breakthroughs in understanding and managing rare 
diseases, reducing suffering through early intervention and innovative therapies. Sustained 
funding, capacity-building, and integration of research into clinical practice are critical to its 
success. The Department is urged to strengthen global partnerships, ensure ethical data-
sharing frameworks, and prioritize accessibility of outcomes for vulnerable families.  
(Para 5.19)   
 The Committee appreciates the commendable efforts made by the Department in 
advancing research on neurological disorders, particularly through cohort-based studies and 
investigator driven projects. These initiatives are crucial in deepening our understanding of 
disease mechanisms and developing innovative diagnostic and therapeutic solutions. 
 (Para 5.22)   
 Keeping in view the rising prevalence of neurological disorders, particularly among 
the aging population, the Committee recommends that the Department should launch a 
dedicated mission to comprehensively research the most prevalent neurological diseases. This 
mission should be supported by substantial funding, targeted research programs, and 
strategic collaborations with leading healthcare institutions, academic centres, and industry 
partners to ensure a holistic approach to prevention, early diagnosis, and treatment. 
(Para 5.23) 
HUMAN RESOURCE CHALLENGES 
 The Committee expresses its deep concern over the acute staffing gaps plaguing the 
Department and autonomous institutions under it, condemning the systemic over-reliance on 
temporary contractual hiring to mask chronic manpower deficits. It underscores that such 
short-term stopgap measures erode institutional capacity, stressing that a robust, permanent 
workforce with specialized expertise is indispensable for driving scientific advancement and 
maintaining global competitiveness. To rectify this, the Committee urgently calls for the 
Department to prioritize filling all critical positions — scientific, technical, and administrative 
— through a mission-driven recruitment strategy.                                                        (Para 6.7) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

24 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
 
MINUTES 
 
__________________________ 

25 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND CLIMATE CHANGE 
(2024-25) 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10:30 A.M. on Thursday, the 20th February 2025 in Committee 
Room ‘G-074’, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi-110001.  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda 
3. Shri Sharad Pawar 
4. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
5. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Alfred Kanngam S. Arthur 
7. Shri Pradyut Bordoloi 
8. Shri Vamsi Krishna Gaddam 
9. Dr. Anand Kumar 
10. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
11. Shri Jashubhai Bhilubhai Rathva 
12. Shri Balwant Baswant Wankhade 
 
SECRETARIAT  
1. Smt. Kusum Sudhir, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Arun Kumar, Director 
3. Shri Rajiv Saxena, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
5. Shri Vaibhav Jain, Committee Officer  
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. He apprised the 
Members that in this meeting, the Committee will deliberate on the Demands for Grants for the 
Financial Year 2025-26, focusing on the Department of Biotechnology, followed by the 
presentations from Department of Space, Ministry of Earth Sciences and Department of Scientific 
and Industrial Research. 
                 3. Thereafter, the following representatives of the Department of Biotechnology appeared 
before the Committee: 
 
1. Dr. Rajesh S. Gokhale, Secretary; 
2. Dr. Alka Sharma, Schientist ‘H’; 
3. Dr. Sanjay Mishra, Scientist ‘H’; 
4. Shri Chetan Prakash Jain, JS&FA; 
5. Ms. Ekta Vishnoi, JS;  
6. Dr. Anamika Gambhir, Scientist ‘G’;  
7. Dr. Nitin Kumar Jain, Scientist ‘G’; 
8. Dr. Onkara Nath Tiwari, Scientist ‘F’; 
9. Dr. Vasmsi Krishna, Scientist 'F'; 

26 
 
10. Shri Pankaj Upadhyay, Director,; and 
11. Ms. Divya Chauhan, Director 
4. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Department of Biotechnology and his team of 
officers and asked them to give a brief presentation on the Demands for Grants (2025-26). 
Thereafter, The Secretary made a Power Point Presentation (PPT) highlighting the Department’s 
role in fostering research, innovation, and industry growth through synergistic linkages between 
Government, academia, and private entities. He highlighted the Department’s focus on mission-
oriented research in climate-resilient agriculture, affordable healthcare, and sustainable industrial 
processes. He also discussed the BioE3 Policy which aims to position India as a global leader in 
sustainable biomanufacturing, focusing on bio-based chemicals, functional foods, and precision 
therapeutics. One of the key achievements highlighted was the 10,000 Genome Project, which 
catalogued genetic diversity across 83 Indian populations. The data, hosted at the Indian Biological 
Data Centre (IBDC), aims to tailor medical practices to India’s genetic context, addressing 
disparities in drug efficacy across ethnic groups. Another significant achievement was in the field of 
cell and gene therapy, where breakthroughs included successful gene therapy trials for haemophilia 
and sickle cell anaemia. Plans for clinical trials were discussed, along with CAR-T cell therapies for 
cancer and organoid models for neurological disorders such as Alzheimer’s and Schizophrenia. The 
Department’s progress in vaccine development was also highlighted, with ongoing work on dengue, 
chikungunya, and malaria vaccines. He also mentioned the development of a recombinant chimeric 
malaria vaccine in collaboration with RMRC Bhubaneswar. In the area of biomanufacturing and 
biofoundry, the Department is focusing on scaling enzyme production for 2G ethanol plants and 
addressing future challenges in industries such as dairy and castor oil through microbial 
fermentation. The Numaligarh Oil Factory in Assam was cited as an example, where a 2G ethanol 
plant is being commissioned to produce ethanol from bamboo. Agricultural innovations were 
another key focus, with speed breeding centres in Varanasi and Ludhiana accelerating crop 
development. The Kisan Kawach pesticide-resistant suit, which protects farmers from pesticide 
exposure, was also showcased. This suit, costing Rs. 600, can be washed up to 1,000 times without 
losing its effectiveness. The Department’s efforts in the North-Eastern region were emphasized, 
with ten percent of the budget earmarked for initiatives in cancer research, indigenous agriculture, 
and biodiversity. The budgetary overview for 2025-26 was presented, with a Budget Estimate (BE) 
of Rs. 3,446 crores, including Rs. 1,000 crores for biomanufacturing and biofoundry.  
5. Thereafter, the Chairman and Members of the Committee raised several queries such as 
China’s shift to microbial fermentation for castor oil production, which threatens Indian exports, 
bioremediation for river cleaning, high-yielding, developing gene-edited crops for drought 
resistance and yield improvement, short-duration crops in Assam to enable multiple harvests, 
nurturing the biotech start-up ecosystem, revival of Bharat Immunologicals and Biologicals 
Corporation Limited (BIBCOL), bridging the budgetary gaps, ensuring timely fund utilization, and 
enhancing transparency in North-Eastern allocations. 
6. The Secretary and other representatives of the Department of Biotechnology, while 
presenting their views, also responded to some of the queries raised by the Chairman and Members 
of the Committee. The Chairman also directed the Secretary to furnish written replies to other 
queries/points/issues raised by him and other Members of the Committee, which could not be 
replied during the meeting, to the Secretariat.      
7. The representatives of the Department of Biotechnology then withdrew. 
8. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
9. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
10. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
11. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 

27 
 
12. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
13. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
14. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
15. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
16. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
17. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
18. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
19. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
20. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
21. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
22. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
23. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
24. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 5:30 p.m. 
                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________ 
******** Relate to other matters. 

28 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND CLIMATE CHANGE 
(2024-25) 
VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 3:30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 19th March, 2025 in Committee Room 
No. 4, First Floor, 'A' Block, PHA Extension, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita – Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Narayanasa K. Bhandage  
3. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
4. Shri Jairam Ramesh   
5. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Pradyut Bordoloi  
7. Shri Phani Bhusan Choudhury 
8. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb 
9. Shri Vamsi Krishna Gaddam 
10. Shri Tapir Gao 
11. Adv K. Francis George  
12. Shri Mahesh Kashyap 
13. Dr. Anand Kumar 
14. Shri Mohibbullah 
15. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
16. Shri Jashubhai Bhilubhai Rathva  
17. Shri Trivendra Singh Rawat 
18. Shrimati Himadri Singh 
19. Shri Balwant Baswant Wankhade  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary  
2. Smt. Kusum Sudhir, Joint Secretary  
3. Shri Arun Kumar, Director  
4. Shri Rajiv Saxena, Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
6. Shri Vaibhav Jain, Committee Officer                       

29 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. The 
Committee then took up consideration of the draft 387th,  388th, 389th, 390th, 391st, 392nd and 393rd 
Reports of the Committee on the Demands for Grants 2025-26, of the Ministries/Departments of 
Atomic Energy; Biotechnology; Scientific and Industrial Research; Science & Technology; Space; 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change; and Earth Sciences, respectively and adopted the same 
after some deliberations. The Chairman requested all the Members to give their 
suggestions/amendments/recommendations to be incorporated in the draft Reports by 5.00 p.m. of 
20th March, 2025. 
3. The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned Reports in both the Houses of 
Parliament on the 25th  March, 2025.  
4. *  *  *  *  *  *  
        
5. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 4:00 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________ 
**** Relate to other matters. 
 