Sixty-Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (1999-2000)
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/68report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:11]
 
 
Sixty-Eighth   Report on Demands for Grants (1999-2000)
of the Department of Space
 
            India’s Space Programme, since its inception in the early sixties, has been guided by a vision which laid emphasis on the
 application of space technology for finding solution to the problems of man and society thereby establishing a viable & self
 reliant space programme.  From the very beginning, long-range plans have been drawn up to steer the programme effectively
 ensuring appropriate linkages among the application needs, satellite missions, launch vehicle capabilities and technology
 development.  Over the last three-and-half decades, significant progress has been made  in  space technology for building
 world-class satellites for communications and remote sensing; for launching the remote sensing satellites from India with
 indigenous launch vehicle; and providing the benefits of space technology to improve the quality of life at the grass root level,
 thus contributing to several areas of national development.
2.         In tune with the goal of self reliant use of space technology for national development, the thrust areas of the Indian
 Space Programme include:-
(a)        satellite  based communication for various applications.
(b)        satellite based remote sensing for resources survey, management and environmental monitoring;
(c)        meteorological applications; and
(d)        development and operationalisation of indigenous and launch vehicles for providing these space services.
3.         The Department of Space (DOS) is responsible for implementing the policies framed by the Space Commission.  The
 policies are carried out through the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) and the three Grant in aid institutions, viz. the
 National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA), the Physical Research Laboratory (PRL) and the National Mesosphere-
Stratosphere-Troposphere Radar Facility (NMRF).
4.         The cumulative expenditure on space research till the end of Eighth Plan period i.e. from the inception in 1962-63 to
 1996-97, is Rs.7431.67 crore.  During the Eighth Plan, most of the programmatic targets and missions planned have been
 achieved. The total expenditure incurred is Rs.3928.53 crore (Plan Rs.3155.74 crore and Non-Plan Rs.772.79 crore). The major
 missions achieved are INSAT-2B, INSAT-2C, INSAT-2D, IRS-1E, IRS-P2, IRS-1C, IRS-P3, SROSS-C1 and SROSS-C2.
 Besides, considerable progress in the areas like development of indigenous cryogenic engine and stage for the GSLV
 programme, technological development for indigenisation of strategic and critical sub-systems & components and setting up of
 facilities for realisation of inertial systems and electro-optical systems have been achieved. 
5.         The Committee was informed that the Planning Commission has allocated a Plan outlay of Rs.6511.72 crore, against
 their earlier communication of Rs.7100.00 crore and the Non-Plan outlay of Rs.1200 crore for the Ninth Plan period. Thus, the
 total outlay for the Ninth Plan is Rs.7711.72 crore. However, the actual Plan budgetary allocation would be decided annually
 based on the programmatic requirements.
6.         The programme directions and the programmatic targets for the Ninth Plan have been formulated after extensive
 interactions and consultations with user Ministries. The major missions planned for the Ninth Plan to realise the programmatic
 targets have been indicated in Annexure-I. While the basic vision would continue to be the large scale application of space
 technology for finding solutions to the problems of man and society, the programme would respond effectively to the dynamic
 and complex problems of the coming years. The   major programmes planned include (i) operationalisation of Geosynchronous
 Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV) towards achievement of self-reliance in launching communication satellites;  (ii) providing
 additional and newer operational communication satellite services to meet the increasing national needs;  (iii) building earth
 observation systems for wide range of applications related to land, water and ocean resources as well as atmospheric
 observations; (iv) establishing the GRAMSAT programme for integrating the potentials of satellite communication and remote
 sensing for rural development including the tele-education and tele-health; (v) establishing new communication services for
 Digital Audio and Data Broadcasting and Direct to Home TV services; (vi) establishing a viable system for Disaster
 Management through Earth observation, satellite-based communications, conventional survey information and local networks;
 (vii) research and development as well as technology development; and (viii) enhanced interface between Indian industry and
 academia to give boost to the national space effort.
7.         The Committee observes that during 1996-97, the Department had utilised the funds to the extent of 99.83 per cent.  In
 1997-98, the fund utilisation level was about 99.13 per cent.  The provisional expenditure indicates maximum utilisation of

Sixty-Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (1999-2000)
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/68report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:11]
 funds by the Department of the RE allocation for 1998-99. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Department has
 made maximum utilisation of the funds allocated to it during 1996-97, 1997-98 and 1998-99.
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1999-2000)
8.         The Committee was informed that keeping in view the Mission profile for Ninth Plan and specifically the programmatic
 needs/milestones targeted for realisation during the current year the budget requirements of the Department of Space has been
 drawn up. A significant part of the budgetary allocation sought for 1999-2000 is towards the ongoing projects  which have
 already been approved by the Government. Out of the total budgetary allocation (Net) of Rs.1755.00 crore and budgetary
 allocation (Gross) of Rs. 1759.82 crore,  the budget for approved major projects is Rs.1029.00 crore. The financial provision for
 BE 1999-2000 is given in Annexure-II.
9.         The major activities/milestones planned to be undertaken during the current year include launching and
 operationalisation of INSAT-2E, launching of IRS-P4 along with two foreign small satellites viz. KITSAT-3 from South Korea
 and DLR-TUBSAT from Germany on board the indigenous launch vehicle PSLV-C2, completion of Spacecraft
 assembly/testing and preparations for launching of INSAT-3A, first developmental flight of GSLV, and assembly, integration,
 testing and readiness of GSAT-1 satellite for GSLV-D1 flight.
10.        According to the Department of Space, the new activities which require  additional allocation of funds during the
 current year include: (i) completion of spacecraft fabrication, assembly & testing and launch & operationalisation of INSAT-
3B; (ii) completion of spacecraft assembly/testing and launch of INSAT-3A;  (iii) initiation of subsystem fabrication and testing
 for INSAT-3C; (iv) completion of procurement activity, spacecraft subsystem fabrication activity and payload development of
 IRS-P5 (Cartosat) spacecraft; (v) completion of procurement long lead items and subsystem fabrication of IRS-P6
 (Resourcesat) spacecraft; (vi) completion of preliminary & detailed design and civil works other than vehicle assembly bay of
 the second launch pad; and (vii) integration and testing of prototype engine and Initiation of hot test of the CUS project.
 Besides, some other new projects which necessitate additional funds include work on IRS-2 (advanced cartography) and
 GSAT-2&3 satellites for development flights of GSLV, etc.         
11.        In formulating the BE for 1999-2000 the important considerations have been the cash flow requirement for INSAT-3
 project including associated launch services.  During the current year, work on two of the INSAT-3 satellites viz. INSAT-3B
 and INSAT-3A are targeted for completion and substantial part of the work on subsequent satellite INSAT-3C is also to be
 completed for possible launch in 2000-01. Accordingly, the fabrication and procurement activities are being accelerated to meet
 this schedule.  The contract for procured launch services for INSAT-3A and 3C are also being concluded and milestone
 payments towards this are also due in 1999-2000.  The estimated cash flow requirement in the current year for INSAT-3 project
 (spacecraft and launch services) alone is Rs.565 crore.
12.        The major Space Applications programmes would require an outlay of Rs.748.92 crore during the current year
 essentially for the NNRMS/NRIS programme, Remote Sensing application development, Integrated Mission for Sustainable
 Development, GRAMSAT pilot project (Jhabua), GSAT-1 application projects, and other application programmes.  This also
 includes Rs.565.00 crore towards INSAT-3 Projects and for programmes like R&D applications, technical facilities
 augmentation/replacement, O&M of related Centres like Space Application Centre, DECU and RRSSCs as well as Grant-in-aid
 to NRSA.
INDIAN NATIONAL SATELLITE SYSTEM (INSAT)
13.        The  system (INSAT), which became operational with INSAT-1B, is a multi-agency, multi-purpose operational satellite
 system which provides domestic long distance telecommunications, meteorological earth observation and data relay, nation
 wide direct satellite TV broadcasting to augmented TV receivers, nation wide radio networking, TV programme distribution
 and re-broadcasting to terrestrial transmitters, etc. The system has enabled communication to and fro any part of India leading
 to training and awareness among rural masses on better agricultural practices, land and water resources management, family
 planning, health care and hygiene, disaster warning and rescue operations, etc.
13.1      The INSAT space segment, which is one of the largest domestic satellites in Asia, at present consists of five satellites
 namely NSAT-ID, INSAT-2A, INSAT-2B, INSAT-2C and INSAT-2DT acquired from ARABSAT Organisation, after INSAT-
2D became inoperable on October 4, 1997.
13.2      Secretary, Department of Space took the opportunity to inform the Committee that the indigenously designed,
 developed and tested INSAT-2E, was launched on 3
rd April, 1999 by the Ariane launch Vehicle of the European Space
 Agency. INSAT-2 is carrying 17 C-Band and lower extended C-Band transponders, a Very High Resolution Radiometer
 (VHRR), similar to that of INSAT-2A and INSAT-2B. It has an additional water vapour channel and a Charged Coupled
 Device (CCD) camera operating in visible, near infrared and short wave infrared bands with 1 km. resolution. Once INSAT-2E
 is operational it would beam television signals not only over India but also over other regions right from Australia on the

Sixty-Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (1999-2000)
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/68report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:11]
 eastern side to Europe on the western side. Eleven 36 MHz equivalent units of C-band capacity on INSAT-2E would be leased
 to INTELSAT. Secretary further informed the Committee that INSAT-2E health is normal and the satellite is expected to be
 ready for operational use by 1 st week of May after completion of all deployments, stabilisation and detailed on-orbit tests. The
 sanctioned cost of the INSAT-2CD & E satellites and 2DT is Rs.654.70 crore. In the current year, the financial requirement for
 these is kept at Rs.26.50 crore.
13.3      In response to a query raised  on the indigenous capability to launch INSAT category of satellites, the Secretary, DOS,
 informed the Committee that the Indian Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV) has capability to launch 1000-1200 kg satellites
 into Polar Orbit and the IRS satellites are launched by PSLV.  The INSAT satellites are heavier weighing 2 to 2.5 tonnes in
 Geo-stationary transfer orbit and hence are being launched currently from foreign launchers.  The Geo-stationary Satellite
 Launch Vehicle (GSLV) programme which is already in advanced stages of development would provide India with the
 capability to launch INSAT type of satellites in future.
13.4      In view of INSAT-1D approaching its end of life and the growing user demand, it became necessary to augment the
 transponder capacity on a short-term basis by leasing seven transponders onboard Thaicom-3 satellite. Accordingly, the
 financial outlay in RE 1998-99 and BE 1999-2000 includes Rs.17.00 crore each for lease of transponders from Thaicom-3
 Satellite.
13.5      The INSAT-3 space crafts (INSAT-3A, 3B, 3C, 3D and 3E) have been planned for providing continuity in services,
 expansion of capacity and improving the capabilities of INSAT system for providing communication and meteorological
 services.   Consequent on the de-commissioning of the INSAT-2D, it has been decided to reconfigure and reschedule INSAT-
3B and launch it ahead of INSAT-3A during 1999-2000.  It is planned to launch INSAT-3A towards the end of 1999-2000.  The
 INSAT-3C and 3D are planned for launch during 2000-2002.
SATELLITE NAVIGATION
14.        Satellite navigation is a service  which is expected to become operational in many advanced countries like United
 States, Japan, Europe, New Zealand, Australia and Canada. The International Civil Aviation Organisation has made Satellite
 navigation equipment mandatory on all civilian aircraft. To upgrade the existing Communications Navigation and Surveillance
 (CNS) and Air-Traffic Management (ATM) system in India, the Airports authority of India (AAI) is planning to make them
 adaptable to the Future Air Navigation System (FANS) through the introduction of Indian Wide Area Differential GPS
 (WADGPS) system. Therefore, as a plan AAI would phase out the existing navigational aids and would increasingly depend on
 satellite navigation by the year 2010.
14.1      The Secretary, DOS, informed the Committee that the Department has prepared and sent a preliminary project report on
 satellite based navigation system to the Airports Authority of India (AAI). The AAI has sought certain technical clarifications 
 which are being studied by the Department. Accordingly, a revised proposal would be sent to AAI shortly. The national
 Steering Committee on communications, navigation and surveillance Air Traffic Management (CNS/ATM) is expected to
 review this proposal with the Department of Space for formalising the plan of action.
INDIAN REMOTE SENSING SATELLITE (IRS)
15.        The Indian Remote Sensing (IRS), started with the launching of IRS-1A in March 1988, is the mainstay of National
 Natural Resources Management System (NNRMS) providing continuously space-based data for the optimal utilisation of
 natural resources. At present the IRS system comprises IRS-1B, 1C, 1D and IRS-P3.
15.1      The  Department has undertaken initiatives in the use of IRS data in the country for drought monitoring and assessment,
 water resources management, forest, environment and the resources sector, geology and mineral prospecting, agriculture
 applications, integrated land and water resources management, wasteland mapping, rural and urban development and coastal
 and ocean-related applications.
15.2      The Remote Sensing applications are carried out under the broad umbrella of National Natural Management System
 (NNRMS). The nine NNRMS Standing Committees encompassing major natural resources and developmental areas like
 agriculture, bio-resources and environment, urban development, etc. periodically review the status of utilisation of remote
 sensing in their respective fields and provide guidance for promoting remote sensing based activities.
15.3      Currently the National (Natural) Resources Information System (NRIS) programme has been undertaken on a pilot scale
 in 30 districts spread over 17 states on 1:50,000 scale and in 4 states (Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Maharastra and Gujarat) on
 1:250,000 scale with active participation from the concerned state governments. The progress made in these states/districts has
 been satisfactory and the systems would be operationalised in these districts and states in the current year.
15.4      The effective utilisation of IRS database on an operational basis is possible only when the states themselves establish
 appropriate mechanism to integrate the database with their developmental planning. In order to realise this objective, the

Sixty-Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (1999-2000)
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/68report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:11]
 establishment of State Natural Resources Management System (SNRMS) at state level has been conceptualised on the pattern
 of the existing NNRMS with the various state line departments closely interacting with each other for effective management of
 natural resources in the states. The SNRMS would be responsible for assessing information needs for natural resources
 management and developmental activities in the state and creating appropriate database and programmes, through the State
 Remote Sensing Centres which would act as the nodal agencies for SNRMS. The first of its kind has been set up recently by the
 Government of Uttar Pradesh. States like Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, and Maharashtra are also in the process of
 establishing SNRMS in the near future.
 
 
16         The Committee agrees that effective management of natural resources is necessary for carrying out
 developmental activities. It is more so when the natural resources appear to be depleting in the years to come while
 demographic pressure are mounting up on the scarce natural resources. Establishment of State Natural Resources
 Management System (SNRMS) for optimal utilisation of natural resources in the states is a step in the right direction. 
WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
17.        The Committee was informed about the application of remote sensing data in finding out water resources and its use in
 providing water to villages. The National Drinking Water Mission and the remote sensing based maps and inputs were
 generated and used to locate ground water resources for drilling bore wells in villages.
17.1      As regards the ground water survey, the Committee was informed that recently that the Ministry of Water Resources
 had requested the Department of Space to undertake the second phase of the Rajiv Gandhi Drinking Water Mission. Under this
 mission 4.5 lakhs habitats in the country would be covered. In the first phase, it has been decided to undertake this programme
 in five states i.e. Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa and Maharashtra covering 1.5 lakhs habitats where the
 drinking water resources have to be identified.  At present,  the Department is engaged in developing the hydro-geo-
morphological maps for these 1.5 lakhs habitats. In Tamil Nadu  382 blocks have been identified by the Department with the
 help of this hydro-geo-morphological mapping. In the next three years  a total of 4.5 lakhs habitats are to be covered by the
 mapping.
18.        The Committee observes that amidst high exploitation and fast depleting  ground water table in the country is a
 matter of serious concern.  Therefore, there has to be a balance between the drawl of water from the surface and
 creation of water harvesting structures.  It is therefore necessary to pursue vigorously the project in Tamil Nadu for
 identifying sites for water harvesting structures.  If the exercise proves successful, the Committee would like the similar
 projects to be drawn up for other parts of the country.
WEATHER FORECASTING
19.        The Committee was informed that a vast array of space based meteorological data exists but what was lacking was
 accurate weather prediction system. Modelling in the tropical region is more complex than modeling in the temperate region
 due to complexities in atmospheric circulation for which it is difficult for us to predict even two or three days before. Therefore,
 accuracy in predicting weather conditions is an urgent need of the agricultural sector. Presently a small Committee has been
 constituted consisting of people from the DOS, DST and the India Meteorology Department (IMD). The Director-General of
 the IMD is the Chairman of the Committee to look into these specific issues relating to the weather forecasting.
19.1      In response to a query raised by the Members on the quality of weather forecasting on Doordarshan, the Committee was
 informed that the matter has been discussed with the Department of Science and Technology (DST),  Secretary, DST has
 formed a Committee with Director General, IMD as the Convenor and Members from DST, Doordarshan, DOS and Ministry of
 Information & Broadcasting to review and recommend innovative weather news on Doordarshan.  The Committee would
 specifically recommend measures to enhance the quality of Doordarshan weather news bulletins to international standards,
 suggest mechanism to monitor the news bulletin and ensure standards, recommend necessary software development, and
 maintain regularity of telecast.  Accordingly, necessary action would be initiated based on the recommendations of the
 Committee.        
19.2      The Committee expresses its concern over the lack of precision in  weather forecasts which have an adverse effect
 on agriculture. Besides, our inability to predict cyclones and other natural calamities plays havoc with human life. It is
 therefore necessary to improve our system of forecasting.
CLIMATE/GLOBAL CHANGE 
20.        On the question of climate study and climatic changes the Committee was informed that the global climate change is an
 important area of concern world over and is a complex study involving extensive observations/data collection, modeling and

Sixty-Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (1999-2000)
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/68report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:11]
 analysis. ISRO/DOS, has taken up a programme for studying parameters related to global environment.  The programme is
 known as ISRO Geo-sphere Bio-sphere programme (IGBP) which is part of an international programme.  The IGBP
 encompasses study of climate and its modeling, minor constituents and radiation, land-air-ocean interactions and past
 climate/global change studies and over 40 research projects are now in progress at various academic institutes/universities in
 this area.  In a co-operative arrangement with NASA & NOAA of USA, ISRO/DOS has also taken up joint research projects on
 the global weather systems which especially improve the prediction capabilities with reference to cyclones and monsoon in the
 country.  IRRO/DOS is also participating in an international program called “Indian Ocean Experiment  (INDOEX)” with the
 objective of improving the understanding on the impact of cloud-aerosol 0radiation interactive processes for monsoon and
 related circulation patterns over Indian oceanic region.
DIRECT-TO-HOME TV MISSION
21.        The basic concept of a Direct to Home Television Broadcasting satellite system (DTHTV) is to launch a high power
 satellite operating in the Ku-band. In this regard, the Committee was informed that the Government is not in a position to
 support financially the DTH programme and instead have suggested to find out private concerns or private resources to manage
 the programme. The Committee was also apprised that the Department is in touch with private investors and a few of them have
 shown interest in supporting the programme. However, no formal contact has been made with the willing investors so far. In
 the current year, however, the financial allocation for this project has been kept at Rs.10 lakhs.
INTEGRATED MISSION FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (IMSD)
22.        Integrated Mission for Sustainable Development (IMSD), which was initiated in 1992, aimed at generating local
 specific action plans for sustainable development of natural resources.  Local specific prescriptions have been  generated using
 data from IRS satellites and collateral socio-economic data.  Presently IMSD covers specific problem areas selected from 175
 districts. Out of which 34 districts are covered in full and in other districts specific blocks or watersheds or parts of the districts
 are being covered, thus covering a geographical area of 84 million hectares.
22.1      Towards institutionalising the use of IMSD action plans in the watershed development planning process of the
 districts/states, 45 demonstrative model districts have been chosen where intense interactions at the state/district/watershed
 levels are going on. Efforts are also on to get appropriate modifications in the guidelines of Ministry of Rural Areas &
 Employment (MoRAE), Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) etc., through interaction with the user Ministries to institutionalise the
 use of IMSD action plan.
22.2      IMSD is mainly carried out in the problem districts of the country and the scope of IMSD would   be enlarged in a
 phased manner after detailed review of the progress made so far. In this regard, consultations with various states have already
 been initiated. Necessary technical details and strategies are being jointly worked out with active participation from the State
 Remote Sensing Centres (SRSC) of various States for taking up the Phase III of the project.
23         The Committee feels that the progress under the project is slow as only 34 districts out of 175 districts have been
 fully covered. The Committee observes that the work under the project needs to be pushed up so as to cover all the 175
 districts within the minimum span of time.
GEO-SYNCHRONOUS LAUNCH VEICHLE (GSLV) PROJECT
24.        GSLV is designed with capability to place INSAT class communication satellites in Geo-synchronous transfer orbit. 
 GSLV employs a three stage configuration of which the third stage employs an imported cryogenic stage from M/s
 Glavkosmos, Russia. The first developmental flight of GSLV (GSLV-D1) is planned with the cryogenic engine and stage
 during 1999-2000. Russia has already supplied one cryogenic engine for this purpose. The second cryogenic engine has also
 been accepted and is awaiting transportation from Russia. Budget provision for these engines has been  made in GSLV project.
24.1      The total cost approved for GSLV project is Rs.1105.30 crore. By the  end of 1998-99 the cumulative expenditure of the
 project was estimated to be Rs.983.87 crore i.e. approximately 89 per cent of the total project cost. Thus, a substantial part of
 the total project cost has already been incurred. The project has already achieved substantial progress and the flight systems are
 getting ready. Realisation of CS2 and CS3 stages and solid motor stage, NGC, and TTC flight packages for GSLV-D2 are
 planned during the current year.
25         The Committee notes with satisfaction the extent of utilisation of funds under the project.
CRYOGENIC UPPER STAGE PROJECT (CUSP)
26.        The Project approved by the Government with a total estimated cost of Rs.335.89 crore is a separate indigenous project
 for development of cryogenic engine for use in GSLV. The thrust of the project during the previous year was towards realising
 the engine subsystem and initiating action for realising facilities for fabrication and testing and commissioning of rotary
 vacuum brazing facility. Gas generator and thrust chamber component brazing were also completed. Besides, final acceptance

Sixty-Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (1999-2000)
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/68report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:11]
 test of the main engine and steering engine test facility were completed at Mahendragiri.
26.1      The cumulative expenditure of this project by the end of 1998-99 would be Rs.221.90 crore i.e. approximately 66 per
 cent of the project cost. The BE for the current year is based on the programmatic target of realising the hardware for engine
 and stage component and testing of cryo engine. The increase in budget sought in BE for 1999-2000 is essentially towards
 commissioning of cryo fluid storage facility at Sriharikota.
27.        The Committee observes that the funds have not been utilised fully. Efforts should always aim at cent per cent
 utilisation of funds.        
DISASTER MANAGEMENT
28.        Disaster Management System can be broadly classified into three phases, viz. (i) pre-disaster planning , consisting of
 steps leading to disaster prevention, disaster mitigation, and disaster preparedness (ii) the response to the disaster comprising
 the disaster warning and the emergency relief aspects, and (iii) the recovery phase consisting of rehabilitation and
 reconstruction. Space-based disaster management system provides valuable inputs in all the three phases, when appropriately
 integrated with the conventional ground based system.
28.1      With a view to ensure quick dissemination of weather warnings of impending disaster from approaching cyclones,
 specially designed receivers i.e.  Cyclone  Warning Dissemination Systems have been installed in the cyclone-prone coastal
 areas to disseminate cyclone warning messages directly to the affected areas. At present 250 CWDS have been deployed in
 various coastal states of India. The India Meteorological Department has planned 100 more CWDS receivers for deployment in
 the Ninth Plan period.
EARTH QUAKE PREDICTION
29.        On prediction of earthquakes with precise information on location and time of incidence, the Secretary, DOS, informed
 that it is extremely difficult and currently there are no proven techniques in this regard.  Satellite remote sensing along with
 collateral data helps in identification and delineation of major structural/tectonically significant zones from the point of view of
 seismic risk.  Such information helps in locating major geo-engineering structures like dams as well as infrastructural facilities
 in relatively safer locations in quake prone regions.  With regard to the disasters per-se, ISRO/DOS, has routinely been
 monitoring all major flood events as well as agricultural drought through INSAT and IRS satellites over the last one decade.
SECOND LAUNCH PAD PROJECT
30.        The Project  was sanctioned during October, 1997, with a total project cost of Rs.289.00 crore.  It would prove
 redundant to the existing launch pad for current versions of Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV) and Geo-synchronous
 Launch Vehicle GSLV), besides enabling launch of advanced launch vehicles to GTO with capability to launch 4 tones class
 satellite.  The facilities include launch pad with jet deflector, vehicle assembly bay, check-out system, propellant and gas
 storage and transfer facilities, etc.   
30.1      The budgetary allocation during the current year is in tune with the milestone targets. The system design, specification
 requirement and detailed input documents for turn key execution have been completed and the contract has been awarded in
 March 1999. As the project execution contract been awarded recently, the project activities would pick up momentum during
 the current year necessitating higher budgetary support.
30.2      The Committee was informed that the major milestones targeted for the current year include completion of preliminary
 design and detailed  design, placement of orders for the major items, completion of civil works other than Vehicle Assembly
 Bay, and receipt of all major items at site. The financial allocation for the project in the current financial year has been kept at
 Rs.83.25 crore.
31.        The Committee is of the view that extra budgetary support for the Second Launch Pad Project may be
 considered at  RE stage in the current year.
IRS-P5 (CARTOSAT) AND IRS-P6 (RESOURCESAT)
32..       IRS P5 (Cartosat) and IRS P6 (Resourcesat) are the satellites with advanced, state-of-the-art remote sensing payloads
 meeting the specific requirements of cartography and agricultural application respectively.
 32.1     The developmental activities of both IRS P5 and IRS P6 are progressing satisfactorily and the hardware realisation is
 expected to gather significant momentum during the current year. During the current year, most of the fabrication activities
 pertaining to IRS P5 spacecraft subsystems are planned to be completed and significant progress would be made in payload
 development. In respect of IRS P6, the procurement of long lead items are planned to be completed in the current year and the
 work on realisation of mainframe subsystems would be initiated.

Sixty-Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (1999-2000)
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/68report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:11]
32.2      The Committee was informed that there could be marginal effect on the delivery schedules of some of the contractual
 items due to the sanctions. However, it is envisaged that the overall schedule could still be met. The budget allocation sought
 for the current year is commensurate with the planned launch schedules, i.e. 2000-01 and 2001-02, for both IRS P5 and IRS P6
 respectively. The budgetary support required for IRS P5/P6 during 2000-2002 has been provided in the Ninth Five  Year Plan
 outlay of the Department.
DEVELOPMENT EDUCATIONAL COMMUNICATION UNIT (DECU)
33.        The Development and Educational Communication Unit (DECU) is involved in the conception, definition, planning,
 implementation and socio-economic evaluation of space applications and works closely with users to experiment innovative
 space system configurations to meet specific requirements.  The total outlay for DECU for the current year is Rs.11.79 crore as
 against Rs.8.59 crore allocated in RE stage of 1998-99. The amount sought in BE stage of the current year is Rs.3.20 crore
 more than the RE and Rs.5.90 crore more than the BE stages of 1998-99.
33.1      The budget under “Development and Educational Communication Unit” (DECU) also includes funds towards execution
 of Jhabua Development Communication Project (JDCP) and the Training and Development Communication Channel (TDCC)
 programs, besides institutional maintenance and operations support of DECU.
33.2      The Secretary, DOS, informed the Committee that the BE stage allocations for the previous year had provision for
 JDCP operations up to October, 1998. However, based on a decision taken by the Committee of Secretaries in January 1998, it
 has been decided to (i) extend the JDCP operations by one more year up to October, 1999 and (ii) expand the network to
 include 200 villages in the  neighbourhood of Dhar and Bhawani districts of Madhya Pradesh with 50 per cent of the budget
 support from the Department of Space and the rest 50 per cent is supported by the Ministry of Rural Areas and Employment.
 Accordingly, increased allocations have been sought in BE stage of the current year towards extension and expansion of JDCP
 project.
33.3      The Department in consultation with Madhya Pradesh Government has embarked on the expansion project of the JDCP
 network in the districts of Dhar and Bhawani and extending the existing JDCP project by one more year till the Madhya
 Pradesh Government takes it over. The backward and tribal  communities of the region – especially women are the main
 beneficiaries of the programme, besides the district and block level extension official of the State Government. This experiment
 would provide valuable inputs for extending the programme to other parts of the country.
33.4      Under Training and Development Communication Channel (TDCC) programme, the new prospective users include
 State Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Himachal Pradesh & Uttar Pradesh, North Eastern Council (NEC), Army HQ,
 NIRD, etc. The major activity under TDCC would be up-gradation of the system and the possible use of digital video. Efforts
 have also been initiated to introduce new technologies in TDCC network in a phased manner.
ISRO SPONSORED RESEARCH PROGRAMME (RESPOND)
34.        Under the RESPOND program, space technology cells have been established in major scientific and technological
 institutions for carrying out research and educational projects in important and advanced areas of space science & technology.
 The academic institutes, for establishing such space technology cells, have been identified taking into account the available
 research base, infrastructure facilities and the expertise in the research areas of direct relevance to ISRO. The financial
 allocation for this programme has been kept at Rs.4.00 crore in the current year.
34.1      Efforts are also being made in this direction to identify few academic institutions/universities for establishing the
 Centres of Excellence and space technology/education centres. Currently, apart from IISc and IITs, more than 40 academic
 institutions/universities are supported through RESPOND program for undertaking research projects of relevance to ISRO. In
 addition, a Centre for Atmospheric Physics and Meteorology at Sri Venkateshwara University,  Tirupati, which functions in
 coordination with National MST Radar Facility, Gadanki, and a space cell at Pune University for conducting studies related to
 Meteorology, Space radiation damage, Optical sensors and long distance rural education program have been established.
35.        The Committee recommends that necessary steps should be taken under the ISRO Sponsored Research
 Programme (RESPOND) to create more Space Technology Cells (STCs) in other premier technological
 institutes/universities, apart from IISc & IITs with a view to strengthen the ISRO academic institution interaction for
 generating a wider infrastructural and manpower training base for space research.
SPACE-INDUSTRY PARTICIPATION
36.        The Committee was told that the Indian Space Research Organisation has been encouraging active participation of
 industries from the country in the execution of space projects with a view to harnessing the potential existing with the industry.
 The co-operative ventures with the industries have been promoted through transfer of technologies to industries for commercial
 exploitation. Besides, provision for technological consultancy and technology utilisation  have been promoted. So far, more

Sixty-Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (1999-2000)
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/68report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:11]
 than 180 consultancy projects have been undertaken including baseline mapping of Gir protected area, acreage estimation of
 mentha crop in some parts of Uttar Pradesh and Punjab, preparation of development plan for Pimpri-Chinchwad Municipal
 Corporation using remote sensing and GIS technologies and development of automobile HMCs. A few major industries have
 been set up with separate fabrication divisions to meet the demands of the space programme.
36.1      The Committee was informed that  three applications for patenting on improved process of gold plating on Magnesium
 alloys substrates, a process of black anodizing on magnesium alloys, and a process of black chromate coating on magnesium-
aluminum alloys had been filed last year.   All these three applications have been granted patents. Patent awareness workshops
 were also conducted last year with a view to make  scientists and engineers “patent conscious” and spreading the patent culture.
37.        After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Space and assessing the progress of various
 important programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the Demands for Grants of
 Rs.1755.00 crore, as sought by the Department of Space for the year 1999-2000, under Demand No. 93  may be
 approved.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations at glance
 
1.         The Committee agrees that effective management of natural resources is necessary for carrying out
 developmental activities. It is more so when the natural resources appear to be depleting in the years to come while
 demographic pressure are mounting up on the scarce natural resources. Establishment of State Natural Resources
 Management System (SNRMS) for optimal utilisation of natural resources in the states is a step in the right direction. 
(Para 16)
2.         The Committee observes that amidst high exploitation and fast depleting  ground water table in the country is a
 matter of serious concern.  Therefore, there has to be a balance between the drawl of water from the surface and
 creation of water harvesting structures.  It is therefore necessary to pursue vigorously the project in Tamil Nadu for
 identifying sites for water harvesting structures.  If the exercise proves successful, the Committee would like the similar
 projects to be drawn up for other parts of the country.
(Para 18)
3.         The Committee expresses its concern over the lack of precision in  weather forecasts which have an adverse effect
 on agriculture. Besides, our inability to predict cyclones and other natural calamities plays havoc with human life. It is
 therefore necessary to improve our system of forecasting.
(Para 19.2)
4.         The Committee feels that the progress under the project Integrated Mission for Sustainable Development (IMSD)
 is slow as only 34 districts out of 175 districts have been fully covered. The Committee observes that the work under the
 project needs to be pushed up so as to cover all the 175 districts within the minimum span of time.
(Para 23)

Sixty-Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (1999-2000)
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/68report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:11]
5.         The Committee observes that the funds have not been utilised fully in case of Cryogenic Upper Stage Project
 (CUSP). Efforts should always aim at cent per cent utilisation of funds.      
(Para 27)
 
6.         The Committee is of the view that extra budgetary support for the Second Launch Pad Project may be considered
 at  RE stage in the current year.
(Para 31)
 
7.         The Committee recommends that necessary steps should be taken under the ISRO Sponsored Research
 Programme (RESPOND) to create more Space Technology Cells (STCs) in other premier technological
 institutes/universities, apart from IISc & IITs with a view to strengthen the ISRO academic institution interaction for
 generating a wider infrastructural and manpower training base for space research.
 
(Para 35)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 