PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1999-2000) 
SIXTY -SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
DEl\1ANDS FOR GRANTS (1999-2000) 
OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY 
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY) 
(DEI\1AND NO. 75) 
(PRESENTED TO RAJY A SA8HA ON 23RD APRIL, 1999) 
(LAID IN LOK SA8HA ON 22ND APRIL, 1999) 
RAJYA SABI-IA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRiL, 1999/V AISAKH, 1921 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
1. COMPOSITION OF Ttit: COMMITI"t:t: 
2. lNTRODUCriON 
3. Rtt'ORr OF THE CoMMtrrt:l: 
4. ANNEXURES 
5. MINUTES 0~ THl: MEETINGS OF THE COMM11TEE 
PAGES 
(i)-(ii) 
(iii) 
i-10 
11-15 
17-22 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS (1998-99) 
1. Shri S.R. Bommai-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Rahasbihari Barik 
4. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
•s. Smt. Saroj Dubey 
%6. Shri Oscar Fernandes 
11. Shri Ram Chandra Khuntia 
8. Dr. D. Masthan 
9. Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty 
10. Shri Lachhman Singh 
$11. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh 
12. Shri W. Angou Singh 
••13. Shri B.P. · Singhal 
14. Shri Prakanta Warisa 
nl5. Vacant 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shri Indra Nath Bhagat 
17. Shri Ranjib Biswal 
18. Shri Chengara Surend ran 
19. Smt. Bhavana Chikhaliya 
20. Dr. (Mrs.) Beatrix D' Souza 
21. Shri M.C. Dhamotharan 
22. Shri Gevrge Eden 
23. Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya 
24. Shri K. Krishnamoorthy 
25. Dr. Charandas Mahant 
ss26. Prof. Ajit Kumar Mehta 
27. Shri Janardan Prasad Mishra 
28. Shri Rupchand Murmu 
• Nomited w.~.f. 27th July, 1991! vice Shri Khan Ghufrnn Znhidi ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.~.f. 4th July, 
1998 on expiry of his term in Rajya Sahha . 
'Yv Nominated w.~.f. 17th July, 199!1. 
# Nomin:lled w.~.f. 17th July, 1\1!11! vice Shri Pranab Mukherj~:c ceased to be 11 Member of the Commitee w.~.f. 29th June, 
1998 
S Nominated w.~.f. 11th August, 1\191! vk-e Shri G. Swaminathan ce:~sed to be a Member of the Committee 
w c.f. 29th June, 1998 on expiry of his term in Rnjya S:.bha. 
•• Nominated w.e.f. 15th September, IWI! v1ce Shri Ram Ratan R:.m who was nominated w.~.f. 12th June, 1998 and 
ce:lSed to be a Member of the Commiuee w.~.f. 4th July, 199tl on expiry of his term in Rajya Sabha. 
** Shri N. Abdul Kh:~der ceased to he n Member of the Committee w.~.f. 29th June, 1998 on expiry of his term in Rajya 
Sabha. 
SS Nominated w.~.f. 12th Jonuary, lWIJ vice Shri Madh:lVrao Scindia ceased to be Member of the Committee 
w.e.f. 16th December, 199tl. 

29. Captain Jai Naruyan Prasad Nishad 
30. Shri Prakash Vishwanath Paranjpe 
31. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pmmanik 
32. Shri S. Vijaya Rama Raju 
33. Shri Inderjit Singh Rao 
34. Smt. Vijaya Raje Scindia 
•35. Mohammad Shahabuddin 
36. Shri Virendra Singh 
37. Prof. Saifuddin Soz 
38. Shri Devji Bhai 0. Tandel 
39. Shri Prasad Baburao Tanpure 
40. Dr: C.P. Thakur 
'41. 
42. 
43. 
#44. 
$45. 
Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
Shri Suresh Warpudkar 
Shri Mukul Wasnik 
Vacant 
Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
•, 
Shri Satish Kumar. Joint Secretary 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Director 
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretury 
Shri Roshan Lal, Committee Officer 
• Nominated w.e.f. 12th April, 1999 vice Shri Maheshwar Singh ceased to be a Member of the 
Committee w.e.f 18!h March, 1999. 
Shri B.M . Menasinakai ceuscd to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. lOth June, 1998. 
$ Shri Ayanur Manjunath ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 11th June, 1998. 

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and 
Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, 
present this Sixty-sixth Report of the Committee. This Report deals with the detailed 
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Department of Biotechnology (Demand No. 75) . 
2. Ln the meeting of the Committee held on the 24th March, 1999 the Secretary and 
other Officers of the Department of Biotechnology gave an overview of the various activities 
of· the Department and the Committee sought clarifications on various aspects of the 
performance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants. 
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department replying to 
the clarifications sought . by the Members and placing before it the required material to 
enable the ·committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of 
13 iotechilOlogy. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on 
April 20, 1999. 
NEw DELHI; 
April, 20, 1999 
S.R. BOMMAI 
Committee on Science & Technology, 
Environment & Forests 

REPORT 
The field of bio-technology has made significant impact in the last decade on the growth 
of agricultural, industrial, plwrmaceutical and medical sectors. The scientific understanding 
at the cellular and molecular levels of biological systems and development of technologies 
based on these hus led to increase in the agricultural productivity, development of vaccines, 
diagnostics, drugs, improved animal husbandry practices, env ironment friendly technologies 
and ~evcral tools for conservation of biological diversity. 
2. In pursuan~:e of these goals, the Department of Bio-technology has provided 
sustained suppo rt to the research, application and commercialising of Bio-technology. The 
Department has made efforts for transferring of some innovations/Research leads to 
indu stry for comme rcia lizutio n and thus serves as a link between research institutions, 
academia and indu stry. Besides supporting basic research, the department has launched a 
number of projects for weaker section of the society. The mandate of the Department 
extends to providing support to R&D, setting up of centres of excellence, promotion of 
large-scal e use of biotechnology, human resource developm ent and manufacturing of 
biologicals. The Department also cremes infrastructural facilities to support Research and 
Production activities; it serves as a nodal point for the collection and dissemination of 
information reluting to biotechnology and evolves bio-safety guidelines. Manufacture and 
application of cell-based vaccines is also one of the major activity of the Department. 
3. It has been stated that during the year 1999-2000, basic research and product and 
process development would be major thrusts through identification of leads from ongoing 
R&D projects . Multi -institutional and multi-disciplinary projects having national impact 
would be pri01·tised and implemented in the areas of agriculture, phyto-pharmaceuticals, 
microbial products, animal biotechnology, infectious diseases and neuro-sciences. 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
4. Based on the recommendation of the Working Group and the proposal submitted for 
Ninth Plan to the Planning Commission, the Department of Biotechnology proposed as 
outlay of Rs. 1026 crore for a period of five years (1997-2002) against which only an amount 
of Rs. 675 crore was sanctioned. Thus the final anrlllal budget was Rs. 85 crore during the 
first year of the 9th Plan (1997-98) against the allocated B.E. of Rs. 107.00 crore & 
projected plan demand of Rs. 129.50 crore (Annexur~-1). During 1998-99, the department 
proposed an outlay of Rs. 125.00 crore, but · the B.E. was kept at the level of last year i.e. 
107.00 crore and the revised estimates were pegged at Rs. 100.81 crore (Annexure-H). 
During the year 1999-2000 the Department has demanded a plan outlay of Rs. 139.00 crore 
while an outlay of Rs. 110.00 crore only has been sanctioned (Annexure-III). 
5. As regards the reasons for the yawning gap of 25% between what was demanded and 
what was actually spent, the Secretary, Department of Biotechnology, informed the 
Committee that every year the Department has been projecting demands based on the 
recom mendations of various Task Forces and Apex Committee on the projects and 
programmes to be planned for each financial year and also keeping in view the priorities of 
the nation and changing trends in the international scenario. The recommended budgetary 
support being released by the Planning Commission has been in the order of 10-15% over 
the R.E. level of previous year. 

6. The Committee has been given to understand that the Department has proposed a 
budgetary outlay of Rs. 1026 crore based on the recommendations of the work group 
constituted by the Planning Commission for preparing the 9th Plan proposals of the 
Department of Biotechnology. As against this amount Planning Commission has committeed a 
budgetary support of Rs. 675 crore. 
7. The Committee observes that the investments made in the area of biotechnology by the 
department for promoting research and development, human resource, establishment of 
infrastructure and autonomous research institutions, have given rich dividends in the form of 
new technologies, patents and publications, academic excellenced and large pool of expertise. 
It is therefore necessary to mount a major effort for bio-industrial development of the 
country . A priority agenda for the next millennium would be to ensure judicious utilisation 
and conservation of biological resources and to undertake mission mode programmes in the 
areas such as vaccines and diagnostics for communicable diseases, genomic anal ysis and to 
develop friendly technologies including transgenic plant research . This would bring about food 
security, nutritional security also diversification of our bread basket. The original proposal for 
9th Plan had more than 50% of the budgetary provision for basic and product oriented 
research with a view to developing products and processes. With the reduced allocation of Rs. 
675 crore, it may not be possible to complete many activities. Therefore, the additional 
allocation of Rs. 75 crore would be necessary to restore several of these important 
programmes for being taken up during the remaining three year (1999-2000). This amount 
would also facilitate conversion of many important R&D leads into products that enhance 
productivity and efficiency of the concerned sectors, provide easy to use, low cost, 
environmentally sound technologies specially for the health care system, for soil fertility, for 
environmental conservation and protection, aimed at sustainable development particularly for 
rural areas. 
8. The Committee is also of the view that Department should draw up its plans 
sufficiently in advance in order to ensure utilisation of allocated funds during a particular 
financial year. This would have an impact on the allocations made during the next financial 
year also. In case of scientific departments, assessment formula for suggesting mandatory cuts 
need not be based on the trend of expenditure during the first six months of the financial year 
as expenditure on programmes and proje~ts generally picks up after the first half of financial 
year. 
BASIC AND PRODUCT ORIENTED R&D 
9. Department of Bio-Technology supports research and development. Some of the 
institutions under the Depurtment e.g . the National Institute of Immunology and the Centre 
for Finger Printing have made some earnings from transfer of technology. The Department 
has earned royalties for its technology for development of monochronal anti-body. But the 
earnings are ploughed back for research , for the benefit of the animals, animal feed, clean 
conditions etc. The earnings have helped create e.g. animal house facility which is serving 
the entire community . 
lO.Thus the projects aim at creation of a strong R&D base and product development. 
These R&D proje cts mainly fall under (i) Basic research; (ii) Crop bio-technoogy; 
(iii) Medicinal and Aromatic Plants ; (iv) Tree and Woody Species, Tissue Culture; 
(v) Seribiote chnology; (vi) Biopro specting of biological wealth; (vii) Medical Bio-technology; 
(viii) Human Genetics and Gcnoms Analysis; (ix) Animal Bio-technology; (x) Aquaculture 
and Marine Bio-technology; (xi) Biodiversity Conservation and Environment. 

11. The allocation for Basic and Product Oriented R&D activities has been restricted to 
Rs. 45.35 crore against the demanded allocation of Rs. 53.50 crore in the current financial 
year as against Rs. 43.40 crore provided for in B.E. and later-on reduced to Rs. 40.63 crore 
at R.E. stage during the last financial year. In reply to a query as to how many projects! 
programmes evolved through Task Forces and Expert Committee for implementation during 
the last financial year were finally taken up for research, the Committee was informed that 
the Department as per its mandate, generates research projects in the priority areas 
identified by the respective Task Forces and Expert Committees and receives projects and 
programmes from individual scientists and team for support. Out of a total of 517 projects 
received during the year 1998-99 the Department has approved and implemented about 205 
projects based on scientific merit and techno-economic feasibility covering 20 different areas 
of specialisation including both basic and applied research. 
12. The Committee is of view that the projects and programmes designed for the benefit 
of farmers, persons belonging to weaker and back ward sections of the Society and the ones 
relating to bio-technologiclll innovations may be given wide publicity through the electronic 
media so that the sections of the sodety for "hich the programmes are intended can benefit. 
Besides, a mechanism should be evolved, for continuous evaluation and monitoring of the 
projects undertaken. 
13. The Department was aske~ whether Government were cosidering any proposal to 
ensure that the Research/non-earning ac~1demic type and other institute consider 
commercialising a part of their activities with a veiw to reduce dependence on budgetary 
support. The Committee was informed that the Department of Bio-technology has not only 
been advocating but ~llso promoting the reseurch orgunisations to consider commercialising a 
part of their activities with a view to reduce dependence on budgetary support. However, 
the Department would like such earnings to be used for improving the basic infrastructure, 
and giving incentives to young scientists. The programmes supported such as Repositories, 
Animal Facilities, Bioinformatic Centres, Pilot Plant to Tissue Culture and Bio-pesticides in 
various institutions have ulready been generating income through sale-proceeds for their 
service and materials. Industries have been involved in serveral R&D projects from the 
beginning to explore commercialisation of the leads during the course of the project. The 
Department also facilitates TechnologyTransfer in close co-ordination with NRDC and BCIL 
for commercialising the R&D leads: 
14. The Committee is happy to note that certain projects undertaken by the Department 
are already generating income. This would reduce their dependence on budgetary support. 
The Departments should ensure that earnings from the projects are commensurate with the 
inputs and are used for reinforcing the projects, by improving the basic infrastructure and for 
providing incentives to young scientists. 
AGRICULTURAL BIO-TECHNOLOGY 
(i) Biological Control of Plant Pests, Diseases and Weeds 
15. The Committee was informed that the projects undertaken by the Department for 
production of bio-pesticides and bio-fertilizers induded four new bio-pesticide technologies 
which are under feasibility studies for commercialisation mass production technologies of 
some of the bio-control agents like-Trichograma (developed by IARI), Trichoderma 
(developed by RRL, Jammu) and Beaveria bassiana and Verticillium lecam (developed by 
AAU, Assam) are being patented. Successful field demonstrations of the some of the bio­
control agents resulted in the recommendation for their use in various States. 

16. In case of Bio-fertilizers the Committee was informe d that a number of projects on 
crop specific bio-fertilizers have been supported. High nitrogen fixing stra ins of rhizobium 
and blue gree algae suitable for diffe rent agrodimatic regions were isolated and 
demonstrated in field conditions Technology for the mass production of mycorrhiza is being 
transferred to industry. Besides, a number of technologies have been developed by the 
department for large scale production of high quality bio-fe rtilize rs specially for rice, pulses, 
fodder, legumes and importa nt forests trees. These tech nologies have been demonstrated 
and are under transfer to field. The department has initiat ed a network programme i.e. 
Integrat ed Nutr ient and pest M anagement to develop a package of practices involving 
various bio-fertilizers for spec ific cropping systems and bio-pesticides. 
17. The Committee commends the work done by the Department in the field of bio­
control agents and bio-fertilizers. The Committee recommends that techniques de,•eloped be 
upgraded and transferred to industry for pilot level production. Besides, the achievements in 
the field of bio-control agents, bio-fcrtilizcr s, production of better quality seeds for 
improvement of crops may be widely disseminated for the benefit of the sections of the society 
which would benefit these achievements. 
(ii) Plant Tissue Culture 
18. As a part of Protocol refinement the Department has initiated a Programme on 
strengthening Tree Biology Research for tacking specific problem s of rege nerati o n and 
improvem ent of important temperate species, production of elite neem varieties at different 
location is continuing. 
19. As regard s the horticultural cro ps the technol ogy for complete plantl et regernerat ion 
of m ango varieties is being refi ned under a coordi nate d programme. Programmes on 
developing a complete package of technology for regeneru tion and extension of banana are 
in the field. Likewise, a project supporte d for the scale up and refinement of the techno lgy 
for Saffron and Kala Zira and a network programmes on Coffee Bio-technology have been 
developed. The test ing of the genetic variation in the tissue culture ruised plants is 
continuing . 
20. The Committee is of the vie'" the efforts be nwde to make use of the tissue culture 
and floriculture technology in areas which are a rich source of herbal heritage, and in areas 
including remote areas where proiJiem of' non-availability of man power is prevalent. 
Additional incentives could be thought of for persons willing to work in these areas to 
augment the man-power re<Juirements. 
SERI BIOTECHNOLOGY I 
21. The Commit!<.:<.: wanted to know the efforts being made to improve th e quality of 
silk , as produced in Chin a. Korea and othe r countr ies, from where we still import silk. This 
ts import an t to bring down the import of silk from ab road . 
22. Sericulture in India is an important agro-and forest-based cottage industry earning 
foreign exchange \\Orth alwut R!:.. 1000 nurc per :uu1um (1997-98) . Seri<:ulture is practi sed in 
about 59.000 villages in India . The indust ry em ploys more than 6 million persons of whom 
the majority are located in rm:tl <~ r ea~ and around -H>'Yo belong to SC I ST. Silk protllll.:tion 
has reached over 15.000 tonn<.:s (1997-98) and India b th<.: se<.:ond largest silk prodw.:cr (18% 
of world production) afte r Chim1 (69 °/.,) Even su. our present production falls very mU<:h 
short of the domestit· tlemand. 

23. The Department of Bio-technology has been supporting a focussed programme on 
the biotechnology of silkworms and host plants over the past few years covering a wide 
spectrum ranging from improvement of breeds to enzyme processing of silk. 
24. The newer techniques of molecular biology and genetic engineering provide 
promises in sericulture . The biotechnological I genetic engineering studies are necessary not 
only on silk worms , but also on their host plants. In pursuance of this, the DBT has 
identified in association with the Central Silk Board thrust areas in sericulture (both 
mulberry and non-mulberry) in which biotechnolgy can play a vital role in increasing 
productivity, enhancing silk quality and improvement of host plants. 
25. The Committee was informed that the on-going and completed project of the 
Dcpart":Ient in the field of sericulture aim at improving Silkworm Productivity by following 
methods:-
(i) Development of gene transfer systems in silkworm: Successful introduction of 
cloned foreign genes into silkworm is already a reality . Attempts now ongoing to 
introduce desirable foreign genes into silkworm. Such genes include those respons­
ible for quality silk yarn, resistance to viruses, bacteria, fungi etc. or "sturdiness". 
(ii) Using the silkworm as a bio-reactor: It would soon be possible to exploit silkworms 
to produce bio-molecules of commercial importance (e.g. vaccines interferons, 
interleukin - 3 etc). Leads already obtained by using recombinant baculovirus 
vactor show great promise in the expression of such products. 
(iii) Producing a molecular genetic map of silkworm: An ambitious project has been 
initiated to identify and map useful genes of silkworms using molecular techniques. 
This will help in breeding better silkworm. 
(iv) Use of diagnostic kits for detection of diseases: A study for the development of a 
diagnostic kit based on immunoassay technique has been completed at the field 
level for nuclear polyhedrosjs virus causing grasserie. A similar study has also been 
carried out for infectious flatchery disease and for pebrine disease. 
(v) Biocontrol of pests (uzifly): An integrated model comprising spraying uzicide 
(benzoci acid) unci release of parasitoid Nesolynx thymus for control of uzifly - a 
serious pest of silkworms has been developed at farmers' level and for Enhancing 
Silk Quality the following techniques are being adopted (i) Enzyme processing of 
silk: This is highly desirable in .view of its eco-friendly nature and its value addition 
to finished products; (ii) Molecular characterization of silk genes in non-mulberry 
silk worm: Molecular biological studies on silk protein (fibroin and sericin) genes of 
non-mulberry silkworms have been initiated; _ and (iii) Molecular studies on non­
mulberry silkworms: Attempts are being made to isolate and characterize the silk 
genes of non-mulberry silkworms for the purpose of introducing the same into the 
system. 
26. Besides, for improvement of Hot Plants, ongoing and completed projects include 
tissue culture propagation of mulberry and non-mulberry host plants, artificial feeds for 
rearing silk worms, induction of haploids and triploids in mulberry as well as geaetic 
tr:msfounution of mulberry. 

MEDICAL BIOTECHNOLOGY AND 1!\ll\IUNODIAGNOSTICS 
27. The Secretary, DBT informed the Committee that special efforts were being made 
to generate projects in the area of major communicable and non-communicable diseases 
namely HIV, tuberculosis, Japanese Encephalitis, cholera, leishmaniasis, malaria, Helicobac~ 
ter plyori and contraceptive vaccines. The funding of multi-institutional projects has yielded 
good leads in terms of targets and objectives. Three assay systems for detection of HIV 
infection were transferred to industry. The western blot test developed at CRI Bombay 
would be marketed by institution very soon. Three PCR based systems developed for early 
diagnosis of tuberculosis are in the advanced stage of validation. Reagents for lgM Mac­
ELISA test of dengue have been made available at NIV Pune for supplying to various 
hospitals for early detection of dengue cases. 
28. Phase I clinical trials of the first indigenously developed chokra vaccine, VA. 1.3 
have been initiated at various Hospitals in the country. The vaccine strain has been found to 
be genetically stable. 
29. A number of new vaccines are under development. A synthetic peptide vaccine has 
been designed for JEV. A DNA vaccine using envelope and non-structural core protein for 
JEV has produced good an tibody response in mice model and in generating T. cell memory. 
Recombinant BCGs using 6 antigens from Mtb and surface ant igen of Hcptatitis B and E 
virus have been develope d. 
30. As regards handicaps faced by the Depar tment in the commercial production and 
marketing of vaccines, the Committee was informed that there me two channels for 
clearance of a particular drug or vaccine. First, the Central Drug Controller has to clear it 
and once it is cleared by the Central Drug Controller the application is given to the state 
where the production has to take place, which follows its own pro~edure. 
31. The Committee was also informed that indigenous kits for Health care developed by 
the Department have no buyers, as they are costlier that the imported ones, though more 
accurate. 
32. The Committee is of the view that the information regarding TB control and leprosy 
control vaccines needs to be publicised widely on a regular basis. 
33. The Committee recommends that efforts be made by the Department to ensure that 
indigenous products in health care get priority over the imported ones and for this purpose 
improvements in quality should remain the main concern. At the same time the price of these 
kits could be subsidised temporarily to promote the sales. 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF IMMUNOLOGY 
34. The Institute has emerged as a centre of excellence in basic immunology, infectious 
diseases molecular design, reproduction etc. Immunological products from plants were 
inve stigated for both immunopotentiating as well as immunosuppressive properties. The 
institute was set up to undertake , aid, promote, guide and coordinate research of a high 
calibre in basic and applied immunology, to carry out research for development of new 
vaccines, immunological reagents for communicable dise~ses; develop immunological 
approaches for regulation of male and female fertility; to interact with industry for 
manufacture of vaccine s and immunolog ical reagents; to organise training programmes for 
techniques in immunological methods and related areas; to establish affiliation with 
recognised Universities and institutions of higher learning for the purpose of enabling 
research scholars to register for post-graduate degree to serve as a national reference centre 
for imm~nology and to provide consultancy services to medical and veterinary institutions , 

public health agem:ics and industries in the countries; provide and promote effective linkages 
between various scientific and research agcncieSitaboratories and other organisations in the 
field of immunology, vaccine development anti related areas; to collaborate with foreign 
organisations in relevant fields. The institute is a collaborating centre for national mission 
project of Cattle herd Improvement'. Several technologies related to diagnosis of AIDS virus, 
anti-leprosy vaccine, and contraceptive vaccines are under trial or transferred to industry. 
The Research leads made in the institute are transferred to industry for pilot level 
production. 
35. In reply to a question whether the Institute proposes to take new projects during the 
current year and how many leads made in immunology, infectious diseases etc., last year, 
were transferred to industry for commercialisation, the Committee was informed that the 
National Institute of Immunology has proposed the plan outlay of Rs. 13.00 crore for the 
current year against B.E. of Rs. 10.00 crore & revised estimates of Rs. 9.89 crore for the 
year 1998-99. The institute proposed to initiate two major projects during the year 
1999-2000; namely, (i) development of Nll-campus-11 at Faridabad at an already existing 
land of 50 acres, and (ii) creation of Transgenic knock-out animal facility. The activities to 
be undertaken at Campus-ll included experiments with bio-hazard materials/organisms, 
nursery for indigenous mcdic.in.al plants and animal biotechnology facilities. 
36. The research leads developed during the last year were (a) Testing & Validation of 
lmmunomodulatory compounds of plant origin with a view to commercialise th~· ~me as 
drugs; (b) A test to detect Nuclear Polyledrosis infection in silkworms which is being 
commer.cialised; (c) A synthetic peptide based ELISA test for HIV-1 & II which is under 
transfer to the industry and is being refined; and · (d) An immunomodulator developed by 
Nil and to be taken with Multi Drug Therapy by Leprosy patients, is poised to be 
commercially launched soon. 
37. The Committee notes that the Budgetary allocation for the Institute this year is 
Rs. 14.00 crore against Rs. 10.87 crore in the BE last year. While the Committee feels 
satisfied with the work being done by the institute, it obSl!rves that there are vast areas of 
knowledge and the institute should strive to penetrate in the higher areas of learning even in 
'the field of immunology. Another common example of study, if not already gone in,o, how the 
Safai Karamcharis engaged in th~ cleaning of garbage dumps develop immunity. But in the 
later stages of life they develop disorders like part ial blindness. What could be the possible 
reasons? The study may lead to some conclusions. 
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR CELL SCIENCE (NCCS) 
38. The centre was established as a national repository of animal cell culture, manpower 
development programmes in animal tissue culture, and to extend infrastructure facilities to 
researchers and institutions in biomedical sciences and conduct the state of the art research 
and development in the area of modern biology. 
39. The Central was established to receive, identify maintain, grow and supply animal 
and human cell lines, tissues, organs and fertilised eggs and embryos, hybrid-cell including 
hybridomas, plasmids, genes and geneomic libraries, to carry out research and development 
in these cell lines and related material and products; to develop, prepare, quality control and 
supply culture media and other regents and materials independently or in collaboration with 
i'id ustry; to organise training programmes for technical personnel in Tissue Culture 
Technology, Tissue banking, Cell products and related areas; to serve as a National 
Referenc~ Centre for Tissue Culture, Tissue Banking, Cell products and Data Bank, etc. 
and provide consultancy services to Medical, Veterinary, Pharmaceutical Institutions, Public 
Health Services and industries, etc. in the country; provide and promote effective linkages 

between various scientific and research agencies/laboratories and other organisations 
including industries; to collaborate with foreign organisations in the relevant areas. 
40. NCCS, Pune has been allocated a plan outlay of Rs. 8.00 crore for the current year 
which is equivalent to the allocation made in the B.E. of the 1998-99, however, at the R.E. 
stage of the year it was reduced to Rs. 7.00 crore, as the procedures for procurement of 
imported equipment and co nsumables involved substant ial amount of time , and also, the 
building construction schedule was delayed due to unavoidable circumstances. 
41. The new initiatives taken up by the Centre include analysis of the role of co­
stimultary molecules in T-cell activation, studies on the identification of melanoma 
oncogene(s), standardisation of foetal live infusion (FLI) therapy in certain major disorders 
like immunodeficiency syndrome, a-plastic anaemia, leukaemia and genetic or metabolic 
disorders, detailed molecular biological studies on the mosquito es, and studies on hemo zin 
pigment that is released into blood along with the merozoit s as schizint infected erythrocyte 
bursts. 
42. The centre has developed a method by which one can grow large sheets of skin from 
small pieces removed from the unaffected areas for treatment of burns, vitilogo and non­
healing ulcers. In collaboration with health institutes such as K.E.M. Hospital, Pune and 
Mumbai and I.T.T.M.M .C & Hospital Mumbai, such cultured epithelia sheets have been 
grafted to more than 85 patients successfully. The technology has been transferred to more 
hospitals. A special training progra1ome was conduced for laboratory personnel from the 
Anned Forces Medical College, Pune. 
43. The Committee notes with satisfaction the achievement of NCCS, Pune. At the same 
time it observes that the budgetary allocation for the current year is marginally Jess as 
compared to B.E. of 1998-99, it is more by about Rs. 1.00 corre as compared toRE of the 
same year. It should be possible for NCCS to at least continue witb the work bein& done. 
CENTRE FOR DNA FINGER PRINTING AND DIAGNOSTICS 
44. The Centre is currently functional in the premises of Centre for Cellular and 
Molecular Biology at Hyderabad. the objective of the Centre is to provide DNA finger 
printing services for crime investigations and for setting paternity dispute and provide DNA 
finger diagnostic services. The building plan has been finalised and construction begun. The 
centre is already providing DNA diagnostic services for human genetic disorders and DNA 
finger printings for use by Indian judiciary in deciding criminal and other forensic cases. It 
has EMB (European Molecular Biology) Bioinformatic network as a national node. 
45. The allocation for this centre on plan side has been kept at Rs. 6.50 crore for the 
current year as against Rs. 7.25 crore in the B.E. of 1998-99, which was later reduced to 
Rs. 5.42 crore at R.E. stage. Asked about the circumstances under which the funds allocated 
during the last year were not fully utilised, the Committee was informed that CDFD is a 
newly established Institute, and is presently housed and operational from Centre for Cellular 
and Molecular Biology (CCMB), Hyderabad. CDFD is in the process of firming its building 
plan and construction activity is to be started. All the grants except grants for "Building" 
have been utilised and this activity is scht:duled for the current year. The Committee was 
also informed that the, building of the institute would by ready in the next two years and till 
then they are going to rent a building for the Institute. 

46. The Committee notes with satisfaction the work being done by the Cen tre in the field 
of DNA finger printing and Diagnostics \\hich is an important area or activity. The Committee 
also notes that the allocation for the Centre is less as compare d to B.E. of 1998-99 but 
considerably more as comp:1rcd to R.E. of th e same year . The Committee hopes that it should 
be possible for the Centre to manage with the allocation. 
CENTRE FOR EXCELLENCEt F ACILITIESt REPOSITORIES AND SERVICES 
47. It includes re )Sitories for conservation of plant/microbes, specialised bio-technol­
ogy facilities, for udvuncc research. pilot scale manufacturing, centres of excellence and 
programmes support tn high priority areas of modern biology. The seven repositories include 
medicinal and aromat1c plants, filaria and reagent s, cryo-preservation of blood cells, tissue 
culture conservution of economically important crops, industrial microorgani sms, blue green 
algae and marine cy<mo-bacteriu. The bio-technology L1cihties include experimental animal 
facilities, genetic enginl!ering and stra111 manipulation unit and biochemical engineering and 
process development. A major programm~: support at the Indian Institute of Sciences, 
Bangalore, in the high priority urcas of modern biology was launched with effect from 
October, 1997 for a period of 5 years involving 55 facully members to car~y out resear.ch on 
three sub-programmes infectious diseases, drug und molecular design as well as genome 
diversity and genetic disorders. These m:tivities ure expected to deliver products/processes 
such as reagents of permanent value for diseuse diagnosis, prevention prophylaxis, drug 
designing and therupeutics for genetic diso rder s. 
48. The overall objective of this scheme is to promote establishment of repositories for 
conservation/preservation of living organisms including microbes both useful and harmful in 
agriculture, human health animal husbandry and bio-industry. Besides, interaction with 
industry, publicity, of services und supplies. in house R&D and database development have 
been the major activities. The alloc<ttion for Centre for Excellence. Facilities, Repositories 
and Services which w<ts kept <tt Rs. 12.00 crore in the Budget Estimates of the .year, 1998-99 
and Rs. 11.05 crore at the R.E. stuge has been significantly reduced to Rs. 9.00 crores. The 
Committee was informed that allocation for this scheme was reduced at the Revised 
Estimates stage because of availability of sale proceeds in some of the facilities amounting to 
about Rs. 55 lakhs. Since the major activities relating to procurement of equipment and 
strengthening infrastructure in most of the progr<~mmeslfacilities as proposed during the 9th 
Plan have been accomplished. the budget for 1999-2000 has been reduced to Rs. 9.00 crore. 
BHARAT IMMUNOLOGICALS AND DIOLOGICALS CORPORATION LTD. (BIBCOL) 
49. Bharat immunologiculs and Biologicals Corporution Limited, was incorporated in 
Public Sector during March, 1989 to manufacture 100 million dose of OPV and other 
immunobiological s with a view to achieve self-sufficiency in manufacturing Oral Polio 
Vaccine. During the current finuncial yeu, BIB COL has supplied 100 million doses from 
)epartment of Family Welfure. 
50. The financi ul assistance to be given to BIBCOL has been kept at Rs. 0.05 crore for 
the year 1999-2000 as was in the B.E . of lust yeur. The Committee was informed that the 
company is planning to produce new and improved vaccines and immunodiagonistics under 
the Product DiverMfil.:<ltion Plan. The produ ct diversification plan submitted by BIBCOL, 
was considered in Prc-EFC meeting held in August. 1998. In the said meeting it was decided 
that further act ion will be taken after 131FR deliberates in the matter and the restructuring 
plan is umkr consideration of the 13lfR <mel their decbion is awaited. The provision 
therefore made. under Jhis head is only a token amount for BlBCOL in the current financial 
year. 

51. The Committee notes with satisfaction that during the current financial year, 
BIBCOL has supplied 100 million doses of Oral Polio Vaccine to Nat ional Immunisation 
Programme and has received addit i.onal supply orde•· for 44 million doses from the 
Department of F3mily Welfare. 
52. The Commi ttee r~commends that the Department should pursue the matter with 
BIFR so that proposed Diversification Plan of BIBCOL could be given a concrete shape. 
INDIAN VACCINE CORPORATION LTD. (IVCOL) 
53. IVCOL was incorporated as a joint venture company in March 1989 to produce 
Injectable Polio Vaccine (IPY), measles and rabies vaccines using an adva nced vero-cell 
technolog y. The Company has since wound up as it has been rendered functionless . The 
Committee specifically enquire d as to how much money has ·been spent on IYCOL so far, 
and what is the extent of loss suffered by the Department on account of winding up of 
IVCOL. The Committee aslo wanted to know how best the assets of the company are being 
utilised by the Departme nt to minimise the losses . The Committee was informed that 
investment in lVCOL projects so far has been Rs. 23.32 crore. This has been equally shared 
between DBT, lPCL am.l PMSV. The contribution thus from the Governme nt is only 
Rs. 8.16 crore. Alre ,idy, as alternative plan to utilise the assests of IYCOL has been 
prep ared by the Department so that there would be no loss to the Government. 
54. The Committee was informed thut the tstab lishmen t of National Brain Research 
Centre (NBRC) in IYCOL premises has bee£1 appro ved by Standing Finance Committee and 
the work would be initiated on receipt of approval by competent authority. 
55. The Committee recomme nds that the matter may be pursued with other partners in 
the projett. 
56. The Committee was also apprised of the following new institutions established by 
the Depa rtment:-
NATIONAL BRAiN RESEARCH CENTRE (NBRC) 
57. A Nationa l Brain Research Centre is being establish ed with the main objecdve of 
consolidati ng the efforts in. the area of Neuro sciences and basic brai n research. An 
interactive session o n, "Vision for Neuroscien ces in the Next Millenn ium" was held during 
the year in which neur oscienti sts from all over the country participated. A n Action Plan for 
the next decade has been drawn. 
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR PLANT GENOME RESEARCH, NEW DELHI 
58. Releasing the potential of the human genome project, the task of analysing the 
genomes of other organisms and plants with the aim of catalogui ng genes, obtaining genetic 
and ph ysical maps of geno me:) and sequ encess is under way. 
59. The research work has started from the existing Centre of Plant Molecular Biology 
.,.?MB) and Genetic Engineering unit (GE U) facilities supported by DBT. The Committee 
was informed that within a short p~riod , a number of transgen ics of importan t crop plants 
~lav e been produced. 
60. After making a detailed scrutiny of the Demands for Gran ts of the Departmen t of 
Biotechnology and assessing the progress of various impor tant programmes and projects 
administered by it, the Committee recommends thut the Demands for Grants of Rs. 120.11 
.crore, as sought by the pepartment of Biotechnology for the current financial y ear, under 
Demand No. 75 are in order and may be approved . 

ANNEXURES 

ANNEXURE-I 
FINANCIAL SUl\11\fARY FOR THE YEAR 1997-98 (PLAN) 
( Rs. In crores) 
-- - - --- --- ·---- --- - ·--- - - --~· -- ------ -· 
S.No. Nam<.: of thL' Sthcmc Demand~ Approved 
Made 
R .E. 
I. 
l. 
., 
3. 
..J . 
5. 
6. 
ll. 
7. 
8. 
I.J. 
lll 
10. 
11. 
s~~T Sector 
f\-lanpowcr Development 
lnfrastnKturc 
l :ati Ji tics 
Basic and Product Based Oriented R&D 
Pwjc~.:ts 
Dcmonstration/ l'ran ~ fc r of Tc <.: hl!ology an d 
Manufatturing A<.:tivitics 
I ntcrnational Coopcwtion 
Scnctariat (Manpower) 
Autonomous Bodies 
Nat io nal Institute of Immunology 
National Cell Culture Sciences. Pune 
Centre For DNA fingerprinting C~nd Diagnostics 
Compani~s 
Uh~arat lmmunologi<.:als and Biologicals Corpora­
tion Limited (BII3COL) 
Indian \'a ctine Corporation Limited (IVCOL) 
ToTAL : 
10.00 
15.00 
52.00 
21.00 
1.00 
0.50 
13.69 
8. ()() 
3.00 
5.31 
0.00 
129.50 
9.00 
13.50 
40.00 
15.30 
1.00 
0.30 
11.59 
7.00 
4.00 
5.31 
0.0~ 
107.00 
6 .25 
12.32 
36.38 
9.16 
1.37 
0.32 
8.50 
2.89 
3.85 
3.96 
0.00 
85.00 
-- - ·- - ·- ·- -· - - - . ---- - - ·----------- - ----- ---

ANNEXURE-II 
FINANCIAL SUMMARY FOR THE YEAR 1998-99 (PLAN) 
( Rs. in crores) 
S.No. Name of the Scheme Plan 
Demands B.E. R.E. Expenditure 
Made as on 
31.1.99 
I. A-S&T Sector 
1. Human Resource Developme nt 9.00 9.00 9.19 7.3114 
2. Centres for Excellence Facilities, Repositories 19.00 12.00 11.05 7.8684 
& Services 
3. Basic and Product oriented R&D 51.20 43.40 40.63 32.0810 
4. Biotech Product & Process Development 12.30 9.30 9.16 6.6463 
5. Bioinformatics 6.00 6.00 5.25 4.5964 
6. International Cooperation 1.50 1.50 1.50 1.2731 
7. Secretariat 0.50 0.50 0.45 0.2785 
II Autonomous Bodies 
8. Nil 12.00 10.00 9.89 6.3300 
9. NCCS 6.00 8.00 7.00 6.5000 
10. Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and 7.25 7.25 5.42 5.4200 
Diagnostics 
III Capital Section - Investment 
11. BIB COL 0.25 0.25 5.00 0.0000 
12. IV COL 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.0000 
Total : 125.00 107.00 100.81 78.3049 

ANNEXURE-III 
TOTAL BUDGET DEMANDS FOR THE YEAR 1999-2000 WITH ALLOCATION 
FOR THE THRUST AREAS 
S.No. Name of the Scheme 
1. A-S&T Sector 
1. Human Resource Development 
2. Centres for Excellence Facilities, Repositories 
& Services 
3. Basic and Product oriented R&D 
4. Biotech Product & Process Developauent 
5. Bloinformatics 
6. International 
Cooperation 
7. Secretariat 
II Autonomous Bodies 
8. Nil 
· 9. NCCS 
10. 
III 
11. 
12. 
Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and 
Diagnostics 
Capital Section -Investment 
BIB COL 
IV COL 
TOTAL: 
Plan 
Proposed 
11.00 
12.50 
53.50 
14.00 
7.00 
2.90 
1.00 
16.00 
9.00 
12.00 
10.00 
0.00 
139.00 
(Rs. in crores) 
Recommended 
10.00 
9.00 
45.35 
9.60 
6.00 
2.00 
0.50 
13.00 
8.00 
6.50 
5.00 
0.00 
110.00 

MINUTES 

XXI 
TWENTY FIRST I\IEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on \Vedm:sday the 24th March, 1999 in Room 
No. 63, Parliament House. New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri S.R. 13ommai-Chairmcm 
RAJYA SABIIA 
2. Shri Rahasbihari 13arik 
3. Shri Oscar Fernandes 
4. Shri R:.tm Chandra Khuntia 
5. Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty 
6. Slui Lachhman Singh 
7. Slui B.P. Singhal 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri lndra Nath 13hagat 
9. Slui Ranjib Biswal 
10. Smt. Bhavana Chikhaliya 
11. Dr. (Mrs.) Bcatrix D' Souza 
12. Slui Gordhanbhai Javiya 
13. Dr. Charan das .Mahant 
14. Prof. Ajit Kum~tr t-.khta 
15. Slui Rupchand Murmu 
16. Capt. Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad 
17. Slui Prakash Yishwanath Paranjpe 
18. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Prumanik 
19. Shri Prasad Daburao Tanpure 
20. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri H.K. Chanuna, Director 
Shri D.P. Ahuja , Under Secretary 
Shri Roshan Lal, Committee Officer 
-LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY 
Dr. (.Mrs.) Manju Sharma, Secretary 
Dr. K. Gurumurthi, Adviser 
Dr. .M. Balasubramanian, Adviser 
Dr. J.R. Arora, Adviser 
Dr. P.K. Ghosh, Adviser 
Dr. V.K . Yinayak, Adviser 
Shri Rahul Sarin. Joint Secretary & Finance Adviser 
Slui S.L. 13hat, Joint Secretary 
Dr. Renu Swarup, PSO 
Dr. S.R. Rao , PSO 

2. The Committee took up for consideration the Demunds for Grants (1999-2000) of the 
Department of Biotechnoiogy. The Secretary in the Department briefly explained for the 
benefit of Members the budgetary allocations on different heads as also the functiomng of 
the Department. The Members then sought clarifications on points relating to the Demands 
for Grants. 
A verbatim record of . the proceedings was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 1.30 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on the 31st 
March, 1999. 

XXVII 
TWENTY SEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.r.t. on Tuesday the 20th April, 1999 in Committee 
Room 'A' Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri S.R. Bommai -Cizairrncm 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
4. Smt. Saroj Dube y 
5, Dr. D . Masthan 
6. Shri Lachhman Singh 
7. Shri W. Angou Singh 
8. Slui D.P. Singha l 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Indra Nath Dhagat 
10. Shri Ranjib Biswal 
11. Smt. Bhavana Chik haliya 
12. Dr. (Mrs.) Deatrix D' Souza 
13. Shri George Eden 
14. Shri Gordhanl>hai Javiya 
15. Shri K. Kri~hnamoorthy 
16. Dr. Charan Dus Mahant 
17. Prof. Ajit Kumar Mehta 
18. Shri Janardan Pn.tsad Mishra 
19. Shri Rupchand Murmu . 
20. Capt. Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad 
21. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik 
22. Shri Mohammad Shahabuddin 
23. Shri Devji Bhai J. Tandel 
24. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
25. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
26. Shri Muku l Wasnik 
SECRETARIAT 
Slui Satish Kumar, Joint secretary 
Shri ILK. Chananu. Director 
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary 
Slui Rosh an La I, Committee Officer 
2. The Commiaee took up for consideration of the draft •••, Sixty-sixth, ••• & *** 
Reports on Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Departments of • •• , •••, Bio­
technology, "'**, • • •, • • \ and u *, and adopted the same. 
••• Relate to other matters. 

3. The Comm ittee authoris ed its Chuinnun and in his absence Shri W. Angou Singh to 
present the Reports to the Rajya Subha and Smt. Bhavana Chikhaliy a and in her absence 
Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pr:.unanik to lay the Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha. 
4. The Committee then adjourne d at 11.30 A.M. 