PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 225
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2012/VAISAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)MAY, 2012/VAISAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON SCIENCE  AND TECHNOLOGY , 
ENVIRONMENT  AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY FIFTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-2013) 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SPACE
(DEMAND NO. 90)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18  MAY, 2012)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18  MAY, 2012)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18  MAY, 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18  MAY, 2012)TH

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY FIFTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-2013)
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SPACE
(DEMAND NO. 90)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18 TH MAY , 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18 TH MAY , 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY , 2012/V AISAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—12
4. S UMMARY OF THE R ECOMMENDATIONS .................................................................................. 13—15
5. M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS  OF THE C OMMITTEE ................................................................ 17—24

MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2011-12)
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
*2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Anil H. Lad
4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
5. Dr. Chandan Mitra
@6. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
7. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
@8. Shri A.V. Swamy
9. Dr. Barun Mukherji
10. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan
LOK SABHA
11. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
12. Shri Ninong Ering
#13. Vacant
14. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
15. Shri Abdul Rahman
16. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
17. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
18. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana
19. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
20. Shri Cosme Francisco Caitano Sardinha
21. Shri Shibu Soren
22. Dr. Rajan Sushant
23. Shri Pradeep Tamta
24. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
**25. V acant
26. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
***27. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
28. Vacant
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
* Shri Janardan Dwivedi re-nominated w.e.f. 2 nd February, 2012.
@ Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra and Shri A.V. Swamy nominated w.e.f. 15th May, 2012.
# Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  3 rd  January, 2012 on his
resignation from the Membership of the Committee.
** Shri Akhilesh Yadav ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 2 nd May, 2012 on his resignation from the
Membership of the Lok Sabha.
*** Nominated w.e.f.  25 th November, 2011.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present
the Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Twenty Fifth Report of the Committee. This
Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2012-2013) of the Department of Space
(Demand No. 90).
2. In its meeting of the Committee held on the 11
th April, 2012 the Secretary and other
Officers of the Department of Space gave an overview of the various activities of the Department
and the Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the Department
to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the
clarifications sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the
Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of Space.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 16
th May, 2012.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
May 16, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.

1
REPORT
India has made an impressive array of achievements in the scientific and technological fields
since Independence. Nowhere is this more apparent than in the arena of Space. Since its inception,
the Indian Space programme, has been characterised by a vision to use space technology for the
socio-economic benefit of our people through establishment of operational space services in a self-
reliant manner. Over the last three decades, India has achieved notable progress in the design,
development and operation of space systems, as well as, using them for vital services like
telecommunication, television broadcasting, meteorology, disaster warning and natural resources
survey and management. The space programme has become largely self-reliant with capability to
design and build satellites for providing space services and to launch them using indigenously
designed and developed launch vehicles. India has effectively developed space technology, applied
it successfully for its rapid developments and is presently offering a variety of space services
globally. The Space Technology has allowed the nation to move into the world of high technology,
a place previously occupied only by a few advanced nations.
2. The Indian space efforts started in the sixties with the establishment of Thumba Equatorial
Rocket Launching Station near Thiruvananthapuram. The Indian Space Research Organisation
(ISRO) was later formed in 1969. Space research activities got an additional fillip with the
formation of the Space Commission and the Department of Space in 1972. In the seventies, satellite
programmes like Aryabhatta, Bhaskara, Rohini and APPLE were conducted. The success of those
programmes led to an era of operational satellite programmes which further led to more advanced
satellites such as the INSAT and IRS series. India has since come a long way in developing a multi-
faceted and multi-dimensional space programme which is indigenous, self-reliant and applications
driven. India is now capable of building its own state of the art satellites such as the Polar Satellite
Launch Vehicle (PSLV) and the Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV) series of satellites.
3. OBJECTIVES OF INDIAN SPACE PROGRAMME
3.1 The primary objective of the Indian Space Programme is to promote the development and
application of space technology and space science for the socio-economic benefit of the nation
through establishment of operational space services in a self-reliant manner. The main thrust areas
of the programme are:
■ Satellite-based communication and navigation for various applications.
■ Satellite-based resources survey and management and environmental monitoring.
■ Meteorological applications.
■ Space Science Research and Planetary Exploration.
■ Development and operationalisation of indigenously built satellites, launch vehicles and
associated ground segment for providing these space-based services.
4. ORGANISATIONAL SETUP
4.1 The Department of Space (DOS) is responsible for implementing the policies framed by the
Space Commission. These are carried out through the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO)
and the Grant-in-aid institutions viz., Physical Research Laboratory (PRL), National Atmospheric
Research Laboratory (NARL), North-Eastern Space Applications Centre (NE-SAC), Semi-conductor
Laboratory (SCL) and Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology (IIST).

2
4.2 The Secretariat of the Department of Space and the Headquarters of ISRO are located in
Bengaluru. The Programme Offices at ISRO Headquarters co-ordinate the overall programmes like
satellite communication, satellite navigation, earth observation, launch vehicle, space science,
atmospheric science, space industry development, disaster management support, international co-
operation, publications and public relations, budget and economic analysis and human resource
development.
4.3 The major Centres, Units and establishments of DOS/ISRO, responsible for carrying out
research and development activities as well as for undertaking various projects and programmes,
are given below:
(a) Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre (VSSC), Thiruvananthapuram, provides the technology
base for the country’s indigenous launch vehicle (rocket) development;
(b) Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre (LPSC), with its facilities at Bengaluru,
Thiruvananthapuram and Mahendragiri, is responsible for development of liquid
propulsion and cryogenic propulsion systems for satellite launch vehicles;
(c) Satish Dhawan Space Centre (SDSC-SHAR) at Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh, is the
launch base and also provides the facilities for processing of solid rocket motors;
(d) ISRO Satellite Centre (ISAC), Bengaluru, is entrusted with the prime responsibility for
the satellite development;
(e) Laboratory for Electro-Optics Systems (LEOS), Bengaluru has the responsibility for
development and production of electro optical sensors for satellites;
(f) Space Applications Centre (SAC), Ahmedabad, carries out research and development in
space applications as well as development of application payloads;
(g) Development and Educational Communication Unit (DECU), Ahmedabad, is involved in
the conception, definition, planning and socio/techno-economic evaluation of
developmental space applications;
(h) National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC), Hyderabad is responsible for satellite data
acquisition and processing, data dissemination, aerial remote sensing and decision
support for disaster management;
(i) Indian Institute of Remote Sensing (IIRS), Dehradun is a premier training and
educational institute set up for developing trained professionals in the field of Remote
Sensing, Geoinformatics and GPS Technology for Natural Resources, Environmental
and Disaster Management;
(j) ISRO Telemetry, Tracking & Command Network (ISTRAC), with its ground stations
at Bengaluru, Sriharikota, Lucknow, Bearslake (USA), Biak (Indonesia), Brunei and
Mauritius provides the telemetry, tracking and command support and spacecraft
mission management for the Indian remote sensing satellite missions, space science
missions and satellite launch vehicle programmes;
(k) Master Control Facility (MCF) with its main facility at Hassan, Karnataka and backup
facility at Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh have the responsibility for control and operation of
INSAT/GSAT/METSAT satellites; and
(l) ISRO Inertial Systems Unit (IISU), Thiruvananthapuram, carries out research and
development in the area of inertial systems for satellites and launch vehicles.

3
4.4 A National Natural Resources Management System (NNRMS), with the Department of
Space (DOS) as the nodal agency, has been established to ensure optimal utilisation of natural
resources using remote sensing data in conjunction with conventional techniques. Under NNRMS,
five Regional Remote Sensing Service Centres (RRSSCs) at Bengaluru, Dehradun, Jodhpur,
Kharagpur and Nagpur have been set up  for execution of remote sensing application programmes
in the respective regions. With effect from December, 2009, the RRSSCs have been redesignated
as Regional Remote Sensing Centres (RRSCs); while RRSC, Dehradun has been merged with IIRS.
4.5 The Department of Space, also have the following organisations, which receive Grants-in-
aid from the Department:
(a) Physical Research Laboratory (PRL), Ahmedabad, an autonomous institution supported
mainly by the Department of Space, carries out research in space sciences.
(b) The National Atmospheric Research Laboratory (NARL) set up at Gadanki near
Tirupati, conducts atmospheric research.
(c) The North-Eastern Space Applications Centre (NE-SAC) established as an autonomous
body under the Department of Space provides space technology inputs for
developmental activities in the North-Eastern Region.
(d) The Semi-conductor Laboratory located at Chandigarh is a research and development
society and is entrusted with the design and development of Very Large Scale
Integrated Circuit (VLSI) devices and development of micro-electronic systems to meet
the strategic needs of the country.
(e) The Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology (IIST) is an autonomous body
under the Department with the objective of creating quality human resources tuned to
suit the requirements of state-of-art space research programme. The Institute offers
graduate, post-graduate and doctoral programmes in the area of space science,
technology and applications. Initially, IIST started the courses from the academic year
2007-08 around the existing infrastructure at Thiruvananthapuram.
4.6 Besides this, the RESPOND programme of ISRO supports sponsored research activity in
space science, space applications and space technology in various national academic/research
institutions and Space Technology Cells in premier technological institutes of the country through
grants-in-aid.
4.7 The detailed budget allocation of the Department of Space for the year 2012-13 was
considered by the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests in its meeting held on the 11
th April, 2012.
5. MONITORING MECHANISMS FOR  ONGOING SCHEMES
5.1 The Committee was informed that in order to monitor and review the progress of all the
ongoing projects/schemes and to provide overall directions, the Department has evolved a two-tier
project management structure consisting of Project/Programme Management Council and Project
Management Board/Project Executive Committee for all the major projects/schemes in the area of
Satellites, Launch Vehicles and Space applications. Multi-level reviews are carried out at the ISRO
Centres/Units and Project Management Boards/Management Councils of all the major projects/
schemes comprehensively covering the technical, managerial, cost and schedule aspects. The ISRO
Council undertakes a rigorous review of all the activities related to Projects/Schemes/Centre,
addressing the managerial/programmatic/financial aspects during the detailed technical presentations.
Further, Space Commission, during every meeting, reviews the progress of all the ongoing projects/
programmes.

4
5.2 The Department further informed that from the financial year 2011-12 onwards, it is
preparing a Results Framework Document (RFD) as part of the Performance Monitoring and
Evaluation System (PMES) for Government Departments to ensure result-oriented governance. As
a part of implementation of the RFD, the Department has clearly spelt out the Vision, Mission,
Objectives and functions of the Department, actions proposed to achieve these objectives, success
indicators to monitor and evaluate the progress in achieving policy, programme, scheme and
project. The targets set in RFD are being monitored periodically by a dedicated group to ensure
that programme targets, as set in the RFD, are met.
5.3 The Committee is of the view that an effective monitoring mechanism is vital to
ensure that the various projects are completed as per the schedule and there is no time or
cost overruns. In this context, the Committee appreciates the adoption of the Result
Framework Document (RFD) by the Department, which aims towards an effective appraisal
of the actual physical and financial progress/achievements in implementation of policies/
programs in comparison to the projected targets for each programme. The Committee, in
view of strengthening of monitoring mechanism, hopes that the Department would, in
future, be able to ensure timely completion of projects and optimum utilization of funds.
6. ELEVENTH PLAN ACHIEVEMENTS AND TWELFTH FIVE YEAR PLAN
6.1 Informing the Committee of the achievements of the Eleventh Five Year Plan, the Department
stated that the successful launch of Chandrayaan-l and the discovery of water molecules on the lunar
surface based on Chandrayaan-l scientific data, has been a landmark achievement. The Department
also informed that several of the targets set for Eleventh Five Year Plan in the area of Launch Vehicle
Development, Earth Observation Systems, Satellite Communication and Space Science research have
been achieved. In respect of some of other missions such as Radar Imaging Satellite (RISAT-1),
Advanced Meteorological Satellite INSAT-3D, Multi-wavelength X-ray astronomy satellites
ASTROSAT, SARAL, GSAT-9, GSAT-10, GSAT-6/6A, GSAT-11 and IRNSS, major progress has been
achieved in Eleventh Plan although the launch of these missions would marginally spill over to the
first half of Twelfth Plan period due to technological developmental complexities, difficulties in
sourcing the critical supplies and mission contingencies.
6.2 The Committee appreciates the achievements made by the Department during the
Eleventh Plan, notably the Chandrayaan-l Mission and progress made in the field of Launch
Vehicle Development, Earth Observation and Satellite Communication Systems. However, it
notes with concern that some of the missions such as Radar Imaging Satellite (RISAT-1),
Advanced Meteorological satellite INSAT-3D, Multi-wavelength X-ray astronomy satellites
ASTROSAT, SARAL, GSAT-9, GSAT-IO, GSAT-6/6A, GSAT-11 and IRNSS could not be
completed as per schedule and shall spill over to the Twelfth Plan period due to
technological developmental complexities, difficulties in sourcing the critical supplies and
mission contingencies. The Committee hopes Department would make all possible efforts to
tide over these difficulties and projects would be completed as per the revised schedule.
6.3 As regards the Twelfth Plan, the Committee was informed that an allocation of Rs. 55,000
crores was sought by the Department, consisting of Plan component of Rs. 47,500 crores and
non-Plan component of Rs. 7,500 crores.
6.4 The new programmes envisaged during Twelfth Plan includes Mars Orbiter Mission,
Advanced Cartographic Satellite-Cartosat-3, Oceansat-3, Resourcesat-3, Scatsat-l, Development of
High-throughput Communication Satellites, Human Space Flight initiatives, Multi-Object Tracking
Radar, Third Launch Pad facilities at Sriharikota, etc. The major thrust of the Indian Space
programme in the Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012-17) will be to strengthen and expand the
operational services in satellite communications and navigation, develop enhanced imaging capability

5
for natural resources management, weather, and climate change studies, undertake space science
and planetary exploratory missions for better understanding of the solar system and the universe
and to develop a heavy lift launcher. Amongst others, the Mars Orbitor Mission, Operation of GSLV
with indigenous cryogenic stage, completing the development flights of next generation GSLV
Mk III, building up the constellation of Indian Regional Navigational Satellite System and
augmenting the INSAT/GSAT system capacity to meet the pressing demand are amongst the priority
programmes envisaged for Twelfth Plan.
6.5 The Committee notes that in the Twelfth Five year Plan (2012-17) the major thrust
of the Indian Space programme will be to carry forward and strengthen the already
established space-based services aimed at socio-economic development of the country. The
Committee hopes that, apart from the ongoing space programmes and its efforts for
developing advanced launch vehicles, the Department should also strive for mastering
critical technologies, so as to reduce the chances of failure of important missions. The
Committee is of the opinion that the next stepping stone of the Department should be to
strive towards sending a Manned Mission to Space, which naturally follows from its
successes obtained in sending launch vehicles which can carry higher payloads to space.
6.6 The Committee also recommends that Department should also strive to increase its
global market share in space services by developing more innovative and competitive space
services on commercial lines and the revenue generated from marketing of these services
should be used for further growth and development of space technology in the country. This
will also increasingly reduce the dependence of our space programme on budgetary resources.
7. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
7.1 The Committee was informed of the budgeted and revised estimates during the last three
years i.e. 2009-10 to 2011-12 of the Department of Space.
A comparison of the B.E., R.E and Actual Expenditure for the years 2009-10, 2010-11 and
2011-12 is given below:
2009-10 2010-11 2011-12
(in Rs. crores) (in Rs. crores) (in Rs. crores)
Budget Estimates 4959.04 5778.04 6626.00
Revised Estimates 4167.04 4880.04 4432.00
Actual Expenditure 4162.96 4482.23 —
% Budget utilization 99.90% 91.85% —
   with respect to R.E.
7.2 The Department also stated that the allocations at RE stage for the year 2011-12 are
expected to be fully utilised. The Department further informed the Committee that the allocation
were reduced at R.E. stage in 2011-12 so as to comply with the ceilings fixed by the Ministry of
Finance during Revised Estimates. It also informed that the reasons for the cut were as follows:–
• Reduction in view of the decision not to import Russian Cryo stages for GSLV and
pursue only the Indigenous Cryo stage.
• Reduction in provision under INSAT-4 Satellites and GSAT-11 satellites as the proposals
in respect of GSAT follow-on satellites viz., GSAT-15 & GSAT-16 including launch
services and GSAT-11 launch services are not yet finalised.

6
• Reducing allocations to Grant-in-aid for SCL, PRL and IIST based on an assessment
of balance funds available with these institutions.
• Reduction due to limiting the scope of development of Multi Object Tracking Radar
(MOTR) at SDSC, Sriharikota to only demonstration module and phasing out the
expenditure on full scale facility.
• Postponement of expenditure on spacecraft & payload subsystem related materials/
components and phasing out expenditure on Indian Regional Navigational Satellite
System (IRNSS) ground segment equipments/facilities based on procurement status.
• Postponement of expenditure related to fabrication of materials and setting up of test
facilities to the next financial year for Semi-Cryo Engine development project based on
programme priorities.
7.3 The Committee is surprised to know that one of the reasons for reduction in overall
allocations of the Department at R.E. stage in 2010-11 was to meet the ceiling fixed by the
Ministry of Finance. The Committee feels that even if reduction is to be affected, it should
be achieved by imposing suitable cuts in non-priority spending areas and priority areas like
space programmes should either be spared or minimum necessary cuts only imposed on
them. The Committee, however, notes that there are some good and valid reasons also for
the reduction of allocation at B.E. stage and there is no indication of any important
programme having been adversely effected due to cuts imposed at R.E. stage.
8. MANNED MISSION INITIATIVE
8.1 The Committee was informed that the Department of Space is designing a detailed feasibility
studies for undertaking indigenous space flight mission with the primary aim to build and
demonstrate the capability to carry human beings to low earth orbit and their safe return back to
earth. The mission was initiated in the year 2006 and the scheduled launch is likely to take place
in the year 2014.
8.2 The Committee finds that the Manned Mission Initiatives/Human Space Flight Programme,
which is one of the flagship programmes of the Department, was allocated Rs. 98.81 crores at
B.E. stage in 2011-12 which was drastically reduced to Rs. 13.l7 crores at R.E. stage in the year
2011-12. The allocation has however been increased to Rs. 60.46 crores in the year 2012-13. On
being enquired about the reasons for fluctuating trend of allocation for the programme, the
Department stated as Phase-I of the Programme pertaining to design, development, and flight
testing of crew module, PS4 augmented service module and development of crew escape system
was not approved, the allocation for R.E. 2010-11 was reduced limiting the expenditure only to pre-
project phase. However, the allocation for B.E. 2012-13 was increased to Rs. 60.46 crores, to
undertake pre-project activities (Rs. 36.21 crores) and a nominal provision of Rs. 24.25 crores was
provided for Phase-I activities anticipating its approval during 2012-13.
8.3 The Committee notes with concern that a programme initiated in the year 2006 and
having target date of 2014 as its completion, is yet to get a final approval even for its
Phase 1 programme. It shows that the Department is either not serious in timely
completion of the project or has casually fixed a schedule for its completion. It also
reflects a lack of proper planning and effective monitoring, as also absence of adequate
research and technological support for timely execution of the project. The Committee,
however, hopes that the pre-pr oject activities would be expeditiously completed and
approval for Phase 1 of the programme obtained, so that the project is completed as per
schedule in the year 2014.

7
9. CHANDRAYAAN-2 AND MARS ORBITOR MISSION
9.1 The Committee was informed that Chandrayaan-2 is a follow-on mission to send an orbiter
and lander rover to moon by 2014-15, with an objective of expanding the scientific knowledge
about the moon, over and above what has been learnt about this natural earth satellite, through
Chandrayaan-1 mission. The Committee has been further given to understand that Government has
approved the undertaking of Chandrayaan-2 mission in September, 2008. The total estimated cost
of Chandrayaan-2 is Rs. 425.00 crores. The work on realisation of payloads and spacecraft
sub-systems is in progress.
9.2 The Mars Orbiter Mission, envisages launching a space craft to reach and orbit around
Mars, using a PSLV launch vehicle during November, 2013. In this connection a study report on
the feasibility of undertaking a planned Mission to Mars has been completed and it has been found
feasible to undertake India’s first mission to Mars during the early phase of Twelfth Plan.
9.3 The Committee while interacting with the Department of Space on 11
th April, 2012, raised
a query regarding the constant rescheduling of Chandrayaan-2 programme, initially from 2010 to
2011 and then to January, 2012. In response to the query the Department stated that Chandrayaan-
2 involves a complex work of sending a lander and a robot to moon for doing experiment on this
satellite. The Department further stated that the lander is made by Russia while the rover is made
in India. While narrating further on the issue, the Department pointed out, that due to
reprioritisation of certain programme by Russia, the Chandrayaan-2 programme has been postponed
to 2014. Moreover, recent three failures in GSLV flights, has placed the Department in a
disadvantageous position to prove the reliability of GSLV mission, which is now taking time.
9.4 Similarly, in case of Mars Mission which is more of a complex mission than Chandrayaan-
2, involving 300 days movement of satellite to Mars through a complex propulsion system that
should sustain for 300 days. Accordingly, the initial plan is to send an orbiter to Mars in 2013,
and if it fails, the projected date will be shifted to 2016 or to 2018 as the time when such a
Mission can be sent is dictated by the geometry of Mars-Earth-Sun.
9.5 The Committee after going thoroughly through the aforesaid reply of the
Department is of the opinion that preparation of an optimistic schedule for missions like
Chandrayaan-2 and Mars Orbitor Mission, alone is not sufficient but what is required is the
will and dedication to complete the mission target within the time schedule. If time
schedule does not inspire the confidence of the team and is seen by it as an unrealistic
target, it will hardly serve any purpose. The Department should, therefore, fix time
schedules in a more realistic way, rather than fixing time schedules which are not to be
adhered. The Committee feels that failure to adhere to programme schedule sends a wrong
message to the public and lowers their confidence in our capability to take our space
programme to new heights. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the
schedule for all missions including complex missions should be prepared only after taking
into account all ground realities, so that a realistic schedule meant to be adhered by all,
rather than that being violated with impunity, is prepared.
10. INDIAN INSTITUTE OF SPACE SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
10.1 The Committee was informed that Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology (IIST),
which was established in 2007, is Asia’s first Space University to offer high quality education in
space science and technology to meet the demands of the Indian Space Programme.
10.2 The Department further stated that IIST  started functioning from the Academic year
2007-08 around the existing infrastructure adjacent to VSSC, Thiruvananthapuram. Later, in August
2010, it started functioning from its new campus at Valiamala near Thiruvananthapuram. Some of

8
the construction activities are still being carried out to make it a fully functional campus. The
increase in allocation from Rs. 10.00 crores in R.E. 2011-12 to Rs. 100.00 crores in R.E. 2012-
13, is mainly due to the ongoing construction work and readiness of buildings and other
infrastructural facilities in the new campus. The Committee was also informed that the number of
students who have registered for the admission test for the IIST was as high as 93,164 and
1,20,957 in the years 2010 and 2011 respectively, while the annual intake of the Institute is only
156 students.
10.3 The Committee commends the initiative of the Department in setting up of the
Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology (IIST) for developing high quality man
power required for our space programmes and research. The Committee is further happy to
note that it is Asia’s first Space Institute to offer the complete range of courses related to
space sciences. The Committee hopes that the Institute would turn into a centre of
excellence imparting high quality space education and producing highly skilled and
proficient space scientists and technologists. The Committee is happy to note that a large
numbers of students are competing for admission to the IIST, which indicates growing
popularity and importance of the institute.
11. OCEANSAT & RESOURCESAT PROGRAMMES
11.1 The Committee was informed of the Oceansat and Resourcesat programmes of the
Department, which aims to provide satellite services for varied applications. The objective of
Oceansat-2, launched on 23rd September, 2009, is to provide continuity of data and services
hitherto provided by Oceansat-1 on oceanography and coastal studies while Oceansat-3 programme,
planned to be realized during Twelfth Plan, will be a follow-on satellite for Oceansat-2 to provide
continuity of data on Ocean and Coastal resources.
11.2 As regards the Resourcesat-2 & 3 programmes, the Department informed that taking into
account the increased use of space imageries for different applications and continued Earth
Observation services required from the Indian Remote Sensing satellites, Resourcesat-2 has been
conceived as a continuity mission with enhanced capabilities which will be mainly for crop
applications, vegetation dynamics and natural resources census applications. Resourcesat-3 Satellite
which is planned as a follow-on mission to Resourcesat-2 will provide continuity of data and
services.
11.3 As regards the Budgetary Provisions, for the Oceansat-2 and 3, an allocation of Rs. 50.00
crores in B.E. 2011-12 was made but was reduced to a nominal allocation of Rs. 1.00 crores at
R.E. stage but it has again be kept at Rs. 50.00 crores in B.E. 2012-13. Explaining the reasons
for non-utilization of funds in 2011-12, the Department explained that a provision of Rs. 50.00
crores was initially included in B.E. 2011-12 for Oceansat-3 Project, anticipating that the formal
approval for the Project would be obtained before March 2012. However, the approval for the
project could not be obtained, in view of the complexities and detailed analysis required to finalise
the payload and spacecraft configuration. Therefore, the provision was brought down to a nominal
allocation of Rs. 1.00 crores at R.E. stage in 2011-12. A provision of Rs. 50.00 crores has now
been included under B.E. 2012-13 towards development of payloads and spacecraft elements of
Oceansat-3 satellite.
11.4 The Committee also noticed a similar decrease in allocation for Resourcesat-2 and 3
programmes, which has also seen a substantial decrease in allocation from Rs. 32.66 crores at B.E.
2011-12 stage to Rs.14.00 crores at R.E. stage. Stating the reasons for the decrease in allocation
the Department explained that, anticipating finalisation and approval of the project, an amount of
Rs. 32.66 crores was provided in B.E. 2011-12, to meet the expenses towards test, fabrication and
pre-launch operation charges for Resourcesat-2 and towards procurement of long lead items,

9
materials and electronic components for Resourcesat-3 project. At R.E. 2011-12 stage, the
allocation was again reduced to Rs. 14.00 crores since the finalisation of project report required
some more time to take shape to take into account the user feedback on Resourcesat-2 data which
was successfully launched in April, 2011. Anticipating finalisation and approval for the project
proposal during the financial year, an amount of Rs.10.50 crores has been provided in B.E. 2012-13
for Resourcesat-3 towards payload development and procurement of long lead items.
11.5 The Committee observes that for both the Oceansat 2 & 3 and Resourcesat 2 & 3
programmes, there has been a trend to seek substantial budgetary allocations at B.E. stage
without making an extensive and critical assessment of the actual requirements. The
Committee feels that budgetary demands should be sought by the Department only after
comprehensive analysis of the actual fund requirement for the programme. Scarce
resources should not be blocked by asking for ambitious allocations and not utilizing them
subsequently. These instances are also a reflection on the capacity of the Department to
plan its projects efficiently, set realistic targets and its determination to achieve the targets
set.
12. TELEMEDICINE
12.1 The Committee was also informed of one of the unique applications of Space Technology
for societal benefit is in the field of healthcare. The programme, Telemedicine, which started in
2001 has been connecting remote/rural/medical college hospitals and Mobile Units through the
Indian Satellites to major speciality hospitals in cities and towns. Presently, the network covers the
areas of Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, Andaman & Lakshdweep Islands, North Eastern States and
other mainland States including tribal districts of States like Kerala, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu,
Chhattisgarh, Punjab, West Bengal, Orissa, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Jharkhand and Rajasthan.
The ISRO telemedicine network covers about 382 hospitals with 306 remote/rural/district/medical
college hospitals and 16 Mobile Telemedicine units being connected to 60 speciality hospitals. The
Mobile Telemedicine units cover diverse areas of Opthalmology, Cardiology, Radiology, Diabetology,
Mammography, general medicine, women and child health.
12.2 The Committee was informed that the Department of Space provides Telemedicine systems
software, hardware and communication equipment, as well as satellite bandwidth, while State
Governments and the speciality hospitals give funds for the infrastructure, manpower and facility
support.
12.3 On being enquired about the steps have been initiated by the Department to expand Tele-
medicine network to the far-flung regions in the country, the Department informed that the band
width required for expansion of Telemedicine network was earlier planned onboard GSAT-5P
satellite with 12 Extended C band transponders. However, due to the failure of the launch vehicle
carrying the GSAT-5P satellite, the expansion of Telemedicine network could not be realised as
planned due to satellite bandwidth limitations. However, with the successful launch of GSAT-12 on
July 15, 2011 onboard India’s PSLY , the required transponder capacity to support Telemedicine
activities has been restored. Currently, the migration of existing Tele-medicine network to the new
GSAT-12 satellite is in progress and after operationalising the existing Telemedicine nodes with
GSAT-12 satellite, the expansion of Telemedicine facility will be pursued.
12.4 The Committee feels that Telemedicine is a very useful programme pursued by the
Department for providing societal benefits by use of space technology to the common
masses. The Committee is aware that to provide even the basic healthcare facilities in all
the villages of the country, would require a huge capital investment, both in terms of
manpower and resources. The Committee is, therefore, of the opinion that this is a very
cost-effective method for providing quality health care facilities in the rural and remote

10
areas of the country. The Committee recommends that the telemedicine network should be
expanded in a time bound manner to cover the backward, remote, inaccessible or disease-
prone areas, left out so far.
12.5 The Committee also notes that due to the failure of the launch vehicle carrying the
GSAT-5P satellite, the expansion of telemedicine network work was adversely affected. The
Committee is happy to note that with the successful launch of GSAT-12, the telemedicine
activities are being restored. The Committee hopes that the migration of telemedicine
network to GSAT-12 satellite, which is currently in progress, will be completed soon and the
expansion of the facility will be pursued with vigour.
13. DISASTER MANAGEMENT SUPPORT SYSTEM
13.1 The Committee has been informed that the Disaster Management Support (DMS)
Programme of ISRO provides continued support towards disaster management in the country
through products and services emanating from the space and airborne systems, both imaging and
communications. The DMS-Decision Support Centre (DMS-DSC) established at National Remote
Sensing Centre is engaged in monitoring natural disasters such as flood, cyclone, agricultural
drought, landslides, earthquakes and forest fires. The information generated from aero-space
systems are disseminated to the concerned in near real-time for aiding in decision-making. Towards
providing emergency communication for disaster management activities, and at the behest of
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), ISRO has set up a satellite based Virtual Private Network (VPN)
linking the National Control Room at MHA with DMS-DSC at NRSC, important national agencies,
key Government Offices in Delhi and the Control Rooms of 22 multi-hazard-prone States.
13.2 When the Committee enquired the Department about the utilization of ‘Virtual Private
Network (VPN)’ for networking the State and District level emergency control centres during
natural disasters and the achievements of the Department in this regard, specially during the recent
natural disasters, the Department informed that in 2011-12, the Virtual Private Network was utilised
by Decision Support Centre, NRSC (National Remote Sensing Centre) for dissemination of value
added products to the States such as Orissa, Assam and Bihar. A primary node has been added
during 2011 at North-Eastern Space Applications Centre (NESAC), Shillong, making the total
number of nodes to 35. The network is being re-activated with a full transponder on-board GSAT-
12 and it is expected that the network will be fully ready for utilisation by end of April, 2012.
13.3 The Committee is of the view that natural disasters such as floods, droughts,
cyclones, earthquakes and landslides are a recurring phenomena and every year widespread
economic devastation and loss of human lives is caused on account of these natural
calamities. The Committee is of the opinion that the services of Virtual Private Network
(VPN) which has been set up for networking the State and district level emergency control
centres for natural disasters management must be optimally utilized for rapid dissemination
of information to lessen the human and economic loss.
14. SPACE INDUSTRY PARTNERSHIP
14.1 The Committee also enquired about the involvement and participation of Indian industries in
the Indian Space Programme and desired to know about the details of the steps taken by the
Department, in this direction. In reply, the Department stated that in order to encourage
participation of more and more Indian Industries in Space Programme, the Department has been
making concerted efforts in (a) enhancing the throughput capacity of the industries already involved
in space technology and also identifying and developing new industries to take up production jobs
for ISRO, (b) farming-out higher level of production aggregates/systems to Indian industries, and
(c) encouraging industries to take up specific development initiatives of relevance to ISRO.

11
14.2 The Department also stated that it has also been working on strategies to achieve a quantum
jump in Industry participation in the coming years. As part of Industry promotion policy, the
Department has set up/earmarked Space Parks at Bangaluru, Shriharikota, Ahmedabad and
Chitradurga with test and fabrication facilities wherein Industry can come and work in close liaison
with ISRO for delivering quality products and services required for Indian Space Programme. For
gearing up towards increased number of launches per year, the production facilities of partner
industries are being augmented e.g. augmentation of HAL-Aerospace Division, Bangaluru for
increasing the production of number of tankages for GSLV Mk III programme; augmentation of
facilities at M/s BHEL to meet for increasing the production of solar panels; a plant is being
established at M/s Travancore Cochin Chemicals Ltd. for production of Ammonium Chlorate
crystals which is a raw material for Ammonium Perchlorate and revamping of M/s HoCL plant at
Rasayani, Maharashtra for production of N
2O4 etc.
14.3 The Committee is of the opinion that active involvement and effective participation
of more and more Indian industries in providing quality products and services needed for
our Space programme will lead to self-reliance and would decrease our dependence on
foreign industries for space equipments and technologies. The involvement of Indian
industries in production of aggregates/systems for the Indian Space programme would
augment the technical expertise of the Indian industry and would also lead to employment
generation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Space should
make concerted efforts in this direction. The Committee also desires that Department of
Space should look forward to transfer more and more technologies which may be useful for
civilian applications to Indian Industries so as to make them globally competitive.
15. FAILURE ANALYSIS COMMITTEE (FAC)
15.1 In response to a query raised by the Committee regarding the appointment of Failure
Analysis Committee to go into the causes of failure of two GSLV flights into space during 2010,
the Department has stated that during the last financial year GSLV-D3, carrying the GSAT-4
spacecraft was unsuccessful on April 15, 2010 and again the launch of GSLV-F06 carrying GSAT-
5P spacecraft failed on December 25, 2010. The Failure Analysis Committee concluded that in case
of GSLV-D3, the anomalous stoppage of the fuel booster turbo pump of the indigenous cryogenic
stage shortly after the ignition of the cryogenic engine was the cause for the mission failure.
Regarding the GSLV-F06, Failure Analysis Committee concluded that the primary cause of the
failure is the untimely and inadvertent snapping of a group of ten connectors located at the bottom
portion of the Russian Cryogenic Stage. The Department has further stated that based on the
recommendations of the Failure Analysis Committees, the Fuel Booster Turbo Pump and the Lower
Shroud of the Indigenous Cryogenic Stage has been redesigned and qualification test are in progress.
15.2 While deliberating on the issue on 11th April, 2012, the Chairman of the Committee queried
about the updating of the aerodynamic characteristics of GSLV configuration which has been made
as per the Failure Analysis Committee recommendations. The Department while responding to the
query mentioned that due to high aerodynamic load, the GSLV F06 failed, as the mass of the
satellite was increased from 1800kg to 2200kg leading to significant increase in the payload and
also increase in diameter of the heat shield to 4 metre.
15.3 In reply to another query, the Department also opined that in future all GSLV vehicles and
other advanced launch vehicles, should be powered with indigenous cryogenic stage as doubts have
been raised about the efficiency of Russian cryogenic technology after the failure of GSLV series
of satellites.
15.4 After going through the replies of the Department of Space and findings of FAC, the
Committee is of the opinion that the Department should make efforts to develop our

12
indigenous cryogenic engines for GSLV and other advanced launch vehicles, as it would
make us self-reliant in this important area. The Committee would, however like the
Department to ensure that every possible care is taken while launching our satellite so that
chances of failure are reduced to the minimum. It should bear in mind that any failure of
our missions, though failures are bound to happen in such complex missions, not only
results in loss of crores of rupees but also raises a doubt in the mind of the people about
the credibility of our space programme.
16. The Committee after examining the various aspects of the Demands for Grants
(2012-13) of the Department of Space, is of the view that the Department, through its
various schemes and programmes, is realising the immense potential of space technology
for national development and in solving the problems of common man. Keeping in view the
excellent and outstanding work that the Department of Space has undertaken, the kind of
competence that the Department has exhibited and the kind of core and critical
programmes that they have envisaged for future, the Committee strongly recommends that
the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance should provide adequate funds for
completion of projects and schemes undertaken by the Department.

13
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
1. The Committee is of the view that an effective monitoring mechanism is vital to
ensure that the various projects are completed as per the schedule and there is no time or
cost overruns. In this context, the Committee appreciates the adoption of the Result
Framework Document (RFD) by the Department, which aims towards an effective appraisal
of the actual physical and financial progress/achievements in implementation of policies/
programmes in comparison to the projected targets for each programme. The Committee,
in view of strengthening of monitoring mechanism, hopes that the Department would, in
future, be able to ensure timely completion of projects and optimum utilization of funds.
(Para 5.3)
2. The Committee appreciates the achievements made by the Department during
the Eleventh Plan, notably the Chandrayaan-1 Mission and progress made in the field of
Launch Vehicle Development, Earth Observation and Satellite Communication Systems.
However, it notes with concern that some of the missions such as Radar Imaging Satellite
(RISAT-1), Advanced Meteorological satellite INSAT-3D, Multi-wavelength X-ray astronomy
satellites ASTROSAT, SARAL, GSAT-9, GSAT-10, GSAT-6/6A, GSAT-11 and IRNSS could
not be completed as per schedule and shall spill over to the T welfth P lan period due to
technological developmental complexities, difficulties in sourcing the critical supplies and
mission contingencies. The Committee hopes Department would make all possible efforts
to tide over these difficulties and projects would be completed as per the revised schedule.
(Para 6.2)
3. The Committee notes that in the Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012-17) the major thrust of
the Indian Space programme will be to carry forward and strengthen the already established
space-based services aimed at socio-economic development of the country. The Committee
hopes that, apart from the ongoing space programmes and its efforts for developing advanced
launch vehicles, the Department should also strive for mastering critical technologies, so as
to reduce the chances of failure of important missions. The Committee is of the opinion that
the next stepping stone of the Department should be to strive towards sending a Manned
Mission to Space, which naturally follows from its successes obtained in sending launch
vehicles which can carry higher payloads to space. (Para 6.5)
4. The Committee also recommends that Department should also strive to increase its
global market share in space services by developing more innovative and competitive space
services on commercial lines and the revenue generated from marketing of these services,
should be used for further growth and development of space technology in the country.  This
will also increasingly reduce the dependence of our space programme on budgetary
resources. (Para 6.6)
5. The Committee is surprised to know that one of the reasons for reduction in
overall allocations of the Department at R.E. stage in 2010-11 was to meet the ceiling
fixed by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee feels that even if reduction is to be
affected, it should be achieved by imposing suitable cuts in non-priority spending areas
and priority areas like space programmes should either be spared or minimum necessary
cuts only imposed on them. The Committee, however, notes that there are some good and
valid reasons also for the reduction of allocation at B.E. stage and there is no indication
13

14
of any important programme having been adversely effected due to cuts imposed at R.E.
stage. (Para 7.3)
6. The Committee notes with concern that a programme initiated in the year 2006 and
having target date of 2014 as its completion, is yet to get a final approval even for its Phase
1 programme. It shows that the Department is either not serious in timely completion of
the project or has casually  fixed a schedule for its completion. It also reflects a lack of
proper planning and effective monitoring, as also absence of adequate research and
technological support for timely execution of the project. The Committee, however, hopes
that the pre-project activities would be expeditiously completed and approval for Phase 1 of
the programme obtained, so that the project is completed as per schedule in the year 2014.
(Para 8.3)
7. The Committee after going thoroughly through the aforesaid reply of the
Department is of the opinion that preparation of an optimistic schedule for missions like
Chandrayaan-2 and Mars Orbitor Mission, alone is not sufficient but what is required is the
will and dedication to complete the mission target within the time schedule. If time
schedule does not inspire the confidence of the team and is seen by it as an unrealistic
target, it will hardly serve any purpose. The Department should, therefore, fix time
schedules in a more realistic way, rather than fixing time schedules which are not to be
adhered. The Committee feels that failure to adhere to programme schedule sends a wrong
message to the public and lowers their confidence in our capability to take our space
programme to new heights. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the
schedule for all missions including complex missions should be prepared only after taking
into account all ground realities, so that a realistic schedule meant to be adhered by all,
rather than that being violated with impunity, is prepared. (Para 9.5)
8. The Committee commends the initiative of the Department in setting up of the
Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology (IIST) for developing high quality man
power required for our space programmes and research. The Committee is further happy to
note that it is Asia’s first Space Institute to offer the complete range of courses related to
space sciences. The Committee hopes that the Institute would turn into a centre of
excellence imparting high quality space education & producing highly skilled and proficient
space scientists & technologists. The Committee is happy to note that a large numbers of
students are competing for admission to the IIST, which indicates growing popularity and
importance of the institute. (Para 10.3)
9. The Committee observes that for both the Oceansat 2 & 3 and Resourcesat 2 & 3
programmes, there has been a trend to seek substantial budgetary allocations at B.E. stage
without making an extensive and critical assessment of the actual requirements. The
Committee feels that budgetary demands should be sought by the Department only after
comprehensive analysis of the actual fund requirement for the programme. Scarce
resources should not be blocked by asking for ambitious allocations and not utilizing them
subsequently. These instances are also a reflection on the capacity of the Department to
plan its projects efficiently, set realistic targets and its determination to achieve the targets
set. (Para 11.5)
10. The Committee feels that Telemedicine is a very useful programme pursued by the
Department for providing societal benefits by use of space technology to the common
masses.  The Committee is aware that to provide even the basic healthcare facilities in all
the villages of the country, would require a huge capital investment, both in terms of
manpower and resources. The Committee is, therefore, of the opinion that this is a very
cost effective method for providing quality health care facilities in the rural and remote

15
areas of the country. The Committee recommends that the telemedicine network should be
expanded in a time bound manner to cover the backward, remote, inaccessible or disease-
prone areas, left out so far. (Para 12.4)
11. The Committee also notes that due to the failure of the launch vehicle carrying the
GSAT-5P satellite, the expansion of telemedicine network work was adversely affected. The
Committee is happy to note that with the successful launch of GSAT-12, the telemedicine
activities are being restored. The Committee hopes that the migration of telemedicine
network to GSAT-12 satellite, which is currently in progress, will be completed soon and the
expansion of the facility will be pursued with vigour. (Para 12.5)
12. The Committee is of the view that natural disasters such as floods, droughts,
cyclones, earthquakes and landslides are a recurring phenomena and every year widespread
economic devastation and loss of human lives is caused on account of these natural
calamities. The Committee is of the opinion that the services of Virtual Private Network
(VPN) which has been set up for networking the State and district level emergency control
centres for natural disasters management must be optimally utilized for rapid dissemination
of information to lessen the human and economic loss. (Para 13.3)
13. The Committee is of the opinion that active involvement and effective participation
of more and more Indian industries in providing quality products and services needed for
our Space programme will lead to self-reliance and would decrease our dependence on
foreign industries for space equipments and technologies. The involvement of Indian
industries in production of aggregates/systems for the Indian Space programme would
augment the technical expertise of the Indian industry and would also lead to employment
generation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Space should
make concerted efforts in this direction. The Committee also desires that Department of
Space should look forward to transfer more and more technologies which may be useful for
civilian applications to Indian Industries so as to make them globally competitive.
(Para 14.3)
14. After going through the replies of the Department of Space and findings of FAC, the
Committee is of the opinion that the Department should make efforts to develop our
indigenous cryogenic engines for GSLV and other advanced launch vehicles, as it would
make us self-reliant in this important area. The Committee would, however, like the
Department to ensure that every possible care is taken while launching our satellite so that
chances of failure are reduced to the minimum. It should bear in mind that any failure of
our missions, though failures are bound to happen in such complex  missions, not only
results in loss of crores of rupees but also raises a doubt in the mind of the people about
the credibility of our space programme. (Para 15.4)
15. The Committee after examining the various aspects of the Demands for Grants
(2012-13) of the Department of Space, is of the view that the Department, through its
various schemes and programmes, is realising the immense potential of space technology
for national development and in solving the problems of common man. Keeping in view the
excellent and outstanding work that the Department of Space has undertaken, the kind of
competence that the Department has exhibited and the kind of core and critical
programmes that they have envisaged for future, the Committee strongly recommends that
the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance should provide adequate funds for
completion of projects and schemes undertaken by the Department. (Para 16)

MINUTES

18

19
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 11 th April, 2012 in Committee Room
G-074, Parliamentary Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Anil H. Lad
4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
5. Dr. Barun Mukherji
6. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan
LOK SABHA
7. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
8. Shri Ninong Ering
9. Shri Abdul Rahman
10. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
11. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
12. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
13. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
** *
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
19
*** Relates to other matter.

20
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. * * *
12. * * *
13. * * *
14. * * *
15. * * *
16. * * *
17. * * *
Representatives of Department of Space
1. Dr. K. Radhakrishnan, Secretary
2. Shri V . Koteswara Rao, Scientific Secretary
3. Shri S. Srinivasan, Additional Secretary
4. Shri A. Vijay Anand, Joint Secretary
5. Shri P.G. Diwakar, Director, EOS
6. Shri H.N. Madhusudhana, Director, BEA
7. Shri N. Prahlad Rao, Director, SCNP
8. Shri V . Ramachandra, Director, LVPO
9. Shri S. Satish, Director, P&PR
18. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee, Secretary,
Department of Space and his team of officials. He informed that the Committee proposed to
discuss the functioning and Demands for Grants for the year 2012-13 of the Department of Space.
While congratulating the Department for its achievements in the year 2011 and various other
initiatives it had taken, the Chairman desired to know as to how it envisaged to make available the
full benefits of space technology to the common man. He also asked the Secretary to brief the
Committee about the budgetary allocations, initiatives for the year 2012-13 and whether the
allocations were sufficient to implement the programmes of the Ministry. Thereafter, the Chairman
asked the Secretary to start his presentation.
19. The Secretary of the Department explained that the Indian Space programme had been made
to suit the needs of the common man. He pointed out that the use of the Remote Sensing satellites
for varied purposes such as getting cloud pictures that were used for weather forecasting; for
management of land and water resources and for observation of oceans, which indirectly benefited
the masses. Informing the Committee of the Mars Mission, the Secretary stated that it was
planning to launch a satellite on board the PSLV launch vehicle, to study whether life is possible
on the planet.
20. The Secretary of the Department in reply to another query, opined that in future all GSLV
vehicles and other advanced launch vehicles, would be powered with indigenous cryogenic stage
*** Relates to other matter.

21
as doubts had been raised about the efficiency of Russian cryogenic technology after the failure
of GSLV series of satellites. It was further stated that the Russian industries which were earlier
making the cryogenic stages for the Indian space programmes had since been disbanded and it
would require at least four years for them to deliver such an engine, necessitating the need for an
indigenous engine. In this direction necessary tests were carried out and it was expected that by
September, 2012 the indigenous engine would be ready.
21. The Committee raised an issue regarding lack of application of the information, particularly
the Remote Sensing data regarding natural resources management, land, water etc. for
developmental purposes. The Secretary of  the Department, informed the Committee that the
Department was focusing towards Translational Research, which intended to utilise high technology
for developmental applications. The Indian Institute of  Remote Sensing was building capabilities in
the managers, administrators, etc. for using the data for focused planning. Besides, the data on
natural resources such as water, was also being made available through websites to several
agencies.
22. In reply to a query regarding the Kalpana-l and Oceansat-2 satellites, the Secretary stated
that while Kalpana-1 is an exclusive meteorological satellite, whose imageries were being used by
the India Meteorological Department for making weather forecasts, the Oceansat-2 satellite provides
data on the oceans such as wind direction over the oceans, chlorophyll content, health of  corals
in Andamans and Lakshadweep and had varied applications. The data which was available through
the said satellites were available for use to the international scientific community as a contribution
from India.
23. Giving the details of  the telemedicine network existing in the country, the Secretary stated
that through that initiative the rural and remote areas of  the country which lacked proper medical
care were connected to 35 super-speciality hospitals in the towns. In reply to another query
regarding the study done by  the Department as regards the retreat of  Himalayan glaciers, the
Secretary stated that the Ministry of  Environment and Forests was working with ISRO to maintain
an inventory of  the glaciers. Besides, certain glaciers were selected to see their variations. About
32,392 glaciers had been monitored over the last 15 years and as per the findings, there had been
a retreat for about 76 per cent of  the glaciers; while there was an advancement for about seven
per cent and there was no change for about 17 per cent of  the glaciers.
24. In response to a query raised by  the Committee regarding the appointment of  Failure
Analysis Committee to go into the causes of  failure of  two GSLV flights into space during 2010,
the Department stated that during the last financial year GSLV-D3, carrying the GSAT-4 spacecraft
was unsuccessful on April 15, 2010  and again the launch of  GSLV F06  carrying GSAT 5P
spacecraft failed on December 25, 2010. The Failure Analysis Committee concluded that in case
of GSLV D3, the anomalous stoppage of  the fuel booster turbo pump of  the indigenous cryogenic
stage shortly after the ignition of  the cryogenic engine was the cause for the mission failure.
Regarding the GSLV-F06, Failure Analysis Committee concluded that the primary cause of the
failure was the untimely and inadvertent snapping of a group of ten connectors located at the
bottom portion of the Russian Cryogenic Stage. The Department further stated that based on the
recommendations of the Failure Analysis Committee, the Fuel Booster Turbo Pump and the Lower
Shroud of the Indigenous Cryogenic Stage had been redesigned and qualification test were in
progress.
25. The Committee also queried about the updating of the aerodynamic characteristics of GSLV
configuration which had been made as per the Failure Analysis Committee recommendations. The
Department while responding to the query mentioned that due to high aerodynamic load, the
GSL-V F06 failed, as the mass of the satellite was increased from 1800kg to 2200kg leading to
significant increase in the payload and also increase in diameter of the heat shield to 4 metre.

22
26. The Committee also raised a query regarding the constant rescheduling of Chandrayaan-2
programme, initially from 2010 to 2011 and then to January, 2012. In response to the query the
Department stated that Chandrayaan-2 involves a complex work of sending a lander and a robot
to moon for doing experiments. The Department further stated that the lander was to be
constructed by Russia and the rover by India. While narrating further on the issue, the Department
pointed out that due to reprioritisation of certain programmes by Russia, the Chandrayaan-2
programme had been postponed to 2014. Moreover, recent three failures in GSLV flights had placed
the Department in a disadvantageous position to prove the reliability of GSLV mission, which was
now taking more time.
27. Similarly, in case of Mars Mission, the Department informed that it was even more complex
mission than Chandrayaan-2, involving 300 days movement of satellite to Mars through a complex
propulsion system that would sustain itself for 300 days. Accordingly, the initial plan was to send
an orbiter to Mars in 2013, and if it is not possible by then, the projected date would be shifted
to 2016 or to 2018 as the time when it can be sent is determined by the geometry of Mars, Earth
& Sun.
The officials, then, withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
28. The Committee then adjourned at 4.37 
P.M.

23
XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 16 th May, 2012 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri Francisco Sardinha — In Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil H. Lad
3. Dr. Chandan Mitra
4. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
5. Dr. Barun Mukherji
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
7. Shri Ninong Ering
8. Shri Abdul Rahman
9. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
10. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
11. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
12. Dr. Rajan Sushant
13. Shri Pradeep Tamta
14. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
15. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them
that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft reports on Demands for Grants
(2012-13) pertaining to Ministries/Departments of ***; ***; ***; *** and Space. He also informed
that the draft reports, approved by the Chairman of the Committee had already been circulated to
Members and that they must have gone through the reports. ***.
23
*** Relates to other matter.

24
3. The Committee then took-up for consideration, its draft ***, ***, ***, 225 th, ***, *** and
*** Reports, one by one. ***.
4. * * *
5. The Committee, then took-up for consideration, one by one, its draft 225 th, *** and ***
Reports, pertaining to the Ministry/Departments of Space, *** and *** adopted them without any
amendments.
6. * * *
7. The Committee, thereafter, decided to present/lay the Report Nos. 222
nd to 228 th on both
the Houses of Parliament on the 18 th May, 2012. The Committee authorised Shri Francisco
Saradinha and in his absence Shri Pradeep Tamta to lay the reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha
and in Rajya Sabha Shri Janardan Dwivedi and in his absence Dr. Barun Mukherji to present the
reports.
8 A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 3.40 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.