file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/103rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
ONE HUNDRED -THIRD REPORT
 
ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2002-2003) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (DEMAND NO. 71)
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 14TH MAY, 2002)
(LAID IN THE LOK SABHA ON THE 14TH MAY, 2002)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2002/VAISAKHA, 1924  (SAKA)
 
E-Mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in
Web site: http://parliamentofindia.nic.in
 C O N T E N T S
                          
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                          
2.INTRODUCTION 
3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                 
4.SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
 5.ANNEXURES 
6.MINUTES  OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE  
                                                                           
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2002)
 
1.         Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
           
RAJYA SABHA
 
     #
2.  Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
Smt. S. Gokula Indira
Shri C. Apok Jamir
Shri Yusuf Sarwar Khan alias Dilip Kumar
Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
Dr. C. Narayana Reddy
Smt. Savita Sharda
Shri B.P. Singhal
&

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/103rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
10.Shri M. V. Rajashekaran
J11.Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
 *12.Vacant
f13 Vacant
b14.Vacant
¥15.Vacant
        
LOK  SABHA
 
Smt. Margaret Alva
Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan                   
Smt. Bhavna Devrajbhai Chikhalia                   
Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
Adv. Suresh Ramrao Jadhav                            
Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya
Shri Babubhai K. Katara
%
23.Kunwar Akhilesh Singh    
Dr. Charan Das Mahant
Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik
Shri Kailash Meghwal
Shri Madhusudan Devram Mistry
Shri Rupchand Murmu
Shri S. Murugesan                               
Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                            
Shri A. Venkatesh Naik                       
Shri B.K. Parthasarathi
Shri Ajit Kumar Panja  
Shri Suresh Pasi                                               
Dr. Ashok Patel                                               
Shri Prahlad Patel        
Prof. R.R. Pramanik                            
Shri Naresh Puglia                               
Shri Ganta Srinivasa Rao         
Prof. I.G. Sanadi
Shri Ram Prasad Singh
Shri Vishvendra Singh  
Shri V. Vetriselvan
Shri Balram Singh Yadav
Shri Akhilesh Yadav
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
            Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary   
            Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
 INTRODUCTION

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/103rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
 Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One
 Hundred-Third Report of the Committee.  This Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
 Department of Scientific & Industrial Research (Demand No.71).
 
2.         In the meeting of the Committee held on the 11
th  April, 2002 the Secretary and other Officers of the Department
 Scientific & Industrial Research gave an overview of the various activities of the Department and the Members sought
 clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for
 Grants.
 
3.         The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by
 the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants
 of the Department Scientific & Industrial Research.
 
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on 9
th May, 2002.
 
 
NEW DELHI;
                                                                                                     C.RAMACHANDRAIAH,
May 9,2002                                                                                                                               Chairman,
                                                                         Committee on Science& Technology, Environment & Forests.
        R E P O R T
 
The Department of Scientific & Industrial Research (DSIR) is a Department of the Ministry of Science & Technology
 and is entrusted with the matters concerning the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research; National Research
 Development Corporation; Central Electronics Limited; National Information System on Science and Technology
 (NISSAT); Registration and Recognition of R&D Units; United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
 (UNCTAD) and World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO); National register for foreign collaborations. 
 Creation of a pool for temporary placement of our Scientists and Technologists; and National register of Scientific
 Manpower. It acts as an administrative link between the Government of India and the CSIR Society.
2.         The Department is concerned with the following departmental programmes:
(a)        Plan Schemes relating to:
                       
(i)         Research and Development by Industry (RDI);
(ii)        Programme Aimed at Technological Self Reliance (PATSER);
Scheme to Enhance the Efficacy of Transfer of Technology
(SEETOT); and
(iv)       National Information System for Science and Technology. (NISSAT)
Besides, the Department is involved in various other activities/matters relating to;
International R&D collaboration involving industrial companies, and industrial
 R&D centres;International Cooperation/Collaboration agreements with other countries relating to industrial R&D with
 the concurrence of the Ministry of External Affairs;
Domestic technology, particularly the promotion of ventures involving the commercialization of such technologies 
 other than those under the Department of Science and Technology;Technology Exports including exports of Technical
 and Consultancy Services, in close cooperation with the Ministry of Commerce;
Technical, engineering and management consultancy organizations and services; andSupport in different forms, to
 industrial R&Dcarriedoutatdiverseunits/institutions/organization.  The Department also manages two Public Sector
 enterprises, namely National  Research Development Corporation (NRDC), and Central Electronics Limited (CEL) and
 an autonomous Organisation – Consultancy Development Centre (CDC)
3.         The Council of Scientific & Industrial Research constituted in 1942 by a resolution of the then Central
 Legislative assembly, is an autonomous body registered under the Registration of Societies Act XXI of 1860.  The 
 functions assigned to the Council are Promotion, guidance and coordination of Scientific and Industrial Research in

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/103rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
 India including the institution and financing of specific researches; Establishment or development and assistance to
 special institutions or departments of existing institutions for scientific study of problems affecting particular industrial
 and trade; Establishment and award of research studentship and fellowship; Utilization of the results of the researches
 conducted under the auspices of the Council towards the development of industries in the country and the payment of a
 share of royalties arising out of  the development of the results of researches to those who are considered as having
 contributed towards the pursuits of such researches; Establishment, maintenance and management of laboratories,
 workshops, institutes and organizations to further scientific and Industrial Research and  utilize and exploit for purposes
 of experiment or otherwise any discovery or invention likely to be of use to Indian industries; Collection and
 dissemination of information in regard not only to research but also to industrial matters generally; Publication of
 scientific papers and journals; and any other activity or activities to promote generally the objects of the resolution.
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
4.         The Department of Scientific & Industrial Research (DSIR ) has been allocated Rs.1040.93 crores for the year
 2002-2003 as against Rs.963.47 crores in B.E. and Rs.927.68 crores in the R.E. of the year 2001-2002.
            A breakup of the financial allocation of CSIR, DSIR and Public Sector Enterprises is as follows:
FINANCIAL SUMMARY FOR 2002-2003 PLAN & NON-PLAN
(Rs .in Crores)
 Plan Non-Plan Total
 Demands
Made
Approved Demands
Made
Approved Demands
Made
Approved
A. CSIR 570.0 412.00 641.65 597.65 1211.65 1009.65
B. DSIR 22.32 17.00 3.49 3.08 25.81 20.08
C. PSE 16.00 11.00 0.20 0.20 16.20 11.20
Total 608.32 440.00 645.34 600.93 1253.66 1040.93
 
            The details of the budgetary projections for the programme of the DSIR during the year 2002-03 are given in
 Annexure I.
            The allocation on the plan side has been kept at Rs.440.00 crores, which represents an increases of about Rs.100
 crores over the R.E. and about 80 crores over the B.E. of 2001-02.
5.         The Committee was informed that CSIR derives its finances from three major sources namely, Budgetary
 support from the government under Plan and Non-Plan, undertaking of contract R&D, consultancy & technical services
 (External Cash Flow – ECF) and internal receipts.
6.         Secretary, DSIR informed the Committee that from the Tenth Five Year Plan it proposes to operate only six 
 plan schemes based on Zero Based Budgetary (ZBB) review  instead of nine schemes as in Ninth  Five year  plan.
 Besides, the ongoing five schemes the CSIR proposed to introduce a new scheme on infrastructure Renovation and
 Refurbishment from the Tenth Five Year Plan onwards. 
           
NATIONAL LABORATORIES
7.         The Committee has been given to an understand that CSIR has a network of 39 Laboratories and 50 field
 stations/extension centres/regional centres located all over the country which undertake R&D in various S&T areas and
 disciplines. These have been established to reach the diverse users and disseminate knowledge and information on
 R&D capabilities, techniques and technologies developed.
8.         The Ninth Five Year Plan (NFYP) was a watershed in the programme planning and implementation in the CSIR.
 During this phase the endeavour was to move the organization towards ‘Programme & Project’ based approach rather
 than discipline/area /sectoral approach.  As a result CSIR formulated and took up over 20 major mission mode projects
 with well defined deadlines, deliverables and cost ceilings. The organizational learning experience derived therefrom
 has given the requisite assurance and conviction to CSIR that  many of the ‘science’ programmes can be projectised
 and taken up in mission mode.
9.         The Committee was informed that during the Tenth Five Year Plan CSIR would  undertake programmes that
 promote: excellence in science; global competitiveness; local relevance innovation.  CSIR further seek to broaden and
 strengthen more of its activities in the project mode by networking and alliancing on a Team India basis. The
 programmes of National Laboratories have been categorized sectorally under Aerospace; Biology and Biotechnology;
 Chemical; Earth Resources and Natural Hazards Assessment; Ecology & Environment; Electronics and

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/103rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
 Instrumentation; Energy; Food & Food processing; Health Care, Drugs & Pharmaceuticals; Housing & Construction;
 Information Dissemination and Products; Leather; Materials, Metals, Minerals and Manufacturing; Rural Development
 with a view to enable and facilitate an easy alignment with the overall ‘National Planning process’. The areas of thrust
 in these categories have been identified through interactions with various national agencies, government departments,
 industry associations and potential clients keeping in view the strengths and capabilities in the CSIR laboratories and
 the external opportunities. 
10.       When asked for the reasons for hike in allocation for National Laboratories by about 23% over RE last year, the
 Department informed that the budgetary allocation to National Laboratories during the year 2002-2003 is Rs.703 crore
 consisting of Rs.310 crore in the Plan and Rs. 393 crore under non-plan.  This represents an increase of about 23% over
 the  Revised Estimates of 2001-2002 and  the increase is essentially on the Plan component.  The year 2002-03 being
 the first year of the Tenth-Five Year Plan, the emphasis has been to evolve and formulate Core Programmes to be
 implemented in Project Mode as directed by the Planning Commission constituted Steering Committee on Science &
 Technology for the Tenth Five Year Plan.  CSIR laboratories would be focusing on these Core Programmes (fifty five
 projects) to be taken in the Mission-Project Mode.  Some of the significant ones are: (i) Spearheading small civilian
 aircraft design, development & manufacture; (ii) Exploration and Exploitation of Microbial Wealth of India for novel
 compounds and biotransformation process; (iii) Molecular biology of selected pathogens  for  developing  drugs 
 targets;  (iv) Pollution  monitoring  and mitigation systems and
devices; (vii) Positioning Indian nutraceuticals and neutrigenomics on a global platform; (viii) Asthmatic and allergic
 disorders mitigation mission; (ix) Newer scientific herbal preparations for global positioning; (x) Design analysis and
 health assessment of Special structures including bridges; (xi) Comprehensive Traditional Knowledge Digital
 Documentation and Library, and (xii) Developing technology packages for disaster prevention and management in
 underground coalfields.
Besides, the allocation is also for building up basic core competencies in new and emerging areas and providing housing
 facilities for scientific, technical and other staff or CSIR.
11.       The Committee notes with satisfaction the various activities in which CSIR laboratories are conducting
 research.  However, the pricing and the terms at which the technology is transferred to industry needs to be looked into
 afresh with a view not only to retain the competitive edge for the industry but it should also be profitable to the
 Government and if possible should also generate royalty for the Government.  From the experience gained in respect of
 ASMON being marketed by only one company, which was not able to cope with the demand, the Committee feels that
 the marketing  rights in respect of new drugs entering the market should be with more than one company to avoid
 inconvenience to customers.
 
PROGRAMMES FOR CORE COMPETENCIES IN BASIC RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT
12.       The Committee has been informed that CSIR needs to pursue free but focused  R&D that provides it the
 requisite knowledge base and core skills for generating newer techniques and technologies of the future. Absence of
 adequate investments in industrial research would deprive the CSIR & nation of any technology advantage on the
 global front that leading to denial of technological leadership.
And also, CSIR consciously invests about 15% to 20% of the resources on national laboratories for such focused but
 free basic research programmes.  The support for such programmes would vary from time to time and from laboratory
 to laboratory.  In the present-context this type of support would be more in the emerging areas of biology (genomics,
 proteomics etc.), new materials, (nano, ultra pure & fine materials etc.) and exploration of emerging crazy ideas in
 other domains.
 
NATIONAL S&T HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
13.       The Committee has been informed that CSIR was aware of the declining trend in the youth taking to science
 education and R&D as a career. One of the underlying causes of decline in science education is that the students were
 herded into dull classes, taught by faculty that was not abreast of the exciting & new development in science and given
 little academic guidance and motivation. In order to prevent this trend the Department aims to take up a training and
 motivation programme for selected Science Teachers to be the `fountain heads’ and `centres of excellence’ in science
 education in schools and under-graduate education. In order to promote interest, excitement and excellence in science
 education at school and undergraduate levels, each CSIR laboratory would adopt atleast one school and one college in
 its sphere of influence. Designated  escort  scientist will  be made responsible for the activity. The laboratory would
 offer
not only its facilities for project work and experimentation but also carry out student guidance and motivational

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/103rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
 programmes.
CSIR would endeavour to inculcate a spirit of entrepreneurship in research scholars to help them establish their own
 R&D enterprises.  In order to attract bright school leaving children to pursue science it would enlarge on CSIR
 Programme on Youth for Leadership in Science (CPYLS). The Shyama Prasad Mukherjee awards were created to
 promote creativity and in nurturing at postgraduate level of science.
14.       The Committee observes that in order to encourage talented persons to take up research, they should be
 encouraged with remunerative schemes and wherever applicable attractive pay scales so that a suitable environment
 congenial to work culture is provided wherein they can sustain their interests in scientific research.  They should also be
 provided state of art laboratory facilities as this also would prevent them from going abroad and thus, reducing brain
 drain.
The Committee is also of the view that the efforts be made to utilize the services of scientists who have since retired by
 involving them in projects which were aimed at inculcating scientific temper among students and this would help utilise
 their talents.  This could be done through re-employment.  Infact the scientists should be allowed to work irrespective
 of the age of retirement, as long as they feel they can meaningfully contribute in the interest of the society and the
 country.
 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY & TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT (IPTM)
15.       The Committee was informed that this  scheme was formulated to enhance the volume and  derive the optimal
 value  of Intellectual Property (IP) generated by CSIR and to share the best innovation and technology management
 practices organizationally and with the Indian S&T community at large. The volume of IP rights secured by CSIR has
 greatly increased, however the task of realizing adequate and appreciable  value from the IPR was yet to be achieved.
16.       The Committee has been informed that the IPR regime  in a state of flux and there were major unresolved issues
 with respect to `traditional knowledge’, `genomic sequences’, `copyright on the Net’ etc. This imposed a continuous
 need to refurbish the skills and knowledgebase of those in CSIR engaged in the IPR game and to advise the
 policymakers appropriately on the new developments and changes proposed in international IPR arena. Asked to
 explain the reasons for increased budgetary allocation for this programme and the number of patents filed last year and
 whether the Department had negotiated and tied up marketing of technologies with various Indian and Foreign
 companies, the Department replied that during the year 2000-01, CSIR had filed total of 862 patents of which 452
 Patents were filed abroad and 410 patents filed in India.  None of the Patents filed by CSIR were in dispute.  CSIR was
 at the second position in terms of Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) patents filed by entity in the year 2001.  However,
 CSIR has set a target of 1200 patents filing (700 foreign and 500 Indian) for the year 2002-03.  The enhanced allocation
 would help meet the cost of filing these patents, maintenance of the enlarged portfolio of existing patents, building
 capacity to defend and initiate patent infringement action and training of CSIR personnel on advanced  aspects of
 Intellectual property & Technology Management.
           
            It has further been stated that CSIR has tied up with some of the most well known Indian and Foreign companies
 for its technologies, a few of these were as follows:
 
Technology Licenses
Biology & Biotechnology
Lysostaphin
Preparation of recombinant, Human Epidermal Growth
 Factor
Preparation of recombinant proinsulin, a precursor to
 human insulin
Staphylokinase
Genomics tools-software, Knowledge alliance in the area
 of Genomics
Euchema Cultivation
 
Chemicals
Water treatment chemicals used in cooling water
Detergent grade Zeolite-A using Sodium aluminate liquor
A new chemical process for proprietary compound CMI-
 
 
 
 
Bharat Biotech (I) Ltd., Hyderabad
 
 
Nicholos Piramal, Mumbai
Pepsico India Holdings Ltd.
 
 
 
 
NALCO Ltd., Bhubaneshwar
 

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/103rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
977
Synthesis of new chemical entities
Benzaldehyde/Nenzoic acid by air oxidation of toluene
Food Grade Hexane & SBP Solvent
Visbreaking technology
 
Intermediate for polycarbonates
 
Homobrassinolide technology
 
 
Aluminium based tanning agent
 
Drug & Pharmaceuticals
 
Chandonium iodide Docetaxel-Anti-cancer drug
Artemisinin extraction
 
A herbal medicine for relief of Asthmatic problems
 
Engineering
 
Metallic Composite Fire Resistant Doors
 
Cement Polymer composite coating
 
Process for sol-gel alumina abrasives
 
20 HP Tractor
Cytomed Inc., USA
 
Loreal, France
Vinati Organics ltd., Mumbai
 
ONGC, Hyderabad
Stone & Webster Engineering Coropration, USA
General Electric Co., USA
 
Godrej Agrovet Ltd., Mumbai
 
 
Quinn International Ltd., Hyderabad
 
 
 
Cipla Ltd., Mumbai
 
Cadila Pharmaceutical Ltd.
 
Herbochem Remedies India Pvt.Ltd.
 
 
 
Godrej & Boyce Mfg. Co. Ltd., Mumbai
 
Berger Paints, Calcutta
 
Carborandum Universal, China
 
International Tractors Ltd., New Delhi
17.       The Committee notes with satisfaction the increasing pace of applications for patents and the resultant folio
 increase.  The Committee would like the Department to simultaneously concentrate its efforts on the utilization of these
 patents by either transferring the technology to the industry or by the Department itself for commercial exploitation
 before they get outdated.
 
NEW MILLENNIUM INDIAN TECHNOLOGY LEADERSHIP INITIATIVE (NMITLI)
18.       In order to capture  global leadership position the scheme was initiated in February 2000 for the country in few
 selected areas based on technology. The scheme necessitated intimate networking between diverse constituents of the
 innovation chain. The choice was to mount two or three large industry oriented projects or to seek windows of
 opportunity in farsighted science – technology intensive projects. Considering the  experience of Indian constituents to
 team up on large civilian commercial projects and the high risks in putting large investment in two / three projects  the
 scheme chose to focus on niche, high science- technology projects with high gain – risk potential. Even then the
 scheme has adopted a system of `options funding’ for the projects with flexibility to foreclose those projects that exceed
 the potential cost-benefit-risk thresholds. CSIR through large-scale national consultation and brainstorming is giving
 support to true Team India spirit, 9 projects encompassing 55 R&D institutions and 20 industrial firms.
19.       When asked about the reasons for reduction in allocation by Rs.5.00 crores and impact of the same on ongoing
 projects, the Department informed that the projects were of 2-3 years duration and thus it was envisaged that the
 majority of projects initiated in 2001 would be completed in the Financial Year 2002-03.  The reduced allocation was
 thus adequate for meeting the 2
nd year allocations of projects initiated in the present year 2001-02 and those to be
 initiated in the 2002-03 year.
20.       The Committee feels that department should take up such technology projects as were important to the country
 and  strive  to bring out the best quality technologies at flexible costs.  Efforts should be made to expeditiously

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/103rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
 complete the project with regular monitoring by competent authorities/panels appointed for the purpose.
 
INFRASTRUCTURE RENOVATION AND REFURBISHMENT
21.       In the course of his presentation the Secretary  informed the Committee that a new scheme for Infrastructure
 Renovation & Refurbishment was being initiated from the Tenth Five Year Plan. This was analogous to the scheme on
 Modernisation and had two components (i) rehabilitating, refurbishing and renovating the laboratories, aging buildings
 and infrastructure and (ii) putting in place a state of art most modern IT infrastructure in all the laboratories. CSIR
 infrastructure was built or acquired more than thirty to forty years ago.  Some of the laboratories like the Central Drug
 Research Institute (CDRI), Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI), Central Salt & Marine Chemicals
 Research Institute (CSMCRI) etc. were housed in palaces which were centuries old.  The premises were converted into
 laboratories by carrying out only small renovations.  Besides, many of the laboratories were quite old. Thus CSIR
 infrastructure was not suited for present day R&D especially in term of Good Laboratory Practice (GLP), International
 Organisation for Standarization (ISO), National
 Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) requirements for accreditation and certification.
 Also many of the laboratory premises were  dilapidated and posed safety hazards.  Thus these  buildings needed
 strengthening of foundations and refurbishing of roofs, revamping of electrical wiring and substations, better
 communications connectivity, lifts etc.   Separate laboratory-wise renovation plans would be prepared and specific
 approval obtained.
22.       The communication systems in CSIR needed modernization. In 1997 CSIR was amongst the first to plan for V-
SAT connectivity to all its laboratories.  This could be established to some limited extent.  The delays in implementation
 and the radical changes in communication set-up since then have made it imperative that these be upgraded into an
 efficient internet.
23.       The Committee agrees that the Infrastructure Renovation and Refurbishment is essential in the present day
 context.  Infact  this  should have been done much earlier in pursuance of recommendations of the Committee in the
 context of modernization of laboratories.  The Committee has time and again reiterated that progressive modernisation
 or renovation was a continuous process and the Department should also ensure that the laboratories that were being
 taken up for refurbishment should be as per world standards. However, it is constrained to observe that  during 9
th plan
 an allocation was made for modernization of laboratories and in 10th plan  they made an allocation for renovation &
 refurbishment which included strengthening of foundation and revamping of electrical wiring and better
 communication connectivity. The Committee observes that both the programmes were similar in nature and being
 analogous could have been taken together. 
 
(i)         CENTRAL ELECTRONICS LIMITED
24.       While deposing before the Committee the Secretary, DSIR,  stated that Central Electronics Limited (CEL) held a
 unique position among the family of public sector enterprises in electronics, with its emphasis on indigenous
 technology, inducted both from its in house developments and from the country's national laboratories for its
 production programmes in diverse hi  technology areas of national relevance.  The company's operations were
 structured in terms of three product categories, which were also its  corresponding business groups,  namely,  (i) Solar
 Photovoltaics (SPV): Crystalline Silicon Cells, Modules and SPV Energy Systems for rural, remote areas and industrial
 applications, (ii) Electronics Systems:  Railway Electronics Equipment, Cathodic Protection System for Oil / Gas
 Pipelines, Projection Television (PTV) Systems and Rural Automatic Telephones Exchanges (RAX) & Very Small
 Aperture (Satellite) Terminals (VSAT), (iii) Electronic Components:  Electronic Ceramics, Professional Ferrites for
 TV, Telecommunication and Defence, Microwave Ferrite Phase Shifters for Missile Radars, Microwave components.
25.       When asked if there were any proposals for disinvestments of CEL the Committee was informed that Central
 Electronics Limited (CEL) had been referred to the Disinvestments Commission.  However, the Disinvestments
 Commission in its eighth report has made certain recommendations, which were in the process of implementation.  The
 recommendations included reduction of manpower through attractive voluntary retirement scheme and improvement of
 financial performance of CEL in two years.  
 
(ii)        NATIONAL RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
26.       National Research Development Corporation (NRDC), a public sector enterprise under DSIR, is engaged in
 development, upscaling, licensing and commercialisation of indigenous technologies as well as export of technologies.
 The objectives of the Corporation were: commercialisation of indigenous technologies; promotion and

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/103rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
 commercialisation of inventions; dissemination of information on technology transfer; and development and promotion
 of rural technology.
As a result of a "New Approach" to its activities, the Corporation has been able to reverse the declining trend in
 technologies acquired from R&D laboratories for licensing.  The organisations from which such technologies were
 acquired have been widened enormously to cover many laboratories under CSIR, Indian Council for Medical Research
 (ICMR), Indian Council for Agricultural Research (ICAR), Defence Research Development Organisation (DRDO),
 Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC), Central Power Research Institute (CPRI), Department of Electronics (DOE),
 Research Design & Standards Organisation (RDSO), Indian Institute Technology (IITs), Universities and other large
 public sector enterprises.
27.       In reply to a question regarding the income of the NRDC, the Secretary informed that NRDC made a profit of
 Rs.17 Lakhs last year.  He also informed that of the total earnings, seventy percent goes back to R&D activities and rest
 thirty percent is left for services.  However, NRDC spends most on intellectual property as the cost of filing a patent is
 exorbitant.
 
28.       The Committee observes that the Public Sector Undertakings (PSU) are no longer considered the model
 employer as they were once considered to be.  They are now hot bed of inefficiency, corruption and lack competitive
 edge.  At the same time in some enterprises the employees are being asked to forego their allowances, being denied of
 even their legitimate dues like Provident Fund.  The Committee feels this is not a good state of affairs so long it tends to
 deny them of their legitimate dues.  But in the wake of this it has become necessary that the PSUs prepare themselves
 to the changing scenario, gain optimum efficiency and increase their profits. This may save them from the processes of
 disinvestments at least for a while.  
 
AEROSPACE
29.       National Aerospace Laboratories (NAL), Bangalore is one of the major player in supporting the National
 Aerospace Programmes of the country.  It has helped Defence R&D, Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO),
 Indian Air Force (IAF), Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) and other organizations to achieve some of their
 programmes / activities and also built up research, development and technology strengths in the areas of civil aircraft
 designs & development.  NAL focused its activities on design, development and fabrication of a civilian aircraft; and
 providing support through in-house expertise and numerous test facilities such as NTAF, ATF, Fatigue Test facility,
 FRP pilot facility to the Light Combat Aircraft (LCA), Advanced Light Helicopter (ALH), Guided Missile, Satellite
 Launch Vehicle, Kaveri Engine programmes etc.  The Department achieved significant milestones in the design,
 fabrication and air worthiness testing of a 9-14 seater light transport aircraft named Saras.  The main activities were to
 design, fabricate and assembly of two flying prototypes and one structural test specimen and flight testing with the
 objective to obtain Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) certification.  This is suited for semi prepared short
 runways and is fuel efficient & cost effective and uses Advanced Composites and avionics.
30.       The Department also provided a catalyst   in development of  two-seater all composites trainer air-craft HANSA-
3 which was designed and built by NAL and is certified by DGCA for day & night flying.  The know-how was licensed
 to a private sector firm and commercial production of the aircraft has commenced with the first order of 5 aircraft.
The Secretary DSIR, informed that       NAL has provided support for the major structural for the LCA and carried out
 the design, fabrication and testing of carbon fibre wings and wing components for the LCA,
31.       The Committee commends the efforts made by the Department for its activities on design, development and
 fabrication of civil aircrafts.  The Committee feels that the technology must be transferred to industry for commercial
 production as these small aircrafts can be of immense use in remote & hilly areas where construction of large runways
 is not feasible.  These can also be used by defence establishment to deliver food & ammunition to remote hill regions.
 
The Committee is constrained to observe that the development of Hansa and Saras has been going on for a considerable
 period.  The Committee  on its visit to  NAL in September, 2000 was informed that  Saras was expected to fly in 2001.
 However, during the course of presentation before the Committee the Secretary, DSIR has stated that  it is scheduled
 for 2002.  The Committee feels that the project particularly the Saras Project has been there for a quite long time and
 such delays should be avoided as they result in cost overruns in addition to losing technological importance.
 
ECOLOGY & ENVIRONMENT
32.       As a result of rapid urbanization and industrialization most Indian cities have higher levels of gases, particulate
 matter and chemical pollutants beyond permissible limits.  Mortality and morbidity statistics also indicate that

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/103rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
 respiratory infections and chronic conditions were becoming wide spread within the urban population.  The quality of
 water in most water bodies has considerably degraded and in most cases cannot be used for any human purposes unless
 adequately treated. Solid wastes abound in cities and their hinterland. This imposes a high cost on the economy in terms
 of loss of man-days, productivity and production. This calls for an urgent need to undertake networked & coordinated
 mission programme to better understand pollution and its impact on human health so as to devise systems and devices
 for its mitigation.
In this direction, CSIR has been a major contributor of S&T inputs for evolving national policies for environmental
 management and to ameliorate environmental problems.  It has conducted special programmes/studies in the areas,
 namely,   
Oceanographic Studies
The Indian Ocean Experiment ((INDOEX) for measurement of the long-range transport of air pollution from South and
 South-East Asia towards the Indian Ocean were studied,
Through Coastal Ocean Monitoring & Prediction System (COMAPS) an extensive chemical and biological observations
 were made along the Ratnagiri – Mangalore coastal stretch which showed that the region was free from major
 contamination,
Air Quality Assessment
National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (NEERI) has taken up a programme National Air Quality
 Monitoring which  resulted in creation of valuable long-term database for 10 major Indian urban centers of pollution
 levels and trends of heterogeneous ionic specific and heavy trace metals. Benzene concentration were monitored in
 various localities of Mumbai spread over a number of seasons which had shown that substitution of lead by benzene in
 petrol as an antiknocking agent had its own deleterious effects.
Water quality assessment
 Under this programme nine urban centers in the country were selected for analysis of physicochemical and
 microbiological parameters including pathogenic organisms of different water sources used for drinking purposes.  This
 has yielded valuable information for planning of public health measures. Br
82 radio isotope and Rhodamine WT
 fluorescent dye were used as tracers to monitor  for monitoring sewage dispersion and bacterial die-off pattern in
 marine environment was also taken up.
33.       The Committee was informed that R&D activities in the area of waste management in India have so far largely
 been directed towards inventorization of sources of toxic wastes, selection of the disposal sites, assessment of
 environmental dangers due to indiscriminate disposal and adoption/adaptation of treatment of disposal technologies
 developed.  The growing concern for the quality of the environment requires the industries to actively seek ways to
 minimize the waste generation; in many cases to work towards an ideal goal of zero discharge.  Zero discharge was
 necessitated because of scarcity of fresh water, legislation banning priority pollutants, and waste minimization strategy
 that would enable the firms not only to save financial resources otherwise required in waste treatment and disposal
 costs but also reduce potential environmental liabilities.
34.       One of the techno-economically feasible example under this context was production of biodegradable plastics
 from waste derived renewable sources, which were expected to contribute to a paradigm shift envisaging consideration
 of waste as an economically exploitable resource and also substitution of non-renewable resource base with renewable
 resource.  Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) are one such class of polymers and Polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) is one of the
 best-known PHAs.  The study aims to bring down the cost of PHB to be comparable to the currently available
 thermoplastics.  CSIR laboratories have contributed in providing appropriate solutions to mitigate pollution of diverse
 industrial wastes.
35.       The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department in abating the pollution.  It feels that data
 generated regarding the various forms of pollution should be supplied to agencies like pollution Control Boards so that
 they can utilize the same in  ensuring pollution free environment.  Besides, Industries should also be supplied with
 newer technologies developed for pollution control, as their acceptance and application of these technologies was
 essential for control of pollution.
 
FOOD AND FOOD PROCESSING
36.       The Committee has been informed that CSIR continues to play a significant role for the advancement of food
 processing sector.  R&D programmes being pursued related to development of pre- and post-harvest technologies for
 export of Mango, Litchi, Strawberry, Guava and Grapes; controlled/modified atmosphere storage of fruits and
 vegetables; techniques for decontamination of fruits and vegetables were progressing. Central Food Technological

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/103rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
 Research Institute (CFTRI), Mysore was exclusively devoted to the sector.
37.       The Secretary, DSIR stated that appropriate pre and post-harvest technology protocols developed by CFTRI for
 Alphonso mango included orchard management, pre-harvest care with spray treatments to control spoilages, optimum
 stage of maturity for harvest, grading, washing post-harvest dip treatments to minimize spoilage, packing in specially
 designed corrugated Fibreboard boxes (CFB), pelletising and precooling. The shelf life of the produce could be
 extended to 35 days with desirable and acceptable ripening characteristics. Besides CFTRI has developed the Modified
 Atmospheric Packaging (MAP) wherein the atmosphere surrounding the commodity was rendered different from
 normal through manipulation of CO
2, O2 and N2 levels in suitable polymeric film packages of desired permeability,
 this offered potential for long distance transportation including export of commercially important fruits such as mango,
 banana, litchi, pomegranate and strawberry as well as important vegetables.
 
38.       In the field of Nutrition supplements for school children, the Committee was informed that   CFTRI has
 developed two nutrients enriched snacks namely nutro biscuits and `suruchi meetha’, a burfi like product, both valuable
 as items for the mid-day meal schemes in schools. 
39.       The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Department should take initiative to impress upon the
 State Governments concerned to waive sales and trade tax so that they reach the maximum population.  The Committee
 also feels that Indian exports especially edible products were not able to compete in international markets due to
 reasons such as unscientific packing which results in leakage or decay of products.  This could be prevented by
 applying best packaging methods.
The Committee appreciates the development of enriched snacks.  Efforts should be made to make available these snacks
 in the schools especially in areas where young students suffer from malnutrition as well as undernutrition.
 
ESTABLISHING GENETICALLY MODIFIED FOODS REFERAL FACILITY
40.       The Secretary informed the Committee that genetically engineered plants were being used for agronomical,
 nutritional, pharmaceutical and industrial applications. Although the use of Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs)
 have the potential to offer real benefits in agricultural practice, the concerns being expressed were mainly on food
 quality, nutrition and health safety. In India several GM crops were under various stages of trials, such as Mustard,
 Tomato, Cabbage, Cauliflower, Cotton, Brinjal etc. So far there were no mandatory regulations for the addition of
 GMO in foods. Considering the large number of GMOs in development, combined with the increasing number of
 GMOs coming to the market, it has become necessary to establish a centre of excellence for testing of GM foods.  The
 Department therefore proposed to set up a state-of-art analytical laboratory for GMO testing,
41.       The Committee is of the view that adequate nutritional and toxicity studies should be conducted before the
 introduction of genetically modified foods in the market.  All the same it should be left to the farmers/users whether to
 adopt these keeping in view their tastes & preferences.
HEALTH CARE, DRUGS & PHARMACEUTICAL
42.       It has been stated that allergy related disorders such as asthma, rhinitis were on the rise in the developing
 countries especially in India due to diverse reasons. These diseases were acquiring dimension of an epidemic resulting
 in huge cost to public health and the economy. Asthma alone affects around 15% of the Indian population and in the
 four metropolis the incidence was placed as high as 30%. Genes and environment both played a very important role in
 this disease. Environment contributed in precipitating the disease due to the increased exposure to sensitizing allergens
 and reduced stimulation of the immune system.
In course of his presentation before the Committee the Secretary, DSIR informed that even though a clear understanding
 of the cellular and molecular mechanisms of this allergic disease was lacking, a group of scientists at the Indian
 Institute of Chemical Biology (a unit of CSIR), Kolkata, developed ASMON, an Aryurvedic medicine for the relief and
 remedy of Asthma (Bronchial), a plant based product known to be used by the people over the centuries.    Bronchial
 asthma patients of all ages could take this medicine safely.  Working on the inhibition of arachidonic acid oxidation by
 the preparation, it has been proposed as an anti-leukotriene asthma medicine.  Elaborating  Asmon, he  said, it inhibits
 oxidation of the arachidonic acid in an ex vivo
blood assay system wherein the blood cells were stimulated by calcium ionopher or known stimulator to enhance their
 oxidative activity.  Asmon helps to control asthma symptoms including the acute breathing problem arising out of
 bronchial asthma.  Asmon offers asthma patients a new treatment option to enhance the control of their asthma by
 inhibiting the oxidation of Arachidonic acid.
43.       The Secretary further stated that the technology had been transferred to M/s Herbo Chem Pvt. Ltd., Kolkata. 

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/103rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
 The company received the Drug Licenses for Asmon as a traditional medicine.  The Company has the capacity of
 20,000 bottles per day and 5,000 capsules per day which could not cope with the demand.  He accepted the fact that
 when the product was launched they didn’t realize its potential for success and lacked negotiating wisdom as such and
 under an agreement gave the company exclusive rights.  The Secretary, however, informed that by July, 2002 a new
 plant would be angulated and a better version Asmon plus would also be launched.
44.       The Committee is happy to note the success of the herbal drug Asmon, but is constrained to observe that the
 rights to manufacture this drug had been exclusively given to one company, which could not cope with the demand. 
 The Committee feels that if adequate study of marketing had been done before giving the exclusive rights, the situation
 as obtaining, could have perhaps been avoided.  Nevertheless, the Committee notes with satisfaction that Asmon plus
 would be launched shortly and the manufacturing/marketing rights would be given to more than one company keeping 
 the interest of the users in view.
 
HOUSING & CONSTRUCTION
45.       This sector was served by four laboratories of CSIR viz Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee, Structural
 Engineering Research Centre, Madras, Structural Engineering Research Centre, Ghaziabad and Central Road Research
 Institute, New Delhi besides six other laboratories RRL Bhopal, Central Electrochemical Research Institute (CECRI),
 Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute (CGCRI), NEERI, NGRI and Central Fuel Research Institute (CFRI),
 were also, to some extent engaged in research on the materials used in construction.  R&D programmes were being
 pursued on development of alternate building construction materials which utilized wastes, economise on energy and
 were eco-friendly; functional planning, construction, maintenance and rehabilitation of structures; and development of
 earthquake cyclone resistant structures.  The Committee has been informed that Fly ash bricks, tiles from ferro-chrome
 and other industrial wastes, multiblend cement formulations and polymer modified cementitious (PMC) tiles were in
 the process of being developed by the various laboratories of the Department. However, the Secretary, in the course of
 his presentation, before the Committee stated that there was no large scale usage of these fly ash bricks because
 conventional bricks were cheaper.
46.       The Committee observes that the quality and cost of construction were two important requisites in the field of
 construction. It is necessary to develop low cost alternatives which the private sector alone can do.  But the technology
 therefore had to be developed & transferred to that sector by our laboratories/institutions after extensive research.  The
 laboratories etc. should therefore be geared up to develop cheaper & durable alternatives.
 
INFORMATION DISSEMINATION & PRODUCTS
47.       Realising the inevitable explosive growth in the IT sector and knowledge based society powering the twenty first
 century, CSIR laboratories have evolved strategies to derive the benefits from the rich data and information base
 generated and from the updated domain knowledge they possessed.  A Unit for R&D on Information Products (URDIP)
 was setup specifically for this purpose.  Also Indian National Scientific Documentation Centre (INSDOC) & National
 Institute of Science Communication (NISCOM) have changed the mode of delivery of their services from the printed to
 the electronic / digital format.  A Unit for R&D on Information Products (URDIP) was setup at Pune to convert the
 dispersed and non-digital databases of CSIR to merchandisable electronic information products.  Gaining by the
 experience of turmeric & neem the emphasis was to first bring out in digital form, traditional knowledge in the health
 domain.  A multimedia laboratory has been established.   The unit has started its operation, from the new premises. It
 devised and put out a multimedia format in two CDs on ‘Health Heritage’ incorporating both traditional knowledge
 from Sanskrit classics and the modern information made available through systematic scientific and patent research. 
 Another CD titled ‘Patenstate’ was a data base of full text of CSIR patents granted between 1991-95.
48.       The Committee notes the development with satisfaction.
 
SCHEME TO ENHANCE THE EFFICACY OF TRNASFER OF TECHNOLOGY (SEETOT)
49.       The Department continued its activities relating to the scheme on National Register of Foreign Collaborations &
 Technology Management (NRFC & TM).  A compilation of primary data on Foreign Collaborations (FCs) for the year
 2000 was brought out.  Computerization of data collected on foreign collaborations for 2001 has been completed. 
During the year, studies on Assessment of Minor Forest Produce Based Industries in the State of Madhya Pradesh,
 Status and Strategy for Development of Essential and Medicinal Plant Species in the North Eastern Region,
 Technology Management Education in India have been completed.
Studies on Technology Status of Vegetable Dyes Industries in the Country.  Technology status of Guar Gum based
 industries and Status of Technology Management Education in Select Countries were in progress. 

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/103rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
With a view to Strengthen the Networking and enhancing technology management capabilities particularly in small and
 medium enterprises a number of activities have been taken up.  A MOU has been singed with Karnataka Council for
 Technological Upgradation. Various programmes envisaged in the collaborative activities with IIT, Bombay and PSG
 Institute of Management, Coimbatore were being continued. Programmes covering various aspects of Technology
 Management, Intellectual Property and Knowledge Management were being organized.  These programmes include
 training of trainers as well.  Few of these were especially designed to meet the requirements of small and medium
 enterprises.
The scheme relating to Promotion and Support to Consultancy Services essentially aims to strengthen our consultancy
 capabilities, for domestic and export markets.  During the period under review, the services of Consultancy Clinic for
 Limekiln Industry at Katni primarily to help small and medium industries were continued.
50.       The Committee was informed that a Study on Role of Consultants in R&D and Innovation was completed
 through NISTADS and final draft report was prepared and also a study on consultancy needs for improving
 performance/ upgradation of textile industry in UP by UPICO was under progress.  Institutional and programme
 support to Consultancy Development Centre (CDC) was provided.  Also, support was provided to Consultancy
 Engineers Association of India (CEAI) and other consultancy promotion organizations.
51.       The Committee feels that the technology, which is transferred to industry, should be in respect of quality
 products only.
 
NATIONAL INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (NISSAT)
52.       The National Information System for Science & Technology (NISSAT) commenced its operations in 1977 with
 the objective of organizing information support facilities for a customer base largely dominated by people engaged in
 research and academics.  In pursuance of the national efforts in liberalisation and globalization of the economy,
 NISSAT reoriented its programme activities in order to be useful to a wider base of clientele in diverse subjects. 
 Besides, establishing the internal linkages between the information industry, its promoters and users, NISSAT has been
 making efforts to establish a bridge between information resource developers and users in India and other countries.
            NISSAT’s emphasis was on an application of the Internet Technology for information Access and
 Dissemination.  It has established VIGYAN Server of Indian Science & Technology and initiated action for the
 development of Sector Specific websites containing information on Tea manufacturing and Marketing,  Indian
 Intellectual Property Law, Indian Ocean, Indian Food Technology & Mysore Library information, Indian Publications
 on CDROMS, Virtual Information Centres for R&D in Industry, Electronic Theses and Dissertations (VIDHYANIDH).
53.       The Committee has been given to understand that the NISSAT encourages and supports a variety of manpower
 development programme which and Web Designing, Total Quality Management (TQM)  in Library Services, Patent
 Information for R&D and Industry, ISO 9000 Quality Management System, etc.  Twenty courses have been organized
 during the current year.
54.       IT applications in library and information centres in the form of computerization of information on holdings and
 services, online and CD based information services etc have introduced revolutionary changes in the availability of
 science and technology information to scientists, industry and other library users.  Till date, textual data management
 package of CDS/ISIS has been implanted in 1830 information centres, Statistical analysis packages of IDAMS in 65
 institutions and integrated library management package SANJAY in 64 institutions to facilitate fast and reliable
 information.
55.       The Department should endeavour to strengthen the library network with the help of latest IT tool & techniques.
56.       After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research and assessing
 the progress of various important programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the
 Demands for Grants of Rs.1040.93 crores, as sought by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
 year 2002-03 under, Demand No. 71 may be approved.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT GLANCE
 
1.         The Committee notes with satisfaction the various activities in which CSIR laboratories are conducting
 research.  However, the pricing and the terms at which the technology is transferred to industry needs to be looked into
 afresh with a view not only to retain the competitive edge for the industry but it should also be profitable to the
 Government and if possible should also generate royalty for the Government.  From the experience gained in respect of
 ASMON being marketed by only one company, which was not able to cope with the demand, the Committee feels that
 the marketing rights in respect of new drugs entering the market should be with more than one company to avoid

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/103rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
 inconvenience to customers.
(Para 11)
2.         The Committee observes that in order to encourage  talented persons to take up research, they should be
 encouraged with remunerative schemes and wherever applicable attractive pay scales so that a suitable environment
 congenial to work culture is provided wherein they can sustain their interests in scientific research.  They should also be
 provided state of art laboratory facilities as this also would prevent them from going abroad and thus, reducing brain
 drain.
           
The Committee is also of the view that the  efforts be made to utilize the services of scientists who have since retired by
 involving them in projects which were aimed at inculcating scientific temper among students and this would help utilise
 their talents.  This could be done through re-employment.  Infact the scientists should be allowed to work irrespective
 of the age of retirement, as long as they feel they can meaningfully contribute in the interest of the society and the
 country.
(Para 14)
3.         The Committee notes with satisfaction the increasing pace of applications for patents and the resultant folio
 increase.  The Committee would like the Department to simultaneously concentrate its efforts on the utilization of these
 patents by either transferring the technology to the industry or by the Department itself for commercial exploitation
 before they get outdated.
(Para 17)
4.         The Committee feels that department should  take up such  technology projects as were important to the country
 and strive  to bring out the best quality technologies at flexible costs.  Efforts should be made to expeditiously complete
 the project with regular monitoring by competent authorities/panels appointed for the purpose.
(Para 20)
5.         The Committee agrees that the Infrastructure Renovation and Refurbishment is essential in the present day
 context.  Infact  this  should have been done much earlier in pursuance of recommendations of the Committee in the
 context of modernization of laboratories.  The Committee has time and again reiterated that progressive modernisation
 or renovation was a continuous process and the Department should also ensure that the laboratories that were being
 taken up for refurbishment should be as per world standards.
However, it is constrained to observe that  during 9
th plan an allocation was made for modernization of laboratories and
 in 10th plan  they made an allocation for renovation & refurbishment which included strengthening of foundation and
 revamping of electrical wiring and better communication connectivity. The Committee observes that both the
 programmes were similar in nature and being analogous could have been taken together. 
(Para 23)
6.         The Committee observes that the Public Sector Undertakings (PSU) are no longer considered the model
 employer as they were once considered to be.  They are now hot bed of inefficiency, corruption and lack competitive
 edge.  At the same time in some enterprises the employees are being asked to forego their allowances, being denied of
 even their legitimate dues like Provident Fund.  The Committee feels this is not a good state of affairs so long it tends to
 deny them of their legitimate dues.  But in the wake of this it has become necessary that the PSUs prepare themselves
 to the changing scenario, gain optimum efficiency and increase their profits. This may save them from the processes of
 disinvestments at least for a while.  
(Para 28)
7.         The Committee commends the efforts made by the Department for its activities on design, development and
 fabrication of civil aircrafts.  The Committee feels that the technology must be transferred to industry for commercial
 production as these small aircrafts can be of immense use in remote & hilly areas where construction of large runways
 is not feasible.  These can also be used by defence establishment to deliver food & ammunition to remote hill regions.
The Committee is constrained to observe that the development of Hansa and Saras has been going on for a considerable
 period.  The Committee  on its visit to  NAL in September, 2000 was informed that  Saras was expected to fly in 2001.
 However, during the course of presentation before the Committee the Secretary, DSIR has stated that  it is scheduled
 for 2002.  The Committee feels that the project particularly the Saras Project has been there for a quite long time and
 such delays should be avoided as they result in cost overruns in addition to losing technological importance.
(Para 31)
8.         The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department in abating the pollution.  It feels that data
 generated regarding the various forms of pollution should be supplied to agencies like pollution Control Boards so that

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/103rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
 they can utilize the same in ensuring pollution free environment.  Besides, Industries should also be supplied with
 newer technologies developed for pollution control, as their acceptance and application of these technologies was
 essential for control of pollution.
(Para 35)
 9.        The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Department should take initiative to impress upon the
 State Governments concerned to waive sales and trade tax so that they reach the maximum population.  The Committee
 also feels that Indian exports especially edible products were not able to compete in international markets due to
 reasons such as unscientific packing which results in leakage or decay of products.  This could be prevented by
 applying best packaging methods.
The Committee appreciates the development of enriched snacks.  Efforts should be made to make available these snacks
 in the schools especially in areas where young students suffer from malnutrition as well as undernutrition.
(Para 39)
10.       The Committee is of the view that adequate nutritional and toxicity studies should be conducted before the
 introduction of genetically modified foods in the market.  All the same it should be left to the farmers/users whether to
 adopt these keeping in view their tastes & preferences.
(Para 41)
11.       The Committee is happy to note the success of the herbal drug Asmon, but is constrained to observe that the
 rights to manufacture this drug had been exclusively given to one company, which could not cope with the demand. 
 The Committee feels that if adequate study of marketing had been done before giving the exclusive rights, the situation
 as obtaining, could have perhaps been avoided.  Nevertheless, the Committee notes with satisfaction that Asmon plus
 would be launched shortly and the manufacturing/marketing rights would be given to more than one company keeping 
 the interest of the users in view.
(Para 44)
12.       The Committee observes that the quality and cost of construction were two important requisites in the field of
 construction. It is necessary to develop low cost alternatives which the private sector alone can do.  But the technology
 therefore had to be developed & transferred to that sector by our laboratories/institutions after extensive research.  The
 laboratories etc. should therefore be geared up to develop cheaper & durable alternatives.
(Para 46)
13.       The Committee notes the development with satisfaction.
 (Para 48)
14.       The Committee feels that the technology, which is transferred to industry, should be in respect of quality
 products only.
(Para 51)
15.       The Department should endeavour to strengthen the library network with the help of latest IT tool & techniques.
(Para 55)
 
ANNEXURES
ANNEXURE-I
BUDGET ESTIMATES ( 2002-03)
(Rs. in crores)
S.No. Head of Development Projects    
 
1.
 
2.
 
 
3.
 
 
4.
 
4.1
Programmes/Schemes
Assistance to Council of Scientific & Industrial
 Research
 
Technology Promotion Development and Utilisation
 scheme
 
Research and Development (APCTT & NISSAT)
 
Investment in Public Enterprises
 
Central Electronics Limited
Plan
412.000
 
 
22.650
 
 
 0.100
 
 
 
2.500
Non-Plan
597.650
 
 
0.200
 
 
0.000
 
 
 
0.000
Total
1009.650
 
 
22.850
 
 
0.100
 
 
 
2.500

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/103rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
 
4.2
 
5.
 
5.1
 
5.2
 
6.
 
7.
 
 
 
 
National Research Development Corporation
 
Loans to Public Enterprises
 
Central Electronics Limited
 
National Research Development Corporation
 
Secretariat Economic Services
 
Management, Administration and Infrastructure
 
 
Grand Total
 
 
 
0.000
 
 
 
2.500
 
0.000
 
0.250
 
0.000
 
 
 
440.000
 
 
 
0.000
 
 
 
0.000
 
0.000
 
3.080
 
0.000
 
 
 
600.930
 
0.000
 
 
 
2.500
 
0.000
 
3.330
 
0.000
 
 
 
1040.930
 
 
M I N U T E S
VII
SEVENTH  MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 11
th April, 2002 in room No. 139, First Floor, Parliament House
 Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
*
1.        Prof. R.R. Pramanik  –– in the Chair
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
Shri C. Apok Jamir
Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
Smt. Savita Sharda
Shri B.P. Singhal
 
LOK SABHA
 
Smt. Margaret Alva
Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan
Smt. Bhavana D. Chikhalia
Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya
Dr. Charan Das Mahant
Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik
Shri Madhusudan Devram Mistry
Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                            
Shri A. Venkatesh Naik                       
Shri Suresh Pasi                                               
Dr. Ashok Patel                                               
Shri Prahlad Patel                    

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/103rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
Prof. R.R. Pramanik                            
Shri Naresh Puglia
Shri I.G. Sanadi                                   
Shri Ram Prasad Singh
Shri Balram Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K.Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
           
            *                                                                      *                                              *
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
 
Dr. R. A. Mashelkar, Secretary
Mrs. Rama Murali, Financial Adviser
Dr. O. P. Agarwal, Head, RPBD, CSIR
Dr. S. Mallick, Head,  HRDG, CSIR
Shri A. K. Bhatia, Head, STMD, CSIR
Shri V. K. Gupta, Head,  ITD, CSIR
Shri R. K. Gupta, Head, IPMD, CSIR
Dr. H. R. Bhojwani, Emeritus Scientist, CSIR
Dr. A. Wahid, Scientist
Shri C. S. Malik, Dy. FA(Budget)
Shri A. K. Verma, Scientist
Shri K. V. Srinivasan, Adviser, DSIR
Dr. A. Lahiri, Adviser, DSIR
Dr. Vinay Kumar, Scientist  ‘G’, DSIR
Shri Jagdish Singh, Scientist ‘G’, DSIR
Dr. G. A. Khaliq, Scientist ‘G’, DSIR
Shri Ashwani Gupta, Scientist ‘F’, DSIR
Shri N. K. Sharma, Managing Director, NRDC
Shri B. A. Mylar Rao, Chairman cum Managing Director, Central Electronics Limited
 
2.         *                                                                      *                                                                 *  
3.         *                      *                      *   re-assembled at 3.00 P.M. to hear the Secretary, Department of Scientific &
 Industrial Research.
4.         The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, DSIR and requested him to make a brief presentation regarding the
 Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Department.  Thereafter the Secretary made a visual presentation regarding the
 major activities and achievements of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.  The Secretary also
 explained briefly the budgetary allocations on different heads as also the functioning of the Department.  Thereafter
 Members sought clarifications on the points that emerged out of the presentation of the Secretary.  The Secretary
 assured the Committee that he would send the written comments on the points on which information was not readily
 available during the discussion.    
            The witnesses then withdrew.
                        A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 5.40 P.M.
 
______________________________________________________________________

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/103rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
* Relates to other matters
 
X
TENTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 9th May, 2002 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
Smt. S. Gokula Indira
Smt. Savita Sharda
Shri B.P. Singhal
Shri M. V. Rajashekaran
Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
 
LOK SABHA
           
Smt. Bhavana Devrajbhai Chikhalia
Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya
Dr. Charan Das Mahant
Shri Rupchand Murmu
Shri S. Murugesan
Shri Ali Mohd. Naik
Dr. Ashok Patel           
Shri Prahlad Patel
Prof. R.R. Pramanik
Shri Ram Prasad Singh                                    
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
 
2.         The Committee took up for consideration the draft 103
rd Report of the Committee on the Demands for Grants
 (2002-03) of the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research.  After minor corrections of oral nature, the Committee
 adopted the draft 103
rd Report.     *        *           *
3.         The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri M. V. Rajashekaran, M.P. to present the Reports
 to the  Rajya Sabha and  Shri  Ali Mohd. Naik, M.P.   and  in his absence Shri Prahlad Patel, M.P. to lay the Reports on
 the table of the Lok Sabha.
4.         The Chairman and Members also congratulated officers of the Secretariat for the excellent work done by them.
5.         *                                                                      *                                                                *
6.         *                                                                      *                                                                *
 

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/103rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
7.         The Committee then adjourned at 10.20 A.M.
_____________________________________________________________________________
* Relates to other matters
 
# Nominated w.e.f. 4th January, 2002 
& Nominated w.e.f. 24th April, 2002 
J Nominated w.e.f. 24th April, 2002 
*Shri Cho S. Ramswamy ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.15th February, 2002 on his resignation  from the membership of
   the Committee
f  Dr. Raja Ramanna ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.18th February, 2002 on his resignation from  the membership of the
   Committee.
b
  Shri Peter Alphonse & Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray  ceased to be a Member of the Committee on expiry of his term  in the Rajya Sabha  
   w.e.f.  2nd  April, 2002.
¥ Smt. Chandresh Kumari and Shri Lachhman Singh ceased to be a Member of the Committee on expiry of his term in the Rajya Sabha 
   w.e.f. 9th  April, 2002.
%  Nominated  w.e.f. 26th April , 2002.
* In the absence of Chairman Prof. R. R. Pramanik was voted  to the Chair during the consideration of the Committee of Demands for Grants
 pertaining to Ministry of Environment & Forests only and in post lunch session Chairman was present during the discussion with the DSIR