 
 
  
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
  
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
       August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka)
REPORT NO. 
395 
THREE HUNDRED NINETY FIFTH REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Three Hundred Eighty Eighth Report of the Department - 
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment, Forests  and Climate Change on the Demands For Grants 
(2025-26) of the Department of Biotechnology 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
 

 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
 CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED NINETY FIFTH REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Three Hundred Eighty Eighth Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment, Forests  and Climate Change on the Demands For Grants  
(2025-26) of the Department of Biotechnology 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
   
  PAGES 
   
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………… (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………… (ii) 
  3. ACRONYMS ……………………………………………………………… (iii) 
4. REPORT …………………………………………………………………... 1-18 
 Chapter I.       Recommendations/Observations which  have been  
                       accepted by the Government 
 
2-10 
 Chapter II.  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee     
does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies 
 
11-13 
 Chapter III.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted  by the     
Committee 
 
14 
 Chapter IV.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
                      Replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
15 
5. MINUTES 16-18 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
(Constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2024) 
 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita -    Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Narayanasa K. Bhandage  
3. Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda 
4. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
5. Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
7. Shri Sharad Pawar 
8. Shri Jairam Ramesh   
9. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
10. Vacant  
LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Sajda Ahmed 
12. Shri Alfred Kanngam S. Arthur 
13. Shri Pradyut Bordoloi  
14. Shri Phani Bhusan Choudhury 
15. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb 
16. Shri Vamsi Krishna Gaddam 
17. Shri Tapir Gao 
18. Adv K. Francis George  
19. Shri Eswarasamy K. 
20. Shri Mahesh Kashyap 
21. Dr. Anand Kumar 
22. Shri Mohibbullah 
23. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
24. Shri Jashubhai Bhilubhai Rathva  
25. Shri Trivendra Singh Rawat 
26. Shrimati Himadri Singh 
27. Shri Tejasvi Surya  
28. Shri Durai Vaiko  
29. Shri Yaduveer Wadiyar 
30. Shri Balwant Baswant Wankhade  
31. Shri Akhilesh Yadav  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Joint Secretary  
Shri Arun Kumar, Director  
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Deputy Secretary 
Ms. I. V. Rajya Laxmi, Committee Officer  
Shri Vaibhav Jain, Committee Officer  
 
     
(i) 
                                                
 Nominated w.e.f. 23rd January, 2025. 

 
 
 
      
INTRODUCTION 
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Three 
Hundred Ninety Fifth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the  
recommendations/observations contained in the Three Hundred Eighty Eighth Report  of 
the Committee on  Demands for Grants (2025-2026) of the Department of Biotechnology, 
which was presented to/ laid on the Table of both the Houses of Parliament on the 25th 
March, 2025.  
2.   There were 17 recommendations/observations in the Three Hundred Eighty 
Eighth Report of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/ 
observations of the Committee were received from the Department on 25th June, 2025.   
3.   In the meeting held on 6th August, 2025, the Committee considered the draft 
Report and adopted the same. 
 
 
 
 
 (BHUBANESWAR KALITA) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman,  
08 August, 2025   Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Sravana 17,  1947 (Saka)  Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and  Climate Change, 
 Rajya Sabha . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
ACRONYMS 
AI Artificial Intelligence 
AMR Antimicrobial Resistance 
BIBCOL Bharat Immunologicals and Biologicals Corporation Limited 
BRIC Biotechnology Research and Innovation Council 
BIRAC Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council 
Bio-RIDE Biotechnology Research Innovation and Entrepreneurship Development 
CABP Community-Acquired Bacterial Pneumonia 
CAUTI Catheter Associated Urinary Tract Infection 
CDFD Center for DNA fingerprinting & Diagnostics 
DBT Department of Biotechnology 
DCGI Drugs Controller General of India 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
ICGEB International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology 
IIL Indian Immunologicals Limited 
IPV Injectable Polio Vaccines 
IVCOL Indian Vaccines Corporation Limited 
NBM National Biopharma Mission 
NBRC National Brain Research Centre 
NIH National Institute of Health 
OPV Oral Polio Vaccine 
PCT Pre Clinical Toxicology 
PPP Public-Private Partnerships 
PMSV Pasteur Meraux Serum & Vaccines 
QA/QC Quality Assurance/Quality Control 
RCB Regional Centre for Biotechnology 
TRC Translational Research Consortiums 
UIP Universal Immunization Program 
UMMID Unique Methods of Management of Inherited Disorders 
WHO World Health Organisation 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
 
REPORT 
The Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations of the Committee 
contained in its ‘Three Hundred Eighty Eighth Report’ on “Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the 
Department of Biotechnology.  The Report was presented to/ laid on the Table of both the Houses 
of Parliament on the 25th March, 2025. 
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Department of Biotechnology in 
respect of all the 17 recommendations/observations contained in the ‘Three Hundred Eighty 
Eighth Report’. The replies of the Department of Biotechnology have been categorized as 
follows:- 
Chapter I: Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: Para Nos.:- 2.11, 2.15, 3.8, 3.9, 4.6, 5.5, 5.7, 5.8, 5.13, 5.16, 5.17, 
5.19 and 6.7  
 Total recommendations – 13 
Chapter II: Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
  Para Nos.:- 4.8, 5.14, 5.22 and 5.23 
  Total recommendations – 04  
Chapter III:  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: NIL 
Chapter IV:  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: NIL 
3. The details of the ATNs have been analyzed in the succeeding Chapters.  
  

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
COMPARATIVE BUDGET ANALYSIS 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.1 The Committee expresses deep concern over the sub-optimal utilization of funds by the 
Department, particularly in the context of the Central Sector Scheme, Bio-RIDE. This 
underutilization not only hampers the effective implementation of critical programs but also 
undermines the potential impact of the Department’s initiatives. The Committee strongly 
recommends that the Department take immediate and appropriate measures to address this issue 
and ensure the optimal utilization of funds allocated to it in the Budget Estimates (B.E.) for 2025-
26. The Department should conduct regular reviews and take corrective actions to prevent delays 
and inefficiencies, thereby maximizing the impact of its programs and achieving the desired 
outcomes in a timely and effective manner.  
(Para 2.11 of the 388th Report) 
  
Action Taken: 
 
1.2  The Department acknowledges the concern of the Committee.  In background, as per 
extant instructions of DOE, Ministry of Finance vide its O. M. F. No. 3/(06)/PFMS/2023 dated 
21st May, 2024, Department has closed its earlier revised funds flow system of CNA-02 
operations in December 2024 for its two Central Sector (CS) Schemes. In compliance to DOE 
O.M., following the merger of earlier two CS schemes along with a new component into newly 
Cabinet approved Scheme-Bio-RIDE, Department transitioned from earlier fund flow system 
(CNA-02) to new revised funds flow system of TSA-Hybrid (1A) in January, 2025. Department 
rolled out the fund utilization of Bio-Ride scheme through TSA-Hybrid system w.e.f. 29th 
January, 2025.   
1.3 Though overall RE budget utilization by the Department has been sub-optimal, the 
percentage (%) of assignments vs utilization in the new revised funds flow system was 84.8%. 
Department could not assign the full RE allocation to child agencies within such a short period of 
time (2 months) as several hundred implementing agencies could not onboard to new TSA-Hybrid 
system due to various reasons.  
1.4 The department has taken cognizance of the new funds flow system, and accordingly, 
necessary actions for the utilization of funds are being undertaken for maximal utilization of the 
budget for achieving the desired outcomes in the programs in a timely and effective manner in FY 
2025-26 and it will be ensured that 50% of the expenditure target is met by 30th September, 2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.5         Given the substantial allocation to Bio-RIDE, the Committee recommends that the 
Department must ensure optimal utilization of funds. Regular monitoring, timely implementation, 
and transparent reporting mechanisms should be established to avoid sub-optimal utilization and 
maximize outcomes. 
(Para 2.15 ibid) 
  
Action Taken: 
 
1.6 The Department has been taking all possible steps to ensure the optimal utilization of 
allocated funds in FY 2025-26 and the outcomes are being monitored regularly.  
 
BIO-RIDE: A UNIFIED FRAMEWORK FOR ADVANCING BIOTECHNOLOGY 
RESEARCH, ENTREPRENEURSHIP, AND BIOMANUFACTURING IN INDIA 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.7         The Committee appreciates the Department for integration of research, industrial 
development, and biomanufacturing under a unified framework. This will significantly enhance 
India's biotechnology capabilities and position the country as a global hub for innovation, 
sustainability, and bio-based industrialization.  
(Para 3.8 ibid) 
  
Action Taken: 
 
1.8 The Department is thankful to the Committee for the appreciation. The integration of 
earlier schemes, Biotechnology Research & Development and Biotechnology Industrial & 
Entrepreneurship Development, and the inclusion of a new component, i.e., Biomanufacturing & 
Biofoundry, will certainly enhance the efficacy of the implementation of programs and 
strengthen the Biotechnology Sector in the country. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.9         The Committee places its confidence in the Department’s ability to effectively implement 
the Bio-RIDE scheme and achieve its ambitious targets. The various initiatives under this scheme 
have the potential to drive transformative changes in healthcare, agriculture, environment, and 
industry. Most importantly, the Committee hopes that the advancements in biotechnology under 
this scheme will ultimately benefit the common man by providing affordable and accessible 
healthcare solutions, enhancing agricultural productivity, promoting environmental sustainability 
through carbon capture technologies and bio-based solutions and creating employment 
opportunities through bio-industrialization and entrepreneurship development. 
 (Para 3.9 ibid) 
  

4 
 
Action Taken: 
 
 1.10 The Department is thankful to the Committee for expressing confidence in the 
Department’s ability to effectively implement the BioRIDE scheme. The Department will ensure 
that the envisaged targets are achieved. The implementation of the scheme will certainly provide 
an impetus to research, development, and innovation in the biotechnology sector, which in turn 
generates biobased products and technologies to provide solutions for the unmet needs of society. 
  
1.11 The potential of emerging biotechnology will be leveraged to get more sustainable, 
economic, and environmentally friendly tools& technologies. 
 
AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.12   The Committee feels that the establishment of BRIC and its integration of research 
institutions under the iBRIC+ framework has significantly enhanced the governance, 
collaboration, and impact of biotechnology research in India. The data provided reflects 
commendable progress in interdisciplinary research, education, biomanufacturing, and industrial 
partnerships. However, to amplify the outcomes, BRIC should scale interdisciplinary research 
into a nationwide innovation network with industry-aligned translational centres, broaden the i3c 
BRIC-RCB PhD Programme via global academic- industry partnerships and merit-based 
fellowships, and develop regional Biomanufacturing Hubs for sector-specific bio-solutions. 
Prioritizing commercialization through streamlined regulatory approvals, incentives for startups, 
and centralized data-sharing platforms will expedite market readiness for innovations in 
diagnostics, biotherapeutics, and disease management. Strengthening mentorship programs, 
industry internships, and entrepreneurial fellowships will cultivate skilled talent, while leveraging 
breakthroughs. By scaling research initiatives, refining governance mechanisms, and deepening 
academia-industry synergies, BRIC can position India as a global leader in biotechnology and 
biomanufacturing, fostering equitable and sustainable advancements in healthcare, agriculture, 
and environmental resilience. 
(Para 4.6 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.13 In an endeavor to position India as a global leader in biotechnology and biomanufacturing, 
the Department is taking following steps:  
 (i) For scaling up i3C BRIC-RCB Ph.D. programme, the Department of Biotechnology 
(DBT) is in discussion with Wellcome Trust (WT) Alliance for seeking support of WT for the i3C 
PhD program. 
 (ii) Strategic group discussion meetings are being conducted for establishment of BRIC 
BioE3 Innovation Parks to strengthen industry-academia synergies. 
 (iii) Entrepreneur-in Residence (EIR) program is being launched in partnership with 
BIRAC and Venture Capitalists for taking forward academic research leads from iBRIC+ towards 
commercialization by supporting young post-docs with fellowships. 

5 
 
KEY INITIAVES AND ACHIEVEMENTS IN HEALTHCARE AND BIOTECHNOLOGY 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.14    The Committee applauds the Department for its strategic foresight and decisive action in 
confronting AMR. Initiatives such as pioneering homegrown therapies, cataloguing priority 
pathogens, establishing AMR bio-repositories, and advancing rapid diagnostics underscore 
India’s resolve to mitigate this global health crisis. The Committee recognizes the breakthroughs 
like Nafithromycin — India’s inaugural indigenous antibiotic targeting drug- resistant 
Community-Acquired Bacterial Pneumonia. This innovation exemplifies scientific excellence and 
addresses critical vulnerabilities among high-risk groups. The Committee emphasizes the need to 
expedite the deployment of such solutions through streamlined regulatory processes, scalable 
production, and inclusive partnerships. Strengthening AMR monitoring frameworks, broadening 
investigations into pathogen prioritization and integrating diagnostics into primary healthcare 
are vital next steps.  
(Para 5.5 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.15 Department is thankful to the Committee for encouraging observations. It is submitted that 
Nafithromycin has been developed by Wockhardt Group and the Phase III clinical study of 
Nafithromycin in India was partially supported by BIRAC, a PSU of DBT.  
1.16 As per the CDSCO guidelines, the Company has received the Manufacturing License from 
CDSCO and intends to launch the drug by mid-2025 
1.17 Further, the Department is continuing its support and coordination for various AMR 
related research activities focusing on advancing diagnostics, novel therapeutics and creating new 
knowledge related to mechanisms of emergence of drug resistance. The Department is also 
committed to contributing to the NAP AMR 2.0 being developed by the Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare.  
1.18 The Department will continue facilitating the regulatory approval of innovations for their 
deployment by the concerned Ministries. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.19 The Committee commends the Department for its laudable efforts under the National 
Biopharma Mission (NBM) in advancing indigenous vaccine development against critical 
diseases such as Dengue, Chikungunya, Malaria, and cervical cancer. The noteworthy progress 
in pre-clinical studies, clinical trials, and translational research, alongside strategic international 
collaborations, underscores India’s growing capacity to address global health challenges through 
innovation. 
(Para 5.7 ibid) 
 
1.20 The Committee urges the Department to expedite regulatory clearances, ensure robust 
post-trial protocols, and prioritize cost-effective manufacturing to facilitate the swift market entry 

6 
 
of these vaccines. Emphasis must be placed on equitable access and affordability for all citizens, 
particularly vulnerable populations. The Committee expresses confidence that the timely 
deployment of these vaccines will significantly reduce disease burden, align with national health 
objectives, and reinforce India’s leadership in global vaccine equity. 
(Para 5.8 ibid) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.21  The Department is grateful to the committee for the appreciation of the NBM program 
and also for the guidance.  
1.22  It is submitted that the NBM team is working in close coordination with the grantees to 
understand the bottlenecks in the road to regulatory approvals, as well as other development 
issues. 
1.23 In addition, NBM is also helping the grantees with access to the Clinical Trial Networks 
(CTNs) and other shared facilities set up under the National Biopharma Mission and by BIRAC 
to accelerate the development process. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.24 The Committee extends its profound appreciation to the Department for the visionary 
launch and strategic implementation of the UMMID Initiative, a critical intervention to address 
the burden of genetic disorders in India. The initiative’s three-pronged approach — establishing 
NIDAN Kendras for genetic diagnosis, enhancing the capacity of healthcare professionals, and 
expanding outreach in aspirational districts — has demonstrated remarkable success in its pilot 
phase. The screening of over 2,73,000 pregnant women and newborns, identification of 37,000 
positive cases, prevention of 34 hemoglobinopathy-affected births, and timely diagnosis of 350 
newborns with congenital metabolic disorders underscore the programme’s transformative 
impact on maternal and neonatal health. Furthermore, the integration of mass awareness 
campaigns, skill-building workshops, and collaborations with educational institutions reflects a 
holistic model for tackling inherited disorders through prevention, early diagnosis, and 
community engagement. 
(Para 5.13 ibid) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.25 The Department is grateful to the committee for appreciation for the visionary launch and 
strategic implementation of the UMMID Initiative.   
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.26 The Committee commends the Department for its exemplary commitment to advancing 
multi-disciplinary research and innovation in the domain of biomedical science and engineering. 

7 
 
The development of pioneering technologies such as InoHeal, Hip Pro, Urovib, and Preztic 
reflects a laudable effort to address pressing healthcare challenges through indigenous solutions. 
However, the Committee notes with concern that a major chunk of India’s medical device 
requirements continue to be met through imports, exposing vulnerabilities in healthcare security 
and economic sustainability. To address this critical gap, the Committee strongly urges the 
Department to intensify its focus on cutting-edge research and development in high-priority 
domains where import dependency remains acute. Priority areas could include the indigenous 
design and manufacturing of advanced imaging systems, such as CT scan machines and MRI 
systems, which are indispensable for modern diagnostics yet predominantly sourced from foreign 
markets. Similarly, the development of ophthalmic devices, including intraocular lenses for 
cataract surgery and retinal imaging equipment, must be prioritized to address the growing 
burden of vision-related ailments and reduce reliance on external suppliers. 
(Para 5.16 ibid) 
 
1.27 Furthermore, the Committee emphasizes the need for innovation in critical care 
equipment, such as ventilators, dialysis machines, and radiation therapy systems, which are vital 
for tertiary healthcare but remain largely imported despite rising domestic demand. Integrating 
emerging technologies like artificial intelligence and machine learning with medical diagnostics 
could further enhance precision, efficiency, and scalability, positioning India as a global leader 
in next-generation healthcare solutions. 
(Para 5.17 ibid) 
 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.28 The Department acknowledges the concern expressed by the committee on the import of a 
major chunk of medical devices.  
1.29 The Department of Biotechnology supports Research and Innovation for the development 
of innovative technologies and products for affordable healthcare. The Department supports 
Biodesign and Biomedical Engineering programs to foster and promote development of 
indigenous affordable medical technologies and creating an ecosystem for Med-Tech innovations 
and entrepreneurship in the country. Some of the medical devices developed/under development 
are: 
 Mobile Eye Surgical Unit (developed at Health Technology Innovation Centre-IIT Madras). 
2 units deployed in field. More than 16000 surgeries performed. 
 Eye-PAC-Portable versatile eye examination device “3nethra” 
(developed at Health Technology Innovation Centre-IIT Madras). More than 2600 devices 
sold in 28 countries. 
Eye-PAC Shisu Netra, Newborn eye screening device(developed at Health Technology 
Innovation Centre-IIT Madras). More than 100 devices sold in 9 countries. 
 Surgical Device for Continuous Curvilinear Capsulorhexis (CCC) (under development).  
 Multifunctional Endoscope for diagnosis and treatment of Sinusitis) (under development). 

8 
 
 Development of Indigenous point of care Transcranial Doppler (TCD) machine for patient 
management (under development). 
 Indigenization of reagents and instruments for the fabrication of lateral flow assays (under 
development). 
 A device based on digital photo elasticity for in-vivo characterization of corneal 
birefringence (under development). 
 Integrated Sonomyography and Soft haptics-based Intuitive Control of Upper-Extremity 
Prosthetic Devices (under development). 
 High Throughput High Quality Multisheet Multichannel Multiorganelle (M3) Cytometry 
System for Disease Diagnosis and Medical Health-care (under development). 
 Development of multimodal optical coherence tomography ultrasound MEMS technology- 
based microscopic-resolution photo acoustic elastography (OCT-US-MEMS-μPAE) imaging 
system: a validation study (under development). 
 Design and Development of Flow Cytometer 
 Microfluidic channel embedded contact lens for ophthalmic drug delivery glaucoma 
treatment (under development). 
 A Customizable and Intelligent Artificial Pancreas for Type-1 Diabetic Patients of India 
(under development). 
 Centre of Excellence for Minimally Invasive Cardiovascular Devices (under development). 
1.30 Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC) supports affordable and 
dependable medical imaging solutions/medical devices through its regular schemes such as Small 
Business Innovation Research Initiative (SBIRI), Biotechnology Industry Partnership Programme 
(BIPP), Biotechnology Ignition Grant Scheme (BIG), Promoting Academic Research Conversion 
to Enterprise (PACE), Social Innovation Programme for Products Affordable & Relevant to 
Societal Health (SPARSH) and through National Biopharma Mission Program (NBM). 
1.31 A few of the selected technologies/products supported under NBM are as follows:  
1. Development of MRI Scanner (Voxelgrids Innovations Pvt. Ltd). The device has already 
received manufacturing approval from CDSCO in the year 2023 and is ready for 
commercial launch in May 2025. 
2. Development of 3 Endoscope devices:  
 Smart eye Technology platform for endoscopy by HTIC and Mitra Medical Services Pvt 
Ltd. 
 Front end acquisition hardware and signal conditioning technology solutions for Minimally 
Invasive Fusion Imaging Endoscopy for Laparoscopic surgeries and other spin-offs by 
Irillic Private Limited and CMR University. (Above mentioned both the products are in the 
early to late stage of the clinical validation.)  
 4k CMOS Optical & IR Imaging techniques & medical grade camera demonstrated for 
endoscopy by Univlabs Technologies Pvt. Ltd. The product has already been licensed for 
manufacturing and commercialized. 
3.  Development of Laryngoscope device (Vphore Labs Pvt. Ltd). The product is in the early 
phase of the clinical validation. 
1.32 In addition, the National Biopharma Mission is supporting development and indigenization 
of fractional flow reserve (FFR) system to determine the narrowing (stenosis) in coronary arteries; 
orthopedic supports, mandibular and dental implants, stem cell’s based diabetic food ulcer 

9 
 
solutions, portable real time high frequency ECG device, SAANS: a multipowered 
multifunctional neonatal breathing support device, titanium heart valve, etc. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.33 The Committee appreciates the mission program launched by the Department. It is a 
remarkable effort to address rare genetic disorders in children, combining research, diagnosis, 
and care. The program’s focus on identifying novel genes, improving diagnosis, enabling prenatal 
counselling, and developing targeted therapies reflects a transformative approach to addressing 
unmet medical needs. The creation of apan-Indian database of genetic variants promises to 
empower clinicians and researchers globally while advancing precision medicine tailored to 
India’s diverse population. The Committee expresses confidence that PRaGeD will catalyze 
breakthroughs in understanding and managing rare diseases, reducing suffering through early 
intervention and innovative therapies. Sustained funding, capacity-building, and integration of 
research into clinical practice are critical to its success. The Department is urged to strengthen 
global partnerships, ensure ethical data- sharing frameworks, and prioritize accessibility of 
outcomes for vulnerable families. 
(Para 5.19 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.34 A dedicated web portal is developed by the Project Coordinating organization, Centre for 
DNA Finger Printing and Diagnostics (CDFD), Hyderabad for capturing the data of patients and 
family members. CDFD is also sharing the scientific data with Indian Biological Data Centre 
established at Regional Centre for Biotechnology, Faridabad. IBDC Platform is well connected 
with globally recognized databases for sharing the data among scientific community.  
 
1.35 The Department will further strengthen the global partnerships and ensure ethical data 
sharing and also share the outcomes with vulnerable families recruited in the programme. 
 
HUMAN RESOURCE CHALLENGES 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.36 The Committee expresses its deep concern over the acute staffing gaps plaguing the 
Department and autonomous institutions under it, condemning the systemic over-reliance on 
temporary contractual hiring to mask chronic manpower deficits. It underscores that such short-
term stopgap measures erode institutional capacity, stressing that a robust, permanent workforce 
with specialized expertise is indispensable for driving scientific advancement and maintaining 
global competitiveness. To rectify this, the Committee urgently calls for the Department to 
prioritize filling all critical positions—scientific, technical and administrative through a mission-
driven recruitment strategy. 
(Para 6.7 ibid) 

10 
 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.37 The Department acknowledges the concern expressed by the Committee. In respect to 
various regular positions in Department of Biotechnology following information is submitted for 
consideration of the Committee:  
1. Scientific Posts 
Recruitment was delayed due to the implementation of RFCS and the need to revise 
recruitment rules accordingly. These rules have now been finalized, and the recruitment 
process is currently underway. 
2. Technical Posts 
A request to fill these posts was sent to SSC, and they have already published the vacancies on 
their website. Once SSC sends the list of selected candidates, the Department will complete 
the appointment process. 
3.   Administrative Posts 
These are not core posts of the Department of Biotechnology. They are filled through DoPT, 
the Department of Official Language. Requests have already been sent to the concerned 
authorities to fill these vacancies. 
1.38 With regard to DBT Autonomous Institutions, it is submitted that 13 DBT Autonomous 
Institutions have been subsumed under Biotechnology Research Innovation Council. With this the 
DBT now supports 02 autonomous bodies i.e. DBT-BRIC and the Regional Centre for 
Biotechnology. For BIRC institutions 119 lapsed positions in scientific cadre has been 
consolidated and revived. The draft Recruitment Rules have been submitted the Department of 
Expenditure for approval. Once the RRs are approved, recruitment will be done on mission driven 
recruitment strategy. 
1.39 To facilitate this, a Virtual Units of Excellence (vUoE) program for prioritising scientific 
areas has been formulated. Scientists will be recruited in these areas to undertake mission mode 
research programs.  
1.40 Further, the Regional Centre for Biotechnology (RCB) called for systemic HR reforms, 
including separate and flexible recruitment, retention, and career progression policies suited to 
autonomous bodies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.1         The Committee expresses deep concern over the current state of BIBCOL and IVCOL 
and urges the Department to take immediate and decisive action for their revival. Recognizing 
their immense potential, the Committee strongly believes that both PSUs can play a pivotal role in 
strengthening and transforming India’s vaccine manufacturing ecosystem. The Committee 
recommends that the Department proactively engage with the Department of Public Enterprises 
(DPE) and persuade them to secure a revival package for both BIBCOL and IVCOL. The 
Department could explore the possibility of merger of both the units to achieve efficiency. If the 
Department succeeds in securing the revival package from DPE, the Committee recommends that 
the Department should expand BIBCOL’s current product portfolio by initiating the production of 
critical vaccines. Additionally, the Department should actively seek technical collaborations with 
reputed international organizations to enhance manufacturing capabilities and technological 
expertise. The Committee acknowledges the Department’s ongoing efforts in developing vaccines 
for Dengue, Malaria, and Chikungunya and suggests that, upon receiving necessary regulatory 
approvals, these vaccines may be manufactured at BIBCOL and IVCOL. Reviving these PSUs 
would not only contribute to ensuring affordable vaccine availability for citizens but also position 
them as key players in the global vaccine market. Once operational, these PSUs can leverage 
their infrastructure to support vaccine exports, further strengthening India’s presence in the 
international biopharmaceutical industry. 
(Para 4.8 of 388th Report) 
  
Action Taken: 
 
2.2 A revival proposal for the BIBCOL was submitted to the Department of Expenditure 
(DoE) for seeking extra funds. The Department of Expenditure (DoE), advised DBT to approach 
the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) for a review under para 2.1 of DPE’s guidelines dated 
13.12.2021 related to the New Public Sector Enterprises (PSE) Policy for CPSEs in non-strategic 
sectors.  Accordingly, the proposal was forwarded DPE for further consideration by the 
Committee of Group of Officers (CGO) headed by the CEO of NITI Aayog including Secretary of 
the concerned Ministry for closure or privatization under the PSE Policy.  
IVCOL: At present, in line with the Government’s commitment to green growth, the Finance 
Minister announced a new scheme on Biomanufacturing and Bio-foundry in the Interim Budget 
2024–25 (Para 69), aimed at promoting environment friendly alternatives like biodegradable 
polymers, bio-plastics, biopharmaceuticals, and bio-agri-inputs. Under this scheme, the 
Department of Biotechnology (DBT), in collaboration with BIRAC, plans to establish 
Biomanufacturing Hubs across the country. IVCOL’s existing facilities may be repurposed for 
this national initiative. 

12 
 
KEY INITIAVES AND ACHIEVEMENTS IN HEALTHCARE AND BIOTECHNOLOGY 
Recommendation/ Observation 
2.3 The Committee acknowledges the Department’s progress in scaling the UMMID Initiative, 
including its expansion to 30 aspirational districts, establishment of30 NIDAN Kendras and 9 
training centres, and the inclusion of private healthcare institutions such as SVIMS Tirupati and 
Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences, Sevagram, in Phase-II. These efforts signify a 
commendable stride toward decentralizing access to advanced genetic screening and care. 
However, given the persistent challenges posed by genetic disorders - particularly in rural and 
underserved regions - the Committee urges the Department to expedite the pan-India expansion of 
the UMMID Initiative with a renewed focus on universal, time-bound screening coverage. This 
must include100% screening of all pregnant women and newborns, irrespective of their access to 
private or Government healthcare facilities. The Committee also recommends that following the 
100% screening, the Department should work upon creating a vulnerability index which would be 
helpful in assessing the susceptibility of specific demographic groups to various genetic disorders. 
(Para 5.14 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
 
2.4 The Department is grateful to the committee for appreciation. It is envisioned that  Phase-
II of the UMMID programme  will cover more than 20 States/ UTs all over India with nearly 70 
UMMID components (outreach centres in aspirational districts, NIDAN Kendras and training 
centres) being supported, which may be beneficial to more than 6 Lakhs pregnant women and 
newborns. The UMMID programme is for development of trained manpower, resources and to 
establish network in government setup within the R&D mandates as per its AoB rules of the 
Department.  After completion of the projects funded under Phase-II of the UMMID programme, 
capacity development in terms of the trained manpower and the minimal required infrastructure in 
the major hospitals will be ready in the country. Also, through this project mode implementation 
of the UMMID programme, a primary ecosystem will be in place to take it up further in the mode 
of a National Screening Program by the concerned agency in the Government. Thus, though 100% 
screening may not be possible, given the limited budget for UMMID initiative; this programme 
can pave the way for  setting up of a ‘National Screening Programme’ for genetic disorders to be 
taken up by health agencies like MoHFW or ICMR. Further, through implementation of UMMID 
initiative, sufficient R&D resources will be generated like samples of positive cases, data 
generation on approximation of percentage of genetic disorders in the areas wherein limited 
screening programs are being implemented, that will help our researchers in advancing country 
specific R&D studies on diagnostics and treatment in genetics disorders.  However, the statistical 
data on vulnerability of the population to genetic disorders and creation of vulnerability index can 
be taken up only when the Government initiatives like ‘National Screening Programme’ for 
genetic disorders to cover 100% screening is carried out. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.5     The Committee appreciates the commendable efforts made by the Department in advancing 
research on neurological disorders, particularly through cohort-based studies and investigator 

13 
 
driven projects. These initiatives are crucial in deepening our understanding of disease 
mechanisms and developing innovative diagnostic and therapeutic solutions. 
(Para 5.22 ibid) 
2.6 Keeping in view the rising prevalence of neurological disorders, particularly among the 
aging population, the Committee recommends that the Department should launch a dedicated 
mission to comprehensively research the most prevalent neurological diseases. This mission 
should be supported by substantial funding, targeted research programs, and strategic 
collaborations with leading healthcare institutions, academic centres, and industry partners to 
ensure a holistic approach to prevention, early diagnosis, and treatment. 
(Para 5.23 ibid) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.7 The Department will intensify its ongoing efforts in the area of Neurological diseases. The 
Department will support targeted interdisciplinary network projects to advance research towards 
prevention, early diagnosis and treatment of neurological diseases like Alzheimers/ Parkinson’s/ 
Acute encephalitis.  
 
 
 
  

14 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
  

15 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND CLIMATE CHANGE (2024-25) 
 
XII 
TWELFTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 10:00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 6th August, 2025 in Committee 
Room No. B, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita – Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
3. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
 
LOK SABHA 
4. Shri Mahesh Kashyap 
5. Dr. Anand Kumar 
6. Shri Mohibbullah 
7. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
8. Shri Jashubhai Bhilubhai Rathva  
9. Shri Balwant Baswant Wankhade  
10. Shri Yaduveer Wadiyar 
11. Shri Vamsi Krishna Gaddam 
12. Shri Eswarasamy K 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Rakesh Naithani, Joint Secretary  
3. Shri Rajiv Saxena, Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. I.V. Rajya Laxmi, Committee Officer 
5. Shri Vaibhav Jain, Committee Officer  
                                     
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. The 
Committee then took up consideration of the draft 394th,  395th, 396th, 397th, 398th, 399th and 400th 
Reports of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the Reports  on  Demands for Grants (2025-2026) of the 

18 
 
Ministries/Departments of Atomic Energy; Biotechnology; Scientific and Industrial Research; 
Science & Technology; Space; Environment, Forest and Climate Change; and Earth Sciences, 
respectively and adopted the same after some deliberations.  
3. The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned Reports in both the Houses of 
Parliament on the 8th August, 2025.  
4. *  *  *  *  * 
5. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 10:46 a.m. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                       RAJIV SAXENA 
06.08.2025                                  DEPUTY SECRETARY 
 
 
 
 